
Democracy for the Few
NINTH EDITION
Michael Parenti, Ph.D.
www.michaelparenti.org
Australia • Brazil • Japan • Korea • Mexico • Singapore • Spain • United Kingdom • United States

Democracy for the Few,
Ninth Edition
Michael Parenti, Ph.D.
Executive Editor: Carolyn Merrill
Editorial Assistant:
Angela Hodge
Marketing Manager:
Amy Whitaker
Marketing Communications
Manager: Heather Baxley
Art Director: Linda Helcher
Print Buyer: Rebecca Cross
Text Permissions Account
Manager: Katie Huha
Photo Permissions Account
Manager: Jennifer Meyer Dare
Production Service:
PrePressPMG
Cover Designer: Grannan
Graphic Design, Ltd.
Cover Image: ©Grannan
Graphic Design, Ltd.
Compositor: PrePressPMG
© 2011, 2008, 2002 Wadsworth, Cengage Learning
No part of this work covered by the copyright herein may be
reproduced, transmitted, stored or used in any form or by any
means graphic, electronic, or mechanical, including but not limited
to photocopying, recording, scanning, digitizing, taping, Web
distribution, information networks, or information storage and
retrieval systems, except as permitted under Section 107 or 108 of
the 1976 United States Copyright Act, without the prior written
permission of the publisher.
For product information and technology assistance, contact us
at Cengage Learning Customer & Sales Support,
1-800-354-9706.
For permission to use material from this text or product,
submit all requests online at cengage.com/permissions.
Further permissions questions can be emailed to
permissionrequest@cengage.com.
Library of Congress Control Number: 2009944057
ISBN-13: 978-0-495-91126-5
ISBN-10: 0-495-91126-7
Wadsworth
20 Channel Center Street
Boston, MA 02210
USA
Cengage Learning is a leading provider of customized learning
solutions with office locations around the globe, including
Singapore, the United Kingdom, Australia, Mexico, Brazil, and
Japan. Locate your local office at
international.cengage.com/region.
Cengage Learning products are represented in Canada by
Nelson Education, Ltd.
For your course and learning solutions, visit www.cengage.com.
Purchase any of our products at your local college store or at our
preferred online store www.CengageBrain.com.
Printed in the United States of America
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 13 12 11 10

To all those who struggle for peace, social justice,
and real democracy.
May their numbers continue to grow.

Contents
PREFACE
ix
ABOUT THE AUTHOR
xii
CHAPTER•
1
Partisan Politics
1
Beyond Textbooks
1
The Politico-Economic System
3
CHAPTER•
2
A Constitution for the Few
5
Class Power in Early America
5
Containing the Spread of Democracy
7
Fragmenting Majority Power
10
Plotters or Patriots?
12
Democratic Concessions
14
CHAPTER•
3
Rise of the Corporate State
17
The War Against Labor
17
Favors for Business
19
Pliable Progressives and Red Scares
21
The New Deal: Hard Times and Tough Reforms
23
iv

CHAPTER•
4
Wealth and Want in the United States
27
Capital and Labor
27
Capital Concentration: Who Owns America?
29
Downsizing and Profiteering
33
Inflation, the Profit-Price Spiral
34
Monopoly Farming
35
Market Demand and Productivity
37
The Hardships of Working America
39
Poverty in Paradise
42
The Human Costs of Economic Injustice
44
CHAPTER•
5
Institutions and Ideologies
47
Corporate Plutocracy
47
Ideological Orthodoxy
49
Corporate Rule and Ruin: Some Examples
51
Left, Right, and Center
52
Public Opinion: Which Direction?
56
Democracy: Form and Content
57
CHAPTER•
6
Politics: Who Gets What?
60
Welfare for the Rich
60
Federal Handouts to Corporate America
62
The Billion-Dollar Bailouts
64
Taxes: Helping the Rich in their Time of Greed
66
Unkind Cuts, Unfair Rates
69
Deficit Spending and the National Debt
70
Some Hidden Deficits
71
CHAPTER•
7
Health and Human Services: Sacrificial Lambs
74
The Poor Get Less (and Less)
74
Social Insecurity: Privatizing Everything
76
A Sick Health System
77
The Health Insurance Racket
79
Contents
v

The “Socialist” Medical Menace?
81
Buyers Beware, and Workers Too
83
Creating Crises: Schools and Housing
85
“Mess Transit”
87
CHAPTER•
8
The Last Environment
90
Toxifying the Earth
90
Eco-Apocalypse
93
Pollution for Profits
94
Government for the Despoilers
96
An Alternative Approach
98
CHAPTER•
9
Unequal before the Law
100
Crime in the Suites
100
Big Crime, Small Punishment (Usually)
103
Class Law: Tough on the Weak
105
The Crime of Prisons
108
A Most Fallible System
110
Sexist Justice
112
The Victimization of Children
114
Racist Law Enforcement
115
CHAPTER•
10
Political Repression and National Insecurity
119
The Repression of Dissent
119
Political Prisoners, USA
122
Political Murder, USA
125
The National Security Autocracy
129
CIA: Capitalism’s International Army or Cocaine Import Agency?
131
Watergate and Iran-contra
133
Homeland Insecurity
134
CHAPTER•
11
The U.S. Global Military Empire
137
A Global Kill Capacity
137
Pentagon Profits, Waste, and Theft
139
Harming Our Own
142
vi
Contents

Economic Imperialism
143
Intervention Everywhere
146
Global Bloodletting
147
CHAPTER•
12
Who Governs? Elites, Labor, and Globalization
151
The Ruling Class
151
Labor Besieged
154
Unions and the Good Fight
156
How Globalization Undermines Democracy
157
CHAPTER•
13
Mass Media: For the Many, by the Few
163
He Who Pays the Piper
163
The Ideological Monopoly
167
Serving Officialdom
170
Political Entertainment
173
Room for Alternatives?
174
CHAPTER•
14
Voters, Parties, and Stolen Elections
177
Democrats and Republicans: Any Differences?
177
The Two-Party Monopoly
179
Making Every Vote Count
181
Rigging the Game
182
Money, a Necessary Condition
184
The Struggle to Vote
187
The War Against Imaginary “Voter Fraud”
189
Shady Elections
191
Pale Democracy
196
CHAPTER•
15
Congress: The Pocketing of Power
197
A Congress for the Money
197
Lobbyists: The Other Lawmakers
200
The Varieties of Corruption
203
Special Interests and Secrecy
205
The Legislative Labyrinth
208
Incumbency and Term Limits
210
Legislative Democracy under Siege
211
Contents
vii

CHAPTER•
16
The President: Guardian of the System
215
Salesman of the System
215
The Two Faces of the President
218
Feds vs. States
221
A Loaded Electoral College
222
The Would-be Absolute Monarch
225
CHAPTER•
17
The Political Economy of Bureaucracy
232
The Myth and Reality of Inefficiency
232
Deregulation and Privatization
235
Secrecy and Deception, Waste and Corruption
238
Nonenforcement: Politics in Command
240
Serving the “Regulated”
242
Public Authority in Private Hands
245
Regulation and Business Ideology
247
CHAPTER•
18
The Supremely Political Court
249
Who Judges?
249
Conservative Judicial Activism (Early Times)
252
Circumventing the First Amendment
255
Freedom for Revolutionaries (and Others)?
257
As the Court Turns
258
Conservative Judicial Activism (Present Day)
265
CHAPTER•
19
Democracy for the Few
268
Pluralism for the Few
268
The Limits of Reform
271
Democracy as Popular Struggle
273
The Roles of the State
275
What Is to be Done?
277
The Reality of Public Production
283
NOTES
289
INDEX
317
viii
Contents

Preface
The study of politics is itself a political act, containing little that is neutral.
True, we can all agree on certain neutral facts about the structure of govern-
ment and the like. However, the book that does not venture much beyond
these minimal descriptions will offend few readers but also will interest few.
Any investigation of how and why things happen draws us into highly con-
troversial areas. Most textbooks pretend to a neutrality they do not really
possess. While claiming to be objective, they are merely conventional, safely
ignoring the more embattled and controversial sides of U.S. political life.
For decades, mainstream political scientists and other proponents of the
existing social order have tried to transform practically every deficiency in the
U.S. political system into a strength. They would have us believe that high-
powered lobbyists are nothing to worry about because they perform an “in-
formational function” vital to representative government, and that the
growing concentration of executive power is a good thing because the presi-
dent is democratically responsive to broad national constituencies rather than
special parochial ones. Conventional proponents have argued that the exclu-
sion of third parties is really for the best because too many parties (more than
two) would fractionalize and destabilize our political system, and besides, the
major parties eventually incorporate into their platforms the positions raised
by minor parties—which is news to any number of socialist and other reform-
ist parties whose views have remained unincorporated for generations.
Reacting to the mainstream tendency to turn every vice into a virtue, left
critics of the status quo have felt compelled to turn every virtue into a vice.
Thus they have argued that electoral struggle is meaningless, that our civil lib-
erties are a charade, that federal programs for the needy are next to worth-
less, that reforms are mostly mere sops to the oppressed, and that labor
unions are usually collaborationist with management. These critics have been
ix

a much needed antidote to the happy pluralists who painted a silver lining
around every murky cloud. But they were wrong in seeing no victories in the
democratic struggles that have been waged.
Democracy for the Few tries to strike a balance. It tries to show how de-
mocracy is violated by corporate oligopoly, and yet how popular forces have
fought back and occasionally made gains. They also have suffered serious
losses, as we shall see. This book offers an interpretation that students are
not likely to get in elementary school, high school, or most of their college
courses, and certainly not in the mass media or mainstream political
literature.
It may come as a surprise to some academics, but there is a marked rela-
tionship between economic power and political power. There are political
scientists who spend their entire lives writing about American government,
the presidency, and public policy without ever once mentioning capitalism, a
feat of omission that would be judged extraordinary were it not so common-
place. In this book I talk about that forbidden subject, capitalism, especially
corporate capitalism, its most advanced and challenging form. Only thusly
can we fully comprehend the underpinnings of the U.S. political system.
I have attempted to blend several approaches. Attention is given to the
formal political institutions such as the Congress, the presidency, the bureau-
cracy, the Supreme Court, political parties, elections, and the law enforcement
system. But these standard features of American government are linked herein
to the broader realities of class power and interest.
In addition, this book devotes attention to the foundations and historical
development of American politics, particularly in regard to the making of the
Constitution, the growing role of government, and the political culture.
In addition we will critically investigate not only who governs, but also
the outputs of the system: who gets what? Instead of concentrating solely on
the process of government, as do many texts, I also give attention to the con-
tent of actual government practices. Thus a major emphasis is placed
throughout the book on the political economy of public policy. The signifi-
cance of government, after all, lies not in its abstracted structure as such,
but in what it does and how its policies affect people at home and abroad. I
have included a good deal of public policy information of a kind not ordinar-
ily found in standard texts, first, because students and citizens in general tend
to be poorly informed about politico-economic issues, and second, because it
makes little sense to talk about the “policy process” as something abstracted
from actual issues and outputs, divorced from questions of power and inter-
est. This descriptive information, however, is presented with the intent of
drawing the reader to an overall understanding of U.S. political reality.
This book generally takes what some would call a structural approach.
Rather than treating political developments as the result of happenstance or
the contrivances of particular personalities or idiosyncratic events, I try to
show that most (but not necessarily all) of what occurs is the outcome of
broader configurations of power, wealth, class, and institution as structured
into the dominant political organizations, the economy, and the society
itself.
x
Preface

Unfortunately there are some individuals who believe that a structural
analysis demands that we treat conspiracies as imaginary things, and con-
scious human efforts as of no great consequence. They go so far as to argue
that we are all now divided into two camps, which they call the structuralists
and the conspiracists. In this book I consider conspiracies (by which most
people seem to mean secret, consciously planned programs by persons in
high places) to be part of the arsenal of structural rule. No social order of
any complexity exists without the application of conscious human agency.
Ruling elements must intentionally strive to maintain the conditions of their
hegemonic rule. The social order of a society does not operate like a mystical
abstracted entity. It is directed for the most part by people who deliberately
pursue certain goals, using all kinds of power, including propaganda, persua-
sion, fraud, deceit, fear, secrecy, coercion, concessions, and sometimes even
concerted violence and other criminal ploys. Rather than seeing conspiracy
and structure as mutually exclusive, we might consider how conspiracy is
one of the instruments used by the dominant interests in political life. Some
conspiracies are imagined; some are real. And some of the real ones are part
of the political structure, not exceptions to it.
This ninth edition has been revised with the intent of updating the book’s
information and advancing its analysis. My hope is that this new edition con-
tinues to prove useful to both students and lay readers. Following is some of
what’s new in the ninth edition:
•
An extensive discussion of the causes and insufficient cures regarding the
Great Recession of 2008–2009, with emphasis on corporate bailouts, hid-
den unemployment, and who benefits and who pays.
•
Updated discussions and new materials for just about every policy area
including the environment, growing economic inequality, new attempts
at regulation, health care, and the hardships of working America.
•
Updated discussions on the “unitary executive,” conservative judicial ac-
tivism, and the Obama administration.
•
New materials on attempts to suppress the popular vote through fraud,
disinformation, and coercion, including the 2004, 2006, and 2008
elections.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
Many thanks to the staff at Wadsworth/Cengage Learning, especially Angela
Hodge and Carolyn Merrill for their valuable service in helping to put this
book together. My thanks also to Sushila Rajagopal, the project manager.
And a word of appreciation goes to Jenny Tayloe, Deidre Vrooman, and
Susan McCallister for the assistance they rendered.
Michael Parenti
Preface
xi

About the Author
Michael Parenti (Ph.D., Yale University) has taught political and social science
at a number of colleges and universities, and now devotes himself full time to
writing and guest lecturing. He is an internationally known, award-winning
author who has published twenty-one books, including God and His Demons
(2010); Contrary Notions: The Michael Parenti Reader (2007); The Culture
Struggle (2006); and The Assassination of Julius Caesar (2003).Various writ-
ings of his have been translated into some twenty languages. His publications,
including previous editions of Democracy for the Few, have been read and
enjoyed by students, lay readers, and scholars, and have been used extensively
in hundreds of college courses across the country. Dr. Parenti lectures fre-
quently throughout North America and abroad. His various talks and inter-
views have played widely on radio, television, and the Internet. Some 300
articles of his have been published in magazines, newspapers, websites, and
scholarly journals, including American Political Science Review, Journal of
Politics, Social Research, and New Political Science.
For more information, visit his Web site: www.michaelparenti.org.
REVIEWER LIST
Dan Brook, Ph.D.
Dr. William A. Pelz, Elgin Community College
Dr. Joseph F. Jozwiak, Jr., Associate Professor of Political Science, Texas
A&M-Corpus Christi
Leslie J. Thornton, Ph.D., University of Michigan-Dearborn
Ronald W. Vardy, Ph.D., University of Houston
Robert, Spitzer, Ph.D., SUNY Cortland
xii

C
H
A
P
T
E
R
1
Partisan Politics
How does the U.S. political system work? What are the major forces shaping
political life? Who governs in the United States? Who gets what, when, how,
and why? Who pays and in what ways? These are the questions pursued in
this book.
BEYOND TEXTBOOKS
Many of us were taught a somewhat idealized version of American govern-
ment, which might be summarized as follows:
1.
The United States was founded upon a Constitution fashioned to limit
political authority and check abuses of power. Over the generations it
has proven to be a “living document,” which, through reinterpretation
and amendment, has served us well.
2.
The people’s desires are registered through elections, political parties,
and a free press. Government decision makers are kept in check by their
need to satisfy the electorate in order to remain in office. The people do
not rule directly but they select those who do. Thus, government deci-
sions are grounded in majority rule—subject to the restraints imposed
by the Constitution for the protection of minority rights.
3.
The United States is a nation of manifold social and economic groups in
which every significant group has a say and no one group chronically
dominates.
4.
These institutional arrangements have given us a government of laws
and not of individuals, which, while far from perfect, allows for a fairly
high degree of liberty and popular participation.
This view of the United States as a happy, pluralistic polity assumes that
existing political institutions operate with benign effect; that power is not
1

highly concentrated nor heavily skewed toward those who control vast
wealth; and that the state is a neutral entity with no special linkage to those
who own the land, technology, and capital of this and other societies. These
key assumptions will be challenged in the pages ahead.
The theme of this book is that our government more often serves the privi-
leged few rather than the general public, principally advancing the interests of
the haves at the expense of the rest of us. The law is usually written and enforced
in highly discriminatory ways. This democracy for the few is a product not only
of the venality of particular officeholders but a reflection of the entire politico-
economic system, the way the resources of power are distributed and used.
To be sure, the American people are not always passive victims (or willing
accomplices) to all this. The mass of ordinary people have made important
political and economic gains, usually after long and bitter contests that have
extended beyond the electoral process. This democratic struggle is an impor-
tant part of the story that will be touched upon in the pages ahead.
This book tries to demonstrate that just about every part of the
politico-economic system, be it the media, lobbying, criminal justice, overseas
intervention, or environmental policy, reflects the nature of the whole, and in
its particular way serves to maintain the overall system—especially the sys-
tem’s basic class interests. In a word, seemingly distinct issues and social pro-
blems are often interrelated.
The political system comprises the various branches of government along
with the political parties, laws, lobbyists, and private-interest groups that af-
fect public policy. By public policy, I mean the decisions made by government.
Policy decisions are seldom neutral. They usually benefit some interests more
than others, entailing social costs that are seldom equally distributed. The
shaping of a budget, the passage of a law, and the development of an admin-
istrative program are all policy decisions, all political decisions, and there is no
way to execute them with neutral effect. If the wants of all persons could be
automatically satisfied, there would be no need to set priorities and give some
interests precedence over others; indeed, there would be no need for politics.
Politics extends beyond election campaigns and the actions of govern-
ment. Decisions that confine certain matters—such as rental costs or health
care—to the private market are highly political, even if seldom recognized as
such. Power in the private realm is generally inequitable and undemocratic
and often the source of conflicts that spill over into the public arena, for in-
stance, management-labor disputes, and racial and gender discrimination.
Someone once defined a politician as a person who receives votes from
the poor and money from the rich on the promise of protecting each from
the other. And former President Jimmy Carter observed: “Politics is the
world’s second oldest profession, closely related to the first.” While not deny-
ing the measure of truth in such observations, I take a broader view. Politics is
more than just something politicians do. It is the process of conflict (and con-
flict resolution) among private interests carried into the public arena. Politics
involves not only the competition among groups within the system but the em-
battled efforts to change the system itself, not only the desire to achieve
predefined ends but the struggle to redefine ends and pose alternatives to the
existing politico-economic structure.
2
Chapter 1

THE POLITICO-ECONOMIC SYSTEM
Politics today covers every kind of issue, from abortion to school prayers, but
the bulk of public policy is concerned with economic matters, which is why
some writers refer to the “politico-economic system.” Among the more vital
functions of government are taxing and spending. Certainly they are necessary
for everything else government does, from delivering the mail to making war.
The very organization of the federal government reflects its close involvement
with the economy: thus, one finds the departments of Commerce, Labor, Ag-
riculture, Interior, Transportation, and Treasury, and the Federal Trade Com-
mission, the National Labor Relations Board, the Interstate Commerce
Commission, the Securities and Exchange Commission, and numerous other
agencies directly involved in the economy. Likewise, most of the committees
in Congress can be identified according to their economic functions, the most
important having to do with taxation and appropriations (spending).
Politics and economics are two sides of the same coin. Economics is con-
cerned with the production and distribution of scarce resources, involving
conflicts between social classes and among groups and individuals within clas-
ses. Much of politics is a carryover of that struggle. Both politics and econom-
ics deal with the survival and material well-being of millions of people; both
deal with the fundamental conditions of social life itself.
This close relationship between politics and economics is neither neutral
nor merely coincidental. Governments evolve through history in order to pro-
tect accumulations of property and wealth. In nomadic and hunting societies,
where there is little surplus wealth, governance is rudimentary and usually
communal. In societies where wealth and property are controlled by a select
class of persons, a state develops to protect the interests of the haves from the
have-nots. As John Locke wrote in 1689: “The great and chief end … of
Men’s uniting into Commonwealths, and putting themselves under Govern-
ment, is the Preservation of their Property.” And Adam Smith, the premier ex-
ponent of early capitalism, stated in 1776: “The necessity of civil government
grows up with the acquisition of valuable property.” And “Till there be prop-
erty there can be no government, the very end of which is to secure wealth,
and to defend the rich from the poor.”1
Many political scientists manage to ignore the relationship between gov-
ernment and wealth, treating the corporate giants, if at all, as if they were but
one of a number of interest groups. They label as “Marxist” any approach
that sees government as largely an instrument to protect the interests of
wealth. To be sure, Karl Marx saw the state to be just such an instrument,
but so did conservative theorists like Thomas Hobbes, John Locke, Adam
Smith, and, in America, Alexander Hamilton and James Madison. They also,
Marx included, saw government as the institution that carried out more gen-
eral functions such as building bridges, protecting the populace from crime,
setting standard weights and measures for trade, and the like. But most impor-
tant of all, just about every theorist and practitioner of politics in the seven-
teenth, eighteenth, and early nineteenth centuries thought of the state as the
protector of propertied wealth.
Partisan Politics
3

“The people who own the country ought to govern it,” declared John Jay.
A permanent check over the populace should be exercised by “the rich and the
well-born,” urged Alexander Hamilton. Unlike most theorists before him, Marx
was one of the first in the modern era to see the existing relationship between
wealth and power as undesirable and exploitative, and this was his unforgivable
sin. The tendency to avoid critical analysis of corporate capitalism persists to
this day among business people, journalists, and most academics.2
Power is no less political because it is economic. By “power,” I mean the
ability to get what one wants, either by having one’s interests prevail in con-
flicts with others or by preventing others from raising their demands. Power
presumes the ability to manipulate the social environment to one’s advantage.
Power belongs to those who possess the resources that enable them to shape
and influence the actions and beliefs of others, such resources as jobs, organi-
zation, technology, publicity, media, social legitimacy, expertise, essential
goods and services, organized force, and—the ingredient that often determines
the availability of these things—money.
Sometimes the complaint is made: “You’re good at criticizing the system,
but what would you put in its place?”—the implication being that unless you
have a finished blueprint for a better society, you should refrain from pointing
out existing deficiencies and injustices. This book is predicated on the notion
that it is desirable and necessary for democratic citizens to examine the society
in which they live, possibly as a step toward making fundamental improve-
ments. It is unreasonable to demand that we refrain from making a diagnosis
of an illness until we have perfected a cure. For how can we hope to find solu-
tions unless we really understand the problem? In any case, improvements and
solutions are offered in the closing chapter and elsewhere in this book.
Political life is replete with deceit, corruption, and plunder. Small wonder
that many people seek to remove themselves from it. But whether we like it or
not, politics and government play a crucial role in determining the conditions
of our lives. People can leave political life alone, but it will not leave them
alone. They can escape its noise and nonsense but not its effects. One ignores
the doings of the state only at one’s own risk.
If the picture that emerges in the pages ahead is not pretty, this should not
be taken as an attack on the United States, for this country and its people are
greater than the abuses perpetrated upon them by those who live for power
and profit. To expose these abuses is not to denigrate the nation that is a vic-
tim of them. The greatness of a country is to be measured by something more
than its rulers, its military budget, its instruments of dominance and destruc-
tion, and its profiteering giant corporations. A nation’s greatness can be mea-
sured by the democratic nature of its institutions, by its ability to create a
society free of poverty, racism, sexism, exploitation, imperialism, and environ-
mental devastation. There is no better way to love one’s country, and strive
for the fulfillment of its greatness, than to entertain critical ideas that enable
us to pursue social justice at home and abroad.3
4
Chapter 1

C
H
A
P
T
E
R
2
A Constitution for the Few
To understand the U.S. political system, it would help to investigate its origins
and fundamental structure, beginning with the Constitution. The men who
gathered in Philadelphia in 1787 strove to erect a strong central government.
They agreed with Adam Smith that government was “instituted for the de-
fense of the rich against the poor” and “grows up with the acquisition of valu-
able property.”1
CLASS POWER IN EARLY AMERICA
Early American society has been described as egalitarian, free from the ex-
tremes of want and wealth that characterized Europe. In fact, from colonial
times onward, men of influence received vast land grants from the crown
and presided over estates that bespoke an impressive munificence. By 1700,
three-fourths of the acreage in New York belonged to fewer than a dozen per-
sons. In the interior of Virginia, seven individuals owned over 1.7 million
acres. By 1760, fewer than five hundred men in five colonial cities controlled
most of the commerce, shipping, banking, mining, and manufacturing on the
eastern seaboard. In the period from the American Revolution to the Consti-
tutional Convention (1776–1787), the big landowners, merchants, and bank-
ers exercised a strong influence over politico-economic life, often dominating
the local newspapers that served the interests of commerce.2
In twelve of the thirteen states (Pennsylvania excepted), only property-
owning White males could vote, probably not more than 10 percent of the
total adult population. Excluded were all Native Americans (“Indians”), per-
sons of African descent, women, indentured servants, and White males lacking
sufficient property. Property qualifications for holding office were so steep as
to exclude even most of the White males who could vote. A member of the
5

New Jersey legislature had to be worth at least £1,000. South Carolina state
senators had to possess estates worth at least £7,000 clear of debt (equivalent
to over a million dollars today). In Maryland, a candidate for governor had to
own property worth at least £5,000. In addition, the absence of a secret ballot
and of a real choice among candidates and programs led to widespread
discouragement.3
Not long before the Constitutional Convention, the French chargé d’af-
faires wrote to his government:
Although there are no nobles in America, there is a class of men denominated
“gentlemen.”… Almost all of them dread the efforts of the people to despoil them
of their possessions, and, moreover, they are creditors, and therefore interested in
strengthening the government and watching over the execution of the law.… The
majority of them being merchants, it is for their interest to establish the credit of
the United States in Europe on a solid foundation by the exact payment of debts,
and to grant to Congress powers extensive enough to compel the people to con-
tribute for this purpose.4
In 1787, just such wealthy and powerful “gentlemen,” our “Founding
Fathers,” congregated in Philadelphia for the professed purpose of revising
the Articles of Confederation and strengthening the central government.5 Un-
der the Articles, “the United States in Congress” wielded a broad range of ex-
clusive powers over treaties, trade, appropriations, currency, disputes among
the various states, war, and national defense. But these actions required the
assent of at least nine states.6 The Congress also had no power to tax, which
left it dependent upon levies agreed to by the states. It was unable to compel
the people—through taxation—to contribute to the full payment of the public
debt, most of which was owed to wealthy private creditors.
The delegates to Philadelphia wanted a stronger central power that would
(a) resolve problems among the thirteen states regarding trade and duties, (b)
protect overseas commercial and diplomatic interests, (c) effectively propagate
the financial and commercial interests of the affluent class, and (d) defend the
very wealthy from the competing claims of other classes within the society. It
is (c) and (d) that are usually ignored or denied by too many textbook writers.
Most troublesome to the framers of the Constitution was the insurgent
spirit evidenced among the people. In 1787, a worried George Washington
wrote to a former comrade-in-arms that a constitution was much needed “to
contain the threat of the people rather than to embrace their participation and
their competence,” lest “the anarchy of the propertyless would give way to
despotism.”7 Even plutocrats like Gouverneur Morris, who shortly before
the Constitutional Convention had opposed strong federation, now realized
that an empowered national government would be the best safeguard for
propertied interests. So Morris “gave up ‘state rights’ for ‘nationalism’ with-
out hesitation.”8
The working people of that day have been portrayed as parochial spend-
thrifts who never paid their debts and who advocated inflated paper money.
Most historians say little about the plight of the common folk in early America.
Most of the White population consisted of poor freeholders, artisans,
6
Chapter 2

tenants, and indentured servants, the latter entrapped in payless servitude for
years. A study of Delaware farms at about the time of the Constitutional Con-
vention found that the typical farm family might have a large plot of land but
little else, surviving in a one-room house or log cabin, without barns, sheds,
draft animals, or machinery. The farmer and his family pulled the plow.9
In the United States of 1787, there existed poorhouses and a large debtor
class. Small farmers were burdened by heavy rents, ruinous taxes, and low in-
comes. To survive, they frequently had to borrow money at high interest rates.
To meet their debts, they mortgaged their future crops and went still deeper
into debt. Interest rates on debts ranged from 25 to 40 percent, and taxes fell
most heavily on those of modest means. No property was exempt from sei-
zure, save the clothes on a debtor’s back.10
Throughout this period, newspapers complained of the increasing num-
bers of young beggars in the streets. Economic prisoners crowded the jails, in-
carcerated for debts or nonpayment of taxes.11 Among the people, there grew
the feeling that the revolution against the British crown had been fought for
naught. Angry armed crowds in several states began blocking foreclosures
and forcibly freeing debtors from jail. In the winter of 1787, impoverished
farmers in western Massachusetts led by Daniel Shays took up arms. Their
rebellion was forcibly put down by the state militia after several skirmishes
that left eleven men dead and scores wounded.12
CONTAINING THE SPREAD OF DEMOCRACY
The specter of Shays’s Rebellion hovered over the delegates who gathered in
Philadelphia three months later, confirming their worst fears. They were de-
termined that persons of birth and fortune should control the affairs of the
nation and check the “leveling impulses” of the propertyless multitude who
composed “the majority faction” (majority class). “To secure the public
good and private rights against the danger of such a faction,” wrote James
Madison in Federalist No. 10, “and at the same time preserve the spirit and
form of popular government is then the great object to which our inquiries
are directed.” Here Madison touched the heart of the matter: how to keep
the “form” and appearance of popular government with only a minimum
of the substance, how to construct a government that would win some pop-
ular support but would not tamper with the existing class structure, a gov-
ernment strong enough to service the growing needs of the entrepreneurial
and landed classes while withstanding the egalitarian demands of the ordi-
nary populace.
The framers of the Constitution could agree with Madison when he wrote
(also in Federalist No. 10) that “the most common and durable source of fac-
tion has been the various and unequal distribution of property [that is,
wealth]. Those who hold and those who are without property have ever
formed distinct interests in society” and “the first object of government” is
“the protection of different and unequal faculties of acquiring property.” So
government is there to see that those who have a talent for getting rich are
not hampered in any way by those who might be made poor in the process.
A Constitution for the Few
7

The framers were of the opinion that democracy (rule by the common
people) was “the worst of all political evils,” as Elbridge Gerry put it. For
Edmund Randolph, the country’s problems were caused by “the turbulence
and follies of democracy.” Roger Sherman concurred: “The people should
have as little to do as may be about the Government.” According to Alexan-
der Hamilton, “all communities divide themselves into the few and the many.
The first are the rich and the wellborn, the other the mass of the people.…
The people are turbulent and changing; they seldom judge or determine
right.” He recommended a strong centralized state power to “check the
imprudence of democracy.” And George Washington, the presiding officer at
the Philadelphia Convention, urged the delegates not to produce a document
merely to “please the people.”13
There was not much danger of that. The delegates spent many weeks de-
bating and defending their interests, but these were the differences of mer-
chants, slaveholders, and manufacturers, a debate of haves versus haves in
which each group sought safeguards in the new Constitution for its particular
concerns. Added to this were disagreements about constitutional structure.
‘‘Religious freedom is my immediate goal, but my long-range plan is to go into real estate.’’
8
Chapter 2

How might the legislature be organized? How much representation should the
large and small states have? How should the executive be selected?
The founders decided on a bicameral legislation, consisting of a House of
Representatives elected every two years in its entirety and a Senate with six-
year staggered terms. It was decided that seats in the House would be allo-
cated among the states according to population, while each state, regardless
of population, would have two seats in the Senate.
Major questions relating to the new government’s ability to protect the
interests of property were agreed upon with surprisingly little debate. On these
issues, there were no poor farmers, artisans, indentured servants, or slaves at-
tending the convention to proffer an opposing viewpoint. Ordinary working
people could not take off four months to go to Philadelphia and write a con-
stitution. The debate between haves and have-nots never took place.
Not surprisingly, Article I, Section 8, that crucial portion of the Constitu-
tion that enables the federal government to serve the interests of investment
property, was adopted within a few days with little debate. Congress was
given the power to regulate commerce among the states and with foreign na-
tions and Indian tribes, lay and collect taxes and excises, impose duties and
tariffs on imports but not on commercial exports, “Pay the Debts and provide
for the common Defence and general Welfare of the United States,” establish a
national currency and regulate its value, borrow money, fix the standard of
weights and measures necessary for commerce, protect the value of securities
and currency against counterfeiting, and establish uniform bankruptcy laws
throughout the country—all measures of primary concern to investors, mer-
chants, and creditors.
Some of the delegates were land speculators who invested in western hold-
ings. Accordingly, Congress was given the power to regulate and protect all
western territorial property. Most of the delegates speculated in government
securities, inflated paper scrip that the earlier Confederation had issued to
pay soldiers and small suppliers. Wealthy speculators bought from impover-
ished holders huge amounts of these nearly worthless securities for a trifling.
Under Article VI, all debts incurred by the Confederation were valid against
the new government, a provision that allowed the speculators to reap enor-
mous profits by cashing in the inflated scrip at face value.14
By assuming this debt, the federal government—under the policies of the
first secretary of the treasury, Alexander Hamilton—used the public treasury
to create by government fiat a vast amount of private capital and credit for
big investors, to be funded by the government’s newly established ability to
lay taxes. The payment of the debt came out of the pockets of the general pub-
lic and went into the pockets of moneyed individuals who were creditors to
the government by virtue of their possessing the inflated scrip. This federally
assumed debt consumed nearly 80 percent of the annual federal revenue dur-
ing the 1790s.15 This process of using the taxing power to gather money from
the working populace in order to bolster private fortunes continues to this
day, as we shall see in the chapters ahead.
In the interest of merchants and creditors, the states were prohibited from
issuing paper money or imposing duties on imports and exports or interfering
A Constitution for the Few
9

with the payment of debts by passing any “Law impairing the Obligation of
Contracts.” The Constitution guaranteed “Full Faith and Credit” in each state
“to the Acts, Records, and judicial Proceedings” of other states, thus allowing
creditors to pursue their debtors across state lines.
Slavery—considered a major form of property—was afforded special ac-
commodation in the Constitution. Three-fifths of the slave population in
each state were to be counted when calculating the state’s representation in
the lower house. This gave the slave states a third more representation in Con-
gress than was otherwise merited. This disproportionate distribution of seats
helped the slave interests to pass laws that extended slavery into new territo-
ries and discouraged Congress from moving toward abolition.
The Constitution never abolished the slave trade. Indeed, the importation
of slaves was explicitly guaranteed for another twenty years until 1808, after
which there would be the option—but no requirement—that it be abolished.
Many slaveholders assumed they would have enough political clout to keep
the trade going beyond that year. Slaves who escaped from one state to an-
other had to be delivered up to the original owner upon claim, a provision
(Article IV, Section 2) that was unanimously adopted at the Convention.16
The framers believed the states were not sufficiently forceful in suppres-
sing popular uprisings like Shays’s Rebellion, so the federal government was
empowered to protect the states “against domestic Violence,” and Congress
was given the task of organizing the militia and calling it forth to “suppress
Insurrections.” Provision was made for erecting forts, arsenals, and armories,
and for the maintenance of an army and navy for both national defense and
to establish an armed federal presence within potentially insurrectionary
states. This measure was to prove a godsend to the industrial barons a century
later when the U.S. Army was used repeatedly to break mass strikes by miners
and railroad and factory workers.
FRAGMENTING MAJORITY POWER
In keeping with their desire to contain the propertyless majority, the founders
inserted what Madison called “auxiliary precautions” designed to fragment
power without democratizing it. They separated the executive, legislative,
and judicial functions and then provided a system of checks and balances be-
tween the three branches, including staggered elections, executive veto, the
possibility of overturning the veto with a two-thirds majority in both houses,
Senate confirmation of appointments and ratification of treaties, and a bicam-
eral legislature. They contrived an elaborate and difficult process for amend-
ing the Constitution, requiring proposal by two-thirds of both the Senate and
the House and ratification by three-fourths of the state legislatures.17 To the
extent that it existed at all, the majoritarian principle was tightly locked into a
system of minority vetoes, making swift and sweeping popular action less
likely.
The propertyless majority, as Madison pointed out in Federalist No. 10,
must not be allowed to concert in common cause against the propertied class
and its established social order. The larger the nation, the greater the “variety
10
Chapter 2

of parties and interests” and the more difficult it would be for a mass majority
to act in unison. As Madison argued, “A rage for paper money, for an aboli-
tion of debts, for an equal division of property, or for any other wicked proj-
ect will be less apt to pervade the whole body of the Union than a particular
member of it.” An uprising of impoverished farmers might threaten Massa-
chusetts at one time and Rhode Island at another, but a national government
would be large enough to contain each of these and insulate the rest of the
nation from the contamination of rebellion.
Not only should the low-income majority be prevented from coalescing,
its upward thrust upon government also should be blunted with indirect forms
of representation.
•
The senators from each state were to be elected by their respective state
legislatures rather than directly by the voters.
•
Direct popular election of the Senate was achieved in 1913 when the Sev-
enteenth Amendment was adopted—126 years after the Philadelphia
Convention—demonstrating that the Constitution is sometimes modifi-
able in a democratic direction, though it does seem to take a bit of time.
•
Senatorial elections were to be staggered, with only a third of the Senate
facing election every two years, thereby minimizing a sweeping change.
•
The president was to be selected by an electoral college whose members,
by 1800, were elected by the people in only five states, and by state leg-
islatures or county sheriffs in the other eleven states.
•
As anticipated by the framers, the Electoral College would act as a
damper on popular sentiment. Composed of political leaders and “men
of substance,” elected in each state by the voters, the Electoral College
would convene months after the election in their various states and
choose a president of their own liking. It was believed they usually would
be unable to muster a majority for any one candidate, and that the final
selection would be left to the House, with each state delegation therein
having only one vote.
•
The Supreme Court was to be elected by no one, its justices being ap-
pointed to life tenure by the president, with confirmation by the Senate.
The only portion of government to be directly elected by the people was
the House of Representatives. Many of the delegates were against this ar-
rangement. They were concerned that with direct elections demagogues would
ride into office on a populist tide only to pillage the treasury and wreak havoc
on the wealthy class. John Mercer observed that he found nothing in the pro-
posed Constitution more objectionable than “the mode of election by the
people.” And Gouverneur Morris warned, “The time is not distant, when
this Country will abound with mechanics [artisans] and manufacturers [fac-
tory and mill workers] who will receive their bread from their employers.
Will such men be the secure and faithful Guardians of liberty? … The igno-
rant and dependent [that is, poor and unschooled] can be … little trusted
with the public interest.”18
When the delegates finally agreed to having “the people” elect the lower
house, as noted earlier, they were referring to a select portion of the
A Constitution for the Few
11

population that excluded almost all White males without property, all Native
Americans, all indentured servants, and all females of whatever race. Also ex-
cluded were slaves, who constituted almost one-fourth of the nation’s popula-
tion. Even among those African Americans who had gained their freedom in
both North and South, few were allowed to vote.
PLOTTERS OR PATRIOTS?
In a groundbreaking book published in 1913, historian Charles Beard fa-
mously argued that the framers were guided by the interests of their affluent
class. Disputing Beard are those who say that the framers were concerned
with higher things than just lining their purses. True, they were moneyed
men who profited directly from policies initiated under the new Constitution,
but they were motivated by a concern for nation building that went beyond
their particular class interests.
That is exactly the point: high-mindedness is a common attribute among
people even when, or especially when, they are pursuing their personal and
class interests. The fallacy is to presume that there is a dichotomy between
the desire to build a strong nation and the desire to protect wealth and that
the framers could not have been motivated by both. In fact, like most other
people, they believed that what was good for themselves was ultimately good
for their country. Their nation-building values and class interests went hand in
hand, and to discover the existence of the “higher” sentiment does not elimi-
nate the self-interested one.
Indeed, the problem is that most people too easily and self-servingly be-
lieve in their own virtue. The founders were no exception. They never doubted
the nobility of their effort and its importance for the generations to come. Just
as many of them could feel dedicated to the principle of “liberty for all” while
owning slaves, so could they serve both their nation and their estates. The
point is not that they were devoid of the grander sentiments of nation build-
ing, but that there was nothing in their concept of nation that worked against
their class interest and a great deal that worked for it.
The framers may not have been solely concerned with getting their own
hands in the till, although enough of them did, but they were explicitly con-
cerned with defending the interests of the wealthy few from the laboring
many. “The Constitution,” as Staughton Lynd noted, “was the settlement of
a revolution. What was at stake for Hamilton, Livingston, and their oppo-
nents was more than speculative windfalls in securities; it was the question,
what kind of society would emerge from the revolution when the dust had
settled, and on which class the political center of gravity would come to
rest.”19
The small farmers and debtors, who opposed a central government that
would be even further from their reach than the local and state governments,
have been described as motivated by self-serving, parochial interests, unlike
the supposedly high-minded statesmen who journeyed to Philadelphia.20 How
and why the wealthy became visionary nation builders is never explained. Not
too long before, many of them had been proponents of laissez-faire and had
12
Chapter 2

opposed a strong central government. In truth, it was not their minds that were
so much broader but their economic interests. Their motives were no higher
than those of any other social group struggling for place and power in the
United States of 1787. But possessing more time, money, information, and or-
ganization, they enjoyed superior results.
Though supposedly dedicated to selfless and upright goals, the delegates
nevertheless bound themselves to the strictest secrecy. Proceedings were con-
ducted behind locked doors and shuttered windows (despite the sweltering
Philadelphia summer). Madison’s notes, which recorded most of the actual de-
liberations, were published, at his insistence, only after all participants were
dead, fifty-three years later, most likely to avoid political embarrassment to
them.21
The founders were motivated by high-minded objectives, some people say,
but they repeatedly stated their intention to erect a government strong enough
to protect the haves from the have-nots (which for them was one of their high-
minded objectives). Deliberating behind closed doors, these wealthy men gave
voice to the crassest class prejudices and most disparaging opinions about
popular involvement. Their concern was to diminish popular control and re-
sist all tendencies toward class equalization (or “leveling,” as it was called).
Their dedication to their propertied class interests were so unabashedly
avowed as to cause one delegate, James Wilson of Pennsylvania, to complain
of hearing too much about how the primary object of government was prop-
erty. The cultivation and improvement of the human mind, he maintained,
was the most noble objective of the polity—a fine sentiment that evoked no
opposition from his colleagues as they continued about their business.
The framers supposedly had a “realistic” opinion of the rapacious nature
of human beings—readily evidenced when they talked about the common peo-
ple—yet they held a rather sanguine view of the self-interested impulses of
their own class, which they saw as inhabited largely by virtuous men of “prin-
ciple and property.” As the “minority faction” these gentlemen would not sac-
rifice the rights of other citizens, especially the right to pursue property and
wealth, a pursuit that they believed constituted the essence of liberty.22
In sum, the Constitution was consciously designed as a conservative doc-
ument, elaborately equipped with a system of minority locks and dams in or-
der to resist popular tides. The Constitution furnished special provisions for
the slaveholding class and for a rising bourgeoisie. For the founders, liberty
meant something different from democracy. It meant liberty to invest, specu-
late, trade, and accumulate wealth without encroachment by the common
populace.
The democratic civil liberties designed to give all individuals the right to
engage in public affairs won little support from the delegates. When George
Mason of Virginia recommended that a committee be formed to draft “a Bill
of Rights,” a task that could be accomplished “in a few hours,” the other con-
vention members offered little discussion on the motion and voted almost
unanimously against it.
If the Constitution was such an elitist document, how did it manage to win
ratification? It was strongly opposed in most of the states. Virginia’s Patrick
A Constitution for the Few
13

Henry charged that the Constitution enabled “a contemptible minority [to] pre-
vent the good of the majority.”23 But the same superiority of wealth, organiza-
tion, and control of political office and ownership of the press that allowed the
rich to monopolize the Philadelphia Convention enabled them to orchestrate a
successful ratification campaign. The Federalists also used bribes, intimidation,
and fraud against their opponents.
What is more, the Constitution never was submitted to a popular vote.
Ratification was by state conventions, each composed of delegates drawn
mostly from the same affluent stratum as the framers. Those who voted for
these delegates themselves usually had to qualify as property holders. Proba-
bly not more than 20 percent of the adult White males voted for delegates to
the ratifying conventions.24
DEMOCRATIC CONCESSIONS
For all its undemocratic aspects, the Constitution was not without its histori-
cally progressive features. Consider the following:25
•
The very existence of a written constitution with specifically limited powers
represented an advance over more autocratic forms of government.
•
No property qualifications were required for any federal officeholder, un-
like in England and most of the states. And salaries were provided for all
officials, thus rejecting the common practice of treating public office as a
voluntary service that only the rich could afford.
14
Chapter 2

•
The president and legislators were elected for fixed terms. No one could
claim a life tenure on any elective office.
•
Article VI reads, “no religious Test shall ever be required as a Qualifica-
tion to any Office or public Trust under the United States,” a feature that
represented a distinct advance over a number of state constitutions that
banned Catholics, Jews, and nonbelievers from holding office.
•
Bills of attainder, the practice of declaring by legislative fiat a specific per-
son or group of people guilty of an offense, without benefit of a trial,
were made unconstitutional. Also outlawed were ex post facto laws, the
practice of declaring some act to be a crime and then punishing those
who had committed it before it was made unlawful.
•
There was strong popular sentiment for a Bill of Rights. In order to ensure
ratification, supporters of the new Constitution pledged the swift adoption
of such a bill as a condition for ratification. So, in the first session of Con-
gress, the first ten amendments were swiftly passed and then adopted by
the states. These rights included freedom of speech and religion; freedom
to assemble peaceably and to petition for redress of grievances; the right
to keep arms; freedom from unreasonable searches and seizures; freedom
from self-incrimination, double jeopardy, cruel and unusual punishment,
and excessive bail and fines; the right to a fair and impartial trial; and
other forms of due process.
•
The Bill of Rights, specifically the Ninth Amendment, explicitly acknowl-
edges that the people have a reserve of rights that go beyond the Consti-
tution. Hence the enumeration of specific rights “shall not be construed
to deny or disparage others retained by the people.”
•
The Bill of Rights also prohibited Congress from giving state support to
any religion or designating any religion as the official one. Religion was
to be something apart from government, supported only by its own be-
lievers and not by the taxpayer—a stricture that often has been violated
in practice.
Contrary to the notion propagated today by many religionists, the foun-
ders did not establish this nation upon religious principles. Thomas Jefferson
advised that we “question with boldness even the existence of a god.” John
Adams wrote, “This would be the best of possible worlds if there was no reli-
gion in it.” James Madison concluded that during almost fifteen centuries the
fruits of Christianity have been “superstition, bigotry and persecution” in
both clergy and laity. Benjamin Franklin openly questioned the divinity of
Jesus. If the delegates in Philadelphia were intent upon inaugurating a Chris-
tian republic, why does the Constitution contain not a single reference to God,
Jesus, or Christianity? As one Christian theologian conceded, “The men who
… put together the Constitution were not Christians by any stretch of the
imagination.”26
The Constitution consolidated the victory of republicanism over British
imperialism. It guaranteed a republican form of government and explicitly re-
pudiated monarchy and aristocracy; hence, Article I, Section 9 states: “No title
of Nobility shall be granted by the United States.”
A Constitution for the Few
15

According to James McHenry, a delegate from Maryland, at least twenty-
one of the fifty-five delegates favored some form of monarchy. Yet few dared
venture in that direction out of fear of popular opposition. Furthermore, dele-
gates like Madison believed that stability for their class order was best assured
by a republican form of government. The time had come for the rich bour-
geoisie to rule directly without the troublesome intrusions of parasitic nobles
and kings.
On a number of occasions during the Philadelphia Convention, this as-
semblage of men who feared and loathed democracy found it necessary to
show some regard for popular sentiment (as with the direct election of the
lower house). If the Constitution was going to be accepted by the states and
if the new government was to have any stability, it had to gain some measure
of popular acceptance.
While the delegates and their class dominated the events of 1787–1789,
they were far from omnipotent. The class system they sought to preserve was
itself the cause of marked restiveness among the people. Land seizures by the
poor, food riots, and other violent disturbances occurred throughout the eigh-
teenth century in just about every state and erstwhile colony. This popular fer-
ment spurred the framers in their effort to erect a strong central government,
but it also set a limit on what they could do.
The delegates “gave” nothing to popular interests, rather—as with the Bill
of Rights—they reluctantly made democratic concessions under the threat of
popular rebellion. They kept what they could and grudgingly relinquished
what they felt they had to, driven not by a love of democracy but by a fear
of it, not by a love of the people but by a prudent desire to avoid riot and
insurgency. The Constitution, then, was a product not only of class privilege
but of class struggle—a struggle that continued as the corporate economy and
the government grew.
16
Chapter 2

C
H
A
P
T
E
R
3
Rise of the Corporate State
Contrary to what is commonly taught, the history of the United States has
been marked by intense and often violent labor struggles, with the government
playing a partisan role in these conflicts, mostly on the side of big business.
THE WAR AGAINST LABOR
The upper-class dominance of public life so characteristic of the founding
fathers’ generation continued throughout the nineteenth century. As early as
1816, Thomas Jefferson complained of an “aristocracy of our monied cor-
porations which … bid defiance to the laws of our country.” In the 1830s,
the period of “Jacksonian democracy,” supposedly the “era of the common
man,” President Andrew Jackson’s key appointments were drawn overwhelm-
ingly from the ranks of the rich, and his policies regarding trade, finances, and
the use of government lands reflected the interests of wealthy investors.1
In an address before “the Mechanics and Working Classes” in 1827, a
worker lamented: “We find ourselves oppressed on every hand—we labor
hard in producing all the comforts of life for the enjoyment of others, while
we ourselves obtain but a scanty portion.” In 1845 in New York, Baltimore,
New Orleans, St. Louis, and other urban centers, the richest 1 percent
owned the lion’s share of the wealth, while a third of the population was
utterly destitute. Poverty and overcrowding brought cholera and typhoid
epidemics, causing the wealthy to flee the cities, while the poor—having
nowhere to go and no way to get there even if they did—stayed and died.
Living in misery, many impoverished people were addicted to alcohol and
drugs (mostly opium). Children as young as nine and ten toiled fourteen-
hour shifts, falling asleep at the machines they tended, suffering from malnu-
trition and sickness.2
17

During these industrial conflicts, Native Americans struggled valiantly
against the expropriation of their lands and the systematic slaughter of their
people, a process that began with the earliest seventeenth-century European
settlements and continued through the eighteenth and most of the nineteenth
centuries, ending with the tribal remnants being confined to desolate, impo-
verished reservations.3
Large landowners and corporations profited greatly from slave labor.
Slaves were used to lay railroads, construct oil lines, harvest tobacco and cot-
ton, and dig for coal, salt, and marble. Insurance companies sold policies to
slaveholders for their human “property.”
Emancipation did not bring liberation to all persons held in servitude. For
more than sixty years, well into the twentieth century, hundreds of thousands
of indigent African Americans were forced to toil at construction sites, rail-
roads, mines, and large farms under slave labor conditions. Arrested for trivial
offenses such as gambling or foul language, they had to work off the inflated
costs of their keep, which they invariably were unable to do. Subjected to
whippings and torture, unsafe work conditions, and wretched food and hous-
ing, tens of thousands perished. One of the biggest users of this convict slave
labor was a subsidiary of U.S. Steel Corporation.4
The corporate struggle against labor in nineteenth-century America, with
its farmers’ rebellions and massive rail and industrial strikes, was as fierce as
any in the industrial world. Civil authorities intervened almost invariably on
18
Chapter 3

the side of the owning class to quell disturbances and crush strikes. State and
federal courts branded “labor combinations” (unions) as conspiracies against
private property and the Constitution.5
Throughout the nineteenth century and well into the twentieth, police, mi-
litia, company thugs, and federal troops attacked strikers and other protes-
tors, killed hundreds, and injured and jailed thousands more. In 1886, police
in Chicago’s Haymarket Square killed at least twenty demonstrators, while
wounding some two hundred in response to a thrown bomb that killed seven
police. Four anarchist leaders—none of whom had been present—were tried
and hanged for having printed appeals some days earlier that supposedly
inspired the incident.
That same year, thirty-five striking African American sugar workers
were massacred in Thibodaux, Louisiana, by a militia detachment composed
of the town’s affluent citizens. The two strike leaders were dragged from jail
and lynched. In 1892, Pinkerton gun thugs hired by a steel company killed
nine striking steel workers in Homestead, Pennsylvania. The strike was even-
tually broken by the National Guard. In 1894, U.S. Army troops killed
thirty-four railroad workers who were among those on strike against the
Pullman company. Over the next few years, scores of striking coal miners
were murdered.6
In the infamous Ludlow Massacre of 1914, Colorado National Guardsmen
fired into a tent colony of miners who were on strike against a Rockefeller-
owned company, killing forty, including two women and eleven children. In
1919, faced with a general strike that began in Seattle and spread elsewhere, the
U.S. Attorney General arrested more than 100,000 workers in seventy cities
across the nation. That same year in Arkansas, over one hundred striking
cotton pickers were massacred by U.S. troops and an armed contingent of
the town’s most prosperous citizens. In 1915, sheriff’s deputies in Everett,
Washington, killed eleven and wounded twenty-seven members of the Industrial
Workers of the World (IWW) who were protesting restrictions on free speech.
In 1932, Henry Ford’s private police fired upon unemployed factory workers,
killing four and wounding twenty-four. In 1937, the Chicago police fired upon
a peaceful crowd of striking steel workers, killing ten and wounding over forty.
An additional six strikers were killed on picket lines in Ohio.7
As even this incomplete list suggests, the forces of “law and order” were
repeatedly utilized to suppress organized labor. The industrial barons regu-
larly called state militia and federal soldiers to their assistance. Short of having
the regular army permanently garrisoned in industrial areas, as was the desire
of some wealthy owners, government officials took steps “to establish an
effective anti-radical National Guard.”8
FAVORS FOR BUSINESS
The same federal government that was unable to stop the illegal slave trade
and the violence perpetrated against abolitionists was able to comb the land
with bands of federal marshals to capture fugitive slaves and return them to
their masters. The same government that could not find the constitutional
Rise of the Corporate State
19

means to eliminate contaminated foods and befouled water supplies could use
federal troops to break strikes, shoot hundreds of workers, and slaughter
thousands of Native Americans. The same government that had not a dollar
for the indigent (poverty being a matter best left to private charity) gave away
21 million acres of land and $51 million in government bonds to a few rail-
road magnates. And statutes intended to outlaw monopolies and trade con-
spiracies were rarely used except against labor unions.
While insisting that competition worked best for all, most business people
showed little inclination to deliver themselves to the exacting imperatives
of an untrammeled free market. Instead they resorted to ruthless business
practices to squeeze out competitors. So by the 1890s, John D. Rockefeller’s
Standard Oil controlled roughly 80 percent of the U.S. oil market. At the same
time the big corporations gorged themselves at the public trough, battening on
fat government contracts, subsidies, land grants, and protective tariffs.
The Constitution makes no mention of corporations. For the first few de-
cades of the new nation, corporate charters were issued sparingly for specific
purposes and fixed periods, usually of twenty or thirty years. Corporations
could not own stock in other corporations or any land beyond what they
needed for their business. Corporate records were open to public scrutiny;
and state legislatures limited the rates that corporations could charge. In
time, with the growing power of the business class, all such democratic con-
trols were eliminated, and corporations emerged as powers unto themselves.9
Using the law of “eminent domain,” the government took land from
farmers and gave it to canal and railroad companies. The idea of a fair price
and safe product for consumers was replaced with the doctrine of caveat emp-
tor (let the buyer beware). Workers were killed or maimed in unsafe work
conditions, without employers being held liable. By the late nineteenth cen-
tury, millions of dollars collected by the government “from the consuming
population, and above all from the … poor wage earners and farmers,” con-
stituting an enormous budget surplus, was doled out to big investors.10 Like-
wise, a billion acres of public land, property of the American people,
constituting almost half the present continental United States, was privatized.
This benevolent government handed over to its friends or to astute first
comers, … all those treasures of coal and oil, of copper and gold and iron, the
land grants, the terminal sites, the perpetual rights of way—an act of largesse
which is still one of the wonders of history. The Tariff Act of 1864 was in itself a
sheltering wall of subsidies; and to aid further the new heavy industries and
manufactures, an Immigration Act allowing contract labor to be imported freely
was quickly enacted; a national banking system was perfected.11
In regard to the needs of the common people, however, the government
remained laissez-faire, giving little attention to poverty, unemployment, unsafe
work conditions, child labor, and the spoliation of natural resources.
Yet democratic struggle persisted. A women’s suffrage movement gath-
ered strength. In pursuit of a living wage and decent work conditions, labor
unions repeatedly regrouped their shattered ranks to fight pitched battles
against the industrial moguls. One important victory was the defeat of the
20
Chapter 3

Southern slavocracy in the Civil War and the abolition of legalized slavery.
During Reconstruction (1867–1877) the former Confederate states were put
under federal military occupation. The new state governments set up in the
South by the U.S. Congress decreed universal suffrage for males of all races
and incomes, along with popular assemblies, fairer taxes, schools for the
poor, and some limited land reform. But once the Northern capitalists allied
themselves with the Southern oligarchs and put an end to Reconstruction, bet-
ter to face their joint struggles against laborers and farmers, most of these
democratic gains were rolled back, not to be recouped until well into the
next century—if then.12
African Americans struggled in the decades after Reconstruction to rise
above the cusp of poverty, only to meet malevolent defeat in crushing waves
of terrorism and repeated violence at the hands of Whites of all classes.13
PLIABLE PROGRESSIVES AND RED SCARES
In the twentieth century, wealthy interests continued to look to the federal
government to do for them what they could not do for themselves: repress
democratic forces and advance the process of capital accumulation. During
the 1900–1916 period, known as the Progressive Era, federal laws were
enacted to protect consumers and workers from unsafe conditions in such
industries as meatpacking, food and drugs, banking, timber, and mining.
Often these regulations mandated expensive improvements and safety features
that were designed to advantage the strongest companies at the expense of
smaller competitors.14
The individuals who occupied the presidency during that era were faithful
collaborators of big business. Teddy Roosevelt, for one, was hailed as a “trust
buster” because of his verbal thrusts against the “malefactors of great
wealth,” yet he was hostile toward unionists and reformers, and invited busi-
ness magnates into his administration. Neither William Howard Taft nor
Woodrow Wilson, the other two White House occupants of that period,
launched any serious operations against big business. Wilson, a Democrat,
railed against giant trusts but his campaign funds came from a few rich con-
tributors. He worked with associates of Morgan and Rockefeller about as
closely as any Republican. “Progressivism was not the triumph of small busi-
ness over the trusts, as has often been suggested, but the victory of big busi-
nesses in achieving the rationalization of the economy that only the federal
government could provide.”15
The period is called the Progressive Era because of the much publicized
but largely ineffectual legislation to control monopolies, and because of the
Sixteenth Amendment allowing for a graduated income tax, the Seventeenth
Amendment providing for the direct election of U.S. senators, and such dubi-
ous electoral reforms as the long ballot and nonpartisan elections. In addition,
many states initiated legislation limiting the length of the workday and provid-
ing worker’s compensation for industrial accidents. Several states passed
minimum-wage laws, and thirty-eight states enacted child labor laws restrict-
ing the age children could be employed and the hours they could work.
Rise of the Corporate State
21

These enactments, representing long-standing demands by workers, were
wrested from a resistant owning class after much bitter and bloody contest.
Even so, much of the reform legislation went unenforced or proved ineffec-
tual. Millions toiled twelve- and fourteen-hour days, six or seven days a
week. According to government figures, 2 million children had to work in
order to supplement the family income. Workers’ real wages (that is, adjusted
for inflation) were lower in 1914 than even during the 1890s. As of 1916,
millions worked for wages that could not adequately feed a family. Each
year 35,000 were killed on the job, while 700,000 suffered serious injuries
and work-related disabilities.16
World War I brought industry and government ever closer. Large sectors
of the economy were converted to war production along lines proposed
by business leaders. The war helped quell class conflict at home by focusing
people’s attention on the menace of Germany’s “barbarian Huns.” Americans
were exhorted to make sacrifices for the war effort. Strikes were now treated
as seditious interference with war production. Federal troops raided and
ransacked union headquarters and imprisoned large numbers of workers
suspected of radical sympathies. In 1918, as the war was winding down, Con-
gress passed the Sedition Act, which mandated a twenty-year prison sentence
for any “disloyal” opinion or contemptuous reference to the U.S. government,
flag, or Constitution. Harsh sentences were dealt out to labor organizers,
socialists, and anarchists. Later that year, the U.S. Attorney General proudly
told Congress: “Never in its history has this country been so thoroughly
policed.”17
During the postwar “Red scare” of 1919–1921, the federal government
continued to suppress radical publications, violently mistreat strikers, and
inflict mass arrests, deportations, political trials, and congressional investiga-
tions of political dissidents. The public was treated to lurid stories of how the
Bolsheviks (Russian Communists) were about to invade the United States, and
how they were murdering anyone in their own country who could read or
write or who wore a white collar.18 Bourgeois leaders around the world
greeted the Russian Revolution of 1917 as a nightmare come true: the work-
ers and peasants had overthrown not only the autocratic Czar but the capital-
ist class that owned the factories, mineral resources, and most of the lands of
the Czarist empire. As Secretary of State Robert Lansing noted, the Russian
Revolution was a bad example to the common people in other nations, includ-
ing the United States.19 Along with England, France, and eleven other capital-
ist nations, the United States invaded Soviet Russia in 1917 in a bloody but
unsuccessful three-year attempt to overthrow the revolutionary government,
a chapter of history about which most Americans have never been informed.
The “Jazz Age” of the 1920s (the “roaring twenties”) was supposedly a
prosperous era. Stock speculations and other get-rich-quick schemes abounded.
But the bulk of the population lived under conditions of severe want, often
lacking basic necessities. In 1928, Congressman Fiorello La Guardia reported
on his tour of the poorer districts of New York City: “I confess I was not pre-
pared for what I actually saw. It seemed almost incredible that such conditions
of poverty could really exist.”20
22
Chapter 3

The stock market crash of October 1929 ushered in the Great Depression,
signaling a major collapse of productive forces. Consumer demand could not
keep up with production. Employees were not paid enough to buy back the
goods and services they produced. As supplies and inventories piled up, busi-
nesses cut back on their workforce, intensifying the downward spiral. The job
losses only sharpened the decline in the public’s buying power, which in turn
led to more layoffs, less buying power, and more business shutdowns, bank
failures, and investment losses until the entire market crashed. In the Great
Depression’s first four years, 15 million workers lost their jobs and millions
lost their retirement savings. There was no national system of unemployment
insurance and few pension plans. Farmers lost their farms; crops rotted while
millions went hungry.
Those lucky enough to still have jobs during the Great Depression of the
1930s faced increasingly oppressive work conditions: speedups, wage and
salary cuts, and a deterioration in safety standards. In addition, employees
endured “thought and speech control so intense in some plants that workers
never spoke except to ask or give instructions.” They often could not question
deductions from paychecks, and they were subjected to “beatings by strike-
breaking Pinkertons and thugs, and … to the searches of their homes by com-
pany men looking for stolen articles.”21
THE NEW DEAL: HARD TIMES AND TOUGH REFORMS
In 1932 Senator Hugo Black (D-Ala.) observed, “Labor has been underpaid
and capital overpaid. This is one of the chief contributing causes of the present
depression…. You cannot starve men employed in industry and depend upon
them to purchase.”22 Even banker Frank Vanderlip admitted, “Capital kept
too much and labor did not have enough to buy its share of things.”23 But
most members of the plutocracy blamed the depression on its victims. Thus,
millionaire Henry Ford said the crisis came because “the average man won’t
really do a day’s work…. There is plenty of work to do if people would do
it.” A few weeks later Ford laid off seventy-five thousand workers.24
With a third of the nation ill-fed, ill-clothed, and ill-housed, and easily an-
other third just barely getting by, a torrent of strikes swept the nation, involv-
ing hundreds of thousands of workers. Between 1936 and 1940, the newly
formed Congress of Industrial Organizations (CIO) organized millions of
workers and won significant gains in wages and work conditions. These victo-
ries were achieved only after protracted struggles in which many thousands
occupied factories in sit-downs, or were locked out, blacklisted, beaten, and
arrested; hundreds more were wounded or killed by police, soldiers, and com-
pany thugs.25 The gains were real but they came at a high price.
The first two terms of President Franklin Roosevelt’s administration have
been called the New Deal, an era commonly believed to have brought
great transformations on behalf of “the forgotten man” (Roosevelt’s phrase).
Actually, the New Deal’s prime dedication was to business recovery rather
than social reform. First came the National Recovery Administration (NRA),
which set up “code authorities,” usually composed of the leading corporate
Rise of the Corporate State
23

representatives in each industry, to restrict production and set minimum price
requirements—with results that were more beneficial to big corporations than
to smaller competitors.26 In attempting to spur production, the Reconstruc-
tion Finance Corporation alone lent $15 billion to big business.
The federal housing program subsidized construction firms and mortgage
bankers—all of little benefit to the many millions of ill-housed. Likewise, the
New Deal’s efforts in agriculture primarily benefited the large producers
through a series of price supports and production cutbacks. Many tenant
farmers and sharecroppers were evicted when federal acreage rental programs
took land out of cultivation.27
The slump in consumption and the glut of unbought goods caused a
severe drop in prices in many markets, including farm products. To bolster
prices, the New Dealers paid farmers to destroy millions of acres of cotton
crops, vast wheat reserves, and millions of hogs and piglets. The stark contrast
of overabundance and hunger caused many to question the serviceability of
capitalism. “Food had to be destroyed to save the market.”28 The public out-
cry caused the White House to form the Federal Surplus Relief Corporation,
which bought up large amounts of surplus foods to feed the unemployed.
Faced with mass unrest, the federal government created a variety of relief
programs that eased some of the privation. But as the New Deal moved to-
ward measures that threatened to compete with private enterprises and under-
mine low wage structures, business withdrew its support and became openly
hostile. While infuriating Roosevelt, who saw himself as trying to rescue the
capitalist system, business opposition enhanced his reformist image in the pub-
lic mind.
The disparity between the New Deal’s popular image and its actual accom-
plishments remains one of the unappreciated aspects of the Roosevelt era. For
instance, the Civilian Conservation Corps (CCC) provided jobs at subsistence
wages for only 3 million of the 15 million unemployed. At its peak, the Works
Progress Administration (WPA) and related agencies employed almost 9 million
people but often for unstable duration and grossly inadequate wages. Of the
millions who were earning subsistence wages, only about half a million were
helped by the minimum-wage law. The Social Security Act of 1935 covered
but half the population and provided paltry monthly payments with no medical
insurance or protection against illness before retirement. Unemployment insur-
ance covered only those who had enjoyed sustained employment in select occu-
pations. Implementation was left to the states, which were free to set whatever
restrictive conditions they chose.29
While government programs were markedly inadequate for the needs of
the destitute, they helped dilute public discontent. But once the threat of polit-
ical unrest subsided, federal relief was slashed, and large numbers of destitute
people were thrust onto a labor market already glutted with unemployed.30
The Roosevelt administration’s tax policy was virtually a continuation of
former President Hoover’s program, with its generous loopholes for business.
When taxes were increased to pay for military spending in World War II, the
major burden was taken up by middle- and low-income classes that had never
before been subjected to income taxes.31
24
Chapter 3

All this is not to deny that, in response to enormous popular agitation and
the threat of widespread radicalization, the Roosevelt administration pro-
duced real democratic gains, including some long overdue social welfare legis-
lation, a number of worthwhile conservation and public works projects, a
rural electrification program, and a reduction in unemployment from 25 to
19 percent. Millions of hungry and destitute people were fed and sheltered.
The steep inequality in income was noticeably eased, thanks to stronger un-
ions, greater regulation of industry, and progressive taxes on corporate profits
and wealth. Under Social Security, working people won not only retirement
pensions but disability insurance and survivors insurance (for children of
deceased workers).
The New Deal built or improved roads across the country, and con-
structed thousands of schools, parks, playgrounds, athletic fields, and air-
ports, along with hundreds of hospitals, post offices, bridges, tunnels, and
courthouses. The CCC created fifty-two thousand acres of public camp
grounds, built over thirteen thousand foot trails, and restored almost four
thousand historic landmarks or monuments. It stocked waterways with mil-
lions of fish, made important contributions to firefighting, rodent and pest
control, water conservation, and preventing soil erosion. Thousands of unem-
ployed writers, actors, musicians, and painters were given modest support and
opportunity to enrich the lives of many in performances that ordinary people
could afford to attend.
Before the Roosevelt era, unions were readily broken by court injunctions,
heavy fines, and violent repression. The New Deal produced a series of laws
such as the Wagner Act and the Norris-La Guardia Act to legalize labor’s abil-
ity to bargain collectively. Management-controlled company unions were
banned, and a minimum wage and forty-hour week were established. Con-
gress set up the National Labor Relations Board (NLRB) with broad powers
to oversee the certification of unions and penalize employers who violated the
organizing rights of workers. Such legislation was both a response and a stim-
ulus to labor’s growing organization and militancy.32
Yet the New Deal era hardly adds up to a great triumph for the common
people. They were ready to go a lot further than Roosevelt did, and probably
would have accepted a nationalized banking system, a more massive job pro-
gram, and a national health care system. In regard to desegregation, open
housing, fair employment practices, anti-lynch laws, and voting rights for
Blacks, the New Deal did nothing. Domestics and farmworkers, the two
most common occupations for African Americans at the time, were excluded
from Social Security coverage. African Americans were excluded from jobs in
the Civilian Conservation Corps, received less than their proportional share of
public assistance, and under the NRA were frequently paid wages below the
legal minimum.33
After the United States entered World War II in December 1941, indus-
trial plant utilization more than doubled. The gross national product, which
had stood at $88 billion in 1940, mushroomed to $135 billion within a few
years. Those who profited most were the industrial tycoons and arms contrac-
tors. But some of it trickled down. Almost all the 8.7 million unemployed
Rise of the Corporate State
25

were either drafted into the armed forces or drawn back into the workforce,
along with 10 million new workers, many of them women. Only by entering
the war and remaining thereafter on a permanent war economy was the
United States able to significantly reduce unemployment. The ruling politico-
economic elites were willing to make the kind of all-out spending effort to kill
people in wartime that they would not make to assist people in peacetime.
In sum, over the nineteenth and twentieth centuries, government’s grow-
ing involvement in economic affairs was not at the contrivance of meddling
Washington bureaucrats but was a response to the systemic instability and cri-
ses of corporate capitalism. Along with the many small labor conflicts handled
by local government, there developed large-scale class struggles—which had to
be contained by the national government. Government provided the subsidies,
services, and protections that business could not provide for itself. The corpo-
rate economy needed a corporate state.
While the populace won formal rights to participate as voters, the state
with its courts, police, and army remained mostly at the disposal of the mon-
eyed class. However, working people were not without resources of their own,
specifically the ability to disrupt and threaten the process of capital accumula-
tion by withholding their labor through strikes, and by engaging in other acts
of protest and resistance. Such agitation wrested concessions from the owning
class and the state. These victories fell short of achieving a social democracy
but they represented important democratic gains for working people.
As our history shows, those on the left—liberals, progressives, and
radicals—have fought for egalitarian and democratic reforms. They opposed
lynching and pushed for laws to abolish child labor. They pushed for the elim-
ination of property qualifications and poll taxes for voting. They supported
anti-monopoly laws, women’s suffrage, desegregation, the right of workers
to unionize, occupational safety, aid to poor families, disability insurance, un-
employment insurance, federal pensions, survivors insurance, the right to
voice dissenting views, peace movements, and the separation of church and
state.
In just about every one of these instances, it was the wealthy plutocrats
(with some notable exceptions) who resisted such reforms and who favored
regressive taxes, massive public subsidies to big business, and repressive mea-
sures against political dissent and against labor unions.
26
Chapter 3

C
H
A
P
T
E
R
4
Wealth and Want
in the United States
Most people who write about the U.S. political system never mention corpo-
rate capitalism. But the capitalist economy has an overbearing impact upon
political and social life. It deserves our attention.
CAPITAL AND LABOR
One should distinguish between those who own the wealth of society and those
who must work for a living. The very rich families and individuals who com-
pose the owning class live mostly off investments, which include stocks, bonds,
rents, mineral royalties, and other property income. Their employees live mostly
off wages, salaries, and fees. The distinction between owners and employees is
blurred somewhat by the range of incomes within both classes. “Owners” refer
to both the fabulously wealthy stockholders of giant corporations and the strug-
gling proprietors of small stores. But the latter hardly qualify as part of the cor-
porate owning class. Among the victims of big business is small business itself.
Small businesses are just so many squirrels dancing among the elephants. Every
year over thirty thousand of them get trampled and go out of business.
Along with factory and service workers, the employee class also includes
professionals and managers who in income, education, and lifestyle tend to
be identified as “middle” or “upper-middle” class. Company managers and
executives are employees whose task is to extract more value-producing per-
formance from other employees. Some top business executives, corporate law-
yers, and entertainment and sports figures enjoy such huge incomes as to be
able eventually to live off their investments, in effect becoming members of the
owning class.
27

You are a member of the owning class when your income is very large
and comes mostly from the labor of other people, that is, when others work
for you, either in a company you own, or by creating the wealth that allows
your investments to give you a handsome return. The secret to great wealth is
not to work hard but to have others work hard for you. This explains why
workers who spend their lives toiling in factories or offices retire with rela-
tively little if any funds to speak of, while the owners can amass considerable
fortunes.
Adam Smith, one of the founding theorists of capitalism, noted in 1776
that “labor … is alone the ultimate and real standard by which the value of
all commodities can at all times and places be estimated and compared. It is
their real price; money is their nominal price only.”1 What transforms a tree
into a profitable commodity such as paper or furniture is the labor that goes
into harvesting the timber, cutting the lumber, and manufacturing, shipping,
advertising, and selling the finished product—along with the labor that goes
into making the tools and whatever else is needed for production and
distribution.
Workers’ wages represent only a portion of the wealth created by their
labor. The average private-sector employee works two hours for herself or
himself and six or more hours for the boss. The portion that goes to the
owner is what Marx called surplus value, the source of the owner’s wealth.
Capitalists themselves have a similar concept: value added in manufacture. In
2000, workers employed in manufacturing alone produced at least $1.64 tril-
lion in value added, as reported by the U.S. Census Bureau, for which they
were paid $363 billion in wages, or less than one-fourth of the market value
created by their labor. Workers employed by Intel and Exxon received only
about one-ninth of the value added, and in industries such as cigarettes and
pharmaceuticals, the worker’s share was a mere one-twentieth. In the last
half century, the overall average rate of value added (the portion going to
the owner) in the United States more than doubled, far above the exploitation
rate in other industrialized countries.
Workers endure an exploitation of their labor as certainly as do slaves
and serfs. The slave obviously toils for the enrichment of the master and re-
ceives only a bare subsistence in return. James Madison told a visitor shortly
after the American Revolution that he made $257 a year on every slave he
owned and spent only $12 or $13 for the slave’s yearly keep. Slavery was a
very profitable system. Serfs and sharecroppers, who must give much of their
crop to the landowner and carry out other unpaid tasks for him, are also
obviously exploited.
Under capitalism, however, the portion taken from the worker is not visi-
ble. Workers are simply paid substantially less than the value they create. In-
deed, the only reason they are hired is so the owner can make money off their
labor. If wages did represent the total value created by labor (after expenses
and improvements), there would be no surplus value, no profits for the owner,
no great fortunes for those who do not labor.
The value distributed to the owners is apart from workers’ wages or even
executives’ salaries; it consists of profits—the money one makes when not
28
Chapter 4

working. The author of a book, for instance, does not make profits on his
book; he earns a recompense (fancily misnamed “royalties”) for the labor of
writing it. Likewise, editors, proofreaders, printers, and salespersons all con-
tribute labor that adds to the marketable value of the book. Profits on the
book go to those who own the publishing house and who contribute nothing
to the book’s value. The sums going to owners are aptly called unearned in-
come on tax reports.
While corporations are often called “producers,” the truth is they produce
nothing. They are organizational devices for the exploitation of labor and ac-
cumulation of capital. The real producers are those who apply their brawn,
brains, and talents to the creation of goods and services. The primacy of labor
was noted in 1861 by President Abraham Lincoln in his first annual message
to Congress: “Labor is prior to, and independent of, capital. Capital is only
the fruit of labor, and could never have existed if labor had not first existed.
Labor is the superior of capital, and deserves much the higher consideration.”
Lincoln’s words went largely unheeded.
Capitalists like to say they are “putting their money to work,” but money
as such does not work. What they really mean is that they are using their
money to put human labor to work, paying workers less in wages than they
produce in sales. That’s how money “grows.” Capital annexes living labor in
order to convert itself into goods and services that will produce still more cap-
ital. All of Rockefeller’s capital (wealth) could not build a house or a machine
or even a toothpick; only human labor can do that. Of itself, capital cannot
produce anything. It is the thing that is produced by labor.
The ultimate purpose of a corporation is not to perform public services or
produce goods as such, but to make as large a profit as possible for the inves-
tor. This relentless pursuit of profit arises from something more than just
greed—although there is plenty of that. Under capitalism, enterprises must ex-
pand in order to survive. To stand still while competitors grow is to decline,
not only relatively but absolutely. A firm must be able to move into new mar-
kets, hold onto old ones, command investment capital, and control suppliers.
So even the biggest corporations are beset by a ceaseless drive to expand, con-
solidate, and find new means of extracting profit from the market.
CAPITAL CONCENTRATION: WHO OWNS AMERICA?
Contrary to a widely propagated myth, this country is not composed mostly
of a broad affluent middle class. The top 1 percent own between 40 and 50
percent of the nation’s total wealth (stocks, bonds, investment funds, land,
natural resources, business assets, and so on), more than the combined wealth
of the bottom 90 percent. True, about 40 percent of families own some stocks
or bonds, but almost all of them have investments of less than $2,000. Taking
into account their debts and mortgages, 90 percent of American families have
little or no net assets.2
If you are not rich, it is because you lacked the foresight to pick the right
parents at birth. Studies show that, despite the well-publicized cases of “self-
made” fortunes, rags-to-riches is a relatively rare exception. Most people die
Wealth and Want in the United States
29

in the class to which they are born. The superrich usually come from families
that have inherited vast fortunes. And the poor usually stay poor, no matter
how hard they toil. In fact, there is less upward social mobility today than a
generation ago.3
The level of inequality in the United States is higher than in any other in-
dustrialized nation, and it continues to grow.4 In recent times, corporate prof-
its have more than doubled. Income from investments has grown two to three
times faster than income from work. In the last twenty years, the 500 largest
U.S. industrial corporations more than doubled their assets, while eliminating
over 5 million jobs. And the years that followed brought the highest level of
corporate profits in the postwar era.
U.S. Census Bureau income studies refer to the “richest 20 percent” who
earn thirteen times more than the poorest 20 percent. But that greatly under-
states the real chasm between rich and poor. To be in the “richest” 20 per-
cent, you need earn only $75,000 or so. In fact, the top 20 percent are not
rich but mostly upper-middle class. If you made $350,000 or more, you
would be in the top 1 percent. Still such an income does not represent great
“The Duke and Duchess of A.T. & T., the Count and Countess of Citicorp, the Earl of
Exxon, and the Marchioness of Avco. The Duke of Warnaco …”
30
Chapter 4

wealth. The real wealth is with the very top superrich stratum, a tiny fraction
of 1 percent of the population, some 145,000 individuals, who increased their
aggregate income by almost 600 percent in the last three decades (adjusting
for inflation). The real income earned by the bottom 90 percent fell by
7 percent.
As with income, so with wealth. In the eight years from 2001 to 2008, the
wealth of the richest 400 Americans had increased by nearly $700 billion for a
grand total of $1.6 trillion, more than the bottom 50 percent (150 million
people) combined.5 The gap between the superrich and everyone else is even
greater than these figures suggest. The Treasury Department says that the
superrich find ways, legal and illegal, to shelter much of their income from
taxes. So much of their wealth is hidden away in secret accounts.
In any case, the tiny top fraction that composes the superrich is not thir-
teen times but thousands of times richer than the poorest quintile. Few of
the people who study income distribution seem to realize how rich the rich
really are.6
Income and wealth disparities are greater than at any time over the previ-
ous sixty years. To paraphrase one economist: if we made an income pyramid
out of children’s blocks, with each layer representing $1,000 of income, over
99 percent of us would be at most five or ten yards off the ground while the
peak for the very richest tiny fraction would be many times higher than
Mount Everest.7
The 2008 Forbes list of the four hundred richest Americans revealed that
almost all were multibillionaires, with a combined total wealth of $1.57 tril-
lion. Bill Gates of Microsoft remained the very richest, with $57 billion. Heirs
of the Walton family—who make their money by paying poverty-level wages
to their Wal-Mart employees—occupied four of the top ten spots on the For-
bes list. Together the Waltons were worth $93 billion.8 The Forbes 400 list
represents the “active rich,” those relatively newly involved in money making.
Left out of the picture is “old money” wealth: the Mellons, Morgans, Rock-
efellers, and others who operate through financial representatives.
The power of this business class is like that of no other group in our soci-
ety. The giant corporations control the rate of technological development and
availability of livelihoods. They relegate whole communities to destitution
when they export their industries overseas to cheaper labor markets. They de-
vour environmental resources, stripping our forests and toxifying the land,
water, and air, while creating conditions of scarcity for millions of people at
home and abroad.
A small number of giant corporations control most of the U.S. economy.
The trend is toward ever greater concentrations as giant companies are swal-
lowed up by supergiants in industries such as oil, pharmaceuticals, telecom-
munications, media, health insurance, weapons manufacturing, and banking.
Thus did Chase Manhattan devour Manufacturers Hanover and Chemical
Bank only then to be acquired by J.P. Morgan. Three years later, J.P. Morgan
Chase bought up Bank One in a $58 billion deal that created the second-
largest U.S. banking company. Meanwhile Verizon took over MCI for $6.7
billion, while Sprint and Nextel merged for $35 billion. Oil titans Exxon and
Wealth and Want in the United States
31

Mobil merged, while Chevron took over Gulf and then consolidated with
Texaco.
The enormous sums expended on these acquisitions could be better spent
on new technologies and production. Over the past twenty-five years, U.S.
corporate giants spent only $2 trillion on research and development but
$20 trillion on mergers and acquisitions—great expenditures of no real social
value. Such mergers benefit the big shareholders, creditors, and top executives
but leave consumers and small suppliers with fewer choices and higher prices.9
A company that is trying to acquire another company seldom has suffi-
cient cash reserves, so it must borrow heavily from banks (all such debts being
tax deductible as business expenses). A firm that wishes to ward off a hostile
takeover by corporate raiders also has to procure large sums to buy a domi-
nant share of its own stock. In either case, corporate consolidations lead to
bigger corporate debts. To meet its debt obligations, the firm reduces wages
and benefits, sells off productive plants for quick cash, lays off employees,
and enforces speedups. Employees bear much of the brunt of merger mania.
Thus after merging with NationsBank, Bank of America reduced its workforce
(through firings and attrition) by thirty-one thousand. Sometimes the merged
corporation moves to a cheaper labor market abroad, causing even more attri-
tion for U.S. workers.10
Rich families like the DuPonts have controlling interests in giant corpora-
tions like General Motors, Coca-Cola, and United Brands. The DuPonts serve
as trustees of dozens of colleges. They own about forty manorial estates and
private museums in Delaware alone and have set up thirty-one tax-exempt
foundations. They frequently are the largest contributors to Republican presi-
dential campaigns and right-wing causes.
Another powerful financial empire, that of the Rockefellers, extends into
just about every industry in every nation of the world. The Rockefellers con-
trol several of the world’s largest oil companies and biggest banks. At one
time or another, they or their close associates have occupied the offices of
the president, vice president, top cabinet posts, the governorships of several
states, and key positions in the Federal Reserve Board, the Central Intelligence
Agency (CIA), the Council on Foreign Relations, and seats in the U.S. Senate
and House of Representatives.
Among the self-enriching individuals in the corporate world are the chief
executive officers (CEOs) of giant companies. In 1973 CEOs earned about 30
to 40 times more than their workers. By 2009 they were making 317 times
more.11 In one year the nation’s top five hundred companies handed out
$10.4 billion in stock options alone, mostly to their CEOs. The ten highest-
paid CEOs in 2008 pocketed from $72 million to $193 million in salaries,
not counting millions more from various perks.12
CEOs enjoy a regal lifestyle that includes company jets, chauffeured cars,
private retreats, free country club memberships, free box seats at major sport-
ing and cultural events, and lavish pensions. General Electric’s CEO, Jack
Welch, luxuriated in a $15 million New York apartment that the company
maintained for him, along with free servants, food, wines, toiletries, and satel-
lite TV at his four homes. As one editorialist wryly observed, “Other than the
32
Chapter 4

cost of a divorce lawyer, it is hard to imagine what Jack Welch has to pay for
out of his own pocket.”13
Companies sometimes run at a loss, yet their top executives still richly re-
ward themselves. American Airlines was brought to the edge of bankruptcy by
its executives, who then voted themselves huge bonuses and millions in extra
pension benefits.
In the 2008–2009 recession, major Wall Street financial institutions
were caught marketing trillions of dollars of inflated and worthless securities.
Millions of employees lost the better part of their company pensions and life
savings, yet the CEOs presiding over this crisis gave themselves multimillion-
dollar bonuses.
Still, it should be remembered that the average CEO collects only about
3 or 4 percent of a corporation’s profits. The rest is distributed to its superrich
stockholders, those who do not work for it and who are vastly richer than the
company’s executive officers, as with the Waltons of Wal-Mart.
DOWNSIZING AND PROFITEERING
Corporations are hailed by some as great job providers. In fact, the top two
hundred transnational corporations account for more than a quarter of the
world’s economic activity while employing hardly one-hundredth of 1 percent
(0.01) of the world’s workforce. The capitalist seeks to raise profitability by
downsizing (laying off workers), speedups (making the diminished workforce
toil faster and harder), downgrading (reclassifying jobs to lower-wage catego-
ries), and using more and more part-time and contract labor (hiring people
who receive no benefits, seniority, paid vacations, or steady employment).
Hundreds of thousands of better-paying manufacturing jobs have been elimi-
nated, while some 80 percent of new jobs have been in low-paying clerical,
retail, and temporary services. In recent downsizing, the ranks of managers
and supervisors have been thinned but less so than workers’ numbers.14
As a cost of production that cuts into profits, wages must be kept down;
as a source of consumer spending, wages must be kept up. By holding down
wages and reducing the workforce, employers diminish the buying power of
the very public that buys their products, thereby creating a chronic tendency
toward overproduction and recession. Recessions occur when workers are not
paid enough to buy back the goods and services they produce. Demand can-
not keep up with production.
For the big capitalists, economic downturns are not unmitigated gloom.
Smaller competitors are weeded out, unions are weakened and often broken,
a reserve supply of unemployed workers helps to further depress wages, and
profits rise faster than wages, at least for a while. The idea that all Americans
are in the same boat, experiencing good and bad times together, should be put
to rest. During recent recessions, corporate profits grew to record levels, as
companies squeezed more output from each employee while paying less in
wages and benefits.
Former secretary of the treasury Nicholas Brady once remarked that re-
cessions are “not the end of the world” and “no big deal.” Certainly not for
Wealth and Want in the United States
33

Brady, who rested comfortably on a handsome fortune, and certainly not for
his wealthy associates, who welcomed the opportunity to acquire bankrupted
holdings at depressed prices.15 Brady and friends understood that the comfort
and prosperity of the rich require an abundant supply of those who, spurred
by the lash of necessity, tend the country club grounds; serve the banquet
luncheons; work the mines, mills, fields, and offices; performing a hundred
thankless—and sometimes health-damaging—tasks for paltry wages.
Wealth and poverty are not just juxtaposed, they are in a close dynamic
relationship. Wealth creates poverty and relies on it for its own continued ex-
istence. Without slaves and serfs, how would the master and lord live in the
style to which they were accustomed? Without the working poor, how would
the leisurely rich make do? Were there no underprivileged, who would be
privileged?
INFLATION, THE PROFIT-PRICE SPIRAL
A common problem of modern capitalism is inflation. Even a modest annual
inflation rate of 3 or 4 percent substantially reduces the buying power of wage
earners and persons on fixed incomes over a few years’ time. Corporate lea-
ders maintain that inflation is caused by wage demands: higher wages drive up
production costs and must be passed on in higher prices. Generally, however,
prices and profits have risen faster than wages.
The four essentials—food, fuel, housing, and health care—which together
devour 70 percent of the average family income, are the most inflationary of
all. Yet the share going to labor in those four industries has been dropping.
The high fuel and gas prices of recent years were not caused by oil workers
or gas station attendants, who continued to earn about the same wages as be-
fore. Food prices are not driven higher by impoverished farm laborers or by
minimum-wage food servers at McDonald’s. And the astronomical costs
of health care cannot be blamed on the dismal wages paid to health care
workers.
How can wages be driving up prices when the portion of business earn-
ings going to full-time workers in most industries has been shrinking, while
the share going to executives, shareholders, and interest payments to bankers
has risen dramatically?16 The “wage-price” inflation spiral is usually really a
profit-price spiral, with the worker more the victim than the cause of inflation.
(This is not to deny that by depressing wages, business is sometimes able to
maintain a slower inflation creep while pocketing bigger profits.)
As financial power is concentrated in fewer hands, prices are more easily
manipulated. Instead of lowering prices when sales drop, the big monopoly
firms often raise them to compensate for the decline, as happened with some
companies in the 2009 recession. Prices also are pushed up by withholding
distribution, as in 2005 when the petroleum cartels created artificial oil and
gasoline scarcities that mysteriously disappeared after the companies jacked
up their prices and reaped record profits.
Massive military expenditures “happen to be a particularly inflation-
producing type of federal spending,” admitted the Wall Street Journal years
34
Chapter 4

ago.17 The Civil War, the First and Second World Wars, the Korean War, and
the Vietnam War all produced inflationary periods. Even during peacetime,
huge defense outlays consume vast amounts of labor power and material re-
sources, the military being the largest single consumer of fuel in the United
States. Military spending creates jobs and consumer buying power while pro-
ducing no additional goods and services. The resulting increase in buying
power without a commensurate increase in consumer supply generates an
upward pressure on prices.
MONOPOLY FARMING
Most of our food supply and farmlands are dominated by a handful of agri-
business firms that control 80 percent of the food industry’s assets and close
to 90 percent of the profits. An agribusiness is a giant corporation that specia-
lizes in large-scale commercial farming, with a heavy reliance on mono-culture
crops, pesticides, herbicides, and government subsidies. Agribusiness mega-
corporations control every stage of food production, from gene splicing in
the laboratory to retail sales in the supermarket.18
Independent family farms are being driven out of business because the
price that agribusiness distributors pay them for their perishable crops is often
below the costs they must pay for corporate-controlled machinery, seeds, and
fertilizers. Today, the combined farm debt is much greater than net family-
farm income. Only 2 or 3 percent of the price on a farm commodity goes to
the farmer; most of the rest goes to the corporate distributors. Of the 2.2 mil-
lion remaining farms (down from 6 million in 1940), about 45 percent survive
by finding additional work off the farm.19
Contrary to popular belief, large commercial agribusiness farms do not
produce more efficiently than small farms. Agribusiness mass-production tech-
niques damage topsoil, cause enormous waste runoffs, and produce heavily
chemicalized crops and livestock. An estimated 70 percent of the antibiotics
used in this country are fed to “factory farm animals” as a regular feed sup-
plement to increase their weight. And because the animals are crowded by the
thousands in inhumane and unhealthy quarters, the medications are used to
lessen the chance of infection. But the buildup of antibiotics in the food chain
is putting both humans and animals increasingly at risk as drug-resistant dis-
eases quickly develop.20
The shift from family farm to corporate agribusiness has brought numer-
ous diseconomies. The family farm uses less pesticides and herbicides, does
not voluntarily resort to genetic engineering, and is concerned about farm
waste disposal and preserving the cleanliness of its groundwater, which it
uses for its own living purposes. Family farms treat their animals in a healthier
and more humane way, injecting less antibiotics and hormones in livestock.
They are also more economical in their use of fuel and topsoil, and by provid-
ing primarily for local markets, they have lower transportation costs.21
With the growth of corporate agribusiness, regional self-sufficiency in
food has virtually vanished. The northeast United States, for instance, imports
more than 70 percent of its food from other regions. For every $2 spent
Wealth and Want in the United States
35

growing food in the United States, another $1 is spent transporting it. Giant
agribusiness farms rely on intensive row crop planting and heavy use of toxic
spraying and artificial fertilizers, causing millions of acres of topsoil to be
blown away each year. The nation’s ability to feed itself is being jeopardized,
as more and more land is eroded or toxified by large-scale, quick-profit, bio-
tech farming, not to mention the damage to people’s health resulting from
consuming foods produced by chemicalized methods.22
On the big agribusiness farms, the plight of the nation’s 2 million farm
laborers has gone from bad to worse. Some are forced to work “off the
clock,” that is, without pay, for several hours each day. The pesticides and
herbicides they are exposed to and their poor living conditions constitute seri-
ous health hazards. And farm laborers are among the lowest-paid workers in
the country.
Much of the food we eat today contains genetically modified (GM; also
called “genetically engineered”) ingredients, created by big biotech companies
like Monsanto. The long-term effects of such “Frankenfood” on our health
are unknown. The agribusiness firms control not only the marketing of these
dubious products but most of the research concerning their effects on our
health and environment. Our freedom to choose organically grown natural
foods is becoming increasingly difficult to exercise. The Food and Drug
Administration (FDA) failed to require safety testing of GM foods, and has
refused to impose mandatory labeling, thereby preventing consumers from
knowing what foods are potentially unsafe biotech products.23
GM soy crops were supposed to bring higher yields at lower costs. They
were bred with a special gene, making them resistant to Monsanto’s powerful
Roundup herbicide that kills everything else that grows. Yet the GM crops
produced lower yields and have eventually needed just as much pesticide ap-
plication as conventional crops.24 “The irony is that this costly research is not
needed. Farmers in developing countries are already growing crop varieties
with most of the traits, such as drought tolerance and insect resistance, that
gene engineers are dreaming of … Farmers in most regions [of the world]
can produce plenty to feed their own communities and cities.”25 Genetic mod-
ification is an expensive, profit-driven solution looking for a problem.
So are the notorious “terminator seeds,” which raise barren crops, thereby
preventing farmers from planting anew with seeds from their own crops. In-
stead the farmers have to buy a new supply of GM terminator seeds every
year, creating more dependency and expense for themselves but bigger profits
for Monsanto and other firms. The resulting genetic uniformity wipes out
natural diversity, making crops still more vulnerable to disease and pests.
This increases the need for pesticides and herbicides beyond what is used on
conventional crops. These pesticides are manufactured by Monsanto and other
companies that also make the terminator seeds.26
Small farmers have had their crops contaminated by genetically modified
pollen drifting over from distantly located agribusiness lands. These farmers
then have been successfully sued and bankrupted by Monsanto because some
small portion of their crop (accidentally) contained GM plants and therefore
constituted an infringement of the corporation’s “property rights.” The farmers
36
Chapter 4

are then usually driven out of business by the legal actions taken by Monsanto
or Cargill or other profit-driven giant firms.27
The terminator technology has been universally condemned by agricul-
tural research institutes and United Nations agencies, as bad for farmers,
harmful to the environment, and disastrous for world food security. By
spreading genetically modified strains at home and abroad, companies like
Monsanto undermine the rich varieties of local crops, wipe out millions of
small and efficient farms that perform well in this and other countries, and
move ever closer to monopolizing the world’s food production.28
MARKET DEMAND AND PRODUCTIVITY
Those who say that private enterprise can answer our needs overlook the fact
that private enterprise has no such intention, its function being to produce the
biggest profits possible. People may need food, but they offer no market until
their need (or want) is coupled with buying power to become a market
demand. When asked what they were doing about the widespread hunger in
the United States, one food manufacturer responded with refreshing candor:
“If we saw evidence of profitability, we might look into this.”29
The difference between need and demand shows up on the international
market also. When the “free market” rather than human need determines
how resources are used, poor nations feed rich ones. Beef, fish, and other pro-
tein products from Peru, Mexico, Panama, India, and other Third World
countries find their way to profitable U.S. markets rather than being used to
feed the hungry children in those countries. The children need food, but they
lack the money; hence, there is no demand. The free market is anything but
free. Money is invested only where money is to be made. Under capitalism,
there is a glut of nonessential goods and services for those with money and a
shortage of essential ones for those without money. Stores groan with unsold
items while millions of people are ill-housed and ill-fed.
The human value of productivity rests in its social purpose. Is the purpose
to plunder the land without regard to ecological needs, fabricate endless con-
sumer desires, produce expensive goods like automobiles, pander to snobbism
and acquisitiveness, squeeze as much toil as possible out of workers while
paying them as little as possible, create artificial scarcities in order to jack up
prices—all in order to grab ever bigger profits for the few?
Or is productivity geared to satisfying essential communal needs first and
superfluous desires last, caring for the natural environment, the public’s health
and well-being, housing, educational opportunities, and cultural life? Capital-
ist productivity-for-profit gives little consideration to the latter set of goals.
Capitalism’s defenders claim that corporate productivity creates prosper-
ity for all. But productivity is a mixed blessing. The coal-mining companies
in Appalachia are highly productive and profitable while creating much mis-
ery, swindling the Appalachians out of their land, forcing them to work
under dangerous conditions, destroying their countryside with strip mining
and mountaintop removal, and refusing to pay any of the resulting social
costs.
Wealth and Want in the United States
37

In the last three decades worker productivity (output per hour of labor)
rose a dramatic 75 percent, while full-time real wages stagnated or declined
in some industries (adjusting for inflation), so that real wages were lower in
2009 than in 1973. If the minimum wage had risen at the same pace as pro-
ductivity, it would be over $14 an hour instead of $7.25. Most profits from
increased productivity go to the firms’ investors and top officers.30
An increase in productivity, as measured by the gross domestic product
(GDP), the total cost of all goods and services in a given year, is no sure mea-
sure of society’s well-being. Important nonmarket services like housework and
child rearing go uncounted, while many things of negative social value are
included in the GDP. Thus, crime and highway accidents, which lead to
38
Chapter 4

increased insurance, hospital, and police costs, add quite a bit to the GDP but
take a lot out of life. What is called productivity, as measured quantitatively,
may sometimes represent a deterioration in the quality of life.
It is argued that the accumulation of great fortunes is a necessary condi-
tion for economic growth, for only the wealthy can provide the huge sums
needed for the capitalization of new enterprises. Yet in many industries, be it
railroads, aeronautics, nuclear energy, communications, or computers, much
of the initial funding for research and development came from the government
(that is, from the taxpayers). It is one thing to say that large-scale production
requires capital accumulation but something else to presume that the source of
accumulation must be the purses of the rich.
Giant corporations leave much of the pioneering research to smaller busi-
nesses and individual entrepreneurs. The inventiveness record of the biggest
oil companies is strikingly undistinguished. Referring to electric appliances,
one General Electric vice president noted: “I know of no original product in-
vention, not even electric shavers or heating pads, made by any of the giant
laboratories or corporations…. The record of the giants is one of moving in,
buying out, and absorbing the small creators.”31 The same can be said of re-
cent advances in the software industry.
Defenders of the free market claim that big production units are needed
for the modern age. However, bigness is less the result of technological neces-
sity and more the outcome of profit-driven acquisitions and mergers, as when
the same corporation has holdings in manufacturing, insurance, utilities,
amusement parks, broadcast media, and publishing.
When times are good, the capitalists sing praise to the wonders of their
free-market system. When times are bad, they blame labor and government
for capitalism’s ills. Workers must learn to toil harder for less in order to
stay competitive in the global economy, they say; then business would not
move to cheaper labor markets in Third World countries. For labor it is a
race to the bottom. Workers who do take wage and benefit cuts “in order to
remain competitive” often end up seeing their jobs exported overseas anyway,
because their wages have not been reduced to the level of subsistence wages in
Indonesia or China.
One cause of low productivity is technological obsolescence. Unwilling to
spend their own money to modernize their plants, big companies cry poverty
and call for federal funds—supposedly to help them compete against foreign
firms. Yet these same companies might then produce huge cash reserves for
mergers. For example, after laying off twenty thousand workers, refusing
to modernize its aging plants, and milking the government of hundreds of
millions of dollars in subsidies and tax write-offs, U.S. Steel came up with
$6.2 billion to purchase Marathon Oil.
THE HARDSHIPS OF WORKING AMERICA
In the last decade, the real wages of the poorest fifth of the nation dropped
almost 9 percent, while the consumer debt (the amount owed on loans, credit
cards, and the like) grew twice as fast as personal income. Meanwhile
Wealth and Want in the United States
39

personal bankruptcies were at record highs, and the gap between the rich and
most other people was wider than at any time since the 1920s.32
In capitalist societies, if people cannot find work, that is their misfor-
tune. No free-market economy has ever come close to full employment. If
anything, unemployment is functional to capitalism. Without a reserve
army of unemployed to compete for jobs and deflate wages, labor would
cut more deeply into profits. In the 2009 recession the unemployment rate
climbed to 9.5 percent or almost 15 million people. This figure does not in-
clude the millions who had exhausted their unemployment compensation
and left the rolls, or part-timers and reduced-time workers who needed full-
time jobs, or the unemployed who gave up looking for work after years of
frustration.33
Nor does the official unemployment figure count the many forced into
early retirement or who join the armed forces because they cannot find work
(and are thereby listed as “employed”), nor prison inmates who had no jobs
before incarceration. Were we to count all these groups, the hidden unemploy-
ment in the United States was upwards of 20 percent. The economy had fewer
jobs in 2009 than it had in 2000 even though the labor force had grown by
some 12 million workers in that time.34
The number of workers forced to settle for part-time work (the under-
employed) has more than doubled in recent decades to about 30 million.
Of course, some people prefer part-time work because of school or family
obligations. But they do not make up the bulk of part-time and sometime
employees. The median hourly wage of part-timers was about one-third less
than full-time employees in the same occupations. Among the part-timers are
millions of “contract workers,” who are paid only for hours put in while
deprived of a regular employment slot. About one-fifth of them, more than
a million, have returned to their old companies, working at the same jobs
but now at lower wage scales, with no health insurance, no paid vacations,
and no pension fund. U.S. Labor Department statistics show that only about
35 percent of laid-off full-time workers end up with equally remunerative or
better paying jobs.35
In the 2008–2009 recession, after almost a year in the doldrums, stock
market prices began to recover, home building picked up, the number of fore-
closures leveled off, yet consumer demand was lagging and people were still
losing their jobs at a high rate—an indication that the recession might drag
on, developing into what is called a jobless recovery—when things get better
for those with money and remain bad for those without.36
Some people say there is plenty of work available; unemployment hap-
pens because individuals are just lazy. But when unemployment jumps by mil-
lions during an economic slump, is it really because a mass of people suddenly
found work too irksome and preferred to lose their income, medical coverage,
and pensions? When jobs do open up, vast numbers of the “lazy” line up
for them. Some examples: At a plant in Iowa, 4,000 people applied for 53
jobs. In New York City, 4,000 people lined up for 700 relatively low-paying
hotel jobs. And 24,500 people applied for 325 low-paying jobs at a new
Wal-Mart outside Chicago.37
40
Chapter 4

Technological advances and automation can expand productivity while
reducing the number of jobs; indeed that is the purpose of automation. An-
other cause of decline in jobs is the runaway shop. U.S. firms move to cheaper
Third World labor markets in order to maximize their profits.
We hear that the United States is a “middle-class nation,” but most
Americans actually are working class. They labor for hourly wages. Even
among white-collar service employees, the great majority are nonmanagerial
and low wage. Conditions for working people have deteriorated compared to
thirty years ago. U.S. workers now have more forced overtime, fewer paid
days off, longer workweeks, fewer benefits, less sick leave, and shorter vaca-
tions, if any. People are working harder for relatively less, as real wages con-
tinue to stagnate or decline and government income supplements are reduced.38
One report showed that a majority of Americans say they are not living as
well as their parents and their earning power is not keeping up with the cost
of living. Larger numbers of them report spending at least one year in poverty
in their lifetimes.39
The total U.S. consumer debt was $2.5 trillion in 2008 or, if mortgages
are included, upwards of $6 trillion. “One reason Americans are going deeper
into debt is because salaries have not increased enough to meet rising
inflation.”40 In the last several decades the household debt burden has mush-
roomed to 30 percent of disposable income. By 2007, some 29 million house-
holds were using at least 49 percent of disposable income to service debt, with
a record share of household income being spent to pay interest on accumu-
lated debt.41
Wealth and Want in the United States
41

With cutbacks in federal college grants, many students have to borrow
more heavily to get an education. At public universities, student borrowers
also work at paying jobs an average of over twenty-two hours a week. In the
end more than 65 percent of college students leave school heavily in debt.
After graduation, students who miss a payment or default on a loan end
up—because of compounded usurious interest rates and penalties—owing
three or four times more than they ever received. There are more than 5 mil-
lion student loans in default. Millions of former students now live in a kind of
“debtor’s prison without walls,” as their debts grow faster than they can be
paid off and their earnings are garnished for years to come, consigning them
to a semipoverty level. Student debt is the only consumer debt that is denied
bankruptcy relief. Not without reason is it described as the “most oppressive
debt in U.S. history.”42
POVERTY IN PARADISE
As of 2007, the Census Bureau reported 37.3 million people living in poverty
in the United States, 12.5 percent of the population, or one out of every eight
Americans. With the recession of 2008–2009, the numbers are expected to
rise substantially. Official estimates generally understate the poverty problem
by excluding many undocumented workers and several million other seriously
poor or homeless who go uncounted in the census. Over 70 percent of the
families below the government’s official poverty line have a member who is
fully employed. They work for a living but not for a living wage.43
According to an IRS report, the share of overall income received by the
bottom 80 percent of taxpayers fell from 50 percent to about 40 percent.
Among the “working poor” are growing numbers of sweatshop workers
who put in long hours for below-minimum wages, plus female domestics in
affluent households who work twelve- to fifteen-hour shifts, six days a week,
for wages sometimes amounting to as little as $2 an hour. An additional 25
million people in the United States live just above the official poverty line in
dire straits. (As of 2009 the official poverty line for an individual was
$10,830; for a family of four, $22,050.) They have no medical insurance, are
often unable to afford a doctor, cannot pay utility bills or keep up car pay-
ments, and sometimes lack sufficient funds for food. It is not laziness that
keeps them down, but the low wages their bosses pay them and the high
prices, exorbitant rents, and regressive taxes they face.44
A recent comprehensive study of low-income workers in America found
abuses everywhere, in factories, retail shops, construction sites, offices, ware-
houses, and private homes. More than a quarter of these workers had been
paid less than the minimum wage. Many were forced to work unpaid before or
after their shifts. Wages and tips were routinely stolen. Workers were forced to
work when sick or injured. Many were denied time off for meals. More than
two-thirds had their breaks denied or shortened. Workers who complained to
government agencies suffered illegal retaliation: firing, suspension, or pay cuts.45
The poverty line is purportedly adjusted regularly by the Consumer Price
Index (CPI) to account for inflation. However, for those of modest means, a
42
Chapter 4

disproportionately larger part of their income goes to basic necessities such as
rent, food, fuel, and medical care. The cost of these necessities rises much
more rapidly than the general price index, but the Census Bureau has failed
to adjust for this, thereby grossly underestimating the extent of poverty in
the nation. Nor do the forty-year-old poverty line measurements reflect the
dramatic escalation of medical costs, housing, and the necessity to own a car
in many parts of the country.46
Americans have been taught that they are the most prosperous people in
the world. The truth is, the United States is forty-ninth in the world in literacy,
and thirty-seventh in health care even while spending more on its health in-
dustry than any other nation. Of twenty industrial countries, the United States
has the highest poverty rate, highest per capita prison population, highest in-
fant mortality rate, and highest rate of youth deaths due to accidents, homi-
cide, and other violence. Americans work longer hours per year and get
less vacation time than workers in any other industrialized country. In the
Western social democracies, employees get five to six weeks of paid vacation
every year. Americans average one to two weeks a year, if that.47
Given the improvement in disease prevention and lifestyle, including more
physical exercise and less smoking, U.S. life expectancy reached an all-time
high of 77.9 years in 2007 (up from 75.4 in 1990). But among the Western
democracies, the United States still rates last in life expectancy behind Britain
at 78.7. And the U.S. population shows increasingly high rates of hyperten-
sion and obesity.48
The poor pay more for most things: exorbitant rents in run-down unsafe
housing units that slumlords refuse to repair and installment sales that charge
interest rates of 200 to 300 percent. Fringe “banks” and check-cashing com-
panies make billions of dollars annually off low-income people by charging
fees of up to 10 percent to cash their paychecks or welfare or Social Security
checks. Predatory lenders make short-term loans at usurious rates to people
who run short of cash between paychecks. Many of these storefront loan
sharks are funded by major banks and corporations. Their growth has been
fueled by a decline in the number of households with bank accounts and an
increase in the low-income population.49
Despite all the talk about affirmative action, African Americans and Lati-
nos endure unemployment and poverty rates about twice as high as that of
Whites, and continue to suffer racial discrimination in employment and other
areas of life.50 One investigation demonstrated that when Whites and African
Americans, who were deliberately matched in qualifications, applied for the
same jobs, the Whites were three times more likely to be hired, and less likely
to encounter discouragement and slighting treatment. Ethnic minorities are
still turned down more often than Whites for home mortgages, regardless of
income.51
Women also number among the superexploited. Two out of three adults
in poverty are women, many of them single mothers. Of the more than
58 million females who work, a disproportionately high number are concen-
trated in low-paying secretarial and service jobs. In the mid-1960s women
averaged 69 cents for every dollar men made. After thirty years of struggle
Wealth and Want in the United States
43

and hard work, they now earn 77 cents for every dollar men receive, even
with similar skills and experience.52 Meanwhile male wages have themselves
declined as higher paying industrial jobs for male workers are outsourced to
other countries.
THE HUMAN COSTS OF ECONOMIC INJUSTICE
About 13 million of the nation’s children live in poverty, a higher rate than
twenty years earlier. Children born into poverty are more likely to be of low
birth weight, die in infancy or early childhood, and be plagued with serious
ailments, including diseases associated with malnutrition. They are more likely
to suffer from untreated illnesses, be exposed to environmental toxins and
neighborhood violence, and suffer delays in learning development.53 Young
and elderly poor suffer a “silent epidemic of oral disease,” from tooth decay
to mouth cancer, due largely to poor overall health and inability to pay for
dental care or dental insurance.54
More than 36 million people, including over 12 million children, live in
households that go hungry during some part of the month, an increase of
5 million since 1999. Hunger or near-hunger in regions all across the United
States poses a torrent of needs that food banks and soup kitchens cannot han-
dle. Many recipients are among the working poor, who need emergency food
to supplement their insufficient earnings. According to a recent study, one in
six young children (those who are five years old and younger) face a constant
threat of food insecurity and do not have adequate access to healthy food.55
A 2007 UNICEF report ranked the United States (along with Britain) as
the worst place to be a child among twenty-one industrialized nations. The
Netherlands, Sweden, Denmark, Finland, and Spain were listed as the best.
The categories studied were health and safety, family cohesion, risk of pov-
erty, risk of alcoholism and drugs, and the like.56
In major American cities and small towns, indigents pick food out of gar-
bage cans and dumps. As one columnist noted, “If the president on his visit to
China had witnessed Chinese peasants eating from garbage cans, he almost
certainly would have cited it as proof that communism doesn’t work. What
does it prove when it happens in the capitalist success called America?”57
Millions of working poor are only a paycheck away from the streets.
Over 95 million people, one-third of the nation, experience housing hardships.
Housing is the largest single expenditure for many low-income families, con-
suming 60 to 70 percent of their income. Due to realty speculations, gentrifi-
cation, condominium conversions, unemployment, low wages, and abolition
of rent control, people of modest means have been squeezed out of the hous-
ing market in greater numbers than ever. Over 2 million affordable housing
units have vanished during the last twenty-five years, forcing more and more
families to double and triple up, imposing hardships and severe strains on do-
mestic relations. Whole families sleep in cars or abandoned buildings, in tent
cities, and in temporary shelters. The 2009 recession brought a sharp increase
in homelessness and in the number of babies being born in shelters, along with
a drastic increase in food shortages.58
44
Chapter 4

Several million Americans are homeless at some point during an average
year, almost a third of whom are families with children. Homelessness offers a
life of stress, hunger, filth, destitution, loneliness, exhaustion, mental depres-
sion, and unattended illness. Many persons who stay in homeless shelters or
makeshift street shelters hold full-time jobs. With rents so high and pay so
low, and jobs disappearing during economic decline, they cannot afford a
place to live.59
Most cities do not provide sufficient affordable shelter or food for their
homeless populations. Instead they increasingly apply the criminal justice sys-
tem to punish those who try to survive on the streets. Authorities prohibit
panhandling, selectively enforce laws against loitering, and enact legislation
making it illegal to sleep, sit, or store personal belongings in public spaces.60
Almost half the people who live in poverty are over sixty-five. Despite
Medicare assistance, the elderly face the highest out-of-pocket health care
costs. About half of all seniors have returned to work or are looking for
work because they cannot subsist on their savings and pensions.
Less than half of private-sector workers have any kind of private pension
or retirement savings such as a 401(k). Corporations often treat worker pension
funds as part of a firm’s assets. They sometimes default on private-pension pay-
ments, failing to set aside sufficient sums to pay workers the benefits they are
owed. Also, if the corporation merges with another or is bought out, the fund
is absorbed by the takeover and the workers may not see a penny of the money
they paid into it. In 2001 alone, $175 billion in workers’ 401(k) savings were
lost or stolen by management. If nothing is done, the entire private pension sys-
tem could eventually collapse under the plunder.61 In fact, many such private
pensions did shrink away when stock values crashed in 2008.
It is difficult for those who have never known serious economic want to
imagine the misery it can cause. People living under the crushing burden of
poverty—without enough money for rent, food, and other necessities, in un-
safe crime-ridden neighborhoods and deteriorated housing—suffer an inordi-
nate amount of unattended pathologies. Drops in income and even modest
jumps in unemployment rates bring discernible increases in depression, high
blood pressure, emotional distress, substance abuse, suicide, and crime. Tens
of millions are addicted to alcohol, tobacco, or illegal drugs. Millions more
are addicted to medical drugs such as amphetamines and barbiturates. The
pushers are the doctors; the suppliers are the drug industry; the profits
are stupendous.62
Each year, thirty thousand Americans on average take their own lives.
Another seventeen thousand or so are murdered. The number of young people
who kill themselves has tripled since the 1950s. Millions of U.S. women are
battered by men; almost 5 million sustain serious injury each year. Over 2 mil-
lion children—mostly from lower-income families—are battered, abused,
abandoned, or seriously neglected each year. Many elderly also are subjected
to serious abuse, which, like child abuse, increases dramatically when eco-
nomic conditions worsen.63
The recession of 2008–2009 only intensified the plight of low- and
middle-income people. For almost thirty years there had been a growing gap
Wealth and Want in the United States
45

between rising productivity and stagnant real wages. This brought an im-
mense increase in corporate profits for the superrich. As one economist noted,
part of this wealth was lent back to working people to finance their homes,
cars, medical care, education, and daily expenses. And part of the wealth
was “invested in the unproductive, speculative, financial sector,” resulting in
still more business and industrial overcapacity, corporate failures, unemploy-
ment, and overall economic instability.64
In sum, the story of the United States’ great “affluence” has a grim side.
The free market is very good for winners, offering all the rewards that money
can buy, but it is exceedingly harsh on millions of others. Contrary to the pre-
vailing social mythology, the U.S. capitalist system squanders our natural
resources, exploits and underpays our labor, and creates privation and desper-
ate social needs amidst commodity glut, serving the few at great cost to the
many, leaving us with a society that is less democratic and increasingly riven
by wealth and want.
46
Chapter 4

C
H
A
P
T
E
R
5
Institutions and Ideologies
In trying to understand the political system, we would do well to look at the
wider social context in which it operates: the predominant social institutions,
values, and ideologies of our society.
CORPORATE PLUTOCRACY
American capitalism represents more than just an economic system; it is a plu-
tocracy, that is, a social order ruled mostly for and by the rich. Along with
business enterprises and banks, the nation’s cultural institutions—that is, its
universities, publishing houses, mass-circulation magazines, newspapers, tele-
vision and radio stations, professional sports teams, foundations, hospitals,
churches, private museums, and charities—are mostly chartered as corpora-
tions, ruled by boards of directors (or “trustees” or “regents” as they might
be called) composed overwhelmingly of affluent business people who exercise
final judgment over institutional matters.
Consider the university. Private and public institutions of higher educa-
tion are run by boards of trustees with authority over all matters of capital
funding and budget; curriculum and tuition; degree awards; and hiring, firing,
and promotion of faculty and staff. Daily decision-making power is delegated
to administrators but can be easily recalled by the trustees when they choose.
Most trustees are successful business people who have no administrative or
scholarly experience in higher education. As trustees, they take no financial
risks because their decisions are covered by insurance paid out of the univer-
sity budget. Their main function seems to be to exercise oligarchic control
over the institution.
Almost all of “our” cultural institutions are ruled by nonelected self-
perpetuating boards of affluent corporate representatives who are answerable
47

to no one but themselves. We the people have no vote, no portion of the own-
ership, and no legal decision-making power within these institutions.
We are taught to think that capitalism breeds democracy and prosperity.
The private-enterprise system, it is said, creates equality of opportunity, re-
wards those who show ability, relegates the slothful to the lower rungs, cre-
ates national prosperity, and bolsters democracy. Little is said about how
capitalism has supported and flourished under some of the most repressive
regimes and impoverished Third World nations.
The corporate enterprise system places a great deal of emphasis on com-
mercial worth: how to compete and get ahead. As Ralph Nader notes, the
free market “only stimulates one value in society—the acquisitive, material-
istic, profit value.” What about the values relating to justice, health, occupa-
tional and consumer safety, regard for future generations, and equitable
social relations?1
Among the key purveyors of plutocratic culture is our educational system.
From grade school onward, students are given a positive picture of America’s
history, institutions, and leaders. Teachers tend to concentrate on the formal
aspects of government and accord scant attention to the influence that
wealthy, powerful groups exercise over political life. Instructors who wish to
48
Chapter 5

introduce a more revealing view invite critical attention from their superiors.
High school students who attempt to explore controversial issues in student
newspapers have frequently been overruled by administrators and threatened
with disciplinary action.2
School texts seldom give more than passing mention to the courageous
history of labor struggle or the corporate exploitation of working people at
home and abroad. Almost nothing is said of the struggles of indigenous
Americans (or Native American “Indians”), indentured servants, small farm-
ers, and Latino, Asian, Middle Eastern, and European immigrants. The his-
tory of resistance to slavery, racism, and U.S. expansionist wars goes largely
untaught in our classrooms.3
Schools and media are inundated with informational materials provided
free by the Pentagon and large corporations to promote a highly favorable
view of the military and to boost privatization, deregulation of industry, and
other blessings of the free market.4 Numerous conservative think tanks and
academic centers have emerged, along with conservative journals, conferences,
and endowed chairs, all funded by right-wing foundations, big corporations,
and superrich individuals.
Many universities and colleges have direct investments in corporate
America, holding stock portfolios worth billions of dollars. Such bountiful
endowments are to be found especially in elite Ivy League schools like Yale,
Harvard, Brown, Columbia, and others. More and more college presidents
and other top administrators are drawn directly from corporate America
with no experience in teaching, research, or university administration. Their
salaries are skyrocketing and their fringe benefits are increasingly lavish, in-
cluding such things as year-long paid leaves at full salary. Some administrators
and faculty earn handsome sums as business consultants. Corporate logos are
appearing in classrooms and student union buildings. Academic-based scien-
tific research is being increasingly funded and defined by corporations that
have a vested interest in the results of the research. With its financing of chairs
and study programs, private industry is influencing who is hired and what is
taught.5
Meanwhile library budgets, scholarships, course offerings, teaching staff,
and student services are being cut back. At most universities and colleges, tui-
tion has climbed more than 30 percent in the last decade years. Tenured and
other full-time faculty positions are being replaced with underpaid part-time
adjuncts. Some 40 percent of all college teachers are adjuncts, working for
no benefits, and carrying heavy teaching loads for paltry pay.6
IDEOLOGICAL ORTHODOXY
In academia, politically radical faculty, and even students, have suffered polit-
ically motivated negative evaluations and loss of stipends, grants, and jobs.
Professors, journalists, managers, bureaucrats, and most other professionals
who wish to advance their careers learn to go along with things as they are
and avoid espousing radical views that conflict with the dominant economic
interests of capitalist society.7
Institutions and Ideologies
49

One agent of political socialization is the government itself. On frequent
occasions the U.S. president or some other official will feed us reassuring pro-
nouncements about the economy or alarming assertions about enemies who
threaten us from abroad or from within. Assisting their efforts at political in-
doctrination are the news media (see Chapter 13).
Although we are often admonished to think for ourselves, we might ask if
our socialization process puts limits on doing so. Ideological orthodoxy so
permeates the plutocratic culture that it is often not felt as indoctrination. The
most effective forms of tyranny are those so deeply ingrained, so thoroughly
controlling, as not even to be consciously experienced as constraints.
In a capitalist society, mass advertising sells not only particular products
but a way of life, a glorification of consumer acquisitiveness. Born of a market
economy, the capitalist culture downplays cooperative efforts and human in-
terdependence. People are expected to operate individually but toward rather
similar goals. Everyone competes against everyone else, but for the same
things. “Individualism” in this corporate-dominated culture refers to acquisi-
tiveness and careerism. We are expected to get what we can for ourselves and
not be too troubled by the problems faced by others. This attitude, considered
inhuman in some societies, is labeled approvingly as “ambition” in our own
and is treated as a quality of great social value.
Whether or not this “individualism” allows one to have much control
over one’s own life is another story. The decisions about the quality of the
food we eat, the goods we buy, the air we breathe, the prices we pay, the
wages we earn, the way work tasks are divided, the modes of transportation
available to us, and the images we are fed by the media are usually made by
people other than ourselves.
People who occupy privileged positions within the social hierarchy be-
come committed to the hierarchy’s preservation and hostile toward demands
for a more equitable social order. Economically deprived groups are seen as a
threat because they want more, and more for the have-nots might mean less
for the haves. Class bigotry is one of the widely held forms of prejudice in
American society and the least examined.
The plutocratic culture teaches that material success is a measure of one’s
worth, and because the poor are not worth much, then society’s resources
should not be squandered on them. In capitalist society, the poor are generally
seen as personally deficient, the authors of their own straitened circumstances.
Rarely are they considered to be the victims of poverty-creating economic
forces: high rents, underemployment, low wages, unattended illnesses, disabil-
ities, and other such features of the free market. As the American humorist
Will Rogers once said, “It’s no crime to be poor, but it might as well be.”
In a society where money is the overriding determinant of one’s life
chances, the drive for material gain is not merely a symptom of a greed-
driven culture but a factor in one’s very survival. As corporate power tightens
its grip over the political economy, many people have to work still harder to
keep their heads above water. Rather than grasping for fanciful luxuries, they
struggle to provide basic necessities. If they need more money than was essen-
tial in earlier days, it is partly because essentials cost so much more.
50
Chapter 5

Because human services are based on ability to pay, money becomes a
matter of life and death. To have a low or modest income is to run a higher
risk of insufficient medical care, homelessness, and job insecurity, and to have
less opportunity for education, recreation, travel, and comfort. Thus, the de-
sire to “make it,” even at the expense of others, is not merely a wrong-headed
attitude but a reflection of the material conditions of capitalist society wherein
no one is ever really economically secure except the superrich, and even they
forever seek to secure and advance their fortunes through further capital
accumulation.
For those who enjoy the best of everything, the existing politico-economic
system is a smashing success. For those who are its hapless victims, or who are
concerned about the well-being of all and not just themselves, the system
leaves a great deal to be desired.
CORPORATE RULE AND RUIN: SOME EXAMPLES
The modern giant corporations portray themselves as benign entities that pro-
vide the jobs and goods and services we all need. In fact, the multinational
corporation is nothing more—or less—than an organized instrument of plu-
tocracy to maximize the accumulation of profits and wealth, without much
regard for the well-being of the workforce, the general public, or the environ-
ment. Consider this incomplete rogues gallery of Corporate America:
Wal-Mart, the world’s largest retailer, exploits international sweatshop
labor, paying subsistence wages, discriminating against women in pay
and promotions, denying workers time for breaks, and forcing employees
to work “off-the-clock” unpaid overtime. Wal-Mart has been forced to
pay at least $352 million to settle numerous wage and hour lawsuits.
Wal-Mart’s calculated underpricing regularly drives smaller family-owned
stores out of business.
Cargill, an international food and agribusiness giant, has been raking in
record profits. The price-fixing that Cargill imposed on the food supply
it controls caused shortages and riots in low-income communities across
the globe. Cargill, like Monsanto, forces others in the food and agricul-
tural industry to buy genetically engineered products. In India, Cargill
used “free trade” laws to deny farmers the right to use and sell the
natural seeds they gleaned from their own crops and had relied on for
centuries.
ExxonMobil has long been Big Oil’s worst polluter and has supported
the “junk science” of front groups that deny global warming. In 2008
ExxonMobil reported the largest annual profit in U.S. history:
$45 billion.
Coca-Cola, number one soft-drink producer in the world, is now aggres-
sively expanding into bottled water. The corporation is buying up and
drying up sources of fresh water in many parts of the world for the pur-
pose of marketing its soda and bottled water.
Institutions and Ideologies
51

AIG is a giant insurance company whose reckless speculation and pre-
datory lending practices led to its own collapse, sending shockwaves
through the global economy and prompting $182.5 billion in taxpayer
bailouts in 2009.
Goldman Sachs was a big seller of mortgage-backed securities at the
height of the real estate bubble. When the economic crash came in
2008–2009, Goldman Sachs received $10 billion in taxpayer bailout
money, then promptly paid out $6.5 billion in bonuses.
Merck, one of Big Pharma’s largest profit makers, is facing tens of billions
of dollars in liabilities for marketing potentially deadly medicine while
concealing the health risks from consumers.
UBS is a Swiss bank that played a key role in major Ponzi schemes and
international swindles. UBS also assisted more than fifty thousand of
America’s wealthiest individuals to commit tax evasion by sheltering
more than $14 billion in assets.8
The above examples show only fragments of the profiteering and malfea-
sance perpetrated by business corporations in a capitalist system that claims to
be the progenitor of democracy and prosperity. Later chapters provide a fuller
picture of what corporate America has been doing to us and the rest of the
world.
LEFT, RIGHT, AND CENTER
Political ideologies traditionally have been categorized as rightist, centrist, and
leftist. Let us consider these broad tendencies, without pretending to do justice
to all their shadings and ambiguities. What is called the political right consists
of conservatives, corporate elites, and many other affluent persons who advo-
cate free-market capitalism and defend big business as the mainstay of the
good society. Free-market capitalism is essentially the unregulated laissez-
faire variety in which private-profit investments have priority over almost all
other social considerations. Conservative ideology preaches the virtues of pri-
vate initiative and self-reliance: rich and poor pretty much get what they de-
serve; people are poor not because of inadequate wages and lack of economic
opportunity but because they are lazy, profligate, or incapable. The conserva-
tive keystone to individual rights is the enjoyment of property rights, espe-
cially the right to make a profit off other people’s labor and enjoy the
privileged conditions of a favored class.
Conservatives blame many of our troubles on what billionaire Steve
Forbes called the “arrogance, insularity, the government-knows-best mental-
ity” in Washington, DC. Everything works better in the private sector, they
maintain. Conservatives are usually thought of as people who want to preserve
the privileges and traditional practices of the upper strata. Most conservative
ideologues today, however, might better be classified as reactionaries, having
an agenda intent upon rolling back all the progressive gains made over
the last century. They want to do away with most government regulation of
business, along with environmental and consumer protections, disability and
52
Chapter 5

retirement support, minimum-wage laws, unemployment compensation, occu-
pational safety, and injury compensation laws. They assure us that private
charity can take care of needy and hungry people, and that there is no need
for government handouts.
Conservatives seem to think that everything would be okay if government
were reduced to a bare minimum. Government is not the solution, it is the
problem, they say. In actual practice, however, conservatives are for or against
government handouts depending on whose hand is out. They want to cut hu-
man services to lower-income groups, but they vigorously support all sorts of
government subsidies and bailouts for large corporate enterprises. They treat
economic recession as just part of a natural cycle. They admonish American
workers to work harder for less, and have not a harsh word about the devas-
tating effects of corporate mergers and buyouts, financial swindles, the expor-
tation of our jobs to cheap labor markets abroad, and the increase in
economic hardship for working people.
Conservatives and reactionaries may want a weak government but they
also want a strong authoritarian state. They are not against strong government
measures to restrict dissent, suppress protests, keep us under surveillance, and
regulate our private lives and personal morals, as with anti-abortion laws and
bans on gay marriage. They generally support harsher police methods, more
severe prison sentences, and more vigorous use of the death penalty. They
want government to require prayers in our schools, subsidize religious educa-
tion, and bring God into public life. They blame the country’s ills on secular
immorality, homosexuality, feminism, “liberal elites,” and the loss of family
Institutions and Ideologies
53

values. The religious right supports conservative causes. In turn, superrich
conservative interests help finance the religious right.
Most conservatives are enthusiastic backers of gargantuan military bud-
gets and a global network of U.S. military bases. They claim to be more patri-
otic than their more liberal opponents, supporting military attacks against
other nations. They seem to equate this bellicosity with patriotism. Truth be
told, when it comes to war, conservative ideologues prefer to let others do
the fighting and dying. Such was the case with President George W. Bush,
Vice President Dick Cheney, commentator Rush Limbaugh, and scores of
other prominent right-wingers who took pains to avoid military service during
the Vietnam War.9
Not all conservatives and reactionaries are affluent. People of rather mod-
est means who oppose big government because they do not see it doing any-
thing for them will call themselves conservatives, for want of an alternative.
As one newspaper columnist writes, they think that government has a prime
responsibility to protect “their right to kill themselves with guns, booze, and
tobacco” but a “minimal responsibility to protect their right to a job, a home,
an education or a meal.”10
Conservative politicians talk about “upholding values,” but they make no
effort to root out corruption in the business world or protect the environment
or lend support to working families. For all their verbal promotion of hetero-
sexual family values and traditional morality, numerous conservative leaders
have been caught in adulterous affairs or homosexual liaisons.11
More toward the center and left-center of the political spectrum are the
moderates and liberal centrists, who might be lumped together. Like the con-
servatives, the centrists accept the capitalist system and its basic values, but
they think social problems should be rectified by piecemeal reforms and regu-
latory policies. Along with conservatives, many liberal centrists support “free
trade” and globalization, thinking it will benefit not just corporations but
everyone. They support big military spending and sometimes back military inter-
ventions abroad if convinced that the White House is waging a moral crusade
against some newly defined “evil” and is advancing the cause of peace and
democracy—as with their support of the massive seventy-eight-day U.S. bomb-
ing of women, children, and men in Yugoslavia in 1999, and the interventions in
Afghanistan and Iraq (until Iraq proved more costly than anticipated).
Many liberals see a need for improving public services and environmental
protections; they support minimum-wage laws, unemployment insurance, and
other wage supports, along with Social Security, nutritional aid for needy chil-
dren, occupational safety, and the like. They say they are for protection of in-
dividual rights and against government surveillance of law-abiding political
groups, yet in Congress (where most of them are affiliated with the Demo-
cratic Party), they sometimes have supported repressive measures and have
gone along with cuts in programs for the needy. Some of them also have voted
for subsidies and tax breaks for business. At other times they deplore the
growing inequality and poverty and have resisted the reactionary rollback of
human services, the assaults on Social Security, and the undermining of both
labor unions and environmental protections.
54
Chapter 5

Further along the spectrum is the political left—the progressives, socia-
lists, Marxists, and others. They want to replace or substantially modify the
corporate capitalist system with a system of public ownership, in which
many of the large corporations are nationalized and smaller businesses
are under cooperative ownership. Some progressives will settle for a social
democracy, the kind of political economy that exists in Sweden, Denmark,
Norway, Finland, and other western European nations, with strong labor un-
ions, good work conditions, and firm controls on business to safeguard the
public interest. They argue that untrammeled free-market capitalism has no
goal other than the accumulation of capital by the privileged few, at everyone
else’s expense. A democratically responsive social democracy, say the progres-
sives, has an important role to play in protecting the environment, advancing
education, providing jobs for everyone able to work, sufficient aid to the
disabled, along with occupational safety, secure retirement, and affordable
medical care and housing.
Many leftists and progressives tirelessly denounce the now defunct com-
munist societies as models for U.S. socialism. Yet some progressives note that
whatever the shortcomings and crimes of communist societies, they did offer
some things that would have been worth preserving: a guaranteed right to a
job, no hunger or homelessness, free medical care and free education to the
highest level of one’s ability, subsidized utilities and transportation, free cul-
tural events, and a guaranteed pension after retirement—entitlements that
were abolished soon after the communist countries opened themselves to the
plunder and harsh inequality of the corporate free market.12
Most U.S. leftists, social democrats, and liberals refrain from uttering a
positive word about the former state socialist societies or revolutionary commu-
nism in general. Many of the more doctrinaire seem little worried about global
capitalism, the system that today has the world in its baneful grip. Instead, they
wage constant battle against something they call “Stalinism” (a code word for
communism). To them, Stalinism is an evil that lurks in many nooks and cran-
nies on the left and must be rooted out. Some of the doctrinaire leftists appear
happiest when attacking other leftist groups for being ideologically impure, in-
sufficiently militant, or of tainted political genealogy.
Generally speaking, revolutionary socialists are distinguished from liberal
reformers in their belief that our social problems cannot be solved within the
very system that is creating them. They do not believe that every human prob-
lem is caused by capitalism but they are convinced that many of the most im-
portant ones are. Capitalism propagates conditions that perpetuate poverty,
racism, sexism, and exploitative social relations at home and abroad, they ar-
gue. To the socialist, U.S. military expansionism abroad is not the result of
“wrong thinking” but the natural outgrowth of profit-oriented capitalism.
They believe that U.S. foreign policy has been quite successful in crushing
egalitarian social reforms in many countries in order to keep the world safe
for transnational corporations.
An ideological tendency that defies ready classification on a lineal political
spectrum are the libertarians, who resemble anarchists (and reactionaries) in
their insistence that government is the source of all our ills. So they call for
Institutions and Ideologies
55

the privatization of social programs and just about everything else. But liber-
tarians differ from free-market reactionaries in their opposition to strong po-
lice enforcement and to U.S. military interventions abroad.
PUBLIC OPINION: WHICH DIRECTION?
The opinions most Americans have about socioeconomic issues are decidedly
more progressive than what is usually enunciated by political leaders and
right-wing media pundits. Surveys show substantial majorities strongly favor-
ing public funding for Social Security, nursing home care, and lower-priced
prescription drugs. Substantial majorities support unemployment insurance,
disability assistance, job retraining, child care, price supports for family farms,
and food stamps for the needy, while opposing tax cuts for the very rich
and privatization of social services. Large majorities want improvements in
managed health care and favor a universal health insurance program run by
the government and funded by taxpayers. The public generally supports a
stronger, not a weaker, social safety net. By nearly three to one, the public
rejects cutbacks in Medicare and Social Security.13
Large majorities feel that the gap between rich and poor is growing, and
that government has a responsibility to try to do away with poverty and hun-
ger, that abortion should be a decision made by a woman and her doctor, and
that racial minorities should be given fair treatment in employment—but not
special preferences in hiring and promotion. After many years of strong sup-
port for organized labor, Americans became much less positive toward unions
during the grim days of the 2009 recession.14
Sixty percent agree that large corporations wield too much power.
A majority believes that corporate executives care very little about the envi-
ronment, are given to falsifying company accounts, and are lining their own
pockets. Large majorities say that corporations have too much influence over
government. Most Americans are concerned about the environment. A major-
ity also favors the death penalty and being “tough” on crime. Yet 60 percent
agree that the president has no right to suspend the Bill of Rights in time
of war or national emergency. By a five-to-three majority, Americans support
the idea of a public health plan to compete with private insurance. Only
25 percent of Americans say banks are honest and trustworthy.15
In sum, on many important issues, a majority seems to hold positions at
variance with those maintained by ideological conservatives and reactionaries
and closer to the ones enunciated by liberals and progressives.
Opinion polls are only part of the picture. There is the whole history of
democratic struggle that continues to this day and remains largely untaught
in the schools and unreported in the media. It is expressed in mass demons-
trations, strikes, boycotts, and civil disobedience—targeting such things as
poverty, unemployment, unsafe nuclear reactors, nuclear missile sites, and
U.S. wars abroad. There have been mass mobilizations in support of legalized
abortion, women’s rights, gay and lesbian rights, and environmental protec-
tions. There have been organized housing takeovers for the homeless, protests
against police brutality, and noncompliance with draft registration. The
56
Chapter 5

Selective Service System admitted that over the years some 800,000 young
men have refused to register (the actual number is probably higher).16 At the
same time, major strikes have occurred in a wide range of industries, showing
that labor militancy is not a thing of the past.
This is not to deny that there remain millions of Americans, including
many of relatively modest means, who succumb to the culture of fear propa-
gated by right-wing reactionaries. They fear and resent gays, ethnic minorities,
feminists, immigrants, intellectuals, liberals, peace activists, environmentalists,
evolutionary scientists, communists, socialists, labor unions, Muslims, and
atheists. They swallow the reactionary line that government is the enemy
(not the powerful interests it serves), and they are readily whipped into jingo-
istic fervor when their leaders go to war against vastly weaker nations.
Yet this society does not produce large numbers of conservative activists.
There are no mass demonstrations demanding tax cuts for the rich, more
environmental devastation, more wars, more tax cuts for the rich, or more
corporate accumulation of wealth.
Despite the mind-numbing distractions of a mass culture and the propa-
ganda and indoctrination by plutocratic institutions, Americans still have
concerns about important issues. Political socialization often produces contra-
dictory and unexpected spin-offs. When opinion makers indoctrinate us with
the notion that we are a free and prosperous people, we, in fact, begin to
demand the right to be free and prosperous. The old trick of using democratic
rhetoric to cloak an undemocratic class order can backfire when people begin
to take the rhetoric seriously and translate it into democratic demands.
There are those who love justice more than they love money, those who
do not long for more acquisitions but for a better quality of life for all.
DEMOCRACY: FORM AND CONTENT
Americans of all political persuasions profess a dedication to democracy, but
they tend to mean different things by the term. In this book, democracy refers
to a system of governance that represents in both form and content the inter-
ests of the broad populace. Decision makers are to govern for the benefit
of the many, not for the advantages of the privileged few. The people hold
their representatives accountable by subjecting them to open criticism, the
periodic check of elections, and, if necessary, recall and removal from office.
Democratic government is limited government, the antithesis of despotic
absolutism.
But a democratic people should be able to enjoy freedom from economic,
as well as political, oppression. In a real democracy, the material conditions
of people’s lives should be humane and not insufferable. Some writers would
disagree, arguing that democracy is simply a system of rules for playing the
political game, with the Constitution and the laws as a kind of rule book.
They say we should not try to impose particular economic agendas on this
open-ended game. This approach certainly does reduce democracy to a
game. It evades the whole question of cui bono? Who benefits from this
game?
Institutions and Ideologies
57

The law in its majestic equality, Anatole France once observed, prohibits
rich and poor alike from stealing bread and begging in the streets. And so the
law becomes something of a fiction that allows us to speak of “the rights of
all” divorced from the class conditions that often place the rich above the law
and the poor below it. In the absence of decent material conditions, formal
rights are of little value to millions who lack the means to make a reality of
their rights.
Take the “right of every citizen to be heard.” In its majestic equality, the
law allows both rich and poor to raise high their political voices: both are free
to hire the best-placed lobbyists and Washington lawyers to pressure public
officeholders. Both are free to shape public opinion by owning a newspaper
or television station. And both rich and poor have the right to engage in
multimillion-dollar election campaigns to win office for themselves or their
political favorites. But again, this formal equality is something of a fiction.
What good are the rules for those millions of people who are excluded from
the game?
We are taught that capitalism and democracy go together. The free mar-
ket supposedly creates a pluralistic society of manifold groups, a “civic soci-
ety” that acts independently of the state and provides the basis for political
freedom and prosperity. In fact, many capitalist societies—from Nazi
Germany to today’s Third World dictatorships—have private-enterprise sys-
tems but no political freedom, and plenty of mass destitution. And the more
open to free-market capitalism they become, the poorer they seem to get. In
such systems, economic freedom means the freedom to exploit the labor of
the poor and get endlessly rich. Transnational corporate capitalism is no guar-
antee of a meaningful political democracy, neither in Third World countries
nor in the United States itself.
When it works with any efficacy, democracy is dedicated to protecting the
well-being of the many and rolling back the economic oppressions and privi-
leges that serve the few. Democracy seeks to ensure that even those who are
not advantaged by wealth or extraordinary talent can earn a decent liveli-
hood. The contradictory nature of “capitalist democracy” is that it professes
egalitarian political principles while generating enormous disparities in mate-
rial well-being and actual political influence.
Some people think that if you are free to say what you like, you are living
in a democracy. But freedom of speech is not the sum total of democracy, only
one of its necessary conditions. Too often we are free to say what we want,
while those of wealth and power are free to do what they want to us regardless
of what we say. Democracy is not a seminar but a system of power, like any
other form of governance. Freedom of speech, like freedom of assembly and
freedom of political organization, is meaningful only if it is heard and if it
keeps those in power responsive to those over whom power is exercised.
Nor are elections a sure test of democracy. Some electoral systems are so
thoroughly controlled by well-financed like-minded elites or rigged by dishon-
est officials that they discourage meaningful dialogue and broad participation.
Whether a political system is democratic or not depends not only on its pro-
cedures but on the actual material benefits and the social justice or injustice it
58
Chapter 5

propagates. A government that pursues policies that by design or neglect are
so steeply inequitable as to damage the life chances of large sectors of the
population is not democratic no matter how many elections it holds.
It should be repeated that when we criticize the lack of democratic sub-
stance in the United States, we are not attacking or being disloyal to our
nation itself. Quite the contrary. A democratic citizenry should not succumb
to state idolatry but should remain critical of the powers that work against
the democratic interests of our nation and its people.
Institutions and Ideologies
59

C
H
A
P
T
E
R
6
Politics: Who Gets What?
With the advent of World War II, business and government became ever more
entwined. Occupying top government posts, business leaders were able to
freeze wages and let profits soar.1 Immediately after the war thousands of
government-owned facilities were sold off as “war surplus” for a pittance of
their actual value, representing a major transfer of public capital to private
business. The U.S. military budget was reduced but never to prewar levels. If
anything, with the advent of the Cold War, the United States maintained a
huge military budget and a permanent war economy that helped bolster busi-
ness profits—in addition to other subsidies that were handed out to corporate
America.
WELFARE FOR THE RICH
In the 1950s, the Eisenhower administration sought to undo what conserva-
tives called the “creeping socialism” of the New Deal by handing over to pri-
vate corporations many billions of dollars worth of oil reserves, public lands
and utilities, government-owned factories, and atomic installations, a kind of
“socialism for the rich.”
The practice of using the public’s money and resources to bolster private
profits continues to this day. Every year the federal government doles out
huge sums in corporate welfare, in the form of tax breaks, price supports,
loan guarantees, bailouts, payments in kind, subsidized insurance rates, mar-
keting services, export subsidies, irrigation and reclamation programs, and re-
search and development grants. In 2006, direct government payouts to big
business totaled $92 billion, roughly three times what is spent yearly on a wel-
fare program such as food stamps. That sum does not include other forms of
corporate feeding at the public trough.2
60

The government leases or sells—at a mere fraction of market value—
billions of dollars worth of oil, coal, and mineral reserves. It fails to collect
hundreds of millions of dollars in royalties, interest, and penalties.3 It permits
billions of dollars in public funds to remain on deposit in private banks with-
out collecting interest. It lends out billions to large firms at below-market in-
terest rates. It tolerates overcharging and cost overruns by companies with
government contracts. And it sometimes even reimburses big corporate
defense contractors for the immense costs of their mergers.4
The government gave away the entire broadcasting spectrum valued
at $37 billion (in 1989 dollars)—instead of leasing or auctioning it off. Every
year, the federal government loses tens of millions of dollars charging
“ranchers” below-cost grazing rates on over 20 million acres of public lands.
These “ranchers” include a number of billionaires, big oil companies, and in-
surance conglomerates. Over the past five decades, at least $100 billion in
public subsidies have gone to the nuclear industry.
The U.S. Forest Service has built almost 400,000 miles of access roads
through national forests—more road miles than the federal interstate highway
system. Used for the operations of logging and mining companies, these
roads contribute to massive mud slides that contaminate water supplies, ruin
spawning streams, and kill people. In 2003, the Bush administration opened
up an additional 200 million acres of public lands to oil, gas, and mineral
companies.5
Agribusiness is one of the favored recipients of federal largesse, reaping
$21 billion in 2006, with more than two-thirds of it going to the wealthiest
agribusiness firms, while the bottom 80 percent took home less than $2,000
on average.6 Britain’s Queen Elizabeth and other members of the royal family
Politics: Who Gets What?
61

have agribusiness investments in the United States that reap upwards of
$2 million yearly in subsidies. Other wealthy recipients of farm supports include
billionaires David Rockefeller and Ted Turner.7 In 2002 the Bush administra-
tion pushed through a gargantuan farm bill designed to hand out $189 billion
in subsidies to agribusiness through 2012. The subsidies were for a select num-
ber of crops: wheat, corn, cotton, rice, soybeans, dairy, peanuts, and sugar.
The subsidies are tied to production. The more you grow, the more you get. To
raise yields, farmers pour on pesticides, herbicides, and fertilizers, they stop ro-
tating crops to rest their fields, and devote every acre to corn or wheat, creating
vast monocultures [that] require still more chemicals…. The vast fields require
costly equipment for planting and harvesting…. Biodiversity falls. As costs rise,
bigger farms buy up smaller farms…. The countryside depopulates. Towns van-
ish. As production rises, prices fall. As prices fall, the subsidies increase, costing
taxpayers more and more money.8
The federal government subsidizes the railroad, shipping, and airline in-
dustries, along with the exporters of iron, steel, textiles, tobacco, and other
products. The government paid $3.3 billion to expand the airline industry
from 1940 to 1944.9 It doles out huge amounts in grants and tax “incentives”
to the big companies to encourage oil and gas drilling, charging the companies
only a pittance for the large amounts of oil extracted from public lands.
County and municipal governments also feed big business. The largest re-
tail corporation in the world, Wal-Mart, has received at least $1 billion of
public money from local governments, including free land, free water and
sewerage service, property tax breaks, and direct cash subsidies.10
Whole new technologies are developed at public expense—nuclear energy,
electronics, aeronautics, space communications, mineral exploration, computer
systems, the Internet, biomedical genetics—only to be handed over to industry
for private gain without the government collecting a dollar. Thus, AT&T man-
aged to have the entire satellite communications system put under its control in
1962 after U.S. taxpayers put up the initial $20 billion to develop it.
Through a series of deceptive accounting loopholes and unlimited deduc-
tions that companies can make for executive compensation, the government in
effect spends $20 billion a year subsidizing corporate executive pay. In 2007,
the House of Representatives tried to close this loophole “but the bill was
blocked in the Senate after a lobbying campaign by some of the richest men in
America.”11
Costs are socialized; profits are privatized in an enormous upward redis-
tribution of income from the taxpaying populace to the corporate rich. Under
corporate-state capitalism ordinary citizens pay twice for most things: first, as
taxpayers who provide the subsidies, then as consumers who buy the high-
priced commodities and services—if they can afford to.
FEDERAL HANDOUTS TO CORPORATE AMERICA
It is frequently argued that big companies must be given all this assistance be-
cause they provide the jobs we need. But the large corporations are capital
intensive, not labor intensive. The net number of new jobs they create is
62
Chapter 6

relatively slight compared to the size of their operations. Most Americans
work for relatively small businesses, and most new jobs are created by small
businesses. Small businesses, however, receive only crumbs from the federal
table.
Billions of taxpayers’ dollars go to bail out giant companies like
Chrysler and Lockheed, while small businesses are left to sink or swim on
their own. When one of the nation’s largest banks, Continental Illinois,
was on the brink of failure, it received $7.5 billion in federal aid. Under
the deregulated thrift market adopted in 1982, savings and loan associations
(S&Ls) could take any investment risk they wanted with depositors’ money,
often at great profit to themselves, with the understanding that failures
and bad debts would be picked up by the government. In many instances,
thrift industry heads funneled deposits into fraudulent deals or directly
into their own personal account. When hundreds of thrifts failed, the gov-
ernment spent over $1 trillion to compensate depositors, 90 percent of
whom held accounts of $100,000 or more, in what amounted to the biggest
financial bailout scandal in history—up to that time. U.S. taxpayers are
having to pay $32 billion a year for the S&L bailout for a period of thirty
years.12
State and local governments also let big business feed at the public trough.
Consider Wal-Mart, the largest company in the world, which takes in over
$280 billion in yearly revenues, owned by the richest family in the world, the
Waltons. Between 1980 and 2004, Wal-Mart received $625 million in pay-
outs from otherwise cash-strapped state and local governments to open up
stores in their areas. Impoverished municipalities have provided Wal-Mart
with building sites, parking lots, roads, sewage systems, and other free infra-
structure aid. Wal-Mart also is indirectly subsidized by the federal government
when its poorly paid workers find it necessary to apply for food stamps and
other public assistance, costing U.S. taxpayers hundreds of millions of dollars
every year.13
The states compete with each other in handing out huge sums to attract
new businesses and keeping old ones from leaving. In cities across the country,
taxpayers have paid hundreds of millions of dollars for new sports stadiums,
while the wealthy owners of professional teams pocketed record profits. State
and local governments provide business with low-interest loans, tax breaks,
zoning privileges, free land, and waivers on environmental regulations. This
costly special treatment is justified as necessary to create new jobs. Yet new
jobs rarely materialize in any appreciable numbers. Eugene, Oregon, provided
$12 million for a corporation to cut down an impressive stand of historic
giant trees and build a parking garage and apartments that created only a
few jobs. Baton Rouge, Louisiana, gave Exxon a $14 million tax break in ex-
change for a net gain of one job (by Exxon’s own estimate). Michigan gave a
company $81 million to build a mill that created only thirty-four permanent
jobs—which comes to $2.3 million per job.14
In sum, free-market advocates, who preach self-reliance to the general
public, are the first to turn to governments at all levels for handouts and other
special considerations.
Politics: Who Gets What?
63

THE BILLION-DOLLAR BAILOUTS
The mother lode of all federal bailouts came with the disastrous recession of
2008–2009. As the free-market system continued to produce more and more
commodities, it used relatively fewer and fewer workers. Thus it accumulated
massive amounts of profit for the few while holding down wages for the
many. Consumer buying power diminished, consumer debt ballooned and
reached its outer limits, consumer demand eventually declined, inventories
piled up, workers were laid off—further diminishing consumer buying power,
in a cycle that led to a serious recession.
The mounting accumulation of surplus capital created a problem for the
moneyed class. There were not enough opportunities to invest. Straddled with
more money than they knew what to do with, big investors poured immense
sums into nonexistent housing markets, predatory lending for unsustainable
mortgages, and other dodgy ventures, creating lots of commercial paper of
no real value, to be sold to the public and each other packaged as “securities”
but representing no real productive value.
Many of these unsecured securities were bought with borrowed funds
(“leveraged”
investments).
Eventually
this
unregulated
financial
system
crashed in upon itself as the real economy gave way. Sales declined drastically.
Jobs continued to disappear. Large financial institutions seemed likely to
drown in their own “toxic assets.” Among the victims of the debacle were
other capitalists, small investors, and the many working people who lost bil-
lions of dollars in savings, pensions, and home equity.
Hundreds of billions of dollars from the federal treasury and several trillions
of dollars printed by the Federal Reserve (the private banking institution that
controls our nation’s money supply15) were handed over to the major financial
institutions of Wall Street, arguably the wealthiest group of plutocrats in the
world, in exchange for vast amounts of virtually worthless mortgage-backed
securities and other pieces of paper; “cash for trash,” some critics called it.
The 2008–2009 “rescue operation” offered corporate America an unpar-
alleled opportunity to plunder the public treasury. Rather than help borrowers
pay or restructure their mortgages, the government used taxpayers’ money to
cover the banks’ losses from speculative investments. Such bailouts were
needed to save the entire financial system, it was claimed. All it saved was a
handful of big-time money grabbers. The bailout money was supposed to
trickle down. It would unfreeze the credit market, but it did not. Creditors
already had plenty of money to lend. In the real economy there just were not
enough “qualified borrowers” (those deemed to be suitable credit risks).
Most of the banks, including JPMorgan Chase and Bank of New York
Mellon, openly stated that they had no intention of letting anyone know
where the bailout money was going. We do know that they used some of it
to buy up smaller banks and prop up banks overseas. CEOs and other top
banking executives also were discovered spending bailout funds on fabulous
bonuses and lavish corporate spa retreats, golf tournaments, and exclusive
receptions.16
64
Chapter 6

Bailout beneficiaries like Citigroup ($45 billion) laid off thousands of em-
ployees while handing out bonuses of $1 million or more to over seven hun-
dred managers. The head of Citigroup’s energy trading unit was slated to be
awarded as much as $100 million in 2009.17 That same year another bailout
winner, Goldman Sachs, posted $3.44 billion in second-quarter profits and
earmarked $11.4 billion in compensation for its employees, payouts that
were almost entirely a government subsidy.18 Goldman Sachs began once
more to speculate wildly with bailout money and dirt-cheap Federal Reserve
loans.
It doesn’t get any better than that for the plutocrats: a casino capitalism
encourages increasingly riskier investments that produce lucrative short-term
payoffs; but, if they go wrong, they are picked up by the government. The
winnings are pocketed by the corporate gamblers and the losses are covered
by the American taxpayers. And to tide them over, the gamblers are handed
multimillion-dollar welfare paychecks.
Bank of America (BoA) received $45 billion in bailout funds (plus $118
billion in asset guarantees), none of which went to the homeowners who
had been thrown out on the street when hit with foreclosures. Instead BoA
bought Merrill Lynch for $50 billion and in 2009 reported second-quarter
profits of $2.4 billion while handing out $3.3 billion in bonuses to its senior
managers. Merrill Lynch itself, while supposedly ailing and about to be
taken over by BoA, paid out $3.6 billion in bonuses, money that came
from the U.S. government.19 AIG, a giant insurance firm, received a phe-
nomenal $180 billion bailout at last count, and immediately spent chunks
of it on bonuses and posh resort retreats for its top management.20
By the end of 2009, over 3.5 million homes had been foreclosed and the
ranks of the unemployed had doubled. The nation’s fund for unemployment
benefits dwindled to dangerously low levels, leaving hundreds of thousands of
needy people without checks for months, and more than a million applicants
yet to be processed into the system. Sixteen states, with exhausted unemploy-
ment funds, were now paying benefits with borrowed cash, taking on addi-
tional billions of dollars in debt and facing increasing pressure to raise taxes
or cut aid.21 As local revenues declined, state and local governments were un-
able to meet their general budgets and were compelled to lay off employees
and cut programs, often for those most in need.
The Obama administration failed to create an actual bailout for the real
economy, for the troubled households of working families, money that could
have been used to rewrite mortgages, keep people in their homes, give them
money to spend on food and shelter, in all, spending from the bottom up
to get the economy back in motion, as was done to some extent during the
New Deal.
In 2009 the Obama administration did announce plans to create a Con-
sumer Financial Protection Agency to shield the public from deceptive and
fraudulent practices by banks and other businesses that offered credit at hid-
den predator rates.22 This proposal was furiously opposed by a banking in-
dustry that was unwilling to live without its tricks and trumps.
Politics: Who Gets What?
65

TAXES: HELPING THE RICH IN THEIR TIME OF GREED
The capitalist state uses taxation, as well as public spending, to redistribute
money in an upward direction. The higher your income, the greater are your
opportunities to enjoy lightly taxed or tax-free income, including tax-free state
and municipal bonds and tailor-made write-offs. In five years (2001–2005) tax
reductions mostly to rich individuals and corporations, including cuts on capital
gains and dividends, have cost the U.S. Treasury about $860 billion.23 (Capital
gains are the profits made from the sale of stocks that have increased in value.
Dividends are that portion of company profits distributed to stockholders.)
In the last two decades, income from capital ownership (dividends, inter-
est, rents) has risen twice as fast as income from salaries and wages.24 While
the rich grow richer, their tax burden grows lighter. The Internal Revenue Ser-
vice (IRS) reports that thousands of U.S. residents in the very highest bracket
pay less than 5 percent of their income in taxes, even though their portion
of total U.S. income has doubled. Generally, the very wealthy have not had
such a large share of the national income since 1929, the year the Great
Depression began.25
Federal taxes on investment income are less than half the rate of federal
taxes on wages and salaries. People making $60,000 pay a much larger por-
tion of their earnings in federal income tax and Social Security taxes than a
family making $25 million. The multibillionaire Warren Buffett noted that
thirteen workers in his office paid an average tax rate of about 33 percent,
compared with the 17.7 percent that he paid. “My cleaning lady pays a higher
tax [rate] on her earnings than I do on my dividends and investments…. It has
been a marvelous, marvelous time to be superrich.”26
Some twenty-five hundred very rich individuals pay no taxes at all, and
the number has been growing. Each year a dozen or so billionaires give up
their U.S. citizenship and take up nominal residence in the Bahamas or other
offshore tax havens, thereby saving millions. Superrich Americans have an es-
timated $500 billion—if not more—squirreled away in overseas tax shelters.27
President Barack Obama announced his intention to crack down on off-
shore tax havens and wealthy cheats. In 2009 the IRS took actions against tax
evaders, including an agreement under which Swiss banking giant UBS AG
admitted to helping American clients hide their incomes and agreed to pay a
$780 million penalty and turn over thousands of names of Americans who
were hiding billions of dollars in taxable income.28
Corporations too are making more money and paying less taxes. The pro-
portion of federal revenues coming from corporate taxes has dropped from
49 percent in the 1950s to 7.4 percent today. Numerous American firms,
including shipping companies, have reincorporated in Bermuda and other
countries in order to qualify as “foreign companies” and enjoy various tax
exemptions in the United States. This move usually entails nothing more
than opening a small overseas office to accept mail. Abusive tax shelters used
by big companies deprive the U.S. Treasury of many billions of dollars every
year, according to a report by the Government Accountability Office, the
investigative arm of Congress.29
66
Chapter 6

Chevron corporation avoided paying billions in U.S. taxes for thirty
years by claiming questionable foreign tax credits.30 The royalties that
Exxon and Mobil give to Saudi Arabia for the oil they extract from that
country are treated as a tax credit, directly subtracted from what the compa-
nies have to pay to the U.S. government. Media tycoon Rupert Murdoch
avoids paying taxes on his U.S. holdings, though they account for the greater
part of his immense fortune. He siphons off many millions of dollars in
stateside profits to his subsidiary in the Netherlands Antilles, a place that
has virtually no income taxes. In addition, the $1.8 billion he paid to acquire
U.S. television stations is written off against profits, further reducing his tax-
able income.31 In effect, we taxpayers help pay for Murdoch’s growing Fox
media empire.
Corporations can deduct for just about all business costs: supplies, sala-
ries, wages, overhead costs, marketing expenses, advertising, business confer-
ences, legal costs, and moving costs. They can write off business meals, travel
and entertainment, investment incentives, operational losses, interest pay-
ments, and depreciation. They shift profits to overseas branches in low-tax
countries and losses to their accounts in high-tax countries. They indulge in
tax shelters so complex that government auditors sometimes cannot properly
trace them. They incur multibillion-dollar merger and acquisition costs that
are then written off as deductions. And they dispatch lobbyists to Washington
to pressure Congress for still more tax breaks.
Politics: Who Gets What?
67

The result is that, even as they brag to stockholders of soaring profits and
a booming economy, over 60 percent of U.S. corporations pay no income
taxes. In one year, General Motors, for years the largest corporation in the
United States, while reporting $4.61 billion in profits, paid the IRS less than
1 percent in taxes.32 Some companies generate so many excess tax write-offs
that they actually receive “negative tax” rebates from the U.S. Treasury.
Thus during a recent four-year period Enron paid nothing in taxes but got
$381 million in tax rebates by using more than 874 offshore accounts.
The total for all such corporate rebates or “negative taxes” in 2004 was
$12.6 billion paid out by the U.S. government.33
It has been argued that taxing the wealthy more heavily would make no
appreciable difference in federal revenue since they are relatively few in num-
ber. In fact, if rich individuals and corporations paid a graduated progressive
tax, as they did twenty years ago, with no shelters, hundreds of billions of ad-
ditional dollars would be collected yearly and the national debt could be
swiftly and substantially reduced. Just the deductions that corporations claim
for the interest on their business loans costs the government nearly $100 bil-
lion a year in lost revenue. Corporate tax evaders also failed to pay billions of
dollars in Medicare and Social Security taxes.34
GOP leaders maintain that tax cuts to big business and wealthy investors
are necessary to induce an economic growth that in turn will create millions of
new jobs and bring a rise in government revenues. In fact, there is little evi-
dence to support this scenario. The American economy grew fastest in the
1950s and 1960s when corporate and individual tax rates were dramatically
higher than today. The enormous tax breaks for the rich handed out during
the George W. Bush administration resulted in the worst job growth perfor-
mance ever recorded over a business cycle. The benefits of tax cuts for the
superrich go mainly to the superrich. Such cuts impose a greater tax burden
on the working public, which, in turn, means less buying power, less con-
sumer demand, and slower job growth.35
The United States has two different methods of collecting taxes. In the
first system working people have their taxes withheld from their paychecks
and their wages are independently reported to the IRS by their employers,
allowing for very little, if any, cheating. In the other system business owners,
corporations, landlords, trust fund holders, and investors are free to monitor
themselves, often resorting to imaginative bookkeeping. The cheating on capi-
tal gains alone is estimated at $29 billion annually.36
Responding to pressure from conservative lawmakers in Congress, the
IRS increased its oversight on people of modest income, while substantially
reducing audits of richer individuals and giant companies.37 Over several
years Congress gave the IRS an extra $1 billion to audit the working
poor. In 2005, responding to public criticism, the IRS began to crack
down on improper tax shelters, collecting more than $3.2 billion mainly
from wealthy delinquents. Still, from 2001 to 2006, the IRS froze refunds
that were due to 1.6 million low-income taxpayers with incomes averaging
around $13,000, most of whom were entitled to the modest amounts or
more.38
68
Chapter 6

UNKIND CUTS, UNFAIR RATES
There are several ways people can be taxed. A progressive income tax imposes
a substantially higher tax rate on the rich, based on the principle that taxes
should fall most heavily on those who have the greatest store of surplus in-
come and the greatest ability to pay. Thus, in 1980 the very richest paid a
70 percent tax rate and the poorest only 18 percent. That rate is not as severe
as it sounds. The tax was graduated so that the rich paid 70 percent on only a
small uppermost portion of their income and lower rates on lower portions,
the same as everyone else. In addition, they continued to enjoy various special
deductions. Today they pay a rate less than half that.
A proportionate income tax, or “flat tax,” imposes the same rate on ev-
eryone, regardless of ability to pay. Its proponents argue that a flat tax brings
simplicity and clarity to the tax code. Instead of the rich paying 70 percent
and the poor paying 15 percent, which is supposedly all too complicated for
us to grasp, we would all pay, say, 20 percent; this way we ordinary folks
would be less confused. The truth is, a proportionate tax lowers the taxes on
wealthier Americans and raise taxes on just about everyone else.
Those who advocate a progressive tax consider the proportionate tax to
be unfair. If both rich and poor pay, say, 20 percent of their income, then a
person who earns $15,000 pays $3,000 in taxes and has only $12,000 to live
on, while one who makes $10 million pays $2 million and still has $8 million
(probably more, because the higher the bracket, the greater the opportunities
for tax-free income). A dollar taken from someone of modest means cuts
closer to the bone, having a greater deprivation impact than a thousand dol-
lars taken from the super rich. Furthermore, most flat-tax proposals apply to
wages and pensions but not dividends, interest, capital gains, corporate earn-
ings, and large inheritances, which are treated still more lightly.
A regressive tax is even more unfair than a flat tax, for instead of paying
the same rate, rich and poor pay the very same amount. Both an indebted stu-
dent and a billionaire executive pay the same tax on a gallon of gas, but the
student is sacrificing a far greater portion of income than the executive. Sales
taxes and excise taxes are highly regressive, be it at the federal or state and
local levels. (A sales tax is a rate imposed uniformly on a general range of
products. An excise tax applies to a specific product, such as a gasoline tax
or cigarette tax.) In forty-five of fifty states, the poorest 20 percent of the
population pay proportionately far more in state and local taxes than the rich-
est 1 percent. In Washington State, for example, the poor pay 17.4 percent of
their income in state and local taxes, while the rich pay only 3.4 percent. Since
the early 1990s, sales and excise taxes have increased, while states began cutting
state income taxes, making their overall tax systems still more regressive.39
Most regressive of all is the national sales tax advocated by some conserva-
tives to replace the income tax. To raise as much as does the current income tax,
we all would have to pay an estimated 30 percent sales tax on most products, a
regressive burden that would drive millions more into poverty and probably
wreck the economy. Some right-wing lawmakers advocate a value added tax,
which is just a more covert and complicated version of a national sales tax.
Politics: Who Gets What?
69

Taxes would be added onto commodities at every stage of production and distri-
bution, with the consumer paying the full tab at the end of the line.
Then there are the estate tax and inheritance tax, both of which are very
progressive. (An estate tax applies to the decedent’s entire estate before disbur-
sal. An inheritance tax is levied on individuals receiving funds and property
from the estate.) As of mid-2006, the law exempted the first $2 million of an
estate for an individual, or the first $3 million for married couples. Enemies of
the estate tax, such as President George W. Bush, have argued that families
have lost their farms because of this “death tax.” But when pressed on the
question, the White House was never been able to produce a single family
farm that fell victim to the estate tax.40 If the estate tax is permanently abol-
ished, it will mean many billions of superrich tax dollars lost yearly that will
have to be made up by working taxpayers.
In 2004 the Republican majority in Congress passed legislation granting a
$136 billion, ten-year corporate tax cut. In 2006, urged on by the White
House and by multibillionaire families such as the Waltons (owners of Wal-
Mart), Congress passed an additional $69 billion in tax cuts mostly for the
nation’s wealthiest taxpayers. That same year the Bush Jr. administration
began eliminating the jobs of 157 IRS lawyers who audited tax returns of
the superrich, especially those involved in gift and estate taxes. Some of these
auditors charged that the layoffs were just the latest moves to shield influential
people who were understating their assets and were big contributors to Bush’s
presidential campaigns. Cheating among the superrich was a major and grow-
ing problem amounting to many billions of dollars a year, according to one
congressional report.41
Most of the “tax reforms” produced by Congress are paraded as relief for
the besieged middle class when actually they mostly benefit the top income
bracket. Of the major tax cuts put through by the Bush administration, the
cumulative reductions were likely to cost the treasury $2.4 trillion over eight
years, with about 50 percent going to the richest fraction of the top 1 percent.
DEFICIT SPENDING AND THE NATIONAL DEBT
When government expends more than it collects in revenues, this is known as
deficit spending. To meet its yearly deficits, the government borrows from
wealthy individuals and financial institutions in the United States and abroad.
The accumulation of these yearly deficits constitutes the national debt.
Conservative leaders who sing hymns to “fiscal responsibility” have been
among the wildest deficit spenders. The ultraconservative Ronald Reagan ad-
ministration in eight years (1981–1988) tripled the national debt from $908
billion to $2.7 trillion. In the following four years, the ultraconservative
George H. W. Bush administration brought the debt up to $4.5 trillion.
The centrist Democratic Bill Clinton administration (1993–2000) slowed
the rate of debt accumulation, and even produced surpluses in its last three
budgets, including a $236 billion surplus for fiscal 2001. At that rate the
debt was expected to be retired within a decade. But then the reactionary
George W. Bush administration (2001–2008) reversed that trend with massive
70
Chapter 6

tax cuts and record deficit spending, increasing the national debt to over
$10 trillion, a 50 percent jump in the eight years of Bush’s presidency.42
Inheriting a massive recession and a huge deficit, the Barack Obama ad-
ministration poured hundreds of billions of dollars into bailouts and stimulus
packages, creating a $1.2 trillion deficit in its first six months in office.43
In 1993, the federal government’s yearly payout on the national debt
came to $210 billion. By 2006, it had climbed to about $430 billion, a sum
that is paid out by ordinary taxpayers to rich creditors. Several things explain
the national debt:
•
The billions of dollars in tax cuts to wealthy individuals and corporations
represent lost revenue that is made up increasingly by borrowing. The
government borrows furiously from the big moneyed interests it should
be taxing. The debt serves the rich investor class well.
•
There is the budget-busting impact of peacetime military spending and the
added operational costs of wars. Thus by 2009, the government was
spending over $10 billion a month on wars in Iraq and Afghanistan
in addition to the standard military budget that had climbed to over
$534 billion for fiscal 2009.
•
The growing national debt itself contributes to debt accumulation. As the
debt increases, so does the interest that needs to be paid out. Every year,
a higher portion of debt payment has been for interest alone, with less for
retirement of the principal, the debt itself. By 1990, over 80 percent of all
government borrowing went to pay for interest on money previously bor-
rowed. Thus, the debt becomes a self-feeding force. The interest paid on
the federal debt each year is the second-largest item in the discretionary
budget (after military spending).
•
Deficit spending is also a way of privatizing the federal budget: the larger
the debt and debt payments, the more that goes to rich private creditors
and the less that goes for government services.
•
The greater the debt, the more excuse right-wing rulers have to defund
human services, environmental protections, and other such frills they so
dislike.
•
Payments on the federal debt constitute an upward redistribution of in-
come. To borrow money, the government sells U.S. Treasury bonds. These
bonds are promissory notes that are repaid after a period of years. Who
gets the hundreds of billions of dollars in yearly interest on these bonds?
Mostly the individuals, investment firms, banks, and foreign investors
with money enough to buy them. Who pays the interest (and the principal)?
Mostly ordinary U.S. taxpayers. As Karl Marx wrote almost 150 years ago:
“The only part of the so-called national wealth that actually enters into
collective possessions of modern peoples—is their national debt.”44
SOME HIDDEN DEFICITS
There are other hidden deficits besides those that show up in the federal bud-
get. First, there is the “off-budget” deficit, an accounting legerdemain that al-
lows the government to borrow additional billions outside the regular budget.
Politics: Who Gets What?
71

A nominally “private” corporation is set up by the government to borrow
money in its own name. For instance, monies to subsidize agricultural loans
are raised by the Farm Credit System, a network of off-budget banks, instead
of being provided by the Agriculture Department. Congress created an off-
budget agency known as the Financing Corporation to borrow the hundreds
of billions of dollars needed for the S&L bailout, instead of using the Treasury
Department. But these sums are taken out of the general revenue, compliments
of the U.S. taxpayer.
Another hidden deficit is in trade. As we consume more than we produce,
and import and borrow from abroad more than we export, the U.S. debt to
foreign creditors increases. Interest payments on these hundreds of billions
borrowed from abroad have to be met by U.S. taxpayers. By early 2009,
China alone held more than $1 trillion of the U.S. debt and was showing a
declining appetite for buying up more U.S. Treasury bonds. The United States
faced what some call a “debt explosion” that could leave its currency under-
mined and its budgets shattered.
Social Security also is used to disguise the real deficit. The Social Security
payroll deduction—a regressive tax—soared during the Reagan years, and to-
day produces a yearly surplus of some $150 billion. By 1991, 38 percent of
U.S. taxpayers, especially in the lower brackets, were paying more in Social
Security tax than in federal income tax. Many Americans willingly accept
these payroll deductions because they think the monies are being saved for
their retirement. On paper, the Social Security surplus fund was almost $2 tril-
lion in 2009. But all those funds have been used to offset deficits in the regular
budget, paying for White House limousines, wars, FBI agents, corporate sub-
sidies and bailouts, interest on the debt, and other items in the federal budget.
“There, there it is again‚ the invisible hand of the marketplace giving us the finger.”
72
Chapter 6

U.S. political leaders have assiduously ignored the surest remedies for
reducing the astronomical national debt: (a) sharply reduce individual and
corporate tax credits, deductions, and shelters, (b) cut back on the huge subsi-
dies to big business and agribusiness that do little to create jobs and much to
fatten the coffers of the very rich, (c) reintroduce a progressive income tax and
estate tax that would bring in hundreds of billions more in revenues,
and (d) greatly reduce the bloated military budget and redirect spending to-
ward more productive and socially useful sectors of the economy that create
more jobs than does military spending.
To summarize: In almost every enterprise, the plutocracy has enjoyed
opportunities for private gain at public expense. Government nurtures private
capital accumulation through a process of subsidies, supports, and deficit spend-
ing and an increasingly inequitable tax system. From ranchers to resort owners,
from brokers to bankers, from automakers to missile makers, there prevails a
welfare for the rich of such magnitude as to make us marvel at the corporate
leaders’ audacity in preaching the virtues of self-reliance whenever lesser forms
of public assistance threaten to reach hands other than their own.
Politics: Who Gets What?
73

C
H
A
P
T
E
R
7
Health and Human Services:
Sacrificial Lambs
The plutocracy rules but not always in the way it would like. Those of wealth
and power must make occasional concessions, giving a little in order to keep a
lot, taking care that the worst abuses of capitalism do not cause people to
agitate against the capitalist system itself. Through much of the twentieth
century, democratic forces pressed their fight against economic and social
injustice. In response, the federal government initiated a limited series of
human services. Since the 1980s even these inadequate but important gains
have come under attack.
THE POOR GET LESS (AND LESS)
Federal programs frequently fail to reach those most in need. The Special Sup-
plemental Food Program for Women, Infants, and Children (WIC) assists only
about half of those eligible. In 1996, a law supported by President Clinton
phased out Aid to Families with Dependent Children (AFDC or “welfare”).
Millions of indigent families were denied food stamps and child nutrition as-
sistance. In 2005, cuts in food stamps left an estimated forty thousand chil-
dren ineligible for free or reduced-price school lunches. Many elderly poor
were ejected from private nursing homes once their federal checks stopped
coming in. Many people with mental or physical impairments were cast onto
the streets, to go hungry, searching out soup kitchens and food banks run by
churches and other charities. In recent years private charity has been unable to
keep up with the increasing numbers of destitute people.1
74

Over the last twenty-five years, funds were slashed from school breakfast
programs, legal services for the poor, remedial education, maternal and child
health care, and assistance to the aged, blind, and disabled, causing severe
hardship for many. Programs employing hundreds of thousands of people—
mostly women—to staff day care centers and offer services to the disabled
and aged have been abolished.
The Reagan administration (1981–1988) cut Supplemental Security In-
come (SSI), the “safety net” for low-income disabled persons, including chil-
dren. By 2000, at least one-third of those needing SSI were no longer being
reached. Disabled recipients of SSI were denied their federal and state cost of
living increases for 2006 by President Bush.
That same year Bush proposed a $2.7 trillion budget containing record al-
locations for the military, overseas wars, and corporate subsidies. But funds for
domestic programs were reduced, including student grants, drug treatment, day
care, air traffic safety, emergency rescue, care for national parks, health re-
search, and Medicare. Bush attempted (unsuccessfully) to eliminate the Com-
modity Supplemental Food Program that provided food to the elderly poor and
low-income mothers with young children, thereby saving $107 million, an
amount equivalent to what the Pentagon spends or misplaces in three hours.2
The recession of 2008–2009 has brought additional reductions in human
services, creating more hunger, isolation, and unattended illness for those with
the fewest economic resources and the least political clout.3
The picture is no brighter at the state and local levels. Because of drastic
cuts in federal grants, many states had to reduce their health care, housing,
education, and family assistance programs. Contrary to prevailing myths,
most recipients of family assistance are White (although African Americans
and Latinos are disproportionately represented); less than 1 percent are able-
bodied men; over 95 percent are U.S. citizens, not illegal aliens; and most stay
on welfare for not more than two years. Recipients do not live in luxury.
Their allotments are far below the poverty level.
In the United States consumer debt reached a record high by 2002 and
doubled in size from 2001 to 2008. The standard view is that people go
heavily into debt because they are addicted to shopping and overspending. In
fact, a nationwide survey found that a large majority of personal bankruptcies
are related to illness and costly medical expenses. About 75 percent of these
had private health insurance that provided inadequate coverage.4 Other major
causes of personal debt include loss of job, small-business failure, and loss of
the family breadwinner. Facing financial emergencies, people with poor credit
standing often turn to corporate lenders who charge predatory fees and usuri-
ous interest rates, amounting to 40 percent and higher. Debt itself creates
more debt. As soon as a monthly payment is missed, penalty fees are piled
on and the debt is compounded. New bankruptcy laws in 2005 made it virtu-
ally impossible for debtors to wipe the slate clean by declaring bankruptcy.
Instead they face a “debtor’s prison without walls,” with heavy garnishment
on future earnings, consigning them to decades of financial hardship.5
Health and Human Services: Sacrificial Lambs
75

SOCIAL INSECURITY: PRIVATIZING EVERYTHING
Plutocrats do not lightly tolerate a nonprofit public sector that creates jobs,
tax revenues, and fulfills human wants while engendering no profits for cor-
porate America. So the owning class pushes for privatization of public services
and resources, both within the United States and throughout the world.
Social Security has long been under intense fire from the privateers. A lit-
tle over half the $500 billion or so that annually goes into Social Security
comes out of employees’ paychecks; the rest must come from employers,
which is a major reason why the latter so dislike the program. For the last
thirty-five years, opponents of Social Security have been predicting that the
retirement fund will soon go broke because of the growing number of seniors.
They urge that employees be allowed to invest their Social Security payments
in the stock market where it supposedly will grow at a faster rate, leaving
everyone with ample fortunes when they retire. Nothing is said about the
portion now contributed by the employer.
But the stock market is not a pension program; it is a form of gambling
that could prove risky to many unpracticed retirees (and even to seasoned in-
vestors). Stock markets can crash without quickly bouncing back. After the
crash of the Great Depression, stocks did not regain their 1929 highs until
1954. If retirement funds were transferred into millions of private accounts
on the stock market, Wall Street brokerage firms would make billions of dol-
lars in fees every year, but Social Security as a pooled system of payments, a
collective insurance fund and safety net, would come to an end.
When calculating the bountiful returns that retirees allegedly would glean
from stock investments, privateers use rosy projections about a continually
booming market. But when predicting bankruptcy for Social Security, they
switch to pessimistic projections of a low-growth economy with abnormally
low payments into the fund. In fact, far from going broke, Social Security pro-
duces enormous surpluses. From 1983 to 2005, Americans paid $1.8 trillion
more in Social Security taxes than were paid out in benefits. According to the
Congressional Budget Office, the Social Security Trust Fund will remain sol-
vent until at least 2052.6
Social Security is the only federal program that produces about $150
billion yearly surplus, the only program that shows every sign of being self-
supporting and solvent for over thirty years to come yet is repeatedly
described by its enemies as being in danger of insolvency.7
Whatever the size of the trust fund, Social Security’s yearly intake should
be able to meet benefit payments indefinitely. If there actually were to be a
shortfall thirty or forty years hence, it could easily be met by extending the
Social Security tax to income earnings above $90,000, which was the cap as
of early 2006, and eliminating the 100 percent exemption on “unearned in-
come” (dividends, interest, capital gains, rents, and so on).8
We already know what happens when government pension funds are pri-
vatized. In Chile when a right-wing government privatized the country’s retire-
ment plan, Chileans soon discovered that the substantial deductions taken
from their paychecks left them with only one-third the benefits that the old
76
Chapter 7

government plan had provided. The private companies that manage the pen-
sion funds gobbled up some 30 percent of workers’ contributions in fees and
administrative costs, raking in high profits even in years when individual ac-
counts lost money. Many workers dropped out of the private plan because the
deductions were too large, the returns too chancy, and the retirement checks
too meager. Countries that followed the Chilean model ended up with equally
dismal results.9
Social Security in the United States is not merely a retirement fund; it is a
three-pronged insurance program that spreads risk and resources across soci-
ety. It consists of (a) retirement pensions for over 30 million seniors and their
spouses; (b) survivors insurance for over 3.5 million children of deceased or
disabled workers, until they reach the age of 18; (c) disability insurance for
4 million persons of all ages who suffer serious injuries and impairments. The
privatizers say nothing about providing for survivor and disability insurance.
Opponents of Social Security claim that it allows the elderly to live off the
labor of the young, because it is the young who are paying into the program
and the elderly who are taking from it. In fact retired parents who receive
public assistance and Medicare are less likely to become a burden to their chil-
dren. Without Social Security 14 million more seniors and disabled would
sink below the poverty level, many into abject destitution.
Although free marketeers insist that Social Security doesn’t work, what re-
ally bothers them is that it does. It is one of the most successful antipoverty and
human services programs in U.S. history. In over six decades, it has never missed
a payment. Its administrative costs are only about 1 percent of annual payouts.
By comparison, administrative costs for private insurance are about 13 percent.
Social Security helps the many instead of the few, redistributing billions of
dollars in a more egalitarian not-for-profit fashion. This is why the program’s
opponents persistently demand that it be “reformed,” that is, eliminated.
A SICK HEALTH SYSTEM
Health care in the United States is in a very unhealthy condition. Too often the
first examination patients undergo is of their wallets. Public hospitals are clos-
ing down for lack of funds. Patients are ejected in the midst of an illness when
they run out of money. People with prolonged illnesses are frequently bank-
rupted by medical bills despite supposedly “comprehensive” private coverage.
The care people are receiving is not getting better, only more expensive.
To maximize profits, hospital staffs are cut and overworked, sometimes to
the point of being unable to give proper care. Contrary to the myth that “pri-
vate enterprise can do it better,” death rates and patient expenses are higher at
private hospitals than at nonprofit ones.
The Institute of Medicine estimates that up to ninety-eight thousand
Americans die annually because of preventable medical errors. Iatrogenic ill-
ness (sickness caused by the treatment itself) kills additional tens of thousands
every year. The federal Centers for Disease Control and Prevention estimates
that 2 million hospital patients contract infections every year and nearly
100,000 die as a result. In addition, there are an estimated 300 million
Health and Human Services: Sacrificial Lambs
77

medication errors yearly, along with faulty diagnoses, equipment failures, sur-
geries on the wrong limb or organ, wrong blood-type transfusions, and mis-
placed or misread tests. A Justice Department investigation revealed that in
one year thousands of patients underwent unnecessary surgical and diagnostic
procedures for which doctors filed more than $1 billion in insurance claims.10
Too many hospitals are cost-cutting profit mills, providing substandard care
for the highest possible prices.
Even when patients are given the correct drug in the right dosage, highly
deleterious or even lethal “side effects” can occur. Just about all drugs have a
toxic component. Many of them are not adequately tested before distribution.
Excessive reliance on medical drugs kills more Americans than all illegal nar-
cotics combined.11 Even vaccinations have come under serious challenge for
being insufficiently tested and delivering ill-effects upon thousands of recipi-
ents, especially children.12
The United States has two federal health programs that have served the
public well: Medicaid, which pays for medical treatment for the poor, and
Medicare, which pays much of the medical cost for the aged and disabled.
Since Congress and the states began cutting back on welfare in 1996, about
a million low-income people have lost Medicaid coverage. Then in 2005 a
Republican-led Congress passed a bill requiring millions of low-income people
to pay higher co-payments and premiums under Medicaid. The result was that
many more indigents had to forgo care. About one-third of those adversely
affected were children.13
Both programs have occasionally been subjected to abuse when some doc-
tors and hospitals overcharge the government enormous sums, while render-
ing inferior care. In one instance certain swindlers formed scores of phony
“We both think you need surgery, but we have to get a third opinion from an accountant.”
78
Chapter 7

medical companies in order to bilk Medicaid and Medicare of hundreds of
millions of dollars for services and equipment that were never provided.14
Nursing homes care for nearly 2 million elderly and disabled, ringing up
from $80 billion to $90 billion in business each year, with more than 75 cents
of every dollar picked up by the taxpayer through Medicaid and Medicare.
The less the nursing home spends on patient care, the more it keeps for its
managers and shareholders. Profit-driven nursing homes have become the
shame of the nation, with their insufficient and poorly trained staffs, filthy
conditions, and neglect and abuse of patients.15
Top corporate executives and their families experience a different kind of
health system from ordinary folks. They generally are provided with complete
health coverage by their companies. They pay no deductibles and virtually no
premiums for medical visits and hospitalization, while enjoying state-of-the-art
treatment at the very best private hospitals in luxury suites.16
The medical industry is the nation’s largest and most profitable business,
with an annual health bill of $1 trillion, or 14 percent of the gross domestic
product (GDP). The industry’s greatest beneficiaries are big insurance compa-
nies and health maintenance organizations (HMOs). These are profit-driven
private companies that charge steep monthly premiums while underpaying
their staffs and requiring their doctors to spend less time with each patient,
sometimes withholding costly—even if necessary—treatment.17
Most HMOs pay doctors only a small fixed yearly fee per patient, no mat-
ter how many visits or treatments are needed. Doctors, whose reputation for
compassion and excellence attract a large share of the sickest (and costliest)
patients, are feeling increasingly demoralized because they cannot make a liv-
ing on fixed HMO fees when trying to treat those who need extensive care.18
Many HMOs claim a nonprofit status, ostensibly because they are en-
gaged in a “public service mission”—even though they run a highly profitable
business. As “nonprofit” organizations, they avoid paying income taxes and
property taxes.
THE HEALTH INSURANCE RACKET
Free-market proponents maintain that government should not be in the busi-
ness of health care and that private insurance companies offer us more choice,
quicker and higher quality service, all at a reasonable cost. Reality paints a
different picture.
Private insurers charge premiums that are prohibitively high for many
Americans. About 50 million Americans are without health insurance
throughout the entire year. Another 30 million have coverage that is so scanty
as to leave them underinsured. Six in ten ailing Americans delayed or deferred
necessary medical treatment in 2008–2009 because of inability to pay. This
included millions who were insured but whose plans did not cover needed ser-
vices. About twenty thousand of the untreated die each year from treatable
illnesses.19
Health insurance premiums have been rising five times faster than wages
over the last eight years, devouring one-fourth or more of the average family’s
Health and Human Services: Sacrificial Lambs
79

income. Since 1980, spending on health care in the United States has ex-
panded three times faster than the overall economy’s growth. In many cities
one or two health insurers dominate the market. Their monopolistic grip
makes it easier for them to dictate low provider reimbursements while charg-
ing ever higher insurance premiums.20
To minimize payouts, insurance companies screen out applicants who are
most likely to need care and seek to insure those least likely to get sick. The
insurers frequently refuse to reimburse for expenses, arguing that the insured
person had a prior condition (no matter how minor it was) or was not origi-
nally of perfect health. In his revealing documentary film Sicko, Michael
Moore reports the case of a woman who was denied coverage for cancer sur-
gery by her insurer because some years earlier she had had a prior condition—
a yeast infection.
Health insurance policies often contain unexpected qualifiers and disclai-
mers in small print, including numerous deductibles, add-ons, and “co-
payments” that the patient must pay. Policyholders might discover too late
that they owe huge sums because their insurance companies pay only for rou-
tine hospital care and not for surgery or lab tests.21
Insurance companies often refuse to pay for special procedures that are
unusually expensive. They have been known to cancel the policies of those
who become afflicted with protracted illnesses (“dump the sick”). A former
Cigna corporate executive admitted to a Senate committee that “the number
of uninsured people has increased as more have fallen victim to deceptive mar-
keting practices and bought what essentially is fake insurance.”22
Before Medicare was established in 1965 under President Lyndon John-
son, more than 40 percent of elderly Americans lacked any kind of health in-
surance. Today Medicare covers everyone sixty-five and over. Surveys show
that Medicare recipients are much more satisfied with their coverage than
other Americans are with for-profit private insurance.23
Of the Americans who do have some form of private insurance, the ma-
jority get it through their employers—who are able to write off the costs as
tax deductions. But in return the government requires that employers must ex-
tend coverage to all their employees and not cherry-pick in the manner done
by insurance companies in the individual-policy market. Many firms, strapped
for funds, are dropping insurance coverage for their workers.
Health care reform is difficult and hugely expensive if left in the hands of
the free marketeers. Many of the goals are impossible to attain without a single-
payer system. Only single-payer would enable us to drastically reduce adminis-
trative costs, relieve employers of the burden of carrying insurance, and provide
a form of universal coverage that is affordable and available to all.
This nation has fifteen hundred different health insurance programs.
These private companies cost hundreds of billions of dollars a year. Private
companies lay out huge sums for marketing, for screening out undesirable ap-
plicants, and for enormous salaries and bonuses to their top directors.
A team of Harvard Medical School researchers estimated that a single-
payer national health insurance could save at least $286 billion annually, en-
ough to cover all the uninsured. Private health insurance companies spend
80
Chapter 7

13 percent of premiums on administrative and overhead costs, compared to 3.2
percent spent for government-managed Medicaid and Medicare, or 0.9 percent
for Canada’s single-payer system—which got rid of health insurance companies
almost three decades ago. Likewise private drug plans have much higher ad-
ministrative costs than would be incurred if Medicare administered the plan.24
THE “SOCIALIST” MEDICAL MENACE?
Free-market reactionaries circulate all sorts of horror stories about the health
care systems in Western social democracies and Canada. We hear that these
government-run systems are in shambles, paralyzed by cold and impersonal
bureaucracies that deny patients the opportunity to choose their own doctors,
require long waits, and deliver expensive and inferior care. The truth is some-
thing else.
•
As compared to the United States, people in Britain, Germany, Holland,
Canada, and elsewhere are more likely to have a regular doctor and they
can choose from a roster of physicians. They do have a choice.
•
Waiting time is generally less than in the United States. No one in Canada
or the European social democracies is kept waiting if they need emer-
gency care or are facing a life-threatening problem.
•
No one is denied medical care because of inability to pay. No one has to
pay anything except occasionally for small fees. Everyone has universal
coverage for both minor and major ailments.
•
People in these countries do not lose their health care when they lose
their jobs.
•
No Danes, Swedes, Germans, Britons, Finns, Norwegians, Belgians,
French, or Canadians are ever plunged into debt or bankruptcy because
of medical bills.
•
All these nationalized health care systems cost about half what is spent in
the United States on health care, yet they offer excellent care and cover
every illness.
•
Any individual in any of these countries can pay for private insurance
and private care if they so choose.
It is in the United States, not the social democracies, that delayed care—
even for emergency needs—is a common fact of life (and death). Over five
hundred hospitals have violated a federal law that requires them to provide
emergency care to anyone, regardless of ability to pay. Many postpone treat-
ment until they can determine how the patient will pay the bill. Fines for such
shabby practices are seldom imposed. No wonder surveys show that Ameri-
cans overwhelmingly support substantial changes in their health care system,
including a public-plan choice.25
Although Canada and the other industrialized democracies spend only
half as much as the United States on health care, they have lower infant mor-
tality rates and healthier average populations with higher life expectancies.
According to a World Health Organization report, U.S. health care costs the
most while being thirty-seventh in quality.26
Health and Human Services: Sacrificial Lambs
81

The U.S. government actually has a socialized medicine system that works
quite well. It is the Veterans Health Administration (VHA), whose success
story is one of the best-kept secrets in American politics. Once plagued by bu-
reaucratic inefficiency and mediocre service, the VHA was upgraded in the
1990s. Today it repeatedly wins a level of client satisfaction superior to any
accorded private health care. The VHA offers integrated coverage to veterans
of the U.S. armed forces. It does not need an enormous administrative staff for
promotional work or elaborate billings and payment accounts. The VHA took
“the lead in electronic record-keeping and other innovations that reduce costs,
ensure effective treatment, and help prevent medical errors,”27 again proof
that public health service outperforms private-profit service.
Another falsehood about Canadian health care is that its drugs are
“unreliable.” In fact, drugs up north are no less safe than in the United States,
just much less expensive. Most medicines in the United States are drastically
overpriced. Pharmaceutical companies claim they need high prices to support
innovative research, but they spend three times more on sales promotions than
on research, while enjoying astronomical profits of $300 billion a year.28 The
companies ply doctors with free drug samples, free food, free medical re-
fresher courses that promote the company’s pharmaceuticals, and payments
for lectures that do the same.29
Most new drugs are just minor variants of existing ones. Federal budget
analysts discovered that the active ingredients in many drugs often cost only
pennies, whereas huge price tags are passed on to consumers. Thus one hun-
dred tablets of Prozac, a widely used antidepressant, cost the consumer about
$247 but the active ingredients cost only 11 cents for the entire bottle.30
82
Chapter 7

Furthermore, pharmaceutical research is heavily subsidized by the govern-
ment to the tune of over $15 billion annually. Most new drugs are patented
after our tax dollars paid for their development.31 The government also fi-
nances the development of orphan drugs, which treat relatively “rare” dis-
eases (afflicting under 200,000 people). Pharmaceutical companies refuse to
develop such drugs; it’s just not profitable enough for them. So the Orphan
Drug Act of 1983 grants a seven-year market protection against any losses
plus generous tax breaks to companies that developed medications for these
relatively unusual diseases.32 Once again, the private sector serves a public
need only when generously bribed by the public sector.
The Bush administration pushed through a highly complicated compul-
sory drug “benefit” that will cost Medicare users $1 trillion in less than a de-
cade, bringing vast profits to the pharmaceutical companies. Deductions to
insure for medications are taken from the Social Security checks of seniors
whether they choose to join or not. The law specifically prohibits Medicare
from negotiating lower drug prices.33
BUYERS BEWARE, AND WORKERS TOO
More and more biomedical research is funded by private companies. Doctors
at some of the nation’s leading medical schools have attached their names and
lent their reputations to scientific papers drafted by ghostwriters employed by
the drug companies. Such “research” is far more likely to produce results fa-
vorable to the corporation that helped pay for it, often putting the consumer
at risk.34
Consumer protection is generally scanty. The Food and Drug Administra-
tion (FDA) tests only about 1 percent of the drugs and foods marketed.
Toothpaste, shampoo, cosmetics, and other items are often contaminated
with carcinogenic by-products, yet the FDA has done little about it. Of the
medical drugs it approves, an estimated half of them cause serious adverse
reactions.35
When Monsanto (owned by DuPont) introduced bovine growth hor-
mone (BGH) to induce dairy cows to produce abnormally high amounts of
milk, the FDA approved the biotech “wonder drug” even though consumer
groups questioned its unknown effects on children and adults. Cows injected
with BGH suffer from illness and malnutrition, making it necessary to
augment their already high intake of antibiotics. The federal government
already buys surplus milk supplies. The increase in (BGH) milk production
will costs taxpayers additional millions, mostly benefiting a few giant dairy
producers.36
“Factory farms” around the country confine livestock in cages for the en-
tire duration of their lives, where they are fed everything from ground-up ani-
mal parts to sewage sludge. Antibiotics are regularly pumped into these
creatures to keep them from sickening, and to increase their weight through
water retention. Antibiotics also create virulently resistant strains of bacteria
for which there is no treatment. Over nine thousand human deaths occur
each year in the United States due to food-borne illnesses. Consumer groups
Health and Human Services: Sacrificial Lambs
83

have been fighting to get the FDA to ban irradiated beef, which is sold at
some fast-food outlets and supermarkets, and has made its way into school
lunches for children. Irradiated beef, which costs 13 to 20 cents per pound
more than ordinary beef, has been found to contain toxic chemicals linked to
cancer and genetic damage.37
One cannot talk about the health of America without mentioning occupa-
tional safety. Every year over 6,000 workers are killed on the job and 4.5 mil-
lion are injured. Another 10,000 die later on from job injuries and 50,000
from occupational diseases caused by toxic chemicals, asbestos, pesticides,
and solvents. Some 50,000 to 60,000 sustain permanent disability, and mil-
lions more suffer from work-related illnesses. Industrial work always carries
some risk, but the carnage today is due mostly to inadequate safety standards
and lax government enforcement of codes. Even in the most egregious cases,
employers rarely face criminal prosecution.38
The Occupational Safety and Health Administration (OSHA) has only
2,043 inspectors to ensure safety for over 135 million workers at about 7 mil-
lion workplaces. Employers file reports of injuries and fatalities on a purely
voluntary basis, making existing statistics unreliable. When cited for viola-
tions, corporations sometimes find it less expensive to pay the relatively light
fines than to improve safety conditions. The free market is a dangerous place
for working people. If a company kills an employee through willful and delib-
erate endangerment, it is only a misdemeanor under federal law.39
Worker’s compensation laws usually place the burden of proof on the in-
jured employee, provide no penalties when industry withholds or destroys ev-
idence, and impose a statute of limitation that makes it difficult to collect on
work-related diseases that have a long latency period. Only about 10 percent
of the millions of workers injured actually win any benefits. And those
who do then forfeit their right to sue a negligent employer. Thus, to some
extent, the government compensation program actually shields industry from
liability.
A decade of efforts in Congress (1997–2006) to increase the $5.15-an-hour
minimum wage were stymied largely by Republican lawmakers and business
groups who argued that a higher minimum wage would drive away jobs. Opin-
ion polls showed widespread support for an increase in the federal minimum
wage. With the advent of a Democratic Congress, in July 2009 the federal
minimum-wage law was advanced to $7.25 an hour, with time-and-a-half pay
for any hours over forty a week.40
A 2009 study of Chicago, Los Angeles, and New York found that any-
where from 12 percent to 43 percent of low-wage workers (varying by indus-
try) were routinely paid less than the minimum wage, and many were denied
proper overtime pay. African American women and immigrant workers were
the most victimized.41
In addition, wage theft has reached epidemic proportions. Employers
commit wage theft when they steal all or some portion of a worker’s earnings
by failing to pay time-and-a-half overtime or any overtime at all, forcing
workers to work extra hours “off the clock” for no pay under threat of losing
their jobs, pocketing the money deducted for Social Security, and laying off
84
Chapter 7

workers without giving them the back pay owed to them. Corporations like
Wal-Mart, Allstate, and IBM have been forced to make multimillion-dollar
settlements with tens of thousands of workers after bitter legal battles. Wage
theft exceeds $19 billion annually and affects about 2 million workers, yet it
goes largely unreported in the news media.42
CREATING CRISES: SCHOOLS AND HOUSING
Economic inequality extends into the field of education. Wealthy districts of-
ten are allocated far more per pupil than less affluent districts. Poorer schools
suffer from overcrowding and underfunding. Various lawmakers and com-
mentators say “we can’t solve the public school problem by just throwing
money at it.” Strange to hear this from people who never tire of throwing
titanic sums at the Pentagon in order to improve the kill capacity of the U.S.
military. A Rand Corporation study shows that more funds for smaller
classes, preschool enrollment, classroom materials, and remedial services do
improve the morale and performance of children from low-income families.
Though not the only consideration, money—or the lack of it—is a core prob-
lem.43 Free marketeers seek to privatize public education by giving parents
money vouchers that they could spend on any school of their choice, including
parochial ones. The schools and teachers would not be certified and there
would be no performance control. Anybody, qualified or not, could start a
school to make some quick bucks from vouchers.
One helpful federal program is Head Start. Children receive food, medical
care, and remedial education, and their parents learn about nutrition and
appropriate community programs. Only three of every five eligible children
are enrolled in Head Start because the program cannot afford to accept
more. Despite its success, a Republican administration decided to “reform”
Head Start by cutting funds for child care, after-school and summer-school
programs, assistance to abused and neglected children, and treatment for sub-
stance abuse.44
President Bush initiated a program called “No Child Left Behind,” which
forces teachers to prepare students for a standardized federal test. Schools that
get enough students to pass are rewarded with more funds. Schools that fail
are given less. Teachers complain of having to “teach to the test” rather than
encourage innovative and exploratory educational effort. Independent reading
and imaginative projects are discarded. Critical thinking is discouraged.
Teaching to the test involves memorizing pat answers; thus in one school, stu-
dents learn that something is a poem “because it rhymes and has stanzas.”
Physical education, art, music, and even science are set aside in some schools.
A host of self-appointed “consultants” sell packaged curricula and test boos-
ters to the schools in what has become a billion-dollar industry. Principals and
superintendents often obsess about meeting test levels lest their school budgets
be cut.45
In 2003, nearly 170,000 high school graduates, among the top in their
classes, had to forgo college because they could not afford it. Students have
had to rely increasingly on loans from banks and other private lenders that
Health and Human Services: Sacrificial Lambs
85

are underwritten by the federal government at great profit to the banks. Here
is how socialism for the rich works:
•
The taxpayers (including ones who cannot afford to send their children to
college) give the banks and other private credit companies billions of dol-
lars with which to make loans to students.
•
If the students pay back the loans with interest, the banks pocket these
profits and use the repaid money for more loans.
•
The loans that students fail to pay back are guaranteed by the taxpayers.
The government buys back these bad debts from the banks and loan com-
panies so that they neither sustain any losses nor carry any risks.
•
The banks and loan companies collect on delinquent loans, using collec-
tion agencies that put liens on the wages and salaries that students might
earn after graduation.
•
Students often work hard to pay off the debts they owe so that the top
executives of these private loan companies can continue to make
multimillion-dollar salaries, use private jets, and frequent the most luxuri-
ous golf and spa resorts in the world.
If the government itself made direct loans to college students, it would
cost only one-fifth as much—but that would mean no profits for the banks
and private loan companies. “The White House estimates that it could save
about $94 billion over 10 years if it cut out all the middlemen. And it has
the basis of a system in place, since the Department of Education already
makes a lot of direct loans to students.”46
In 2005 and 2006, the Bush Jr. administration cut hundreds of millions of
dollars from the education budget, including funds for vocational training and
programs for disadvantaged students.47 Meanwhile the government gives sig-
nificantly more financial aid to the wealthiest private universities than to
needy community colleges and evening schools.48 Much federal aid also goes
to medical schools and graduate and postgraduate science programs.
So with housing. The bulk of federal housing assistance goes not to poor
households but to affluent ones. Middle- and upper-income homeowners re-
ceive tax deductions for the interest paid on their mortgages, and capital gains
deferrals on housing sales, costing the government over $100 billion in reve-
nues each year. This is several times more than what the Department of Hous-
ing and Urban Development (HUD) is allocated for low-income housing.
Upper-income people who own beachfront homes receive federally subsi-
dized insurance that leaves the government liable for billions of dollars in
claims. One such beneficiary was multimillionaire ex-president Bush Sr., who
preached free-market self-reliance while benefiting from federal insurance that
covered most of the $300,000 to $400,000 worth of storm damage to his es-
tate in Maine.49
Private housing developments built with government assistance are often
rented to low-income people for a year or two to qualify for federal funds,
then sold to other private owners who, not held to the original contract, evict
the tenants and turn the units into high-priced rentals or condominiums.
Every year, hundreds of thousands of low-cost housing units are lost to
86
Chapter 7

demolition, gentrification, and sales to private investors, as the crisis of afford-
able housing spreads across the United States.50
The government has two programs for low-income tenants. The first is
public housing, which accommodates about 1.3 million families, half of
whom collect some form of public assistance. Public-housing projects plagued
by drugs and gang crime have received a lot of media attention. But the many
public-housing projects, including ones for the elderly, that work fairly well
receive little press notice.
The other government housing program consists of Section 8 vouchers,
which provide 1.5 million low-income families with rent subsidies. The family
pays the landlord 30 percent of its income and the government pays the land-
lord the rest. Again, the public sector subsidizes the private-profit sector.
About half of the million or so low-income households that receive rent vou-
chers return them unused because affordable apartments are unavailable.
Only one-quarter of poor U.S. households get any kind of housing subsidy—
the lowest level of any industrialized nation.
Rents have soared far above incomes in many parts of the country, fur-
ther shrinking the supply of affordable housing. Millions of Americans not
classified as homeless double up, or pay more than they can comfortably af-
ford for cramped, substandard quarters. Tens of thousands of low-income
Americans have been excluded from public housing for minor offenses that
may have occurred years ago, or for merely being arrested, though not con-
victed of anything.51
The reduction in public-housing funds over the last twenty-five years re-
mains the major cause of homelessness. Many cities are passing ordinances
that make it a crime to sit or lie in a public place with a sleeping bag or shop-
ping cart. Homeless people are harassed, roughed up and arrested, driven from
one town to another, their few possessions confiscated and destroyed, their
makeshift campgrounds and other sleeping spaces sealed off. The homeless
have an inordinately high rate of untreated physical and psychological illnesses.
In 2008–2009, during the subprime-mortgage scandal, millions of working
families were dispossessed of their homes by the duplicitous practices of preda-
tory lenders and investors. Many ended up doubling up with relatives or living
in low-rent hovels or “tent cities,” only adding to the housing crisis in Amer-
ica. Early in its first year in office, the Obama administration announced the
Making Home Affordable (MHA) Program, a comprehensive plan intended
to assist some 7 to 9 million homeowners by reducing mortgage payments to
affordable levels and preventing avoidable foreclosures. The program was de-
signed to restore the housing market, shore up its slumping values and prices,
and ease the impact and frequency of foreclosures—without eliminating fore-
closures or restoring ownership to the many who lost their homes.52
“MESS TRANSIT”
The transportation system provides another example of how private profit
takes precedence over public need. Up until the 1920s the transporting of pas-
sengers and goods was done mostly by electric car and railroad. Mass-transit
Health and Human Services: Sacrificial Lambs
87

rails use only a fraction of the fuel consumed by cars and trucks. But these
very efficiencies are what made them so undesirable to the oil and automotive
industries.
Consider the fate of Los Angeles. In 1935 that city was served by one of
the finest rail systems in the world, covering a seventy-five-mile radius with
quiet, pollution-free electric trains that carried 80 million passengers a year.
But General Motors (GM) and Standard Oil, using dummy corporations as
fronts, purchased the system, and replaced the electric cars with GM buses
fueled by Standard Oil. By 1955, the corporations had replaced electric street-
car networks with gas-guzzling high-emission buses in over one hundred cities
across the nation. Then they cut back on city and suburban bus services to
encourage mass dependency on cars. In 1949, General Motors was found
guilty of conspiracy in these activities and fined the crushing sum of $5,000.53
Motor vehicles extract a staggering social cost. In the United States about
42,000 people are killed in motor vehicle accidents every year and well over
3 million are injured, many of them seriously incapacitated for the remainder
of their lives. Auto accidents are the leading cause of death for people between
the ages of fifteen and thirty-four. As of 2009, upwards of 3.6 million Ameri-
cans have perished on the roads, more than twice the number killed in all the
wars fought in the nation’s history, about 120 a day. This figure does not usu-
ally include deaths that occur several days or weeks later from injuries origi-
nally sustained in the auto accident. Motor vehicles also kill 1 million animals
each day. More deer are slaughtered by cars than by hunters.54
More than half the land in U.S. cities is taken up by the movement, park-
ing, and servicing of vehicles. The suburban sprawl made possible by cars
wipes out the surrounding farm communities, and necessitates higher per ca-
pita costs for sewage and water system construction and, in turn, still greater
dependency on auto vehicles. Federal, state, and local governments spend over
$300 billion annually on road construction and maintenance, highway pa-
trols, and ambulance and hospital services related to automotive mishaps.55
The automobile is one of the greatest causes of air pollution in urban areas
and of global warming throughout the world. An estimated thirty thousand
deaths yearly are caused by automotive emissions. Rubber tire and oil slick
runoffs and the tons of salt poured on winter roads cause trees and vegetation
to wither while damaging bays and rivers. The average vehicle generates seven
hundred pounds of air pollution and four tons of carbon just in its manufac-
ture. Auto companies have done little to develop zero-emission vehicles, falsely
claiming there is insufficient demand. If anything, car dealers and the general
public have long been asking for affordable zero-emission vehicles.56
Medical costs for auto victims are enormous, as are the costs of a court
system that litigates so many vehicular-injury cases. As much as one-fifth of
the average household’s income is expended on car payments, auto insurance,
gasoline, servicing, repairs, parking, and other auto-related costs. Those who
are unable to drive—the elderly, the disabled, and the young—are frequently
isolated by a car-dominated transport system.57
One thing that would help is more mass transit. Railroads, subways, and
metro lines are vastly more efficient and less damaging to the environment
88
Chapter 7

than cars and trucks, but they receive proportionately far less in subsidies.
Amtrak, our public rail system, provides much needed intercity passenger ser-
vice at relatively minimal cost. Yet in 2009 Amtrak received all of $1.6 billion
in appropriations from Congress, about what the Pentagon spends in a day.
The Obama stimulus bill of 2009 did provide $8 billion for Amtrak for
much-needed repairs and upkeep. And Congress started preparing a six-year,
multibillion-dollar plan that would allocate more funds for public transit and
less for new roads and highways.
More funds are needed also to repair our bridges, one in four of which
are structurally deficient or functionally obsolete. We need to spend $250 bil-
lion to fix our aging water pipes and sewers, and additional billions of dollars
for our telecommunications system, airports, tunnels, and national parks.58
Many of the enormous allocations that go for bombs and bailouts could be
put to more useful and needed purpose.
Health and Human Services: Sacrificial Lambs
89

C
H
A
P
T
E
R
8
The Last Environment
Those of privileged and powerful means believe they have a right to use as
they wish whatever natural resources still remain on the planet, while passing
off their diseconomies onto others. They seem unaware that the planet’s very
survival is at stake.
TOXIFYING THE EARTH
Like sin, environmental degradation is regularly denounced but vigorously
practiced. Every year industry dumps over a billion pounds of toxins, including
carbon dioxide, sulfur dioxide, mercury, and hundreds of other noxious sub-
stances into our environment. Corporations do this not because they want to
sicken people and destroy the planet but because they want to minimize costs
and maximize profits. Industry introduces about a thousand new chemicals into
the marketplace annually, often with unreliable information about their effects.
Each year some ten thousand spills from pipelines and tankers spread millions
of gallons of oil into our coastal waters, taking a dreadful toll as the oil works
its way through fish-spawning and animal-breeding cycles.1
Rain forests throughout the world, with their precious stock of flora and
fauna, are being turned into wastelands. Less than 20 percent of the world’s
original forest cover remains today, mostly in Russia, Canada, and parts of
South America and Africa, almost all of it threatened by rapacious clear-
cutters.2 In the United States, more than 96 percent of the ancient redwood for-
ests have been wiped out by fast-buck timber companies. As the trees disappear
so do the spawning streams and distinctive menagerie of life.3 The U.S. Depart-
ment of Agriculture estimates that every year up to 400,000 acres of wetlands
in the United States are obliterated by commercial farming and developers.
90

The industrial production of meat fouls vast areas of land and waterways
with waste runoff and preempts millions of acres for livestock feed. According
to one report, meat consumption is the most environmentally harmful activity
consumers can engage in, except for operating a gas-driven car.4
Fast-buck exploitation of the planet’s resources and population explosion
have brought more toxic effusion, ecological disruption, and an extinction
rate of 17,500 species of plants and animals every year. By overfishing, large
commercial fleets are wiping out the world’s marine life and driving out small-
scale fishermen.
Many widely used chemicals are endocrine disrupters and hormone mi-
mickers. Working their way into the food chain, they undermine our health
and genetic viability. In the United States toxic-waste dumps and incinerators
are situated predominantly in or near low-income African American, Latino,
and Native American communities, contributing to inordinately high cancer
rates among these populations.5 High levels of leukemia and brain and testic-
ular tumors have been found among children who live near utility power
plants and toxic sites. Over the last several decades, the rate of cancer among
American children has been rising by double digits. A newborn child faces a
The Last Environment
91

risk of about one in six hundred of contracting cancer by age ten.6 Since 1940
breast cancer rates among women have tripled.
An estimated 50,000 to 100,000 deaths each year in the United States are
caused by air pollution. The number of asthma sufferers has been increasing
at the alarming rate of 50 percent each decade as air quality continues to de-
teriorate. As of 2007, 6.7 million children and 16.2 million adults suffered
from asthma in the United States.7
More than 45 million Americans are drinking and bathing in water that is
ridden with parasites and toxic chemicals. Excess lead levels have been found
in the drinking water of one of every five Americans, contributing to hyperten-
sion, strokes, heart ailments, and learning disabilities. In some neighborhoods,
tap water was found to contain remnants of rocket fuel. Two studies warn
that mothers’ breast milk “can contain traces of chemical flame retardant.”8
On average, each person’s body carries measurable levels of fifty to eighty
or more toxic chemicals. These contaminants are probably the leading cause
of death in the United States.9
Sometimes toxins are poured not into the environment but directly into
our bodies. Thus silicofluorides, a toxic-waste product, is used for fluori-
dation. Most of the U.S. population is subjected to compulsory fluoridation
in their drinking water because it supposedly protects children from tooth
decay. But Sweden, Germany, Norway, Netherlands, Denmark, and France
stopped using fluoridation over twenty-five years ago. Communities in
Finland, East Germany, Cuba, and Canada that stopped using fluoride actu-
ally showed a decrease in tooth decay. Fluoridation causes fluorosis, which
consists of severe tooth enamel loss, pitting, and discoloration. As it accumu-
lates in the body, fluoride becomes increasingly toxic, having been linked to
thyroid and neurological disorders, reproductive afflictions, bone fractures,
Alzheimer’s, and cancer.10
Six million acres of irreplaceable topsoil are eroded yearly by chemical
farming. The use of toxic herbicides and pesticides has doubled over the
last few decades, with high levels found in foods and drinking water, risking
birth defects, liver and kidney diseases, brain damage, and cancer, not to
mention the loss of fish, birds, and trees. Homeowners drench their yards
and lawns with many times more herbicides and insecticides per acre than
even farmers use, killing many useful insects that aerate the soil and polli-
nate plants.11 The more chemicals that are poured into the environment,
the more that are needed. For example, forest and lawn pesticides kill the
songbirds that eat bugs, thereby removing a natural pest control and causing
greater infestation—which in turn creates a greater reliance on pesticides.
Pesticides produce generations of insects increasingly resistant to chemical
controls—which necessitates more potently toxic chemicals. The result is
that over a thirty-five-year period, pesticide use has increased tenfold (along
with profits from pesticide sales) yet crop losses to insects and other pests
have almost doubled. Chemical companies like Monsanto would want it no
other way. Their goal is not to make things all better and then go out of
business; it seems they prefer to market a product that increases the very
conditions for its expanded use.12
92
Chapter 8

After a nine-year study, the EPA concluded that the most widely used pes-
ticide, atrazine, along with other pesticides might have unacceptable impacts
on the environment and our health, causing abnormalities in the human endo-
crine system.13 Along with pesticides are the chemical fertilizers that are used
abundantly with much damage to the soil and little benefit to crop yield. Since
1984, the production of the world grain staples that most of humanity sur-
vives on has been falling behind population growth.14
ECO-APOCALYPSE
The earth itself is beginning to lose its natural ability to remove air pollutants.
There exists in the atmosphere a highly reactive oxygen compound, a free radi-
cal known among chemists as a molecular scavenger. This key molecule cleanses
the air by attacking and transforming many of the gases it bounces into. Concen-
trations of this vital scavenger have decreased by 10 percent worldwide over a
twenty-year period.15
The life support systems of the entire ecosphere—the planet’s thin skin of
air, water, and topsoil and its finite supply of material resources—are threat-
ened by global warming, endless capitalist industrial expansion, and massive
population growth.16 Global warming (also referred to as climate change) is
caused by motor vehicle exhaust and other fossil fuel emissions that create a
“greenhouse effect,” trapping heat close to the earth’s surface.
The last several decades have produced the warmest years on record. By
2004 emissions of greenhouse gases reached an all-time high, nearly double
the average annual rate. These buildups are altering the climatic patterns on
which we depend for our rainfall, resulting in record hurricanes, windstorms,
droughts, and floods. In northern climes as well as warmer ones, rising tem-
peratures have diminished soil moisture and rainfalls, disrupting the forest’s
ability to renew itself. The consequent increase in drought and forest fires
only adds to the warming.
Atmospheric warming is leading to the disappearance of freshwater
sources in many parts of the world, causing life-threatening disaster for mil-
lions. Drought and overuse have led to serious water shortages in almost every
area of the United States, not just the usually parched Southwest. Reservoirs
have dropped to record lows. Waterfalls have disappeared. River basins and
lakes are shrinking. Underground aquifers—the source of 60 percent of U.S.
freshwater—are being depleted. Industrial expansion and the population
boom create an additional drain on water supplies, while contributing directly
to greater greenhouse emissions and more global warming.17
The meltdown of permafrost in the northern climes releases vast amounts of
carbon dioxide and methane that further accelerate the heat buildup, creating a
cycle that feeds on itself. Global warming is causing the Antarctic and Arctic ice
caps and Greenland glaciers to melt. Arctic ice caps act as reflector shields
against the sun’s rays. As they melt away, the earth absorbs still more of the
sun’s heat causing still more meltdown. The melting of the ice caps brings a dra-
matic rise in sea levels. causing them to swallow up shorelines and small islands,
and disrupt natural ecosystems, threatening to flood large sectors of the globe.
The Last Environment
93

By exacerbating flooding and drought, global warming causes more than
300,000 deaths and about $125 billion in economic losses each year. The in-
creased death rates are from illnesses including malnutrition, diarrheal disease,
malaria, and various heat-related ailments.18
The vast amount of freshwater released into the oceans from this melt-
down is smothering the Atlantic Gulf Stream. Deprived of Gulf Stream
warmth, much of Europe and North America could be transformed into frigid
land masses that would be able to feed but a tiny fraction of their present
populations. The Gulf Stream is already showing signs of slowing down, and
Europe experienced one of its coldest winters in 2005–2006. The same slow-
down of currents is occurring in the Pacific Ocean.19
Unless we move swiftly and massively away from fossil fuels and develop
sufficient wind, solar, and tidal power, the compounding feedback effects of
global warming are likely to bring utter catastrophe to the entire planet.
Some experts believe it is already too late.20
Unfortunately, during his occupancy of the White House (2001–2008),
George Bush took no action that might cut into the profits of the oil compa-
nies. Instead the White House muzzled scientists at NASA and at the National
Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration who were pointing to an impending
ecological catastrophe.21
Beset by a profound economic crisis into the second year of his adminis-
tration, President Barack Obama was unwilling or unable to pursue any kind
of ecological master plan that could bring a dramatic reversal. The American
Clean Energy and Security Act of 2009 aims at reducing greenhouse emissions
17 percent by 2020. Other provisions include new renewable requirements for
utilities, new energy efficiency incentives for homes and buildings, and grants
for green jobs—all steps in the right direction but relatively small steps.
Also of concern is the shrinkage of the ozone layer that envelops the planet.
Ozone-depleting chemicals, chiefly chlorofluorocarbons (CFCs), are emitted into
the earth’s atmosphere every year. Ozone depletion causes excessive ultraviolet
radiation, which in turn disrupts the DNA of plants and humans and depresses
the human immune system. Excessive ultraviolet radiation damages trees, crops,
coral reefs, and fish, and is destroying the ocean’s phytoplankton—a source of
about half this planet’s oxygen.22 If the oceans die, so do we.
The top five CFC polluters in the United States are corporate military con-
tractors. U.S. space shuttles have seriously damaging effects on the ozone
layer, yet the space program goes on and on. In 2003, scientists announced
that the ozone depletion rate had slowed down significantly thanks to the in-
ternational ban on CFCs. However, because CFCs have very long atmospheric
lifetimes, ranging from fifty to over a hundred years, and some nations have
not banned them, full recovery of the ozone layer is expected to take the better
part of this century, assuming we have that much time.
POLLUTION FOR PROFITS
Profits are higher when corporations can unload their diseconomies onto the
environment. Luxury cruise ships dump hundreds of thousands of gallons of
94
Chapter 8

wastewater on each trip they make. Cargo and container ships illegally dump
tons of oily toxic sludge into the ocean on a regular basis, causing serious
devastation of marine life. About forty thousand acres of coastal wetlands,
providing spawning and feeding areas for most commercial fishing, are disap-
pearing each year. Tons of nitrogen and phosphorus excess running off from
farms, cattle feedlots, and city sewers, and airborne nitrates from automobiles
and power plants, cause massive algae blooms that create “dead zones” of
oxygen-less water in our bays, estuaries, and ocean shorelines.
The costs of industrial effluents (which compose 40 to 60 percent of the
loads treated by municipal sewage plants) and the costs of developing new
water sources (while industry and agribusiness consume 80 percent of the na-
tion’s daily water supply) are passed on to the public; so are the costs of clean-
ing up radioactive sites, and tending to the sickness and disease caused by
pollution.
Strip mining and deforestation by coal and timber companies continue to
bring ruination to wildlife and watersheds. U.S. mining companies are now re-
sorting to mountaintop removal, a radical strip-mining process that blows off
the entire top of a mountain to get at the coal in a quicker, more profitable
way. Whole mountain ranges consisting of some five hundred mountaintops
ranging across West Virginia, Virginia, and Kentucky—once rich in freshwater,
wildlife, and tree cover—are transformed into barren moonscapes. About twelve
hundred mountain streams have been buried beneath dumped rock and dirt.
Toxic runoff leaches from the mines into the groundwater, and sediments from
denuded lands pour into waterways and fisheries. Landslides wash away homes
and entire hamlets. U.S. regulations forbid the dumping of industrial waste into
rivers and streams. But under the Bush administration, the mining companies’
massive mountaintop debris was reclassified as “fill material” that could be freely
dumped, with much destruction to streams and countryside.23
An 1872 mining law is still the law of the land. It allows mining compa-
nies to dig out gold and copper on public lands without paying any royalties
and observing only minimal environmental protection. What the law has left
in its wake is a battered landscape of abandoned mines and poisoned streams.
A new bill that would require mining companies to pay royalties and observe
environmental safeguards was pending in Congress in 2009.24
Industrial toxins—including lead, arsenic, cadmium, and dioxin—along
with radioactive wastes are increasingly being recycled as fertilizer to be spread
over farm fields and grazing lands nationwide. In some states, agribusiness
companies have succeeded in passing “food disparagement laws” that allow
them to sue anyone who questions the safety of their products. Whether they
win or not, such litigious threats have a chilling effect on critics.25
Companies like Monsanto have a long record of releasing toxic wastes
into unsuspecting communities, then covering up their actions for decades.
Monsanto’s Sauget plant was the world’s leading producer of polychlorinated
biphenyls (PCBs), a substance linked to cancer, mental disability, birth defects,
and immune disorders. For years Monsanto concealed studies that found
PCBs unsafe. The vile substance was finally banned in 1970. At least forty-
four Monsanto properties qualify as Superfund toxic sites.26
The Last Environment
95

Pesticide companies and their compliant bureaucrats in the federal and
various state agricultural departments will suddenly designate harmless insects
like the gypsy moth and the light brown apple moth—creatures that have been
around for decades—as a lethal menace to crops and foliage. They then pro-
mote aerial spraying of whole communities, putting whole populations at risk,
especially children and the elderly.27
GOVERNMENT FOR THE DESPOILERS
With the fate of the planet at stake, the U.S. government’s response has been
less than inspiring. The Safe Drinking Water Act remains haphazardly en-
forced. The Clean Air Act became a bonanza for coal producers, who were
given billions of dollars ostensibly to clean up their act. And the Endangered
Species Act, one of the world’s toughest wildlife preservation laws, has proven
largely ineffectual, with failures mounting faster than successes.
People exposed to atmospheric nuclear tests and the contaminating clouds
vented from continued underground tests have suffered a variety of serious ill-
nesses. Nuclear mishaps have occurred at reactors in a dozen states. In the
area around Three Mile Island, Pennsylvania, livestock aborted and died
prematurely, and households experienced what amounts to an epidemic of
cancer, birth defects, and premature deaths.28
Nuclear power plants are so hazardous that insurance companies refuse
to cover them. And they are too expensive to attract corporate investors. The
average two-reactor nuclear power plant is estimated to cost upwards of $18
billion to build, and that is before cost overruns. The carbon imprint created
96
Chapter 8

by the manufacturing of the nuclear plants themselves, the production of en-
ergy rods, the cooling towers, and the need for vast amounts of cooling water
demonstrate that nuclear energy is no answer to global warming. Still, nuclear
power plants continue to be built, with Congress shelling out billions of dol-
lars in tax credits, federal loan guarantees, insurance, and direct subsidies.29
For decades the government knowingly let uranium and other lethal sub-
stances leak into the groundwater and drinking wells. It has allowed private
industry and the military to deposit radioactive nuclear wastes into ocean
dumps and prime fishing beds along the ocean coasts of the United States.
The Department of Energy has no known safe method of disposing of radio-
active waste.
We were told that nuclear power would be clean and inexpensive. In fact,
the construction of nuclear plants involved cost overruns of 400 to 1,000 per-
cent, often bringing higher rather than lower electric rates. The nuclear indus-
try has no long-term technology for the entombment or decontamination of
old plant sites. Thousands of tons of “slightly” radioactive metal from reac-
tors and laboratories are being considered for recycling, to be used in such
common items as zippers, food cans, and silverware. Nuclear industry repre-
sentatives assure us that the effect of such radioactive commodities on human
health would be “negligible.”30
The federal government’s Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) has
conducted almost no basic research on the long-term health effects of pollu-
tion. EPA monitors only about 1 percent of the seventy thousand different
synthetic chemicals and metals in commercial use. State and federal officials
take action in less than 2 percent of the thousands of annual environmental
complaints, and usually only after prolonged public agitation forces them to
do what they are being paid to do. Various state governments have adopted
legislation that allows corporate polluters to monitor themselves, without hav-
ing to tell authorities or the public the results.
The government sometimes collaborates with the polluters. The Bush
administration slashed the budgets of the EPA and the U.S. Forest Service
and removed wilderness protections.31 Politically appointed agency heads sup-
pressed scientific information about the damage done to ecology and wild-
life.32 The inspector general of the EPA reported that the agency failed to
fully assess the health impacts of mercury pollution because Bush appointees
intervened and compromised the study. New rules instituted by Bush Jr.
allowed coal-fired plants to expand without installing modern air pollution
control equipment to reduce mercury and other emissions.33
Over the last decade, the White House slashed funding for environmental
science and stacked scientific committees with members dedicated to the gov-
ernment’s pro-industry, anti-environment agenda. Government departments
accepted industry-sponsored reports that denied any environmental crisis,
while rejecting more worrisome independent studies from universities and
other research institutions.34
The Department of the Interior opened millions of acres of national parks
and forests to strip mining. The Army Corps of Engineers opened 60 million
acres of wetlands to private developers. The Corps has spent more than
The Last Environment
97

$25 billion in this century building dams and levees that have left a bleak
legacy of ecologically ravaged rivers, silted lakes thick with dead fish, and de-
struction of wildlife and plant habitats. The Corps’ efforts at containing rivers
in narrowly corseted waterways has only intensified the velocity and fre-
quency of floods.35
Corporate polluters are more often rewarded than punished. The Defense
Department has paid private defense contractors upwards of $1 billion to
clean up pollution from their own operations. (Again, the public sector must
generously bribe the private-profit sector to get it to show some social
responsibility.) When the Energy Department does impose cash penalties on
contractors who violate its safety rules, the companies are then allowed to
bill the government for the fines!
AN ALTERNATIVE APPROACH
In the face of an impending ecological catastrophe of global magnitude, grow-
ing numbers of people have been developing organic agriculture and environ-
mentally sustainable energy sources. Throughout the world, be it ecological
logging in Guatemalan rain forests or high-nutrition chemical-free “clean rice”
in Vietnam, there is a growing consciousness about the advantages of organic
production. Cuba has provided the most dramatic example of an entire nation
turning to organic farming—by force of circumstance. No longer able to count
on Soviet aid in the 1990s, and unable to import chemicals or modern farming
machines, the Cubans returned to oxen for plowing, while discarding chemical
pesticides and herbicides. They also developed integrative natural pest manage-
ment and networks of urban food gardens, all with much success.36
One study found that chicken farmers in Denmark did just as well or bet-
ter after eliminating the use of antibiotics in feed. Likewise, tomato farmers
in Florida earned much more per acre after switching from methyl bromide
(a soil fumigator and pesticide banned by Congress) to bahia grass pasture.
Thousands of farmers in the United States have abandoned chemical farming
and have turned to organic methods, soon achieving larger yields at less cost
by using crop rotation, natural pest control, and nonchemical fertilizers, meth-
ods that revitalize the soil. They get little if any assistance from the Depart-
ment of Agriculture, which is too busy serving agribusiness and chemical
farming. Organic farming means no profits for Monsanto and other chemical
companies.37
Today growing numbers of people in this country and around the world
rely on solar devices. Wind and solar power plants in California provide
power for about a million people. They can be built faster and cheaper than
nuclear or fossil fuel plants and have no toxic emissions. Renewable nonpol-
luting energy provides about 7.5 percent of this country’s energy production.
Twelve states in the Great Plains have a wind energy potential greater than the
electric use of our entire nation.38 However, recent administrations have done
little to develop these alternative sources. Despite its smaller economy, Japan
spends almost eight times more on solar energy research and development
than the United States.
98
Chapter 8

Solar, wind, and tidal energy sources would be readily accessible if
government and corporations devoted more resources to their development.
A new generation of high-efficiency windmill turbines are becoming the
fastest-growing energy source in parts of Europe, Latin America, and India.
The hydrogen fuel cell—as with nuclear energy—is misleadingly hailed as
a nonpolluting alternative source. It comes from an oil derivative and emits
carbon dioxide, a greenhouse gas. So too with ethanol, a corn-based fuel de-
scribed by the Council of Economic Advisors and Federal Trade Commission
as “costly to both consumers and the government and will provide little envi-
ronmental benefit.” It will cost even more than regular gasoline.39
In sum, things work best for big business when costs are socialized and
profits are privatized. Government is an insufficient bulwark against the bane-
ful effects of giant corporate capitalism and often a willing handmaiden. Why
that is so will be examined in later chapters. Of utmost importance are the
serious contradictions that exist between our well-being and the profit-driven
corporate system. Big business’s modus operandi is to produce and sell at an
ever expanding rate, treating the world’s resources as limitlessly expendable.
But the earth is finite, as is its water supply, oxygen, topsoil, and ability to
absorb toxins and heat from energy consumption. An infinitely expanding
capitalism and a fragile, finite ecology are on a calamitous collision course.
Our very survival hangs in the balance.
The Last Environment
99

C
H
A
P
T
E
R
9
Unequal before the Law
Although we have been taught to think of the law as a neutral instrument
serving the entire community, in fact it is often written and enforced to favor
the very rich over the rest of us.
CRIME IN THE SUITES
People fear street crime more than the white-collar variety because of its po-
tential violence and vivid portrayal in movies and television shows. But corpo-
rate crime costs the nation much more in lives and money than does street
crime. Burglary and robbery cost the public under $4 billion a year, while
the wrongdoings of a handful of major corporations cost hundreds of billions
a year. The FBI estimates that sixteen thousand people in the United States are
murdered every year. Meanwhile there are the tens of thousands who annu-
ally fall victim to carcinogenic pollutants, unsafe food and water, hazardous
consumer products, and profit-driven medical malpractice.1
The FBI and the Justice Department issue annual crime reports that never
mention corporate lawbreaking. For the feds, crime usually means crime in the
streets not crime in the suites. For every corporation convicted of swindling in-
vestors, consumers, and workers, there are hundreds more that go unpunished.
For every company convicted of polluting the nation’s waterways or selling ille-
gal pesticides, there are hundreds more that go unchallenged. Public prosecutors
who fight corporate crime are greatly underfunded and understaffed.2
One of the more egregious instances of corporate malfeasance involved
DuPont, Ford, GM, ITT, Boeing, and other companies whose factories in
Germany produced tanks, planes, and synthetic fuels used by the Nazi mili-
tary to kill American troops during World War II. After the war, rather than
being prosecuted for aiding the enemy, ITT collected $27 million, and General
100

Motors over $33 million, from the U.S. government for damages inflicted on
their German plants by Allied bombings. At least fifty U.S. corporations oper-
ated in Germany in 1941–1945, while the Nazis were at war with the United
States. Faced with class action law suits in 1999–2000, growing numbers of
corporations admitted having greatly profited from unpaid slave labor sup-
plied from Nazi concentration camps.3 No U.S. corporate head was ever pros-
ecuted for complicity in these war crimes.
Corporate crime is not a rarity but a regularity. The Justice Department
found that most giant companies have committed felonies. Many are repeat
offenders. Over the years, General Electric was convicted of 282 counts of
contract fraud and fined $20 million. Charged with 216 violations involving
toxic substances, WorldCom was fined $625,000. Over a sixteen-year period,
major oil firms cheated the government of nearly $856 million in royalties by
understating the value of the oil they pumped from public lands.4 In none of
these instances of grand larceny did anyone go to jail.
Honeywell ignored defects in gas heaters, resulting in twenty-two deaths
and seventy-seven crippling injuries, for which it was fined $800,000. Johns-
Manville Corporation suppressed information about the asbestos poisoning of
its workers; when ordered to pay damages in civil court, it declared bank-
ruptcy to avoid payment. For dumping toxic chemicals into well water that
was subsequently linked to eight leukemia deaths, W. R. Grace was fined
$10,000. Charged with unlawfully burning toxic wastes into the atmosphere
for twenty years, Potomac Electric Power Co. of Washington, D.C., was fined
the crushing sum of $500.5 In none of these cases did anyone go to prison.
Unequal before the Law
101

Many corporate crimes are not even prosecuted. A Union Carbide plant
spewed lethal pesticides over Bhopal, India, in what was history’s worst indus-
trial accident, killing over 22,000 people (at last count) and seriously afflicting
more than 100,000. Despite charges of gross negligence and culpable homi-
cide, executives from Union Carbide (now merged with Dow Chemical) were
never put on trial.
Claiming it did not have enough lawyers and investigators, the U.S. gov-
ernment failed to pursue more than one thousand fraud and embezzlement
cases involving savings and loans (S&L) associations and banks, amounting
to hundreds of billions of dollars in losses to U.S. taxpayers.6
In 2005 the Bank of New York agreed to pay $38 million in penalties and
victim compensation arising from a case of money laundering and fraud, but
no one went to jail. That same year Halliburton failed to make payments
to pension participants as legally required, instead using some of the funds
for executive pensions and bonuses. Halliburton was required to pay almost
$9 million and an undisclosed tax penalty, but no one went to prison for
that grand larceny.7
As of 2006 there was an estimated $450 billion shortfall in retirement and
disability funds, as numerous companies defaulted on their pension payments.
Federal law requires companies to honor their obligations to these funds, but
there is no real enforcement mechanism.
When Firestone pled guilty to filing false tax returns concealing $12.6 mil-
lion in income, it was fined $10,000, and no one went to jail. Over seven hun-
dred people a year are imprisoned for tax evasion, almost all of them for sums
smaller than the amount Firestone concealed. Over several years Food Lion
cheated its employees of at least $200 million by forcing them to work “off
the clock,” but in a court settlement the company paid back only $13 mil-
lion.8 Who says crime does not pay?
In 2004 Halliburton paid a $7.5 million fine for false earnings reports.
Halliburton also was accused of grossly overcharging the government for
gasoline intended for U.S. armed forces. For work done on a nuclear plant,
Bechtel grossly overcharged the government. Nobody at Halliburton or
Bechtel went to jail, and both companies continued to be awarded fat govern-
ment contracts.9
Someone who robs a liquor store is more likely to go to prison than peo-
ple who steal millions of dollars from shareholders, employees, consumers,
and taxpayers. James Watt, Interior Secretary under the Reagan administra-
tion, helped rich clients illegally pocket millions of dollars in low-income
housing funds. Watt was able to sidestep eighteen felony charges of perjury
and plead guilty to a misdemeanor, for which he got five years’ probation
and a $5,000 fine.10
In recent years prominent firms such as Enron, Adelphia, R. J. Reynolds,
AOL Time Warner, Arthur Andersen, Refco, Bristol Meyers, ImClone, Global
Crossing, and HealthSouth have been investigated for accounting and tax fraud,
manipulating stock values, insider trading, and obstructing justice, all of which
left tens of thousands of shareholders and employees with huge losses. Only a
handful of executives from these companies have seen the inside of a prison.11
102
Chapter 9

In 2008, venture capitalist Craig Berkman, former head of the Oregon
Republican Party, was found guilty in a civil case of defrauding investors
and was ordered to pay them a total of $28 million. Berkman claimed he
had no money and was deeply in debt. Soon after, however, he contributed
$50,000 to the Republican presidential campaign. Some jurors in the case
wondered why criminal charges were not brought against Berkman for swin-
dling millions of dollars.12
Columbia/HCA, a for-profit hospital chain, pleaded guilty in 2009
to grand felony charges of overbilling state and federal health plans, and
paid $1.7 billion in fines. But no one saw the inside of a prison.13
In 2009, fourteen Wall Street trading firms paid more than $69 million
in forfeited profits and penalties. A few months later, General Electric paid
$50 million for having manipulated its books to inflate its stock values. At
that same time, a former chief of American International Group (AIG), the
giant insurance firm, agreed to pay just $15 million in penalties for overseeing
fraudulent transactions that amounted to at least $2 billion.14 Nobody went
to jail for these immense swindles.
Also in 2009, the pharmaceutical giant Pfizer agreed to pay $2.3 billion to
settle civil and criminal charges that it had illegally marketed a painkiller. Ille-
gal marketing is all too common in the drug industry, according to consumer
advocates. It was Pfizer’s fourth settlement involving criminal activities in
seven years. Yet no one went to prison.15
BIG CRIME, SMALL PUNISHMENT (USUALLY)
Penalties often are uncollected or suspended. The Justice Department failed to
collect some $7 billion in fines and restitution from thirty-seven thousand
corporations and individuals convicted of felonies. Over one hundred S&L
plea-bargainers, who escaped long prison terms by promising to make penalty
repayments of $133.8 million, repaid less than 1 percent of that amount.16
The Bush Jr. administration decreased major fines for mining safety violations,
then in nearly half the cases did not collect the fines. On the relatively
rare occasions that corporate criminals are given prison terms, the sentence is
usually light—averaging about eleven months—and sometimes is not even
served.17
Wall Street investor Michael Milken pleaded guilty to securities violations
and was sentenced to ten years—reduced to twenty-two months, most of
which was spent doing community service. Corporate criminals sentenced to
community service seldom do but a small portion of it, if any. Milken had to
pay back $1.1 billion but retained a vast fortune of $1.2 billion from his deal-
ings. Likewise, Ivan Boesky walked off with $25 million after paying his fine
for insider trading and doing a brief spell behind bars. “Every major partici-
pant in these [Wall Street investment] crimes emerged from the experience as a
wealthy man.”18 Again, who says crime does not pay?
Only rarely are thieving corporate officers hit with heavy prison terms.
One highly publicized case involved the notorious swindler Bernard Madoff,
who took in some $65 billion from affluent investors, foundations, charities,
Unequal before the Law
103

and banks, pocketing the money instead of investing it. In 2009, the
71-year-old Madoff was sentenced to 150 years in prison.19
Another grand swindler was Marc Dreier, a prominent lawyer (graduate of
Yale University and Harvard Law School) who sold more than $700 million
worth of fake promissory notes to investors and stole more than $46 million
from clients. He was sentenced to twenty years in prison not long after Madoff.
Hundreds of employees lost their jobs when his law firm collapsed.20
The many examples given above hardly represent a complete listing of cor-
porate malfeasance. It seems that almost every week some financier is charged
with fraud and theft—and this does not count the many who do not get caught.
Besides individual brigands and Ponzi schemers, there are the widespread plots
involving mortgage fraud and consumer fraud. The Treasury Department esti-
mates that mortgage frauds—with more than five thousand cases reported
each month in 2009—costs the public anywhere from $15 billion to $25 billion
a year.21
A Democratic-controlled Congress passed and President Barack Obama
signed the Fraud Enforcement and Recovery Act of 2009, which gives the fed-
eral government more authority to prosecute mortgage fraud at virtually every
step of the mortgaging process, from predatory lending on Main Street to se-
curities manipulation on Wall Street. It also creates a bipartisan commission
to police the financial flimflam that helped to spark a major economic
recession.
With good reason do opinion surveys find a majority of the public believ-
ing that wrongdoing is rampant in the business world and “executives are
bent on destroying the environment, cooking the books and lining their own
pockets.” Some 90 percent think that big corporations have too much influ-
ence over government, whereas only 2 percent consider company bosses “very
trustworthy.”22
Every year in the United States “criminals amass hundreds of billions of
dollars from … mortgage fraud, extortion, embezzlement, illegal gambling,
bank fraud, public corruption, human trafficking, identity theft, securities vio-
lation, insurance fraud, intellectual property piracy, and bankruptcy fraud.”23
Even when the perpetrators end up behind bars, their loot often goes undis-
covered, including real estate, yachts, aircraft, offshore accounts, and other as-
sets amounting to tens of billions of dollars that could be used to compensate
victims.24
Corporations have been using SLAPP suits (Strategic Lawsuit Against Public
Participation) as a way of silencing public criticism about corporate products or
practices. The meat industry sued Oprah Winfrey for “product disparagement,”
after she commented on her television show that hamburgers were not safe to
eat. Winfrey won the case, but she no longer dared to criticize the meat industry.
In West Virginia, an environmental activist was sued $200,000 for accusing a
coal company of poisoning a local river. Win or lose, such lawsuits have a chill-
ing effect on critics of corporate wrongdoing who lack the financial resources to
sustain years of litigation. As one New York Supreme Court judge remarked
about SLAPP suits: “Short of a gun to the head, a greater threat to First Amend-
ment expression can scarcely be imagined.”25
104
Chapter 9

The relatively small number of federal actions against corporate America
hardly supports the image of business as the victim of a merciless federal gov-
ernment run amok. More often than not, government lawyers are outspent
and outdone.26 In 2005, supposedly to eliminate “frivolous lawsuits,” a
Republican-controlled Congress passed a “tort reform” that made it more dif-
ficult for people to launch class actions against big corporations. Frivolous
lawsuits actually are not a great problem. Generally they are quickly dismissed
by judges before ever going to trial. The suits that really antagonize corporate
America are anything but frivolous. Think of the class action cases against to-
bacco companies, utilities, auto manufacturers, chemical plants, and the asbes-
tos industry on behalf of workers and consumers who have suffered great
injury.
Furthermore, U.S. businesses themselves file four times as many lawsuits
as do individuals, and they are penalized much more often than anyone else
for pursuing frivolous litigation. Corporations think the country is too liti-
gious only when they themselves are sued. But most litigation against business
comes from other businesses.27
CLASS LAW: TOUGH ON THE WEAK
Supreme Court Justice Hugo Black noted in Griffin v. Illinois (1956) that
there “can be no equal justice where the kind of trial a man gets depends
on the amount of money he has.” Whether the legal system treats a person
Unequal before the Law
105

as prince or pariah rests largely on one’s financial resources. The corporate
executive with a team of high-powered attorneys has a different legal experi-
ence than the poor person with an underpaid court-appointed lawyer who
sees the defendant for the first time on the day of the trial. Some 80 percent
of accused persons nationwide rely on public defenders.28
As the recession deepens, the criminalization of poverty intensifies. The
number of ordinances against the homeless or those residing in rundown
neighborhoods has been rising in recent years. Loitering along a street, litter-
ing, failing to produce an ID if stopped by police, getting snared in a random
police sweep, carrying an open bottle of liquor—such things can lead to
arrest, and arrest can send you deeper into the poverty pit because it can be
difficult to get a job with a police record.29
Poor, uneducated persons and racial minorities are more likely to be
arrested, denied bail, induced to plead guilty, and do without adequate legal
representation. Public defender services are among the first to be cut when
budgets are tight. A slumping economy brings higher crime rates and more
unemployed defendants who cannot afford a lawyer. Every wrongfully con-
victed defendant leaves a real criminal on the street. The poor are less likely
to have a jury trial if tried, more likely to be convicted and receive a harsh
sentence, less able to launch extended appeals, and less likely to receive proba-
tion or a suspended sentence than are business executives, mobsters, celebri-
ties, and wealthy people in general.30
Workers engaged in labor struggles seldom find the law on their side. In
recent years, police in various locales across the nation have attacked striking
farm laborers, truckers, miners, meatpackers, janitors, and factory and con-
struction workers, arresting and injuring hundreds. Private security forces
beat up striking workers and break picket lines with acts of violence that
have gone unchallenged by police and prosecutors. Workers have been impri-
soned for resisting court injunctions against strikes and pickets, and even for
shouting at scab workers or talking back to police while on picket lines. In the
1990s seven strikers were shot by company goons in Indiana, and a striking
coal miner in Kentucky was shot dead by a gun thug, as was another miner in
West Virginia and a farm worker in Texas. In none of these cases did police
apprehend anyone—despite eyewitnesses who could identify the killers.31
Relatively petty offenders are sometimes accorded draconian treatment.
Some examples from over the last three decades: A Virginia man got ten years
for stealing 87 cents. A youth in Louisiana received fifty years for selling a few
ounces of marijuana. A Houston youth was sentenced to fifty years for rob-
bing two people of $1. A five-time petty offender in Dallas was sentenced to
one thousand years in prison for stealing $73. In South Dakota a seven-time
nonviolent criminal who wrote a $100 check that bounced was given a life
sentence. A California man got twenty-six-years to life for trying to take the
written portion of a driver’s license test for his cousin who spoke little English,
normally a misdemeanor punishable by up to one year in prison. A migrant
worker in North Carolina spent thirty-five years in prison for stealing a televi-
sion set; he was released in 2005. In 2002, a man in California who stole
nine videos worth $153 was sentenced to life with no possibility of parole
106
Chapter 9

for fifty years. That same year actress Winona Ryder stole $5,500 of merchan-
dise from a swanky department store in California, and the prosecutor did not
ask for jail time, saying: “We simply want Ms. Ryder to take responsibility for
her conduct.”32
Some people maintain that the tough lock-’em-up policy explains the drop
in crime rates in recent years. But states and municipalities with low incarcer-
ation rates sometimes show a greater decrease in crime than locales with high
incarceration rates. And states that have imposed a draconian “three strikes”
law (a mandatory life sentence for a third felony conviction) show no greater
decline in violent crime than states without it. The decline in crime seems to
have been caused by the lower birth rate and subsequent drop in the popula-
tion of males between eighteen and thirty.33
The “war on drugs” is most responsible for the prison population explo-
sion. Playing upon public fears about narcotics, lawmakers throughout the
country outdo themselves in passing harsh mandatory drug sentences. The re-
sult is that three-fourths of our federal and state inmate population consists
mostly of young petty drug offenders who are averaging more jail time than
mobsters, murderers, child molesters, and rapists.34 To illustrate: In 2004, a
federal judge sentenced a man to twenty-two years for beating an elderly
woman to death. A few hours later, the same judge sentenced a twenty-
five-year-old first-time drug offender, father of two young children, to fifty-
five years. The judge had no choice. Federal mandatory drug laws demanded
the sentence.35
The enormous cost of warehousing great numbers of nonviolent petty of-
fenders has caused some state governments to abolish mandatory sentences
and divert drug users into treatment programs, thereby substantially reducing
the exploding prison population and saving hundreds of millions of tax
dollars.36
Well-connected narcotics violators are often treated more leniently than
poorer ones. For example, the son of U.S. Representative Dan Burton (R-IN)
was arrested for transporting nearly eight pounds of marijuana in Louisiana,
then arrested again for possession of thirty marijuana plants in Indiana. He
was sentenced to do community service. Florida governor Jeb Bush eagerly
filled his state’s prisons with drug offenders, but when his own daughter was
arrested on prescription fraud, he immediately pleaded for the public to show
compassion. She never went to jail. Nor did right-wing talk-radio bully Rush
Limbaugh, who had repeatedly called for locking away drug abusers while he
himself was illegally procuring controlled substances from various doctors to
feed his addiction. Instead of jail, he was allowed to check himself into a pricey
private rehabilitation center.37
Big narcotics cartels rarely feel the heat. Legislation to stop the laundering
of drug money through legitimate financial institutions remains virtually unen-
forced. Meanwhile, the “war on drugs” provides profitable employment for
hundreds of thousands of prison guards, police, and law enforcement bureau-
crats and officials.
The FBI cooks its crime statistics by classifying drug trafficking, burglary,
and prostitution as violent crimes. All this feeds public fears and lends support
Unequal before the Law
107

for still larger law enforcement budgets and more draconian measures.38 To
be sure, violent crime is a serious problem, but a more accurate description
of its scope might help calm fears and encourage a more just and effective
enforcement.
THE CRIME OF PRISONS
As of 2009 the United States had the largest prison population in the world,
larger than China or India, nations with far more people. With less than 5 per-
cent of the world’s population, the United States had almost 25 percent of
the world’s prison population, about 2,311,000 inmates in federal and state
prisons and local jails. If we count not only inmates but also those on parole
or probation, the correctional population totals 7.3 million or 1 in every
31 adults, more than four times the number in 1980. In the last three decades,
prison sentences have doubled in length. Over 140,600 inmates are serving a
life sentence, a third of them for crimes other than murder, including burglary
and drug offenses. Many states are now spending more on prisons than on
education.39
Of those sentenced to state prisons, most are drug offenders with no his-
tory of violence or of any significant selling activity. Four out of five drug ar-
rests are for possession of illegal substances, most commonly for marijuana
offenses. These mass arrests of petty offenders has done nothing to break up
the power of the illegal multibillion-dollar drug traffickers.40
Of the people in prison, over 90 percent are men, mostly low-income
and underemployed. About 47 percent are White, 46 percent are African
American, and 7 percent are classified as Latino or other groups. Two-thirds
of the inmates serving life sentences are African American or Latino, often
incarcerated under tough mandatory minimum-sentencing laws. One in ten
African American men in the country, ages twenty-five to twenty-nine, were
imprisoned in 2008, many because of possession of crack cocaine. Prisons
are anything but “correctional institutions.” Most of them remain breeding
grounds for disease and violence. Inmates are among the physically sickest
people in the nation.41
An estimated 60,500 male inmates in state and federal prisons were raped
in one year, along with thousands more in local jails—with many more prob-
ably left uncounted. Victims seldom report the abuse because of unresponsive
authorities or fear of reprisal. Given these sexual assaults, HIV rates are eight
to ten times higher in prison than outside. Rape victims often suffer serious
emotional damage, and are sometimes driven to suicide. One tragic illustra-
tion: In Texas sixteen-year-old Rodney Hulin, incarcerated for starting a fire
in a dumpster, was repeatedly beaten and gang-raped. His pleas for protection
and those made by his mother were ignored by prison authorities. He ended
his torment by hanging himself.42
Thirty-six
states
and
the
federal
correctional
system
have
super-
maximum-security facilities that are little better than high-tech dungeons.
Prisoners in these solitary units are subjected to severe sensory deprivation,
isolated in bare concrete cells sealed off by solid steel doors cutting off sound
108
Chapter 9

and visual contact with others, an isolation that amounts to torture. They
never see daylight and live under constant electronic monitoring. They are
denied reading material, television, radio, counseling, and religious services,
and most telling of all, ordinary human contact. They must eat in their cells,
and are repeatedly harassed, taunted, and severely beaten by guards for trivial
infractions of inconsistent rules. Some are put on powerful body-racking,
mind-altering drugs, and retreat into madness.43 Some prisoners, including
minors, are made to wear stun belts. Activated by remote control, the belts de-
liver a 50,000-volt electric shock that lasts eight seconds, causing severe pain
and instant incapacitation. The horrific conditions in some U.S. jails include
overflowing toilets and cells infested with vermin and lacking ventilation.
Around the country, inmates have died under suspicious circumstances,
often murdered by other prisoners or succumbing to the torture and beatings
administered by guards. Disabled inmates, unable to care for themselves often
suffer terrible neglect and are most at risk. To make matters worse, Congress
passed, and President Clinton signed, the Prison Litigation Reform Act and
other bills that reduced the inmates’ already limited legal protections against
custodial brutality.44
There is endemic pilfering in prisons, most of it perpetrated by the custo-
dial personnel. Guards steal food, office supplies, sporting gear, and whatever
else to supplement their usually generous pay and benefits. As they spend
more, they get more. To quote one guard: “If there’s any money in the pris-
on’s operating budget at the end of the year, the administration orders it
spent. They’re afraid the politicians won’t increase next year’s budget if
money is left over.”45
New five-hundred-bed prisons continue to be opened, and more bodies
are being corralled to fill them, usually drug offenders from the more vulner-
able lower-income communities. Some state and federal prisons are run by
private firms. The private company often extracts free acreage, plus tax abate-
ments, and then gets the state or federal government to pay the maintenance
costs and provide the equipment. To be profitable, private prisons skimp on
food and medical care for prisoners and ensure that the prisons are kept filled.
A 90 to 95 percent capacity is needed “to guarantee the hefty rates of return
needed to lure investors.”46
Privately run prisons suffer far more inefficiency and abuse and more law-
suits than even state prisons. When the prisons prove insufficiently profitable,
companies lease them back to the government for a profit—the same govern-
ment that subsidized the original construction—thereby obliging the taxpayer
to pay twice over.47
After serving their time, ex-convicts face daunting hurdles trying to put
their lives back together. In some states both public and private employers
deny jobs to convicted felons. Ex-convicts can be refused food stamps, family
assistance, and public housing, and for a length of time a driver’s license.
Upon release, they are faced with serious debts, including court costs, copay-
ments for public defenders, monthly fees to private probation companies, and
fees for rehabilitation classes and drug tests. When payments cannot be met,
the unpaid interest compounds and the debt can double and triple in size.48
Unequal before the Law
109
h
r

Facing record budget deficits, several states have begun to ease up on the
lock-’em-up craze. They are sending nonviolent drug offenders into rehabilita-
tion rather than prison, shortening probation, and reducing the number of
people locked up for minor technical violations.49
A MOST FALLIBLE SYSTEM
The criminal justice system is highly fallible. In hundreds of instances, the
wrong person is apprehended and convicted. Some examples: Peter Limone
was wrongly imprisoned for thirty-three years, including four on death row.
He was released when it was discovered that FBI agents hid evidence that
would have proven him innocent. Nicholas Yarris spent twenty-one years un-
der the threat of execution for rape and murder until DNA testing proved that
he was the wrong man. Investigations of the Los Angeles Police Department
alone resulted in over one hundred convictions being overturned based on
planted evidence and falsified police reports. In addition, there are hundreds
of mistaken-identity cases around the nation involving people with similar
names or appearances.50
Over the past century hundreds of innocent persons in the United States
have been executed for crimes they did not commit.51 Ruben Cantu was exe-
cuted for killing one man and wounding another. Twelve years later the man
who had been wounded and a co-defendant both declared that Cantu had not
been present at the crime and that they had fingered him because of pressure
and threats from the authorities.52
“Ahem! Uh … er … ah … hmm … (shuffle shuffle) … we, ah, made a couple of big
mistakes in your death penalty trial.”
110
Chapter 9

Even demonstrable innocence may not be enough to save the wrongly
convicted: Leonel Torres Herrera was executed—on a technicality—in 1992
in Texas. There was clear evidence of his innocence, the court acknowledged;
but it refused to stay his execution because the evidence was submitted too
late for an appeal.53
In Illinois in 2000, Governor George Ryan, a Republican and advocate
of the death penalty, felt compelled to call a moratorium on executions
after thirteen of the twenty-seven inmates on death row in his state were
released because new evidence (often DNA tests) proved them innocent.
The Nebraska legislature passed a similar moratorium. Between 1973 and
September 2009, over 135 people in twenty-five states were released from
death row because of evidence of their innocence, roughly one exoneration
for every seven executions. If they had been rushed to the death chamber,
there would have been no opportunity to reopen their cases.54 Of the people
on death row, the great majority are low-income; some are mentally ill
or retarded; 10 percent are without counsel and virtually all the rest had
court-appointed lawyers.
A wrongful conviction creates the additional injustice of allowing the real
culprits to go free, often to commit additional crimes. For eighteen years three
African American perpetrators got away with a gang rape and double murder
in Chicago for which four other African American males were wrongly con-
victed: two of the innocent men got life sentences and two were sent to death
row. Their eventual release came when DNA tests showed that none of the
four could have committed the rape. This proved to some observers that
“the system works.” In fact, it was the system that imprisoned the wrong
men. They were freed thanks to the energetic efforts of a Northwestern Uni-
versity journalism professor and his student investigators.55
Some argue that the death penalty acts as a deterrent to capital crimes.
The evidence does not support this view. States without the death penalty do
not have higher crime rates. States that adopt the death penalty do not experi-
ence a discernible drop in capital crime rates over the years. Homicide rates
have risen and fallen along roughly symmetrical paths in states with and with-
out the death penalty, suggesting that it is rarely a deterrence.56
A compelling argument against capital punishment is that it assumes the
infallibility of a very fallible enforcement process, tainted by coerced confes-
sions, mistaken identity, perjured testimony, evidence suppressed by overzeal-
ous police and prosecutors, questionable forensic practices, incompetent or
overworked defense attorneys, gross errors, and the prejudices of judges and
jurors. Revelations about the pitfalls of the criminal justice system have caused
public support for the death penalty to fall by 20 percent in recent years.
Until 2005 the United States was the only country that still allowed exe-
cution of minors (seventeen or younger). Then in Roper v. Simmons (2005),
the Supreme Court ruled 5 to 4 that it was unconstitutional to sentence any-
one to death for a crime he or she committed while under eighteen years of
age. The Court argued that the failings and judgments of a minor could not
be equated with those of an adult, and that there was more possibility of re-
form for the young.
Unequal before the Law
111

SEXIST JUSTICE
Effective law enforcement is needed to protect the public from corporate
felons, swindlers, organized mobsters, murderers, rapists, muggers, child abu-
sers, spouse batterers, hate-crime perpetrators, and others. But the law fre-
quently fails those most in need of its protection. Every year an estimated
2 million to 4 million women are assaulted by their male partners in the
United States, making domestic violence the single largest cause of injury to
women. Most female murder victims die at the hands of current or former
husbands or boyfriends.57
Rape is a crime that police have learned to take more seriously—but ap-
parently not seriously enough. Rape kits that gather all possible evidence of
the rapist’s DNA are regularly left untested for a year or more; many of the
kits are simply discarded without a test. When New York City made a con-
certed effort over the last decade to test every kit that came in, the result was
increased detections and an arrest rate that rose from 40 to 70 percent.58
Restraining orders—to keep batterers away from their victims—often are
not issued by courts even though legally required, or are ignored by prosecu-
tors. Abusers frequently fail to attend counseling and treatment programs—
whose effectiveness in any case remains uncertain.59 Only a small percentage
of male batterers are ever prosecuted and incarcerated. Battered women fre-
quently are denied legal and medical assistance from agencies, and the assaults
they endure are often trivialized by unsympathetic police and judges. But
women who kill their abusers almost always receive severe sentences even if
the repeated battering had become life threatening. Rape victims, too, are of-
ten treated as if they brought it on themselves. In some law schools, rape is
still considered from the viewpoint of the accused rather than the victim. Femi-
nist organizations have had only limited success in getting law officials to take
more active measures against rapists and batterers.60
For many poor women, welfare and family assistance was their primary
means of escape, providing support for them and their children, and enabling
them to leave their batterers. Cutbacks in welfare have caused a dramatic
drop in the number who attempt to escape abusive relationships.61 In desper-
ate attempts at finding means of support and escape, some battered low-
income women turn to drug dealing—which, in turn, helps explain the sharp
increase in the female prison population.
Women have made important gains, moving into professions and occupa-
tions previously off limits to them. They are now entering law school in
greater numbers than men, yet female lawyers still earn less than their simi-
larly qualified male counterparts, and compose only a tiny portion of law
firm partners, law school deans, and judges. Women on average still earn
less for doing the same work as men and are more likely to be relegated to
lower-paying, dead-end jobs.62
Since the advent of Title IX—a federal law (1972) that prohibits discrimi-
nation on the basis of sex in regard to “any education program or activity
receiving federal financial assistance”—women now make up the majority
of undergraduates in U.S. colleges and universities. Women’s team sports
112
Chapter 9

account for more than one-third of all high school and college varsity athlet-
ics. Girls do equally as well as boys in elementary mathematics, sciences, and
technology classes, and women are making career inroads in medicine, sci-
ence, business, and engineering.
About half the females who get pregnant do not want to be pregnant. Yet
some 85 percent of the nation’s counties lack access to safe abortion provi-
ders. Dominated by advocates of compulsory pregnancy (who call themselves
“pro-life”), many local governments have been imposing nuisance laws on
abortion clinics, demanding changes in door widths, ceiling heights, size of
counseling rooms, and dozens of other trivial but costly “repairs” that make
it too expensive for the clinic to remain open. Still 1.5 million women manage
to procure safe and legal abortions every year, many of them voicing their
profound thanks for the service.
As of 2009, advocates of compulsory pregnancy—who believe that a fer-
tilized ovum is a human being with rights that take precedence over its human
carrier—have committed 8 murders of doctors and abortion workers, 2 kid-
nappings, 17 attempted murders, 41 bombings, and 175 arsons against abor-
tion clinics and family-planning centers; along with innumerable acts of
vandalism, assaults, intimidation, burglaries, and blocking clinic entrances.
Abortion and birth control centers have sustained millions of dollars in da-
mages. They continue to spend large sums on bulletproof glass, armed guards,
security cameras, and metal detectors. The violence perpetrated by the advo-
cates of compulsory pregnancy largely explains why so many counties in
America do not have a single abortion provider.63
Many of these terrorist acts show a large degree of organized and coordi-
nated effort among anti-abortion groups. Yet the FBI still does not classify
anti-abortion violence as domestic terrorism. It is hard to imagine such a lack-
adaisical FBI response if identifiable radical groups had subjected hundreds of
banks to arson attacks, bombings, and killings.
As of 2008, the number of women in prison had climbed to over 207,700,
just under 10 percent of the total U.S. prison and jail population. African
American women have been the hardest hit by the lock-’em-up craze. Incar-
cerated women endure poor medical care, sexual harassment, forced strip
searches, and rape by male guards. A three-year study of U.S. prisons docu-
mented more than one thousand cases of sexual abuse, with hundreds more
going unreported out of fear of retaliation. In federal women’s prisons 70 per-
cent of the correctional officers are men. Male correctional officials watch
women undressing in the shower or the toilet. They retaliate, often brutally,
against female inmates who complain about sexual assault and harassment.
The United States is one of the few countries that allow unaccompanied male
staff to supervise female prisoners.64
What kind of women end up in prison? Mostly young single mothers with
few job skills, many having left home early because of sexual or physical
abuse, many with a drug or alcohol addiction to ease the pain of their lives.
Almost all have been living in or near poverty. Most of them are convicted of
prostitution, shoplifting, petty drug dealing, or passing bad checks to feed
themselves and their children. None of them are big-time narcotics traffickers,
Unequal before the Law
113

gangsters, or embezzlers. Few have committed an act of violence, though
many have been victims of violence in their lives. Many are charged as acces-
sories to crimes committed by boyfriends or ex-boyfriends who implicate them
in order to get lighter sentences. Some women have been given life in prison
without parole for conspiracy to distribute drugs, even though they played
only tangential roles to the men involved.65
Another group that has long been the target of legal and social oppression
in the United States and elsewhere are homosexuals. Violence against gays and
lesbians ranges from physical harassment to murder. Tens of thousands of
homosexuals have been hounded out of jobs and out of the armed forces.
Lesbians and gays have been denied custody of their children on the grounds
that their sexual proclivities made them unfit parents. In one case, a Florida
judge transferred custody of a girl from her devoted lesbian mother to her
father who had served eight years in prison for murdering his first wife.66
The organized struggles launched by homosexuals against hate crimes and
discriminatory housing and employment practices have met with some success.
In 2003 the Supreme Court ruled that state laws banning sexual practices be-
tween consenting adults of the same sex violated an individual’s right to privacy
and due process.67 But homophobic attitudes and actions remain a widespread
problem as witnessed by the backlash against gay marriage through much of
the nation. Marriage is currently defined as exclusively between a man and a
woman in at least forty-two states. Some thirty states have added defense
of (heterosexual) marriage amendments to their constitutions. Five states
(Massachusetts, Connecticut, Iowa, Vermont, New Hampshire) plus the District
of Columbia recognize same-sex unions, as do entire nations such as Canada,
Norway, Belgium, Spain, Sweden, and South Africa.68
THE VICTIMIZATION OF CHILDREN
Children are another group who have received insufficient protection from
federal and state authorities. In any year in the United States, there are about
900,000 confirmed cases of children being battered, burned, starved, tortured,
seriously neglected, and in other ways abused, with some 2,000 children per-
ishing each year. The actual number is probably higher because nonaccidental
injuries and deaths of children are sometimes mistakenly dismissed by author-
ities as “accidents.” Every year about 150,000 children are reported missing,
of whom some 50,000 are never found.69
Studies find that about one in four women and almost one in six men re-
port having been sexually abused as children, most frequently by a close fam-
ily member—a father, stepfather, and the like—or less often by a clergyman,
teacher, or day-care attendant. Well into their adulthood, sex-abuse victims
suffer from depression, sexual dysfunction, eating disorder, alcoholism, and
other afflictions. An estimated 39 million survivors of childhood sexual abuse
exist in America today. Only a minute percentage of child rapists are ever con-
victed. And conviction usually brings a relatively light sentence. In many states
the rapist is treated leniently, usually with probation or some counseling
sessions that have little therapeutic effect. “For the good of the family” the
114
Chapter 9

incestuous rapists are frequently allowed to return home and resume their
victimization—with a vengeance. Sometimes, judges even grant custody or un-
supervised visitation rights to the sexually abusive parent.70
An estimated 45,000 to 50,000 women and children are brought into the
United States every year under false pretenses and forced to work as prostitutes,
laborers or servants. In 2000, Congress approved a law designed to fortify mea-
sures against domestic violence and against the trafficking of women and chil-
dren. The Government Accountability Office found that about 3.7 million
minors worked either too many hours or at prohibited jobs, and more than
200,000 children are injured on the job each year.71
Sensationalized media accounts of high school shoot-ups and “youth
crime waves” cause some people to forget that youngsters are more often vic-
tims than perpetrators of violence. Statistically, they are safer in school than in
their own homes.
More than a million children are kept in orphanages, reformatories, and
adult prisons. Most were arrested for petty transgressions or were just in the
wrong company when a crime was committed. Minors incarcerated in juvenile
correctional facilities are routinely subjected to sexual assault, severe beatings,
prolonged solitary confinement, neurologically damaging psychoactive medi-
cations, and, in some cases, psychosurgery.72
Behavioral medications are increasingly being ministered to children, in-
cluding preschoolers under five years old. Drugs can be prescribed for totally
nonmedical reasons, as when a child is being fidgety or inattentive, or other-
wise incurs the disfavor of institutional custodians. In 2009, the Food and
Drug Administration approved the use of antipsychotic drugs for children to
treat manic and bipolar and other psychotic states such as schizophrenia. The
drugs, administered with no long-term adequate test, have numerous damag-
ing side effects, even leading to suicide and sudden death from stroke or
cardiopulmonary failure.73
Parents who dislike their children’s lifestyle, dissenting political views, or
“bad attitude” sometimes can have them confined indefinitely in psychiatric
institutions. Millions of U.S. residents have spent time in psychiatric wards at
one time or another. It is easier to get committed than one might think, and
harder to get out. Some people languish there for decades under terrible con-
ditions with no legal recourse. The worst of these institutions have suspi-
ciously high death tolls. Mental patients who have no state funding or whose
insurance runs out are frequently released out on the streets even if they are in
real need of custodial care. In many instances, county jails end up holding
mentally ill persons, usually for minor disturbances.74
RACIST LAW ENFORCEMENT
Whatever the gains made by people of color, including ascendancy to the pres-
idency, African Americans and other ethnic minorities still confront serious
discrimination in various walks of life and at the hands of the law. Affirmative
action for Whites has long been the rule. Since 1790, immigration laws have
favored White European immigrants over people of color. Slavery and
Unequal before the Law
115

segregation allowed Whites to superexploit Black labor for centuries. For gen-
erations Whites got the better schools and better funding. From the 1930s to
the 1960s some 15 million White families procured homes with federally sub-
sidized loans, whereas people of color were mostly excluded from the pro-
gram. Whites currently are inheriting property and other assets from their
parents and grandparents, accumulated at a time when people of color were
allowed almost no access to such assets.
One study found that White men with prison records were offered jobs
just as often, if not more so, than Black men who had never been arrested.
Black ex-convicts are only one-third as likely as White ex-convicts to get a
job offer—which means a higher recidivism rate for Blacks because ex-
convicts with jobs are much less likely to commit further crimes.75
The nation’s prison population is disproportionately African American,
Latino, low-income, and underemployed. It is usually assumed that this reflects
the higher crime rate and social pathology among such groups. In fact, various
studies show that drug use, alcoholism, violence, weapons possession, and
drunken driving actually have been higher among White youths than among
Black youths over the last decade—but much less publicized.76 The class and
racial biases of the law enforcement system are major factors in determining
who goes to prison. An attorney who specializes in juvenile cases notes that
youngsters from well-to-do (mostly White) families, who get into minor scrapes
with the law, are turned over to their parents with a warning to stay out of
trouble. But in less affluent neighborhoods, children are arrested, charged, and
brought to court. African American youths are more likely than White offen-
ders of the same age to be apprehended, tried, and convicted, and more likely
to get longer prison terms than Whites convicted of the same crimes.77
Almost six times as many Whites use narcotics as African Americans, yet
62 percent of drug offenders sent to state prisons nationwide are African
American; in some states it is as high as 90 percent. About 82 percent of fed-
eral crack defendants are Black, even though a federal health survey found
that most crack users are White. African Americans, who commit only about
26 percent of violent crimes in a given year, compose 46 percent of the U.S.
prison population.78
Prosecutors are far more likely to seek the death penalty if the victim is
White. Almost all inmates on death row (whether Black or White) are there
for murdering a White person. African Americans are almost four times more
likely to receive the death penalty and significantly less likely to have it com-
muted than Whites who perpetrate similar crimes.79 In Texas in 2005, four
White men beat an African American man unconscious and left him for dead;
three of them received thirty-day sentences and one got sixty days. Also in
Texas, a young White male chained a homeless Black man to a tree and burned
him to death with gasoline. He served only a year in juvenile detention.80
Police—who are mostly White, well-paid, and residents of middle-class
White suburbs—often stop drivers based on their skin color rather than on
the way they are driving, in what has been called racial profiling. On Inter-
state 95 between Baltimore and Delaware, one study found that African
Americans drove only 14 percent of the cars but accounted for 73 percent of
116
Chapter 9

the stops. Investigations of police departments in numerous locales reveal that
incidents of racist brutality are widespread and often tolerated by department
commanders.81
Another study found that Black women were nine times more likely than
White women to be stopped and searched for drugs coming through airport
security—even though White women were twice as likely to be carrying
drugs.82
Unarmed African American and Latino persons have been shot or beaten
to death by police officers in circumstances impossible to justify. Four New
York City police officers in plain clothes fired forty-one times at Amadou
Diallo, an unarmed man who was standing in the hallway of his house, hitting
him nineteen times including several bullets in the back; they were found not
guilty of any crime.
Los Angeles police shot Michael William Arnold 106 times, claiming he
had brandished a weapon—an air gun that miraculously was still in his right
hand when his body was examined, even though he had been shot several
times in the head and three times in his right hand, oddly with no damage to
the gun. In New York, police dragged Lebert Folkes from his sister’s car
parked in front of his house and shot him in the face. The next day they apol-
ogized; his car had been mistakenly identified as stolen.83
There are far more examples than space will allow. With few exceptions
the police get away with it. Prosecutors are extremely hesitant to bring charges
against cops, and White middle-class juries, fed a steady diet of crime shows
and crime news, are reluctant to convict. The FBI and Justice Department do
not even keep national statistics on assaults and killings perpetrated by police
officers.
To be sure, the police themselves do not go unscathed. Every year across
the country some 16,500 law enforcement officers are injured on the job, and
about 150 are killed. The police sometimes apprehend reckless drivers and
dangerous criminals. They assist in times of community emergency and per-
form other commendable services. But police also serve a class-control func-
tion, protecting the haves from the have-nots. They deal with the ill-fed and
ill-housed, the exploited and abused, in a containment campaign that rulers
and many community members insist upon.
Decades ago a former Boston Police Commissioner, Robert DiGrazia,
noted the class injustices in the “war against crime”:
Those who commit the crime which worries citizens most—violent street
crime—are, for the most part, the products of poverty, unemployment, broken
homes, rotten education, drug addiction and alcoholism, and other social and
economic ills about which the police can do little, if anything…. Politicians get
away with law-and-order rhetoric that reinforces the mistaken notion that
police—in ever greater numbers and with more gadgetry—can alone control
crime. The politicians, of course, end up perpetuating a system by which the rich
get richer, the poor get poorer, and crime continues.84
A final word about corporate crime and street crime. We should
be aware of how they are interrelated. The poor get poorer as the rich get
richer. The white-collar corporate plunderers take a terrible toll on society,
Unequal before the Law
117

especially upon those who are least able to defend themselves. They help
create the very want, injustice, and maldistribution that contribute so much
to street crime. If it is true that we need more law and order, more respect
for other people’s rights, then we should start at the top, vigorously apply-
ing the law to those who plunder without regard for the ruinous effects
on others.
118
Chapter 9

C
H
A
P
T
E
R
10
Political Repression and
National Insecurity
The corporate-dominated state is more sincerely dedicated to fighting organized
dissent than fighting organized crime. The law often appears ineffective when
attempting to implement social reforms that benefit the many, but when mobi-
lized against political heterodoxy, law enforcement is pursued with a boundless
punitive vigor that itself becomes lawless.
THE REPRESSION OF DISSENT
One agency used by the authorities for political harassment is the Internal
Revenue Service (IRS), which has gone after civil rights leaders and anticapi-
talist radicals. The Communist Party had its assets seized and was illegally de-
nied tax exemption for years—while the two procapitalist major political
parties enjoyed uninterrupted exemption.1 The State Department and U.S.
Immigration and Customs Enforcement (ICE) exclude anyone from abroad
who might be affiliated with communist, anarchist, or allegedly “terrorist”
groups, or who engage in activities “prejudicial to the public interest.” Every
year under these sweeping provisos, scores of internationally prominent wri-
ters, artists, musicians, scientists, and labor leaders from other countries have
been refused the right to visit and address audiences in the United States.2 So
the government protects us from dangerous thoughts by deciding whom and
what we can or cannot hear from abroad.
Under a 1990 law, supposedly no one can be refused a visa because of ide-
ology, yet the State Department and ICE continue to maintain a “lookout list”
of hundreds of thousands of persons, many of them connected to peace and
social justice organizations. Canadian communists who want to visit the United
119

States must file their fingerprints with the Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI)
and the Royal Canadian Mounted Police, make “pro-American” vows, and
provide proof that they are now actively engaged in opposing communism.
Meanwhile right-wingers and reactionaries from other countries generally enjoy
unchallenged entry.
The U.S. government signed the Helsinki accords, an agreement among
nations not to impose travel restrictions upon their own citizens. Yet thou-
sands of U.S. citizens have been denied U.S. passports and put on “No Fly
Watch Lists” because the State Department decided that their activities were
“contrary to the interests of the United States.” In 2004, regulations were is-
sued barring American publishers from printing books by authors from
nations that are under U.S. sanction. The publishers must first get U.S. gov-
ernment approval, which is not easy to do.3 To further inoculate us from
unsafe thoughts, Congress passed a totalitarian-type law in 2003 creating an
advisory board that can censor any course curriculum at publicly funded
institutions that contains “anti-American” criticisms of U.S. foreign policy.4
Corporations have fired employees for having the wrong political opin-
ions. The courts have supported their right to do so, ruling in Lloyd Corpora-
tion v. Tanner (1972) that the First Amendment of the Constitution prohibits
only government—not private-sector employers—from suppressing speech.
People with affiliations to anticapitalist groups have been hounded out of
jobs in labor unions, teaching, entertainment, and various other fields by fed-
eral and state investigators.5
The FBI has millions of files on organizations and individuals often con-
taining uncorroborated rumors from anonymous sources concerning per-
sonal lives and political leanings. A secret court created by the Foreign
Intelligence Surveillance Act (FISA) of 1978 reaches court decisions in com-
plete secrecy, with no published record. Targeted individuals and organiza-
tions cannot see transcripts or contest the surveillance in any manner or even
be informed that they are under surveillance. The target need not be under
suspicion of committing a crime but might simply be deemed a “threat to
U.S. national security.”6
During the popular struggles against war and racial segregation in the late
1960s, some activists suffered physical assault and even death at the hands of
White vigilantes while police and FBI informants either looked the other way
or actually assisted.7 One police official declared that there were more law of-
ficers throughout the country “on political intelligence assignments than are
engaged in fighting organized crime.”8 In various cities, secret police units
have spied on and harassed hundreds of thousands of lawful individuals and
organizations.9 Perhaps one reason authorities cannot win the “war on crime”
and the “war on drugs” is that they have been too busy fighting the war on
political nonconformity.
This seems true of the FBI. In 1971, files stolen from an FBI storage facil-
ity in Media, Pennsylvania, and subsequently published in national magazines
revealed that the largest portion of FBI work in the mid-Atlantic region was
directed at political activists and draft resisters (47 percent), whereas only
1 percent was dedicated to organized crime.10
120
Chapter 10

For decades, the FBI conducted a counterintelligence program, Cointel-
pro, designed to subvert progressive groups. Working closely with right-wing
organizations, the FBI used forged documents, illegal break-ins, telephone
taps, and undercover provocateurs. The bureau infiltrated labor unions in at-
tempts to brand them “communist controlled,” and it worked with manage-
ment in the surveillance of strikers. As the New York Times belatedly
acknowledged, “Radical groups in the United States have complained for
years that they were being harassed by the Federal Bureau of Investigation
and it now turns out that they were right.”11
The FBI continued to keep a “security index” of many thousands of names,
mostly from groups opposed to capitalism, who were slated for arrest and
detention in case of a “national emergency”—even though the law authorizing
this practice was declared unconstitutional. As one FBI agent stated, “The
[Cointelpro] program is still in operation, but under a different code name.”12
As director of the FBI for almost a half century, J. Edgar Hoover kept
elaborate
dossiers
on
notables—including
presidents,
cabinet
members,
Supreme Court justices, and members of Congress—often threatening expo-
sure of the seamier side of their personal lives in order to win advantage
over them. Hoover planted defamatory stories in the press, collaborated with
segregationists, and harassed civil rights leaders like Martin Luther King Jr.
He used FBI funds for his private profit and accepted lavish gifts from wealthy
friends whom he then protected from criminal investigation. Hoover also cul-
tivated relations with organized-crime figures, making no serious effort to
move against the mob for more than thirty years.13
Over the years the FBI and police continued their surveillance and disrup-
tive infiltration of anticapitalist parties, peace organizations, environmental
groups, civil liberties organizations like the National Lawyers Guild, and advo-
cacy groups for political prisoners.14 Authorities have made “preemptive raids”
on demonstrators. They have beaten, pepper-sprayed, and arrested lawful pro-
testors without justifiable cause, subjecting them to harsh jail conditions.15
One dissenter noted that the Washington, D.C., police force “can’t seem
to get its act together to fight crime” yet it can turn out in massive numbers to
squelch peaceful demonstrations. “Where are all those cops the rest of the
year when we need them?”16 So with the police in other cities: they seem so
much more capable and determined when attacking union organizers, civil
rights protestors, and peace demonstrators than when confronting mobsters
or corporate felons.17 A Senate Judicial Committee hearing in 2006 revealed
that the FBI had improperly conducted secret surveillance of antiwar groups,
including Quakers and a Catholic peace organization. As one senator com-
plained, “What business does the FBI have spying on law-abiding citizens
simply because they oppose the war in Iraq?”18
In the months leading up to the Republican National Convention in
Minneapolis, an FBI-led “Terrorist Task Force” infiltrated protest organiza-
tions and conducted preemptive seizures and arrests, entering homes, seizing
computers and political literature, and handcuffing and arresting peaceful pro-
testors, journalists, and lawyers representing detainees. By the fourth day of
the convention, over eight hundred arrests had been made, almost all peaceful
Political Repression and National Insecurity
121

demonstrators, with felony charges lodged against some two hundred. This
increasingly has been the repressive response of FBI and police against demon-
strators exercising their First Amendment right to assemble and protest.19 In
the last decade or so, in various cities police have repeatedly violated our con-
stitutional right to assemble and protest.
POLITICAL PRISONERS, USA
Despite claims to the contrary, the U.S. government has a history of politically
motivated incarcerations. In 1915, radical labor leader Joe Hill was executed
in Utah for a crime he did not commit, most investigators believe. The promi-
nent labor leader Eugene Debs and some six thousand other socialists, pacif-
ists, and labor organizers were imprisoned or deported during the First World
War or immediately after. The anarchists Sacco and Vanzetti were arrested
and eventually executed in Massachusetts for a crime virtually all investigators
say they did not commit.20
Hundreds of war resisters were imprisoned during World War II and
the Korean War. Over 120,000 law-abiding Japanese Americans had their
homes, farms, and businesses confiscated and were sent to internment
camps as “security risks” for the duration of World War II. Hundreds of
Italian and German aliens, including elderly grandparents, were forcibly in-
terned. The Smith Act of 1940 prohibited the advocacy of revolutionary
ideas and was used to jail scores of American communists and other anti-
capitalists for the better part of ten years or more. Others spent time behind
bars for refusing to cooperate with congressional witch hunts during the
McCarthy era.21
During the Vietnam War, several thousand youths were jailed for refusing
to serve in the armed forces; thousands more chose exile. Almost every anti-
war activist who occupied a position of national or even local leadership was
arrested at one time or another or left the country or went underground.22
African American leaders involved in progressive community causes and
struggles against drug pushers have been railroaded into prison on trumped-up
charges—including Martin Sostre, Frank Shuford, the leaders of Black Men
Against Crack—often to be subjected to beatings and solitary confinement and
made to serve astronomical sentences.23
In Tchula, Mississippi, Eddie Carthan was elected the first African
American mayor since Reconstruction, and the first to oppose the local plu-
tocracy. Carthan initiated programs for nutrition, health care, day care, and
housing rehabilitation, and refused to appoint cronies of the big planters.
The Board of Aldermen, dominated by planter interests, cut his salary to vir-
tually nothing and barred him from his city hall office. The governor had all
federal funds to Tchula cut off, ending most of the mayor’s programs. When
Carthan retook his office with five auxiliary police, he was charged with as-
sault and sentenced to three years, convicted on the testimony of a witness
who later recanted. After combing through the mayor’s papers, the FBI dis-
covered that Carthan had authorized an assistant to sign his name to a deliv-
ery receipt for day-care equipment; for this “fraud” he was given an
122
Chapter 10

additional four-year sentence. Then, after a Black alderman (allied with the
local White elites and implicated in drug dealing) was robbed and killed and
the murderers convicted, Carthan was charged with having plotted the mur-
der and imprisoned. He was released only after protest campaigns were
launched around the country.24 The low-income Black voters of Tchula got
a lesson in what happens to democratic leaders who intrude upon an en-
trenched and wealthy power.
Prisoners who openly profess radical views or who protest against prison
conditions have been repeatedly denied parole, and subjected to mind-altering
drugs, beatings, prolonged shackling, isolation, and other mistreatment. From
1968 to 1971, over three hundred members of the Black Panther Party (a rev-
olutionary Marxist organization) were arrested, many held without bail or
trial for a long duration. At least ten former Panthers, convicted on fabricated
evidence and coerced testimony that was subsequently recanted, served thirty
years each in prison. Panther Albert Washington died in prison after serving
over twenty-eight years, during which he was repeatedly mistreated for his po-
litical ideas. Panther Herman Bell has been unjustly locked up since 1975,
after a trial that included perjured testimony, torture, and evidence suppressed
Political Repression and National Insecurity
123

by the prosecution. Another Black Panther, Anthony Bottom (aka Jalil Abdul
Muntaqim), has been incarcerated since 1971. Black Panthers Marshall
“Eddie” Conway, Albert Woodfox, and Herman Wallace served almost forty
years each in prison (mostly in solitary) for crimes that were never proven
against them. Another Black revolutionary, Robert Hillary King, was released
after twenty-nine years in solitary confinement; his conviction was overturned
and he pleaded guilty to a lesser charge of conspiracy to commit murder.25
Panther leader, Geronimo Pratt, was charged with murder when he was a
UCLA student. The FBI conveniently lost its surveillance records showing that
Pratt was four hundred miles away attending a Panther meeting in Oakland at
the time of the murder. After serving twenty years in prison, Pratt had his con-
viction overturned and was paid a settlement of $4.5 million.26
Community activist Fred Hampton Jr. (son of Black Panther leader Fred
Hampton, who was murdered in bed by law officers raiding his home) was
tried on a bogus charge of arson in Chicago. During the trial no evidence
was produced demonstrating that a fire had actually taken place or that
Hampton was connected to the alleged incident. Yet in 1993 he was given
eighteen years, subjected to harsh mistreatment for organizing around inmates
rights. He managed to get paroled in 2001.27
There is the death row case of Mumia Abu-Jamal, ex-Panther, radio jour-
nalist, and articulate critic of social injustice and police brutality. A police offi-
cer in Philadelphia was shot by one Arnold Beverly, whose confession to the
shooting was corroborated by a lie detector test. Mumia arrived on the scene
as Beverly fled and was himself shot by an arriving cop. In a deeply flawed trial,
involving an incompetent defense, police perjury, and intimidated witnesses,
Mumia was convicted and sentenced to death, even though no ballistic evidence
linked him to the shooting. Several eyewitnesses have unequivocally indicated
that he was not the gunman. He has been on death row since 1982.28
Imprisoned for long terms were members of the American Indian Move-
ment, including Leonard Peltier, accused of shooting two FBI agents and con-
victed on affidavits that the government now concedes were fabricated. Peltier
has been incarcerated since 1976.29 Puerto Rican nationalists received an av-
erage of sixty-seven years for seditious conspiracy, specifically, belonging to a
group that intended to overthrow U.S. rule in Puerto Rico. (Sedition is defined
as “the incitement of resistance to lawful authority.”) Others who have served
or are still serving long sentences are members of the Black Liberation Army,
the Republic of New Afrika (a Black separatist movement), the African Peo-
ples Socialist Party, Chicano and North American anticapitalist revolutionar-
ies, and radical community organizers.30 In 2001, five Cubans—who were
monitoring extremist Cuban American groups in Florida that were plotting
terrorist attacks against Cuba—were falsely charged with espionage against
U.S. military bases and given draconian sentences.31
The members of Plowshares, a peace group, jackhammered the concrete
around a missile silo in 1984. For this protest action, eleven of them were
each sentenced to eighteen years in prison. A White woman, Linda Evans,
organized so effectively against racism that the Louisiana Ku Klux Klan put
her on their death list. To protect herself, she purchased guns using a false
124
Chapter 10

identification. For this and for harboring a fugitive, Evans was sentenced to
forty-five years. Susan Rosenberg and Tim Blunk, anticapitalist activists,
were each given fifty-eight years for weapons possession and false identifica-
tion. Marilyn Buck, a White person who aligned herself with the Black
liberation movement, was convicted of conspiracy to use violence against
government property, and sentenced to an incredible eighty years. She has
been in prison since 1983.32
Convicted of attempted robbery (that never took place) and aiding a
Black Panther to escape prison, Silvia Baraldini, a campus radical and antiwar
activist, was sentenced to forty-three years. She and other political prisoners
were held in a high-security unit at Lexington, Kentucky, enduring window-
less cells, total isolation, and constant surveillance by hostile male guards. In
time, their eyesight and health seriously deteriorated. Transferred to her native
Italy in 1999 to serve the remainder of her sentence, Baraldini was released in
2006 under a pardon law approved by the Italian Parliament.33
Supporters have pointed out that none of these accused individuals were
ever convicted of harming anyone. They were given draconian sentences in
prison not for what they had done but for their political activities and ideolo-
gies. In this respect they fit the definition of political prisoners.
Environmental activists like Jeff Luers also have encountered harsh treat-
ment. He was sentenced to twenty-two years and eight months in prison for
burning three sport utility vehicles at a dealership in Oregon as a protest ac-
tion against the ecological damage wrought by such gas guzzlers. This was a
heavier sentence than given to serial rapists, child molesters, and arsonists. (In
Oregon arsonists usually get less than five years.) After much agitation, the
sentence was reduced to ten years, given that it was a crime in which no one
was injured.34
Sometimes just uttering the wrong words can be enough. In 2005 a fed-
eral court convicted Muslim spiritual leader Dr. Ali Al Tamimi for supposedly
remarking to his followers at a meeting that they should go abroad and train
for a jihad in Afghanistan. For this “terroristic” advocacy he was sentenced to
life in prison.35
POLITICAL MURDER, USA
During the antiwar demonstrations of the Vietnam era, law enforcers used le-
thal force against unarmed protestors on several occasion. In Orangeburg,
South Carolina, police fired into a peaceful campus gathering, killing three
African American students and wounding twenty-seven others. Ohio National
Guardsmen killed four White students and maimed two others who were par-
ticipating in an antiwar protest at Kent State University. Ten days later, at the
all-Black Jackson State College in Mississippi, police began shooting into a
women’s dormitory where protesting students had peaceably congregated, kill-
ing two and wounding a dozen others.36 “Impartial” investigations by the very
authorities responsible for the killings exonerated the uniformed murderers.
Police attacked the Black Panther Party in more than ten cities, wrecking
offices, stealing thousands of dollars in funds, and arresting, beating, and
Political Repression and National Insecurity
125

shooting occupants in planned operations coordinated with the FBI. At least
thirty-four Panthers were murdered by police by the early 1970s.37
A famously dedicated union leader of the United Auto Workers (UAW),
Walter Reuther, who was playing a key role in activating the labor movement
against the Vietnam War, was killed when his small plane crashed in 1970.
Evidence indicated that the plane’s altimeter had been sabotaged. A year and a
half earlier Reuther and his brother Victor, another UAW labor activist, had
barely escaped death in a remarkably similar incident—a malfunctioning altim-
eter (in a different aircraft). Weeks before the fatal crash, President Nixon and
other Republican leaders had labeled Reuther a “dangerous menace.” Assassi-
nation attempts against both Walter and Victor had occurred years earlier when
both were shot by snipers while in their respective homes, causing permanent
injury to both. For years Reuther had been constantly tracked by the FBI.38
Between 1991 and 1993 three Haitian talk-show hosts in Miami, who
aired critical commentaries about CIA-supported military repression in Haiti,
were shot dead.39 Individuals in the Cuban American community who advo-
cated a conciliatory policy toward the Cuban communist government were
subjected to threats and attacks. A right-wing Cuban exile terrorist group
openly claimed credit for some twenty-one bombings between 1975 and
1980 and for the murder of a Cuban diplomat in New York, yet the group
escaped arrest in all but two instances.40
In the United States, between 1981 and 1987, there were eleven killings of
Vietnamese publishers, journalists, and activists who had advocated relations
with the communist government of Vietnam. In each instance, a U.S.-based
right-wing Vietnamese organization, VOECRN, claimed responsibility. One
of VOECRN’s victims, a publisher of a Vietnamese-language weekly, survived
his shooting and identified the gunman. The assailant was convicted but the
conviction was reversed at the prosecutor’s request because “he had no prior
criminal record in this country.” The police and FBI claimed that such attacks
were unrelated and devoid of a political motive—despite VOECRN’s politi-
cally inspired communiqués claiming responsibility.41
There is the strange case of Professor Edward Cooperman who was shot
in his office at California State University, Fullerton. As founder of an organi-
zation advocating scientific cooperation with Vietnam, Cooperman had re-
ceived death threats. Lam Van Minh, a Vietnamese émigré and Cooperman’s
former student, admitted witnessing the professor’s death and was arrested.
As he tells it, Cooperman produced a gun that accidentally discharged and
killed him. Minh left, taking the gun with him for some reason. He then
took a female friend to a movie, after which he returned to the office and
placed the gun in Cooperman’s hand. The office had the appearance of a
struggle. The prosecution introduced little to challenge Minh’s improbable
story. He was convicted of involuntary manslaughter, sentenced to three
years, and served only one. Minh had been previously arrested for possession
of stolen property. His lawyer was procured by a right-wing Vietnamese
organization.42
In Chicago, after repeated death threats, Rudy Lozano, a Chicano union
organizer and communist, who worked effectively to unite Latinos, African
126
Chapter 10

Americans, and Whites around working-class causes, was shot dead in his
home by someone who came to his door on the pretense of asking for a
drink of water and who stole nothing. According to family members, para-
medics who arrived at the scene thought they could save Lozano’s life, but
police blocked them from getting near him, because “evidence might be
destroyed.”43
Other political murders or suspicious deaths in the United States include:
•
Alan Berg, a popular Denver talk-show host who engaged in impassioned
arguments with anti-Semitic and racist callers and who was killed by
members of a White supremacist group.
•
Don Bolles, who, at the time of his murder, was investigating a far-
reaching financial scandal that implicated some of Arizona’s most power-
ful political and business leaders.
•
Karen Silkwood, who was investigating radiation safety negligence at
Kerr-McGee corporation.
•
Danny Casolaro, whose uncovering of government and business corrup-
tion might have implicated high-ranking U.S. officials.
•
David Nadel, a Berkeley, California, political activist and organizer,
whose identified murderer is living at a known location in Mexico.
•
Marine Colonel James Sabow at Marine Corps Air Service, El Toro (de-
clared a “suicide” even though the back of his head was bashed), who
threatened to blow the whistle on corrupt covert operators with links
to drug trafficking. Four other specialists and contractors connected
with the El Torro operation were all found dead under suspicious
circumstances.44
In 2005 some one hundred heavily armed FBI agents surrounded the
home of Ojeda Ríos, the seventy-two-year-old leader of a Puerto Rican inde-
pendence movement who had evaded arrest after the heist of a Wells Fargo
truck in 1990. The agents approached with guns blazing. The autopsy per-
formed on Ríos’s body revealed that he could have survived had he received
proper medical attention. Instead, the FBI allowed no one into the house for
eighteen hours while Ríos slowly bled to death. Amnesty International con-
cluded that the killing had the blueprint of an “extrajudicial execution.”45
Federal agents have lent support to violent rightist groups. In the 1970s a
paramilitary “peacekeeping” force under FBI direction carried out a terrorist
campaign on the Pine Ridge Indian Reservation that was directly responsible
for hundreds of assaults and for the deaths of more than sixty supporters of
the American Indian Movement. In San Diego, the FBI financed a crypto-
fascist outfit called the Secret Army Organization, whose operations ranged
from burglary and arson to kidnapping and attempted murder. The Senate
Intelligence Committee revealed that the FBI organized forty-one Ku Klux
Klan chapters in North Carolina alone. FBI informants in the Klan did noth-
ing to stop KKK members from committing murder and other acts of violence.
In some instances, as in the 1979 Greensboro, North Carolina, massacre of
four members of the Communist Workers Party, FBI informants procured
weapons for the murderers and directed them to the right location. The
Political Repression and National Insecurity
127

Greensboro police also knew of the impending attack but took no action. The
gunmen were filmed on videotape by journalists who were covering the rally
but the perpetrators were acquitted.46
From 1969 to 1972, U.S. Military Intelligence and the Chicago police
jointly operated an organization called the Legion of Justice. Its members
clubbed and maced protestors and antiwar demonstrators, broke into their
headquarters, stole files, vandalized a progressive bookstore, and committed
other such criminal acts.47
Violent right-wingers usually go unscathed by the authorities. The Louisi-
ana district court that gave Linda Evans forty-five years also sentenced Don
Black, a KKK member who transported illegal weapons and attempted to set
up a drug cartel, to three years. He was out in two. When asked what they
intended to do about the fifteen or so right-wing paramilitary terrorist camps
within the United States, a Justice Department official said the camps did not
appear to be in violation of any federal statute.48
An American, Michael Townley, linked with the CIA, admitted in 2005 to
having perpetrated a number of assassinations for the Chilean dictatorship in
the 1970s. He was given only ten years for the murder of Chilean diplomat
Orlando Letelier and American activist Ronnie Moffit in Washington, D.C.
But he was soon freed under the witness protection plan. Luis Posada Carilles
was linked to Townley, the CIA, and various terrorist acts including killing
seventy-three people in the bombing of a Cuban airline. The Bush administra-
tion, which professed a dedication to fighting terrorism, refused to hand
Posada over to Venezuela or Cuba where he is facing murder charges.
Posada’s close accomplice in the bombing of the Cuban airline, Orlando
Bosch, was pardoned of all his misdeeds by the elder President Bush in 1990
and lives as a free man in Florida. All charges against Posada himself were
dismissed by a Bush-appointed federal judge on a technicality having to do
with faulty translation at his naturalization interview. Two years later in
2009 Posada was indicted for lying about his involvement in a series of 1997
bombings that targeted tourist spots in Cuba.49
When two Chicano socialists were killed by bombs planted in their cars,
the FBI made no arrests. When a powerful bomb wrecked the offices of sev-
eral progressive and civil liberties groups in New York, injuring three people,
the police made only a perfunctory investigation. After a series of threats, an
antinuclear organizer was shot dead in Houston and an assistant was
seriously wounded; police came up with not a clue.50
The FBI was quick to make arrests when leftist environmentalists Judi
Bari and Darryl Cherney were injured by a car bomb in 1990. They arrested
the victims, Bari and Cherney, calling them “radical activists” and charging
that the bomb must have belonged to them. Bari, an outspoken advocate of
nonviolence, was seriously injured in the blast. Never fully recovering her
health, she died of cancer in 1997. The charges were eventually dropped
for lack of evidence. Bari’s organization launched a civil rights lawsuit
charging that the FBI itself was involved in the bombing. In 2004 the Justice
Department agreed to pay Cherney and the Bari estate a $2 million
settlement.51
128
Chapter 10

Rightist terrorists are treated lightly by law enforcers, leftist groups are
treated severely. There is nothing inconsistent about this position. Left
groups—no matter how nonviolent and lawful—challenge the corporate capi-
talist system or some aspect of its privileges and abuses, whereas rightist
groups—no matter how violent and unlawful—do the dirty work for that sys-
tem. Thus there is a community of interest between the rightists and the law
agencies and sometimes an unspoken collaboration.
However, when right-wing extremists engage in counterfeiting and bank
robberies, and plan attacks against federal targets instead of leftist targets, as
with the Oklahoma City bombing of a federal building that claimed 168 lives,
including 19 children, in 1995, then law enforcers move against them, albeit
sometimes belatedly.
THE NATIONAL SECURITY AUTOCRACY
Within the government there exists a loose grouping of authorities that some
have called the national security state, consisting of the president, the secretar-
ies of State and Defense, the National Security Council, the Joint Chiefs of
Staff, and numerous intelligence agencies like the FBI and CIA. The national
security state’s primary function is to defeat movements at home and abroad
that seek alternatives to free-market globalization.
Political Repression and National Insecurity
129

Congress has no exact idea how much it allocates for intelligence opera-
tions because specific funds are hidden in other budget items—in violation of
Article I, Section 9 of the Constitution, which declares that no funds shall be
drawn from the treasury except by lawful and publicly accounted appropria-
tion. A deputy director of the CIA stated that the overall “intelligence budget”
was $44 billion in 2005.52
There is the Pentagon’s Defense Intelligence Agency, which deals with mili-
tary espionage and counterintelligence. Every echelon within the Pentagon—
army, navy, and air force—and every regional command around the world
has its own intelligence service.53 The National Reconnaissance Office (NRO)
uses satellites in orbit to eavesdrop on telephone conversations and diplomatic
communications, and photograph potential targets for military action. In the
early 1990s, the NRO could not account for $4 billion in secret funds. Its top
two NRO managers were ousted, but no one went to jail.54
The National Security Agency (NSA) breaks codes and monitors nearly all
telephone calls and telegrams between the United States and other countries.
Using the “war on terror” as an excuse, the Bush administration brought the
NSA back into the business of domestic surveillance, spying on Americans
whose views differed from those of the White House.55
Presiding over the entire “intelligence community” is the National Intelli-
gence Council, established in 2005 to provide the president and senior policy-
makers with analyses of foreign policy issues that have been reviewed and
coordinated among the various intelligence agencies.56
At one time or another, various intelligence agencies have admitted to
maintaining surveillance on millions of private citizens and even members
of Congress. They plant their operatives in other units of government. They
plant stories in the U.S. media, secretly enlisting the cooperation of media
bosses, journalists, and editors. The CIA alone has subsidized the publica-
tion of hundreds of books and has owned outright more than two hundred
wire services, newspapers, magazines, and book-publishing complexes. The
agency has recruited thousands of academics across the country as spies
and researchers, secretly financing and censoring their work. CIA agents
have infiltrated student, labor, and scientific groups. The agency conducts
its own resident-scholar programs and offers internships to undergraduate
and graduate students.57
The CIA has infiltrated and disrupted dissenting organizations in this
country and abroad. The National Conference for New Politics (NCNP), a
progressive coalition, never recovered from the CIA’s divisive and disruptive
“Operation Chaos” attacks from within.58 The CIA admitted to carrying out
mind-control projects at over eighty institutions, sometimes on unsuspecting
persons, and was responsible for the death of at least one government
employee.59
In violation of the National Security Act of 1947, which states that the
CIA “shall have no police, subpoena, law enforcement or internal security
functions,” the agency has equipped and trained local police forces in the
United States, and conducts covert operations against U.S. citizens within
this country and abroad.60
130
Chapter 10

CIA: CAPITALISM’S INTERNATIONAL ARMY OR
COCAINE IMPORT AGENCY?
U.S. intelligence agencies do more than just gather intelligence. One could
fill volumes delineating their crimes against humanity. In countries like
Guatemala, Greece, Brazil, Chile, Indonesia, Argentina, Zaire, Guyana, Haiti,
Panama, Mozambique, Angola, Jamaica, Kosovo, and the Philippines, U.S.
national security forces and U.S.-supported mercenary armies have used every
means to destroy popular revolutionary movements and governments or even
just reformist ones, and install repressive regimes that were totally accommo-
dating to U.S. corporate interests. What a State Department memorandum
had to say about Guatemala could apply to any number of places, namely
that the government has used indiscriminate “counter-terror” to combat in-
surgency. “People are killed or disappear on the basis of simple accusations….
Interrogations are brutal, torture is used and bodies are mutilated. We [the
U.S. government] have condoned counter-terror…. We encouraged the
Guatemalan Army to do these things.”61
The CIA has stolen elections and waged disinformation campaigns
abroad. It has bribed officials, incited ethnic enmities, and funded and trained
secret armies, paramilitary forces, saboteurs, torture teams, and death squads.
It has pursued destabilization and assassination campaigns against govern-
ment leaders, labor unions, and peasant, religious, and student organizations
in numerous nations.62
CIA training manuals unearthed by a Freedom of Information lawsuit re-
vealed that the agency taught methods of torture to Third World militaries,
such as electric shock, water torture, sleep, food, and sensory deprivation, and
psychological torture such as forcing victims to witness the torture of loved
ones, including one’s children or parents. Other CIA manuals taught methods
of assassination.63 Torture has become an American export. According to
Amnesty International, the U.S. Commerce Department has issued hundreds of
export licenses worth more than $27 million for thumbscrews, leg irons,
shackles, stun guns, and electro-shock instruments, “specifically designed imple-
ments of torture,” much of it to countries with dismal human rights records.64
After World War II, U.S. intelligence agencies put thousands of Nazi war
criminals and their collaborators on the U.S. payroll, utilizing them in repres-
sive operations against the left in Latin America and elsewhere.65 The U.S.
government also used scientists of the notorious biological warfare Unit 731,
part of the Japanese military during World War II. Unit 731 conducted fright-
ful experiments in China and elsewhere, including human vivisection, with
and without anesthesia. Evidence strongly suggests that the U.S. military
used Unit 731 scientists during the Korean War (1950–1953) to create
epidemics of hemorrhagic fever, a disease previously unknown in Korea.66
Released CIA documents disclosed that the CIA maintained a clandestine
biological warfare program targeting the populations and crops of a number
of countries, including North Korea, Vietnam, Laos, Panama, and Cuba.
The CIA deployed weather modification technology, and sprayed insect infes-
tations to destroy crops in Cuba, along with a virus that caused swine fever,
Political Repression and National Insecurity
131

the first such infection in the Americas, forcing the slaughter of pigs in Cuba
to prevent a widespread epidemic among humans. The agency is also charged
with causing an epidemic of dengue hemorrhagic fever, transmitted by mos-
quitoes, afflicting some 300,000 people, killing 57 Cuban adults and 101 chil-
dren, the first major epidemic of dengue in the Western Hemisphere. In 1997,
Cuba presented a report to the United Nations charging Washington with
“biological aggression.”67
Throughout the 1970s and 1980s, in various Western European coun-
tries, the CIA helped maintain secret paramilitary units to carry out acts of
terrorism against anticapitalist organizations. The House Intelligence Commit-
tee reported that “several hundred times a day” CIA operatives “engage in
highly illegal activities” overseas that endanger the freedom and lives of for-
eign nationals.68
The CIA has recruited hit men for “international murder missions,” sup-
plying arms and money to Italian and Corsican mafias to murder members of
communist-led dockworkers’ unions in Italy and France in 1947 and 1950.
After these unions were broken, the mobsters were given a freer hand trans-
porting heroin from Asia to Western Europe and North America. Assisted by
the CIA itself, anticommunist drug lords in Southeast Asia and Afghanistan
increased their opium production and distribution tenfold.69
CIA involvement in Central America contributed to the U.S. cocaine epi-
demic of the 1980s. CIA planes transported guns and supplies down to right-
wing mercenary troops in Nicaragua, the “contras,” and procapitalist political
and military leaders in other Latin countries; the planes then were reloaded
with cocaine for the return trip to the United States. The CIA itself admits
having known and done nothing about narcotics shipments to inner-city po-
pulations in this country. It was reported that a CIA “anti-drug unit” was
involved in cocaine trafficking.70 Drug infestation can serve as a useful
social-control mechanism, keeping low-income African American and Latino
youths shooting themselves up with needles and each other with guns rather
than organizing militant revolutionary groups as in the 1960s.
A former official observed: “In my 30-year history in the Drug Enforce-
ment Administration [DEA] and related agencies, the major targets of my
investigations almost invariably turned out to be working for the CIA.”71 In
November 1993, a former DEA director and a DEA agent both appeared on
CBS’s 60 Minutes and detailed the CIA’s massive theft of cocaine from DEA
warehouses. The cocaine was later sold on the streets in the United States.
Likewise DEA efforts at thwarting the drug outflow from Burma have been
stymied by the CIA and State Department on behalf of Burma’s corporation-
loving, drug-running dictatorship.72
CIA operatives participated in the multibillion-dollar savings and loan
swindles. Monies gained from such deals, along with drug money laundered
through various banks and other financial institutions, were illegally used to
finance CIA covert activities.73
A mountain of evidence suggests that elements of the “intelligence com-
munity,” assisted by certain mobsters, were involved in the assassination of
President John Kennedy in 1963 and in the subsequent massive cover-up.
132
Chapter 10

Kennedy was considered a dangerous liability because of what were perceived
as his “liberal” foreign and domestic policies, including his unwillingness
to pursue an all-out ground war in Indochina, and his determination to bring
intelligence agencies under firmer executive control.74
In 1982, at the urging of the Reagan administration, Congress passed a
law prohibiting publication of any information that might help identify pres-
ent or former intelligence agents, even if the information came from already
published sources. Under that law, some journalistic exposés of illegal covert
activities themselves became illegal.
It has been argued that a strong intelligence system is needed to gather
the information needed by policymakers. But the CIA and other agencies
have been unlawfully involved in covert actions that go beyond intelligence
gathering, including drug trafficking, mercenary wars, torture, sabotage,
assassinations, and disinformation campaigns against the U.S. public itself.
With the overthrow of the Soviet Union and other communist countries,
the spies and militarists of the national security state faced a shortage of
enemies. How would they justify their bloated budgets if there were no adver-
saries menacing us? New ones had to be conjured: “rogue nations,” “inter-
national terrorists,” “Islamic extremists,” and the like. Such alarmist stories
did little to protect our national security but much to protect the budgets of
the national security establishment, and much to keep the repressive global
apparatus intact.
WATERGATE AND IRAN-CONTRA
In June 1972, a group of ex-CIA agents were caught breaking into the Demo-
cratic Party headquarters in the Watergate building in Washington, D.C. The
burglary was part of an extensive campaign involving electoral sabotage, wire-
tapping, theft of private records, and illegal use of campaign funds. It was
subsequently revealed that President Richard Nixon himself was involved in
the skulduggery and related cover-up activities. Facing impeachment, he re-
signed from office. His successor, Gerald Ford, promptly pardoned Nixon
for all crimes relating to Watergate. Nixon never served a day in jail and re-
tired on his presidential pension. Persons found guilty in the affair were given
light sentences.75
In 1986, another scandal, known as “Iran-contra,” rocked the White
House. It was discovered that the Reagan administration had been selling mil-
lions of dollars worth of arms to Iran, a country it repeatedly accused of sup-
porting terrorism. As part of a covert operation to bypass Congress and the
Constitution, Reagan officials funneled the funds from these secret sales to the
Nicaraguan mercenaries known as the “contras,” who were waging a terrorist
war of attrition against a democratic socialist Nicaraguan government. Funds
also may have been diverted to pay for the campaigns of Republican candidates.
President Reagan admitted full knowledge of the arms sales, but claimed that he
had played no role in its operation and had no idea what happened to the
money. In subsequent court testimonies his subordinates said that Reagan had
been actively involved in the entire affair. But he never served a day in jail.76
Political Repression and National Insecurity
133

Despite abundant evidence of involvement by the White House and the
National Security Council in Iran-contra, no reforms to rein in secret opera-
tions were implemented. A special prosecutor did manage to convict eleven
individuals of destroying government documents, obstructing justice, perjury,
illegally diverting funds, and other crimes, nine of whom received probation
and light fines, and only one went to jail for a short spell. Some of the people
involved, such as former CIA director and then Vice President George Bush
Sr., were never indicted despite testimony directly implicating them. Once
Bush Sr. became president in 1989, he pardoned a half dozen criminals, in-
cluding Defense Secretary Caspar Weinberger, and State Department official
Elliot Abrams, who later became Bush Jr.’s deputy national security advisor.77
Much is made of how presidents stand by subordinates who are accused
of wrongdoing, supposedly out of “loyalty” to them. In fact they usually are
bound by something stronger than loyalty, namely self-interest. An underling
abruptly cut loose might turn into a damaging source of disclosure. During
the Watergate affair, the one aide President Nixon tried to throw to the
wolves, John Dean, ended up singing the entire conspiracy libretto to
Congress and the world. Generally, it is best for a president who is implicated
in an illegal affair to do everything possible to firm up the skittish line of
lieutenants who stand between him and lawful retribution.
HOMELAND INSECURITY
The 11 September 2001 attack on the Pentagon and the World Trade Center
in New York, resulting in almost three thousand deaths, provided an atmo-
sphere of national alarm that made it relatively easy for the Bush administra-
tion to embark on overseas invasions, while increasing surveillance and
suppression at home.
In the weeks before 9/11, the White House had been repeatedly warned
by U.S. military intelligence, the FBI, and the CIA of plans for domestic terror-
ist attacks using explosives and airline hijacking, to be conducted by Muslim-
extremist networks. Warnings also came from other experts including the
administration’s own counterterrorist advisor, Richard Clarke. Various for-
eign countries sent warnings that a major attack on U.S. soil was imminent.
Attorney General John Ashcroft quit flying on commercial airlines after a
“threat assessment,” and several top Pentagon officials canceled flights
the day before the attacks. But President Bush and his associates chose to do
nothing about the impending threat. Instead Bush himself went on one of the
longest presidential vacations in White House history.78
After the attacks had occurred, and using them as a justification, Bush in-
creased military spending, initiated wars against Iraq and Afghanistan, and
rammed the so-called USA Patriot Act through Congress without an opportu-
nity for public debate. Under the Patriot Act:
•
The government can monitor people’s Internet habits, the contents of
their computer documents, e-mails, telephone calls, and the books they
borrowed from the library.
134
Chapter 10

•
Without a court order and without having to show probable cause that
criminal activity was brewing, federal agents could now go into homes
to copy or seize people’s business and personal records while occupants
were away.
•
Persons such as librarians, doctors, bank officials, business employers,
and neighbors were obliged to turn over other people’s personal data to
the government, and were prohibited under threat of federal prosecution
from telling anyone.
•
For the first time in our history U.S. citizens could be held indefinitely
without a warrant, without charges or hearings or habeas corpus, or ben-
efit of legal representation, and without being able to contact their fami-
lies, all in violation of the Fifth, Sixth, and Fourteenth Amendments of
the Constitution.79
•
Given the overly broad definition of “terrorism” provided in the act, the
government could designate—in violation of the First Amendment—any
protest group as a terrorist organization and any civil disobedience as
“domestic terrorism.”
Hardly two years after the Patriot Act was passed, over one hundred U.S.
cities, counties, and towns had passed resolutions calling for its repeal. But in
2003, the Republican-controlled Congress passed additional laws to expand
the act by removing judicial oversight and transferring still more power to
law enforcement authorities.80
During that same period, an Amnesty International report revealed that
U.S. federal agents were conducting what they called “extraordinary rendi-
tion,” which consisted of abducting individuals in various parts of the world,
including the United States, and without any semblance of due process and
often without any reliable evidence, sending them off to be interrogated and
tortured by regimes abroad for extended periods of time. Other reports indi-
cated that detainees held by U.S. authorities in Guantanamo, Iraq, and else-
where. No charges were brought against government personnel regarding the
abuse and death of detainees.81
A report by the International Committee of the Red Cross, gathered in 2007
but not published until 2009, revealed that prisoners detained on suspicion of
being terrorists were regularly tortured by the CIA. Though kept in isolation at
different locations, the prisoners described remarkably similar torments: water-
boarding, forced to stand shackled for days in one position, slammed repeatedly
into walls, deprived of sleep and solid food, forced to remain naked for months
at a stretch often in frigid cells. All were kept in continuous solitary confinement
for their CIA detention, ranging from sixteen months to more than four years.82
The White House insisted that spying on U.S. citizens without a warrant
and incarcerating people without benefit of a hearing or trial was necessary
for our security. Justice Department lawyers provided memorandums stating
that the government could ignore international law that prohibits torture and
calls for due process.83
As far as our real security needs are concerned, next to nothing has
been done to implement necessary measures within the United States. Airport
Political Repression and National Insecurity
135

security remains something of an inconvenient joke. One test survey con-
ducted by the Transportation Security Administration itself “found that fake
guns, bombs, and other weapons got past security screeners almost one-fourth
of the time.”84 As of 2006 our entire agricultural system remained open to
biological attack, according to a former Secretary of Agriculture in the Bush
administration. Nuclear power plants and chemical plants, many located close
to large urban populations, remained vulnerable to attack. Rail yards with
tanker cars full of deadly chemical gases were stored behind unlocked and un-
guarded gates. Millions of shipping containers moved through U.S. ports
unchecked; high-tech detection devices were still not in place, and only 6 per-
cent of containers were physically inspected.85
During his first year in the White House, President Obama banned torture
and some other brutal interrogation methods. But he continued the practice of
preventive detention, incarcerating individuals indefinitely for years without
charges and without affording them an opportunity to demonstrate their inno-
cence. His Justice Department ruled that military and intelligence agencies
would need the approval of U.S. Attorney General Eric Holder to withhold
classified evidence in court. Holder also initiated an investigation of CIA
abuse of prisoners.86
In sum, under the guise of “fighting communism,” “fighting terrorism,”
“protecting U.S. interests,” or “defending democracy,” the purveyors of state
power have committed horrendous crimes against the people of this and other
countries. The ancient question of political philosophy, quis custodiet ipsos
custodes? (who guards the guardians?), is still with us.
136
Chapter 10

C
H
A
P
T
E
R
11
The U.S. Global
Military Empire
The United States is said to be a democracy, but it is also the world’s only
superpower, with a global military empire of a magnitude never before seen
in history. What purpose does this empire serve?
A GLOBAL KILL CAPACITY
The U.S. military has a nuclear overkill capacity of more than eight thousand
long-range missiles and twenty-two thousand tactical ones, along with ground
and air forces ready to strike anywhere and a fleet larger in total tonnage and
firepower than all the other navies of the world combined. With only 5 percent
of the earth’s population, the United States devotes more to military expendi-
tures than all the other industrialized nations put together. Over the last half
century, U.S. leaders deployed thousands of nuclear weapons and hundreds of
thousands of military personnel to over 350 major bases and hundreds of
minor installations spanning the globe. This massive deployment supposedly
was needed to contain a Soviet Union bent on world domination—although
evidence indicates that the Soviets were never the threat they were made out
to be by our Cold War policymakers.1
Despite the overthrow of the USSR and other Eastern European com-
munist nations in 1990–1992, U.S. military allocations continued at
budget-busting stratospheric levels, and U.S. overseas military strength
remained deployed in much the same pattern as before, with its Cold War
arsenal of long-range nuclear missiles aimed mostly at the former Soviet
Union, an enemy that no longer exists. In recent years the list of sites tar-
geted by U.S. nuclear weapons actually grew by 20 percent, including new
137

targets in Russia, Belarus, Ukraine, Kazakstan, China, Iran, Iraq, and North
Korea.2
The direct yearly military appropriations rose to about $534 billion by
2010, really closer to $850 billion if we count the indirect costs of war and
empire, such as veterans benefits and medical costs, annual debt payments
due to military spending (over $100 billion), covert military and intelligence
operations, the 70 percent of federal research and development funds that
goes to the military, “supplementary appropriations” for specific wars as in
Iraq and Afghanistan (about $130 billion in 2010), and defense expenses
picked up by nonmilitary agencies including “defense related activities” of
the General Services Administration, along with the Energy Department’s
nuclear weapons programs, which consumes more than half of that depart-
ment’s budget.3
The U.S. government also runs a Foreign Military Financing Program,
which gives billions of dollars a year to other countries to purchase weaponry
from U.S. firms. The U.S. taxpayers fully subsidize these sales while the profits
go to the corporate arms dealers.4
The federal budget is composed of discretionary spending (the monies
that the Congress allocates each year) and mandatory spending (the monies
that must be allotted in compliance with already existing authorizations,
such as payments on the national debt or Social Security). In the discretion-
ary budget, more money is spent on the military than on all domestic pro-
grams combined.
138
Chapter 11

The Bush administration made an accelerated effort to develop the Strate-
gic Defense Initiative, or “Star Wars.” First proposed in the mid-1980s,
“Star Wars” is an outer-space missile program that supposedly would inter-
cept and destroy all incoming warheads launched by other nations. Over the
years the Pentagon has spent more than $120 billion unsuccessfully trying to
create this “space shield,” and wants another $62 billion for the years 2010 to
2014. If the “Star Wars” project ever does prove successful, it will make the
nuclear arsenals of other nations obsolete and deprive them of any deterrence
against U.S. nuclear missiles. This in turn will encourage them to spend more
to update their own long-range attack systems.5 Also “Star Wars” is in viola-
tion of the Outer Space Treaty, signed by ninety-one nations including the
United States, which bans weapons of mass destruction in space.
A chief of the U.S. Space Command enthused: “We’re going to fight from
space and we’re going to fight into space. We will engage terrestrial targets
someday—ships, airplanes, land targets—from space.”6 The professed goal of
the U.S. Space Command is to dominate “the space dimension of military
operations to protect U.S. interests and investments.”7 The military already
can beam powerful electromagnetic or pulsed radio-frequency radiation trans-
missions back to earth (Project HAARP), seriously impairing the mental capac-
ity of whole populations, causing “severe physiological disruption or perceptual
disorientation” for an extended period, according to the air force.8
PENTAGON PROFITS, WASTE, AND THEFT
The arms procurement program run by the Department of Defense (DOD) is
rife with fraud and profiteering. The DOD’s own auditors admit the military
cannot account for one-fourth of what it spends, over $100 billion a year.
Such sums do not just evaporate; they find their way into somebody’s pockets.
A secretary of defense during the Bush administration, Donald Rumsfeld,
admitted that “according to some estimates we cannot track $2.3 trillion in
transactions.” When Bush called “for more than $48 billion in new defense
spending,” this caused Retired Vice Admiral Jack Shanahan to remark,
“How do we know we need $48 billion since we don’t know what we’re
spending and what we’re buying.”9
If the Pentagon’s “misplaced” funds were returned to state and local gov-
ernments on a pro rata basis, they all would be able to pay off their debts,
vastly improve their educational and health services, and still have funds left
over for other things. There’s more to this story:
•
The Pentagon was storing $41 billion in excess supplies gathering dust or
rusting away.
•
The U.S. Army allocated $1.5 billion to develop a heavy-lift helicopter,
even though it already had heavy-lift helicopters and the Navy was build-
ing an almost identical one.
•
Congress voted for C-130 cargo planes the Air Force did not want because
they were so dysfunctional, and extra B-2 bombers that the Pentagon never
requested.
The U.S. Global Military Empire
139

•
Congress added $6.2 billion to a supplemental spending bill for, among
other things, a C-17 aircraft that defense secretary Robert Gates recom-
mended terminating.
•
The Air Force started to develop an F/A-22 fighter plane in 1986 that cost
$29 billion and was still not combat ready twenty years later in 2005.
•
The Pentagon is spending billions to build 187 F-22 fighter planes that
seem intended for war with a major power. After a furious battle in
Congress, funding for an addition 7 F-22s was cut, saving the country
$1.75 billion. But the Air Force has plans for yet another super fighter
plane, the F-35.
•
The Pentagon approved a plan to spend $16 billion to lease one hundred
jetliner refueling tankers from Boeing, which cost more than buying the
planes. The tankers had been built by Boeing in part with Pentagon
funds.10
The Government Accountability Office (GAO), watchdog agency for
Congress, reported that the Pentagon had no sure way of knowing how
$200 billion was spent waging war in Iraq and Afghanistan. The GAO
identified instances in which costs were off by 30 percent or more.
Multibillion-dollar Pentagon contracts were plagued by “inadequate plan-
ning and inadequate oversight,” according to the GAO controller-general.
A third or more of government property that Halliburton and its subsidiaries
were paid to manage in Iraq could not be located by auditors. Halliburton
and other contractors were repeatedly paid for work never performed. They
grossly overcharged the Pentagon for fuel supplies, construction, and meals
for troops, while delivering substandard equipment and contaminated water
to U.S. bases in Iraq.11
Two members of Congress concluded that Halliburton was systematically
overcharging on hundreds of requisitions every day, with an enormous cumu-
lative cost to the taxpayer of billions of dollars. “The general feeling,” con-
cluded one Army contracting officer, “is that the contractor [Halliburton] is
out of control.”12
Military contractors generally enjoy what are called cost plus contracts.
They get paid whatever it costs to do the job plus a guaranteed profit. There
are no penalties for failure. Hence the more wasteful the performance, the
costlier is the job and the bigger the profit. There is a disincentive to get the
job done efficiently and economically when waste is built into the system.13
Defense contractors have been known to make out duplicate bills to dif-
ferent military agencies, getting paid twice for the same service. Tests have
been rigged and data falsified to make weapons appear more effective than
they actually are. Many top defense contractors have been under criminal in-
vestigation, but most fraud goes unpunished. The public purse is pilfered on
small items too. The military paid $511 for lightbulbs that cost 90 cents and
$640 for toilet seats that cost $12. And after paying the Boeing Company
$5,096 for two pliers, the tough Pentagon procurers renegotiated the price
down to $1,496—a real bargain.14
140
Chapter 11

Billions are spent on military pensions that go mostly to upper-income
senior officers. Vast sums have been expended at military bases for golf
courses, polo fields, restaurants, and officers’ clubs, replete with gold-plated
chandeliers, oak paneling, and marble fixtures. There is a Pentagon-leased
luxury hotel outside Disney World in Florida that requires an annual federal
subsidy of $27 million. Two golf courses at Andrews Air Force Base in
Maryland were not enough; so a third one costing $5 million was built. And
in the midst of intense budget cutting of human services, Congress allocated
$1 billion for seven luxury aircraft to service the Pentagon’s top commanders.
Meanwhile, of the fifteen thousand disabled troops returned from Iraq by
2004, many went for months without receiving pay and medical benefits to
which they were entitled.15
Corporate contractors enjoy these special features of military spending:
•
There are no risks to speak of. Unlike automobile manufacturers who
must worry about selling the cars they produce, the weapons dealer has
a guaranteed contracted market.
•
Almost all contracts are awarded at whatever price a corporation sets
without competitive bidding. That means the defense firm can name its
own price and the Pentagon pays up.
•
Many large military contracts have cost overruns of 100 to 700 percent. To
cite a notorious example, the C-5A transport plane had a $4 billion cost
overrun (and its wings kept falling off). In recent years the price tag on
the ninety-five biggest weapons programs have grown nearly $300 billion
beyond their original cost estimates.16
•
The Pentagon directly subsidizes corporate defense contractors with free
research and development, public lands, buildings, renovations, and
yearly cash subsidies totaling in the billions.17
•
Defense spending does not compete with the consumer market and is vir-
tually limitless. There are always more advanced weapons of destruction
to develop and obsolete weaponry to replace.
Various services that used to be performed by military personnel—kitchen
duty, laundry, military prison construction, heavy-equipment maintenance, and
certain security assignments—are now contracted out to private companies that
perform these tasks often with little oversight and for heavily padded prices.18
Military spending is much preferred by the business community to other
forms of government expenditure. Public monies invested in occupational
safety, environmental protection, drug rehabilitation, or public schools pro-
vide for human needs and create jobs and buying power. But such programs
expand the nonprofit public sector, bringing no direct returns to business—if
anything, shifting demand away from the private market. In contrast, a weap-
ons contract injects huge amounts of public funds directly into the private
corporate sector at a rate of profit that is generally two or three times higher
than what other investments yield.
U.S. leaders say that military spending creates jobs. So do pornography
and prostitution, but there might be more worthwhile ways of boosting
The U.S. Global Military Empire
141

employment. In any case, civilian spending generates more jobs than military
spending:
Jobs created by spending $1 billion on the military: 8,555.
Jobs created by spending $1 billion on health care: 10,779.
Jobs created by spending $1 billion on education: 17,687.
Jobs created by spending $1 billion on mass transit: 19,795.19
To put military spending in perspective, consider the following: the $800
million Congress saved in 1997 by cutting Supplementary Security Income for
150,000 disabled children amounts to less than one-third the cost of building
and maintaining one B-2 bomber.20 The $5.5 trillion spent just for nuclear
weapons over the last half century exceeded the combined federal spending
on education, social services, job programs, the environment, general sciences,
energy production, law enforcement, and community and regional develop-
ment during that same period.21
To keep America on its arms-spending binge, corporate lobbyists and the
Department of Defense itself spend millions of dollars on publicity to boost
various weapons systems. The DOD finances military-related research projects
at major universities, and propagates the military viewpoint at hundreds of
conferences and exhibitions, and in many thousands of brochures, press
releases, articles, and books written by “independent scholars” in the pay of
the Pentagon.
HARMING OUR OWN
The U.S. military inflicts numerous hidden costs upon the economy, the envi-
ronment, and human life. The armed services use millions of acres of land at
home and abroad in bombing runs and maneuvers, causing long-lasting dam-
age to vegetation, wildlife, and public health. Military target ranges on the
Puerto Rican island of Vieques, in South Korea, and even within the United
States are heavily contaminated with petroleum products, uranium, and other
carcinogenic heavy metals, causing cancer rates among nearby inhabitants
several hundred times higher than in any normal population.22
The U.S. military is a major polluter, using vast amounts of ozone-
depleting materials, and generating 500,000 tons of toxins yearly. The
Pentagon admitted to Congress that some 17,500 military sites violate fed-
eral environmental laws.23 The military contaminates the air, soil, and
groundwater with depleted uranium, plutonium, tritium, and other toxic
wastes, while amassing vast stockpiles of lethal chemical and biological
agents. There are some 20,000 radioactive and toxic chemical sites on mili-
tary bases and nuclear weapons plants and laboratories across the United
States. Many of these have repeatedly released radioactive and other harmful
wastes into the air and waterways, including millions of gallons dumped
illegally into makeshift evaporation pits and seepage basins.
Populations at home and abroad have been sickened by nuclear bomb
tests. After decades of denial, the government is conceding that American
142
Chapter 11

workers who helped make nuclear weapons were exposed to radiation and
chemicals that produced cancer and early death. The Department of Energy
admits that it would cost astronomical sums and take decades to clean up
the contamination generated by nuclear arms production and testing, and
that most of these sites actually will never be cleaned up but will need “per-
manent stewardship” for generations to come.24
During the 1950s the U.S. Army conducted germ warfare experiments in
American cities, causing numerous civilian illnesses and deaths, a rare epidemic
of infections. The U.S. Coast Guard, responsible for policing our waterways,
has dumped more than 100,000 used batteries containing lead, mercury, and
other chemicals into our rivers and bays.
The military is also a danger to its own ranks. Every year hundreds of
enlisted personnel are killed in vehicular accidents, firing exercises, practice
flights, maneuvers, and other readiness preparations. During World War II
the Navy tested the effects of poison gas using sailors as guinea pigs. As
many as 60,000 took part in the experiments, many suffering long-term dis-
abilities. Tens of thousands of veterans have been sickened or have died from
exposure to atomic testing during the 1950s or from toxic herbicides used in
the Vietnam War. And more than 200,000 Gulf War veterans may have been
exposed to depleted uranium or other highly hazardous materials, including
anthrax inoculations that are suspected of causing serious illness. In 1994
Senator John Rockefeller (D-W.Va.) issued a report revealing that for at least
fifty years the Department of Defense used hundreds of thousands of military
personnel in human experiments involving intentional exposure to toxic chem-
ical agents that caused serious ailments.25
The Department of Defense is one of the biggest and cruelest users of
animal experimentation. Animals “are burned, shot, bled, irradiated, dosed
with biological, nuclear, and chemical weapons assaulted with cannonades of
noise, exposed to deadly viruses,” and then studied as they suffer lingering
deaths.26
ECONOMIC IMPERIALISM
In recent decades, U.S. industries and banks have invested heavily in the Third
World (the poorer regions of Asia, Africa, and Latin America), attracted by
the rich natural resources and the high return that comes with underpaid
labor and the absence of taxes, environmental regulations, and occupational
safety costs. The U.S. government grants subsidies and tax concessions to
corporations for their overseas investments, along with compensations for
losses due to war or confiscation by a foreign government. Washington
refuses aid to any country that nationalizes, without full compensation, assets
owned by U.S. firms.
U.S. corporate investments do little to improve and much to diminish the
lot of Third World peoples. The transnationals push out local businesses and
preempt their markets. American agribusiness cartels, heavily subsidized by
the U.S. government, dump surplus products in other countries at below cost
and undersell local farmers. They expropriate the best land in these countries
The U.S. Global Military Empire
143

for cash-crop exports, usually monoculture crops requiring large amounts of
pesticides, leaving less acreage for the hundreds of varieties of organically
grown foods that feed the local populations.27
By displacing local populations from their lands and robbing them of
their self-sufficiency, corporations create overcrowded labor markets of des-
perate people who are forced to toil for poverty wages, often in violation of
the countries’ minimum-wage laws. In Haiti, for instance, workers are paid
11 cents an hour by corporate giants such as Disney and Wal-Mart. The
United States is one of the few countries that has refused to sign an interna-
tional convention for the abolition of child labor and forced labor. This posi-
tion stems from the child labor practices of U.S. corporations throughout the
Third World, where children as young as twelve suffer high rates of injuries
and fatalities.28
The savings that big business reaps from cheap labor abroad are not
passed on in lower prices to their customers. Corporations do not outsource
to far-off regions in order to save money for U.S. consumers but to increase
their margin of profit. Thus shoes made by Indonesian children working
twelve-hour days for 13 cents an hour cost a company only $2.60 to be
made but still are sold for $90 or more in the United States.29
Since World War II, hundreds of billions of dollars in U.S. military aid
have been given to some eighty-five nations. The U.S. has trained and
equipped some 2.3 million foreign troops and police, the purpose being not
to defend these countries from outside invasion but to protect capital invest-
ments and the ruling oligarchs from their own restive populations.30
U.S. aid money also subsidizes the infrastructure needed by corporate in-
vestors in the Third World: ports, highways, and refineries. U.S. nonmilitary
aid to foreign nations comes with strings attached. The food that the United
States offers as aid must be produced on U.S. soil rather than in the countries
that are supposed to be helped. Other aid monies often must be spent on U.S.
products, and the recipient nation is required to give investment preferences to
U.S. companies, shifting consumption away from home-produced foods and
144
Chapter 11

commodities in favor of imported ones, creating more dependency, hunger,
and debt.31
The United States Agency for International Development (USAID) used to
boast on its Web site that “the principal beneficiary of America’s foreign assis-
tance programs has always been the United States. Close to 80 percent of
[USAID] contracts and grants go directly to American firms.”32
Much aid money never sees the light of day, going directly into the per-
sonal coffers of sticky-fingered officials in the recipient countries.
USAID openly proclaims that one of the prime goals of U.S. foreign assis-
tance is to further “America’s foreign policy interests in expanding democracy
and free markets,” that is, making the world safe for U.S. capitalism. Some
critics say that the U.S. government uses aid as a political weapon to coerce
governments to do what Washington wants and to reward political and mili-
tary partners rather than to advance genuine social or humanitarian causes
abroad. Thus in June 2009 President Obama terminated $64 million in aid
to Nicaragua’s leftist Sandinista government, just as President Reagan had
done in 1981. Obama claimed that the Sandinistas might have manipulated
municipal elections in 2008—of which there seemed to be little evidence.33
Aid also comes from other sources. In 1944, the United Nations created
the World Bank and the International Monetary Fund (IMF). Voting power in
both organizations is determined by a country’s financial contribution. As
the largest “donor,” the United States has a dominant voice, followed by
Germany, Japan, France, and Great Britain. The IMF operates in secrecy
with a select group of bankers and finance ministry staffs drawn mostly from
the rich nations.
The World Bank and IMF are supposed to assist nations in their develop-
ment. What actually happens is another story. A poor country borrows from
the World Bank to build up some aspect of its economy. Should it be unable
to pay back the heavy interest because of declining export sales or some other
reason, it must borrow again. But the IMF imposes a “structural adjustment
program” (SAP), requiring debtor countries to grant tax breaks to the trans-
national corporations, reduce wages, and make no attempt to protect local
enterprises from foreign imports and foreign takeovers. The debtor nations
are pressured to privatize their economies, selling at scandalously low prices
their state-owned mines, railroads, and utilities to private corporations. They
are forced to open their forests to clear-cutting and their lands to strip mining,
without regard to the ecological damage done. The debtor nations also must
cut back on subsidies for health, education, transportation, and food, spend-
ing less in order to have more money to meet debt payments. Required to
grow cash crops for export earnings, they become even less able to feed their
own populations.
Here then we have explained a “mystery”: the number of people living in
poverty is growing at a faster rate than the world’s population. Why, as aid
and loans and capital investments have increased abroad over the last half
century, so has poverty? Answer: Such programs were never designed to fight
poverty but are intended to augment the wealth of transnational investors at
the expense of local populations.
The U.S. Global Military Empire
145

Throughout the Third World, real wages have declined, and national
debts have soared to the point where debt payments absorb almost all of the
poorer countries’ export earnings.34 Some critics conclude that IMF and
World Bank structural adjustments do not work, because the end result is less
self-sufficiency and more poverty for the recipient nations. Why then do the
rich member states continue to fund the IMF and World Bank? It is because
foreign loan programs do work, depending on who benefits. Their intent is
not to uplift the masses in other countries but to serve the interests of global
finance, to take over the lands and local economies of Third World peoples,
indenture their labor with enormous debts, privatize public services, and elim-
inate the trade competition these countries might have posed had they ever
really been allowed to develop. In these respects, foreign loans and structural
adjustments, aid and investments, all work very well indeed—not for the
recipient nations but for the predatory lenders.
INTERVENTION EVERYWHERE
The U.S. government intervenes in countries around the world, supposedly to
fight terrorism, stop drug trafficking, protect our national security, and defend
freedom and democracy. Closer examination shows that U.S. rulers mainly
have been defending the capitalist world from social change—even when the
change has been peaceful and democratic. So they overthrew reformist govern-
ments in Iran, Guatemala, the Congo, the Dominican Republic, Brazil, Chile,
and Uruguay. Similarly, in Greece, the Philippines, Indonesia, and at least ten
Latin American nations, military oligarchs—largely trained and financed by
the Pentagon and the CIA—overthrew popular governments that pursued egal-
itarian policies for the benefit of the destitute classes. And in each instance, the
United States was instrumental in instituting right-wing regimes that were unre-
sponsive to popular needs and wholly accommodating to U.S. investors.35
In Nicaragua, a U.S.-backed mercenary force killed over 30,000 people,
orphaned more than 9,000 children, and destroyed crops, homes, schools,
health clinics, and other facilities—for an estimated damage of over $3 billion.
In Angola and Mozambique, wars waged by CIA-backed forces left several
million dead and millions more homeless and destitute. In East Timor, the
U.S.-funded Indonesian military slaughtered some 200,000 people, more than
one-third of the population.36
The United States invaded Grenada in 1983 and Panama in 1989 to over-
throw reformist governments, replacing both with free-market regimes
propped up by U.S. force, bringing U.S.-financed elections, along with higher
unemployment, lower wages, cutbacks in education and human services,
and a dramatic increase in privatization, crime, drugs, and poverty.37 What
Nicaragua, Angola, Mozambique, East Timor, Grenada, and Panama had in
common were governments that were redirecting some portion of their coun-
tries’ labor and resources toward the needs of the people, putting them very
much out of step with the rigors of free-market global profiteers.
In 1990–1991, Iraq asked for a larger share of the oil market to the an-
noyance of the giant petroleum companies. In retaliation for the slant drilling
146
Chapter 11

of its oil fields by the feudal rulers of Kuwait, Iraqi dictator Saddam Hussein
(a former CIA client) invaded Kuwait. In response, the elder President Bush
launched massive bombings that contaminated Iraq’s fertile agricultural lands
with depleted uranium and killed, by Pentagon estimates, 200,000 people.
In the years that followed, Iraq, which once had the highest standard of living
in the Middle East, was reduced to destitution, kept down by U.S.-led
sanctions—and with its own oil kept off the international market, unable to
infringe upon oil cartel profits.38
Also targeted was Yugoslavia, a fairly large and prosperous country that
had retained many socialist features; some 80 percent of its economy was in
the public sector. Yugoslavia showed no interest in joining NATO or the
European Union, and its people, especially in the Serbian Republic, resisted
the push to complete privatization (despite having opened themselves to IMF
loans). A series of Western-financed secessionist wars helped break Yugoslavia
into a cluster of privatized, right-wing, free-market republics with high unem-
ployment and low wages. Yugoslavia leaders were charged with “genocide”
and “ethnic cleansing” by President Clinton and his associates, and subjected
in 1999 to seventy-eight days of bombing by U.S.-led NATO forces that killed
or wounded thousands and devastated the industry, infrastructure, and ecol-
ogy of that once prosperous nation.
Subsequent reports revealed that there had been no systematic mass-rape
and mass-atrocity policy by the Serbs as charged by Washington and the
Western media, though atrocities had been committed by all sides in the
Yugoslav wars. Likewise, the reported mass graves in Kosovo supposedly con-
taining thousands of Albanians killed by Serbs failed to materialize once
NATO forces occupied that province. The main victims of ethnic cleansing
seemed to be the Serbs themselves, as large numbers of them were driven
from their ancestral homes in Croatia, Bosnia, and Kosovo, along with many
thousands of Roma, Gorani, and Jews. Yugoslavia was destroyed because it
refused to make the transition from socialism to free-market capitalism.39
GLOBAL BLOODLETTING
At one time or another U.S. leaders, both Democratic and Republican, have
supported brutal wars of attrition against popular insurgencies in Guatemala,
El Salvador, Haiti, Thailand, Vietnam, Cambodia, and Laos. In all these in-
stances, torture and death squad killings were common methods of counterin-
surgency.40 In 1999, President Clinton apologized for past U.S. support of
murderous right-wing governments in Guatemala that killed over 200,000
people. Such involvement “in violence and widespread repression was
wrong”; it was a “mistake,” and must never happen again, said the president,
even as he continued to support violent interventions against Iraq, Yugoslavia,
Haiti, Somalia, and other countries.41
From 1955 to 1975, U.S. forces dropped almost 8.4 million tons of
bombs and napalm, and 18 million gallons of chemical defoliants, destroying
over 40 percent of Vietnam’s plantations and orchards and over 40 percent of
its forest lands and much of its aquatic resources. Several million Vietnamese,
The U.S. Global Military Empire
147

Laotians, and Cambodians were killed; millions more were maimed or con-
taminated by toxic chemicals; almost 10 million were left homeless. Some
58,000 Americans lost their lives and hundreds of thousands more were
wounded or permanently disabled. But the war did benefit the top ten military
contractors (including DuPont, ITT, and Dow Chemical) who grossed $11.6
billion (in 1973 dollars). From 1979 into the 1990s, U.S. leaders aided the
maniacal Khmer Rouge in Cambodia in order to debilitate the socialist-
leaning government of that country, prolonging a civil war that took tens of
thousands of lives.42
U.S. rulers became more friendly toward countries like China, Russia,
Vietnam, Libya, and Mozambique when they departed from their collectivist
programs and threw their economies open to private investment. Mozambique,
for instance, privatized nearly fifteen hundred state-run firms, and removed gov-
ernment protections from many others, causing widespread unemployment and
deep impoverishment. In the former communist countries of Eastern Europe
and the Soviet Union, capitalist privatization brought the shutdown of much
industry, a drastic reduction of human services, and skyrocketing unemploy-
ment, poverty, crime, homelessness, prostitution, and other such blessings of the
free-market paradise.43
Colombia is another country that has a history of U.S.-financed repres-
sion, including the systematic murder by army, police, and paramilitary death
squads of tens of thousands of workers, students, farmers, and clergy who try
to organize against their overlords. From 1986 to today upwards of two thou-
sand labor unionists in Colombia have been assassinated by CIA-supported
death squads. Along with weaponry and helicopters, the U.S. military also
provides defoliation chemicals that wreaked havoc on Colombia’s environ-
ment and people.44 In countries like Indonesia, Nigeria, India, Burma, and
Colombia, U.S. transnational corporations have paid police and military to
beat, arrest, and in some cases kill labor unionists or residents who protested
against the ecological damage and community displacement caused by corpo-
rate enterprise.45
For all their talk about human rights, U.S. government leaders have used
force and violence to prop up “pro-West” regimes throughout the world.
Strikes have been outlawed, unions destroyed, wages cut, and dissidents mur-
dered.46 In the late 1980s, the U.S. national security state helped Mexico carry
out a campaign of extermination against progressive reformist elements.
Mexican authorities admitted that at least 275 political dissidents were tor-
tured and assassinated. One survivor described how she was raped, tortured,
and then forced to watch the torture of her husband and one-year-old
daughter.47
At times, elections are manipulated by U.S. interventionists with the use of
enormous sums, dishonest counts, and well-directed terror, as happened in
Jamaica, Chile, El Salvador, Panama, Yugoslavia, and elsewhere.48 But if elec-
tion outcomes are not satisfactory to U.S. leaders, they are declared “rigged”
and “fraudulent” (regardless of what international supervisors might say), as
happened in revolutionary Nicaragua in the 1980s, in Yugoslavia in the 1990s
and 2000, and in Haiti in 2000. Such governments are then targeted for
148
Chapter 11

destabilization by U.S. rulers. After reformist president Hugo Chavez was
elected in Venezuela and proceeded to use oil revenues for social programs
for the poor, the White House predictably denounced him as a dictator, a fire-
brand, and an aggrandizing enemy of the United States, rejecting his overtures
for friendly relations as deceptive ploys.
In the wake of the 11 September 2001 attacks on the World Trade Center
and the Pentagon (about which there remain many unanswered questions49),
President Bush invaded Afghanistan, vowing to capture Osama bin Laden, the
reputed terrorist perpetrator. Nine years later, the anti-U.S. resistance loomed
stronger than ever in Afghanistan as the United States became immersed more
deeply in a costly conflict with local extreme Islamic militants called the Taliban.
A number of informed observers—including U.S. Commander General David
Petraeus—were of the opinion that al Qaeda terrorists had long vacated
Afghanistan.
In 2002 the International Criminal Court (ICC) was ratified by about
one hundred nations to prosecute leaders of signatory states who were re-
sponsible for war crimes and human rights abuses. Because the United States
was not granted a blanket exemption from prosecution, Bush withdrew from
the treaty that set up the ICC. In addition, his administration announced it
would no longer be bound by the strictures of international law and previ-
ous treaties.50 By 2005 the United States further undermined the ICC by
pressuring member states to grant U.S. personnel immunity from prosecu-
tion. In May 2005, Angola became the hundredth state to sign such an
agreement. Had it not done so, it would have lost all U.S. aid. As a perma-
nent member of the United Nations Security Council, the United States also
could veto any case being referred to the ICC by the UN.
In March 2003, in the face of massive antiwar protests around the world
and at home, Bush launched an invasion of Iraq, claiming that Iraqi leader
Saddam Hussein possessed weapons of mass destruction, a charge that proved
to be without substance. The war was expected to be a quick and profitable
venture that would give U.S. petroleum interests direct access to Iraq’s vast oil
reserves, and get rid of the independent-minded leadership in that country.
However, almost four years later, the Iraq conflict showed no promise of let-
ting up, with U.S. casualties at upwards of forty-five hundred dead, over thirty
thousand wounded, and tens of thousands of Iraqis killed and many more
seriously injured, while much of Iraq was in ruins.
Extreme sectarian violence escalated in Iraq, as Shiite and Sunni Muslims
attacked U.S. forces and each other. Whole areas were contaminated by de-
pleted uranium from U.S. shells. Ordinary Iraqis took an additional blow
when U.S. authorities privatized most of the state-owned economy: prices sky-
rocketed, food and housing subsidies were abolished, and rations for the very
poor were cut.51
As of 2010, President Obama made moves to reduce the number of U.S.
troops in Iraq while escalating the conflict in Afghanistan under the question-
able notion that the terrorist organization al Qaeda was based in that country.
Obama also increased the U.S. military presence in Colombia and supported
the further expansion of NATO with its threatening encirclement of Russia.
The U.S. Global Military Empire
149

At the same time, he continued to threaten Iran, and intensified the sanctions
and trade embargoes against North Korea. In short, Obama was showing no
new modus operandi or bright new goals in the realm of foreign affairs.
If we define “imperialism” as that relationship in which the ruling inter-
ests of one country dominate, through use of economic and military power,
the land, labor, natural resources, finances, and politics of another country,
then the United States is the greatest imperialist power in history.
U.S. expansionism advances the opportunities for corporate global invest-
ment, and prevents the emergence of social orders that are revolutionary or re-
formist or even conservative nationalist (as in Iraq) if they utilize their resources
and labor in independent, but there are ways that diminish the profitability and
domain of the global empire. The profits of this empire flow into the hands of
a few hundred corporate and financial conglomerates, whereas the immense
costs are borne by the common people at home and throughout the world.
150
Chapter 11

C
H
A
P
T
E
R
12
Who Governs? Elites,
Labor, and Globalization
Those who control the wealth of society, the corporate plutocracy, exercise
trusteeship over educational institutions, foundations, think tanks, publica-
tions, and mass media, thereby greatly influencing society’s ideological out-
put and information flow. They also wield a power over political life far in
excess of their number. They shape economic policy through the control of
jobs and investments. They directly influence the electoral process with their
lavish campaign contributions and lobbying, and make it their business
to occupy the more important public offices or see that persons loyal to
them do.
THE RULING CLASS
What we have in the United States is a plutocracy (rule by and for the
wealthy). Not all wealthy persons are engaged in ruling. Most prefer to con-
centrate on other pursuits. The ruling class consists largely of politically active
members of the wealthy corporate class. Most top policymakers are drawn
from big corporations, prominent law firms, and, less frequently, from the
military and scientific establishments. Many are linked by social ties and com-
mon financial investments. Many attend the same elite schools and have
worked in the same corporations.1
Legend has it that many U.S. presidents rose from humble origins. In fact,
since the beginning of the Republic, the top leadership positions—including
the presidency, the cabinet, and the Supreme Court—have gone predomi-
nantly to White males from affluent families, with most of the remainder com-
ing from the top 5 or 10 percent of the population.2
151

The crucial factor, however, is not the class origin of leaders but the class
interest they serve. A rich person who manifests markedly progressive leanings
is not likely to be invited into a position of power. Conversely, persons from
relatively modest economic background such as Presidents Lyndon Johnson,
Ronald Reagan, Richard Nixon, and Bill Clinton rise to the top by showing
themselves to be faithful guardians of the upper circles. The question then is
not only who governs, but whose interests and whose agenda are served by
who governs, who benefits and who does not, questions that are the central
focus of this book.
The top politico-economic elites frequently gather to decide what candi-
dates to support and what policies to pursue at home and abroad, so to better
secure their common class interests. They meet at the Knickerbocker Club in
New York and various other well-served sites. For almost a century, many of
them have gathered every summer at Bohemian Grove, a vast luxurious male-
only retreat in a California redwood forest owned by the Bohemian Club of
San Francisco. The guest list has included every Republican U.S. president and
some Democratic ones, many top White House officials, and directors of large
corporate and financial institutions. “The collective corporate stock owner-
ship by [Bohemian Grove] members and guests conservatively exceeds
$100 billion.”3
Also playing an unofficial but influential role in policy formation are the
policy advisory groups with their networks of corporate and political nota-
bles. One of the more prominent is the Council on Foreign Relations (CFR),
started in 1918, now with almost forty-two hundred members—including
representatives from the Rockefeller, Morgan, and DuPont groups. The CFR
is funded by the nation’s top financial institutions, media networks, and
152
Chapter 12

corporations. CFR members have included U.S. presidents, cabinet officers,
members of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, CIA directors, Federal Reserve officers,
key members of Congress, an occasional college or university president, and
major media moguls. Almost one-third of CFR members are from the corporate
business sector and big banks, including directors from Citigroup, AIG, Disney/
ABC,
ExxonMobil,
Dow
Jones,
Goldman
Sachs,
ChevronTexaco,
and
Halliburton.4
Of the various policy groups, the Council on Foreign Relations is proba-
bly the most influential. It is simultaneously a think tank that exercises influ-
ence over foreign and economic policy and a membership group that gathers
together many of the leading players in politico-economic life. The CFR
helped create the Marshall Plan, the International Monetary Fund, and the
World Bank. It advocated a strategic nuclear arsenal and U.S. military inter-
vention in numerous countries including the massive escalation in Vietnam. In
1980, the CFR strongly recommended a sharp rise in arms spending and a
harder line toward the Soviets. All these positions became official policy; so
too the “war on terrorism,” a venture vigorously propagated in 2002 by
CFR scholars and spokespersons who produced many publications and made
hundreds of talk-show appearances to promote the invasion and occupation
of Iraq.5
Some CFR members also belong to the Trilateral Commission, an assem-
blage of political and business leaders from the major industrial countries, dedi-
cated to advancing global free-market capitalism. Other policy groups such as
the Committee for Economic Development, the Business Council, the Business
Roundtable, and the U.S. Chamber of Commerce, all composed largely of direc-
tors from giant companies, exercise considerable influence over policies that
impact on business interests—and on the lives of millions of us.6
The influence of these organizations inheres in the enormous economic
power they wield, and in their capacity—unique among social groups in this
country—to fill top government posts with persons directly from their ranks
or others recruited to serve corporate interests during both Democratic and
Republican administrations. Numerous top members of the Ford, Carter,
Reagan, Bush Sr., Clinton, Bush Jr., and Obama administrations have been
CFR members, Trilateralists, or chief executives of Wall Street investment
houses and banks, or just multimillionaires from corporate America. Some
also have been members of the Bilderberg Conference, an organization that
regularly brings together political leaders, financiers, and other notables from
around the world.
The Clinton, Bush Jr., and Obama administrations offered more gender
and racial variety than usually found but not much class diversity.
While still governor of Arkansas, Bill Clinton himself was a member of the
Council on Foreign Relations, the Trilateral Commission, and the Bilderberg
Conference, having attended the latter in 1991 with financier David
Rockefeller. How Clinton emerged as a presidential candidate is itself a
story. At a private meeting in New York, in June 1991, top Wall Street
executives, mostly linked to the Democratic Party, held a series of meetings
with presidential aspirants in what one organizer called “an elegant cattle
Who Governs? Elites, Labor, and Globalization
153

show.” They questioned Arkansas governor Bill Clinton, who impressed the
executives “with his willingness to embrace free trade and free markets.”7
Clinton became their candidate, and in short order was designated and trea-
ted by the corporate-owned media as the “frontrunner” for the Democratic
presidential nomination—and was treated as such.
After running on a platform promising sweeping changes, President Obama
went on to appoint a number of establishment policy elites, including Secretary
of the Treasury Timothy Geithner, erstwhile Republican, a former director of the
IMF and once president of the New York Federal Reserve, a member of the CFR,
and a member of the Group of Thirty (a highly selective policy consultative group
in Washington, D.C.). Another Obama appointment was Lawrence Summers
as director of the White House National Economic Council. Summers formally
was chief economist at the World Bank and president of Harvard University.
Plutocratic interests are served also by well-financed conservative think
tanks such as the Heritage Foundation and Project for a New American
Century. They produce studies showing that America’s main ailment is gov-
ernment regulations, and the cure is laissez-faire economics, globalization,
abolition of human services, and no taxes on business and wealthy investors.
Richly funded right-wingers recruit and train cadres of ideologically commit-
ted writers and publicists who infiltrate government agencies, congressional
and lobbying staffs, and news agencies, issuing a steady stream of materials
to advance the corporate free-trade, free-market agenda.
LABOR BESIEGED
Through most of U.S. history, the federal government has been friendly to
business and hostile to labor. National security agencies such as the FBI have
long spied on unions, usually in cooperation with management.8 Few if any
labor leaders occupy top decision-making posts in government. Few if any hold
command positions in universities and foundations. None own TV or radio
networks or major news syndicates.
In 1935 working people won a major victory when a law was passed set-
ting up the National Labor Relations Board (NLRB) as an independent federal
agency to protect labor’s right to collective bargaining. In the years that fol-
lowed, union membership increased dramatically and workers across the
country won wage gains amounting to billions of dollars. Then, in 1947, a
Republican-controlled Congress passed the Taft-Hartley Act, which imposed
restrictions on strikes, boycotts, and labor organizing. Union membership
has steadily shrunk from 35 percent of the workforce to about 12 percent. If
we don’t count public employees and consider only the private sector, union
membership declined to 7.9 percent, lower than during the 1930s.9
As of 2010, twenty-two states enforce right-to-work laws that allow anti-
union workers in a firm to enjoy the same wages and benefits that the union
negotiates on behalf of its dues-paying members. The union is also required to
defend the nonunion workers in grievances with management. This freeload-
ing constitutes a drain on union resources.
154
Chapter 12

More than a thousand consulting firms instruct employers on how to pre-
vent workers from organizing and how to get rid of existing unions. The
bosses can raise all sorts of questions to delay the election for months. They
can inundate workers with anti-union propaganda, force them to attend anti-
union meetings including one-on-one sessions with their supervisors, and ply
them with gifts and promises. In contrast, union organizers are denied access
to the work site.
Company bosses have used armed thugs to break union organizing efforts
by creating a climate of violence and intimidation. During union election
drives, management can threaten to close the plant or move it elsewhere if a
union is voted in. When employees at one Wal-Mart store unionized,
Wal-Mart closed the store down, suddenly claiming it was unprofitable. After
eleven Wal-Mart meat cutters in Texas voted for a union, the company elimi-
nated meat cutting in all its stores and turned to prepackaged meat.10
Every year thousands of workers are unlawfully fired for attempting to
organize, although management always gives other reasons such as “poor
performance.” If workers are immigrants, they run the risk of deportation
should they try to form a union.11
Employers can use NLRB procedures to delay elections for months, even
years, prolonging every hearing, appealing every unfavorable decision in the
courts. When unions do win recognition, management may then refuse to
negotiate an acceptable contract and will challenge the election results before
the NLRB and then into the courts. The NLRB will sometimes spend years
investigating minor or frivolous management charges. By the time the com-
pany is ordered to bargain a contract, many union supporters may have quit
or been fired; others may have lost hope or been intimidated into silence, and
new employees have been screened for union sympathy.12
In 2005 a Republican-controlled NLRB ruled that an employer can pro-
hibit workers from fraternizing on or off duty, which makes it nigh on impos-
sible for workers to gather and talk about forming a union, for fear of being
fired. Such a ruling violates the very intent of the National Labor Relations
Act: the worker’s right to collective action, not to mention the constitutional
right to lawfully associate with whomever one pleases. The NLRB also de-
cided that temporary workers could not bargain alongside permanent workers
without the employer’s consent (not likely to be granted). In addition it ruled
that owners did not need to provide records to verify their claims of not being
financially able to meet contract conditions.13
Often management will refuse to renew an existing contract when it ex-
pires. The company may deliberately deny employees access to the work site,
what is known as a lockout. Then it hires permanent replacements (“scabs”)
to break the union. The threat of scab replacement has discouraged strike
activity and further hampers the right to unionize.
By substantial majorities of almost two to one, public support of labor
unions continues to be strong.14 Union membership has declined not because
unions are so unpopular but because of the repressive, one-sided conditions
under which organized labor has been forced to operate.
Who Governs? Elites, Labor, and Globalization
155

UNIONS AND THE GOOD FIGHT
Organized labor usually cannot match business in spending power and politi-
cal muscle. In recent elections, big business outspent labor by twenty-four to
one.15 If we add the huge sums expended by individual fat cats and wealthy
candidates, the ratio is even more lopsided. Far from having too much power,
unions have been fighting for their lives against off-shoring (exporting jobs to
lower-wage markets abroad), strikebreakers, and hostile rulings from courts
and the NLRB.
In the 1940s and 1950s government witch-hunting purged the labor
movement of communists. The Reds were among the most effective and dedi-
cated organizers. Maurice Zeitlin found that communist-led unions were more
democratic than anticommunist ones. They consistently secured better con-
tracts for workers and gave stronger support to minority representation.16
We sometimes hear that labor unions are corrupt and undemocratic. In-
deed, some union leaders vote themselves sumptuous salaries and collude
with management and gangland thugs to intimidate the workforce. But such
corruption tends to be concentrated in a relatively small number of locals.
And management readily tolerates corrupt union leaders and mobsters who
steal from the union treasury, intimidate workers, sign “sweetheart contracts”
favorable to management, and do nothing to help the rank and file and every-
thing to help themselves. Owners can live with these kinds of plundered dys-
functional unions. They most dislike unions run by honest and dedicated
leaders who fight hard to protect the interests of their rank and file. The own-
ers themselves are no strangers to crime and corruption in the form of bribes,
kickbacks, tax evasion, toxic dumping, insider trading, stock swindles, and
the pilfering of workers’ pension funds. Department of Labor statistics on
“labor racketeering” reveal that most of the fines are imposed not on labor
leaders but on businesses that defraud unions. More often than not, the un-
ions are the victims not the criminals.17
Unions have been criticized for causing recessions. By driving up labor
costs, they force companies to mechanize, cut back on jobs, and relocate to
cheaper labor markets, it is said. But union strength correlates with prosperity
rather than with poverty and recession. In states where unions have been tra-
ditionally weak (for example, Alabama, South Carolina, and Mississippi), the
standard of living has been lower than in states where labor has a stronger
organized presence.18 Wages in the United States compare favorably to wages
in Third World countries that have very weak or nonexistent unions. But U.S.
wages compare unfavorably to better-unionized nations such as Canada and
Western Europe. Unionized workers average 26 percent higher wages than
non-union workers in this country, and are more likely to have better benefits
and safer work conditions.19
A strong labor movement correlates not only with prosperity but with de-
mocracy. Countries in which labor is well-organized enjoy more human rights
than countries where unions are nonexistent. Unions. They are one of the few
institutions in which ordinary working people can give an organized response
156
Chapter 12

to the issues affecting their lives. The rank and file participate in union elec-
tions at higher rates than in national elections. In most unions the entire mem-
bership gets to vote on a contract that the union leaders negotiate with
management.
Organized labor has been at the forefront of the fight against child labor
and for the eight-hour day and safer work conditions. Unions have played an
important role in the passage of major civil rights legislation and have sup-
ported single-payer health insurance, affordable housing, mass transportation,
consumer protections, public education, and progressive tax rates. They have
opposed the many “free trade” agreements (discussed below) that circumvent
democratic sovereignty. Unions have backed environmental controls and
peace movements in coalitions with other organizations. Some of the more
progressive unions broke with the militaristic Cold War mentality of the
AFL-CIO leadership and opposed U.S. intervention against reformist and
revolutionary movements in Central America and elsewhere.
For labor unions to reverse their long decline, they need repeal of the laws
that hamstring their ability to organize and win decent contracts. The NLRB
must once again become an agency that defends—rather than undermines—
the right to collective bargaining. Union leaders need to invest the vast sums
in their pension funds in social programs beneficial to their rank and file. And
AFL-CIO leaders must stop promoting a U.S. foreign policy that supports op-
pressive regimes and preserves cheap labor markets in the Third World—to
which U.S. jobs are then exported.20
Human labor is the basis of our well-being. It deserves far better treat-
ment than it is getting.
HOW GLOBALIZATION UNDERMINES DEMOCRACY
The goal of the transnational corporation is to become truly transnational,
poised above the sovereign power of any particular nation while being ser-
viced by all nations. Cyril Siewert, a Colgate Palmolive executive, could have
been speaking for all transnationals when he remarked, “The United States
doesn’t have an automatic call on our [corporation’s] resources. There is no
mindset that puts this country first.”21 What comes first is the company’s
profits and investment opportunities.
One way to elevate the giant transnationals above the sovereign power of
democratic constituencies is through “free trade” agreements such as the
North American Free Trade Agreement (NAFTA) and the General Agreement
on Tariffs and Trade (GATT), and similar agreements. As presented to the
public, free trade does away with irksome regulatory laws, integrates national
economies into a global trade system, and thereby creates more trade, more
jobs and prosperity, a process called “globalization” that is treated as a natu-
ral development beneficial to all.
The GATT agreements created the World Trade Organization (WTO), an
international association of over 120 signatory nations. The WTO has the
authority to overrule or dilute any laws of any nation deemed to burden the
Who Governs? Elites, Labor, and Globalization
157

investment and market prerogatives of transnational corporations. It sets up
three-member
panels
composed
of
“trade
specialists”
who
exercise
a
decision-making power superior to that of any nation, thereby ensuring the
supremacy of international finance capital. These panelists are drawn mostly
from the corporate world; they meet in secret, are elected by no one, and
operate with no conflict-of-interest strictures. Their function is to allow the
transnational companies to do as they wish in pursuit of profit.
No free-trade restrictions are directed against private business; almost all
are against governments. Signatory governments must treat foreign companies
the same as domestic ones, and honor all corporate patent claims made on the
world’s natural resources. Should a country refuse to change its laws when a
“free trade” panel so dictates, it can be fined or deprived of needed markets
and materials.22
Free-trade edicts forced Japan to accept greater pesticide residues in
imported food, prevented Guatemala from outlawing deceptive advertising
on baby food, and suppressed a Guatemalan law that encouraged mothers
to breast-feed their children (the law interfered with baby-food product
opportunities). Free-trade rulings eliminated the ban on asbestos and on
endangered-species products, and ruled against marine-life protections in
various countries. The European Union’s prohibition on the importation of
hormone-ridden U.S. beef had overwhelming popular support throughout
Europe, but a three-member WTO panel decided the ban was a violation of
free trade. Likewise with the European ban on imports of genetically modi-
fied crops from the United States, and other food import regulations based
on health concerns. The WTO overturned a portion of the U.S. Clean Air
Act banning certain additives in gasoline because the ban restricted imports
from foreign refineries. And it overturned that portion of the U.S. Endan-
gered Species Act forbidding the import of shrimp caught with nets that
failed to protect sea turtles.23
Free-trade agreements allow multinationals to impose monopoly prop-
erty rights on indigenous and communal agriculture. In this way corporate
agribusiness can better penetrate local food-producing communities and
monopolize their resources. There is the example of the neem tree, whose
extracts contain naturally pesticidal and medicinal properties. Cultivated
for centuries in India, the tree has attracted the attention of various West-
ern pharmaceutical companies. The pharmaceuticals filed patents that gave
them exclusive control over the marketing of neem tree products, a ruling
that is being reluctantly enforced in India, causing mass protests by farm-
ers. Tens of thousands of erstwhile independent Indian farmers must now
work, if at all, for the powerful pharmaceuticals on terms set by the
companies.
In a similar vein, the WTO ruled that the U.S. corporation RiceTec has
the patent rights to all the many varieties of basmati rice, grown for centuries
by India’s farmers. It also ruled that a Japanese corporation had exclusive
rights throughout the world to market curry powder. In these instances,
158
Chapter 12

“free trade” means monopoly corporate control. Such developments caused
Malaysian prime minister Mahathir Mohamad to observe:
Theft of genetic resources by western biotech TNCs [transnational corporations]
enables them to make huge profits by producing patented genetic mutations of
these same materials. What depths have we sunk to in the global marketplace
when nature’s gifts to the poor may not be protected but their modifications by
the rich become exclusive property?
If the current behavior of the rich countries is anything to go by, globaliza-
tion simply means the breaking down of the borders of countries so that those
with the capital and the goods will be free to dominate the markets.24
Globalization has even given us “water markets.” Universally recognized
as a public resource and a human right, water sources are now being priva-
tized, sold to corporations who then maintain exclusive rights to sell the water
as a profitable commodity, in some cases even prohibiting local residents from
using barrels to collect their own rainwater.25
Under the free-trade agreements, public services can be eliminated because
they cause “lost market opportunities” for business, or create an unfair subsidy.
To offer one instance: the less expensive, single-payer automobile insurance pro-
gram proposed by the province of Ontario, Canada, was declared “unfair
competition.” Ontario could have its public auto insurance only if it paid U.S.
insurance companies what they estimated would be their present and future losses
in Ontario auto insurance sales, a prohibitive cost for the province. Thus the
Who Governs? Elites, Labor, and Globalization
159

citizens of Ontario were not allowed to exercise their democratic sovereign power
to institute an alternative not-for-profit, single-payer auto insurance system.
Under NAFTA, the U.S.-based Ethyl Corporation sued the Canadian gov-
ernment for $250 million in “lost business opportunities” and “interference
with trade” because Canada banned MMT, an Ethyl-produced gasoline
additive considered carcinogenic by Canadian officials. Fearing they would
lose the case, Canadian officials agreed to lift the ban on MMT, pay Ethyl
$10 million in compensation, and issue a (misleading) public statement calling
MMT “safe.” California also banned the unhealthy additive; this time a
Canadian-based Ethyl company sued California under NAFTA for placing
an unfair burden on free trade.26
International free-trade agreements like GATT, NAFTA, and the Central
American Free Trade Agreement (CAFTA) have hastened the corporate acqui-
sition of local markets, squeezing out smaller businesses and worker collec-
tives. At the same time thousands of small companies and farms in other
countries have been forced out of business. Mexico, for instance, was flooded
with cheap, high-tech, mass-produced corn and dairy products from giant U.S.
agribusiness firms. These firms are so heavily subsidized by the U.S. govern-
ment that they easily undersold Mexican farmers, driving 1.5 million of them
off the land and sending their local distributors into bankruptcy. Before
NAFTA, Mexico was self-sufficient in food; now it has to import food.27
Free-trade globalization has eroded farm incomes and destroyed rural
livelihoods, doubling the number of people living in poverty in Mexico. The
number of malnourished people across the entire Third World grew by an av-
erage of 4.5 million a year. And over 1 million jobs were lost in the United
States, including many in family farming.28
“Free” trade is not fair trade; it benefits the rich interests in all nations at
the expense of the rest of us, circumventing what little democratic sovereignty
we have been able to achieve. “Globalization” means turning the clock back
on many twentieth-century reforms that infringe upon the prerogatives of in-
vestment capital. Under the free-trade accords, there is no freedom to boycott
products, no prohibitions against child labor, no guaranteed living wage, and
no health and safety protections—not when such things are judged as interfer-
ing with market opportunities.
We Americans are told that to remain competitive in a global economy,
we must increase our output while reducing our labor and production costs;
in other words, work harder for less. We must introduce more wage conces-
sions and cuts in human services, more deregulation and privatization. Only
then might we cope with the impersonal forces of globalization that are
sweeping us along.
In fact, there is nothing impersonal about these forces. “Free trade” agree-
ments are consciously planned by big business and its government minions in
pursuit of a deregulated world economy that undermines all democratic checks
upon business practices, and leaves all the world’s population in the merciless
embrace of transnational free-market capitalism. So the people of the world
are finding it increasingly difficult to get their governments to impose protective
160
Chapter 12

regulations or develop new forms of public-sector production out of fear of
being overruled by some self-selected international trade panel.29
“Free trade” treaties are in violation of the U.S. Constitution, as suggested
by the following:
•
The Constitution’s preamble makes clear that sovereign power rests with
the people: “We the People of the United States … do ordain and estab-
lish this Constitution for the United States of America.”
•
Article I, Section 1 of the Constitution reads, “All legislative Powers
herein granted shall be vested in a Congress of the United States.”
•
Article I, Section 7 gives the president (not some trade council) the power
to veto a law, subject to being overridden by a two-thirds vote in
Congress.
•
Article III gives adjudication and review powers to a Supreme Court and
other federal courts as ordained by Congress.
•
The Tenth Amendment to the Constitution states: “The powers not dele-
gated to the United States by the Constitution, nor prohibited by it to the
States, are reserved to the States respectively, or to the people.”
•
There is nothing in the entire Constitution that allows—and much that
disallows—an international trade panel to exercise supreme review
powers overriding the constitutionally mandated decisions of the legisla-
tive, executive, and judicial branches.
True, Article VII says that the Constitution, federal laws, and treaties
“shall be the supreme Law of the land,” but certainly this was not intended
to include treaties that overrode the sovereign democratic power of the people
and their representatives.
In any case, the trade agreements do not have the status of treaties. To
exclude the Senate from deliberations, they were called “agreements” not
treaties, a semantic ploy that enabled President Clinton to bypass the two-
thirds treaty ratification vote in the Senate and avoid any treaty amendment
process. The World Trade Organization was approved by a lame-duck ses-
sion of Congress held after the 1994 elections. No one running in that elec-
tion uttered a word to voters about putting the U.S. government under a
perpetual obligation to ensure that national laws do not conflict with WTO
rulings.
What is being undermined is not only a lot of good laws dealing with en-
vironment, public services, labor standards, and consumer protection, but the
very right to legislate such laws. Our democratic sovereignty is being surren-
dered to secretive plutocratic trade panels that presume to exercise a power
greater than that of the people and their courts and legislatures. What we
have is a coup d’état by international finance capital. Corporate property
and investment rights—including the “intangible property of expected prof-
its”—are elevated to a supreme position over all democratic rights and human
needs. The new free-trade globalism makes no provision for popular represen-
tation, no public forum for debate and decision, no elections, no institutional-
ized democratic checks to hold decision makers accountable.
Who Governs? Elites, Labor, and Globalization
161

Designed to leave the world’s economic destiny to the tender mercy of
bankers and multinational corporations, globalization is a logical extension
of imperialism, a victory of empire over republic, corporate capital over de-
mocracy. In recent times however, given popular protests, several multilat-
eral trade agreements have been stalled or voted down. Over the years,
militant protests against free trade have taken place in scores of nations.
More and more, people throughout the world are resisting the loss of demo-
cratic accountability that masquerades under the banner of “globalization”
and “free trade.” And national leaders are thinking twice before signing on
to new trade agreements. Meanwhile, existing free-trade agreements do not
need to be “revised” but repealed, and instead of “free trade” we need fair
trade, that is, trade that serves the interests of the many rather than the cu-
pidity of the few.
162
Chapter 12

C
H
A
P
T
E
R
13
Mass Media: For the
Many, by the Few
The mainstream media claim to be free and independent, objective and neutral,
the “watchdogs of democracy.” A closer look suggests that they behave more
like the lapdogs of plutocracy.
HE WHO PAYS THE PIPER
The major news media or press (the terms are used interchangeably here) are an
inherent component of corporate America. Only six giant conglomerates—Time
Warner, General Electric, Viacom, Bertelsmann, Walt Disney, and News Corpo-
ration (down from twenty-three in 1989)—own most of the print publications,
movie studios, record labels, and radio and television programming in the United
States, with additional holdings abroad. About 85 percent of the daily newspaper
circulation in this country belongs to a few giant chains, and the trend in owner
concentration continues unabated. All but a handful of the 150 movies distrib-
uted to mass markets each year are from six major studios. Big banks and
corporations are among the top stockholders of mainstream media. Their repre-
sentatives sit on the boards of all major print and broadcast media.1
After heavy lobbying and campaign donations, the broadcast industry
secured passage of the 1996 Telecommunications Act. Under this law compa-
nies that previously were restricted to owning only one radio and one TV outlet
in a local market now could own up to six radio and two television stations in
that one area. Most of the nation’s thousands of radio stations were bought
up by large conglomerates, the biggest being the right-wing Clear Channel
chain with nine hundred stations. With fewer independent stations came less
public-interest programming and more syndicated right-wing “hate radio”
163

hosts who rail against liberals, environmentalists, peace demonstrators, socia-
lists, and gays.
Media bosses do not hesitate to kill stories they dislike and in other ways
inject their own preferences into the news. As one group of investigators con-
cluded years ago: “The owners and managers of the press determine which
person, which facts, which version of the facts, and which ideas shall reach
the public.”2 In recent times, media bosses have refused to run stories or com-
mentaries that reflected favorably on single-payer health insurance, or un-
favorably on “free trade” globalization and U.S. military intervention in
other countries. In 2004, through its many radio stations, Clear Channel
sponsored jingoistic “Rally for America” events around the country in sup-
port of the U.S. invasion of Iraq. That same year Walt Disney Co. blocked
its Miramax division from distributing a documentary by Academy Award
winner Michael Moore because it offered an unflattering picture of President
Bush. Sinclair Group, the largest owner of local TV stations in the country,
censored its ABC affiliates for reading the names of U.S. soldiers killed in
Iraq (because it might dampen support for the war). Sinclair sends recorded
right-wing editorial commentary to its affiliates to be broadcast as local
news, and regularly makes large contributions to Republican candidates.3
Fox News, part of the vast media empire owned by right-wing billionaire
Rupert Murdoch, refused to air an advertisement critical of Samuel Alito
when he was being considered for the Supreme Court. The ad cited examples
of’ the ideologically driven conservative opinions Alito promulgated while
serving as an appeals court judge. The Fox station in New York also refused
to broadcast a Democratic candidate’s ad because it poked fun at President
Bush and therefore was deemed “disrespectful.” Fox News reportedly quizzes
journalistic applicants to be sure they are registered Republicans. Daily
memos come down from the corporate office at Fox telling reporters and com-
mentators what the story of the day should be and what point of view was
expected when reporting it.4
Corporate advertisers are another powerful group who leave their political
imprint on the media. As erstwhile president of CBS Frank Stanton remarked,
“Since we are advertiser-supported we must take into account the general objec-
tive and desires of advertisers as a whole.”5 To give one example among many:
A consumer reporter was fired by KCBS-TV in Los Angeles after automotive
advertisers repeatedly complained to his bosses about his critical reports on
car safety.
Corporate sponsors might cancel advertising accounts not only when they
feel that the reporting reflects poorly on their product, but when they perceive
a “liberal” drift in news and commentary. To give one example, the prize-
winning Kwitney Report, a PBS news show that revealed U.S. backing of
death squads and dictators in Central America and other hot issues, went off
the air because it could not procure corporate funding.6
The media bosses control the journalists, not the other way around. Jour-
nalists can sometimes slip critical information into stories, but if they persist,
their reports are spiked, they are reassigned, and soon their careers are at risk.
For reporting on the abuses of corporate America, Frances Cerra incurred the
164
Chapter 13

ire of her New York Times editors and was transferred to a Long Island beat.
There she wrote articles on the Shoreham nuclear power plant that ran
counter to the Times’ pronuclear stance. Her final story was suppressed as
“biased”; it reported that the plant was in serious financial trouble—which
proved true. Cerra was never given another assignment.7
The managing editor of the Santa Fe New Mexican, David Mitchell, was
sacked for running a series on the dangers of the Los Alamo National Labo-
ratory. Unfortunately for him, the paper’s owner was heavily involved in pro-
moting nuclear technology. Tom Gutting, city editor of the Texas City Sun,
was fired for criticizing the White House’s performance in the hours after the
9/11 attack. So was columnist Dan Guthrie of the Daily Courier in Oregon.
In a front-page editorial Guthrie’s bosses announced that criticism of the
president and his associates “needs to be responsible and appropriate.”8
Sometimes a journalist can be penalized for off-duty activities or com-
ments. The San Francisco Chronicle fired a columnist for participating in a
mass demonstration against the U.S. invasion of Iraq—even though Califor-
nia law explicitly states that employers cannot forbid or prevent employees
from participating in political activities. After correspondent Ashleigh Ban-
field suggested at a campus talk that news coverage of the Iraq war was sani-
tized and Americans were not getting the whole story, her NBC contract was
not renewed.9 Meanwhile media owners attend political fundraisers and state
dinners, contribute to election campaigns, and socialize with high-ranking
officeholders, but this is not seen as violating journalistic standards of
neutrality and objectivity.
Mass Media: For the Many, by the Few
165

Newspeople who consistently support the worldview of global capitalism
and the national security state are the ones more likely to be rewarded with
choice assignments, bonuses, and promotions. Additional blandishments,
such as lucrative speaker’s fees from moneyed interests, often blunt the recipi-
ent’s critical edge. One might recall how the Shah of Iran, a brutal dictator
detested by most of his people, received a glowing press in the United States.
For twenty-five years, over five hundred newspeople received the Shah’s gifts
and were invited to his lavish parties. The few who wrote critically of him
were left off his gift list.
When ABC correspondent John Stossel emerged as a laissez-faire ideo-
logue, announcing that “it is my job to explain the beauties of the free mar-
ket,” his career took off. An ardent supporter of chemicalized agribusiness,
Stossel claimed that organic food “could kill you” and catastrophic global
warming is a “myth.” He called for the privatization of Social Security, the
curbing of environmental education, and the celebration of greed as a good
thing for the economy. Instead of being challenged for his one-sided views,
Stossel was given a seven-figure contract and a starring role in numerous
ABC-TV specials.10
The major networks claim their news shows are “fair” and “balanced.”
But one study found that conservative guests on network opinion shows out-
numbered liberal ones by three to one. (Leftist radicals were too scarce as net-
work guests even to be counted.)11 In 2006, a supposedly liberal network,
CNN, hired right-wing opinion maker and gambling addict William Bennett
as a political commentator. More recently, Fox hired Glenn Beck, a right-
wing radio host. Beck once called the indigent victims of Hurricane Katrina
“scumbags,” and talked of killing dissidents he disliked. He said he “under-
stood” a mass killer in Alabama who must be like millions of Americans frus-
trated for being shut down by the liberal elites. Beck also called President
Obama “a racist” who had “a deep-seated hatred for White people.”12
Another Fox commentator, Bill O’Reilly, denounced critics of the U.S. in-
vasion and occupation of Iraq as “traitors” who along with “all those clowns
at the liberal radio network” should be arrested by the FBI and put “in chains.”13
On Fox News the conservative-liberal imbalance was the most pronounced of
any network. The more people watched Fox News, the more misinformed
they were. Fox viewers (an astounding 80 percent) were the most likely to be-
lieve one or more of the following: (a) Iraq was linked to the al Qaeda terror-
ist network, (b) Iraq had weapons of mass destruction, and (c) world opinion
favored the U.S. invasion of Iraq—all demonstrably false statements.14
On rare occasions, the news media will go against a strong corporate in-
terest, as with the exposés on how the tobacco industry conspired to hook
people on smoking by inserting extra nicotine in cigarettes, and how smoking
caused cancer. We knew about the link between smoking and cancer for over
half a century. But the press and policymakers gave the issue their attention
only after a growing public outcry and numerous class action suits against
Big Tobacco—and after the tobacco companies were banned from advertising
in the major media. A host of other consumer issues such as carcinogens in
cosmetics, radioactive materials in products, the use of industrial sludge as
166
Chapter 13

fertilizers, and the unsafe quality of many medications, along with manifold
issues relating to the environment, still do not get much exposure.
THE IDEOLOGICAL MONOPOLY
Conservative commentators repeatedly accuse the media of “liberal” bias. In
fact most daily newspapers offer an editorial perspective ranging from blandly
centrist to ultraconservative. Over the last seventy years the Republican presi-
dential candidate received more newspaper endorsements than the Democrat
in sixteen out of eighteen elections. Surveys show that Washington journalists,
though more liberal on “cultural issues” such as abortion and gay rights, are
more than twice as likely as the general public to support corporate free trade
and far more in favor of trimming Medicare and Social Security.15
So nervous are journalists about being called “liberal” that they take
pains to criticize or ignore progressive leaders while shining up to rightists.
Consider how the liberal media collaborated in the campaign waged to im-
peach President Clinton for lying about a sexual tryst he had with an intern,
an act that itself was not unlawful. Then compare that to how no major media
called for President Bush’s impeachment for the momentous lies he repeat-
edly uttered in order to justify his aggression against Iraq—claiming that
Iraq was linked to al Qaeda and that Saddam Hussein had weapons of
mass destruction—lies of immense political dimension.
The “expert” guests appearing on newscasts are predominantly govern-
ment officials (or former officials), corporate heads, and members of conserva-
tive think tanks. Likewise TV pundits, radio talk-show hosts, and syndicated
columnists are predominantly and often vehemently conservative. Both radio
and television are awash with the likes of Rush Limbaugh and Michael Savage
who aggressively pound home a message of reaction and hostility toward any-
thing resembling liberal reform.
Of the “liberal” commentators who are hailed as representing the “Left,”
many are little more than “pro-capitalist, middle-of-the-road tepid centrist” as
former New York Times syndicated “liberal” columnist Anthony Lewis can-
didly described himself. These tepid souls are nowhere as far left as the con-
servatives are far right. The whole left portion of the political spectrum is
mostly shut out of the mainstream media.
Still, critical information does make its way into the media—to the great
annoyance of conservatives. Much of it is cited in various chapters of this
book What often is missing is any cohesive analysis of the significance of
that information. And in many instances even the most basic information is
lacking if it reflects unfavorably on those with significant economic power.
Consider the media’s presentation of these topics:
Ideology. For at least the last thirty years the ultraconservatives have en-
joyed a near monopoly in the propagation of political ideology, constantly
pounding home this message: don’t look to government to solve our problems;
government is the problem; the free market would solve our ills were it not for
bureaucratic meddling from Washington; the environment is doing fine; if the
tree huggers had their way all our corporations would be closed and we would
Mass Media: For the Many, by the Few
167

be out of jobs; we have the best health care system in the world—the best of
everything for that matter; America was founded as a Christian nation and we
should keep it that way; America faces a world filled with enemies who are only
waiting to pounce upon us; the latte-sipping liberal elites look scornfully upon
our American way of life; they seek to divest us of our family values while im-
posing their secular amorality upon us; liberals prefer to see hard-working
Americans exploited by welfare chiselers rather than teaching people to be
self-reliant; liberals bring us divorce, greedy labor unions, collectivism, a weak
military, socialism, gun control, and policies of “tax spend, tax spend.”
Through a process of relentless and repetitive messaging, the reactionaries
pounded home the above themes. With enormous sums of money made avail-
able to them by rich corporate right-wingers, they formed whole new net-
works like Fox and the Christian Broadcasting Network. They started
numerous new magazines and other publications. They bought up hundreds
of radio stations and sponsored mean-spirited reactionary commentators
who were nothing but well-paid propagandists.16
All this time the Democrats and liberals have done little by way of developing
a “media message machine” that could counter the right-wing propaganda jugger-
naut. They address themselves to this or that issue, as such issues arise, but they do
little about offering general principles and salient information to the public.
Economy. News reports on business rely almost entirely on business
sources. The overall corporate economy is more celebrated in the abstract
than critically examined in its specifics. The dumping of corporate diseconomies
onto the public, the outsourcing of capital and jobs to low-wage countries, the
increasing accumulation and concentration of wealth for the superrich, the ten-
dency toward chronic recession, inflation, and underemployment, and other such
developments are treated superficially, if at all. Poverty remains an unexplained
phenomenon in our capitalist paradise.
Whether portraying the poor as unworthy idlers or innocent unfortunates,
the press seldom gives critical attention to the market forces that create and
victimize low-income people. The press has failed to explain the real impact of
the national debt and how it generates an upward redistribution of income and
undermines public-sector spending. Almost nothing is said in the mainstream
media about how corporate America regularly puts profits before people, or
how “free trade” globalism is really monopoly corporate globalism.
Most media commentators were unwilling to see chronic overproduction
and depressed wages as having anything to do with the severe economic crisis
of 2008–2009, preferring to blame the recession on the malfeasance of indi-
vidual speculators rather than on the systemic dysfunction of an unregulated
untrammeled capitalism.
Elections. Media coverage of electoral campaigns focuses mostly on the
contest per se: who will run, who will win, and what campaign ploys are play-
ing well with the public. Relatively little attention is given to policy content.
News commentators act more like theater critics, reviewing the candidate’s per-
formance and style. One study found that more than two-thirds of campaign
coverage centers on insider strategy and political maneuvering rather than sub-
stantive
issues.17 Progressive
candidates find themselves
dependent
for
168
Chapter 13

exposure on mass media that are owned by the same conservative interests they
are criticizing. Hoping to educate the public on the issues, they discover that the
media allow little or no opportunity for them to make their position under-
standable to larger publics that might be willing to listen. The sheer paucity of
information can make meaningful campaign dialogue nearly impossible.
The major media ignored or summarily dismissed the many questions
about widespread fraud in the 2000 and 2004 presidential elections, swiftly
declaring a Republican winner despite flagrant irregularities in both contests
(see the next chapter).18 The media’s systemic ideological role has been to pre-
serve the legitimacy of a national election that some critics have shown to be
demonstrably stolen.
Crime. The press has helped create—the “lock-’em-up” crime craze
throughout America. Because of the increasing coverage that both the news
and entertainment media gave to crime, the number of respondents who
ranked crime as the prime problem jumped sixfold—even as the nationwide
homicide rate actually dropped by 20 percent.19 Corporate crime however is
another story, largely an underreported one. The media will denounce partic-
ularly greedy and corrupt CEOs—the ones who get caught—while leaving
untouched the free-market corporate system that produces them.
Affirmative Action. Instead of treating affirmative action as an attempt to
redress long-standing injustices, the media has frequently overlooked the per-
sistence of racism and sexism in many walks of life, leaving people with the
impression that African Americans and women are enjoying special privileges
at the expense of White males.20
Labor. Most newspapers have large staffs for business news but not a sin-
gle labor reporter. Reporters seldom enlist labor’s views on national questions
whereas corporate leaders are interviewed regularly. Ordinary workers are
virtually never treated as knowledgeable sources about work issues. There
are no daily or periodic reports about the number of workers killed or injured
on the job. Unions are usually noticed only when they go on strike, but the
issues behind the strike, such as occupational safety or loss of benefits, are
rarely acknowledged. The misleading impression is that labor simply wants
too much. Unions make “demands” while management makes “offers.”
Political Protests and Globalization. Citizens who exercise their demo-
cratic rights under the First Amendment by launching protests against official
policy often are given short shrift. The hundreds of thousands who have dem-
onstrated around the world against “free trade” treaties have been character-
ized as violence-prone zealots and “flat-earthers.” The major media treat
globalization as a benign and natural process, rather than a transnational
corporate strategy to roll back public regulations and democratic protections
in countries around the world. With good reason did David Rockefeller, dur-
ing a speech at the 1991 Bilderberg Conference, declare: “We are grateful to
the Washington Post, the New York Times, Time Magazine and other great
publications whose directors have attended our meetings and respected their
promises of discretion for almost forty years. It would have been impossible
for us to develop our plan for the world if we had been subjected to the lights
of publicity during those years.”21
Mass Media: For the Many, by the Few
169

Global Empire and War. Reports about U.S. involvement in foreign affairs
usually rely heavily on government releases. The media support U.S. military inter-
ventions into other countries, accepting with little critical examination official as-
sumptions that Washington’s war policy is motivated by concerns for democracy,
national security, and peace. Some pundits, like New York Times columnist
Thomas Friedman, are passionate promoters of global corporatism and U.S. mili-
tary attacks on smaller, weaker nations. Friedman called for “bombing Iraq, over
and over and over again.” One of his favorite slogans was “Give war a chance,”
which he used in support of U.S. aggressions against Yugoslavia, Afghanistan, and
Iraq.22 Over 1 million Iraqi deaths resulted from the U.S. invasion and occupation
while billions of U.S. dollars have been unaccountably lost in Iraq. But the media
have given relatively little attention to this immense loss of life and treasure.23
Commentators stress the importance of maintaining U.S. military might
and “credibility” (that is, the willingness to use force and violence). Little if
any positive exposure is given to anti-imperialist struggles or to domestic
critics of U.S. overseas interventions. The corporate media, along with NPR
and PBS, portrayed the Vietnam War, the U.S. invasions of Grenada and Pan-
ama, the destruction of Yugoslavia, and the decade-long bombing attacks and
subsequent invasion of Iraq pretty much as the White House and the Pentagon
wanted, with little attention given to the underlying imperial interests and the
devastation wreaked by U.S. forces.24
Human rights violations in communist North Korea and China are repeatedly
alluded to, whereas U.S.-supported terrorism in scores of countries, utilizing death
squads, massacres, and mass detentions, receives scant notice, if any. The press
downplayed or ignored outright the slaughter of some 500,000 Indonesians by the
U.S.-supported militarists of that country, and the extermination campaign waged
by those same militarists in East Timor. The media made little mention of the
massive repression of dissident populations in Uruguay, Guatemala, Turkey,
El Salvador, Argentina, Haiti, Honduras, Nigeria, Palestine, Zaire, the Philippines,
and other U.S.-supported free-market regimes. While supportive of right-wing pro-
capitalist regimes, the media are strenuously negative toward leftist movements
and governments such as Castro’s Cuba and Chavez’s Venezuela.25 The media
have had little to say about U.S.-supported counterrevolutionary mercenary forces
in Angola, Mozambique, Nicaragua, and elsewhere whose blood-drenched
campaigns took hundreds of thousands of lives.26
Meanwhile, the space program is reported the way NASA wants, with
scarcely a word given to those who criticize its costs and the serious damage
it does to the earth’s protective ozone layer.
SERVING OFFICIALDOM
Getting too close to the truth can prove harmful. In a series of deeply re-
searched articles in the San Jose Mercury News, reporter Gary Webb exposed
the CIA’s involvement in the drug traffic between the contras (U.S.-supported
mercenary troops in Central America) and inner-city dealers in the United
States. Webb was swiftly subjected to a barrage of counterattacks from the
Washington Post, New York Times, Los Angeles Times, the major TV
170
Chapter 13

networks, and other keepers of permissible opinion. They accused him of say-
ing things he had not said, while ignoring the more damning and well-
substantiated heart of his findings. Eventually, Webb’s editor caved in to the
pressure, making a public self-criticism for having published the series. Webb
left the Mercury News, his career in shambles. A subsequent report by the
CIA itself largely confirmed his charges.27
In 1998 CNN producers April Oliver and Jack Smith ran a story accusing
the U.S. military of using sarin, a highly lethal nerve gas, in an operation in
Laos in 1970 that killed about one hundred people including two American
defectors. An immediate storm of abuse descended upon Oliver and Smith
from the Pentagon. CNN hastily issued a fawning retraction and fired the
two producers. Oliver and Smith put together a report showing that their
story was based entirely on testimony by U.S. military personnel, including
participants in the operation who stood by their stories.28 Their report re-
ceived almost no attention in the media.
Scores of supposedly “independent and objective” journalists move back
and forth in their careers between media and government, in what has been
called the “revolving door.” David Gergen served in the Nixon, Ford, Reagan,
and Clinton administrations, and in between was an editor at U.S. News and
World Report and a PBS commentator. Pat Buchanan was a staff writer for
President Nixon, a columnist and TV opinion-show host for CNN, a staff
writer for President Reagan, then a CNN host again.29
More than four hundred U.S. journalists, including nationally syndicated
columnists,
editors,
and
major
publishers,
have
carried
out
covert
“Actually, Lou, I think it was more than just my being in the right place at the right time.
I think it was my being the right race, the right religion, the right sex, the right socioeco-
nomic group, having the right accent, the right clothes, going to the right schools …”
Mass Media: For the Many, by the Few
171

assignments for the Central Intelligence Agency over the last four decades,
gathering intelligence abroad or publishing the kind of stories that create a
domestic climate of opinion supportive of U.S. interventionism. Included
among them were such prominent press moguls as William Paley, erstwhile
head of CBS; Henry Luce, late owner of Time Inc.; and Arthur Hays Sulzber-
ger, late publisher of the New York Times. The CIA has owned more than
240 media operations around the world, including newspapers, magazines,
publishing houses, radio and television stations, and wire services. Many
Third World countries get more news from the CIA and other Western
sources than from Third World news organizations. Stories exposing the ma-
jor media’s complicity with the CIA themselves have been suppressed by the
major media.30
If Cuban or Chinese or Venezuelan journalists were shown to work for
their respective countries’ intelligence agencies, and if they were found to be
intermittently occupying official positions within their governments, including
secret operations, it would be taken as a sure sign that these nations lacked an
independent press.
Those investigative journalists who persist in unearthing troubling truths
often run into difficulty. The Justice Department won a Supreme Court deci-
sion allowing the government to issue subpoenas requiring newspeople to dis-
close their sources to grand-jury investigators, in effect forcing the press to be
an investigative arm of the very officialdom over whom it is supposed to act
as a watchdog. One study found that more than thirty-five hundred subpoe-
nas were served on members of the news media in one year alone.31 Dozens of
reporters have been jailed or threatened with prison terms for trying to protect
their sources by refusing to hand over materials and tapes. Such government
coercion creates a chilling effect, encouraging the press to avoid trouble from
officialdom by censoring itself.
Government officials give choice leads to sympathetic journalists and
withhold information from troublesome ones. They meet regularly with me-
dia bosses to discuss specific stories. Every day the White House, the Penta-
gon, and other agencies release thousands of self-designed reports to the
media, many of which are then uncritically transmitted to the public as
news from independent sources. The Bush Jr. administration secretly con-
fected favorable news reports about itself by hiring actors to pose as journal-
ists, producing phony “video news releases” that were distributed and
broadcasted as “news” by hundreds of local TV stations. The White House
also paid several real journalists tens of thousands of dollars—in government
funds—to produce news and opinion pieces that promoted the administra-
tion’s policies.
According to the Government Accountability Office, such acts violated
the law against spreading “covert propaganda” within the United States at
public expense. But the Republican-controlled Congress took no action
against the president. The Bush people also hired someone (an erstwhile male
prostitute who had paid numerous visits to the White House) to pose as a
journalist under a fictitious name, so that he could ask rehearsed questions
of the president or his press secretary at news conferences.32
172
Chapter 13

POLITICAL ENTERTAINMENT
The entertainment media (movies and television shows) undergo a rigorous
political censorship. Even the New York Times admits that network “produc-
tion and standards” (censorship) departments have reduced their policing of
sexual and other cultural taboos, but “network censors continue to be vigilant
when it comes to overseeing the political content of television films.”33 Televi-
sion shows and films that treat anti-imperialist and anticorporate themes have
trouble getting sponsors and funding. Even if produced, they are likely to get
very limited distribution. Such was the fate of movies like Salt of the Earth,
Burn, Winter Soldier, Salvador, Reds, 1900, Matwan, and Romero.34
What is considered a political or nonpolitical film is itself a political judg-
ment. Almost all mainstream entertainment is political in one way or another.
Even movies and television shows that do not promote a specifically political
story line may propagate images and themes that support militarism, imperial-
ism, racism, sexism, authoritarianism, and other undemocratic values. In the
entertainment world, adversities are caused by ill-willed individuals and
cabals, never by the injustices of the socioeconomic system. Problems are
solved by individual derring-do rather than by organized collective effort.
In war movies like Black Hawk Down, Stripes, and Heartbreak Ridge,
the U.S. military is almost always portrayed sympathetically, locked in battle
against some pernicious foe, never serving as an instrument of U.S. empire
building. The Pentagon has maintained a cozy relationship with the entertain-
ment industry for years, providing armored equipment, matériel, base access,
and even troops for battle scenes. In exchange, the military brass imposes
script changes that portray the military in a completely favorable light and
aid in the recruitment and retention of personnel.35
In the media’s entertainment world, nefarious violence is met with righ-
teous violence, although it is often difficult to distinguish the two. By the
time he finishes elementary school, a typical American male child will have
seen eight thousand TV murders, and many thousands more assaults and
other acts of violence. Studies indicate that people who watch a lot of crime
shows have a higher fear of crime and urban minorities, and are more willing
to embrace authoritarian solutions.36
Women are still marketed as sexual objects in ads and story lines, but in
recent years they sometimes are also depicted as intelligent and capable per-
sons, occupying positions of authority and responsibility. The same holds for
African Americans, although they still appear far less often than Whites in
leading roles. Latinos are the most underrepresented group in prime-time tele-
vision, closely followed by Asian Americans, while Native Americans are
virtually invisible, except for the hackneyed “cowboy and Indian” flicks.
Years ago African Americans predictably played servants and street crimi-
nals. Now they play police and street criminals, still usually in minor roles.
The Black police captain scolding the hero cop and the Black judge (frequently
female) admonishing courtroom lawyers have become new African American
stock characters. African Americans abound in prime-time sitcoms, but the
more serious struggles faced by the African American community in almost
Mass Media: For the Many, by the Few
173

every area of life and work are rarely afforded realistic portrayal. African
American actors still experience a shortage of racially nonspecific roles dealing
with real-life problems that can affect anyone regardless of ethnicity.
There have been some notable exceptions to the dismal fare served up to
mass audiences. Movies like A Civil Action and Erin Brokovitch cast a reveal-
ing light on the venality of corporate polluters. Iron Jawed Angels gave a fine
portrayal of the women’s suffragist movement. North Country depicted the
struggle by female miners against workplace sexist harassment. Both Syriana
and Good Night and Good Luck pursued topics that were critical of the
powers that be. However, most films and television shows produced in the
business-owned entertainment world give scarce attention, if any, to important
and potentially fascinating social, cultural, political, and historical themes.37
In recent years the Public Broadcasting System (PBS) has become more
sensitive to race, gender, and gay issues but still virtually ignores working-
class concerns, out of fear of alienating corporate underwriters. When labor
unions have funded documentaries and dramas having a working-class per-
spective, public television bosses usually have refused to run them, claiming
that labor (with its millions of workers) represents a “special interest.”38
ROOM FOR ALTERNATIVES?
In sum, the news is a product not only of deliberate manipulation but of the
ideological and economic power structure under which journalists operate and
into which they are socialized. If we consider censorship to be a danger to our
freedom, then we should understand that the media are already censored by
those who own or advertise in them and by the entire corporate-dominated
political culture that sets limits on what is permissible opinion.
Sometimes, however, the media cannot easily suppress and distort realities
about the world because reality itself is radical. The Third World really is
poor and exploited; the U.S. government really does side with the rich oli-
garchs and suppresses leftist reform movements at home and abroad; the gap
between wealth and poverty really is growing ever greater in most of the
world; there really is crime and corruption in high places; the environment
really is facing catastrophic dangers caused mostly by massive fossil fuel con-
sumption; corporations do wield enormous power and do downsize their
workforce while reaping record profits. To maintain some connection to the
world, the press must occasionally report glimmers of these realities. When it
does, the rightists complain furiously about a “liberal bias.”
Furthermore, the press is not entirely immune to more democratic and
popular pressure. Despite the media’s misrepresentation and neglect, if a
well-organized and persistent public opinion builds around an issue, it occa-
sionally can break through the media sound barrier.
Is there any alternative to the major media? The Public Broadcasting Act
of 1967 did launch the Public Broadcasting System as an alternative to com-
mercial television. Instead of being independently financed by a sales tax on
television sets or some such method, PBS was made dependent on annual ap-
propriations from Congress and was run by a board appointed by the presi-
dent. PBS and National Public Radio (NPR) are now required to match
174
Chapter 13

federal funds with money from listener contributions and corporate sponsors.
Both NPR and PBS offer commentators who are just about as politically safe
as any found on the commercial networks.
Of the many high-quality documentaries made by independent producers
dealing with important political controversies, few are accorded mainstream
exposure. Thus Faces of War, revealing the U.S.-supported counterinsurgency
destruction visited upon the people of El Salvador, was denied broadcast
rights in twenty-two major television markets. The award-winning Building
Bombs and the exposé on the Iran-contra affair, Coverup, were denied access
to PBS and all commercial channels. Deadly Deception, a documentary cri-
tical of General Electric and the environmental devastation wreaked by the
nuclear weapons industry, won the Academy Award, yet, with a few local
exceptions, was shut out of commercial and public television. So too was the
Academy Award–winning documentary Panama Deception, which offered a
critical exposé of the U.S. invasion of Panama. A powerful and moving exposé
of the profit-driven American health care system is Michael Moore’s Sicko,
which played in a few movie theaters but never made it to any network.
Many areas of the country are awash in talk shows and news commen-
tary that are outspokenly ultrarightist, pro-corporate, militaristic, anti-union,
and antifeminist. Wealthy conservatives have poured millions of dollars into
building the religious right’s numerous radio and television outlets, including
the Christian Broadcasting Network, which has as many affiliates as ABC.
There is a significant religious left in this country, dedicated to peace and so-
cial justice issues, but it gets no big financial backing or major media outlets,
and therefore is seldom heard by mass audiences.
Denied access to mainstream media, the political left has attempted to get
its message across through community- and listener-sponsored radio stations
and small publications that suffer chronic financial difficulties and sometimes
undergo harassment from authorities and infiltrators. Skyrocketing postal
rates effect a real hardship on dissident publications. At the same time, the
government continues to subsidize billions of pieces of junk mail sent out by
business and advertising firms.
For a while unlicensed “microradio” or “pirate” radio stations began bur-
geoning across the country. These pirate stations transmit in a limited one- to
five-mile radius, too small to interfere with larger signals. The real nuisance
they pose is their heterodox views. Micro stations in a number of locales have
been forcibly shut down by the FCC and local police, who break into their prem-
ises and haul off their broadcast equipment. There are also legal low-power sta-
tions (LPFM) that are required to have a license or waiver from the FCC under
penalty of law. A station seeking a LPFM license has to be in areas where there is
space on the dial, which rules out most urban areas. Over half the LPFM licenses
granted by the FCC have gone to right-wing church groups.39
The airwaves are the property of the people of the United States and
should be open to divergent views. Here are some modest proposals for a
more democratic media:
•
The antitrust law that limits the number of media outlets any one corpo-
ration can own should be revived.
•
The amount of airtime given to advertising should again be limited.
Mass Media: For the Many, by the Few
175

•
The networks ought to pay for use of the public airways, and these
fees should go to financing noncommercial public broadcasting. Public
television and radio should be funded by a public tax system rather than
by rich corporate “underwriters.”
•
All broadcast stations should be required to allocate time for free and
open debates among a diverse array of political proponents including
the most progressive and revolutionary.
There once did exist a “Fairness Doctrine,” a law requiring that time
be given to an opposing viewpoint after a station broadcasted an editorial
opinion. But there was no requirement as to the diversity of the opposing
viewpoints, so usually the range was between two only slightly different
stances. The FCC ruled that broadcast time should not be made available to
“communists or the communist viewpoint” but only to “persons other than
communists.”40 Even this pale and slanted law was too much for the reaction-
aries. President Reagan vetoed the Fairness Doctrine in 1987 when Congress
attempted to renew it.
Ultimately the only protection against corporate-dominated monopoly
media is ownership by the people themselves, with provisions for the inclusion
of a broad spectrum of conflicting views. This is not as chimerical or radical
as it sounds. In the early 1920s, before it was swallowed up by commercial
interests, radio consisted primarily of hundreds of not-for-profit stations run
mostly by colleges, labor unions, and community groups.41 Today more
community-supported radio stations and public access cable-TV stations are
needed. The microradio station should be encouraged, for it is among the
most democratic of media, requiring almost no capital while being relatively
more accessible to the community in which it operates.
The Internet also offers progressive websites that provide information and
opinion rarely accommodated by mainstream media. By its nature the Internet
provides for individual transmission and commentary by just about anyone
who has a computer and an opinion, bringing us some of the best and worst,
but also providing new opportunities for networking and organizing, and for
gathering information. Some giant telephone and cable companies began pres-
suring Congress to limit the number of Internet servers, in an effort to estab-
lish high-fee monopoly control. Their goal has been to create the electronic
equivalent of an expensive “fast lane,” while relegating all nonpaying users
to slower, more limited, and less reliable access.42
Those who own the newspapers and networks will not relinquish their
hold over the communication universe. Ordinary citizens will not have access
until they can gain control over the resources that could give them access, an
achievement that would take a different kind of economic system than the cor-
porate “free market” we have. In the meantime, Americans should have no
illusions about the “free and independent press” they are said to enjoy.
176
Chapter 13

C
H
A
P
T
E
R
14
Voters, Parties, and
Stolen Elections
The U.S. political system is said to be democratic, for we get to elect our leaders
in free and open elections. Yet, as a democratic institution, the electoral process
is in need of serious upgrading.
DEMOCRATS AND REPUBLICANS: ANY DIFFERENCES?
For generations, professional party politicians ran the party machine in city
neighborhoods and towns, doling out little favors to little people and big fa-
vors to realty speculators, business contractors, and party leaders themselves.
The political bosses were occupied mostly with winning elections rather than
with questions of social justice. Old-fashioned political machines can still be
found in some cities, but over the years party organizations have declined for
a number of reasons:
First, campaign finance laws now allocate federal election funds directly
to candidates rather than to parties, thereby weakening the influence of the
party organization.
Second, now that many states have adopted the direct primary, candidates
are less likely to seek out the party organization for a place on the ticket, and
more likely to independently pursue the nomination by entering the primary.
Third, because televised political ads can reach everyone in their living
room, the party precinct captain is less needed to canvass the neighborhood
and publicize the candidate. Today’s candidate needs moneyed backers or per-
sonal wealth to pay for costly media campaigns, complete with pollsters and
public relations experts, who help select issues and shape electoral strategy.
Candidates expend huge sums selling their image in catchy sound bites,
177

marketing themselves as they would a soap product to a public conditioned to
such appeals. As someone once said: “You can’t fool all the people all of the
time, but if you fool them once it’s good for four years.”
Voters sometimes will support one candidate only out of fear that the
other candidate will make things even worse. This lesser-of-two-evils appeal
is a common inducement to voter participation. Some voters feel that they
are not really offered a choice but are forced into one, voting not so much
for as against someone. When presented with issue-linked choices, however,
voters in the main are able to make critical distinctions and do respond ac-
cording to their pocketbook interests and other specific preferences.1
It is not quite accurate to characterize the Republicans and Democrats as
Tweedledee and Tweedledum. They are not exactly alike and do take signifi-
cantly different positions at times. But on some fundamental issues, the similar-
ities between them loom so large as frequently to obscure the differences. Both
the Democratic Party and the GOP (“Grand Old Party,” a nickname for the
Republican Party) are committed to the preservation of the private corporate
economy; the use of subsidies, tax allowances, and global “free trade” agreements
to bolster business profits; huge military budgets; a costly and wasteful manned
space program; and the use of force and violence to defend the transnational
corporate empire. The two parties have been characterized as “nonideological.”
In a sense they are, insofar as their profound ideological commitment to the
corporate system at home and abroad is seldom made an explicit issue.
In the last several decades, however, there has been a sharpening of ideo-
logical differences between the two parties. The Republican Party has been the
more ideologically consistent party, tirelessly launching attacks on every inci-
dental issue to demonize their liberal opponents, while preaching the virtues
of family values, free enterprise, free market, and superpatriotism. Judging
from the performance of the last several GOP administrations, the Republican
leadership is dedicated to eliminating taxes for corporations and the very rich,
outlawing abortion and gay marriage, undoing environmental protections,
eliminating government-run human services (including Social Security), and
abolishing all government regulations of corporate activities.
The Republicans have voted for increased military spending and troop allot-
ments; for armed interventions in other countries; for enormous subsidies for ag-
ribusiness, big oil, and the pharmaceutical industry; against raising the minimum
wage; against assistance to homeowners in crisis and jobs programs during
recent recessions; against a public option for health care and having the gov-
ernment negotiate for lower Medicare drug prices; and against support for
renewable energy or other meaningful measures dealing with global warming.
The Democrats, or at least the more progressive ones, favor consumer
rights, universal health insurance, human services, labor rights, environmental
protections, safe and legal abortions, progressive taxes, cuts in military spend-
ing, and gender and ethnic equality.
Generally Republicans get most of their votes from conservatives, White
males, rural and suburban dwellers, fundamentalist Christians and other reg-
ular churchgoers, managerial professionals, the upwardly mobile, people who
earn over $100,000, and those with some college education.
178
Chapter 14

Democrats generally do best among liberals, women, city dwellers, wage
workers, African Americans, Jews, people who earn under $20,000, and those
who are among the least and the most educated, that is, without high school
diplomas or with advanced degrees.
The Republican Party leadership, as centered in the Republican National
Committee, is a disciplined outfit, run from the top down, with a tight grip on
state and county committees. It launches systematic campaigns to achieve a con-
servative ideological dominance, targeting both issues and individuals, striving for
permanent control of state and national legislatures through redistricting and
heavy campaign spending, while stacking the courts with right-wing ideologues.
Unlike the GOP, the Democratic Party lacks a centralized command and
ideological attack mode. It seems to have no overall agenda for locking down
control of the electoral process and the institutions of government. It is a loose
coalition of groups, with state and local committees that often go their own
way, supplemented by independent organizations that pursue one or another
issue. The Democrats seem incapable of matching the GOP’s uncompromising
and relentless attack mode. Indeed, in recent times the Democrats have been
led by a president, Barack Obama, who spends much time reaching out for a
bipartisan consensus that does not exist.
There also are differences within each party between voters and party acti-
vists. Delegates to a recent Republican national convention were more conserva-
tive on issues than a majority of registered Republican voters. One in five
delegates put their net worth at $1 million or more. Most were White middle-
aged males opposed to campaign finance reform, affirmative action, gay rights,
progressive income tax, single-payer health care, stronger environmental protec-
tions, and legal abortion. They supported a federal law to impose prayer in the
schools but not federal funds for school repair programs. The chances of finding
a GOP delegate with a family income under $25,000 was fifty to one. At the
Democratic national convention the odds were somewhat lower: fourteen to
one, but still hardly representative of the wider public.
THE TWO-PARTY MONOPOLY
A nationwide poll reported that 53 percent of respondents felt we should have a
third major political party.2 But all fifty states have laws—written and enforced
by Democratic and Republican officials—setting some daunting requirements
for third-party ballot access. In some states, independent or third-party candi-
dates must collect large numbers of signatures and pay burdensome filing fees.
Sometimes the time to collect signatures is limited to one week, virtually an
impossible task.3
The Supreme Court upheld a Washington State law that requires minor-
party candidates to win at least 1 percent of the total primary election vote in
order to run in the general election, in effect depriving most minor candidates
of ballot access.4 Bills have been submitted in Congress, so far without suc-
cess, that would institute a more permissive and uniform ballot access law
throughout the fifty states. Over the years, some of the unfair restrictions
against third parties have been struck down in court battles.
Voters, Parties, and Stolen Elections
179

It has been argued that restrictive ballot requirements are needed to screen
out frivolous candidates. But who decides who is “frivolous”? And what is so
harmful about such candidates that the electorate must be protected from them
by all-knowing Republican and Democratic party officials? In fact the few
states that allow relatively easier access to the ballot—such as Iowa, Tennessee,
Vermont, and New Hampshire, where relatively few signatures are needed and
enough time is allowed to collect them—have suffered no invasion of frivolous
or kooky candidates.
The Federal Election Campaign Act gives millions of dollars in public
funds to the two major parties to finance their national conventions, pri-
maries, and presidential campaigns. But public money goes to third-party can-
didates only after an election and only if they glean 5 percent of the vote,
something nearly impossible to achieve without funds. In sum, they cannot
get the money unless they get 5 percent of the vote; but they are not likely to
get 5 percent without the substantial amounts of money needed to buy suffi-
cient national exposure.
While receiving nothing from the federal government, minor parties must
observe all federal record-keeping requirements. The Federal Election Commis-
sion, designated by law to have three Republican and three Democratic commis-
sioners, spends most of its time checking the accounts of smaller parties and
filing suits against them and against independent candidates. Hence two private
political parties are endowed with law enforcement powers to regulate the activ-
ities of all other parties in ways that preserve their two-party monopoly.
180
Chapter 14

MAKING EVERY VOTE COUNT
The system of representation itself discriminates against third parties. The
winner-take-all, single-member-district plurality system used in the United States
artificially magnifies the strength of major parties. A party that polls a plurality
(the largest number of votes even if less than a majority) wins 100 percent repre-
sentation with the election of a district’s single candidate, whereas the other
parties, regardless of their vote, receive zero representation. Because there are
few districts in which minor parties have a plurality, they invariably have a
higher percentage of wasted or unrepresented votes, and win a lower proportion
of seats, if any.
Even voters of the two major parties are shortchanged. In various coun-
ties of Northern California, GOP voters compose 20 to 35 percent of the turn-
out but receive zero representation because they are unable to elect a member
of their party. In parts of Kansas, Nebraska, and Oklahoma, Democratic
voters cast 30 to 40 percent of the votes, but receive zero representation be-
cause all the congressional seats are won by Republicans. Across the country,
those living in safe Republican or safe Democratic districts and who support
the weaker party have little reason to vote. Of course the same holds for those
who support minor parties.5
In most congressional districts one party dominates over the other. The
two-party system is largely a patchwork of one-party dominions—magnified
by the winner-take-all system. About one of every ten representatives is elected
to Congress with no opposition at all in either the primary or the general elec-
tion. Over 90 percent of congressional incumbents who seek reelection are
successful in that endeavor. Death and voluntary retirement seem to be the
more important factors behind membership turnover.
In contrast to the winner-take-all system is proportional representation
(PR), which provides a party with legislative seats roughly in accordance with
the percentage of votes it wins. Let us say ten single-member districts were joined
into one multiseat district. Every party provides a ranked list of ten candidates.
Voters vote for the party of their choice, and each party is awarded their propor-
tional number of seats. A party that gets around 50 percent of the vote would get
only five seats (for the top five candidates on its list); one that received 30 percent
would get three seats, while one that received 20 percent would get two seats.
Just about every vote would be represented.6
Some political scientists and pundits argue that proportional representa-
tion is an odd, overly complicated system that encourages the proliferation
of splinter parties and leads to legislative stalemate and instability. They laud
the two-party system because it supposedly allows for cohesion and stable
majorities. Actually there is nothing odd or quirky about PR; it is the most
popular voting system in the world. Some form of PR is used in virtually every
country in Europe, from Austria and Belgium to Sweden and Switzerland.
Winner-take-all is found in only a handful of countries.7 In 1993 New Zealand
adopted proportional representation in a national referendum by an over-
whelming vote. PR usually produces stable coalition governments that are con-
sistently more representative and responsive than winner-take-all systems.
Voters, Parties, and Stolen Elections
181

PR voting is not complicated. Citizens simply cast votes for the parties that
more closely reflect their interests. Nor is PR completely alien to the United
States. Some local governments and school districts have employed it for years.
PR gives ethnic minorities and diverse political groups a better chance of win-
ning some representation. In 1945, in the last PR race for the New York City
Council, Democrats won fifteen seats, Republicans three, Liberals and Commu-
nists two each, and the American Labor party one; public interest in city council
elections was high. PR was abolished in New York not because it didn’t work
but because it worked too well, giving representation to a variety of leftist dis-
senting views. After winner-take-all was reinstalled in New York, the Democrats
won thirty-four council seats, the Republicans one, and smaller parties were
completely frozen out.8
To repeat: Winner-take-all elections artificially magnify the representation
of the stronger parties and the weakness of the lesser ones. Wedded to the un-
fair advantages of the current system, Democrats and Republicans in Congress
passed a law in 1967 requiring all states to set up single-member, winner-
take-all districts for Congress. This system deprives minority parties not only
of representation but eventually of voters too, because not many citizens wish
to “waste” their ballots on a minor party that seems incapable of achieving a
legislative presence. So third parties are locked in a vicious cycle: They cannot
win because they lack support, and they have trouble gaining support because
they are small and cannot win.
Sometimes it does not seem worth the effort to vote for one of the two ma-
jor parties in districts where the other so predominates and will be winning the
sole representation. If we had PR, however, every vote would be given some
representation, and people would be more likely to vote. This partly explains
why voter turnout ranges from 36 to 42 percent for congressional elections,
whereas in countries that have PR, turnouts range from 70 to 90 percent.9
With proportional representation, there is a broader choice of parties, a higher
rate of participation, and a more equitable representation than in our winner-
take-all, single-member-district, two-party system.
RIGGING THE GAME
The electoral system is rigged in other ways. A common device is redistricting,
changing the boundaries of a single-member district ostensibly to comply with
population shifts but really to effect a preferred political outcome. Often the
intent is to dilute the electoral strength of new or potentially dissident consti-
tuencies, including ethnic minorities. Thus, the New York City Council split
fifty thousand working-class Black voters in Queens into three predominantly
White districts, making them a numerical minority in all three. Likewise in
Los Angeles County and nine Texas counties, heavy concentrations of Latinos
were divided into separate districts to dilute their voting impact.
An extreme form of politically motivated redistricting is the gerrymander.
District lines are drawn in elaborately contorted ways so as to maximize
the strength of the party that does the drawing.10 Sometimes, as just described.
gerrymandering is used to deny minority representation by splitting a
182
Chapter 14

concentrated ethnic area into different districts. Other times it is used to assure
minority representation by creating a district that manages to concentrate en-
ough African American voters so as to allow the election of an African American.
Conservative opponents condemn such practices as “racial gerrymandering” and
“reverse discrimination.” But defendants argue that such districts may look bi-
zarre on a map but are the only way to abridge a White monopoly and ensure
some Black representation in states where Whites remain disproportionately
overrepresented even after a supposedly equitable redistricting.
The courts have ignored the gerrymandering that shapes so many districts
around the country. After the 1990 census, the Republican administration of
Bush Sr. directed certain states to maximize the number of districts packed
with African American and Latino voters. Bush had an ulterior motive. By
corralling minorities (who voted heavily Democratic) into electoral ghettos,
the GOP would have a better chance of carrying the more numerous sur-
rounding White districts.11
Redistricting occurs every ten years, as a function of reapportionment.
The Constitution mandates that every decade a national census shall be taken
and House of Representative seats shall be reapportioned, according to the
shifts in population between the various states. When states lose or gain seats
in the reapportionment, they must then redistrict after the census, a task per-
formed by the various state legislatures, subject to veto by the governors. If a
state neither gains nor loses seats after a particular census, there still may be
population shifts within it that warrant the redrawing of district lines.
In 2001, after the 2000 census, congressional district lines were redrawn
in Colorado and Texas in a way that federal courts decided was fair, as did
the Texas GOP governor and GOP attorney general. But just two years later,
after Republicans won complete control of state legislatures in both states,
they took the unprecedented step of redrawing district lines already ratified
by the courts, and doing it in a severely partisan way, especially in Texas
where the congressional delegation went from seventeen to fifteen in favor of
Democrats to twenty-one to eleven in favor of Republicans, a shift unparal-
leled in the annals of gerrymandering. In 2006 the Supreme Court upheld the
newly imposed redistricting, setting aside the practice described in the Consti-
tution of redrawing districts once every ten years after the national census,
and opening the door for a partisan redistricting scramble any time a state
legislature might change hands.12 Only about a dozen states have constitu-
tional prohibitions against multiple redistricting within the same decade.
Even if districts are redrawn by a neutral computer method, under the
winner-take-all system large numbers of voters are still without representa-
tion. Proportional representation provides the more equitable system. Thus
Democrats living in a 65 percent Republican district in the Dallas suburbs
are effectively gerrymandered out of an opportunity to elect a person who re-
presents their interests. But with PR, the five Republican Dallas suburban dis-
tricts would be made into one composite district with five representatives, and
Democratic voters would be able to elect one or two of the five, thereby at-
taining representation roughly proportional to their numbers instead of being
entirely shut out.
Voters, Parties, and Stolen Elections
183

The decennial national census itself introduces distortions because it often
undercounts low-income voters, missing more renters than homeowners and
many poor residents in overcrowded neighborhoods and remote rural areas,
who tend to be less forthcoming with census takers. Undercounting means
underrepresentation in Congress and the state legislatures, and less federal
aid. According to the Census Bureau, one national census missed an estimated
8.4 million people and double-counted or improperly tallied 4.4 million, in-
cluding many affluent Whites who had more than one residence.13
If, despite rigged rules, radical parties gain grassroots strength and even
win elections, they are likely to become the object of official violence. The case
of the U.S. Socialist Party is instructive. By 1918, the Socialist Party held twelve
hundred offices in 340 cities including seventy-nine mayors, thirty-two legisla-
tors, and a member of Congress. The next year, after having increased their vote
dramatically, the Socialists suffered the combined attacks of state, local, and
federal authorities. Their headquarters in numerous cities were sacked, their
funds confiscated, their leaders jailed on trumped-up charges, their immigrant
members summarily deported, their newspapers denied mailing privileges,
and their elected candidates denied their seats in various state legislatures and
Congress. Within a few years the party was finished as a viable political force.
While confining themselves to legal and peaceful forms of political competi-
tion, the Socialists discovered that their opponents were burdened by no similar
compunctions. The guiding principle of ruling elites was and still is: when
change threatens to rule, then the rules are changed.
MONEY, A NECESSARY CONDITION
A huge handicap faced by third-party candidates—and progressive candidates
within the major parties—is the lack of funds needed to win office. Money is
the lifeblood of present-day electoral campaigns. A race for a seat in the House
of Representatives can cost several million dollars. Senatorial and gubernatorial
contests sometimes are many times more than that. In the 2008 presidential and
congressional campaigns, spending by all advocacy groups and candidates and
party committees totaled $5.3 billion, a record amount that did not include the
many millions spent on hundreds of state and local contests.14
Sometimes millions are expended not to win office but merely to procure a
party nomination in a primary contest against other members of the same party.
And before the actual primary there is what some call the money primary. The
candidate who amasses an enormous war chest or who has an immense personal
fortune thereby discourages would-be challengers. He or she is treated seriously
as a candidate and is likely to be designated the “front runner” by the media.
During the 2000 Republican presidential primaries, Bush Jr., son of a former
president, “won” the money primary by raising $50 million four months before
the first primary in New Hampshire. That sum came from just a small number of
superrich donors.15 Several other GOP primary opponents dropped out after they
discovered that most of the fat cats had already committed their checkbooks to
Bush. By the time Bush won his party’s nomination in July 2000, he had already
spent over $97 million—and the campaign against his Democratic opponent had
184
Chapter 14

yet to begin.16 Thus, well before the actual election, a handful of rich contributors
winnow the field, predetermining who will run in the primaries with what level of
strength and plausibility. Only the very rich get to “vote” in the money primary.
That may be a little less true with the advent of the Internet. Nowadays
fundraisers for less-established candidates are able to access larger numbers of
potential supporters without incurring big costs. Still there remains the need to
convince potential donors, even small ones, that the candidate is a “serious
one,” something not easy to do if the media have designated the candidate as
a minor fixture not to be taken seriously as the nominee to be.
Every four years both major parties receive millions of dollars in federal
funds—allocated to them by a Congress dominated by these same two parties—
to finance their national presidential nominating conventions. The Democratic
and GOP conventions also receive substantial sums from their host cities, and
large cash gifts from corporations, including buffet lunches, hospitality rooms,
and postsession celebrations for the convention delegates.17 Big corporations
bankroll the televised presidential debates, which usually are limited to the
two major-party candidates.
As mandated by law, as of January 2009 an individual can contribute to the
campaigns of as many candidates as he or she wants, but not more than $2,400
in a primary and $2,400 in the election for a total of $4,800 per candidate. That
same individual can also give $30,400 to the national party committee, $10,000
to state and local party committees, and various other contributions. In sum, one
person can contribute $45,600 to all candidates and $69,900 to all party and
political action committees within a biennial period.18 In addition, there are the
fat speaking fees, travel accommodations, and other free services that companies
are happy to provide to needy or greedy legislators.
There is also soft money, which consists of funds that can be used only for
“issue advertising” and for singing the candidate’s praises—as long as the ad
does not urge us to vote for or against anyone. Difficult to distinguish from
campaign ads, soft-money ads provided an enormous loophole for campaign
expenditures, totaling hundreds of millions of dollars to the major parties. The
McCain-Feingold Act of 2002 banned the solicitation and spending of soft
money by national parties and federal candidates. Though designed to plug
loopholes in spending, the new law spawned loopholes of its own. Indepen-
dent committees could still raise money apart from any party or candidate.
And individual contributions could be passed along to future nominees in
“bundled” amounts that exceeded the $5,000-per-candidate limit.
In national elections, business generally outspends labor by more than seven
to one. When it comes to soft money and state initiatives and ballot propositions,
the ratio of business over labor spending is more like twenty-one to one, with
most of that money finding its way into the coffers of the more conservative can-
didates of the two parties.19 To hedge their bets, corporations and other big do-
nors sometimes contribute to both parties, though usually substantially more to
the Republicans.20 Contributions often are doled out even to lawmakers who
run unopposed, to ensure influence over the preordained victor.
A candidate needs funds for public relations consultants, pollsters, campaign
travel; campaign workers, offices, telephones, computers, faxes, mailings; and,
Voters, Parties, and Stolen Elections
185

most of all, media advertisements. Yet some say that money is not a major influ-
ence because better-financed candidates sometimes lose, as demonstrated by bil-
lionaire Steve Forbes, who spent $30 million of his personal fortune in 2000 and
still failed to gain the GOP presidential nomination. Electoral victory, the argu-
ment goes, is more likely to be determined by other factors such as party label,
ideology, issues, and incumbency. The largest sums go to entrenched incumbents
who are expected to win, so money does not bring victory, it follows victory.
In response, we might note that candidates who are the bigger spenders may
not always win but they usually do, as has been the case over the last fifteen years
in more than 80 percent of House and Senate races. Even in “open races,” with no
incumbent running, better-funded candidates won 75 percent of the time. In the
2008 congressional election, Democratic candidates received noticeably more in
direct contributions than Republicans, and won control of both the House and
Senate.21 This does not establish a simple one-to-one causal relationship between
money and victory. But given the central role money plays in launching a cam-
paign and promoting a candidate, how can we say it is of no crucial importance?
Money influences not only who wins, but who runs, and who is taken
seriously when running. Candidates sometimes are backed by party leaders
explicitly because they have personal wealth and can use it to wage an effec-
tive campaign. It is true that Steve Forbes failed to gain the GOP nomination.
But even though he was of lackluster personality and had a fuzzy program, his
money enabled him to win primaries in two states and be treated as a serious
contender throughout the campaign.
Candidates who win while spending less than their opponents still usually
have to spend quite a lot. While not a surefire guarantor of victory, a large
war chest—even if not the largest—is usually a necessary condition. Money
may not guarantee victory, but the lack of it usually guarantees defeat. With-
out large sums, there is rarely much of a campaign, as poorly funded “minor”
candidates have repeatedly discovered.
The influence of money is also evident in the many state ballot initiatives from
Florida to California relating to a range of vital issues. In many instances, there
initially is strong voter support for the public-interest position. Then big business
launches a heavily financed blitz of slick television ads, outspending its opponents
by as much as fifty to one in some cases, and opinion turns in business’s favor.22
There seems to be a growing awareness of the undue and undemocratic influ-
ence of money. In Georgia, civil rights leaders launched a court challenge mandat-
ing the creation of publicly financed state elections because winners were enjoying
more than a 300 percent spending advantage over losers. In Maine, voters ap-
proved a law in 1996 that allows candidates to opt for full public financing
of their campaigns. A few years later a similar law was approved by voters in
Massachusetts and in Vermont. In 2002, a majority of the legislature in Maine
won races on public money, lawmakers who thereby were not indebted to mon-
eyed interests. In Arizona, Janet Napolitano became the first governor of any state
to be elected with public financing. Her opponent opposed public funding and
raised almost $2 million in private donations. Public funding of elections is
resisted by those who can readily outspend their opponents, but it wins bipartisan
support among voters across the nation.23
186
Chapter 14

THE STRUGGLE TO VOTE
The United States ranks among the lowest in the world in voter turnout.
Nearly a third of adult Americans are not even registered to vote. Some people
fail to cast a ballot because they care little about public affairs. But others,
including some who do vote, feel deeply cynical and angry about politics.
They are disenchanted by the hypocrisy and pretense, the constant drone of
campaign ads, and the vast sums spent. Many have trouble believing that vot-
ing makes a difference. In a New York Times/CBS poll, 79 percent of respon-
dents agreed that government is “pretty much run by a few big interests
looking out for themselves.”24
It has been argued that since nonvoters tend to be among the more apa-
thetic and less informed, they are likely to be swayed by prejudice and dem-
agogy. Hence it is just as well they do not exercise their franchise.25 Behind
this reasoning lurks the dubious presumption that better-educated, upper-
income people who vote are more rational and less compelled by self-interest
Voters, Parties, and Stolen Elections
187

and ethno-class prejudices, an impression that itself is one of those comforting
prejudices upper- and middle-class people have of themselves.
Some writers argue that many people don’t bother to vote because they
are fairly content with things. Certainly some individuals are blithely indiffer-
ent to political issues—even issues that may affect their lives in important
ways. But generally speaking, voter apathy is often a psychological defense
against feelings of powerlessness and disillusionment. What is seen as apathy
may really be antipathy.
Some political analysts argue that low voter participation is of no great im-
port because the preferences of nonvoters are much the same as the preferences
of voters. If the stay-at-homes were to vote, it supposedly would not change the
outcome of most elections. In fact, upper-income persons vote at almost twice
the rate as those of lower-income, and for conservative candidates at almost
three times the rate. Hence, it would make a difference if low-income citizens
voted in greater numbers, and on those occasions when they do, it does.
The argument is sometimes made that deprived groups, such as ethnic
minorities, who feel thwarted by politics should accept the fact that they are
numerically weak and unable to command wide support for their demands. In
a system that responds to the democratic power of majority numbers, a minor-
ity poor cannot hope to have its way.
What is curious about this argument is that it is never applied to more
select minority interests—for instance, oilmen. Now oilmen are far less numer-
ous than the poor, yet the deficiency of their numbers, or of the numbers of
other tiny minorities like bankers, industrialists, and billionaire investors, does
not result in any lack of government responsiveness to their wants.
Furthermore, many people fail to vote because they face various kinds of offi-
cial discouragement and intimidation. Two centuries of struggle have brought real
gains in extending the franchise. In the early days of the Republic, propertyless
White males, indentured servants, women, Blacks (including freed slaves), and
Native Americans (“Indians”) had no access to the ballot. In the wake of
working-class turbulence during the 1820s and 1830s, formal property qualifica-
tions were abolished for White males. And after a century of agitation, women
finally won the right to vote with the adoption of the Nineteenth Amendment in
1920. In 1961, the Twenty-third Amendment gave District of Columbia residents
representation in presidential elections, but they are still denied full voting repre-
sentation in Congress. In 1971, partly in response to the youth antiwar rebellions
of the late 1960s, the Twenty-sixth Amendment was quickly adopted, lowering
the minimum voting age from twenty-one to eighteen.
The Fifteenth Amendment, ratified in 1870, written in the blood of civil
war, prohibited voter discrimination because of race. But it took another cen-
tury of struggle to make this right something more than a formality in many
regions. In 1944, the Supreme Court ruled that Whites-only party primaries
were unconstitutional.26 Decades of agitation and political pressure, aug-
mented by the growing voting power of African Americans who had migrated
to Northern cities, led to a number of civil rights acts and several crucial Su-
preme Court decisions. Taken together these actions gave the federal govern-
ment and courts power to act against segregationist state officials and against
188
Chapter 14

discriminatory state restrictions—such as long-term residency requirements
and poll taxes.27 The result was that in certain parts of the South, African
Americans
began
voting
in
visible
numbers
for
the
first
time
since
Reconstruction.
During the 1980s, President Reagan threatened to cut off federal aid to state
and local agencies that assisted in voter registration drives. Voting rights acti-
vists who tried to register people in family-assistance offices were arrested.
Question: Why would an American president cut off federal aid and arrest peo-
ple who were helping other Americans to register to vote? Answer: The other
Americans were seen as voting the wrong way. Reagan was a Republican and
the people in family-assistance offices were largely low-income Democrats.
In 1986, the Reagan White House sent FBI agents streaming into South-
ern counties to interrogate over two thousand African Americans about voter
fraud. While finding no evidence of fraud, the FBI did cause some voters to
think twice about going to the polls. The motive behind this kind of intimida-
tion is as political as it is racial. If African Americans voted overwhelmingly
for Republican candidates rather than for Democrats, then Republican admin-
istrators would not likely be hounding them.
In 1992, a Democratic Congress passed a “motor voter” bill that sought to
increase voter turnout among the elderly, the poor, and the infirm by allowing
citizens to register as they renew their driver’s licenses, or apply for Social Secu-
rity, unemployment, welfare, or disability benefits. President Bush Sr. vetoed it.
Question: Why would an American president veto a bill that helped other Ameri-
cans to vote? Answer: Once again, they were likely to vote the wrong way.
The following year a bill was passed allowing registration at motor vehi-
cle and military recruiting offices, but to avoid a Republican Senate filibuster
it contained no provision for voter registration at welfare and unemployment
offices. There have been widespread reports as late as 2009 that even this lim-
ited law was not being adequately enforced.28
THE WAR AGAINST IMAGINARY “VOTER FRAUD”
Today, while many legal restrictions have been removed, new barriers to vot-
ing loom. In various Western democracies, governments actively pursue pro-
grams to register voters, leading to high registration rates and high voter
participation. In contrast, U.S. federal and state officials have a history of
making it difficult for working people to register and vote. In a dozen or
more states within the United States we find the following:
•
Would-be voters may be required to prove their citizenship with a passport,
birth certificate, or other government ID, documents that poor and elderly
citizens often lack. People who had been voting for many years suddenly
found themselves disqualified. In Missouri alone, newly installed photo ID
requirements threaten to disfranchise up to 240,000 state residents.
•
In some states citizens are being required to pay voter ID fees—which
amounts to an unconstitutional poll tax, felt most heavily by low-
income voters.
Voters, Parties, and Stolen Elections
189

•
Legislation pending in some states prohibits the elderly from using photo IDs
issued by retirement centers or neighborhood associations when going to the
polls. Many low-income elderly do not have driver’s licenses to use as IDs.
•
Registration centers are usually open only during working hours when
blue-collar and lower-level service people cannot get off from work. The
locations of registration centers can be remote and frequently changed.
•
Registration forms are sometimes unnecessarily complex, in short supply,
poorly distributed, and sluggishly processed.
•
Onerous and unnecessary rules are imposed on grassroots voter registra-
tion drives, such as requiring registration forms to be turned in within
forty-eight hours after being filled out; or making it illegal for anyone to
get within one hundred feet of a line of voters to offer legal advice regard-
ing their voting rights.
•
If your name in the registration database (John Smith) does not perfectly
match your name as spelled on your driver’s license or some other ID (John
L. Smith), you can be turned away at the polls, and many have been.
•
Polling places are sometimes not situated in accessible locations. In one
Texas county, officials closed down all but one of thirteen polling sta-
tions, and Black and Latino voter turnout plummeted from twenty-three
hundred to three hundred. In parts of Mississippi, a person might have to
register both at the town and county courthouses, which could mean
driving ninety miles round trip.
•
In recent elections, more than one in five registered voters did not vote
because of long work hours, physical disabilities, parental responsibilities,
lack of transportation, or other difficulties. In some democracies, mea-
sures are taken by officials to assist voters facing such obstacles, but not
in the United States.29
According to the standard view, working people and the poor have a low
voter turnout because they are wanting in information and civic awareness.
But if they are so naturally inclined to apathy, one wonders why entrenched
interests find it necessary to take such strenuous measures to discourage their
participation.
Daunting ID and registration requirements are supposedly intended to
keep ne’er-do-wells from attempting to cast ballots in someone else’s name, a
problem that—despite repeated investigations—has not been shown to exist in
any numbers. Most recently the Century Foundation found no evidence of
voter impersonation or of felons or other persons trying to illegally cast bal-
lots.30 Still Republican officials continue to invent stories about droves of
fraudulent voters “stealing driver’s licenses or passports so they can sneak
into the booth and cast an illegal ballot. GOP leaders have intimidated voters
of color, unfairly purged voter rolls, and set up unconstitutional barriers to
the ballot box—all in the name of cleaning up ‘voter fraud.’”31 This untiring
crusade is obviously aimed at limiting the number of voters from demographic
groups that favor the Democrats.
Republican efforts to suppress the vote have enjoyed some success. In the
2008 presidential election, 4 million to 5 million voters did not cast a ballot
190
Chapter 14

because they encountered registration difficulties or failed to receive absentee
ballots. An additional 2 million to 4 million registered voters were discour-
aged from voting due to administrative hassles like long lines and new voter
identification requirements.32 Had the election been a closer contest, a sup-
pressed vote of this magnitude would have produced a different outcome.
When United Auto Workers union members took election day off, they
were able to work at bringing out the vote, serve as poll watchers, and find
time themselves to vote. Yet most workers cannot participate at that level be-
cause elections are held on a workday (Tuesday), making voting difficult for
those who have late commutes.
One positive development: Every state in the union now allows people to
vote several days earlier than election day. In some states early voting is pro-
vided only for those who have an excuse. In other states early voting is avail-
able to anyone who might want to avail themselves of it. In the 2008 election,
mindful of the punishing long voter lines of previous elections, early voters
turned out in record numbers totaling about 30 percent of the total vote.
About 5 million Americans are prohibited from casting a ballot because
of past criminal records or because they are currently behind bars. Three states
(Florida, Kentucky, and Virginia) still impose lifetime disfranchisement on
anyone ever convicted of a felony, impacting disproportionately on low-income
communities of color. Other states have scaled back similar bans in recent years.
People who were still behind bars are denied the vote in all but two states
(Maine and Vermont), yet they are counted as part of the population of the
communities in which the prisons are located, creating political districts that
would not otherwise exist. When funds and legislative seats are allocated
according to population, conservative rural communities with large prison
populations disproportionately glean more seats and funds for themselves.
Cities lose out on funds that could be used for both crime prevention and pri-
soner rehabilitation. Inmates should be counted as residents of the community
to which they are likely to return after incarceration, the places where reentry
programs need to be funded.33
SHADY ELECTIONS
Often presumed to have died out with old-time machine politics, shady electoral
methods are with us more than ever. In one of the closest contests in U.S. history,
the 2000 presidential election between Vice President Al Gore and Texas Gover-
nor George W. Bush, the final outcome hinged on how the vote went in Florida.
Independent investigations in that state revealed serious irregularities directed
mostly against ethnic minorities and low-income residents who usually voted
Democratic. Some thirty-six thousand newly registered voters were turned
away because their names had never been added to the voter rolls by Florida’s
secretary of state Kathleen Harris, a Republican who was in charge of the state’s
election process while herself being an active member of the Bush election cam-
paign. Others were turned away because they were declared—almost always in-
correctly—“convicted felons.” In several Democratic precincts, state officials
closed the polls early, leaving lines of would-be voters stranded. Under orders
Voters, Parties, and Stolen Elections
191

from Governor Jeb Bush (Bush Jr.’s brother), state troopers near polling sites de-
layed people for hours while searching their cars. Some precincts required two
photo IDs, which many citizens do not have. Uncounted ballot boxes went miss-
ing or were found in unexplained places or were never collected from certain
African American precincts. During the recount, the Republican national leader-
ship shipped in some young bullies, mostly GOP congressional aides from
Washington, D.C., to storm the Dale County Canvassing Board, punch and
kick one of the officials, shout and bang on their office doors, and generally
created a climate of intimidation that caused the board to abandon its recount
and accept the dubious pro-Bush tally.34
Even though Bush lost the nation’s popular vote to Gore by over half a
million in the official count (and probably more than that in an honest count),
these various coercive actions suppressed enough pro-Gore ballots to give
Florida to Bush by about five hundred votes, along with the Electoral College
and the presidency itself. Similar abuses occurred in other parts of the country.
A study by computer scientists and social scientists estimated that 4 million to
6 million votes were left uncounted in the 2000 election.35
The 2004 presidential election between Democratic challenger Senator John
Kerry and the Republican incumbent, President Bush, amounted to another stolen
election. Some 105 million citizens voted in 2000, but in 2004 the turnout climbed
to at least 122 million. Preelection surveys indicated that among the record
16.8 million new voters Kerry was a heavy favorite, a fact that went largely unre-
ported by the press. In addition, there were about 2 million progressives who had
voted for Ralph Nader in 2000 but who switched to Kerry in 2004. Yet the
official 2004 tallies showed Bush with 62 million votes, about 11.6 million
more votes than he got in 2000. Meanwhile Kerry showed only 8 million more
votes than Gore received in 2000. To have achieved his remarkable 2004 tally,
Bush would have had to keep all his 50.4 million from 2000, plus a majority of
the new voters, plus a large share of the very liberal Nader defectors. Nothing in
the campaign and in the opinion polls suggested such a mass crossover. The
numbers did not add up.
In key states like Ohio, the Democrats achieved immense success at regis-
tering new voters, outdoing the Republicans by as much as five to one. More-
over the Democratic Party was unusually united around its candidate—or
certainly against the incumbent president. In contrast, elements within the
GOP displayed open disaffection. Prominent Republicans, including some for-
mer officeholders, diplomats, and military brass, publicly voiced serious mis-
givings about what they saw as the Bush administration’s huge budget deficits,
reckless foreign policy, pronounced theocratic tendencies, and threats to indi-
vidual liberties. Sixty newspapers that had endorsed Bush in 2000 refused to
do so in 2004; forty of them endorsed Kerry.36
All through election day 2004, exit polls showed Kerry well ahead, yet the
official tally gave Bush a victory. Before the election, several Republican lights
had announced their intention to suppress the Democratic vote. In an inter-
view with U.S. News & World Report, Pennsylvania House Speaker John
Perzel observed that Kerry would need a huge number of votes in Philadelphia
to carry the state: “It’s important for me to keep that number down.”
192
Chapter 14

Rep. John Pappageorge (R-MI) was quoted in the Detroit Free Press as saying,
“If we do not suppress the Detroit vote, we’re going to have a tough time in this
election.” In Nevada, former executive director of the state GOP Dan Burdish
told the press, “I am looking to take Democrats off the voter rolls.”37 Here is
an incomplete list of how the GOP “victory” was secured:
•
In some places large numbers of Democratic registration forms disappeared.
Absentee ballots sometimes were mailed out to voters just before election
day, too late to be returned on time, or they were not mailed at all.
•
Overseas ballots normally and reliably distributed by the State Department
were for some reason distributed by the Pentagon in 2004. Nearly half of the
6 million American voters living abroad—a noticeable number of whom
formed anti-Bush organizations—never received their ballots or got them
too late to vote. Military personnel, usually more inclined toward support-
ing the president, encountered no such problems with their overseas ballots.
•
Voter Outreach of America, a company funded by the Republican National
Committee, collected thousands of voter registration forms in Nevada, prom-
ising to turn them in to public officials, but then systematically destroyed the
ones belonging to Democrats.
•
Tens of thousands of Democratic voters were stricken from the rolls in
several states because of “felonies” never committed, or committed by
someone else, or for no given reason. Registration books in Democratic
precincts were frequently and inexplicably out-of-date or incomplete.
•
In states like Ohio, Democrats enjoyed record turnouts but were deprived
of sufficient numbers of polling stations and voting machines. Many of
the machines in their precincts kept mysteriously breaking down. After
waiting long hours many people departed without voting. Pro-Bush pre-
cincts had no such troubles.
•
A similar pattern was observed with student populations in several states.
Students at conservative religious colleges had little or no wait at the
polls, whereas students from liberal arts colleges were forced to line up
for as long as ten hours, causing many to give up.
•
A polling station in a conservative evangelical church in Miami County,
Ohio, recorded an impossibly high turnout of 98 percent, while a polling
place in Democratic inner-city Cleveland recorded an impossibly low turn-
out of 7 percent.
•
Latino, Native American, and African American voters in New Mexico
who favored Kerry by two to one were five times more likely to have
their ballots spoiled and discarded in districts supervised by Republican
election officials. In these same Democratic areas, Bush “won” an aston-
ishing 68 to 31 percent upset victory.
•
Cadres of right-wing activists, many of them religious fundamentalists fi-
nanced by the Republican Party, handed out flyers in key Democratic pre-
cincts warning that voters who had unpaid parking tickets, an arrest record,
or owed child support would be arrested at the polls—all untrue.
•
Democratic poll watchers in Ohio, Arizona, and other states, who tried to
monitor election night vote counting, were menaced and shut out by squads
Voters, Parties, and Stolen Elections
193

of Republican toughs. In Warren County, Ohio, GOP officials announced a
“terrorist attack” alert, and ordered the press to leave. They then moved all
ballots to a warehouse where their secret counting produced some fourteen
thousand more votes for Bush than he had received in 2000.
•
Bush did remarkably well with phantom populations. The number of his
votes in two counties in Ohio exceeded the number of registered voters,
creating turnout rates as high as 124 percent. In a small conservative sub-
urban precinct of Columbus, where only 638 people were registered, the
touch-screen machines tallied 4,258 votes for Bush. In almost half of New
Mexico’s counties, more votes were reported than were recorded as being
cast, and the tallies were consistently in Bush’s favor.38
Exit polls showed Kerry solidly ahead of Bush in both the popular vote and
the Electoral College. Exit polls are an exceptionally accurate measure of elec-
tions. In three recent elections in Germany, exit polls were never off by more
than three-tenths of 1 percent. Unlike ordinary opinion polls, the exit sample is
drawn from people who have actually just voted. It rules out those who say they
will vote but never make it to the polls, those who cannot be sampled because
they have no telephone or otherwise cannot be reached at home, those who are
undecided or who change their minds about whom to support, and those who
are turned away at the polls for one reason or another. Exit polls have come to
be considered so reliable that international organizations use them to validate
election results in countries around the world.
Republicans argued that in 2004 the exit polls were inaccurate because
they were taken only in the morning when Kerry voters came out in greater
numbers. In fact, the polling was done at random intervals all through the
day, and the evening results were much the same as the early returns.
Most revealing, the discrepancies between exit polls and official tallies
were never random but worked to Bush’s advantage in ten of eleven swing
states that were too close to call, sometimes by as much as 9.5 percent as in
New Hampshire, an unheard of margin of error for an exit poll. In Nevada,
Ohio, New Mexico, and Iowa, exit polls registered solid victories for Kerry,
yet the official tally went to Bush, virtually a statistical impossibility.39
In states that were not hotly contested, the exit polls proved quite accurate.
Thus exit polls in Utah predicted a Bush victory of 70.8 to 26.4 percent; the
actual result was 71.1 to 26.4 percent. In Missouri, where the exit polls predicted
a Bush victory of 54 to 46 percent, the final result was 53 to 46 percent.
One explanation for the strange anomalies in vote tallies was found in the
widespread use of touch-screen electronic voting machines. These machines
produced results that consistently favored Bush over Kerry, often in chilling
contradiction to exit polls. In 2003 more than nine hundred computer profes-
sionals signed a petition urging that all touch-screen systems include a verifi-
able audit trail. Touch-screen voting machines can be easily programmed to
throw votes to the wrong candidate or make votes disappear while leaving
the impression that everything is working fine. A tiny number of operatives
can access the entire network through one machine and change results at
will. The touch-screen machines are coded, tested, and certified in complete
194
Chapter 14

secrecy. Verified counts are impossible because the machines leave no reliable
paper trail. Any programmer can write code that displays one result on the
screen, records something else, and prints yet something else. There is no
known way to ensure this does not happen.40
Since the introduction of touch-screen voting, mysterious congressional elec-
tion results have been increasing. In 2000 and 2002, Senate and House contests
and state legislative races in North Carolina, Nebraska, Alabama, Minnesota,
Colorado, and elsewhere produced dramatic and puzzling upsets, always at the
expense of Democrats who were ahead in the polls. In some counties in Texas,
Virginia, and Ohio, voters who pressed the Democrat’s name found that the
Republican candidate was chosen. In Cormal County, Texas, three GOP candi-
dates all won by exactly 18,181 votes apiece, a near statistical impossibility.
All of Georgia’s voters used Diebold touch-screen machines in 2002, and
Georgia’s incumbent Democratic governor and incumbent Democratic sena-
tor, who were both well ahead in the polls just before the election, lost in
amazing double-digit voting shifts.41
This may be the most telling datum of all: In New Mexico in 2004 Kerry
lost all precincts equipped with touch-screen machines, irrespective of income
levels, ethnicity, and past voting patterns. The only thing that consistently cor-
related with his defeat was the touch-screen machine itself. And in Florida
Bush registered inexplicably sharp jumps in his vote (compared to 2000) in
counties that used touch-screen machines.42
Companies like Diebold, Sequoia, and ES&S that market the touch-screen
machines are owned by militant supporters of the Republican Party. The CEO
of Diebold, Walden O’Dell, raised huge sums for the Bush campaign. (In 2009
Diebold sold its voting-machine division to ES&S, its largest competitor, put-
ting an even more monopolistic grip on the voting-machine system.) These
companies refused to explain how their machines worked, claiming proprie-
tary rights, a claim that has been backed in court. Election officials are not
allowed to evaluate the secret software. Apparently corporate trade secrets
are more important than voting rights.
The companies also argued that secrecy was needed in order to maintain
security. One security technologist disagrees: “Any voting-machine company
that claims its code must remain secret for security reasons is lying. Security
in computer systems comes from transparency—open systems that pass public
scrutiny—and not secrecy.”43
The solution is to use only electronic voting machines that produce readily
countable paper ballot results. Election officials would be required to conduct
random hand recounts of paper ballots in 3 or 4 percent of precincts, and
more in very close races. Such routine audits are an important check on the
accuracy of the computer count. The best system of all is the one in which
voters directly record their votes on paper and the paper ballots are then
jointly counted by officials of all political parties.44
Incidents of electoral fraud also were reported in the 2006 and 2008 elec-
tions but by then a great deal of light had been thrown on the strange anoma-
lies of electronic voting machines, along with court challenges and public
protests—all of which may have discouraged the partisan hackers.
Voters, Parties, and Stolen Elections
195

PALE DEMOCRACY
What policymakers do can have serious effects on our well-being. So it does
matter who gets elected. And who gets elected is much determined by how the
electoral system is run. In Western European countries, with their strong party
systems and several weeks of relatively brief campaigning, money does not
reign supreme as in the United States. Benefiting from the more democratic
system of proportional representation, left-oriented parties in Europe have es-
tablished a viable presence in parliaments, even ruling from time to time. Con-
sequently they have been able to create work conditions, human services, and
living standards considerably superior to those found in the United States.
Over the long haul just about every life-affirming policy that has come out
of government originated not with policymakers and political leaders but with
the common people, be it the eight-hour work day, the abolition of child la-
bor, public education, the right to collective bargaining, workers’ benefits, oc-
cupational safety, civil rights, civil liberties, women’s rights, gay rights, health
care, consumer protection, and environmental protection. When an issue wins
broad, well-organized popular support and receives some (usually reluctant)
attention in the media, then officeholders are less able to remain forever indif-
ferent to it.
The way people respond to political reality depends on the way that real-
ity is presented to them. If large numbers have become apathetic and cynical,
including many who vote, it is at least partly because a questionable electoral
system discourages the kind of creative mass involvement that democracy is
supposed to nurture. But even within a constricted two-party context, elec-
tions—if kept somewhat honest—are one of the potentially soft spots in the
capitalist power structure.
196
Chapter 14

C
H
A
P
T
E
R
15
Congress: The Pocketing
of Power
The Congress created by the framers of the Constitution is a bicameral body,
divided into the House of Representatives, whose 435 seats are distributed
among the states according to population, and the Senate, with two seats
per state regardless of population. Thus nine states—California, New York,
Florida, Texas, Pennsylvania, Illinois, Ohio, Minnesota, and New Jersey—
contain more than half the nation’s population but only 18 of the Senate’s
100 seats. Whom and what does the Congress represent?
A CONGRESS FOR THE MONEY
The people elected to Congress are not demographically representative of the
nation. Women are 52 percent of our population but composed only 92 of the
435 members of the House of Representatives in the 111th Congress in 2010,
and 17 of 100 U.S. senators. African Americans and Latinos together are a
quarter of the nation’s population, yet African Americans held only 42 seats
in the House, while Latinos occupied 25; the Senate had only one African
American senator and three Latinos. In addition, occupational backgrounds
are heavily skewed toward the upper brackets. Though they are only a small
fraction of the population, lawyers (many of them corporate attorneys) com-
pose about half of both houses. Bankers, investors, entrepreneurs, and busi-
ness executives compose the next largest group, along with former mayors,
state legislators, and other local officeholders. There are almost no blue-
collar persons or other ordinary working people in Congress, although some
members are of low-income family origin.1
197

Plutocracy—rule for the rich by the rich—prevails in Congress for the
most part. As one senator admitted, “At least half of the members of the Sen-
ate today are millionaires.… We’ve become a plutocracy.… The Senate was
meant to represent the interests of the states; instead, it represents the interests
of a class.”2 The lower chamber too, remarked another critic, is evolving
“from a House of Representatives to a House of Lords.”3 Many House and
Senate members file financial disclosure forms that give a vague and incom-
plete listing of their personal wealth. Persons elected to Congress these days
tend to be even wealthier than in earlier times—because escalating campaign
costs give rich individuals an ever greater advantage when running for office.
In addition to their private income, the people who represent us in Congress
receive a salary of $174,000 (as of 2010), which alone puts them in the top 3 per-
cent bracket. Many of them enjoy vastly different lifestyles and income opportu-
nities than those whom they claim to represent. We get transportation policy
made by lawmakers who never have to endure the suffocation of a crowded bus
or hunt for a parking space, agricultural policy by those who never tried keeping a
family farm going, safety legislation by lawmakers who never set foot in a factory
or mine, and minimum-wage laws by those who never have to try to support a
family on poverty income. So we have Rep. Jim Talent (R-MO) who repeatedly
voted against raising the minimum wage while himself teaching a two-
hour-a-week class at Washington University in St. Louis for $90,000 a year, or
about $1,500 an hour, in addition to his congressional salary.4
198
Chapter 15

We have health care policies formulated by lawmakers who never have to
sit for hours in a crowded clinic or go without care. Members of Congress—
including those conservatives who rant against publicly funded medical
coverage—enjoy all the benefits of socialized medicine: free medical care,
free hospitalization, free surgery, and free checkups with no co-payments,
no deductibles, no hidden fees, no disqualifying preconditions, all free for
themselves and their families. And after they leave Congress, they are
guaranteed private medical insurance in addition to Medicare. There is not
one recorded instance of any right-wing member of Congress refusing this
free socialistic medical care even as they denounce it as unsuitable for the
rest of us.
Likewise, while attacking our Social Security retirement programs, the
GOP-dominated 109th Congress itself enjoyed a retirement plan that allows
anyone who has served in the House or Senate to draw a pension for the
rest of his or her life upon leaving office, the amount depending on time
served, along with cost of living increases over the years. And unlike most
pensions, members of Congress do not have to pay a penny into the plan.
“Congress is the best that money can buy,” said the humorist Will Rogers.
Given the skyrocketing costs of media-driven electoral campaigns, the quip is
truer than ever. Members of Congress go where the money is, scrambling for
congressional committee assignments that deal with issues of greatest interest
to big donors. Lawmakers who received contributions from tobacco companies
were three times more likely to have voted against crackdowns on cigarette
sales to minors. The same members of Congress responsible for spending bil-
lions on the F-22 fighter plane and related military hardware, and insisting on
an additional dozen of the planes—which the Pentagon did not want—received
over $1.3 million from the weapons builders in 2008.5
Political donations can represent some of the most profitable investments a
business can make. For $36.5 million in campaign donations, the banking in-
dustry was granted deregulation and savings and loan bailout legislation that
would cost the U.S. public at least $1 trillion. The timber industry spent only
$8 million on contributions to secure a logging road subsidy worth $458 mil-
lion, a return on investment of over 5,700 percent. With a mere $5 million in
campaign donations, the broadcasting industry was able to procure free digital
TV licenses, a giveaway of public property worth $70 billion, for a staggering
1,400,000 percent return on investment.6
There is a saying: “The dollar votes more times than the man.” The power of
money works ceaselessly to reduce the influence of citizens who have nothing to
offer but their votes. Most senators and many House representatives get the
greater part of their money from outside their districts or home states. Senator
Robert Dole (R-Kan.), for instance, worked hard to get a billion-dollar farm sub-
sidy for tobacco growers, and received generous contributions from the tobacco
industry. But tobacco is virtually an unknown crop in Kansas, the state that
elected him, so whom was he representing?7
Politicians can claim that money does not influence their votes, but their
votes certainly influence the money flow. Those who vote the way powerful
interests want are more apt to be rewarded with handsome donations from
those same interests. In June 2008, standing before a room of oil executives,
Congress: The Pocketing of Power
199

Republican presidential candidate John McCain abandoned his previous posi-
tion against coastal oil drilling and declared his support for it. A month later,
oil and gas executives donated a total of $1 million to McCain’s campaign.8
Big donors might be strung along now and then, contributing in the hope
of buying a legislator’s eventual support, but they do not long reward those
who habitually oppose them. Legislators themselves admit they feel obliged
to accommodate big contributors. At a Senate Democratic Caucus, Senator
Harold Hughes (D-Iowa) once said his conscience would not allow him to
continue in politics because of the way he had been forced to raise money.
The late Senator Hubert Humphrey (D-Minn.) concurred, bemoaning the “de-
meaning and degrading” way he had to raise money, and “how candidates
literally had to sell their souls.”9
LOBBYISTS: THE OTHER LAWMAKERS
Lobbyists are persons hired by interest groups to influence legislative and admin-
istrative policies. Some political scientists see lobbying as part of the “informa-
tion process”: the officeholder’s perception of an issue is influenced primarily by
the information provided him or her—and the lobbyist’s job is to be the pro-
vider. Often the information presented on behalf of an issue is less important
than who is presenting it. As one congressional committee counsel explained:
“There’s the twenty-three-year-old consumer lobbyist and the businessman
who gives you $5,000. Whom are you going to listen to?”10
Along with the slick brochures and expert testimony, corporate lobbyists of-
fer succulent campaign contributions, fat lecture fees, easy-term loans, prepaid
vacation jaunts, luxury resorts, four-star restaurants, lush buffets, lavish parties
with attractive escorts, stadium suites at major sporting events, and other hus-
tling enticements of money.
Legislators sometimes rely on lobbyists to write their speeches, plant stor-
ies in the press on their behalf, launch fundraising drives, and even write some
of the bills that the lawmakers submit to Congress.
Some 34,000 lobbyists prowl the Capitol’s lobbies (hence their name) or
seek favorable rulings from agencies within the vast executive bureaucracy,
their numbers having doubled in recent years. Lobbyists outnumber legislators
by sixty-three to one. The amount they spend to influence lawmakers is even
more than the amount spent to elect them.11
High-powered Washington lobbyists are often corporate attorneys, busi-
nesspeople, or former public officeholders with good connections in govern-
ment. Business lobbyists can be credited with thwarting or watering down
antitrust, environmental, food safety, health care, prolabor, and proconsumer
measures, exercising an influence over government that eclipses just about every
other major interest.12 Almost eighty foreign governments also have lobbyists in
Washington looking for trade and aid agreements, including some regimes that
have been among the world’s worst human rights abusers.
Officeholders who prove especially cooperative toward lobbying interests
might later be rewarded with lucrative positions in the corporate world when
they return to private life. Barred from lobbying for only one year after
200
Chapter 15

leaving public service, they are becoming lobbyists with increasing frequency.
A recent example is Rep. Billy Tauzin (R-La.) who, having played an active
role in passing the trillion-dollar boondoggle Medicare prescription drug bill,
was reportedly offered a $2 million-a-year job with PhRMA, the pharmaceu-
tical industry’s leading lobbying group. Lured by huge incomes, more than
270 former members of Congress have registered to lobby over the last decade
(along with about 2,000 former congressional staff people).
In recent years, a campaign known as the K Street Project was launched
by House Republican leaders. They got trade associations and lobbying firms
to fire Democratic lobbyists and hire only designated Republicans, in effect
imposing a one-party monopoly over the influence system.13 Some lobbyists,
in a reverse flow, have subsequently won election to Congress, further blur-
ring the line between lobbyists and lawmakers. Many thousands of disclosure
documents that are required by law for lobbyists to file are not filed.
The most effective resource that lobbyists have at their command is
money. Money buys accessibility to the officeholder and the opportunity to
shape his or her judgments. Access alone does not guarantee influence. About
a century ago, before he became president of the United States, Woodrow
Wilson pointed out:
Suppose you go to Washington and try to get at your Government. You will al-
ways find that while you are politely listened to, the men really consulted are the
men who have the big stake—the big bankers, the big manufacturers, and the big
masters of commerce.… The masters of the Government of the United States are
the combined capitalists and manufacturers of the United States.14
When a fundraising dinner in Washington netted the Republican Party
$9 million in big donations, President Bush Sr.’s press secretary Marlin Fitzwater
defended the event: “[The donors] are buying into the political process.… That’s
what the political parties and the political operation is all about.” Asked how less
wealthy persons could buy into the process, Fitzwater replied vaguely, “They have
to demand access in other ways.”15
Those who argue that lobbyists are effective not because of money but be-
cause they shape the “information flow” might consider that the ability to dissem-
inate information and propagate one’s interests itself presumes organization,
expertise, exposure, and staff—things that money can buy. The mere possession
of great wealth and control of industry give corporate interests a social standing
unknown to ordinary working citizens. Their needs are paraded as the “needs of
the economy” and of the nation itself.
One ex-lobbyist concludes that the lobbyist’s main job is to circumvent
existing laws and get preferential treatment from Congress “for clients who
have no legal rights to them.”16 On one occasion lobbyists from Boeing, the
Business Roundtable, the National Association of Manufacturers, and others
used a congressional committee room beneath the House chamber as a com-
mand post, with its House telephones and fax machines, in a successful effort
to win approval of a free-trade bill. Some of the corporate lobbyists refused to
explain how they got there when challenged by a group of congressional
Democrats.17
Congress: The Pocketing of Power
201

A favorable adjustment in rates for interstate carriers, a special tax benefit
for a family oil trust, a high-interest bond issue for big investors, the leasing of
public lands to a private company, emergency funding for a faltering aeronautics
plant, a massive bailout for big banks, a postal subsidy for advertising firms, the
easing of safety standards for a food processor, the easing of pollution controls
for a chemical plant—all these hundreds of bills and their special amendments
and thousands of administrative rulings, which mean so much to particular busi-
ness interests, spur the efforts of legislators and administrators while going
largely unnoticed by a public that pays the monetary and human costs and sel-
dom has the means to make its case, or even discover it has a case.
Public-interest groups that attempt to speak for the general populace do
not have an easy time of it, especially when their proposals are directed
against powerful economic interests. The relative scarcity of power resources
(the most crucial being money) limits their efforts. Many of these citizen
groups devote an inordinate amount of time foraging for funds just to main-
tain their offices and tiny staffs.
Despite these inequities, there exists “the school of happy pluralism,” which
sees power as widely and democratically diffused. One political scientist con-
cludes that “nearly every vigorous push in one direction” by a lobbying interest
“stimulates an opponent or coalition of opponents to push in the opposite direc-
tion. This natural self-balancing factor comes into play so often that it almost
amounts to a law.”18 The evidence presented in this book does not support
such a cheerful view. Do the homeless, the unemployed, and most ordinary citi-
zens really have the kind of political clout that makes them figure as near equal
contestants in the influence system with high-rolling corporate lobbyists?
Supposedly the diversity of cultural, economic, and ethnic groups in our so-
ciety creates multiple cross-pressures that mitigate the strength of any one alle-
giance. Thus some voters might favor the Democrats on bread-and-butter issues
but support the Republicans’ antigay and antiabortion stances. Such cross-
pressures do not seem to apply to the politically active segments of the big-
business community that frequently collude around common class interests,
giving mutual support to each other’s agendas in a process known as logrolling.
Logrolling is not the same as compromise. Rather than checking and
blunting the selfish demands of each group as in compromise situations,
special-interest legislators and lobbyists cobble together winning votes in Con-
gress by backing one another’s claims at the expense of those who have little
power in the organized influence system.
Pressure group efforts are directed not only at officeholders but also at the
public, in what has been called grassroots lobbying. The goal is to bombard
the lawmakers with a media blitz and messages from concerned persons in
their home constituencies. Among the earliest practitioners of grassroots lob-
bying were liberal public-interest groups. But it was not long before business
associations also adopted this approach, the difference being that they have
been able to spend vastly more on shaping opinion visibility.
Corporate special interests sometimes hide behind pressure-group front
organizations that have uplifting, public-service-sounding names. The National
Wetlands Coalition is really a well-financed lobby of oil and mining companies
202
Chapter 15

and real-estate developers with the single mission of undoing the regulations
that protect our wetlands and endangered species. The Coalition for American
Growth and American Jobs is really dedicated to facilitating corporate out-
sourcing and export of jobs to cheaper labor markets abroad. Front groups
can spend immense sums on political activities without having to disclose their
donors and expenditures as long as they do not expressly advocate voting for a
particular candidate.19
Some pressure groups do not represent the constituencies they claim to. For
instance the American Medical Association (AMA) claims to speak for the medi-
cal profession in its opposition to public health insurance. But the AMA now
represents only 19 percent of practicing physicians, about half of whom support
a single-payer health system. Less publicized but larger medical groups such as
the Physicians for a National Health Program, the American College of Physi-
cians, and the American Medical Student Association, not to mention various
nurses associations, are in sharp disagreement with the AMA.20
Some grassroots lobbying is intended to build a climate of opinion favor-
able to the corporate giants rather than to push a particular piece of legislation.
The steel, oil, and electronics companies do not urge the public to support the
latest tax loophole or business handout. If anything, they prefer that citizens
not trouble themselves with such matters, but they do “educate” the public
with a whole menu of false claims about the many jobs they create, the selfless
services they provide the community, and the loving care they supposedly give
to the environment. With this kind of institutional advertising, the corporations
sell themselves and the entire business system rather than selling just their
particular products.
THE VARIETIES OF CORRUPTION
Members of Congress will sometimes act as pressure politicians without prod-
ding from any pressure group, because they already are well funded by the
group, or have lucrative holdings of their own in the same industry, or fear
the group’s political clout at election time, or are ideologically driven to sup-
port its cause. Legislators with large agribusiness holdings sit on committees
that shape agricultural programs directly benefiting themselves. Fully a third
of the lawmakers hold outside jobs as lawyers or officers of corporations
and financial institutions that link them with the very industries they oversee.
More than one-third of the senators make money every time the military bud-
get increases because they have investments in the defense industry. Almost
half the Senate and over a hundred House members have interests in banking,
including many who sit on committees that deal with banking.
Some senators and representatives travel for fun at government expense
under the guise of conducting committee investigations, a practice known as
junketing. In one five-year period, lawmakers and their staff members in-
dulged in 23,000 “fact-finding” junkets costing almost $50 million. The tab
was picked up mostly by private sponsors interested in winning legislative fa-
vors. The legislators and their dedicated assistants journeyed to investigate
such urgent trouble spots as Hawaii (150 trips), Paris (200), and Italy (140).21
Congress: The Pocketing of Power
203

Members of Congress also have been known to place relatives on the pay-
roll and pocket their salaries or take salary kickbacks from staff members.
Some have billed both the government and private clients for the same ex-
pense, or have used unspent travel allocations and unspent campaign contri-
butions for personal indulgences.22
The donations that lobbyists make to congressional campaigns are legal as
long as there is no explicit promise of official favors in exchange for the money.
Lawmakers who most closely boost corporate agendas not surprisingly seem
most likely to luxuriate in corporate largesse. Corporations also are allowed to
make unlimited donations to pay for a cooperative Congressperson’s legal ex-
penses. When House majority leader Tom DeLay (R-Tex.) came under investiga-
tion for various shady dealings, several of the nation’s largest firms and their
executives donated hundreds of thousands of dollars to his defense fund.23
Even by today’s jaded and permissive standards, lobbyists and legislators
might still do things that are deemed unlawful. In 2005 the most notorious of
these was lobbyist Jack Abramoff who was charged with bribing members of
Congress and the Bush administration in exchange for official favors. Then
there was Rep. Randy Cunningham (R-Cal.) who pleaded guilty to accepting
up to $2.4 million in bribes from defense contractors and evading $1 million
in taxes, for which he was sentenced to eight years and four months in federal
prison, the severest sentence meted out to a member of Congress as of then.24
Numerous politicos who preached family values and denounced libertine life-
styles were themselves guilty of illicit liaisons and other hypocritical practices.
A prime example is Rep. Dan Burton (R-In.), an outspoken proponent of “family
values,” a married father of three, with a 100 percent approval rating from the
right-wing Christian Coalition. Calling President Clinton a “scumbag” because
of his extramarital activities, Burton himself was eventually forced to admit to fa-
thering a child during an extramarital affair. He used campaign money and fed-
eral funds to hire women of dubious credentials as part of his congressional staff.
One of his ladies received about a half-million dollars in payments, but it remained
unclear what she did to earn such generous wages. Burton also paid rent on her
house—which he claimed was his “campaign headquarters” though oddly it was
located outside his district. He also reimbursed himself for thousands of dollars
annually in travel expenses, and unexplained “campaign expenses” for gifts, flow-
ers, golf balls, and sundry other things. As of 2010, Burton was still in Congress.25
Of the dozens of other notable cases of moral hypocrisy and dishonesty was
Senator Larry Craig, a Republican from Idaho. An outspoken opponent of gay
marriage and gays in the military, Craig was arrested for making sexual ad-
vances toward an undercover police officer in a men’s toilet. He pleaded guilty
to disorderly conduct. Several other men, including one from Craig’s college
days, identified the senator as having engaged in sexual activity with them or
having made overtures with that intent. He did not run for reelection.26
Scores of lawmakers or their aides have been indicted or convicted of bribery,
influence peddling, extortion, and other crimes. And those were only the ones un-
lucky enough to get caught. Numerous other members have retired from office to
avoid criminal charges. The House and Senate ethics committees are charged with
overseeing and enforcing ethics codes, but they do a less than impressive job of it.
204
Chapter 15

In 1997, the House barred outside groups and individuals from lodging
ethics complaints against its members. When Tom DeLay was facing felony
indictments in 2004, the House GOP pushed through a rule to ensure that
such criminal charges would not prevent him from keeping his post as House
Majority Leader. When this proved too outrageous, House Republicans
adopted a rule requiring that an ethics complaint had to muster a majority
of votes on the Ethics Committee. But membership on the committee was
evenly split according to party affiliation, so party-line votes made it nigh on
impossible for ethics complaints to see the light of day.
If, as they say, power corrupts, it usually gets a helping hand from money.
Members of Congress are not the only culprits. In just one six-year period, the
number of other public officeholders convicted included 3 cabinet officers, 3 gov-
ernors, 34 state legislators, 20 judges, 5 state attorneys-general, 28 mayors,
11 district attorneys, 170 police officers, and a U.S. vice president, Spiro
Agnew, who resigned in exchange for the dropping of charges of bribery, extor-
tion, and income-tax evasion. A U.S. president, Richard Nixon, escaped im-
peachment and jail by resigning from office and being granted a pardon by his
successor, Gerald Ford.
A Government Accountability Office study found over 77,000 cases of
fraud in federal departments and agencies during a two-and-a-half-year pe-
riod, nearly half in the Pentagon. Only a small number of the individuals in-
volved were prosecuted.27
The number of high-level members of the Reagan administration accused
of unethical or illegal conduct was record breaking. The charges included
fraud, improper stock dealings, tax violations, perjury, obstructing congres-
sional investigations, accepting illegal loans, gifts, and favors, and otherwise
using public resources for personal gain. Only a few went to jail; many re-
signed but many stayed on, including Attorney General Edwin Meese, whose
memory lapsed seventy-nine times (“I don’t remember”) when questioned be-
fore a Senate committee regarding a host of shady financial dealings.28
Some observers see corruption as a more or less acceptable fact of life.
Passing a little money under the table is supposedly just another way of oiling
the wheels of government and getting things done.29 But corruption often goes
beyond the petty bribe to reach momentous proportions. Rather than being a
violation of the rules of the game, it becomes the name of the game, something
more than merely an outgrowth of a politician’s flawed character. Corruption
in government promotes policies that drain the public treasure to feed the pri-
vate purse. It vitiates laws and regulations that might otherwise safeguard
community interests. It produces favoritism for the few and injury and neglect
for the many. Private venality becomes a public enemy.
SPECIAL INTERESTS AND SECRECY
For years, power in Congress rested with the twenty or so standing (that is,
permanent) committees in each house that determined the destiny of bills: re-
writing some, approving a few, and burying most. The committees were dom-
inated by chairpersons who rose to their positions mostly by seniority, that is,
Congress: The Pocketing of Power
205

by being repeatedly reelected, a feat best accomplished in a safe district or pre-
dominantly one-party state.
Both parties in both houses have a caucus or “conference” consisting of the
entire membership of the party in that particular house. The party caucus elects
the majority or minority leader and party whips. The majority party’s caucus
also elects the committee and subcommittee chairs and controls their official in-
vestigative activities. Totaling over 240 in the House and Senate combined, the
subcommittees have staffs of their own and fixed legislative jurisdictions.
The subcommittees simplify the lobbyist’s task of controlling legislation.
Each special-interest group has its own special-interest subcommittee. For
example, be it cotton, corn, wheat, peanut, tobacco, or rice producers, each
major agribusiness interest is represented on a particular subcommittee of the
Senate and House Agricultural Committees by senators and representatives
ready to do battle on their behalf. To decentralize power in this way is not to
democratize it. The separate units are for the benefit of specific groups, often to
the neglect of the unorganized public.
Much is made of the “powerful chairmen” said to preside over this or that
committee. Thus the chair of the House Armed Services Committee was always
considered “powerful,” but it was because he served the powerful interests of cor-
porate America and the military. Power does not adhere to a position in some
mystical fashion. When a progressive Democrat, Ron Dellums, became chair of
the House Armed Services Committee through seniority, and sought to roll back
some military spending, he felt his position to be tenuous indeed, as most of his
committee responded less to his leadership and more to the big contractors and
206
Chapter 15

big campaign donors from the defense industry. Suddenly the powerful committee
chair was not so powerful.
Some appropriations are known as pork barrel or just pork or earmarks.
Such earmarks are tucked away in larger spending bills, have limited legislative
sponsorship, and are usually tacked on at the last minute (sometimes giving them
the additional name of add-ons). Pork generally consists of projects that are of
local interest but are highly visible representations of the legislator’s ability to
bring home the federal bacon: a $400,000 parking lot for a town of three hun-
dred people in Alaska, $250,000 to highlight the health benefits of California
wine, and $550,000 for a Dr. Seuss memorial in Massachusetts. Congressional
pork-barrel spending used to average several billion dollars a year, but by 2006
it had climbed to $27 billion for some 15,000 projects.30 Not all earmarks are
frivolous or wasteful; many are quite useful. Taken together earmarks represent
a tiny sum compared to the hundreds of billions doled out annually for fat de-
fense contracts, corporate subsidies, and tax breaks for the superrich.
When it involves the poor and the powerless, Congress knows how to save
money. A Republican-controlled Congress, with assistance from conservative
Democrats, cut food programs for infants and senior citizens, assistance pro-
grams for the disabled, home-care and therapy programs for the infirm and han-
dicapped, and medical care, home-heating aid, and job and housing programs
for low-income families and elderly—the kind of cuts that transfer into suffering
and hardship for the most vulnerable members of society.31
In contrast the Congress is keenly supportive of the national security state
and the arms industry. In 1982, a massive grassroots movement for a bilateral,
verifiable freeze on nuclear weapons swept the country, yet the lawmakers con-
tinued to vote for major escalations in nuclear weaponry. In 2000, over 80 per-
cent of the U.S. public favored a ban on nuclear weapons testing, yet the
Comprehensive Test Ban Treaty was defeated in the Senate by a 51 to 48 vote;
all 51 were Republican senators. In 2009, a substantial majority of the public
disapproved of U.S. military involvement in Iraq and Afghanistan, yet the
Democratic-controlled Congress continued to vote for funds to maintain it.
Congress seems unable to rein in the national security state. When the
lawmakers ruled that no military aid was to be given to mercenary forces in
Nicaragua, funds for right-wing contra terrorists continued to be found even
during the period of the most stringent congressional prohibitions. More re-
cently, the Pentagon continued to aid Indonesian military units despite a con-
gressional ban intended to curb the torture and murders committed by these
same units.
The Pentagon and various intelligence agencies, including the CIA, DIA
(Defense Intelligence Agency), and NSA, sponsor fellowship programs that en-
able them to place their employees on congressional staffs for a year at a time,
influencing lawmakers in ways quite differently than would a cadre of con-
gressional fellows from antipoverty or environmental organizations. There is
little to prevent fellows from being assigned to congressional staffs for the
express purpose of spying on particular House or Senate members. Congres-
sional fellowships are also awarded to employees of corporate firms with an
interest in military contracts and other legislation, including General Electric,
Congress: The Pocketing of Power
207

General Dynamics, and DuPont—with no provision made for possible conflict
of interest.32
Congressional committees hold many of their sessions behind closed doors,
keeping influential business groups informed while keeping the public in the
dark. “The thing that really makes me mad is the dual standard,” complained a
Senate committee staff member. “It’s perfectly acceptable to turn over informa-
tion about what’s going on in committee to the auto industry or the utilities but
not to the public.”33 Secrecy can envelop the entire lawmaking process. A bill
cutting corporate taxes by $7.3 billion was (a) drawn up by the House Ways
and Means Committee in three days of secret sessions, (b) passed by the House
under a closed rule after only one hour of debate with (c) about only thirty mem-
bers present who (d) passed the bill without benefit of a roll call vote.
Legislation can have deceptive packaging and hidden contents. A bill that
raised the minimum wage by 85 cents contained lesser known provisions that
favored transnational corporations with tax shelters and opportunities to roll
back worker benefits and raid pension funds. In 2006, a bill offering a long
overdue but paltry increase in the minimum wage also had attached to it a
huge tax cut for the very rich. It was defeated by Senate Democrats.
Some of the most significant legislation is drafted clandestinely. Without ben-
efit of public hearings and public debate, a coterie of high-placed government of-
ficials and corporate executives secretly put together the North American Free
Trade Agreement (NAFTA), a two-thousand-page bill that went largely unread
by the lawmakers voting on it. It was presented to the House of Representatives
with a fast-track proviso. Fast track requires that Congress accept or reject an
agreement in toto without amending it and with only two days of debate
THE LEGISLATIVE LABYRINTH
As intended by the framers of the Constitution, the very structure of Congress
has a conservative effect on its performance. The staggered terms of the
Senate—with only one-third elected every two years—are designed to blunt
any mass sentiment for a sweeping turnover. The division of the Congress into
two separate houses makes concerted legislative action all the more difficult.
A typical bill before Congress must make its way through various com-
mittees of, say, the House of Representatives, during which time it might be
given a hearing, be subjected to amendments, recommitted to its originating
committee, or pigeonholed (killed). If it survives this process, it goes before
the entire House where it is debated, passed, or rejected. If passed by the
House, the bill is sent to the Senate, which either places it directly on its cal-
endar for debate and vote or refers it to a standing committee to repeat the
same process of hearings and amendments. It can die in committee or be sent
to the Senate floor. The Senate might defeat the bill or pass the House version
either unchanged or amended. If the House refuses to accept the Senate
amendments, a conference committee is put together consisting of several se-
nior members from each house. Should the conference committee be able to
reach a compromise, an identical version of the bill is returned to each house
for a final vote.
208
Chapter 15

Sometimes conference committees go into business for themselves, introduc-
ing elaborate changes. Thus under a GOP-controlled Congress, a conference
committee consisting entirely of House and Senate Republicans deleted from
the final version of an $87 billion spending bill a provision that would have pe-
nalized corporations guilty of war profiteering in Iraq or Afghanistan.34
A bill that does not make it through both houses before the next congres-
sional election must be reintroduced and the entire process begun anew. If passed
by both houses, the bill goes to the president who either signs it into law or vetoes
it. The president’s veto can be overridden only by two-thirds of the members of
each house who are present and voting. If the president fails to sign the legislation
within ten days after passage, it automatically becomes law unless Congress
adjourns in that time, in which case it has been pocket vetoed and so dies.
The bill that survives this legislative labyrinth to become law may be only
an authorization act to bring some program into existence. Congress then
must repeat the entire process for an appropriations bill to finance the autho-
rization—something the lawmakers occasionally fail to do.
Various dilatory tactics, from time-consuming quorum calls to Senate fi-
libusters, can thwart legislative action. For seventy years, until the 1950s, the
filibuster (limitless debate in the Senate designed to obstruct legislative action)
was wielded by Southern Democrats to block 257 antilynching bills. Eventu-
ally a cloture rule was passed mandating that the Senate could end debate by
a three-fifths vote (sixty votes). Procedural filibusters rather than actual ones
have become the more likely practice. If a motion to end debate gets sixty or
more votes, then it is assumed that cloture has been achieved and no filibuster
can be successfully attempted. If it fails to get sixty votes, then it is treated as
having been blocked by filibuster.
In the 1980s and 1990s, Republicans used the procedural filibuster far more
frequently than did Democrats. They filibustered or threatened to filibuster bills
that supported arms control, public financing of congressional campaigns, limits
on private campaign spending, legal abortions at military hospitals, human
rights conditions on military aid to El Salvador, a modest tax-rate increase on
the rich, accessible voter registration for the poor and unemployed, outlawing
the use of scabs as permanent replacements of strikers, and a $16.3 billion jobs
program.35 In 1998, a bill that banned lobbyists’ gifts and meals and a bill de-
signed to end loopholes in campaign financing were killed when proponents
could not achieve the sixty votes needed to overcome a filibuster threat. Some
bills are so compromised and watered down to make them filibuster proof that
they end up being of little worth
The Senate requirement of sixty votes to pass a bill—if a filibuster challenge
arises—is arguably unconstitutional. The Constitution requires a supermajority
(two-thirds) in only five instances: to override a presidential veto, ratify a treaty,
propose an amendment to the Constitution, convict an impeached official, and
expel a member of the Senate or House. It does not call for a supermajority for
ordinary legislation.36
About 80 percent of the bills never make their way out of the legislative laby-
rinth to become law. Many of these are best left buried. But the lawmakers’ wis-
dom is not the only determinant of what gets through; class power is also at work.
Congress: The Pocketing of Power
209

Legislation intended to assist the needy moves along the slow lane: a $100 million
bill to fund summer jobs for unemployed youth is debated in Congress for eight
months, with dozens of attempts at crippling amendments; a pilot project supply-
ing school breakfasts for a small number of malnourished children is debated at
agonizing length. But when Continental Illinois Bank is about to go bankrupt, bil-
lions of dollars are handed out for a quick rescue transfusion, with hardly any de-
liberation. Hundreds of billions are readily channeled into the savings and loan
bailout. Billions for new weapons systems are passed in a matter of days. NAFTA
is rammed through without amendment in two days. And domestic programs that
had taken many years of struggle to achieve are cut by many billions of dollars in a
few weeks. The major financial interests may not always get all they want, but
they usually enjoy the fast lane in Congress.
The USA Patriot Act also traveled the fast lane, being rushed through
Congress so quickly that most members had no chance to read it and no notion
of its extreme and repressive provisions (discussed in Chapter 10). Throughout
his first year in office, President Obama kept the Patriot Act intact with all its
potentially oppressive features.
INCUMBENCY AND TERM LIMITS
For members of Congress getting reelected is a major concern; for some it is
their only concern. In any case, the great majority of them are quite successful
at it. The turnover in Congress is rarely more than 5 to 8 percent. In the 2000
election 98 percent of the incumbents who chose to run again were reelected.
There are several reasons for this:
Campaign funding and constituent service. By definition, incumbents are
people who have already demonstrated an ability to muster enough money and
votes to win. They maintain an office in their home district to perform services
for constituents, doing little favors for little people and big favors for big people,
gathering votes from the former and campaign money from the latter.
Name recognition. Incumbents generally enjoy a head start over potential
challengers in name recognition. They issue press releases and use their frank-
ing privileges (free congressional mailings) to correspond with constituents,
sending out newsletters that advertise their devoted efforts as lawmakers.
One-party dominance. Many states and districts are demographically in-
clined toward one party or another, and many districts are gerrymandered to
concentrate party strength in lopsided ways, so much so that it is sometimes
difficult to recruit a challenger. Those who face tough reelection challenges
and have problems raising funds are more inclined to retire than those who
occupy safe and well-financed seats.37
Conservatives had nothing against limitless incumbency in Congress when
conservative Southern Democrats or Republicans dominated the influential com-
mittee leadership positions. But when senior positions began going to moderately
liberal and even progressive Democrats, including members of the Congressional
Black Caucus, conservatives became the moving force behind term limits (allow-
ing a legislator to serve a limited number of terms with no further opportunity to
be reelected to the same office). Some misguided progressives joined in the
210
Chapter 15

campaign, believing that term limits would rid the Congress of entrenched oli-
garchs and bring infusions of fresh ideas and improved legislative performance.
Others argued that a Congress in which members could serve only one or
two terms would lack institutional memory and experience and be wanting in
professional efficacy. When one recalls that it takes many years of struggle to
pass major public-interest legislation, who in Congress would be able to stick
around long enough to see things through?
Term limits actually were adopted by referendums in various state legislatures,
and the results have not been encouraging. There is weaker legislative leadership
and greater power for bureaucratic chiefs, legislative staffers, and, above all, lobby-
ists. Without benefit of a veteran leadership with real institutional memory,
the “perpetually inexperienced” legislators, limited to only two terms, commit
frequent tactical and procedural errors. Sometimes there are prolonged debates on
frivolous resolutions but hardly any discussion on bills of major importance. Bud-
gets are passed in record time because lawmakers often do not fully understand
what they are voting for. Newly arrived legislators undo laws that had just been
passed the term before, or give exhaustive reconsideration to bills that had been de-
feated the previous term, or remain blithely ignorant about past legislative disasters
that are in need of fixing. “It takes hours just to get everybody in line for a single
vote.… [M]any are distracted by new campaigns for other offices.”38
With term limits, the elected position is seen more than ever as a tempo-
rary position. Legislators are sometimes inclined to depart even before their
terms are finished in order to take an appointive post or run for some other
office. “They don’t have much experience; all they have are political futures.
Donors are more important than constituents,” a public-interest advocate said
of the term-limited California lower house. Term limits create a perpetually
freshman and sophomore legislature that is “more amateurish, much more ju-
venile and much less informed,” said another.39
Of the twenty-one states that had adopted term limits since 1990, the
state supreme courts in four (Massachusetts, Oregon, Washington, and
Wyoming) have ruled that limits were unconstitutional. In two other states
(Idaho and Utah) the state legislatures have repealed limits. That leaves fifteen
states with term limits for state lawmakers.40
In 1992, highly publicized and well-financed initiatives to limit terms in the
U.S. Congress to six or twelve years (depending on the state) won voter endorse-
ments in fourteen states; the limits applied only to the congressional delegations of
the respective states. But several years later, the U.S. Supreme Court ruled that
Article I of the Constitution prohibits a state from erecting new qualifying barriers
for congressional candidates, including incumbents running for reelection.41 The
decision invalidated the congressional term limit provisions of twenty-three states.
So as of today there are no term limits on the U.S. Congress.
LEGISLATIVE DEMOCRACY UNDER SIEGE
Behind Congress there stands the entire corporate social order, with its hold
over the economy and wealth of society, its control of mass media, and its
high-paid lobbyists and moneyed contributors. Given all this, it is surprising
Congress: The Pocketing of Power
211

that any democratic victories are won in Congress. Yet, from time to time
popular pressures prevail and progressive lawmakers do manage to push
worthwhile measures through Congress, or block something egregious.
The legislators also sometimes perform democratic watchdog functions over
administrative agencies, checking to see why a Labor Department field office is
not functioning, why a Social Security office is being closed, why a cancer clinic
has not received its funding, why vacancies in an agency investigating racketeer-
ing have not been filled, why a report on wage rates at rural hospitals has not
been released, why compensation has not been made to injured veterans, and
other such matters.
The most useful watchdog of government, the Government Accountability
Office (formerly the General Accounting Office), created and directed by
Congress to investigate everything from military waste to environmental abuse,
operates at the request of legislators and reports directly to Congress. This
congressional agency is an important democratic pressure on behalf of ordinary
people, prodding a recalcitrant and often secretive federal bureaucracy.
Even during the rightist Reagan and Bush Sr. presidencies, Congress ap-
proved the expansion of Medicare, strengthened major civil rights statutes and
environmental programs, and imposed sanctions on South Africa because of its
racist apartheid policy. Congress, then, is not just a special-interest arena. It is
also a place where larger critical issues are sometimes joined, where democratic
inputs can be registered, where progressive forces occasionally can mount at-
tacks against a conservative status quo or maintain some (partially successful)
defense against the free-market rightist rollback.
In times past the majority party in Congress, be it Democratic or Repub-
lican, usually maintained a degree of accommodation and compromise toward
the minority party, according it proportionate representation on standing
committees and conference committees, access to proposed legislation, and
equal debating time. The understanding was that today’s majority party is
likely to find itself in the minority someday, at which time it would want to
be treated with the same consideration.
With the increasing number of gerrymandered and touch-screen upset vic-
tories for Republican candidates, the GOP majority leadership in Congress in
2002–2006 showed a growing disinclination to practice procedural democracy,
feeling that it would predominate indefinitely as the legislative majority. Bills
were written in secrecy, often by right-wing lobbyists and other special interests,
with no hearings called, and no realistic debate allowed in most instances.
Omnibus bills, thousands of pages long, were brought to the House floor with
no advance notice, in violation of the seventy-two-hour rule. Democrats were
excluded entirely from conference committees, where the Republicans rewrote
legislation even after the conference was closed, usually ending up with far
more conservative bills than what originally went into conference.
The House operated in increasing secrecy. During the spring and summer
months of 2003, in the wee hours of what was usually Friday night when many
members had left to visit with constituents, the GOP House leadership rammed
through cuts in veterans benefits by three votes, slashed education and health
care by five votes, gave enormous tax cuts to the very rich by a handful of votes,
212
Chapter 15

eviscerated the Head Start assistance program for low-income children by one
vote, and passed the Medicare privatization and prescription drug bill by one
vote. As one participant, Rep. Sherrod Brown (D-Ohio), described it:
Always in the middle of the night. Always after the press had passed their dead-
lines. Always after the American people had turned off the news and gone to
bed.… What did the public miss? They didn’t see the House votes, which nor-
mally take no more than 20 minutes, dragging on for as long as an hour as
members of the Republican leadership trolled for enough votes to cobble together
a majority … coercing enough Republican members into switching their votes to
produce the desired result. In other words, they didn’t see the subversion of
democracy.42
In keeping with House rules, voting is supposed to last fifteen minutes but
on numerous occasions—when the final tally did not go the way GOP leaders
wanted—they kept the roll call vote open sometimes for several hours into the
early morning, cajoling and arm-twisting to get the votes the White House de-
manded. In one instance, Rep. Nick Smith (R-Mich.) stated publicly that he
was pressured to change his “no” vote to “yes” by party leaders who assured
him that if he cooperated, “business interests” would contribute $100,000 to
his son’s campaign to succeed him in Congress, and if he did not, they would
make sure his son never made it to Congress. He stood firm, and in fact, his
son was opposed and defeated in that year’s Republican primary.43
How can we create a Congress that is more responsive to voters and less
responsive to moneyed interests and legislative manipulators?
First and foremost, we need honest elections, not ones that are stolen by
those who control the registration and voting, or who are in an unanswerable
position to fix the final tally (see the discussion in Chapter 14).
Second, candidates should win office instead of buying their way in. What
is needed is a system of public campaign financing that neutralizes the influ-
ence of private contributions. Candidates who accept public funding would
have to agree to limit their spending to the amount of the public allocation.
Those who decline taxpayer money would be free of that spending limit—
but their opponents would then qualify for public funds equal to any amount
spent by the privately funded candidate. Limitless private funding would be
allowed—but it would be matched and therefore neutralized by public fund-
ing. In states like Maine and Arizona that have public financing of elections,
the amounts spent by candidates have dropped dramatically.
Third, strict prohibitions should be placed on lobbyist gifts and services
that are now little more than legalized bribery.
Fourth, broadcast media should be required to set aside free and equal
time for all candidates during campaigns. The airwaves are the property of
the American people, part of the public domain. Broadcasters are granted li-
censes to operate stations, but that does not mean they own the air waves to
use as they choose. It is no infringement on their free speech to oblige them, as
a public service, to make some portion of broadcast time available to office
seekers who want to discuss public issues.
Fifth and finally, campaign times are too long. Candidates start announc-
ing their candidacy and jockeying for position more than a year before
Congress: The Pocketing of Power
213

election day. Longer campaigns create bigger campaign bills, more depen-
dency on those with money, more mass-marketing of a candidate’s image
with less time given to actual issues and policies.
With honest vote counts, secure access to voter registration and ballots,
public financing of campaigns, limits on private perks, and free access to me-
dia, the representative system would be more democratic in process and con-
tent. Major public office would be more accessible to others besides the rich
or those supported by the rich. And democracy would have much more hope
and substance to it.
214
Chapter 15

C
H
A
P
T
E
R
16
The President: Guardian
of the System
The president, we are told, plays many roles: chief executive, “chief legislator,”
commander-in-chief, head of state, and party leader. Seldom mentioned is the
president’s role as promoter and guardian of corporate capitalism. The presi-
dent is the embodiment of the executive-centered state system that serves corpo-
rate interests at home and abroad.
SALESMAN OF THE SYSTEM
Every modern president has served as the politico-economic system’s ideologi-
cal salesperson, praising “free enterprise” and hailing America as the greatest
country in the world. Prosperity, our presidents tell us, is here or not far off—
but so are the nation’s many wild-eyed enemies, be they communists, revolu-
tionaries, terrorists, Islamic “fanatics,” or whatever. There is no shortage of
adversaries supposedly waiting to pounce upon the United States, thwarted
only by the readiness of U.S. military forces around the world.
Whether Democrat or Republican, liberal or conservative, the president
tends to treat capitalist interests as synonymous with the nation’s well-being.
America will achieve new heights spurred on “by freedom and the profit mo-
tive,” President Reagan announced. “This is a free-enterprise country,” said
President Bill Clinton. “I want to create more millionaires in my presidency”
than did other presidents.1
Presidents describe the overseas investments of giant corporations as “U.S.
interests” abroad, to be defended at all costs—or certainly at great cost to the
taxpayer. The president’s primary commitment abroad is not to democracy as
such but to free-market capitalism. In an address before the United Nations,
215

27 September 1993, President Clinton said: “Our overriding purpose is to expand
and strengthen the world’s community of market-based democracies.” In fact,
U.S. presidents have supported any number of market-based dictatorships in
Latin America, the Middle East, and elsewhere. And they have helped destroy
any number of popular-based governments that sought alternatives to free-
market corporatism, as in Chile, Nicaragua, South Yemen, Indonesia, East Timor,
Mozambique, Iraq, and Yugoslavia—suggesting that the president’s prime service
is not to democracy but to the global free market.
At the Constitutional Convention of 1787, the wealthy planter Charles
Pinckney proposed that no one qualify for the presidency who was not worth
at least $100,000—a munificent sum in those days. Although the proposal
was never written into the Constitution, it seemingly has been followed in
practice. In modern times almost all major presidential candidates have been
millionaires either when they first campaigned for the office or by the time
they left it.
Presidents have relied heavily on the judgments of corporate leaders,
drawing their top advisors primarily from industry and banking. One descrip-
tion of President Ford could easily apply to most other White House occu-
pants: He “follows the judgment of the major international oil companies on
oil problems in the same way that he amiably heeds the advice of other big
businesses on the problems that interest them.… He is… a solid believer in
the business ideology of rugged individualism, free markets and price compe-
tition—virtues that exist more clearly in his mind than they do in the practices
of the international oil industry.”2
216
Chapter 16

During the economic crisis of 2008–2009, President Obama showed himself
incapable of delivering a thorough critique of Wall Street’s irresponsible financial
legerdemain. He argued against putting a cap on the multimillion-dollar bonuses
that induced financial speculators to take unwarranted risks. Obama repeatedly
announced that “we are all in this together” when in fact the general public was
taking most of the losses and paying most of the expenses on behalf of the Wall
Street speculators.
Presidents are as capable of trading favors for money as any influence-
peddling, special-interest politician. Big contributors may disclaim any intention
of trying to buy influence, but if it should happen that they find themselves or
their firms burdened by a problem that only the White House can handle, they
see no reason why they shouldn’t be allowed to exercise their rights like other
citizens and ask their elected representative, who in this case happens to be their
friend, the president of the United States, for a little help. The success any group
enjoys in winning White House intercession has less to do with the justice of its
cause than with the monetary resources it commands and the place it occupies
in the class structure.
President Nixon helped settle a multibillion-dollar suit against ITT and
then received a $400,000 donation from that corporation. Reagan pushed
through the deregulation of oil and gasoline prices, then received huge con-
tributions from the oil industry. A “team” of 249 fat cats put up at least
$100,000 each to help elect Bush Sr. in 1988. In return, they all were granted
special dispensations on regulatory and legal matters. Seventy-one big contri-
butors to Bush Jr.’s 2000 campaign were awarded no-bid contracts totaling
$8 billion for lucrative projects in Iraq and Afghanistan. Bush waived pay-
ment of at least $7 billion in government royalties for the oil and gas taken
from publicly owned reserves, all to benefit an industry that was already mak-
ing record profits. In his two presidential campaigns, Bush Jr. received a total
of $61.5 million from oil and gas companies alone.3 Among Barack Obama’s
biggest campaign contributors in the 2008 presidential race were Goldman
Sachs, Microsoft, Citigroup, JPMorgan Chase, Morgan Stanley, and General
Electric, almost all of whom benefited directly from the multibillion-dollar
bailout subsequently doled out by the Obama administration.4
Like any local political-patronage dispenser, presidents will award choice
posts to big contributors. Bush Sr. received a total of $900,000 from persons he
later appointed to ambassadorships; many had no political or diplomatic experi-
ence. Nixon insisted that people who were offered ambassadorships be required
“to pay at least $250,000” in campaign contributions. Bush Jr. appointed big do-
nors as Secretaries of Commerce and Labor and chief of Homeland Security.5
Speaking to a gathering of his wealthy supporters in the 2004 campaign, he re-
marked, “What an impressive crowd, the haves and the have-mores. Some people
call you the elite. I call you my base.”6
Given that they live like opulent potentates, it is probably not easy for
presidents to remain keenly aware of the travails endured by ordinary working
people. The president resides in the White House, a rent-free, 132-room mansion
set on an eighteen-acre estate, with a well-stocked wine cellar, tennis courts, a pri-
vate movie theater, gymnasium, bowling alley, and heated outdoor swimming
The President: Guardian of the System
217

pool. In addition, the president has a domestic staff of about one hundred, includ-
ing six butlers, the free services of a personal physician, a dozen chauffeured li-
mousines, and numerous helicopters and jets, including Air Force One. He has
access to the imperial luxuries of Camp David and other country retreats, free
vacations, a huge expense allowance—and for the few things he himself must
pay for—a $400,000 annual salary.7
Journalists and political scientists have described the presidency as a “man-
killing job.” Yet presidents take more vacations and live far better and longer
than the average American male. After leaving office they continue to feed from
the public trough on an annual pension of $180,100 with adjusted increases for
inflation, plus funds for office space, staff, and travel expenses, along with full-
time Secret Service protection. Some ex-presidents pick up other perks, as when
a group of self-described “independently wealthy” individuals bought a sumptu-
ous estate in fashionable Bel Air, California, which they gave to Ronald Reagan
when he left office, in appreciation for all he had done for them.
It is said that the greatness of the office lends greatness to its occupant, so that
even persons of mediocre endowment grow in response to the presidency’s re-
sponsibilities and powers. Closer examination reveals that presidents have been
just as readily corrupted as ennobled by high office. At least six presidents em-
ployed illegal FBI wiretaps to gather incriminating information on rival political
figures. The White House tapes, which recorded Nixon’s Oval Office conversa-
tions, showed him to be a vindictive, bigoted, foul-mouthed man whose shallow-
ness the majestic office could cloak but not transform. On occasion, Nixon
requested the IRS to stop auditing the incomes of close friends and go after his
political enemies. Official audits revealed that he underpaid his taxes by
$444,022 while spending over $2.4 million of taxpayers’ money on improve-
ments of his private estate.8
President Reagan repeatedly fabricated stories and anecdotes about nonexis-
tent events. The Iran-contra affair revealed him to be a manipulator and dissem-
bler who felt himself unaccountable to Congress and above the law. Like some of
his predecessors, Bush Jr. proved himself impatient and ill-tempered with subordi-
nates, given to self-righteous attacks against critics, and ready to cover up a num-
ber of shady deals from his past, including insider trading with Harken Energy
shares. As one columnist complained: “How can Bush crack the whip on Big Busi-
ness when he’s a wholly owned subsidiary of it?”9 The same can be said of other
political leaders in both Republican and Democratic administrations.
THE TWO FACES OF THE PRESIDENT
One of the president’s many roles is “chief liar,” performed by offering the public
a deceptive admixture of populist rhetoric and plutocratic policy. Presidents
Richard Nixon and Gerald Ford both voiced their support for environmentalism
and then opened new forest lands to strip mining. Both gave lip service to the prob-
lems of the Vietnam veteran, the plight of the elderly, and the needs of the poor,
yet cut benefits to these groups. President Jimmy Carter promised to reduce the
military budget and arms sales; instead he increased both. He talked of helping
the needy, but proposed cutbacks in youth summer jobs, child nutrition
programs, and other benefits, while offering lavish subsidies to big business.10
218
Chapter 16

The gap between rhetoric and policy became a virtual chasm during the
Reagan years. President Reagan lauded our veterans, but offered a budget that
reduced veterans’ health care. He described himself as a champion of racial equal-
ity without mentioning that he had cut inner-city programs and had done nothing
to enforce civil rights. He announced that his tax cuts had benefited working folks
and not the rich—though the figures said just the opposite. He called for the rule
of law in international affairs, yet launched an unlawful invasion of Grenada and
a mercenary war of attrition against Nicaragua. And he refused to accept the law-
ful jurisdiction of the World Court when Nicaragua brought the case before that
tribunal.11
Reagan’s successor, President George Bush Sr., proclaimed himself the “edu-
cation president,” yet slashed education funds for disadvantaged children and
others. As the self-professed “environment president,” Bush Sr. opposed interna-
tional measures against global warming and ozone depletion.12
“The courage to change” was the campaign theme that helped get Bill Clinton,
a Democrat, elected president in 1992, yet he did not seem interested in changing
much of anything. He did nothing to liberalize the labor laws that made union
organizing so difficult. He supported a $3 billion reduction for low-income
housing. He vowed to confront the cataclysmic problems of global warming,
then himself did nothing about greenhouse gases.13
Clinton talked of world peace but bombed Iraq on false pretexts and kept
sanctions against that country in place for eight years, causing the death of tens
of thousands. He bombed Yugoslavia round-the-clock for seventy-eight days,
wreaking far more death and destruction than the “civil war” he professed to be
suppressing. He publicly apologized to the Guatemalan nation for the role played
by the United States in training and assisting the Guatemalan military in its mass
murders. At the same time, his administration reinitiated aid to that same
military.14
Most of Clinton’s appointees were of corporate background. Clinton reap-
pointed the ultraconservative Republican Alan Greenspan as chair of the pow-
erful Federal Reserve System. He picked Republicans to serve as his secretaries
of Defense and State and as special advisors to his staff. Yet polls indicated that
people thought of Clinton as a liberal. Nearly 60 percent incorrectly believed
that he advocated universal health coverage. Most thought that labor contrib-
uted more to his campaigns than big business; actually business gave more. The
public “appear to like his agenda—even if, as it turns out, they don’t know
what it is.”15 In this, Clinton successfully performed the role of every president
in a corporate-dominated system, convincing the people he was their man when
in fact he was someone else’s.
George Bush Jr. was second to none in his ability to say one thing and do an-
other. When first campaigning for office, Bush said he would reduce government
spending and stay out of foreign wars. Once in office he increased spending to re-
cord levels and plunged the country into two wars. He promised to “keep the gov-
ernment from raiding the Social Security surplus,” yet his yearly budgets raided
the Social Security surplus to pay for other programs. Bush hailed America’s mili-
tary, but he cut health care benefits for military veterans, closed several of their
hospitals, and directed the Veterans Administration to stop informing veterans
about their benefits. He repeatedly claimed that his tax cuts benefited middle- and
The President: Guardian of the System
219

low-income people, when in fact, the lion’s share went to the top 1 percent, and
over 30 percent of taxpayers at lower rungs got nothing at all.16 Like every other
recent president, Bush vowed to protect the environment, yet he weakened or re-
voked rules that protected wildlife or limited carbon, sulfur, and mercury emis-
sions in the atmosphere, and arsenic in drinking water.17
Bush said nothing about what his administration was doing for women,
probably because it was not doing much. He refused to fund family-planning pro-
grams; he proposed a $20 million reduction in assistance to (largely female) vic-
tims of domestic violence, and cuts in nutrition programs for pregnant women
and infants. He mouthed some generalities about racial equality but eliminated
the minority business development agency.18
Bush reduced federal spending on education, libraries, school lunches, child
care, remedial reading, and programs to help abused children. He claimed that
“our first goal” was employment for “every man and woman who seeks a job.”
But he did nothing to promote employment programs and presided over an
economy that lost almost 3 million jobs in three years.19
Bush declined to participate in an international effort to crack down on tax
and money-laundering havens. He claimed that war with Iraq was necessary be-
cause Iraqi leader Saddam Hussein had active links to the al Qaeda terrorist orga-
nization and possessed weapons of mass destruction. In fact, the CIA reported
that there were no links between Saddam and al Qaeda. And UN inspectors re-
ported they had free access in Iraq and found no weapons of mass destruction,
nor did the U.S. military once it occupied the country.20
In 2008, the Democratic contender for the presidency, Barack Obama, cam-
paigned on a promise of change and a vague “Yes we can” slogan. Once in office
he seemed to effect relatively few changes in policy. He produced a military budget
of record size. After promising to reverse the egregious aspects of Bush’s “faith-
based initiatives” and restore the separation of church and state, Obama retained
and extended such initiatives. While talking about helping Main Street’s working
families, Obama presided over a multitrillion-dollar bailout for Wall Street bank-
ers. He accepted substantial cuts in his stimulus spending package that was
supposedly designed to put millions of unemployed back to work. He ruled that
dispossessed homeowners who have fallen prey to the deceptions and greed of
mortgage brokers and lenders would not be eligible for relief.
He spent much of the early months of his presidency trying to rule by biparti-
san consensus, reaching out to uncompromising reactionary GOP opponents who
took every concession he made as an invitation to pound away at him all the
harder. By the end of his first year, Obama began to look like a weak president
incapable of fighting for progressive change.21
Obama did little to rein in the national security state. He appointed Leon
Panetta as director of the CIA, and Panetta promptly became a total advocate of
the agency’s prerogatives, making no attempt to clean house. President Obama
did not rescind the domestic wiretapping program installed by Bush Jr., and he
continued the practice of sending terrorist suspects to third countries for interro-
gation. These prisoners (euphemistically designated as “detainees”) often were ar-
rested on flimsy evidence, given no legal defense, never tried, confined indefinitely
in violation of habeas corpus, and subjected to harsh treatment including
220
Chapter 16

protracted torture. Obama refused to release hundreds of Pentagon photos show-
ing the abuse of prisoners by U.S. personnel, although he did promise that there
would be no such torture on his watch.22
Like other politicians, only more so, the president is caught between the de-
mands of democracy and the powers of plutocracy. He must make a show of
serving the people while advancing the major domestic and global interests of
corporate America. He also must do for the capitalist system what individual ca-
pitalists cannot do. The president must reconcile conflicts between various busi-
ness interests, usually deciding in favor of big industry and big finance and
against small business and small investors. Sometimes he must oppose the inter-
ests of individual companies or industries, keeping them in line with the overall
needs of the corporate economy. When engaged in such conflicts the president
takes on an appearance of opposing the special interests (particular industries)
on behalf of the common interest. In fact, he might better be described as protect-
ing the common interests of the special interests by keeping the free market from
devouring itself.
When President Obama handed out hundreds of billions of dollars to large
financial institutions, while doing next to nothing to help the millions who were
losing their homes because of deceptive predatory mortgages sold to them by
those same big financial interests, was he serving the national interest or a special
interest? Much depends on how the labels are applied. If we believe the national
interest entails the needs of industry and other major components of corporate
America that have such a ripple effect on the national (and international) econ-
omy, then the president was responding to a national interest. By this view, the
social needs of homeowners—a constituency of many millions—are defined as a
more limited “special” interest.
Others would argue that the national interest is not served when giant invest-
ment firms receive favored treatment at the expense of workers, homeowners, and
taxpayers. Just because corporations have nationwide holdings does not mean
they serve the interests of the nation’s populace. The “national interest” or “pub-
lic interest” should encompass the ordinary public rather than relatively small
groups of corporate elites. Contrary to conventional belief, the public monies dis-
tributed to these favored few do not “trickle down” to the mass of working people
at the bottom—as the dispossessed homeowners and newly unemployed can
testify.
Whichever position one takes, it becomes clear that there is no neutral way of
defining the national interest. Whatever policy the president pursues, he is likely to
be helping some class interests rather than others. It is a matter of historical record
that presidents usually have chosen a definition of the national interest that serves
the giant conglomerates, at cost to us lesser mortals.
FEDS VS. STATES
Champions of big business forever dream of a marriage between Big Business and
Little Government. It is easier for DuPont to control the state of Delaware than
deal with the entire federal government. Conservatives argued for states rights
through much of the twentieth century when the federal government was
The President: Guardian of the System
221

advancing civil rights for minorities and expanding human services for everyone.
In the 1980s, Republican President Reagan sought “to curb the size and influence
of the federal establishment” by giving many reduced social programs back to the
states (when he could not abolish them outright). This supposedly would revital-
ize state governments. In actuality, states and cities were given greater responsibil-
ity for dealing with social problems but less resources to do so given the drastic
cuts in federal revenue sharing.
Twenty years later, variations of this problem persisted. In 2005, Connec-
ticut sued the federal government, arguing that it should not be required to
spend $50 million of its own money to carry out the federal standardized
school test programs under the so-called No Child Left Behind Act. In 2006,
Texas and four other states, responding to the administration’s Medicare pre-
scription drug law, sued the federal government, arguing that it was a viola-
tion of the Constitution for states to relinquish their own taxpayer dollars for
a federally legislated program.
When states initiate progressive actions, conservatives discard their states’
rights posture and use the central government to override state powers. For in-
stance, the Reagan administration argued that the states were prohibited from
establishing nuclear plant emission standards more stringent than those imposed
by federal authorities. Years later the Bush administration and a Republican-
controlled Congress (a) pushed for a bill that would wipe out any state food safety
regulations that were stricter than federal standards, (b) moved class action law-
suits from state to federal courts where plaintiffs faced more obstacles when suing
corporations for wrongdoing, (c) asserted that the federal government was
exempt from state cleanup and environmental laws, (d) prohibited states from
buying quality medications from Canada that were far less expensive than what
was sold by U.S. pharmaceuticals.23
Laws that affect the personal realm—family relations, contracts, probate, cer-
tain crimes—are usually left to the states, because people in different parts of the
country take different approaches. Thus marriage laws vary from state to state on
such things as age of consent, community property, grounds for divorce, same-sex
wedlock, and child custody.
Since 1787, conservatives have been for a strong central government or a
weak one, strong state and local governments or weak ones, federal supremacy
over states or state supremacy over federal, depending on which arrangement
best served moneyed interests at any particular juncture. Abstract notions such
as “states’ rights” and a “revitalized federalism” are not an end unto themselves
but a means of serving the dominant corporate class.
A LOADED ELECTORAL COLLEGE
Under Article 2, Section 1 of the Constitution, presidents are not elected by the
people but by a majority of “electors,” appointed in such manner as the various
state legislatures might direct. The number of electors allotted to each state is
equal to the total number of its seats in the House of Representatives plus its two
senators.24
222
Chapter 16

When electing a president we actually are voting for a slate of party-
designated electors who are pledged to the candidate of our choice. After the
election, the victorious slates of electors gather in their respective states and
cast their ballots to elect the president. Since 1796 at least seventeen electors
have failed to support the candidate to whom they had been pledged. In 1960 a
Nixon elector from Oklahoma voted for Senator Harry Byrd, as did six of the
eleven Alabama electors pledged to John Kennedy. In 2000, one of the three
Democratic electors from the District of Columbia abstained, even though
the district went heavily for Gore. In 2004, one Republican elector from West
Virginia announced he might not vote for Bush. Twenty-six states have passed
laws requiring electors to vote as they originally pledged to do.
The framers of the Constitution assumed that the Electoral College, as it be-
came known, would generally consist of propertied and educated gentlemen
who would meet months after the election to deliberate and select a president,
acting as a damper on popular passions and misjudgments. It was expected
that candidates would seldom achieve a majority of the Electoral College, in
which case the election would be thrown into the House of Representatives,
where each state delegation would vote as a single unit, casting only one vote.
By awarding a state’s entire electoral vote on a winner-take-all basis to the
candidate who wins a plurality of the state’s popular vote, the Electoral Col-
lege often creates artificial or exaggerated majorities out of slim pluralities.
Thirteen times since 1838, a candidate with a plurality (the largest vote of all
the various candidates but still short of a majority) was elected president by
the artificially magnified majority of the Electoral College. This happens be-
cause a candidate might have, say, 47 percent of the vote in a particular state
(with the other 53 percent divided among several other candidates), but wins
100 percent of the winner-take-all Electoral College vote, thus greatly inflating
the winning tally. In 1984 Reagan won 58.8 percent of the votes cast but
97.5 percent of the Electoral College. Under this system, the location of votes
sometimes becomes more important than the actual number of votes.
It is also nigh on impossible for a third-party candidate, whose support is
thinly spread around the nation rather than concentrated in one region or a few
states, to carry a state and make a showing in the Electoral College. This freezing
out of third-party candidates is seen as a virtue by those who believe that the two-
party system is a bulwark against fractious multiparty coalitions.
There are others who believe that a polity is not fully a democracy unless
everyone’s vote is counted as equal. The Electoral College does not provide an
equal count; it distorts the popular vote by giving each state, regardless of its pop-
ulation, two extra electoral votes, equivalent to its seats in the U.S. Senate. Hence
small states are overrepresented and large ones are underrepresented. Wyoming,
with a population of 500,000, is guaranteed the minimum three electoral votes
allotted to each state (and to the District of Columbia), or one elector for every
167,000 people. In contrast, California with its 35 million people and fifty-five
electoral votes, has one elector for every 645,000 votes, only about one-fourth
the vote power of Wyoming.
Because the Republicans control a number of relatively less populated
western and southern states, this gives them proportionately more electoral
The President: Guardian of the System
223

votes per popular votes, which helps explain how in the 2000 presidential
election, Vice President Al Gore won the popular vote by 543,895 ballots,
but Texas governor George W. Bush won a larger number of smaller states
with their padded electoral votes, thereby gleaning a bare 271–266 Electoral
College majority, in what many saw as a stolen election (see Chapter 14).
When a highly dubious pro-Bush vote count in Florida was challenged in
the courts, the Republican-controlled Florida legislature declared its intent to
brush aside all challenges and summarily accept the list of pro-Bush electors
that the Florida secretary of state, an active member of the Bush campaign,
had certified as the winning slate. The Florida lawmakers were within their
legal (if not moral) rights, for Article II, Section 1 of the Constitution states,
the electors in each state shall be appointed “in such manner as the Legislature
thereof may direct,” demonstrating yet another profoundly undemocratic fea-
ture of the Electoral College.
It has been argued that by treating the large states as giant blocks of electoral
votes, the Electoral College enhances their importance, and because large states
like New York and California tend to be liberal, this works to the advantage of
liberals. But there is no set correlation between state size and ideology. Texas is a
large state yet one of the more conservative. And both New York and California
have elected conservative Republican governors with some frequency.
An additional distortion caused by the Electoral College under the winner-
take-all rule is not between large and small states but between “sure” states (in
which one party seems like the certain winner) and “unsure” or “battleground”
states, which offer a close race with an uncertain outcome. Presidential candi-
dates do next to nothing in safe states because such efforts would have little
effect upon the final Electoral College count. Instead they concentrate their
media advertising, public appearances, issues, and voter turnout efforts on the
dozen or so battleground states where a strong campaign can make a difference.
Because of the Electoral College, national contests are not truly national.
With the direct election of the president, every vote would count equally
regardless of location, whether in a one-sidedly Democratic or Republican state
or an evenly divided one, whether in sparsely populated Wyoming or hugely
populated California. There would be no possibility of someone winning the
vote but losing the election, and no possibility of a state legislature picking a
slate of electors contrary to the one elected. An attempt to introduce a constitu-
tional amendment through Congress for the direct election of the president
failed in 1977–1978, because of the opposition of members from smaller states
advantaged by the two extra elector votes. Over the last several decades, opin-
ion polls have consistently found large majorities across the nation favoring
direct presidential elections.25
Short of abolishing the Electoral College, a state could allocate its elec-
toral votes to candidates in proportion to their popular vote in that state. As
of now, Maine and Nebraska give two electoral votes to the statewide winner
and one electoral vote for every congressional district that a presidential can-
didate carries. In 2004, an amendment to abolish the Electoral College was
introduced in the House of Representatives but went nowhere.
224
Chapter 16

THE WOULD-BE ABSOLUTE MONARCH
Article 1 of the Constitution gives Congress the power to declare war, make the
laws of the land, raise taxes, and spend money. Article 2 seems far more limited;
it gives the president the power to appoint ambassadors, federal judges, and se-
nior executive officers (subject to Senate confirmation), and to make treaties
(subject to ratification by two-thirds of the senators voting). The president can
veto laws (but the veto can be overridden by a two-thirds vote in both houses),
and he can call Congress into special session and do a few other incidental
things. The president has two really significant functions: to see that the laws
are faithfully executed and to serve as commander-in-chief of the army. All in
all, relying solely on the Constitution, we might think that Congress determines
policy and writes the laws, while the president does Congress’s bidding by
putting laws into operation.
The reality is something else. In the last century or so, the role of government
has grown enormously at the municipal, state, and federal levels and in the exec-
utive, legislative, and judicial branches. But the tasks of serving capitalism’s vast
needs and interests in war and peace have fallen disproportionately on the level
of government that is national and international in scope: the federal; and on the
branch most suited to carrying out the necessary technical, organizational, and
military measures: the executive.
The executive branch today is a vast conglomeration of departments and
agencies, its largest single component being the Pentagon. The Executive Office
of the President contains a number of administrative units to help the president
formulate and coordinate overall policy. The growth of presidential powers
has been so great as to have frequently eclipsed Congress—and sometimes the
Constitution itself.
Conservatives long called for “limited government,” yet they also have come
to appreciate the uses of a strong presidency in advancing the causes of military-
industrial capitalism at home and abroad. It was a right-wing president, Ronald
Reagan, who broadened the realm of executive power. Reagan requested (unsuc-
cessfully) an item veto that would have allowed him to veto select portions of any
bill he signed. He called for repeal of the Twenty-second Amendment, which limits
presidents to just two terms. In contrast, some of his liberal opponents talked
about making the executive more accountable to Congress, and said nothing bad
about the Twenty-second Amendment and nothing good about an item veto.
Presidents frequently claim extraconstitutional prerogatives, such as the
following:
Executive Privilege: Withholding Information. At times, presidents place
themselves and their associates above the reach of congressional investigation
by claiming that the separation of powers gives them an inherent right of exe-
cutive privilege, the right to unaccountable secrecy regarding Executive Office
documents and plans. Executive privilege has been used to deny information
on everything from undeclared wars to illegal campaign funds and burglaries
(Watergate). The Supreme Court has collaborated in promoting executive
privilege as something deserving of constitutional standing, deciding that a
The President: Guardian of the System
225

“presumptive privilege” for withholding information (in noncriminal cases)
belongs to the president. Presumptive indeed, since the concept of executive priv-
ilege does not exist in the Constitution or any law.26
In 2000, Vice President Dick Cheney chaired a task force consisting mostly
of his former oil industry associates to rewrite the nation’s energy policy accord-
ing to their specifications. Their plan, it was eventually revealed, included dril-
ling in wilderness areas and eliminating clean air laws. It also contained
elaborate provisions for a military invasion of Iraq (this was well before the
9/11 attacks on the World Trade Center). When the Government Accountability
Office asked for the names of task force members and transcripts of the meet-
ings, Cheney refused, citing “executive privilege,” which apparently now covers
the vice president, oil executives, and war-for-oil policies.
In 1974, Congress passed the Freedom of Information Act to guarantee citi-
zens access to government information. In 1978, the Presidential Records Act
further established that presidential papers and tapes belong to the government,
not to former presidents, and were to be opened to the public twelve years after a
president left office. But through much of 2001, Bush Jr. delayed release of
Reagan’s presidential records, in effect protecting some members of his own ad-
ministration who had served under Reagan—not to mention his own father who
had been Reagan’s vice president. Then Bush unilaterally rewrote the Presiden-
tial Records Act with an executive order giving himself and all former presidents
the right to veto requests to open presidential records. Bush claimed that it was a
matter of “national security,” but national security documents already were
excluded from public inquiry.27
The Obama administration continued, like its predecessors, to argue that
the state secrets privilege was rooted in the Constitution. The White House
maintained that on national security grounds the executive branch could have
lawsuits dismissed and evidence kept secret from the courts. Civil libertarians
argue that such an untrammeled privilege easily becomes a way of concealing
the worst kinds of government misconduct.28 The White House then attempted
to keep the privilege but with limitations upon it. Obama’s Attorney General
Eric Holder decided that military and intelligence agencies would not be free to
withhold anything and everything they wanted to; they now needed the ap-
proval of the Justice Department to keep classified evidence out of court and
out of sight. Holder also initiated an investigation of the CIA’s abuse of
prisoners.29
Executive Order: Rule by Decree. As the above example shows, the presi-
dent will frequently issue an executive order, a decree or regulation that has
the impact of a law without authorization from Congress (or the Constitu-
tion). Reagan unilaterally abrogated the treaty of commerce and friendship
with Nicaragua in order to wage a war of attrition against that country.
Reagan, Bush Sr., and Bush Jr. all used executive orders to take wetlands out
of protection and grant favorable deregulations to industry. When Congress
resisted Clinton’s request for a $40 billion package to bail out Mexican and
Wall Street financiers, the president resorted to executive fiat, offering the
financiers up to $20 billion from a fund originally set up to support the U.S.
dollar in international markets.
226
Chapter 16

In the wake of the 9/11 attack, Bush Jr. issued a host of executive orders
supposedly to enhance national security, one of which rescinded certain labor
protections required of federal contractors. When a federal court revoked
Bush’s decision, the president ignored the court decision, justifying his action as
a response to “national emergency.” Executive Order 11000 allows the govern-
ment to mobilize civilians into work brigades under government supervision;
11002 designates the Postmaster General to operate a national registration of
all persons; and 11004 allows the government to designate residential areas to
be abandoned and move whole populations to new locations.30
Nonenforcement and Unilateral Decisions. The Supreme Court has long
been aware that its decisions have the force of law only if other agencies of gov-
ernment choose to abide by them. Congress belatedly came to the same realiza-
tion, developing a new appreciation of the executive’s power to command the
personnel, matériel, and programs needed for carrying out decisions. The pecu-
liar danger of executive power is that it executes. The executive alone has the
power of implementation, acting—or refusing to act—with the force of state,
often with initiatives all its own making. Consider the following:
•
The Reagan administration terminated benefits for hundreds of thousands
of disabled Americans. When federal courts found the action to be illegal,
the administration announced it would ignore the unfavorable court
decisions.
•
When a federal judge ordered the Bush Sr. administration to make surplus
federal property available to the homeless under a 1987 law, the White
House refused to execute the court order.
•
Both the Reagan and Bush Sr. administrations impounded (refused to
spend) billions appropriated by Congress for housing and low-income pro-
grams, and impounded billions intended for improvements in mass transit
and air safety.
•
Congress prohibited military sales to the Guatemalan dictatorship, yet the
White House went ahead and sold $14 million worth of military equipment
to that regime.
•
When the Congress failed to pass Bush Jr.’s faith-based initiatives, he
signed an executive order allowing Christian religious groups to receive
over $1.1 billion to carry out their own programs. The money came out
of the operational budgets of other federal agencies.
•
The Bush Jr. administration unilaterally reshaped environmental policy for
the benefit of logging companies and other developers, offering a generous
settlement that weakened environmental and species protections whenever
industry sued. “None of the decisions was subject to prior public comment
or congressional approval.”31
Presidential Signing Statements. Bush Jr. repeatedly resorted to an extra-
constitutional, extrajudicial device known as presidential signing statements. A
signing statement is a memorandum the president might issue after he signs a bill
into law. Its purpose is to create a record of legal objections about the act or some
provision of it for judges to consider in any future court challenge. During a period
of 213 years, forty-two presidents issued statements regarding six hundred
The President: Guardian of the System
227

provisions of law. During his first 6 years, Bush used signing statements over eight
hundred times—in a more extensive way—to indicate that he would leave unen-
forced all or any portion of a law. Rather than vetoing a bill and facing the possi-
bility of having his veto overridden after open debate in Congress, Bush resorted
to this unilateral and unaccountable method of virtually nullifying any law he
disliked.
Bush issued a signing statement declaring he would not obey a law that re-
stricted the government’s contingency plans to secretly search private homes and
seize private papers and records at will. He issued another asserting that he
would not obey a law forbidding the White House to censor or withhold scien-
tific data requested by Congress. Perhaps his most infamous signing statement
came when he declared himself not bound by the ban on torture passed over-
whelmingly by Congress. Nor did he see himself bound by congressional
oversight powers in the application of the Patriot Act. Senators on the Judiciary
Committee accused Bush of an “unprecedented” and “astonishing” power grab
to do as he pleased without regard to the laws passed by Congress.32
Midnight Regulations. When presidents are about to leave office, they dis-
cover a good deal of unfinished business. So in the closing days of their adminis-
trations they issue a flood of presidential dictates known as midnight
regulations. Bush Jr.’s midnight regulations included rulings that undermined
the Clean Air Act and the Endangered Species Act, eliminated environmental
protections for fisheries, made it harder to protect workers from toxic expo-
sures, and made it tougher for employees to take family leave or medical leave.33
Unitary Executive and “Inherent Power.” Today some conservatives
propagate the concept of a unitary executive, the notion that the president has
autonomous constitutional powers that inhere in the office itself, allowing him
to act as he sees fit in matters of national security, overriding the Congress and
usurping judicial oversight when the president deems it necessary. To be sure,
Article 2 of the Constitution says that “executive power” is vested in the presi-
dent. But it has never been made clear what that term means, neither in Madi-
son’s day nor today. What seems certain is that the framers of the Constitution
did not intend to give the president unanswerable totalistic power.
Yet presidents themselves have sometimes made claim to dictatorial absolut-
ist power. When asked whether a U.S. military foray into Bolivia, ostensibly to
catch drug traffickers, was in the national interest, President Reagan said, “Any-
thing we do is in the national interest.” President Nixon went even further, assert-
ing an “inherent executive power” under the Constitution to commit even
criminal acts when impelled by what he considered to be national security consid-
erations. As he put it, “When the president does it, that means it is not illegal.”34
President Bush Sr. stated that he would notify Congress of covert operations
about to be launched—unless he decided not to, “based on my assertion of the
authorities granted this office by the Constitution.” In 2002, President Bush Jr.
remarked, “I do not need to explain why I say things. That’s the interesting thing
about being the president… I don’t feel like I owe anybody an explanation.”35
Bush acknowledged that he had not complied with the Foreign Intelligence Sur-
veillance Act of 1978, which forbids wiretapping and eavesdropping on Ameri-
cans without a warrant. He maintained that a 2001 authorization to use military
228
Chapter 16

force against terrorists and “the president’s inherent constitutional powers”
allowed him to violate the act.36 In fact, such powers are not designated in the
Constitution.
Throughout his presidency Bush asserted that in matters of national security
he was unbound by U.S. law or international treaties, including laws prohibiting
the torture of prisoners. He claimed the power to imprison at will “enemy com-
batants,” persons rounded up not from any battlefield but from farms and vil-
lages in Afghanistan and Iraq sometimes solely on accusations from a feuding
neighbor or from someone interested in the reward money. For years such detai-
nees were deprived of legal counsel, formal charges, and court trial.37
The “unitary executive” is a euphemism for an executive claiming an unlim-
ited statist empowerment free of any checks and balances and other constitu-
tional restraints, a presidential autocracy. Using unilateral initiatives, the
president willfully concocts his own laws—“by the power and authority vested
in me by me”—something not allowed by the Constitution.38 Inside every presi-
dent is a divine-rights monarch trying to get out.
War Powers. The growth of unaccountable executive power is nowhere
more evident than in the realm of international conflict. “War is the true nurse
of executive aggrandizement,” wrote James Madison in 1787. It was not the in-
tent of the framers to confer upon the president any power to start a war. The
Constitution gave Congress the sole right to declare war. But as commander-
in-chief, presidents over the last two centuries have committed U.S. armed forces
into action abroad almost three hundred times. In only five of these conflicts has
Congress declared war, the last time in December 1941 to enter World War II. In
more recent times, U.S. presidents have invaded the sovereign states of Grenada
and Panama; bombed Iraq, Somalia, and Yugoslavia; invaded and occupied
Yugoslavia, Afghanistan, and Iraq; and supported proxy wars against a score
of other nations, overthrowing governments and engaging in unlawful block-
ades and other acts of war, without a declaration of war from Congress. Against
the expressed will of Congress, President Reagan used U.S. planes and bases to
wage a mercenary war against Nicaragua in the 1980s.
Congressional attempts to rein in unilateral presidential war making have
proven ineffective. The War Powers Act, passed in 1973 over President Nixon’s
veto, requires that the president seek congressional approval within sixty days
after launching a military action. The act allows the president to unilaterally en-
gage U.S. troops only in case of an attack on the United States or its territories,
possessions, or armed forces. Presidents have regularly violated the act. Clinton
engaged U.S. air forces in combat for seventy-eight days over Yugoslavia, never
bothering to get congressional approval beyond sixty days. And U.S. military
advisors in Colombia engaged in combat actions without benefit of statutory
or constitutional mandate.
In October 2002, a Republican-controlled Congress voted the president
power to engage in war at any future time should he unilaterally decide to do
so. Bush Jr. took the nation into wars with Afghanistan and Iraq. Both invasions
have proven to be protracted and costly in lives and treasure, and both were con-
tinued by the Obama administration. Supposedly these wars have made all of us
much safer.
The President: Guardian of the System
229

Recent presidents have claimed a “constitutional and historic power” to
conduct foreign affairs without limitations from Congress. In fact the Consti-
tution does not grant the president the right to wage covert (or overt) actions
against other nations. The power of a singular ruler to lead an entire nation
into war, treating the army as his personal force, is the power of an absolute
monarch, an imperial presidency.39
Executive Agreements. The president can circumvent the Senate’s consti-
tutional power to ratify treaties by unilaterally entering into executive agree-
ments with foreign nations, another extraconstitutional contrivance. Even
treaties that are formally ratified by the Senate may then be subjected to selec-
tive interpretation by the White House. Some senators complained that the
president’s interpretation of a treaty’s “true meaning” undermined the Sen-
ate’s constitutional duty to ratify a treaty because the Senate would have no
certainty about what it was actually approving.40 Treaties aside, the White
House makes claim to secret measures and appropriations. Thus many sena-
tors had not heard of the automated battlefield program for which they had
unwittingly voted appropriations. Congress also unknowingly funded CIA co-
vert operations in Laos and Thailand that were in violation of congressional
prohibitions. And the lawmakers ordered a halt to expansion of a naval base
in the Indian Ocean, only to discover that construction was continuing.
Congressional Collaboration and Surrender. In his dealings with Con-
gress, the president has a decided edge. (a) He can command the kind of me-
dia attention that lesser officeholders can only dream about. (b) Lawmakers
who vote the way he wants on crucial bills are more likely to get White House
support for their home district projects and for upcoming campaigns.
(c) There being only one president but many legislators, the chief executive
has the advantage of unitary initiative and action. (d) The executive branch
controls much of the crucial information. Congress frequently goes along be-
cause it depends heavily on what the executive departments have to say.
The president tends to be more powerful than Congress when he assumes
a conservative stance and less powerful when he wants to push in a progres-
sive direction. This reflects the society’s wider distribution of politico-
economic resources of power already discussed in this book. Like any political
officeholder, the president is more likely to enjoy a successful use of power
when he moves on a path charted by powerful interests.
The Congress itself sometimes collaborates in the usurpation of its own
power, granting various presidents, and a widening list of executive agencies,
confidential funds for which no detailed invoices are required. When a Repub-
lican president has a rigidly partisan Republican Congress at his call, then
there is even less check on his power. Thus the 109th GOP-controlled Con-
gress repeatedly failed to challenge the Bush administration’s illegal use of do-
mestic surveillance, its unilateral claim to expanded powers, and the indefinite
detention and mistreatment of designated “enemy combatants.”
From time to time Congress has fought back. Both houses now have bud-
get committees with staffs that can more effectively review the president’s bud-
getary proposals. Along with the investigations conducted by its standing
committees and subcommittees, Congress has the Government Accountability
230
Chapter 16

Office, which is independent of the executive branch and carries out assign-
ments for congressional members of all parties, an agency created and funded
by Congress to investigate government doings and report directly to Congress
and the American public. The GAO plays an important role in uncovering ex-
ecutive waste, wrongdoing, mismanagement, and nonenforcement of the law.
To sum up, the purpose of executive power is to advance the process of
“free-market” capital accumulation. There is not likely to be much progressive
change from the top, no matter who is in the White House, unless there is also
mass social unrest and mobilization for fundamental reforms at the base. Until
then, presidents will pursue their prerogatives and their wars.
The President: Guardian of the System
231

C
H
A
P
T
E
R
17
The Political Economy
of Bureaucracy
Bureaucracy can be found in just about every area of modern capitalist society,
in big corporations, universities, religious establishments, and other private
organizations as well as in government. A bureaucracy is an organization that
(a) mobilizes human and material resources for explicitly defined projects or
purposes, (b) is staffed by career personnel with specialized skills and designated
responsibilities, and (c) is coordinated by a hierarchy of command.1
THE MYTH AND REALITY OF INEFFICIENCY
Bureaucracies have certain bothersome characteristics that seem to inhere in the
nature of the beast. For instance, the need for consistent and accountable oper-
ating procedures can create a tendency toward red tape and a limited capacity to
provide new initiatives. The need to divide responsibilities over widely dispersed
activities can cause problems of coordination and accountability. For the aver-
age citizen there are the incomprehensible forms and labyrinthine runarounds
orchestrated by the petty autocrats and uncaring time servers who inhabit the
bureaucracies of private business as well as government. Still, bureaucracies per-
form crucial and complex tasks—for better or worse. “The feat of landing men
on the moon,” observes Duane Lockard, “was not only a scientific achievement
but a bureaucratic one as well.”2 The same might be said of the Vietnam
War, the Social Security system, the national highway program, and most other
large-scale undertakings.
According to the prevailing corporate ideology, government bureaucracy
is an inefficient drain on the more productive private economy. The pro-
posed remedy is to either abolish government programs or privatize them,
232

that is, hand them over to private contractors. Free marketeers insist that
everything works better in the private sector, and government should be
“run more like a business.” One might wonder how that could be possible.
Government deals with complex social problems, conflicting goals, and com-
peting constituencies. Exactly what businesses should government be run like?
The fifty thousand firms that go bankrupt every year? Or the large successful
corporations—themselves giant bureaucracies and recipients of billions of dol-
lars in public subsidies—that regularly skirt the law, pay few or no taxes, and
cater only to paying customers? Do we want government run like the private
companies that are controlled by sometimes swindling directors, who answer
to no one but themselves and a few banks and big investors?
If we run government like a business (whatever that means), then who
will take care of the costly, nonprofit public services that the public—and
business itself—demand? For instance, who will provide the vast sums that
government spends on roads and highways required by the automotive and
trucking industries? the snow removal services? the compensatory payments
to the unfortunates whose homes and farms are in the way of new highways?
and the highway patrols that rein in drunken drivers and other menacing mo-
torists? In such instances, is government a burden on the auto industry, or is it
the other way around?
There are gross inefficiencies and waste in private business, but they are
rarely publicized. Operational expenses are generally less in public bureaucra-
cies than in private organizations. Administrative costs for the government’s
Medicare program are under 3 cents per dollar. Administrative costs for pri-
vate health insurance are 26 cents per dollar. In recent decades, top federal
salaries have declined in real buying power while the earnings of corporate
executives have skyrocketed.3
Social Security has been a more reliable and less expensive retirement pro-
gram than private pension plans. A Roper poll asked people to estimate the
administrative costs of Social Security as a percentage of benefits. Conditioned
to think of government programs as inefficient, respondents guessed 50 per-
cent, on average. Actually only 1 percent is spent on administration. By com-
parison, the administrative costs for private insurance are about 13 percent of
annual payments. Likewise, administrative costs at nonprofit public hospitals
average less than at private-profit hospitals.4
Public power utilities owned by local governments offer rates averaging
20 percent less than those charged by private power companies. In four years
after it was created in 1998, the Long Island Power Authority in New York
cut rates 20 percent, saving customers an estimated $2.1 billion. Public utili-
ties in Palo Alto and Los Angeles offered rates that were 20 to 40 percent less
than what was charged by the privately owned Pacific Gas & Electric (PG&E)
elsewhere in California. The Palo Alto and Los Angeles public utilities spent
zero on lobbying and on payments to private stockholders, whereas PG&E
spent over $2 million on lobbying and transferred $5.1 billion in three years
from customers to mostly affluent stockholders. In one year, the Palo Alto
public utility transferred $7.3 million, and the (much larger) L.A. public utility
$124 million, to their respective local governments to be spent on public
The Political Economy of Bureaucracy
233

services. PG&E transferred nothing back to the communities from which it so
handsomely profited.5
Corporate leaders want to eliminate social spending programs not because
they don’t work but because they often do. And when they do, they demonstrate
that not-for-profit public-owned services (socialism) can outperform for-profit
public-owned services (capitalism) at least in many basic areas. Conrail, a
government-owned rail system, gave better service at less cost than the investor-
owned lines it replaced. But this very success was intolerable to those who cor-
rectly see nonprofit public ownership as a threat to the private-profit system. So,
Conrail was “privatized” (sold back to private investors) at a giveaway price.
Likewise the rail systems in Europe are government owned and are superior to
anything we have.
Supplemental Security Income (SSI), created in 1972, provides a minimum
monthly income for the elderly and disabled, along with Social Security pay-
ments. With all this funding, destitution among the elderly and disabled
should have dropped. It did.
The food stamp program was supposed to substantially reduce hunger
and malnutrition. It did.
Free marketeers have argued that antipoverty programs did not end pov-
erty, true, but they were never designed to do so. The programs were meant to
provide benefits that alleviated some of the misery, and they did.
In one decade, government requirements for seat belts, speed limits, emer-
gency public health facilities, and safety features on consumer products helped
produce a 21 percent drop in accidental fatalities. Since the Occupational
Safety and Health Administration (OSHA) was established, even with its seri-
ous understaffing, the job fatality rate has been cut in half and an estimated
140,000 workers’ lives have been saved.6 We need more of OSHA, not less.
The business community opposes such programs because they expand the
public sector; they provide for social needs, and create alternative sources of
individual income and public revenues, leaving people less desperately com-
peting for jobs, and less willing to work for miserable wages. They demon-
strate that life can be served well without anyone making a huge profit and
growing rich off the rest of us.
Environmental regulations do benefit the public with cleaner air and water,
but they cut into industry profits. Public housing did dramatically reduce over-
crowding and homelessness between 1940 and 1980, but it created a whole stock
of housing units that compete with the private supply, helping to dampen rents in
the private housing market. Rent control did keep millions of units affordable
while allowing landlords to make “reasonable” profits, but nowhere as much
profits as they otherwise could make without rent control.7
We can appreciate what public programs accomplish when the programs are
cut back. The rollbacks in public housing and rent control were accompanied by
a sharp rise in landlord profits and homelessness. In the 1970s the sight of home-
less people was relatively rare. By the Reagan era of the 1980s, homelessness
became commonplace. The closing of venereal disease clinics fueled a noticeable
increase in VD cases. The heartless reductions in welfare and nutrition payments
increased hunger among impoverished adults and children. A watering down of
234
Chapter 17

worker-safety rules, clean-air standards, and pesticide controls further toxified
the environment and cost the nation in human life. And cuts in public works
construction led to overflowing sewers and corroding bridges.8
DEREGULATION AND PRIVATIZATION
Business wants an end to any regulations that limit profit opportunities. In the last
decade, thanks to campaigns waged by its lobbyists, the nation’s electric power
industry underwent deregulation. State after state removed the price regulations
they had set to limit how much the utility could charge customers. Utility bills
doubled and even tripled, bringing ever greater profits. Customers in eleven de-
regulated states pay about $50 billion more annually for their utility power than
their counterparts in regulated states. “The reality behind those numbers is a lot
of bent, gnarled hands trembling when they open the electric bill.”9
Those who argue that the free market will best provide for us seem to for-
get why utilities had their rates regulated in the first place: they do not operate
in a competitive market; they are monopolies that provide an essential com-
modity to a captive market.
After the reign of several conservative administrations, Americans in 2006
were getting only half as much energy from wind, solar, and geothermal
sources as they had twenty years earlier.10 Deregulation can often be a matter
of life and death. An amendment to the National Highway Safety Act, abol-
ishing federal safety regulations on small to medium trucks, led to a discern-
ible increase in accidents and fatalities.
The Political Economy of Bureaucracy
235

Along with deregulating the private sector, corporate America advocates
privatizing the public sector by selling off to private investors the nation’s public
schools, hospitals, housing, postal services, transit systems, and municipal water
systems. Capitalism constantly feeds off socialism by extracting subsidies, grants,
loan guarantees, bailouts from the public treasury, a socialism for the rich. Over
twenty states in the United States have enacted legislation allowing private cor-
porations, including investment firms like Goldman Sachs, Morgan Stanley, and
the Carlyle Group, to buy or lease public highway and transportation infrastruc-
ture from which they will pocket billions of dollars in toll collections.11
Generally the first step toward privatization is to drastically defund the
public service, thus causing it to deteriorate. This in turn is treated as proof
that “government doesn’t work” and needs to be handed over to private cor-
porations that presumably will get the job done more efficiently.
Experience demonstrates otherwise. Communities in Florida, Maryland,
Michigan, Connecticut, and elsewhere found private-profit voucher schools
more costly and less serviceable and have reverted to a public school system. A
report by the U.S. Department of Education showed that in reading and mathe-
matics students attending public schools generally did as well as, or better than,
private-school students of comparable backgrounds.12 To be sure, there are
public schools all over the country that are miserably equipped and under-
staffed, but what they need is better funding, not further budget slashing.
Short of complete privatization, many functions within governments at
the federal, state, and local levels have been contracted out to private business.
The Internal Revenue Service hired commercial debt collectors to collect back
236
Chapter 17

taxes from delinquent taxpayers. The private agents keep as much as 25 per-
cent of what they recover. Everyone agreed that IRS workers could collect un-
paid taxes more cheaply and effectively than private contractors, but because
of staff shortages, the IRS is often unable to follow up for years on the big
cases.13 Again, the public service is often undermined by lack of funds and
staff, serving as an excuse to promote privatization.
Today the U.S. government spends more on private contractors than on
federal workers. Be it highly skilled professional work or janitorial mainte-
nance, the service usually ends up costing the government more when con-
tracted out. Though private contractors spend less money on worker wages
and benefits, they funnel much more into upper-management salaries and
stockholder profits. Furthermore, private contractors doing government work
are often left unsupervised and waste or overcharge billions of dollars—as
demonstrated most recently by the corrupt and profiteering private services
contracted by the Pentagon in Iraq.14
The story is the same in other countries. In Britain and Chile, government
pension funds were privatized. Vast fortunes were made by those who handled
the accounts while the pensioners ended up with almost nothing. In Bolivia, the
privatization of oil refineries led to a 15 percent hike in gas prices. New Zealand
sold $14 billion in public assets to private interests, including railways, telecom-
munications, utilities, and water resources, leading to more expensive services, a
decrease in the value of New Zealand’s dollar, and a growth in the gap between
rich and poor. In countries throughout Eastern Europe, the free-market privati-
zation that replaced the socialist system led to poorer and vastly more expensive
services, and much plundering of public natural resources by private interests.15
The public sector carries out tasks that private business cannot handle.
Consider the much maligned post office: what private corporation would de-
liver a letter three thousand miles, door to door, for the price of a postage
stamp, or forward your mail to a new address at no extra cost? Republican
administrations, however, attempted to put the U.S. Postal Service on a more
“profit-motivated” basis. They contracted out postal jobs to low-wage non-
union companies, reduced delivery service, paid fat bonuses to top manage-
ment, and disregarded health and safety regulations for postal workers—all
resulting in more expensive and less efficient service.
In cities throughout the nation, working-class neighborhoods have been
razed to make way for shopping malls, industrial parks, sports arenas, and con-
vention centers, built with public funds to benefit already rich private investors.
These projects incur multimillion-dollar state and municipal debts that consti-
tute a large part of the U.S. urban fiscal crisis. Instead of contrasting the profitabil-
ity of private business with the debt-ridden costliness of government, we would do
better to see the causal connection between the two.
Government in capitalist America is usually not allowed to compete with the
private sector. Unused offices in a U.S. government building may not be rented
out, for it would put government in competition with private rentals. Govern-
ment is allowed to operate only in the unprofitable markets that business does
not want. Thus, public hospitals show none of the handsome profits of private
ones because they handle the uninsured modest-income people who cannot
The Political Economy of Bureaucracy
237

afford the astronomical costs of private health care. And “the Department of
Housing and Urban Development can subsidize low-income housing, but it can
neither build units itself nor divert private investment from middle-class subur-
ban development.”16
SECRECY AND DECEPTION, WASTE AND CORRUPTION
Both public and private bureaucracies have a decided tendency toward secrecy. The
more secrecy, the more administrators can do what they want without having to
answer for it. Most of the secrecy in public bureaucracy is on behalf of private busi-
ness, the military, and intelligence agencies. The government has suppressed infor-
mation concerning bank bailouts, toxic-waste disposal, hazardous chemical
substances in water supplies, and the harmful effects of pesticides and nuclear
power plants. The government withheld information regarding the medical pro-
blems of tens of thousands of U.S. military personnel exposed to nuclear tests in
the 1950s. Also kept secret was information on the ill effects of defoliants in the
Vietnam War, chemical weaponry during the Gulf War (1990–1991), and nuclear
tests and germ warfare experiments upon civilian populations in U.S. urban areas.17
President Reagan issued a presidential directive that forced some 2 million
government workers to take a pledge of secrecy and of lifetime government cen-
sorship of their writings and speeches. Administrators have sought to undercut the
Freedom of Information Act by outright denial of requests, or by imposing years
of delay before releasing materials, or inking out more and more information on
the released documents, and sometimes charging exorbitant copying fees.18
The total number of government classified documents is not known, though
the figure is estimated at well into the billions. At least 70 percent of the millions
of World War II documents related to war crimes still remain secret, some sev-
enty years later. In the last decade, in cooperation with the CIA and other intelli-
gence agencies, the National Archives began reclassifying thousands of historical
documents that had been declassified and available to the public for years, in-
cluding some already published or photocopied long ago by historians. No one
explained why these materials were being removed from the public eye.19
The Bush Jr. administration suppressed evidence about dangerous levels of
mercury and lead emissions. It rewrote and otherwise downplayed the conclu-
sions of government scientists on the link between global warming and fossil fuel
emissions. It overruled an earlier review by top government scientists that sup-
ported the medical use of marijuana. The administration knowingly withheld
data from Congress showing that the Medicare drug prescription program im-
posed on millions of senior citizens would cost far more than the president had
acknowledged. During Bush’s reign, all government-sponsored environmental
and health studies required White House clearance before being released, allow-
ing the administration to suppress studies that highlighted the dangers of chemi-
cals in our food, environment, and consumer products. The administration also
altered a scientific analysis of the deleterious impact of cattle grazing in order to
allow expanded access to public lands by ranchers.20
Native Americans tried to get the Interior Department to stop the daily
destruction of electronic and hard-copy documents that detailed how billions
238
Chapter 17

of dollars in grazing, logging, mining, and oil royalties from Indian-owned
land went missing.21
Government secrecy breeds unaccountability and ultimately waste and cor-
ruption. The Department of Agriculture gave billions of dollars worth of con-
tracts to agribusiness firms that were caught rigging bids, fixing prices, and
defrauding government programs. Affordable housing grants and mortgage in-
surance, intended for low-income elderly, went to luxury resorts. The top offi-
cials involved in such deals received lavish perks from corporate clients.
The White House’s own Office of Management and Budget found that year
after year agencies and departments could not account for tens of billions of dol-
lars. What is more, when they realized their huge accounting discrepancies,
rather than searching to see where the money went, they simply entered
multibillion-dollar balance adjustments, writing off the missing sums by fabri-
cating new numbers that were “unsupported, unapproved, and erroneous.”
Management of the Department of Defense (Pentagon) was deemed “the worst
in government,” routinely showing the biggest losses, and unable to account for
much of its enormous annual budget and its worldwide assets of over $1 trillion.
Accounting systems were so chaotic in many departments that audits were im-
possible. Thousands of employees had been authorized to process payments
without oversight or accounting, further raising the risk of fraud and theft.22
(One of the better-managed budgets was in the Social Security Administration.)
One audit found spending abuses by officials and contractors in virtually
every aspect of operations carried out by the National Aeronautics and Space
Administration (NASA). The losses, estimated at over $3.5 billion, were “only
the tip of the iceberg.” Meanwhile the Army Corps of Engineers repeatedly
failed to collect most of the royalties on more than three hundred oil and gas
leases, and could not account for the sums that had been collected. But no one
was prosecuted.23
Public servants who become whistleblowers by going public about wrong-
doings often risk their careers (instead of being hailed as dedicated public ser-
vants). In the federal bureaucracy, as in most other organizations—including
corporations, churches, universities, police, and military—there usually is more
concern about the bad publicity caused by disclosures of wrongdoing than about
the wrongdoing itself. Some instances of how whistleblowers have been treated:
•
After reporting that his superiors were favoring certain wealthy tax-
payers, an IRS division chief was transferred to an obscure office, had
his pay reduced, and was subjected to a criminal investigation for “unau-
thorized disclosures of taxpayer information.”
•
When several scientists announced that radiation safety standards were at
least ten times too low, the Department of Energy—beholden to the nu-
clear industry—fired them, confiscated their data, and publicly attacked
their integrity.
•
A U.S. sailor serving on an aircraft carrier could no longer tolerate the
dumping of raw sewage and trash into the ocean every day, including
plastics, computers, and toxins. For going public he was court-martialed,
demoted, and sentenced to the brig.
The Political Economy of Bureaucracy
239

•
A State Department policy advisor revealed that the CIA had covered up
two murders committed by one of its operatives. The disclosure caused a
public outcry that prompted the CIA to rid itself of many hirelings who
were implicated in major crimes abroad. The whistleblower’s reward? He
was declared a security risk, had his State Department career destroyed,
and faced a criminal investigation.24
These are not isolated instances. The board created by the Whistleblower
Protection Act to handle complaints had a backlog of one thousand cases only
four months after its creation. In one year alone it received 814 complaints of
reprisals against whistleblowers.25 During the Bush Jr. administration, whis-
tleblowers in the Pentagon, FDA, CIA, FBI, Mine Safety and Health Adminis-
tration, and the departments of Justice, Interior, Energy, and Health and
Human Services found themselves subjected to reprisals and were removed
from their positions.26 The White House has argued in several cases that gov-
ernment information is government property; therefore employees who take
and release such information are guilty of theft. Thus leaking information
about crimes is itself treated as a crime.
But blowing the whistle sometimes bring rewards. Under the False Claims
Act, whistleblowers who expose companies that swindle the government are
promised up to a quarter of the money recovered. Since its inception the act
has generated more than $12 billion in retrieved funds for the federal treasury
and over $1 billion for hundreds of whistleblowers.27
NONENFORCEMENT: POLITICS IN COMMAND
Contrary to the conventional wisdom, anonymous bureaucrats do not usurp
power for themselves. In fact, career bureaucrats pretty much do as they are
told by their politically appointed agency heads. The professional ethic of most
bureaucrats is: remain neutral and wait for the policy line to be set from above.
This usually means: avoid doing anything that might prove troublesome to the
powers that be. Politics is in command.
Many rulings by bureaucratic agencies, published daily in the Federal Reg-
ister, are as significant as major pieces of legislation. In the absence of precise
guidelines from Congress, they often take the place of legislation, handed down
by agency heads or by the White House. Thus, without a word of public debate,
the Price Commission approved more than $2 billion in utility rate increases.
Under a White House directive, the Social Security Administration was obliged
to use “stricter eligibility” rules to deprive 265,000 disabled persons of public
assistance.
The political process does not end with the passage of a bill but continues at
the administrative level, albeit in more covert fashion, influencing how a law is
administered. There has been lax enforcement or total nonenforcement of drug
safety standards, consumer protection laws, civil rights, voting rights, collective
bargaining rights, and protection of public lands and parks. Most nonenforce-
ment is not the result of bureaucratic inertia but political intent, perpetrated by
right-wing policymakers who are unsympathetic to the regulatory programs.
240
Chapter 17

A prime example would be the Bush Jr. administration’s unwillingness to en-
force the antitrust laws, leaving unchallenged the increasing monopoly concen-
trations and mergers perpetrated by giant companies. One critic complained,
“This is a story about how ideology has taken over the law enforcement
process.”28
Bush also “managed to effect a radical transformation of the nation’s en-
vironmental laws, quietly and subtly, by means of regulatory changes and bu-
reaucratic directives,” including novel and often obscure rule revisions that
undermined the Clean Air Act.29 A top EPA official of twelve years and a dec-
orated civil servant, Eric Schaeffer, resigned, charging that the Bush adminis-
tration refused to crack down on companies that poured 7 million tons of
toxic substances into the air every year.30
Among the few things working in favor of public-interest regulations are
public-interest groups. Most enforcement cases against powerful corporate
polluters, for instance, are initiated by environmental and local citizens
groups. The Environmental Protection Agency rarely initiates action and usu-
ally opposes tough environmental laws. Citizen environmental groups sue to
make EPA do what it is getting paid to do and what the law requires it to
do. But it often takes years of struggle before the EPA will act.
Often agencies are not sufficiently staffed to handle the enormous tasks
that confront them. The EPA staff can monitor but a fraction of the one thou-
sand new potentially toxic chemicals that industry pours into the environment
each year. The Federal Aviation Administration regularly drops a large num-
ber of airline safety cases because it has too few lawyers to do the work.31
After nearly a year in office, the centrist-oriented Obama administration had
done little to improve enforcement of environmental laws. Effective laws are
already on the books but they remain largely underapplied by the EPA. President
Obama was called upon by public-interest groups to impose stricter monitoring
of water and air quality, and the safety of the food supply. The groups wanted
better funding and stronger support for agencies such as the EPA, the Centers for
Disease Control and Prevention, the Consumer Product Safety Commission, and
others that had suffered drastic budget cuts under the previous administration or
had been deterred by the White House from carrying out their missions.32
Likewise, representatives of a farm workers union complained that enforce-
ment of existing laws, not enactment of new ones, was needed to alleviate the
housing and safety problems faced by farm workers. In Obama’s first year in
the White House, the Government Accountability Office (GAO) found that the
Labor Department was regularly failing to enforce minimum-wage, overtime
and child labor laws, leaving millions of workers vulnerable.33
People who insist that things do not get done because that is the nature of the
bureaucratic beast seem to forget that only certain kinds of things do not get done,
whereas other things are done all too much. The law making some 13 million chil-
dren eligible for medical examination and treatment had the same legal status as
the law to develop a “Star Wars” outer-space weapon system, the latter backed by
the White House, giant industrial contractors, research institutes, Pentagon brass,
and key members of Congress. If anything, the Star Wars program was vastly
more expensive and of greater technical and administrative complexity. Yet it
The Political Economy of Bureaucracy
241

moved ahead, while the children’s health program moved hardly at all. Several
years later, almost 85 percent of the youngsters had been left unexamined, causing
“unnecessary crippling, retardation, or even death of thousands,” according to a
House subcommittee report. The important difference between the two programs
was not bureaucratic but political.
The effectiveness of a law or an administrative program depends on the
power of the groups supporting them. Laws that serve powerful clientele are
likely to enjoy a vigorous life, whereas laws that have only the powerless to
support them are often stillborn. An agency set up to regulate industry on be-
half of consumers, workers, or the environment may possess a zeal for reform
in its youth, but before long it is likely to be reined in. The capitalist political
economy is the graveyard of reform-minded administrative bodies.
In its youthful days after World War I, the Federal Trade Commission (FTC)
moved vigorously against big business, but representatives of industry prevailed
upon the president to replace some of the commissioners by others more sympa-
thetic to the corporations.34 Some sixty years later, the pattern was to repeat itself.
Staffed by consumer advocates, the FTC began vigorous action against shady
business practices, only to find itself under fire from the business community and
their acolytes in Congress and the White House. The FTC had its jurisdictional
powers abridged and its budget cut. In similar fashion, the Consumer Product
Safety Commission had its staff cut by more than half and was then stacked with
conservatives who had neither training nor interest in product safety.35
Frequently, members of Congress demand to know why an agency is
bothering their constituents or their campaign contributors. Administrators
who do not want unfavorable publicity or a cut in their appropriations are
likely to apply the law in ways that satisfy the legislators who control their
budgets. Also, the promise of a lucrative post with a private firm whose inter-
ests they favored while in public office can exercise a considerable influence
on the judgments of administrators.
Bureaucratic rulings can go the other way sometimes, strengthening regu-
latory laws rather than undermining them. In September 2009, given a bit
more political room under the Obama administration, the EPA announced
that it was ordering a review of numerous permits to mine coal by blowing
the tops off mountains in Appalachian states. The agency was to consider the
possibility that such a practice was gravely damaging to water quality.36
SERVING THE “REGULATED”
There are regulatory agencies that are under the command of various execu-
tive departments, such as the Labor Department’s Occupational Safety and
Health Administration (OSHA) and the Justice Department’s Drug Enforce-
ment Administration (DEA). And there are independent regulatory commis-
sions, such as the Federal Communications Commission (FCC) and Federal
Trade Commission (FTC), that operate outside the executive branch, making
quasi-judicial rulings that can be appealed only to the courts. They report
directly to Congress but their personnel are appointed by the president, with
Senate confirmation.
242
Chapter 17

These various agencies frequently become protectors of the industries they
are supposed to regulate:
•
The FCC serves the telephone companies and the media networks.
•
The Federal Energy Regulatory Commission maintains a permissive pol-
icy toward energy producers.
•
The Department of Transportation defers to the oil-highway-automotive
combine.
•
The Army Corps of Engineers and the Bureau of Reclamation continue to
mutilate the natural environment on behalf of utilities, agribusiness, and
developers.
•
The Department of Interior serves the oil, gas, mining, agribusiness, and
timber companies.
•
The Nuclear Regulatory Commission obligingly serves the nuclear indus-
try, extending operating licenses to aging plants that pose serious pro-
blems, while easing restrictions on construction.
•
And
the
Pentagon—spending
more
than
all
the
other
agencies
combined—gives untiring support to the arms industry.
In 1949, with a limited budget of only $2 million, the Food and Drug
Administration (FDA) proceeded against thousands of violators. Today, with
a budget a hundred times larger, the FDA rarely takes action against major
food or drug companies. It has learned discretion. Now pharmaceutical firms
can make all sorts of dubious claims about the safety and efficacy of their
drugs and charge just about any price the market will bear.37
When Monsanto marketed its bovine growth hormone (BGH), the FDA ap-
proved the drug despite a GAO study showing harmful effects to cows and po-
tentially to humans. When Dr. Richard Burroughs voiced his concerns about the
approval of BGH, he was fired from the FDA.38 The agency also ruled that milk
producers who refused to use the drug and wished to label their milk as free of
BGH would not be allowed to do so, a ruling that was rescinded after much
public outcry. (Milk producers must still give notice on containers that BGH
causes no ill effects, a claim that has never been substantiated.)
The FDA is charged with protecting much of the nation’s food supply but
as of 2010 it had neither the authority nor resources to do so. The agency
could only try to cajole food producers to voluntarily recall their product after
people have taken ill or even died. A bill pending in the House of Representa-
tives would give the FDA more power to impose and enforce safety standards
for the food we eat.39
A hundred or so people die every year from food poisoning and thou-
sands of others are sickened, yet the Department of Agriculture (USDA) exer-
cises little control over meat production. All it can do is try to persuade a meat
company to recall a tainted product. Proposals to give USDA stronger en-
forcement powers have been opposed by powerful lobbies and lawmakers be-
holden to meat producers.40
Over the past fifty years, intensive chemical farming has damaged the
quality of millions of acres of once fertile soil, enough to cause a discernible
drop in the nutritional level of many grains and vegetables. The USDA is
The Political Economy of Bureaucracy
243

aware of the problem but shows no inclination to act on it. Ever responsive to
giant agribusiness, the USDA attempted to promulgate national standards for
organic foods that included irradiated and genetically modified foods. The
move was stalled by strong public opposition.41
In response to public pressure, Congress passed a law in 1996 to lower
pesticide limits in food in order to protect children. Yet, years later not one
limit was lowered as the law requires. Pesticide levels were actually increasing
in fruits and vegetables.42
In violation of the Fair Labor Standards Act, millions of children in the
United States toil long hours at hazardous jobs in sweatshops, mills, fast-
food restaurants, and on agribusiness farms. Each year tens of thousands of
them are injured and hundreds are killed at the workplace. Employers are
not too worried about violations because the laws are rarely enforced. The
average business can expect to be inspected once every fifty years, if that.
The average fine handed down in cases involving workplace death or perma-
nent injury of children is relatively light.43
In most instances involving corporate America, federal regulators do not
regulate, either because their agency is too wedded to the particular industry
or too intimidated by it, or because the agency’s legislative mandate does not
provide enough enforcement power. Even if they wished to crack down on big
business, most federal agencies are woefully understaffed or outmanned by
cadres of high-paid corporate lawyers.
But enforcement can be quite stringent when used as a political weapon
against the less powerful. Thus while displaying little enthusiasm for regulat-
ing big business, the Bush Jr. administration saddled labor unions—at every
level from the smallest local to the national leadership—with a nightmare of
endless punitive financial reporting requirements designed to eat up the un-
ions’ resources and paralyze their activities.44
Conservative administrations that are hostile to the whole idea of using gov-
ernment to serve public needs often promote policies of inaction. This was dra-
matically illustrated by the Bush-appointed officials of Homeland Security and
the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) who had no experience or
interest in security or disaster management, and who never even established a
clear chain of command for domestic emergency. When a horrendous hurricane
hit New Orleans and surrounding areas in 2005, Homeland Security and FEMA
remained inactive for several days. Although forewarned, FEMA did nothing
about the weakened levees that broke and flooded much of New Orleans. It
made no use of trucks, boats, medical personnel, and food that were offered
from various quarters including other government agencies. It made little effort
to rescue, evacuate, and mobilize relief for disaster victims. And it misappro-
priated and squandered huge sums of relief funds allocated to it.45
Nonperformance is due less to bureaucratic inertia than to political intent.
A conservative administration deliberately appoints agency heads who do lit-
tle to address problems and are opposed to government solutions.
So federal meat-inspection laws have been administered by officials with a
history of opposition to meat inspection. Public-housing programs have been
supervised by former realty investors who are openly hostile to public
244
Chapter 17

housing. Environmental programs have been administered by former industry
representatives antagonistic to environmental regulations.
Bradley Smith, who considered limits on campaign spending to be uncon-
stitutional, was given a Republican seat on the Federal Election Commission,
which enforces limits on campaign spending.
Spencer Abraham, who twice sponsored bills that would have eliminated
the Department of Energy while he was a U.S. senator, was appointed by Bush Jr.
as Secretary of Energy, from which post he did everything to champion coal and
nuclear interests, and nothing to develop clean energy sources.
To chair the Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC), Bush chose
Harvey Pitt, a corporate lawyer who had been a frequent critic of SEC regula-
tions and had represented many of the same industries he now was supposed
to regulate without fear or favor. A host of oil, gas, and coal industry lobby-
ists who opposed industry regulation by the Interior Department were given
key regulatory posts in Interior. Bush also picked Margaret Spelling as Secre-
tary of Education even though she had never spent a day as teacher or school
administrator, and had displayed no interest in educational issues. She proved
to be a strong proponent of privatizing public schools.46
President Obama appointed Timothy Geithner as Treasury secretary to
supervise the financial bailout of 2008–2009. Geithner had been president of
the Federal Reserve Bank of New York and was close to many of the specula-
tors and investors at Goldman Sachs and AIG and other Wall Street finan-
ciers, the very people he was supposed to be reining in and regulating.
Likewise Obama appointed Lawrence Summers as director of the White
House National Economic Council to assist in trying to bring the unregulated
banking crisis under control. This same Summers, while serving as Clinton’s
Secretary of the Treasury, had worked for the repeal of key regulatory bank-
ing provisions, a deregulation that arguably led to the subprime mortgage cri-
sis. But Summers insisted that financial crises are caused by an excess of
regulation. This self-professed free marketeer was now called upon to regulate
his friends, the Wall Street moguls.
PUBLIC AUTHORITY IN PRIVATE HANDS
Along with its funds and services, government sometimes surrenders its very au-
thority to big business. Control of federal lands and water has been handed over
to local “home-rule” boards dominated by large ranchers, who thereby success-
fully transform their economic power into a publicly sanctioned authority.47 In
every significant line of industry, advisory committees staffed by representatives
of leading corporations work closely with government agencies, making most of
the important recommendations at meetings not open to press or public. Their
reports become the basis for government actions and new legislation, winning
them special advantages over smaller competitors, workers, and consumers.
Under the guise of “voluntaristic” and “decentralized” policymaking, the
federal government often grants business associations—dominated by the big-
gest firms—the power to nominate their own personnel to public licensing
boards and other administrative bodies. Such measures transfer sovereign
The Political Economy of Bureaucracy
245

authority to favored private producers. There exists, then, unbeknownst to
most Americans, a large number of private decision makers who exercise pub-
lic authority to suit themselves without having to answer to the public.
Among one of the most powerful of these is the Federal Reserve, which
controls the nation’s interest rates and money supply. At the behest of the
major banks, in 1913 Congress and President Woodrow Wilson created the
Federal Reserve Board. Its key architect was Nelson Aldrich, father-in-law of
John D. Rockefeller Jr. All federally charted banks and many state banks are
members of the “Fed,” as it is called. The Fed’s seven-person board of gover-
nors is appointed to staggered fourteen-year terms by the U.S. president, who
can make only two appointments during his four-year term. Once appointed,
the board members answer to no one but the banking industry. The five re-
gional members of the Fed’s top policy committee are selected by bankers
from the various regions.
The U.S. Constitution gave Congress the exclusive power to create
money. But the coterie of private bankers who compose the Fed now exercise
this sovereign power. Check the money in your wallet; every bill of whatever
denomination is labeled “Federal Reserve Note.” When the Treasury needs
money, it must turn to this private banking institution, the Federal Reserve.
The Treasury prints interest-bearing U.S. Government Securities, an issue of,
say, $10 billion face value. These securities are IOUs that are given to the
Fed. The Fed then enters $10 billion as a debit, which is given to the Treasury.
If Treasury wants it in cash, the Fed has the cash printed at the Bureau of
Engraving and Printing, the same place government securities are printed.
The Fed then enters $10 billion on its books as a credit owed to it by the
Treasury, and now collects interest on the $10 billion asset. When the reserve
ratio is eight to one, the Fed can lend $8 for every $1 dollar it has on reserve. In
effect, much of the money it lends is created out of thin air! Instead of issuing
interest-free money of its own, the U.S. Treasury is borrowing from a private
banking source, the Fed, incurring an enormous debt. Thus the major banks
are allowed to create fiat money and collect interest on that money from the gov-
ernment and the taxpayers. The Federal Reserve is a money-making machine,
returning $16 billion to $24 billion a year in profits, a grand source of income
that goes directly into the bulging coffers of a tiny financial class.48
In 1963, President John Kennedy voiced his unhappiness with this fidu-
ciary arrangement. He began issuing silver-backed Treasury notes as currency
to replace Federal Reserve Notes, thereby beginning to save taxpayers billions
of dollars. Within a few months, Kennedy was assassinated and the printing
of interest-free Treasury notes was stopped almost immediately.
Congress holds an agency accountable primarily by controlling its appro-
priations, but the Fed evades this control by drawing its operating funds from
the billions of dollars it collects in interest on government securities. In 1996,
in what the New York Times called “a rare independent examination” of “the
secretive central bank,” the GAO issued a report criticizing the Fed’s manage-
ment of its own finances. The GAO noted that the Fed did not always seek
fully competitive bids for services it bought, and that it had accumulated a
$3.7 billion contingency fund that should have been returned to the Treasury.49
246
Chapter 17

Generally the Fed pursues a conservative, deflationary policy, making it
difficult for the president and Congress to prime a sluggish economy. The
Fed’s autonomy supposedly demonstrates its “independence” from politics.
But everything it does has a political effect, usually favorable to banking and
other big moneyed interests. The Fed’s big bankers have public authority to
act as nonelected oligarchs who can manipulate the money supply, pocket
enormous earnings, and impact on the economy in defiance of elected offi-
cials, while being answerable to no one.
In August 2009, in what might be considered a small victory for the
American public, a federal court ruled that the Federal Reserve should open
its books for the first time and reveal how it was spending the nation’s money.
Meanwhile 270 representatives in Congress co-sponsored a bill to have the
GAO audit the Fed. Playing upon public fears, the Fed continued to resist dis-
closure, claiming that such transparency would jeopardize its independence
and destabilize the economy—as if the economy were not already unstable.
REGULATION AND BUSINESS IDEOLOGY
If government is corporate capitalism’s provider and protector at home and
abroad, and if government and business are so intermingled as to be often in-
distinguishable, why are businesspeople so critical of “government meddling
in the economy”? There are a number of explanations. First, corporate Amer-
ica is not at all against monopolistic regulations that limit entry into a market,
weaken smaller competitors, subsidize select industries, set production stan-
dards that only big companies can meet, and encourage monopoly pricing.
It is public service regulation that big business wants eliminated, such
things as antitrust laws, and worker, consumer, and environmental protec-
tions. These are anathema to business because they benefit the general public
while cutting into the profits of the privileged investor. Deregulation in the
public-service realm leaves business freer to pursue profits without incurring
any obligation for the social costs of that pursuit. Deregulation has given the
mining companies a free hand to devastate whole regions without having to
pay any restoration costs. Deregulation allows corporate executives to pad
their paychecks with fringe benefits and stock options without having to tell
stockholders or tax collectors, an arrangement that one business journalist
called “a license to steal.”50 Deregulation also has enabled banks to increase
customer-service fees at a time when their own computerized customer-service
costs have declined.
Business is not really committed to some abstract “free-market” principle.
Government regulations that enhance profits are quietly supported and those
that cut into profits are loudly denounced. It is only in the latter case that the
cry for deregulation is heard throughout the nation’s boardrooms.
Business people adhere to the business ideology, a belief in the virtues of
private enterprise free of “government meddling.” That business leaders might
violate this creed in their own corporate affairs does not mean their devotion
to it is consciously hypocritical. Beliefs are no less sincerely held because they
are self-serving. Quite the contrary, it is a creed’s congruity with a favorable
The Political Economy of Bureaucracy
247

self-image and self-interest that makes it so convincing to its proponents re-
gardless of what the facts are. Many businesspeople, including those who
have benefited in almost every way from government contracts, subsidies,
and tax laws, believe their gains are the result of their own self-reliance and
talents in a highly competitive “private” market. They believe that the assis-
tance business gets from the government benefits the national economy,
whereas the assistance others get is a handout to parasites.
What is really needed is not an endless proliferation of regulatory units
but a change in the conditions that demand so much regulation—that is, a dif-
ferent method of ownership and a different purpose for production, one that
puts people before profits.
248
Chapter 17

C
H
A
P
T
E
R
18
The Supremely Political Court
Supreme Court justices and other federal judges are nominated by the presi-
dent and subject to confirmation by the Senate. They have life tenure and can
be removed from office only for misconduct and only through impeachment
by the House and conviction by a two-thirds vote after a trial in the Senate.
The size of the Supreme Court is determined by statute, fluctuating over the
years from six to ten members, being fixed at nine since 1877.
WHO JUDGES?
All three branches of government are sworn to uphold the Constitution, but
the Supreme Court alone formally reviews the constitutionality of actions
by the other two branches, at least in those cases brought before it. Nothing
in the Constitution gives the Court this power of judicial review, but the pro-
ceedings of the Constitutional Convention of 1787 reveal that many delegates
expected the judiciary to overturn laws it deemed inconsistent with the Con-
stitution.1 Of even greater significance is judicial interpretation, the Court’s
power to decide the intent and scope of laws as they are applied in actual
situations.
By its nature, the Supreme Court is something of an aristocratic branch:
its members are appointed rather than elected; they enjoy life tenure and are
formally accountable to no one once in office; and they have the final word on
constitutional matters. Of the 111 justices who have sat on the Court up to
2010, there have been 106 White males, 2 African American males, and 3 White
women (one of whom is Latino).
In class background and political proclivity, the justices (and federal judges
at other levels) have more commonly identified with the landed interests than
with the landless, the slave owners rather than the slaves, the industrialists
249

rather than the workers, the exponents of Herbert Spencer rather than of
Karl Marx. A Lincoln appointee to the Court, Justice Samuel Freeman Miller,
made note of the judiciary’s class biases: “It is vain to contend with judges
who have been at the bar, the advocates for forty years of railroad companies,
and all the forms of associated capital…. All their training, all their feelings are
from the start in favor of those who need no such influence.”2 Through most
of its history, notes one scholar, “the Court’s personnel were recruited mainly
from the class of corporate lawyers, so there was no shortage of empathy with
the desires of expanding capitalism.”3
Federal judges and Supreme Court justices have been known to enjoy ex-
pensive gifts and lavish trips paid for by corporations and other affluent inter-
ests that seek to influence their judicial rulings. There are no rules to regulate
these practices or to track any conflict of interest or personal links that judges
might have to litigants. A GAO report found that judges improperly issued
hundreds of decisions involving corporations in which they themselves owned
stock. One judge threw out lawsuits against a medical center on whose board
he sat.4 Justice Antonin Scalia went on an all-expenses-paid duck-hunting trip
with Vice President Dick Cheney in 2004, then two weeks later refused to
recuse himself before deciding in Cheney’s favor in a case that was of keen
personal and political interest to the vice president.5
“I’m happy to say that my final judgment of a case is almost always consistent with my
prejudgment of the case.”
250
Chapter 18

Elected judges in state courts around the country routinely accept campaign
contributions from lawyers and litigants, and seldom recuse themselves from
cases involving these same donors. In one instance, a judge refused to disqualify
himself and twice cast the deciding vote to throw out a $50 million jury verdict
against a corporation that had donated $3 million to his campaign. In 2009,
the U.S. Supreme Court by a slim majority (with four conservatives opposed)
ruled that judges must recuse themselves from such cases.6
Chief Justice Charles Evans Hughes once remarked, “We are under a
Constitution but the Constitution is what the judges say it is.”7 And what
they say is largely determined by their ideological predilections. If the justices
look favorably upon a policy, then they are inclined to argue, “There is noth-
ing in the Constitution that prohibits it.” If they do not like the policy, then
they will say, “There is nothing in the Constitution that allows it.” Thus Justice
Anthony Kennedy wrote in support of a military death penalty case that there
is nothing in the Constitution prohibiting Congress from delegating to the
president, acting as commander in chief, the power to impose the death penalty
in military capital murder cases. But with equal logic one could argue that
there is nothing in the Constitution that grants Congress the right to delegate
such an immense and fatal power.
Occasionally a president will select someone for the Court whose behavior
goes contrary to expectations, but almost always the justices’ voting records
are close to the ideological preferences of the president who appoints them.8
In the 1980s, President Reagan was second to none in this endeavor, system-
atically stocking more than half of the 744 federal judgeships with conserva-
tive ideologues, mostly in their thirties and forties, who would be handing
down decisions and shaping the law of the land for the next three to five
decades.9
Reagan’s successor, George Bush Sr., appointed an additional 195 federal
judges, all conservatives, usually youngish, including Clarence Thomas, a
forty-three-year-old reactionary mediocrity to replace the great Thurgood
Marshall on the Supreme Court.
When Bill Clinton, a Democrat, became president, he had an opportunity
to fill more than one hundred judicial vacancies and bring a little more ideo-
logical balance to the appellate and district courts. A record number of his
appointments were women or ethnic minority members (or both), but on the
whole they were the least progressive of any modern Democratic president, ren-
dering liberal decisions in only 46 percent of cases.10 Over half of the sixty-five
federal judges he appointed in 1998 were millionaires. Clinton was quick to
drop judicial candidates when there was serious opposition from Republicans,
as happened in over sixty instances.
President Bush Jr. whined repeatedly about the “obstructionism” of Sen-
ate Democrats in blocking his nominees for judgeships. In fact, in just a few
years the Senate confirmed over two hundred of his selections and blocked
only ten—seven of whom were eventually confirmed. Bush’s appointees in-
cluded Carolyn Kuhl, who devoted years to preserving tax breaks for colleges
that practiced racial discrimination, and Jay Bybee, who said that the First
Amendment should not be used to limit the states’ infringements on liberty
The Supremely Political Court
251

and that Congress has no power to stop violence against women and little
power to limit what the president does. While serving in the Justice Depart-
ment, Bybee authored a memo arguing for the legality of torture.11
The appointment and confirmation of judges and justices has become a
heavily politicized process, with various conservative and liberal groups mobi-
lizing for or against a nominee in attempts to sway the public and the Senate.
The antagonists understand that the ideology of the candidate is a key deter-
minant in how he or she will decide cases.12
In preparation for their confirmation hearings before the Senate Judiciary
Committee, both Chief Justice John Roberts and Justice Samuel Alito (Bush Jr.
appointees) engaged in dress rehearsal hearings where they were interrogated
and coached by White House handlers in how to avoid making statements
that would reveal their ideological commitments. During confirmation pro-
ceedings, each nominee repeatedly insisted that he would approach issues
with an open mind, judging each case purely on its merits. Roberts claimed
he would be as neutral as an umpire, not making the rules but evenhandedly
applying them with “modesty and humility” (his words).
When asked by the senators about Oregon’s Death with Dignity Act,
Roberts said he believed that the federal government should not enter this
arena and that “the right to be left alone is one of our basic rights.” But once
on the Court, he decided that the federal government indeed should enter this
arena and should overrule the referendum twice affirmed by Oregon’s voters
to let terminally ill patients end their own lives humanely.13 In short, Roberts
and Alito misled the senators. Once confirmed they followed their own ideo-
logical predilections quite predictably. “Robert’s record [as Chief Justice] is not
that of a humble moderate but … of a doctrinaire conservative…. In every
major case since he became the nation’s seventeenth Chief Justice, Roberts
has sided with the prosecution over the defendant, the state over the con-
demned, the executive branch over the legislative, and the corporate defendant
over the individual plaintiff.”14
CONSERVATIVE JUDICIAL ACTIVISM (EARLY TIMES)
Much of the debate about the Supreme Court today centers on whether (a) the
Court should act politically and ideologically by exercising a liberal “judicial
activism,” vigorously supporting individual rights and social needs, or (b) em-
ploy a conservative “judicial restraint” and “strict construction,” cleaving
close to the traditional intent of the Constitution and not injecting a personal
partisan agenda. In practice, however, through most of its history the Court
has engaged in a conservative judicial activism, pursuing a partisan agenda in
defense of wealthy interests and other privileged groups. Be it slavery or segre-
gation, child labor or the sixteen-hour workday, state sedition laws or assaults
on the First Amendment, Supreme Court justices have shown an infernal agil-
ity in finding constitutional justifications for the continuation of almost every
inequity and iniquity.
In its early days under Chief Justice John Marshall, the Court emerged as
an activist guardian of corporate property. Consider the landmark case Trustees
252
Chapter 18

of Dartmouth College v. Woodward (1819). In response to the demands of
farmers and artisans for affordable education, the New Hampshire state legisla-
ture turned Dartmouth College, an elite private school, into a public university.
Dartmouth’s trustees opposed the move, but the state court concluded that
the legislature had acted within its province, for education was “a matter of
the highest public concern.” Furthermore, the trustees had no property right in
Dartmouth; their right of office was a public trust. The Marshall Court thought
otherwise. Dartmouth’s corporate charter (granted by the English Crown in
1769 before there was a United States) was a contract that could not be im-
paired by legislative enactment. Dartmouth was a private corporation and
would have to remain one.
When the framers wrote in the Constitution that states could not impair
contract obligations, they were thinking of contracts between individuals. But
in Dartmouth College, Marshall decided that a state’s effort to create a demo-
cratic education system was “a power of at least doubtful utility.” More im-
portant was a state’s obligation to preserve contracts with private corporations
(even though corporations are mentioned nowhere in the Constitution).
Various justices, including Marshall himself, were slaveholders who up-
held the primacy of property rights in slaves, rejecting all slave petitions for
freedom. Right up until the eve of the Civil War, in the famous Dred Scott v.
Sandford (1857), the Court concluded that, be they slave or free, Blacks were
a “subordinate and inferior class of beings” without constitutional rights.
When the federal government wanted to establish national banks, give
away half the country to private speculators, subsidize industries, set up com-
missions that fixed prices and interest rates for large manufacturers and
banks, send Marines to secure corporate investments in Central America and
elsewhere, imprison people who denounced capitalism and spoke out against
war, deport immigrant radicals without a trial, or use the United States Army
to shoot workers and break strikes, the conservative activists who dominated
the Court inventively devised loose constructionist activist interpretations of
the constitution in order to move in these reactionary directions.
But when the federal or state governments sought to limit workday hours,
set minimum-wage or occupational safety standards, ensure the safety of con-
sumer products, guarantee workers rights to collective bargaining, then the
Court ruled that ours was a limited form of government that could not tamper
with property rights and the “free market” by depriving owner and worker of
“substantive due process” and “freedom of contract.” “Substantive due pro-
cess,” a self-contradictory concept that exists nowhere in the Constitution,
was a contrivance of conservative judicial activism. In effect, conservative
financial interests were now to be treated as part of judicial due process.
This allowed the Court to declare laws unconstitutional even if there was no
violation of due process.15
More often than not, the Supreme Court has been a conservative activist
force. It prevented Congress from instituting a progressive income tax, a deci-
sion that took eighteen years and the Sixteenth Amendment to the Consti-
tution to circumvent. The Court upheld the interests of slaveholders right up
to the Civil War and accepted racist segregation for almost a century after.
The Supremely Political Court
253

It delayed female suffrage for forty-eight years, a decision undone only by the
Nineteenth Amendment. And it has prevented Congress from placing limita-
tions on personal campaign spending by rich candidates.
The Fourteenth Amendment, adopted in 1868 ostensibly to establish full
citizenship for Blacks, says in part, “No State shall … deprive any person of
life, liberty, or property, without due process of law; nor deny to any person
within its jurisdiction the equal protection of the laws.” Once more conserva-
tive judicial activism reigned supreme as the Court decided that “person” in-
cluded corporations and that the Fourteenth Amendment was really intended
to protect business conglomerations from the “vexatious regulations” of the
states.16 By 1920, conservative activists on federal courts had struck down
roughly three hundred labor laws that had been passed by state legislatures to
ease the inhumane conditions endured by working people. Between 1880 and
1931, the courts issued more than 1,800 injunctions against labor strikes. (An
injunction is a court order prohibiting a party from taking a specific action.)
When Congress outlawed child labor, the Court’s conservative majority
found it to be a usurpation of the reserved powers of the states under the
Tenth Amendment, which reads: “The Powers not delegated to the United
States by this Constitution, nor prohibited by it to the States, are reserved to
the States respectively or to the people.” But when the states passed social-
welfare legislation, the Court’s conservative judicial activists found it in viola-
tion of “substantive due process” under the Fourteenth Amendment.17 Thus
they used the Tenth Amendment to stop federal reforms initiated under the
Fourteenth Amendment, and they used the Fourteenth to stop state reforms
initiated under the Tenth. Juridically speaking, it is hard to get more brazenly
activist than that.
In 1896, a conservative activist Supreme Court produced Plessy v. Fergu-
son, which rendered an inventive reading to the Fourteenth Amendment’s
equal protection clause. Plessy legitimated the racist practice of segregation
by enunciating the separate but equal doctrine: the forced separation of Blacks
from Whites in public facilities did not impute inferiority as long as facilities
were more or less equal (which they rarely were).
Convinced that they too were persons despite the treatment accorded
them by a male-dominated society, women began to argue that the Fourteenth
and Fifth Amendments applied to them and that the voting restrictions im-
posed on them by state and federal governments should be abolished. The
Fifth Amendment says, among other things, that no person shall be denied
“due process of law.” (It applies to the federal government just as the Four-
teenth Amendment due process clause applies to the states.) But in Minor v.
Happersett (1875), the all-male conservative activist Court fashioned another
tortured interpretation: women were citizens, true, but citizenship did not nec-
essarily confer the right of suffrage.18 The Court made up its mind that “pri-
vileges and immunities of citizens,” “due process,” and “equal protection of
the laws” applied to such “persons” as business corporations, but neither to
women nor to persons of African descent.
Well into the New Deal era, the Supreme Court was the activist bastion of
laissez-faire capitalism, striking down—often by slim 5 to 4 majorities—reforms
254
Chapter 18

produced by the state legislatures and Congress. From 1937 onward, under
pressure from the public and the White House, and with the switch of one con-
servative justice to the side of the liberals, the Court began to accept the consti-
tutionality of New Deal legislation.
CIRCUMVENTING THE FIRST AMENDMENT
The Supreme Court opposed restrictions on capitalist economic power, but
supported restrictions on the civil liberties of persons who agitated against
that power. The First Amendment says, “Congress shall make no law …
abridging the freedom of speech, or of the press.” Yet, from the Alien and
Sedition Acts of 1798 to today, Congress and the state legislatures have
passed numerous laws to penalize the expression of politically heretical ideas
as “seditious” or “subversive.” During the First World War, almost two thou-
sand prosecutions were carried out, mostly against anticapitalists who ex-
pressed opposition to the war, including the U.S. socialist leader Eugene
Victor Debs, who was thrown into prison. One individual, who in private
conversation in a relative’s home opined that it was a rich man’s war, was
fined $5,000 and sentenced to twenty years.19
During World War I, a radical named Charles Schenck distributed a leaf-
let that urged repeal of the draft and condemned the war as inspired by Wall
Street. Schenck was charged with attempting to cause insubordination among
U.S. military forces and obstructing recruitment, both violations of the Espio-
nage Act of 1917. The Supreme Court upheld his conviction. In ordinary
times, Justice Oliver Wendell Holmes reasoned, such speech is protected by
the First Amendment, but when a nation is at war, statements like Schenck’s
create “a clear and present danger” of bringing about “evils that Congress has
a right to prevent.” Free speech, Holmes argued, “does not protect a man in
falsely shouting fire in a crowded theater and causing a panic.”
The analogy is farfetched. Schenck was not in a theater; he was distributing
leaflets against the war. Holmes was summoning the same argument paraded
by every ruler who has sought to abrogate a people’s freedom: these are dan-
gerous times; national security necessitates a suspension of democratic rights.20
More than once the Court treated the allegedly pernicious quality of a
radical idea as justification for its suppression. When the top leadership of
the Communist Party was convicted under the Smith Act, which made it a fel-
ony to teach or advocate the violent overthrow of the government, the Court
upheld the convictions, arguing in Dennis et al. v. United States (1951) that
there was no freedom under the Constitution for those who conspired to
propagate revolutionary movements. Free speech was not an absolute value
but one of many competing ones. Justices Hugo Black and William O. Doug-
las dissented, arguing that the defendants had not been charged with any acts
or even with saying anything about violent revolution, but were intending to
publish and teach the classic writings of Marxism-Leninism. In any case, the
First Amendment was designed to protect the very heretical views we might
find offensive and fearsome. Safely orthodox ideas rarely needed constitu-
tional protection, they argued.
The Supremely Political Court
255

Six years later, fourteen more communist leaders were convicted under
the Smith Act for propagating forbidden political beliefs. This time, with
both the political climate and the Court’s makeup having shifted, the justices
ruled that the Smith Act prohibited only incitement to unlawful actions and
not “advocacy of abstract doctrine.” The convictions were overturned. Justice
Black added the opinion that the Smith Act itself should be declared uncon-
stitutional because “the First Amendment forbids Congress to punish people
for talking about public affairs, whether or not such discussion incites to ac-
tion, legal or illegal.”21 In response to pressure from free-speech advocates,
Congress repealed the Smith Act in 1977.
Communists might sometimes be denied free speech, but not liquor and
tobacco companies. The Court’s conservative judicial activists determined
that Rhode Island’s ban on advertising liquor prices violated “commercial
speech,” as did a Massachusetts law requiring tobacco ads in stores to be at
least five feet high, out of children’s direct vision.22 The Court’s conservative
activists ruled, in the words of Justice Lewis Powell, that corporate spending
to influence votes during a referendum campaign “is a type of speech in-
dispensable to decision-making in a democracy.”23 In a dissenting opinion,
Justices Byron White, William J. Brennan, and Thurgood Marshall argued
that “corporations are artificial entities created by law for the purpose of fur-
thering certain economic ends.” Their enormous economic power threatens
“the very heart of our democracy, the election process.”
The Court’s record in the area of personal liberties, though gravely want-
ing, is not totally devoid of merit. It overturned attempts by the states to cen-
sor publications, to deny individuals the right to peaceful assembly, and to
weaken the separation between church and state.24 But it also allowed U.S.
Army Intelligence to spy on lawful civilian political activity, and prohibited
civilians from bringing political literature and demonstrations to military
posts.25 Reporters were denied a right to confidential news sources when
subpoenaed by officials, thus limiting their ability to protect informants and
conduct investigations.26
The Court decided that bans on political signs in public places were not a
restriction on free speech, nor bans on demonstrations and leafleting at shop-
ping malls.27 When handcuffed, peaceful protestors had their eyes forced open
and deliberately swabbed with stinging pepper spray chemicals by police offi-
cers, the Court’s conservative majority ruled that there was no needless pain
and brutality involved if the officers reasonably believed that the level of force
was legally permissible.28 So police can use unreasonable force as long as they
think it is reasonable.
In Thornburgh v. Abbott (1989), prison officials were granted almost a
free hand in deciding what publications prisoners could receive, a censorship
applied mostly to politically dissident literature. As with prisoners, so with
students. The Court determined that high school administrators could censor
student publications and transfer faculty who dealt with classroom subjects
that their superiors disliked.29 The federal courts have repeatedly ruled that
teachers or other employees who are denied contracts or otherwise discriminated
256
Chapter 18

against because of their political views have no grounds for legal redress,
unlike employees who encounter racial or gender discrimination.
The Court did uphold the right to criticize public figures even in objec-
tionable ways.30 But it also decided that a Michigan state worker, who had
been denied a promotion because the police Red squad had a file on his polit-
ically active brother, could not sue the state, a decision that placed the state’s
politically repressive acts above legal challenge.31 In 1996, the high court
ruled that the FBI could maintain files on Americans who were engaged in le-
gal political activities protected by the First Amendment—even though Con-
gress had passed the Privacy Act prohibiting such surveillance.32
In Garcetti v. Ceballos (2006), a 5 to 4 majority found that the First
Amendment did not protect public employees against retaliation by their
supervisors for anything said while performing their duties. This meant that
whistleblowers who made their complaints public faced a greater danger of
retaliation. In a dissent, Justice Stevens said, “The notion that there is a cate-
gorical difference between speaking as a citizen and speaking in the course of
one’s employment is quite wrong.”
Through all this, the conservative majority on the Court today remains
steadfast in protecting us from hearing naughty words on the air.33
FREEDOM FOR REVOLUTIONARIES (AND OTHERS)?
Some people argue that revolutionaries violate the democratic rules of the
game and should not be allowed to take advantage of the very liberties they
seek to destroy; in order to preserve our freedom, we may have to deprive
some people of theirs.34 Several rejoinders might be offered.
First, by suppressing “harmful” thoughts, political rulers are in effect
making up our minds for us, depriving us of the opportunity to hear and de-
bate heterodox ideas. An exchange with anticapitalist revolutionary advocates
is forbidden because the dissident has been silenced—which in effect puts a
limit on our own critical thoughts regarding this subject.
Second, it is not true that anticapitalists are dedicated to the destruction
of freedom. Much of the working-class ferment in United States instigated
by socialists and communists actually widened the areas of dissent and
helped extend the franchise to propertyless working people. The crucial role
communists played in struggling for labor reforms, peace, and civil rights
strengthened rather than undermined democratic forces. Likewise, the militant
antiwar protests conducted by self-professed revolutionaries during the
Vietnam era broadened the spectrum of critical information regarding U.S.
foreign policy, at least for a time.
Third, the construction of new socioeconomic alternatives would bring an
increase in freedom, including freedom from poverty and hunger, freedom to
share in the making of decisions that govern one’s work and community, and
freedom to experiment with new forms of production and ownership. Admit-
tedly some freedoms enjoyed today would be lost in a revolutionary demo-
cratic socialist society, such as the freedom to exploit other people and get
The Supremely Political Court
257

rich from their labor, the freedom to squander natural resources and treat the
environment as a septic tank, the freedom to monopolize information and
exercise unaccountable socioeconomic power.
In many countries, revolutionary movements brought an increase in free-
dom by advancing the conditions necessary for health and human life, pro-
viding jobs for the unemployed and education for the illiterate, using
economic resources for social development rather than for corporate profit,
ending foreign exploitation, and involving much of the populace in the task
of economic reconstruction. Revolutions can extend a number of real free-
doms without destroying those that never existed for the people of those
countries. The argument can be debated, but not if it is suppressed.
Finally, as a point of historical fact, the threat of revolution in the United
States has never been as real or harmful to our liberties as the measures taken
to “protect” us from revolutionary ideas. In the name of national security
and the “war on terrorism,” authorities will suppress any mobilized opinion
that is seen as “giving comfort to the enemies of our land.” Instead of wor-
rying about some future revolutionary menace, we should realize that free-
dom is in short supply in the present society. The real danger comes from
those at the top who would insulate us from “unacceptable” viewpoints.
No idea is as dangerous as the force that seeks to repress it. (See the discus-
sion in Chapter 11.)
AS THE COURT TURNS
What direction the Supreme Court takes depends largely on the climate of the
times and on the political composition of the justices. In the 1960s, fortified
by the social activism of the wider society and a liberal majority on the bench,
the Court under Chief Justice Earl Warren for the first time in U.S. history
ruled repeatedly on behalf of the less affluent, issuing a number of decisions
that (a) protect civil liberties, (b) reapportion legislative districts in accordance
with population distribution, and (c) extend the economic rights of the poor.35
The Warren Court handed down several decisions aimed at abolishing racial
segregation. The most celebrated, Brown v. Board of Education (1954), unan-
imously ruled that “separate educational facilities are inherently unequal” be-
cause of the inescapable imputation of inferiority cast upon the segregated
minority. In addition, the Court nullified state prohibitions against interracial
marriage.36
In the years after Warren, the Court moved mostly in a rightward direc-
tion on a variety of crucial issues.37 What follows is a representative selection
of cases.
Abortion and Gender Mistreatment. Abortion and sex discrimination
cases have received mixed treatment. On the positive side, the Court has ruled
that (a) sexual harassment on the job violated a person’s civil rights, (b) vic-
tims of sexual harassment can obtain monetary damages from the institution
in which the harassment occurred, and (c) schools are liable under federal law
for failing to stop a student from subjecting another student to severe and con-
tinual sexual harassment.38
258
Chapter 18

The justices declared unconstitutional a requirement that women seeking
abortions must notify their husbands, but in another case they decided that
underage women must obtain parental consent for an abortion.39 The reason-
ing seems to be that a young woman is not mature enough to decide about
getting an abortion but she is mature enough to be forced to become a mother
and raise a child. In Webster v. Reproductive Health Services (1989), the
Court gave states broad powers to impose restrictions on abortions, such as
barring the use of public money, medical personnel, and facilities. In 2003
the justices decided that states had the right to force women seeking an abor-
tion to be counseled against having one, as well as to face other obstacles, in-
cluding postponing the decision and returning for an additional trip to the
clinic—which can work a hardship on low-income women who must travel
far to find an abortion clinic.40
In Scheidler v. National Organization for Women (2003), the Court re-
versed a previous decision and ruled that antiabortion protestors who blocked
clinics and harassed abortion providers were not subject to heavy penalties
under the federal racketeering law. But in Stenberg v. Carhart (2000), the
Court ruled 5 to 4 that the government could not prohibit doctors from per-
forming late-term abortion, because it might be the most medically appropri-
ate way of terminating some pregnancies.
Affirmative Action and Civil Rights. Justice Harry Blackmun explained in
University of California v. Bakke (1978) that affirmative action had to be
taken to correct long-standing racial inequities. But by the late 1980s, the jus-
tices were making it more difficult to establish discrimination claims against
employers, and were sharply limiting the ability of state and local govern-
ments to set aside a small fixed percentage of contracts for minority busi-
nesses.41 A 5 to 4 majority decided that if an employer asserts “business
necessity” to justify a racist or sexist practice, the burden is on the worker to
prove intent and show that the practice is not job related.42 It is often impos-
sible to demonstrate intent. We can see the effects of an action but usually can
only divine the motive.
In Ledbetter v. Goodyear (2007), the only woman among sixteen men at
the same management level discovered after twenty years of employment that
she had been earning less than any of her colleagues, including those with less
seniority. Too late, the Supreme Court’s conservative majority ruled: employ-
ees may not bring suit unless they have filed a formal complaint with a federal
agency within 180 days “after the alleged unlawful employment practice
occurred.” This seemingly unrealistic requirement could prevent thousands of
discrimination cases from being filed. In any case, the 180-day limitation was
generated out of thin air, another instance of conservative jurists legislating
from the bench.
Over the past several decades there have been a few victories for racial
justice. For instance, Palmore v. Sidoti (1984) ruled that a divorced woman
cannot be denied custody of her children because she remarried a man of an-
other race. For the most part, however, conservative judges have refused to
redress racial grievances relating to voting rights, school redistricting, and
law school admission.43 In Grutter v. Bollinger (2003), the Court did rule
The Supremely Political Court
259

that the University of Michigan Law School could consider an applicant’s race
as an additional qualification in order to promote campus diversity.
In a companion decision, however, the justices struck down Michigan’s
undergraduate admission system that awarded points for minority status.
(The university also granted admission points to children of alumni, rural
residents, and students whose families make big donations, but none of these
special treatments were challenged.) Ironically, the sternest opponent of affir-
mative action on the Court has been Justice Clarence Thomas, an ultraconser-
vative African American, who himself got into Yale Law School because of
affirmative action.
On the brighter side, the Supreme Court issued unanimous decisions sup-
porting legal protections for employees who were victims of racial and gender
discrimination and harassment.44
Criminal Justice. In Massey v. Washington (1991), the justices decided
that sentencing a mentally retarded thirteen-year-old to life imprisonment
was not a violation of the Eighth Amendment’s prohibition against “cruel
and unusual punishment.” The youth’s older codefendant testified that
Massey “was just there” and had not killed anyone.
The Court upheld a life sentence given to a man for three minor frauds
totaling $230. Chief Justice William Rehnquist argued that this was not exces-
sive and that cruel and unusual punishment might be when someone is given,
say, a life sentence for “overtime parking”—an example so farfetched as to
allow for nearly any kind of excess.45 In 1991, the Court ruled that a life sen-
tence without parole for a first-time conviction of cocaine possession was not
cruel and unusual punishment. In 2003, the Supreme Court’s conservative
majority continued on its medieval course, sustaining a fifty-year-to-life man-
datory minimum sentence for an offender convicted of two counts of petty
theft. He had a history of minor offenses but no violent crimes.46 That same
year, Ewing v. California upheld a conviction of twenty-five years for some-
one who stole three golf clubs.
The Court’s ever-inventive conservative activists decided that when im-
posing sentence, federal judges may take into account not only the crimes for
which defendants were convicted but additional charges for which juries
found them not guilty. Thus a charge that cannot be proven in court might
still bring punishment.47 To its credit, the Court came out strongly against
racial bias in jury selection, specifically prosecutors’ practice of deliberately
challenging and removing African Americans from jury panels.48 The justices
reaffirmed the right of defendants to competent representation, calling for a
new trial for a convict whose attorney had slept through substantial portions
of his trial.49
The justices seem to think children can fend for themselves. The prohibition
against cruel and unusual punishment, they decided, does not protect school-
children from corporal punishment even if they are severely injured by school
officials. And the due process clause does not protect an individual from an-
other individual, not even a child from an abusive parent.50
Child abusers seem to get more juridical consideration than their victims.
By a 5 to 4 vote in Stogner v. California (2003), the Court struck down a
260
Chapter 18

California law that had extended the statute of limitations for prosecuting
suspected sex abusers, putting a stop to criminal investigations across the
state. The majority argued that lengthening the statute of limitations violated
the Constitution’s ex post facto clause, which prohibits changing the law and
making something a crime after the fact. Actually the acts involved were
crimes when they were committed. Only the time available for prosecution
had been changed. Stogner raped his own young daughters. In this case, it
was four conservatives who had the good sense to dissent.
The Fourth Amendment protection against unreasonable searches and
seizures was seriously weakened when the Court upheld the police’s power
to conduct sweeping searches in private homes and on buses, to arrest indivi-
duals without a warrant, and to hold them without a court hearing.51
The conservative activists ruled that in order to file lawsuits against inhu-
mane prison conditions, inmates had to show that prison officials exhibited
“deliberate indifference.” It was not explained how one could demonstrate
deliberate neglect if the inhumane prison conditions themselves did not.52 By
a 6 to 3 majority in Hope v. Pelzer (2002), the Court did declare unconstitu-
tional an Alabama prison practice of handcuffing inmates to a metal pole for
hours in the blazing summer heat, seeing it as cruel and unusual punishment.
In McNally v. United States (1987), the Court reined in the prosecutory
power when applied to upper-class white-collar offenders, making it more dif-
ficult to bring mail fraud charges against persons in private business, govern-
ment, and the judiciary. Justice Stevens dissented, wondering “why a Court
that has not been particularly receptive to the rights of criminal defendants”
now protects “the elite class of powerful individuals who will benefit from this
decision.”
The Court has ruled that the federal government does not have the
authority to ban gun possession near schools or prosecute perpetrators of
domestic violence. Such matters came under the jurisdiction of the states.
Yet, under the interstate commerce clause, the feds could regulate the medici-
nal use of marijuana, because locally grown pot might eventually end up
crossing state lines (which is also true of guns circulated near schools). The
decision affirmed the federal government’s prosecution of people in California
who smoked pot to ease the symptoms of multiple sclerosis and other painful
and debilitating diseases.53
Death Penalty. Generally the Supreme Court has been pruning down the
death penalty. Coker v. Georgia (1977) declared that death is an excessive
penalty for the crime of rape. Kennedy v. Louisiana (2008) ruled that even
rape of a child was not sufficient cause for execution—only those convicted of
first-degree murder can be executed. Ford v. Wainwright (1986) made it un-
constitutional to execute an insane person because a defendant must be able
to comprehend the proceedings and punishment. Atkins v. Virginia (2002)
did the same for mentally retarded persons, as did Roper v. Simmons (2005)
for those who were under eighteen at the time of their crime. Ring v. Arizona
(2002) held that juries, not judges, must make the critical findings that send
convicted murderers to death row. Baze v. Rees (2008) ruled that lethal-
injection drugs used by Kentucky and most other states do not constitute cruel
The Supremely Political Court
261

and unusual punishment, thus clearing the way for a resumption of executions
nationwide.
Economic Inequality. In seeming violation of the Fourteenth Amend-
ment’s equal protection clause, the justices decided that a state may vary the
quality of education in accordance with the amount of taxable wealth located
in its school districts, thus allowing just about any degree of deprivation.54
Despite a law limiting water subsidies to farms of 160 acres or less and to
farmers who “live on or near the land,” the Court held that large commercial
farms, including ones owned by Standard Oil, were entitled to the subsidies.55
California’s Proposition 13 restricted tax increases on property bought before
1975, so that persons with newly purchased homes carry tax burdens as much
as thirteen times heavier than longtime and often more affluent owners, in
what amounts to a kind of caste system.56
Electoral System. Several decisions by conservative judicial activists
snipped away at the “one-person, one-vote’” reapportionment rule and
allowed for greater population disparities among state and congressional
legislative districts.57 The Court continued to hold that states could not pro-
hibit corporations from spending unlimited amounts to influence the outcome
of public referenda, because such expenditures were a form of “speech” and
business firms were to be considered “persons.” Nor could limits be imposed
on the amount that rich candidates expend on their own campaigns, or the
amount that they and political parties may spend on other candidates if the
expenditure is made “independently,” that is, without being controlled in
any way by the candidate.58
In 2000, in an apparent departure from this stance, the Supreme Court, in
a 6 to 3 decision, upheld a state’s authority to impose strict limits on cam-
paign contributions, because preserving the integrity of the electoral process
outweighed an individual’s right to give large sums to a favored candidate.
As Justice Stevens noted: “Money is property; it is not speech.”59 In 2001
and again in 2004, by slim majorities the Court upheld limits on how much
“soft money” political parties and rich donors could spend on candidates’ ads,
including ads that target a candidate’s constituency close to election time and
promote a candidate in some way.60
In Citizens United v. Federal Election Commission (2009), rather than
showing judicial restraint by deferring to the elected branch, the conservative
justices displayed disdain for Congress’s attempts to limit campaign spending.
Instead the conservative activists overthrew the Court’s own prior rulings lim-
iting campaign spending. “What the conservatives seemed most concerned
about,” wrote one editorialist “was protecting the interests of corporations.”61
The Court held 5 to 4 that states could not impose term limits on their
representatives in Congress; the Constitution allowed for only three qualifying
restrictions: age, residency, and citizenship.62 The justices also decided that
states can prohibit small parties from endorsing a major-party candidate,
thus ruling out cross-endorsements or fusion tickets and diminishing the lever-
age a minor party might have.63
The 600,000 or so U.S. citizens (overwhelmingly Democrats) who reside
in Washington, D.C. (the District of Columbia) and pay federal taxes have
262
Chapter 18

no constitutional right to representation in Congress, the justices decided, in
seeming violation of the one-person, one-vote rule.64
In a clear victory for Republicans, the Supreme Court’s conservative
majority ruled that Indiana could require voters to produce a photo ID before
being allowed to cast a ballot. The requirement, also imposed by several other
states, is supposedly intended to thwart voter fraud. But proponents were un-
able to produce a single instance in Indiana of a person posing as another in
order to cast a ballot. Opponents argued that such laws could cause many
eligible voters to stay home if they did not have an up-to-date driver’s license
or passport or some other government-issued photo ID, documents that poor
and elderly citizens often lack.65 In seeming defiance of the Supreme Court,
the following year the Indiana law was overturned by an Indiana state appel-
late court, which ruled that the law did not treat all voters equally since no ID
requirements were imposed on voters who used mail-in ballots.66
In 2006, the Court ruled that the Texas legislature could redraw congres-
sional districts in mid-decade (districts that had been judged by both parties as
fairly done just two years before), in effect allowing a gerrymandering that
gave the Republican Party six additional congressional seats and the Demo-
crats six fewer. The ruling set aside the long-standing practice, as explicitly
described in the Constitution, of redrawing districts once every ten years after
the national census.67
Environment. The justices legislated from the bench in the Exxon Valdez
case. The Exxon oil tanker, steered by a captain who had been drinking
heavily, ran aground in Alaska’s Prince William Sound in March 1989, spill-
ing 11 million gallons of oil—the largest spill on record in North America, foul-
ing 1,200 miles of pristine Alaska coastline, causing serious ecological damage,
killing marine life, and destroying the homeland and livelihoods of nearly
33,000 people. Exxon was fined $5 billion in punitive damages. (The company
was earning about $30 billion to $40 billion a year.) The Supreme Court gal-
loped to Exxon’s rescue and reduced the damages by nine-tenths to $500 mil-
lion, ruling that compensation payments and punitive payments should be on a
one-to-one ratio. Here again the activist conservatives were legislating purely
on their own. Critics of the ruling said they could find no justification for the
Court’s ratio. The victims in the case were left shocked and disappointed,
awarded about $15,000 each, not enough to begin paying off debts after
almost twenty years of litigation.68
The Supreme Court also rescued gold-mining companies when it ruled
that the Clean Water Act does not prevent them from dumping millions of
tons of toxic waste into rivers, streams, lakes, and bays, obliterating life in
these water bodies.69
Executive Power. Conservative judicial activists support an expanded role
for presidential power and executive privilege. Over the years, federal courts
have refused to hear cases challenging the president on such things as the un-
declared war in Vietnam, the unprovoked U.S. invasion of Grenada, the impo-
sition of embargoes on Nicaragua, the U.S. invasion of Panama, and the U.S.
bombing of Iraq and Yugoslavia. A Massachusetts law mandating that the
state boycott companies that do business with the brutal dictatorship of
The Supremely Political Court
263

Myanmar (Burma) was struck down because it was judged as interfering in
the president’s capacity to act for the nation on foreign affairs.70
Cheney v. United States (2004) ruled that the White House had constitu-
tional immunity from all legal demands for information, except when under
criminal investigation. As Justice Scalia argued approvingly, “I think executive
privilege means whenever the president feels he is threatened, he can simply
refuse to comply with a court order. He has the power … to say ‘No this in-
trudes too much upon my powers.’”71 But Hamdan v. Rumsfeld (2006) did
rein in that autocratic monarchical power a bit when a majority of justices
repudiated the plan to put Guantanamo detainees (held five years as “terrorist
suspects”) on trial by military commissions. The Court ruled that the com-
missions had no basis in federal or international law, that testimony was
extracted through coercion, and that defendants had been denied the right to
attend their trials.
Labor and Corporate Economy. Over the last decade the Supreme Court
has delivered a series of victories to big corporations at the expense of work-
ing people, ruling that (a) workers have no right to strike over safety issues if
their contract provides a grievance procedure, denying, for example, miners
the right to walk off the job in the face of immediately dangerous safety viola-
tions that management refused to remedy, (b) employers can penalize workers
for unionizing by closing down operations and denying them jobs, (c) unions
cannot collect fees from nonunion employees that are used for political cam-
paign contributions, only those fees and dues necessary to perform its duties
as a collective bargaining representative, and (d) companies can give preferen-
tial hiring to scabs who crossed picket lines.72
In NLRB v. Kentucky River Community Care (2001), a 5 to 4 majority
decided that nurses who help less-skilled workers to deliver services can be
classified as “supervisors” and therefore are not allowed to organize a union.
The dissenting justices argued that such an arbitrarily broad definition of
“supervisor” threatened the right of many other professional employees to
organize.
In 2003, the Court ruled that undocumented immigrants had no right
to be reinstated in their jobs if they were fired for joining a union, nor could
they hope to collect back pay for the time they were deprived of work.73
Retaliatory firings for union organizing are a violation of the National Labor
Relations Act, but this seemed not to faze the Court’s conservative activists
who legislate from the bench. In another case the conservative justices decided
that punitive damages against corporations are “unconstitutional” if they are
many times higher than the amount awarded for injuries.74 Punitive damages
are awarded in a jury trial (so it is hard to see how due process has been de-
nied), and such awards are meant to punish business wrongdoers in amounts
that have an impact. But again out of thin air the Court’s conservative acti-
vists set up standards exclusively of their own devising.
Separation of Church and State. The First Amendment reads in part:
“Congress shall make no law respecting an establishment of religion, or pro-
hibiting the free exercise thereof.” (An established church is one that is largely
or fully supported by the government or recognized as the official religion of
264
Chapter 18

the nation.) Disregarding this separation of church and state, the Court has
long held that religious organizations can enjoy various exemptions from tax-
ation, in effect forcing laypersons to pick up that portion of the tax burden
that religious bodies do not pay.75 Thus people are being forced to subsidize
religions they may not believe in.
In a series of 5 to 4 decisions, a deeply divided Court ruled that (a) federal
funds given to religious groups to promote chastity did not violate separation
of church and state, (b) tuition, textbook, and transportation costs for private
schools (including religious ones) were tax deductible, (c) a university could
not refuse to subsidize a student religious publication with mandatory student
activity fees, and (d) federal money may be used to pay for special education
teachers and other instructional equipment in parochial schools.76
In Zelman v. Simmons-Harris (2002), a 5 to 4 majority upheld a program
that allows parents to use public money to pay for private schools, mostly reli-
gious ones. In Chandler v. Siegelman (2001), the justices let stand a lower court
ruling that allows moments of prayer at graduations and football games.
In support of church-state separation, the Court ruled that authorities
cannot require public schools to teach the biblical notion (“creationism”)
that the world was made by God as a perfectly finished product in six days.
And states could withhold state scholarships from students preparing for the
ministry.77 The court also upheld a lower federal court order requiring the
removal of a Ten Commandments monument from the Alabama state judicial
building.78
The Supreme Court’s ideological bias is reflected not only in the decisions
it hands down but in the cases it selects or refuses to review. During the last
two decades of conservative domination, review access has been sharply cur-
tailed for plaintiffs representing labor, minorities, consumers, and individual
rights. Powerless and pauperized individuals have had a diminishing chance of
getting their cases reviewed, unlike powerful and prestigious petitioners such
as the government and giant corporations. State and federal prosecutors were
able to gain a hearing by the high court at a rate fifty times greater than defen-
dants. Criminal defendants who could afford the legal filing fee were twice as
likely to be granted a Supreme Court review as were indigent defendants.79
CONSERVATIVE JUDICIAL ACTIVISM (PRESENT DAY)
Because the Court can neither fashion legislation nor enforce its decisions, it
has been deemed the “least dangerous branch.” But a militantly conservative
Court bolstered by a conservative executive can exercise quite an activist influ-
ence. Again and again the Court’s conservative activists imposed their own
tortured logic to cases, blatantly violating the clear language of a law in order
to undermine the efforts of a previously liberal Congress. Or the Court upheld
conservative-inspired executive regulations designed to negate a statute passed
by the Congress.
Conservative political leaders complain of judicial activism when judges
expand civil rights, civil liberties, abortion rights, and the rights of women,
gays, minorities, immigrants, and workers. But these same conservatives
The Supremely Political Court
265

manifest no outrage when the Supreme Court declares corporations to be
“persons,” money to be “speech,” and the president to be supreme and un-
accountable. A consistent double standard obtains. Judicial activism that sup-
ports democratic working-class rights and socioeconomic equality invites
attack. Judicial activism that strengthens authoritarian statism and big-business
prerogatives is readily embraced. “Most activist, politicized judges on the federal
bench today,” notes one critic, “are conservative Republicans.”80
Conservatives say that judges should not try to “legislate from the
bench,” the way liberal activists supposedly do. They insist that jurists show
modesty and restraint, including a careful regard for past court decisions. But
a Yale study reveals that conservative justices like Thomas and Scalia have a
far more active rate of invalidating or reinterpreting Congressional laws than
more liberal justices like Stephen Breyer and Ruth Bader Ginsberg.81 The
Court’s right-wing jurists have been not only the most willful, ideologically
driven activists of all, they have been downright adventuristic, showing no
hesitation to invent concepts and constructions out of thin air, eviscerate per-
fectly legitimate (but liberal) laws, shift arguments and premises as their ideol-
ogy dictates, roll back egalitarian politico-economic gains, and weaken civil
liberties, civil rights, and the democratic process itself (such as it is).
Conservative activism was nowhere more evident than in Bush v. Gore
(2000). In a 5 to 4 decision, the conservatives overruled the Florida Supreme
Court’s order for a recount in the 2000 presidential election, arguing that
because different counties might use different modes of tabulating ballots
in a hand recount, this would violate the equal protection clause of the
Fourteenth Amendment. In fact, the methods used to count votes by hand
in Florida would lead to results no less uniform than recounts in any other
state across the nation, as Justice Stevens noted in his dissent. The Demo-
cratic candidate, Vice President Al Gore, was behind by only a hundred or
so votes in Florida and was gaining ground with each attempt at recount.
The Court’s conservative judicial activists did not give Florida a chance to
fix the problem. They abruptly ended the counting and in effect appointed
Bush Jr.—the candidate who failed to get a majority of both the popular
vote and the Electoral College—president of the United States.82 In this
case, Justices Thomas and Scalia both refused to recuse themselves even
though Thomas was married to a consultant in the Bush campaign and
Scalia had two sons employed in law firms representing Bush in the very
same Florida proceedings.
The Court’s conservatives have held that the federal government must
not use the equal protection clause of the Fourteenth Amendment to force
states to stop violence against women, or mandate a more equitable mode
of property taxes or a more equitable distribution of funds between rich
and poor school districts. But in Bush these same justices now ruled that
the equal protection clause could be used to stop a legal recount conducted
by the state of Florida. At the same time, they explicitly stated that Bush v.
Gore could not be considered a precedent for other equal protection issues.
In no other case in the Court’s history have the justices prohibited the prece-
dent set from being treated as a precedent. In other words, the Fourteenth
266
Chapter 18

Amendment was operative only when the conservative activists decide to
activate it, not at any other time.
Life tenure was supposed to shield the federal judiciary from outside influ-
ences and place it above partisan politics. Experience shows that federal
judges are as political and ideological as anyone else. A fixed term of ten or
twelve years, as some states allow their state judges, would still give a jurist
significant independence, but it would not allow him or her to remain un-
accountable for an entire lifetime. Judges who exhibit a hostile view toward
constitutional rights eventually could be replaced. With more turnover, ideo-
logically partisan groups might find it more difficult to pack the courts for
many years ahead.
The justices read not only the Constitution but also the newspapers. They
talk not only to each other but to friends and acquaintances. Few jurists re-
main untouched by the great tides of public opinion and by the subtler shifts
in values and perceptions. The Court is always operating in a climate of opin-
ion shaped by political forces larger than itself. The hope is that democratic
forces will prove increasingly effective in restraining the reactionary oligarchic
activism of the federal courts.
The Supremely Political Court
267

C
H
A
P
T
E
R
19
Democracy for the Few
This country contains a diverse array of interest groups. If that is what is
meant by “pluralism,” then the United States is a pluralistic society, as is any
society of size and complexity. But the proponents of pluralism presume to be
saying something about how power is distributed and how democracy works.
Supposedly the government is not controlled by corporate elites who get what
they want on virtually every question. If there are elites in our society, they are
checked in their demands by conflicting elites. No group can press its advan-
tages too far and any sizable interest can find a way within the political sys-
tem to make its influence felt. Government stands above any one particular
influence but responds to many. So say the pluralists.1
PLURALISM FOR THE FEW
The evidence offered in the preceding chapters leaves us with reason to doubt
that the United States is a pluralistic democracy as described above. Most
government policies favor large-investor interests at a substantial cost to the
rest of the populace. Long and hard democratic struggles have won some
real benefits for the pubic, yet inequities and social injustices of immense pro-
portions continue and even worsen. There is commodity glut in the private
market and chronic scarcity in public services. While the superrich get ever
richer, possessed with more money than they know what to do with, the num-
ber of people living below or perilously near the poverty level has continued
to climb.
To think of government as nothing more than a referee amidst a vast
array of “countervailing” groups (which presumably represent all the impor-
tant interests within society) is to forget that government best serves those
268

who can best serve themselves. Power in America “is plural and fluid,”
claimed one pluralist.2 In reality, power is structured through entrenched,
well-organized, well-financed, politico-economic channels. Wealth is the most
crucial power resource. It creates a pervasive political advantage, and affords
ready access to most other resources.
Those who celebrate the existing plutocracy have little to say about the per-
vasive role of political repression in U.S. society, the purging and exclusion of
anticapitalist dissidents from government, from the labor movement, the media,
and academia, and from public life in general. They have little to say about the
surveillance and harassment of protest organizations and public-interest advo-
cacy groups. They seem never to allude to the near-monopoly control of ideas
and information that is the daily fare of the news and entertainment sectors of
the mass media, creating a climate of opinion favorable to the owning-class ide-
ology at home and abroad. Nor are the plutocratic celebrants much troubled by
an electoral system in which votes are suppressed and vast sums of money are a
prerequisite for office.
Apologists for the existing system make much of the fact that wealthy in-
terests do not always operate with clear and deliberate purpose. To be sure,
like everyone else, elites sometimes make mistakes and suffer confusion about
tactics. But if they are not omniscient and infallible, neither are they in a state
of chronic confusion. If they do not always calculate correctly in the pursuit of
their class interests, they do so often and successfully enough. And they are
keenly aware that they do have class interests.
Is the American polity ruled by a secretive, conspiratorial, omnipotent,
monolithic power elite? No, the plutocracy, or ruling class, does not fit that
simple caricature. First of all, no ruling class in history, no matter how auto-
cratic, has ever achieved omnipotence. All have had to make concessions and
allow for unexpected and undesired developments. In addition, ruling elites
are not always secretive. The influence they exercise over governing bodies is
sometimes covert but often a matter of public record, some of it reported even
in the mainstream media. Their influence is exercised through control of the
top posts in business and government, and their control of interlocking direc-
torates and trusteeships whose existence, though not widely advertised, is
public knowledge. These elites do often find it desirable to plan in secret,
minimize or distort the flow of information, and pursue policies that may vio-
late the laws they profess to uphold. Examples aplenty have been offered in
this book.
American government is not ruled by a monolithic elite. Occasionally
sharp differences arise in ruling circles about how best to advance the interests
of the moneyed class. Differences can arise between moderate and extreme
conservatives, between small and large investors, and domestic and interna-
tional corporations. But these conflicts seldom take into account the interests
of the working public. When push comes to shove, what holds the various
elites together is their common interest in preserving an economic system
that ensures the accumulation of corporate wealth and the privileged lifestyles
of the superrich.
Democracy for the Few
269

Does this amount to a “conspiracy theory” of society? First, it should be
noted that not all conspiracies are theories; some do exist. A common view is
that conspiracy is only the imaginings of kooks. But just because some people
have fantasies of conspiracies does not mean that all conspiracies are fanta-
sies. There was the secretive plan to escalate the Vietnam War as revealed in
the Pentagon Papers, the Watergate break-in, the FBI COINTELPRO dis-
ruption of dissident groups, the several phony but well-orchestrated “energy
crises” that sharply boost oil prices, the Iran-contra conspiracy, and the hun-
dreds of savings and loan conspiracies.
Ruling elites insist upon conspiring in secret, without being held account-
able to anyone, for example, Vice President Cheney’s secret meeting with oil
magnates to map out national energy policy (see Chapter 16). They sometimes
call it “national security.” But when one suggests that their plans (whether
covert or overt) are intended to benefit the interests of their class at cost to the
rest of us, one is dismissed as a “conspiracy theorist.” It is allowed that farmers,
steelworkers, or schoolteachers may concert to advance their interests, but it
may not be suggested that moneyed elites do as much—even when they occupy
the top decision-making posts of government and finance. Instead, we are asked
to believe that these estimable persons of high station walk through life indiffer-
ent to the fate of their vast holdings.
Although there is no one grand power elite, there is continual communi-
cation and coordination between various corporate and governmental elites in
almost every policy area, centering around the common interests of the corpo-
rate owning class. Many of the stronger corporate groups tend to predominate
in their particular spheres of interest, more or less unmolested by other elites.
In any case, the conflicts among moneyed elites seldom work to the advantage
of the mass of people. They are conflicts of haves versus haves. Often they are
resolved not by compromise but by logrolling and collusion. These mutually
satisfying arrangements among “competitors” usually come at the expense of
the public interest. To be sure, the demands of the unfortunates may be heard
occasionally as a clamor outside the gate, and now and then concessions are
granted to take the edge off their restiveness.
Big business prevails not only because it uses campaign donations and
shrewd lobbyists to manipulate policymakers. Business also exerts an overall in-
fluence as a system of power, a way of organizing capital, employment, and
large-scale production. Because big business controls much of the nation’s econ-
omy, government perforce enters into a uniquely intimate relationship with it.
The health of the economy is treated by policymakers as a necessary condition
for the health of the nation, and since it happens that the economy is mostly in
the hands of large interests, then presumably government’s service to the public
is best accomplished by service to those interests, so it is often thought. The
goals of business (high profits, cheap labor, easy access to rich natural re-
sources, and secure and expanding markets) become the goals of government,
and the “national interest” becomes identified with the systemic needs of cor-
porate capitalism. In order to keep the peace, business may occasionally accept
reforms and regulations it does not like, but government cannot ignore busi-
ness’s own reason for being, that is, the never-ending accumulation of capital.
270
Chapter 19

THE LIMITS OF REFORM
Government involvement in the U.S. economy represents not socialism (as that
term is normally understood by socialists) but state-supported capitalism, not
the communization of private wealth but the privatization of the common-
wealth. This development has brought a great deal of government involve-
ment, but of a kind that revolves largely around bolstering the profit system,
not limiting or replacing it. In capitalist countries, government generally na-
tionalizes sick and unprofitable industries and privatizes profitable public
ones—in both cases for the benefit of big investors. In 1986, in what
amounted to a bailout of private investors, the social democratic government
in Spain nationalized vast private holdings to avert their collapse. After bring-
ing them back to health with generous nourishment from the public treasure,
they were sold back to private companies. The same was done with Conrail in
the United States, as we have seen. Likewise a conservative Greek government
privatized the state-owned telecommunications system, which had been
reporting continuous profits for several years.
When a capitalist government takes over an enterprise, it usually gives full
compensation to the previous owners. Hence, the same wealthy investors who
once owned the private stocks now own public bonds and collect the interest
on these bonds. The wealth of the enterprise remains in private hands whereas
nominal ownership is public, a socialism for the rich. What the public owns in
this case is a huge bonded debt—with all the risks and losses and none of the
profits. State-supported capitalism cannot prosper without passing its im-
mense diseconomies onto the public.
Defenders of the existing system assert that the history of “democratic
capitalism” has been one of gradual reform. To be sure, important reforms
have been won by working people. To the extent that the present economic
order has anything humane and civil about it, it is because of the struggles
of millions of people engaged in advancing their living standard and their
rights as citizens. It is somewhat ironic to credit capitalism with the genius of
gradual reform when (a) most economic reforms through history have been
vehemently and sometimes violently resisted by the capitalist class and were
won only after prolonged, bitter, and sometimes bloody popular struggle,
and (b) most of the problems needing reform have been caused or intensified
by corporate capitalism.
Fundamental reform is difficult to effect because those who have the inter-
est in change have not the power, while those who have the power have not
the interest, being disinclined to commit class suicide. It is not that most of-
ficeholders have been unable to figure out the steps for egalitarian change; it
is that they are not willing to go that way. For them the compelling quality of
any argument is determined less by its logic and evidence than by the strength
of its advocates. The wants of an unorganized public with few power re-
sources of its own and no cohesive political agenda are seldom translated
into policy imperatives by officials.
Furthermore, the reason our labor, skills, technology, and natural re-
sources are not used for social needs is that they are used for corporate gain,
Democracy for the Few
271

if used at all. The corporations cannot and will not build low-rent houses, feed
the poor, clean up the environment, or offer higher education to any qualified
low-income person—unless government gives them lucrative contracts to do
so. The corporation does not exist for social reconstruction but for private
profit. Our social and ecological problems are rational outcomes of a basically
irrational system, a system structured not for satisfying human need but for
magnifying human greed.
How can we speak of the U.S. politico-economic system as being a prod-
uct of the democratic will?
What democratic mandate directs the government to give away more
monies every year to the top 1 percent of the population in interest payments
on public bonds than are spent on services to the bottom 20 percent?
When was the public consulted on interest rates and agribusiness
subsidies?
When did the public insist on having unsafe overpriced drugs, and geneti-
cally altered foods, and hormone-ridden meat and milk—and federal agencies
that protect rather than punish the companies that market such things?
When did the American people urge that utility companies be allowed to
overcharge consumers?
When did the voice of the people clamor for unsafe work conditions in
mines and factories and on farms, and for recycling radioactive metals into
consumer products and industrial sludge into agricultural topsoil?
How often have the people demonstrated for multibillion-dollar tax breaks
for the superrich, and privatization of Social Security, and a multibillion-dollar
space shuttle program that damages the ozone layer and leaves us more bur-
dened by taxes and deprived of necessary services?
When did we demand an unworkable multibillion-dollar space missile
program that only increases the dangers of nuclear instability?
When did the populace insist that the laws of the land be overruled by
international nonelective anonymous trade panels in service to the transna-
tional corporations?
What democratic will decreed that we destroy the Cambodian countryside
between 1969 and 1971 in a bombing campaign conducted without the con-
sent or even the knowledge of Congress and the public?
When did public opinion demand that we wage a mercenary war of attri-
tion against Nicaragua, or invade Grenada, Panama, Somalia, Afghanistan,
Iraq, and Haiti, slaughtering tens of thousands in the doing; or support wars
against popular forces in El Salvador, Guatemala, Angola, Mozambique, the
Western Sahara, and East Timor; or subvert progressive governments in Chile,
Indonesia, Yugoslavia, and a dozen other countries?
Far from giving their assent, ordinary people have had to struggle to
find out what is going on. Often their leaders sweep them along with heavy
dosages of patriotic hype and fear of imminent dangers. Yet, despite all
that, substantial segments of the public mobilize against the worst abuses
and most blatant privileges of plutocracy, against the spoliation of the
environment, and against bigger military budgets and armed interventions in
other lands.
272
Chapter 19

DEMOCRACY AS POPULAR STRUGGLE
The ruling class has several ways of expropriating the earnings of the people.
First, as workers people receive only a portion of the value their labor
power creates. The rest goes to the owners of capital. On behalf of owners,
managers continually devise methods to increase the rate of production and
profit.
Second, as consumers people are victimized by monopoly practices that
force them to spend more for less. They are confronted with increasingly ex-
ploitative forms of involuntary consumption, as when relatively inexpensive
mass-transit systems are eliminated to create a greater dependency on automo-
biles, or low-rental apartments are converted to high-priced condominiums, or
a utility company doubles its prices after deregulation.
Third, as taxpayers working people have had to shoulder an ever larger
portion of the tax burden, while corporate America and the superrich pay
proportionately less and less. Indeed, the dramatic decline in business taxes
and estate taxes has been a major cause of debt growth. And as we have
seen, the national debt itself is a source of income for the moneyed creditor
class and an additional burden on the populace.
Fourth, as citizens the people endure the hidden diseconomies foisted onto
them by private business, as when a chemical company contaminates a com-
munity’s air or groundwater with its toxic wastes, or when the very survival
of the planet is threatened by global warming.
The reigning system of power and wealth, with its attendant injustices,
activates a resistance from workers, consumers, community groups, and tax-
payers—who are usually one and the same people. There exists, then, not only
plutocratic dominance but popular opposition and demands for reform.
There is a tradition of popular struggle in the United States that has
been downplayed and ignored. It ebbs and flows but never ceases. Moved
by a combination of anger and hope, ordinary people have organized, agi-
tated, demonstrated, and engaged in electoral challenges, civil disobedience,
strikes, sit-ins, takeovers, boycotts, and sometimes violent clashes with the
authorities—for socioeconomic betterment at home and peace abroad. Against
the heaviest odds, dissenters have suffered many defeats but won some impor-
tant victories, forcibly extracting concessions and imposing reforms upon resis-
tant rulers.
Democracy is something more than a set of political procedures. To be
worthy of its name, democracy should produce outcomes that advance the
well-being of the people. The struggle for political democracy—the right to
vote, assemble, petition, and dissent—has been largely propelled by the strug-
gle for economic and social democracy, by a desire to democratize the rules of
the political game in order to be in a better position to fight for one’s socio-
economic interests. In a word, the struggle for democracy has been an inher-
ent part of the struggle against plutocracy.
Through the nineteenth and twentieth centuries, the moneyed classes
resisted the expansion of democratic rights, be it universal suffrage, aboli-
tionism, civil liberties, or affirmative action. They knew that the growth of
Democracy for the Few
273

popular rights would only strengthen popular forces and impose limits on elite
privileges. They instinctively understood, even if they seldom publicly articu-
lated it, that it is not socialism that subverts democracy, but democracy that
subverts capitalism.
The reactionary agenda being successfully advanced in recent years is
designed to take us back to the days before the New Deal, to a country with
a small middle class and a large impoverished mass, when the United States
was a “Third World” nation long before the term had been coined. Wages
are held down by forcing people to compete more intensely for work on terms
most favorable to management. Historically, this is done with speedups,
downgrading, layoffs, union busting, and the threat of plant closings. In addi-
tion, owners eliminate jobs through mechanization and moving to cheaper
labor markets overseas. They also have sought to ease child-labor laws, lower
the employable age for some jobs, bring in more immigrants, and raise the
retirement age, further increasing the number of workers competing for jobs.
Another way to depress wages is to eliminate alternative sources of sup-
port. The historical process of creating people willing to work for subsistence
wages entailed driving them off the land and into the factories, denying them
access to farms and to the game, fuel, and fruits of the commons. Divorced
from this sustenance, the peasant became the proletarian. Today, unemploy-
ment benefits and other forms of public assistance are reduced in order to
deny alternative sources of income. Public jobs are eliminated so that more
workers will compete for employment in the private sector, helping to depress
wages.
Still another way to hold down wages and maximize profits is to keep the
workforce divided and poorly organized. Racism helps to channel the eco-
nomic fears and anger of Whites away from employers and toward minorities
and immigrants who are seen as competitors for scarce jobs, education, and
housing. When large numbers of workers are underpaid because they are
Blacks, Latinos, illegal immigrants, or females, this depresses wages and in-
creases profits.
The plutocracy struggles to keep the working populace in its place. The
feeling among the superrich is that too much already goes to the people and
into the nonprofit sector. As the common lot of the citizenry advances, so do
their expectations. A century ago the working populace lived in hovels and
toiled twelve to fourteen hours a day for poverty wages, frequently under
gruesome conditions with no benefits. Their children more often went to
work than to school. But after decades of struggle, working people were able
to better their lot. By the 1970s millions of them were working eight-hour
days and had job seniority, paid vacations, time-and-half overtime, company
medical insurance, and adequate retirement pensions; many lived in decent
housing and even could pay a mortgage on a home of their own, while their
kids went to public school and some to public universities. Along with this
came improvements in occupational safety, consumer safety, and health care.
The plutocracy wondered, where will it end? The better off the common
people become, the still better off they want to be, it seemed. And more for the
general populace meant less for the privileged few. By the 1970s it looked like
274
Chapter 19

this country might end up as a quasi-egalitarian social democracy unless
something was done about it. As Paul Volcker said when he was chair of the
Federal Reserve in 1980, “The standard of living of the average American has
to decline.”3
Decline it did. What much of this book has documented is the reactionary
rollback to an earlier time: an increase in poverty, homelessness, substandard
housing, and substandard schools; longer work days with no overtime pay; no
job security or seniority; wage and benefit cutbacks; a growing tax burden in-
creasingly shifted onto the backs of the lower and middle classes, coupled with
a runaway national debt; fewer if any vacation days; expensive profit-driven
but dangerously inadequate health care; privatization of public services; re-
ducing disability assistance and family support; and undermining occupational
safety regulations and consumer and environmental protections.
When democratic forces mobilize to defend their standard of living, the
ruling class must attack not only their standard of living but the very demo-
cratic rights that help them defend it. Democracy becomes a problem for the
plutocracy not when it fails to work but when it works too well, helping the
populace to move toward a more equitable and favorable social order, nar-
rowing the gap however modestly between the superrich and the rest of us.
So democracy must be diluted and subverted, smothered with disinformation
and media puffery, with rigged electoral contests, and large sectors of the pub-
lic disfranchised, bringing faux victories to the more reactionary candidates.
At the same time, the right of labor to organize and strike come under persis-
tent attack by courts and legislatures. Federal security agencies and local po-
lice repress community activists and attack their right to protest. And U.S.
leaders enter into a series of international trade agreements to bypass our
democratic sovereignty altogether and secure a corporate supremacy, elevating
investment interests above all democratic rights.
THE ROLES OF THE STATE
The state is the single most important instrument that corporate America has
at its command. The power to use police and military force, the power of em-
inent domain, the power to tax and legislate, to use public funds for private
profit, float limitless credit, mobilize highly emotive symbols of loyalty and
legitimacy, and suppress political dissidence—such resources of state give cor-
porate America a durability it could never provide for itself.
The state also functions to stabilize relations among giant firms. Histori-
cally, “firms in an oligopolistic industry often turn to the federal government
to do for them what they cannot do for themselves—namely, enforce obedi-
ence to the rules of their own cartel.”4 A central function of the capitalist state
is to protect capitalism from itself, from the capitalists who plunder not only
the public but the private investment system, killing the goose that lays the
golden eggs.
The state is also the place where liberal and conservative ruling-class fac-
tions struggle over how best to keep the system afloat. The more liberal and
centrist elements argue that those at the top of the social pyramid should give
Democracy for the Few
275

a little in order to keep a lot. If conservative goals are too successful, if wages
and buying power are cut back too far and production increased too much,
then the contradictions of the free market intensify. Profits may be maintained
and even increased for a time through various financial contrivances, but
overcapacity and overproduction lead to economic recession, unemployment
grows, markets shrink, discontent deepens, and small and not so small busi-
nesses perish. The capitalist system begins to devour itself.
As the pyramid begins to tremble from reactionary victories, some of the
less myopic occupants of the apex develop a new appreciation for the base
that sustains them. They call for concessions to those below. But the more re-
actionary free marketeers press ever backward with their agenda. If demand
slumps and the pie expands only slightly or not at all, that is quite all right
as long as the slice going to the owning class continues to grow. If profits
are going up, then the economy is “doing well”—even if the working public
is falling behind in real wages, as happened during much of 2001–2009.
The state also acts on behalf of the plutocracy at the international level.
One way to ease the economic competition between capitalist nations is to
destroy the competing capital of other countries either by underselling and
driving them out of business as in much of the Third World, or by forced pri-
vatization and deindustrialization as in Eastern Europe and the former Soviet
Union, or by sanctions and massive bombings of a country’s industrial and
ecological base and expropriating its rich resources as in Iraq and Yugoslavia.
The elites of a country that has achieved world superpower status, such as the
United States, have a special advantage in such global stratagems.
The state best protects the existing class structure by enlisting the loyalty
and support of the populace, getting them to collaborate in their own mis-
treatment. The state establishes its legitimacy in the eyes of the people by
keeping an appearance of popular rule and neutrality in regard to economic
interests, and by playing on the public’s patriotic pride and fear, conjuring
up images of cataclysmic attack by foreign forces, domestic subversives, com-
munists, and now Islamic terrorists.
Having correctly discerned that “American democracy” as professed by
establishment opinion makers is something of a sham, some people incorrectly
dismiss the democratic rights won by popular forces as being of little account.
But these democratic rights and the organized strength of democratic forces
are, at present, all we have to keep some rulers from imposing a dictatorial
final solution, a draconian rule to secure the unlimited dominance of capital
over labor. Marx anticipated that class struggle would bring the overthrow
of capitalism. Short of that, class struggle constrains and alters the capitalist
state, so that the state itself, or portions of it, becomes a contested arena.
The vast inequality in economic power that exists in our capitalist society
translates into a great inequality of social power. More than half a century
ago Supreme Court Justice Louis Brandeis commented, “We can have democ-
racy in this country, or we can have great wealth concentrated in the hands of
a few, but we can’t have both.” And some years earlier, the German sociolo-
gist Max Weber wrote: “The question is: How are freedom and democracy
in the long run at all possible under the domination of highly developed
276
Chapter 19

capitalism?”5 That question is still with us. As the crisis of capitalism deepens,
as the contradiction between the egalitarian expectations of democracy and
the demoralizing thievery of the free market sharpens, the state must act
more deceptively and repressively to hold together the existing politico-
economic system.
Why doesn’t the capitalist class in the United States resort to fascist rule?
It would make things easier: no organized dissent, no environmental or occu-
pational protections to worry about, no elections or labor unions. In a coun-
try like the United States, the success of a dictatorial solution to the crisis of
capitalism would depend on whether the ruling class could stuff the demo-
cratic genie back into the bottle. Ruling elites are restrained in their autocratic
impulses by the fear that they might not get away with it, that the people and
the enlisted ranks of the armed forces would not go along.
Furthermore, a state that relies solely on its bayonets to rule is exposed
for what it is at its core, an instrument of class domination. It loses credibility,
generates resistance rather than compliance, and risks igniting a rebellious and
even revolutionary consciousness. Given secure and growing profit margins,
elites generally prefer a “democracy for the few” to an outright dictatorship.
Representative government is a serviceable form of governance for corpo-
rate America—even if a sometimes troublesome one. By offering a modicum
of liberty and self-rule to the populace, it masks the moneyed interests served
by the state. Rather than relying exclusively on the club and the gun, bour-
geois democracy plays the contradictory roles of protector of capital and ser-
vant of the people. By employing a seemingly benign legitimate power, it more
effectively marshals popular support and maintains a privileged status quo.
What is said of the state is true of the law, the bureaucracy, the political
parties, the legislators, the universities, the professions, and the media. In order
to best fulfill their class-control functions yet keep their social legitimacy, these
institutions must maintain the appearance of neutrality and autonomy. To fos-
ter that appearance, they must occasionally exercise some critical independence
and autonomy from the state and from capitalism. They must save a few deci-
sions for the people, and take minimally corrective measures to counter some
of the many egregious transgressions against democratic interests.
WHAT IS TO BE DONE?
It is not quite true that Americans are so brainwashed by right-wing propa-
gandists that they reject all improvements in their politico-economic lives.
Here are some examples to the contrary:
When successive White House administrations did nothing to raise the
minimum wage, a score of states chose to hike their minimum wages to a dol-
lar or more above the federal level. Dozens of cities implemented living-wage
requirements for companies with municipal contracts. They launched legis-
lative initiatives on public health and safety, the environment, and political
campaign contributions. Many communities have successfully mobilized to ex-
clude Wal-Mart and other large retailers because these companies have dismal
labor practices and wreak havoc on local businesses.6
Democracy for the Few
277

Nevada voted to require its legislators to fund K–12 education before any
other budget expenditure. Arkansas voted to put its lottery money into educa-
tion. North Carolina chose to put money collected from fines into its public
school system and is requiring a more equitable distribution of state funds
among rich and poor school districts. Maine voters rejected a cap on their
property taxes, being unwilling to invite the disastrous effects upon themselves
that Proposition 13 has delivered upon California. Montana voters okayed
medical marijuana. Colorado voted for a program to promote renewable en-
ergy. And Washington State voted to ban nuclear-waste dumping.7
Many townships in Pennsylvania, New Hampshire, and elsewhere have
adopted ordinances asserting community rights to self-governance and ban-
ning corporations from dumping sewage sludge, bottling the community’s
water, and other unwanted corporate operations. Growing numbers of people
in the United States and abroad are organizing to protect the climate. Many
are mobilizing against genetically modified foods and in support of local
organic agriculture.8
These and other changes are needed to bring us to a more equitable and
democratic society. Here are some recommendations:
Agriculture and Ecology. Distribute to almost 2 million needy farmers
much of the billions of federal dollars now handed out to rich agribusiness
firms. Encourage organic farming and phase out pesticides, herbicides, chemi-
cal fertilizers, hormone-saturated meat products, and genetically modified
crops. In 2007, researchers told a UN conference that a large-scale shift to
organic agriculture could help fight world hunger while also helping the envi-
ronment. Farmers who go back to traditional methods do not have to spend
money on expensive chemicals and tend to grow more diverse and sustainable
crops.9
“And so, while the end-of-the-world scenario will be rife with unimaginable horrors, we
believe that the pre-end period will be filled with unprecedented opportunities for profit.”
278
Chapter 19

Stop the agribusiness merger mania that now controls almost all of the
world’s food supply. Agribusiness conglomerates like Cargill and Continental
should be broken up or, better yet, nationalized.
Engage in a concerted effort at conservation and ecological restoration,
including water and waste recycling. Stop the development of ethanol and
hydrogen cell “alternative” energies; they themselves are environmentally
damaging in their production and use. Phase out dams and nuclear plants,
and initiate a crash program to develop sustainable alternative energy sources.
This is not impossible to do. Sweden has eliminated the use of nuclear power
and may soon be completely doing away with fossil fuels, replacing them with
wind, solar, thermal, and tidal energies.
Launch birth control and legal abortion programs across the globe in
hope of getting control of the population explosion that promises to defeat
any sustainable environmental program.
Build rapid mass-transit systems within and between cities for safe, eco-
nomical transportation, and produce zero-emission vehicles to minimize the
disastrous ecological effects of fossil fuels. Ford had electric cars as early as
the 1920s. Stanford Ovshinsky, president of Energy Conversion Devices, built
a newly developed electric car that had a long driving range on a battery that
lasted a lifetime, used environmentally safe materials, was easily manufactured,
with operational costs that were far less than a gas-driven car—all reasons why
the oil and auto industries were not supportive of electric cars and had them
recalled and destroyed in California.10
Meanwhile, around the world hundreds of millions of automobiles with
internal combustion engines continue to produce enormous quantities of toxic
pollution and greenhouse gases. The dangers of global warming are so immense,
so compounding and fast acting that an all-out effort is needed to reverse the
ecological apocalypse of flood, drought, and famine. This is the single most
urgent problem the world faces (or refuses to face). Unless we move swiftly,
changing direction 180 degrees, we will face a future so catastrophic that it
defies description, and it may come much sooner than we think.
Economic Reform. Reintroduce a steep progressive income tax for rich
individuals and corporations—without the many loopholes that still exist.
Eliminate off-shore tax shelters and foreign tax credits for transnational cor-
porations, thereby bringing in hundreds of billions in additional revenues. Put
a cap on corporate tax write-offs for advertising, equipment, and CEO stock
options and perks. Strengthen the estate tax instead of eliminating it. Give tax
relief to working people and low-income employees.
Corporations should be reduced to smaller units with employee and commu-
nity control panels to protect the public’s interests. As in the nineteenth century,
they should be prohibited from owning stock in other corporations, and granted
charters for only limited times, such as twenty or thirty years, and for specific
business purposes, charters that can be revoked by the government for cause.
Company directors should be held criminally liable for corporate malfeasance
and for violations of consumer, environmental, and occupational safety laws.
Electoral System. To curb the power of the moneyed interests and lobby-
ists, all candidates including minor-party ones should be provided with public
Democracy for the Few
279

financing—as already is the case in Maine, Vermont, and for judgeships in
North Carolina. In addition, a strict cap should be placed on campaign spend-
ing by all party organizations, candidates, and supporters. The various states
should institute proportional representation so that every vote will count and
major parties will no longer dominate the legislature with artificially inflated
majorities. Also needed is a standard federal electoral law allowing uniform
and easy ballot access for third parties and independents. We should abolish
the Electoral College to avoid artificially inflated majorities that favor the
two-party monopoly and undermine the popular vote. If the president were
directly elected, every vote would count equally regardless of its location.
We need protection against attempts by local authorities to suppress or
intimidate voters, as was done by Republican officials in several states during
the stolen presidential elections of 2000 and 2006 (see Chapter 14). As of
now, in each state elections are presided over by the secretaries of states who
often are active party partisans, as was the case in Florida and Ohio. What we
need is a federal nonpartisan commission of professional civil servants to pre-
side over the electoral process to ensure that people are not being falsely chal-
lenged or arbitrarily removed from voter rolls. As an additional safeguard
teams of foreign observers, perhaps from the United Nations, should observe
and report on election proceedings and testify as to their fairness and honesty.
Also needed are more accessible polling and registration sites in low-
income areas; and an election that is held on an entire weekend instead of a
Tuesday so that persons who must commute far and work long hours will
have sufficient opportunity to get to the polls. Most important, we need paper
ballots whose results can be immediately and honestly recorded in place of the
touch-screen machines that so easily lead to fraudulent counts.
The District of Columbia should be granted statehood. As of now its
607,000 citizens are denied genuine self-rule and full representation in Congress.
They elect a mayor and city council, but Congress and the president retain the
power to overrule all the city’s laws and budgets. Washington, D.C., remains
one of the nation’s internal colonies.
Employment Conditions. Americans are working harder and longer for
less, often with no job security. Many important vital services are needed,
yet many people are unemployed. Job programs, more encompassing than
the ones created during the New Deal, could employ people to reclaim the en-
vironment, build affordable housing and mass-transit systems, rebuild a crum-
bling infrastructure, and provide services for the aged and infirm and for the
public in general.
People could be put to work producing goods and services in competition
with the private market, creating more income and more buying power. The
New Deal’s WPA engaged in the production of goods, manufacturing clothes
and mattresses for relief clients, surgical gowns for hospitals, and canned
foods for the jobless poor. This kind of not-for-profit public production to
meet human needs brings in revenues to the government both in the sales of
the goods and in taxes on the incomes of the new jobs created. Eliminated
from the picture is private profit for those who parasitically live off the labor
of others—which explains their fierce hostility toward government attempts
280
Chapter 19

at direct production. They denounce it as socialism—which is what it is in
embryonic form.
Fiscal Policy. The national debt is a transfer payment from taxpayers to
bondholders, from labor to capital, from have-nots and have-littles to have-
it-alls. Government could end deficit spending by taxing the financial class
from whom it now borrows. It must stop bribing the rich with investment
subsidies and other guarantees, and redirect capital investments toward not-
for-profit public goals. The U.S. Treasury should create and control its own
money supply instead of allowing the Federal Reserve and its private bankers
to pocket billions of dollars every year through its privatized monopolized
money supply.
Gender, Racial, and Criminal Justice. End racial and gender discrimina-
tory practices in all institutional settings. Vigorously enforce the law to protect
abortion clinics from vigilante violence, women from male abuse, minorities
and homosexuals from hate crimes, and children from incest rape and other
forms of adult abuse. Release the hundreds of dissenters who are serving
long prison terms on trumped-up charges and whose major offense is their
outspoken criticism of the existing system. Release the tens of thousands who
are enduring draconian prison sentences for relatively minor and nonviolent
drug offenses.
Health Care and Safety. Allow all Americans to receive coverage similar
to the Medicare now enjoyed by seniors, but including alternative health treat-
ments. Funding might come from the general budget as in the single-payer
plan used in Canada and elsewhere, providing comprehensive service to all.
Under single-payer health care, the billions of dollars that are now pocketed
by HMO investors and executives would be used for actual medical treat-
ment. We would get better coverage and universal coverage for half of what
we are paying now to the self-enriching insurance companies, HMOs, and
private-profit hospitals.
Thousands of additional federal inspectors are needed for enforcement of
occupational safety and consumer protection laws. “Where are we going to
get the money to pay for all this?” one hears. The question is never asked in
regard to the gargantuan defense budget or enormous corporate subsidies. As
already noted, we can get the additional funds from a more progressive tax
system and from major cuts in big-business subsidies and military spending.
Labor Law. Provide government protections to workers who now risk
their jobs when trying to organize unions. Prohibit management’s use of per-
manent replacement scabs for striking workers. Penalize employers who refuse
to negotiate a contract after union certification has been won. Repeal the re-
strictive “right to work” and “open shop” laws that undermine collective bar-
gaining. Lift the minimum wage to a livable level. In a number of states, there
are “living wage movements” that seek to deny contracts and public subsidies
to companies that do not pay their workers a livable scale.
Repeal all “free trade” agreements; they place a country’s democratic
sovereignty in the hands of nonelective, secretive, international tribunals that
undermine local economies and diminish living standards throughout the
world.
Democracy for the Few
281

Military Spending. The Defense Department spending binge of the last
two decades has created a crushing tax burden, and has transformed the
United States from the world’s biggest lender into the world’s biggest spender
and biggest debtor nation. We could save hundreds of billions of dollars each
year by clamping down on the massive corruption, duplication, price gouging,
and waste in military spending—without any risk to our national security. To
save additional billions each year and cut down on the damage done to the
environment, the United States should stop all nuclear tests, including under-
ground ones, and wage a diplomatic offensive for a nuclear-free world.
With no loss to our “national security,” Washington also could save tens
of billions of dollars if it stopped pursuing foreign interventions and dropped
its costly and dangerous Star Wars antimissile missile program.11
The loss of jobs that will come with ridding ourselves of a war economy
could be mitigated by embarking upon a massive conversion to a peacetime
economy, putting the monies saved from the bloated military budget into human
services and domestic needs enumerated earlier. The shift away from war spend-
ing would improve our quality of life and lead to a healthier stronger overall
economy, while bringing serious losses to profiteering defense contractors.
National Security State. Prohibit covert actions by intelligence agencies
against anticapitalist social movements at home and abroad. End U.S.-
sponsored counterinsurgency wars against the poor of the world. Eliminate
all foreign aid to regimes engaged in oppressing their own peoples. The bil-
lions of U.S. tax dollars that flow into the Swiss bank accounts of foreign
autocrats and militarists could be much better spent on human services at
home. Lift the trade sanctions imposed on Cuba and other countries that
have dared to deviate from the free-market orthodoxy.
The Freedom of Information Act should be enforced instead of under-
mined by those up high who say they have nothing to hide, then try to hide
almost everything they do.
News Media. The airwaves are the property of the American people. As
part of their public-service licensing requirements, television and radio stations
should be required to give—free of charge—public airtime to all political view-
points, including dissident and radical ones. The media should be required to
give equal time to all candidates, not just Democrats and Republicans. Free air-
time each day for every political party during the month before election day, as
was done in Nicaragua, helps level the playing field and greatly diminishes the
need to raise large sums to buy airtime. In campaign debates, the candidates
should be questioned by representatives from labor, peace, consumer, environ-
mental, feminist, civil rights, and gay rights groups, instead of just inane media
pundits who limit the universe of discourse so as not to give offense to their
corporate overlords.
Social Security and Taxation. Reform Social Security in a progressive
way by cutting 2 percent from the current 12.4 percent Social Security flat
tax rate, and offset that lost revenue by eliminating the cap on how much in-
come can be taxed. At present, earnings of more than $97,000 are exempt
from FICA withholding tax. This change would give an average working fam-
ily modest tax relief and would help reverse the regressive ploy of raising
282
Chapter 19

FICA payroll taxes for low- and middle-income people while reducing taxes
for the wealthy.
Close many loopholes that allow rich individuals to get away with so
much untaxed income. End federal and state tax giveaways to corporations.
In most states the rich pay a smaller portion of their income in state and local
taxes and the poor pay the highest. Raise the state income tax in all states in a
strong progressive direction.
Transportation and Infrastructure. Develop a nationwide high-speed rail
system that could transport passengers and freight at far less cost with much
greater speed, cutting back on gas-guzzling cars and trucks while saving thou-
sands of lives and billions of gallons of fuel, and reducing greenhouse gas
emissions by millions of tons. As of now the United States has the most back-
ward railroad system of all industrial nations.
As with transportation, so with our entire infrastructure: government
investment has been pivotal in developing the railroads, highways, and mass-
communication systems. Now it is needed to refurbish water and sewage sys-
tems, bridges and tunnels, electric grids, national parks, and numerous other
things. A national bank would be a great aid in funding such public work
projects, which themselves would create many decent-paying jobs.12
THE REALITY OF PUBLIC PRODUCTION
None of the measures listed above will prevail unless the structural problems
of capitalism are themselves resolved. What is needed then is public ownership
of the major means of production and public ownership of the moneyed
power itself—in other words, some measure of socialism.
But can socialism work? Is it not just a dream in theory and a nightmare
in practice? Can the government produce anything of worth? As mentioned in
an earlier chapter, various private industries (defense, railroads, satellite com-
munication, aeronautics, the Internet, and nuclear power, to name some) exist
today only because the government funded the research and development and
provided most of the risk capital. Market forces are not a necessary basis for
scientific and technological development. The great achievements of numerous
U.S. university and government laboratories during and after World War II
were conducted under conditions of central federal planning and not-for-
profit public funding. We already have some socialized services, and they
work quite well when sufficiently funded. Our roads and some utilities are pub-
licly owned, as are our bridges, ports, and airports. In some states so are liquor
stores, which yearly generate hundreds of millions of dollars in state revenues.
There are credit unions and a few privately owned banks like the Com-
munity Bank of the Bay (Northern California) whose primary purpose is to
make loans to low- and middle-income communities. We need public banks
that can be capitalized with state funds and with labor union pensions that
are now in private banks. The Bank of North Dakota is the only bank wholly
owned by a state. In earlier times it helped farmers who were being taken
advantage of by grain monopolies and private banks. Today, the Bank of
North Dakota is an important source of credit for farmers, small businesses,
Democracy for the Few
283

and local governments. (North Dakota is one of only two states that were not
drowning in debt and deficits as of 2010.) Other states have considered creat-
ing state banks, but private banking interests have blocked enactment.
We should create a national bank with money issued directly by the
Treasury Department to provide low-interest easy-term loans for people who
want to start small businesses, go to school, or own a home—a national bank
that is run on a nonprofit basis, the goal being not to plunder the public but
to make credit available for those who have a productive need.
Often unnoticed is the “third sector” of the economy, consisting of more
than 30,000 worker-run producer cooperatives and thousands of consumer
cooperatives, credit unions, housing co-ops, and rural utility co-ops; along
with scores of cooperative banks, cooperative insurance companies, and tele-
communication and cable co-ops. Employees own a majority of the stock in at
least 1,000 companies.13 Construction trade unions have used pension funds
to build low-cost housing and to start unionized, employee-owned contracting
firms. The Organic Consumers Association, with a membership of 250,000
strong, works for the conversion of the nation’s agricultural system to organic
farming and calls for a moratorium on genetically engineered crops.
There are also the examples of “lemon socialism,” in which governments
in capitalist countries have taken over ailing private industries and nursed
them back to health, testimony to the comparative capacities of private and
public capital, socialism rescuing capitalism as usual. In France immediately
after World War II, the government nationalized banks, railways, and natural
resources in a successful attempt to speed up reconstruction. The French tele-
phone, gas, and electric companies were also public monopolies. Public own-
ership in France brought such marvels as the high-speed TGV train, superior
to trains provided by U.S. capitalism. The publicly owned railroads in France
and Italy work much better than the privately owned ones in the United States
(which work to the extent they do because of public subsidies).
The state and municipal universities and community colleges in the United
States are public and therefore “socialist”—shocking news to some of the stu-
dents who attend them—and some of them are among the very best institu-
tions of higher learning in the country (although all of them are becoming
less and less affordable because of tuition increases and hence less socialist).
Publicly owned utilities in this country are better managed than investor-
owned ones; and because they do not have to produce huge salaries for their
CEOs and big profits for stockholders, their rates are lower and they put mil-
lions of dollars in profits back into the public budget.
Then there is the British National Health Service, which costs 50 percent
less than our private system yet guarantees more basic medical care. Even
though a Tory government during the 1980s imposed budget stringency on
British health care “in order to squeeze economies from the system at the
expense of quality,” a majority of Britons still want to keep their socialized
health service.14
All the industrialized Western European democracies provide free medical
care, education, and human services for those in need, along with strong gov-
ernment regulations on corporations and financial institutions. Citizens of these
284
Chapter 19

countries work fewer hours than do Americans and enjoy five- and six-week
vacations. They also have far more generous benefits and sick-leave policies.15
Free marketeers in various countries do what they can to undermine pub-
lic services by depriving them of funds and eventually privatizing them.16 The
privatization of postal services in New Zealand brought a tidy profit for inves-
tors, a rise in postal rates, wage and benefit cuts for postal workers, and a
closing of more than a third of the country’s post offices; in sum, poorer ser-
vice at higher cost: capitalism replacing socialism. Likewise, the privatization
of telephone and gas utilities in Great Britain resulted in dramatically higher
management salaries, soaring rates, and inferior service. Rightist governments
rush to privatize because public ownership does work, at least in regard to
certain services. A growing and popular not-for-profit public sector is a threat
to private investors.
Most socialists are not against personal-use private property, such as a
home. And some are not even against small businesses in the service sector.
Nor are most socialists against modest income differentials or special mone-
tary rewards for persons who make outstanding contributions to society.
There is no guarantee that a socialized economy will always succeed. The
state-owned economies of Eastern Europe and the former Soviet Union suf-
fered ultimately fatal distortions in their development because of (a) the back-
log of poverty and want in the societies they inherited; (b) years of capitalist
encirclement, embargo, invasion, devastating wars, and costly arms buildup;
(c) excessive bureaucratization and poor incentive systems; (d) lack of admin-
istrative initiative and technological innovation; and (e) a repressive political
rule that allowed little critical expression and feedback. At the same time, it
should be acknowledged that the former communist states transformed im-
poverished semi-feudal countries into relatively advanced societies. Whatever
their mistakes and crimes, they achieved what capitalism cannot and has no
intention of accomplishing: adequate food, housing, and clothing for all; eco-
nomic security in old age; free medical care; free education at all levels; and a
guaranteed income.
As the peoples in these former communist countries are now discovering,
the “free market” means freedom mostly for those who have money and a
drastic decline in living standards for most everyone else. With the advent of
“free-market reforms” in the USSR and Eastern Europe, inflation diminished
workers’ real wages and pensions, and dissolved their savings. Health and
education systems were privatized and then deteriorated. Unemployment, pov-
erty, beggary, homelessness, crime, violence, suicide, mental depression, and
prostitution skyrocketed. By 70 and 80 percent majorities, the people in these
newly arrived free-market countries testify that life had been better under the
Communists. The breakup of farm collectives and cooperatives and the rever-
sion to private farming caused a 40 percent decline in agricultural productivity
in countries like Hungary and East Germany—where collective farming actu-
ally had performed as well and often better than the heavily subsidized private
farming in the West.17
The question of what kind of public ownership we should struggle for
deserves more extensive treatment than can be given here. American socialism
Democracy for the Few
285

cannot be modeled on the Soviet Union, China, Cuba, or other countries with
different historical, economic, and cultural developments. But these countries
ought to be examined so that we might learn from their accomplishments, prob-
lems, failures, and crimes. Our goal should be an egalitarian, communitarian,
environmentally conscious, democratic socialism, with a variety of participatory
and productive forms, offering both economic security and democracy.
What is needed to bring about fundamental change is widespread organiz-
ing, not only around particular issues but for a movement that can project
both the desirability of an alternative system and the great necessity for demo-
cratic change, a movement ready to embrace new alternatives, including public
ownership of the major corporations and worker control of production. With
time and struggle, we might hope that people will become increasingly intoler-
ant of the growing injustices of the reactionary and inequitable free-market
system and will move toward a profoundly democratic solution. Perhaps then
the day will come, as it came in social orders of the past, when those who
seem invincible will be shaken from their pinnacles.
There is nothing sacred about the existing system. All economic and polit-
ical institutions are contrivances that should serve the interests of the people.
When they fail to do so, they should be replaced by something more respon-
sive, more just, and more democratic. Marx said this, and so did Jefferson.
It is a revolutionary doctrine, and very much an American one.
286
Chapter 19

Acknowledgments
Page 8: Donal Reilly/Conde Nast Publications/www.CartoonBank.com
Page 14: Copyright Fred Wright/UE. Reprinted by permission.
Page 18: Clay Bennett. From Extra! November-December 1995, p. 6. Copyright © 1995
Bennett/North America Syndicate. Reprinted by permission.
Page 30: Dana Fradon, Copyright © The New Yorker Collection, 1979. Dana Fradon from
<cartoonbank.com>. All rights reserved. Originally published in The New Yorker,
February 9, 1979, p. 32. Reprinted by permission
Page 38: Copyright Fred Wright/UE. Reprinted by permission.
Page 41: Tom Toles/Universal Uclick
Page 48: 1995 Andrew B. Singer. Reprinted by permission.
Page 53: Neatly Chiseled Features
Page 61: Mike Smith EDT (new) © 2008 King Features Syndicate
Page 70: Phil Witte. From Z Magazine, May 2005, p. 8. Reprinted by permission.
Page 72: Charles Barsotti/Conde Nast Publications/www.Cartoonbank.com
Page 78: 1995 by Etta Hulme/Fort Worth Star-Telegram. Reprinted by permission of
United Media, Inc.
Page 82: John Jonik
Page 91: © 1991 by Kloss
Page 96: 1998 by Bill Schorr. © United Feature Syndicate, Inc. Reprinted by permission.
Page 101: OLIPHANT © 2002 Universal Press Syndicate. Reprinted with permission.
All rights reserved.
Page 105: © John Jonik. Reprinted by permission.
Page 110: Bruce Beattie. From USA Today, June 16, 2000. Copyright © 2000 by John
Beattie/Copley News Service. Reprinted by permission.
Page 123: 1976 Herblock Cartoon. © The Herb Block Foundation. Reprinted by
permission.
Page 129: © Gary Huck. Huck/UE/Huck-Konopacki cartoons. Reprinted by permission.
Page 138: Matt Wuerker and The Cartoonist Group.
Page 144: Johnny Hart. “B.C.” By permission of Johnny Hart and Creators Syndicate, Inc.
All rights reserved.
Page 152: © 1995 Clay Bennett. Reprinted by permission.
Acknowledgments
287

Page 159: Dan Wasserman. © Tribune Media Services, Inc. All Rights Reserved. Reprinted
with permission.
Page 165: John Jonik/From North Coast Xpress, Winter 2000, p. 32.
Page 171: Warren Miller/Conde Nast Publications/www.cartoonbank.com
Page 180: Paul Conrad. From the Los Angeles Times Syndicate, 1999. Copyright ©
Tribune Media Services, Inc. All rights reserved. Reprinted with permission.
Page 187: 1992 Herblock Cartoon. © The Herb Block Foundation. Reprinted by
permission.
Page 198: Herblock. From the Washington Post. Copyright © 1982 Herblock. Reprinted
with permission.
Page 206: JoNik. From Independent Politics, March 2006, p. 23.
Page 216: Gahan Wilson/Conde Nast Publications/www.cartoonbank.com
Page 235: Mike Konopacki. Copyright © Huck/Konopacki Teacher Cartoons. Used with
permission.
Page 236: www.bulbul.com
Page 250: Dana Fradon/Conde Nast Publications/www.cartoonbank.com
Page 278: Robert Mankoff/Conde Nast Publications/www.cartoonbank.com
288
Acknowledgments

Notes
CHAPTER d
1
PARTISAN POLITICS
1. John Locke, Treatise of Civil Government
(Appleton-Century-Croft, 1937), 82; Adam
Smith, An Inquiry into the Nature and
Causes of the Wealth of Nations (Encyclo-
paedia Britannica, 1952, originally 1776),
309, 311.
2. See
William
Appleman
Williams,
The
Great Evasion (Quadrangle Books, 1964),
for an analysis of the way Marxist thought
has been stigmatized or ignored by American
intellectuals and those who pay their salaries.
3. For a development of this view, see Michael
Parenti, Superpatriotism (City Lights, 2004).
CHAPTER d
2
A CONSTITUTION
FOR THE FEW
1. Adam Smith, An Inquiry into the Nature
and Causes of the Wealth of Nations (En-
cyclopaedia Britannica, Inc., 1952), 311.
2. Sidney Aronson, Status and Kinship in the
Higher Civil Service (Harvard University
Press, 1964); and Daniel M. Friedenberg,
Life, Liberty, and the Pursuit of Land: The
Plunder of Early America (Prometheus
Books, 1992).
3. Aronson, Status and Kinship, 49; A. E.
McKinley, The Suffrage Franchise in the
Thirteen
English
Colonies
in
America
(B. Franklin, 1969, originally 1905).
4. Quoted in Herbert Aptheker, Early Years
of the Republic (International Publishers,
1976), 41.
5. On the class interests of the framers, see
Charles Beard, An Economic Interpreta-
tion of the Constitution of the United States
(Macmillan, 1936, originally 1913). Even
Forrest McDonald, a conservative critic of
Beard’s interpretation, documents the opu-
lent background of fifty-three of the fifty-
five delegates; see his We, the People: The
Economic Origins of the Constitution (Uni-
versity of Chicago Press, 1958), chapter 2.
6. Articles of Confederation, in National
Documents (Unit Book Publishing, 1905),
59–71.
7. Jennifer Nedelsky, Private Property and
the Limits of American Constitutionalism
(University
of
Chicago
Press,
1994),
27–28, 159.
8. Merrill Jensen, The Articles ofConfederation
(University of Wisconsin Press, 1948), 30.
9. Bernard Herman, The Stolen House (Uni-
versity Press of Virginia, 1992); Clifford
Lindsey Alderman, Colonists for Sale: The
Story of Indentured Servants in America
(Macmillan, 1975).
10. Jensen,
The
Articles
of
Confederation,
9–10;
Beard,
An
Economic
Interpreta-
tion, 28; Aptheker, Early Years of the
Republic, 33–36.
11. Aptheker, Early Years of the Republic, 137,
144–145.
289

12. David Szatmary, Shays’ Rebellion: The
Making of an Agrarian Insurrection (Uni-
versity of Massachusetts Press, 1980).
13. For these and other unflattering comments
by the delegates regarding the common
people and democracy, see Max Farrand
(ed.), Records of the Federal Convention
of 1787 (Yale University Press, 1966
[1937]), vols. 1–3, passim.
14. Beard, An Economic Interpretation, pas-
sim. Enormous profits accrued to holders
of public securities.
15. Aptheker, Early Years of the Republic, 114.
16. For an excellent study of the enormous in-
fluence wielded at the founding by the slave-
holding class, see Paul Finkelman, Slavery
and the Founders (M. E. Sharpe, 1996).
17. Amendments
could
also
be
proposed
through a constitutional convention called
by Congress on application of two-thirds
of the state legislatures and ratified by con-
ventions in three-fourths of the states. This
method has yet to be tried.
18. Farrand, Records of the Federal Conven-
tion, vol. 2, 200ff.
19. Staughton Lynd, Class Conflict, Slavery
and the United States Constitution (Bobbs-
Merrill, 1967). For discussions of the class
interests behind the American Revolution,
see Alfred Young (ed.), The American
Revolution: Explorations in the History
of American Radicalism (Northern Illinois
University Press, 1977); and Edward Coun-
tryman, A People in Revolution (Johns
Hopkins University Press, 1982).
20. For examples of those who confuse the
founders’ broad class interests with the na-
tional interest, see David G. Smith,The Con-
vention and the Constitution (St. Martin’s
Press, 1965); also several of the essays in
Robert Goldwin and William Schambra
(eds.), How Democratic Is the Constitution?
(American Enterprise Institute, 1980).
21. Farrand, Records of the Federal Conven-
tion, vol. 1, xii–xv.
22. James Madison, Federalist No. 10.
23. Cecelia
M.
Kenyon
(ed.),
The
Anti-
Federalists (Bobbs-Merrill, 1966), 246–247.
24. Jackson Turner Main, The Antifederalists
(University of North Carolina Press, 1961);
and Michael Gillespie and Michael Lie-
nesch (eds.), Ratifying the Constitution
(University Press of Kansas, 1989).
25. This section on the Constitution’s pro-
gressive features is drawn mostly from
Aptheker, Early Years of the Republic,
71ff. and passim.
26. R. P. Nettelhorst, “Notes on the Founding
Fathers and the Separation of Church and
State,”
http://www.theology.edu/journal/
volume2/ushistor.htm; Robert Boston, Why
the Religious Right Is Wrong About Separa-
tion of Church & State (Prometheus Books,
1993); Jim Walker, “Little-Known U.S.
Document…,” http://www.sullivan-county.
com/nfo/dispatch/fathers_quote2.htm.
CHAPTER d
3 RISE OF THE
CORPORATE STATE
1. Andrew Lipscomb (ed.), The Writings of
Thomas Jefferson (G. P. Putnam’s, 1897),
vol. 15, 112; Edward Pessen, Riches, Class
and Power Before the Civil War (D. C.
Heath, 1973), 278, 304.
2. John Spargo, The Bitter Cry of the Children
(Quadrangle
Books,
1968,
originally
1906); Edward Pessen, The Many Faceted
Jacksonian Era (Greenwood Press, 1977),
7–31; Otto L. Bettmann, The Good Old
Days—They Were Terrible (RandomHouse,
1974), 152–153.
3. Dale Van Every, Disinherited: The Lost
Birthright of the American Indian (Avon
Library, 1967); David Stannard, American
Holocaust: The Conquest of the New
World (Oxford University Press, 1993).
4. Douglas Blackmon, Slavery by Another
Name (Anchor Books, 2009).
5. Boyer and Morais, Labor’s Untold Story,
216–221. A comprehensive study is Philip
Foner, History of the Labor Movement in
the United States, vols. 1–6 (International
Publishers, 1947, 1955, 1964, 1965, 1980,
1981).
6. Richard Boyer and Herbert Morais, La-
bor’s Untold Story (United Electrical, Radio
and Machine Workers, 1971), passim.
7. For these and other examples of corporate
state violence, see Sidney Lens, Radicalism
in America (Thomas Y. Crowell, 1969);
Daniel Fusfeld, The Rise and Repression
of Radical Labor in the United States
1877–1918 (Charles H. Kerr, 1985); Foner,
History of the Labor Movement; Boyer
and Morais, Labor’s Untold Story.
8. William Preston Jr., Aliens and Dissenters
(Harvard University Press, 1963), 24; see
also Matthew Josephson, The Robber Bar-
ons (Harcourt, Brace, 1934), 365.
290
Notes

9. Richard Grossman and Frank T. Adams,
Taking Care of Business: Citizenship and
the Charter of Incorporation (Charter Ink.,
1993); and Why Do Corporations Have
More Rights Than You?—publication of
Democracy Unlimited (Arcata, CA), n.d.
10. Josephson, The Robber Barons, 395.
11. Josephson, The Robber Barons, 52.
12. James S. Allen, Reconstruction: The Battle
for Democracy, 1865–1876 (International
Publishers, 1937); Eric Foner, Reconstruc-
tion (Harper & Row, 1988).
13. Blackmon, Slavery by Another Name,
passim.
14. Gabriel Kolko, The Triumph of Conserva-
tism (Quadrangle Books, 1967), chapters 1
and 2.
15. Kolko, The Triumph of Conservatism,
281–284;
also
Frank
Harris
Blighton,
Woodrow Wilson and Co. (Fox Printing
House, 1916).
16. Boyer and Morais, Labor’s Untold Story,
180–184 and passim.
17. John
Higham,
Strangers
in
the
Land
(Rutgers University Press, 1988), 212 and
passim.
18. Robert Murray, Red Scare (McGrawHill,
1955), 95–98; Christopher May, In the
Name of War (Harvard University Press,
1989).
19. William Appleman Williams, “American
Intervention in Russia: 1917–1920,” in
David Horowitz (ed.), Containment and
Revolution (Beacon Press, 1967), 38.
20. Howard Zinn, A People’s History of the
United States (Harper & Row, 1980),
376; also the Brookings Institution study
cited in Boyer and Morais, Labor’s Untold
Story, 237.
21. Charles Eckert, “Shirley Temple and the
House of Rockefeller,” in Donald Lazare
(ed.), American Media and Mass Culture
(University of California Press, 1987), 174.
22. Rhonda Levine, Class Struggle and the
New Deal (University Press of Kansas,
1988), 70.
23. Boyer and Morais, Labor’s Untold Story,
249.
24. Zinn, A People’s History, 378.
25. Irving Bernstein, Turbulent Years, A His-
tory of the American Worker 1933–1941
(Houghton
Mifflin,
1970);
Boyer
and
Morais, Labor’s Untold Story, passim.
26. Barton Bernstein, “The New Deal,” in Bar-
ton Bernstein (ed.), Toward a New Past
(Pantheon, 1963), 269; Levine, Class Strug-
gle and the New Deal, chapters 1 and 4.
27. Frances Fox Piven and Richard Cloward,
Regulating the Poor (Pantheon, 1971), 76;
also Bernstein, “The New Deal,” 269–270.
28. Christopher D. Cook, Diet for a Dead
Planet (New Press, 2004), 101.
29. Piven and Cloward, Regulating the Poor,
chapters 2 and 3; Nick Taylor, American-
Made: The Enduring Legacy of the WPA,
When FDR Put America to Work (Bantam,
2008).
30. Piven and Cloward,Regulatingthe Poor, 46.
31. Gabriel Kolko, Wealth and Power in Amer-
ica (Praeger, 1962), 31; Paul Conkin, The
New Deal (Thomas Y. Crowell, 1967), 67.
32. Michael Goldfield, “Worker Insurgency,
Radical Organization, and New Deal Labor
Legislation,”
American Political Science
Review, 83, December 1989, 1258; also Art
Preis, Labor’s Giant Step (Pioneer, 1964);
Roger Keeran, The Communist Party and
the Auto Workers’Union(International Pub-
lishers, 1981).
33. Ira Katznelson, When Affirmative Action
Was White (Norton, 2005); and Bernstein,
“The New Deal,” 278–279.
CHAPTER d
4
WEALTH AND WANT
IN THE UNITED STATES
1. Adam Smith, An Inquiry into the Nature
and Causes of the Wealth of Nations (En-
cyclopaedia Britannica, 1952), 33.
2. See David Chandler’s report at http://
www.lcurve.org.
3. Paul Krugman, “The Death of Horatio
Alger,” http://thenation.com/doc.mhtml?=
20040105&s=krugman.
4. David Cay Johnston, “Richest Are Leaving
Even the Rich Far Behind,” New York
Times, 5 June 2005.
5. Don Monkcrud, “US Income Inequality
Continues
to
Grow,”
Capital
Times,
18 July 2009.
6. Michael Parenti, “The Superrich Are Out
of Sight,” http://www.michaelparenti.org/
Superrich.html.
7. For a similar model, see David Chandler’s
“L-curve,” http://www.lcurve.org/.
8. The Forbes 400, Forbes.com, http://www.
forbes.com/2008/09/16/forbes-400-billio
naires-lists-400list08.
9. James Brock, “Merger Mania and Its
Discontents:
The
Price
of
Corporate
Notes
291

Consolidation,”
Multinational
Monitor,
July/August 2005.
10. On transnational corporations, see David
Model, Corporate Rule (Black Rose Books,
2003).
11. Monkcrud, “US Income Inequality Con-
tinues to Grow.”
12. CEO Compensation, Forbes.com, http://
www.forbes.com/lists/2008/12/lead_best
bosses08_CEO-Compensation_CompTot
Disp.html/.
13. New York Times, editorial, 15 September
2002.
14. New York Times, 1 October 2000; David
Gordon, Fat and Mean: The Corporate
Squeeze of Working Americans and the
Myth of Managerial “Downsizing” (Mar-
tin Kessler Books/The Free Press, 1996).
15. Lewis Lapham, “Notebook,” Harper’s,
April 1991.
16. New York Times, 17 October 2005.
17. Wall Street Journal, 30 August 1978.
18. Christopher D. Cook, Diet for a Dead
Planet: How the Food Industry Is Killing
Us (New Press, 2004), 125–152.
19. USDA, 2007 Census of Agriculture, http://
www.agcensus.usda.gov/Publications/2007/
Online_Highlights/Fact_Sheets/farm_num
bers.pdf.
20. “Farms and Antibiotics,” New York Times,
24 July 2009.
21. Cook, Diet for a Dead Planet, 160–186;
and Fact Acts, Summer 2005.
22. Marc Lappé and Britt Bailey, Against the
Grain: Biotechnology and the Corporate
Takeover of Your Food (Common Cour-
age Press, 2002).
23. Rob Smart, “Guess Who’s Controlling Our
Food Supply,” CommonDreams.org, 27
July 2009; Nathan Batalion, “50 Harmful
Effects
of
Genetically
Modified
(GM)
Foods, updated 2009, RawWisdom.com,
http://www.raw-wisdom.com/genetically-
modified-food.
24. Sue Branford, “Why Argentina Can’t Feed
Itself,” The Ecologist, 8 October 2002.
25. Kathleen McAfee in San Francisco Chron-
icle, 6 June 2004.
26. Luke
Anderson,
Genetic
Engineering,
Food
and
Our
Environment
(Lilliput
Press, 2000).
27. “Say No to Genetic Engineering,” Green-
peace, 24 November 2008, http://www.
greenpeace.org/international/press/releases/
stop-gm-crops-save-our-food. One case in
Canada was won against Monsanto by a
farmer; see Monsanto v. Schmeiser, http://
www.percyschmeiser.com.
28. Donald Barlett and James Steele, “Monsan-
to’s Harvest of Fear,” Vanity Fair, May
2008,
http://www.vanityfair.com/politics/
features/2008/05/monsanto200805.
29. Quoted in Hunger, U.S.A. (Beacon Press,
1968), 4.
30. “Worker Productivity Grows at a Rapid
Pace,” New York Times, 12 August 2009;
Danny Schecter, “Can Doing What Seems to
Be the Right Thing Turn Out to Be the Wrong
Thing?” ZNet Daily Commentary, 18 July
2009, http://www.zcommuncations.org/.
31. Quoted in Paul Baran and Paul Sweezy,
Monopoly
Capital
(Monthly
Review,
1966), 49.
32. David K. Shipler, The Working Poor:
Invisible in America (Vintage, 2008).
33. Michael Luo, “Out of Work, and Too
Down to Search On,” New York Times,
7 September 2009.
34. NewYorkTimes,15Julyand11August2009.
35. See the daily labor reports of the U.S. Bu-
reau of Labor Statistics.
36. U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics, July 2009,
http://www.bls.gov/.
37. San Francisco Chronicle, 17 August 2005;
Chicago Sun-Times, 26 January 2006.
38. Working Hard, Falling Short, report by
Working Poor Families Project, 12 October
2004; Keith Yearman, “Green Shoots in
America’sRuins,”ZMagazine,March2005.
39. Mark
R.
Rank,
One
Nation
Under-
Privileged (Oxford University Press, 2004);
New York Times, 6 March 2006.
40. Kenneth Sumerford, “US Public Debt and
Consumer Debt—Increasing and Danger-
ous in 2008,” Ezine Articles, n.d., http://
ezinearticles.com.
41. “Fundamentals: U.S. Debt Crisis 2008–
2009,” University of KMT, http://www.
ukmtpress.com/universityofkmtpress/
id234.html.
42. Alan Michael Colling, The Student Loan
Scam: The Most Oppressive Debt in U.S.
History—and How We Can Fight Back
(Beacon Press, 2009).
43. U.S. Census Bureau, Income, Poverty, and
Health Insurance Coverage in the United
States: 2007, August 2008, http://www.
census.gov/prod/2008pubs/p60-235.pdf
(21 May 2009).
44. Holly Sklar, Laryssa Mykta, and Susan
Wefald, Raise the Floor: Wages and Polices
That Work for All of Us (Ms. Foundation
292
Notes

for Women, 2001); Beth Shulman, The
Betrayal of Work (New Press, 2005).
45. “Broken Laws, Unprotected Workers,”
study by Center for Urban Economic De-
velopment and other institutions, released
2 September 2009.
46. 2009 Federal Poverty Guidelines, http://
www.atdn.org/access/poverty.html; “How
We Measure Poverty,” Oregon Center for
Public Policy, February 2000.
47. Los Angeles Times, 16 October 2008;
Jeremy
Rifkin,
The
European
Dream
(Tarcher, 2004), 39–80.
48. Reports by the National Center for Health
Statistics; also San Francisco Chronicle,
13 November 2007.
49. Michael Hudson (ed.), Merchants of Mis-
ery: How Corporate America Profits from
Poverty (Common Courage Press, 2002).
50. See Urban League’s annual report, The
State of Black America, 2009.
51. “The Impact of Institutional Racism on
the Employment and Educational Oppor-
tunities
for
Minority
Youth,”
Annual
Meeting
National
Youth
Employment
Coalition,
13
December
1999,
http://
www.nyec.org/racismpanel.htm; Oakland
Tribune, 9 August 2000.
52. See AFL-CIO report, http://www.aflcio.
org/issues/jobseconomy/women/equalpay.
53. See reports by National Center for Chil-
dren in Poverty, 2009, http://www.nccp.
org/topics/childpoverty.html.
54. Oral Health in America: A Report of the
Surgeon General, http://www.surgeongen
eral.gov/library/oralhealth/.
55. “The Growing Face of Modern Hunger in
America,” April 2009, http://cookingupas
tory.com/the-growing-face-of-modern-hun
ger-in-america/; and reports by Feeding
America, www.feedingamerica.org/.
56. UNICEF study reported in Los Angeles
Times, 15 February 2007.
57. William
Raspberry,
“Garbage
Eaters,”
Washington Post, 2 May 1984.
58. Shannon Moriarty, “Recession Babies,”
End Homelessness, 21 July 2009, http://
homelessness.change.org/blog/view/recessi
on; Habitat for Humanity, “U.S. Statistics
and
Research,”
http://www.habitat.org/
how/why/us_stats_research.aspx (23 July
2009).
59. On homelessness, see National Coalition
for the Homeless National, http://www.
google.com/#hl=en&q=national+coalition+
for+the+homeless+statistics&aq=f&oq=hu
nger+in+america+2009;
and
National
Health Care for the Homeless. www.
nhchc.org/publications.
60. “Homes Not Handcuffs: The Criminaliza-
tion of Homelessness
in U.S.
Cities,”
report by National Law Center on Home-
lessness and Poverty, and the National
Coalition for the Homeless, 2009.
61. “Sneak Attack of the 410(k)s,” Labor
Party Press, July 2002; New York Times,
6 December 2005; San Francisco Chroni-
cle, 22 December 2004.
62. See Helen Epstein, “Ghetto Miasma: En-
ough to Make You Sick,” New York
Times Magazine, 12 October 2003; also
annual reports from National Institute of
Mental Health.
63. Thomas Joiner, Why People Die by Sui-
cide (Harvard University Press, 2006); Ka-
ren Balkin (ed.), Violence Against Women
(Greenhaven Press, 2004); National Clear-
ing House on Child Abuse and Neglect,
http://nccanch.acf.hhs.gov/2005.
64. Art Perlo, “False Hope on the Economy,”
People’s Weekly World, 11–17 July 2009.
CHAPTER d
5
INSTITUTIONS AND
IDEOLOGIES
1. Nader quoted in Home and Gardens,
August 1991.
2. For examples of censorship of high-school
newspapers,
see
http://www.ioerror.us/
2005/11/30/two-high-school-newspapers-
censored/
and
http://www.beverly-under
ground.com/editorials.htm.
3. On the biases of textbooks, see Michael
Parenti, History as Mystery (City Lights,
1999), 11–21.
4. Mark Maier, “High-School Economics:
Corporate Sponsorship and Pro-Market
Bias,” Dollars and Sense, May/June 2002.
5. Jennifer Washburn, University Inc.: The
Corporate Corruption of Higher Educa-
tion (Basic Books, 2005); also report in
Chronicle of Higher Education, 17 No-
vember 2008.
6. San Francisco Chronicle, 13 November
2005.
7. Stephen Best, Anthony J. Nocella II, and
Peter McLaren (eds.), Academic Repres-
sion: Reflections from the Academic In-
dustrial Complex (AK Press, 2009).
8. This list of corporate rogues is adapted
from a compilation by Corporate Account-
ability International, 2009 report.
Notes
293

9. Michael
Parenti,
Superpatriotism
(City
Lights, 2004), 125–127.
10. Frank
Scott,
in
Coastal
Post
(Marin
County, California), 1 February 1996.
11. Michael Parenti, God and His Demons
(Prometheus, 2010), chapter 13.
12. For further discussion see Michael Parenti,
Blackshirts and Reds: Rational Fascism
and the Overthrow of Communism (City
Lights, 1997).
13. Economic Policy Institute, www.epinet.
org/pulse; New York Times, 24 May
2005; Public Citizen’s Health Research
Group, Health Letter, June 2004.
14. Gallup Polls, http://www.gallup.com/.
15. http://harrisinteractive.com/harris_poll/
HarrisPoll.
16. Stephen Kohn, The History of American
Draft Law Violations 1658–1985 (Green-
wood Press, 1986).
CHAPTER d
6
POLITICS:
WHO GETS WHAT?
1. Richard
Boyer
and
Herbert
Morais,
Labor’s Untold Story (United Electrical,
Radio
and
Machine
Workers,
1972),
331–332, 339.
2. See David Cay Johnston, Free Lunch: How
the Wealthiest Americans Enrich Them-
selves at Government Expense (and Stick
You with the Bill) (Penguin, 2008); Mark
Zepezauer, Take the Rich Off Welfare
(South End Press, 2004); Arianna Huffing-
ton, Pigs at the Trough: How Corporate
Greed and Political Corruption Are Under-
mining America (Three Rivers Press, 2007).
3. Edmund Andrews and Simon Romero,
“Royalties Owed to U.S. Treasury,” New
York Times, 10 February 2006.
4. Stephen Slivinski, “The Corporate Welfare
State:
How
the
Federal
Government
Subsidizes U.S. Business,” Cato Institute,
14 May 2007, http://www.cato.org/pubs/
pas/pa592.pdf.
5. San Francisco Chronicle, 5 August 2003.
6. Slivinski, “The Corporate Welfare State”;
Christopher D. Cook, Diet for a Dead
Planet (New Press, 2004), 225.
7. Devinder Sharma, “Farm Subsidies: The
Report
Card,”
ZNet
Commentary,
27 November 2005; Cook, Diet for a
Dead Planet, 226.
8. Carolyn Lochhead, “Farm Bill Kills Farm-
ing,” San Francisco Chronicle, 20 May
2002.
9. FrankKofsky,HarryS.Trumanandthe War
Scare of 1948 (St. Martin’s Press, 1994).
10. George Monbiot, “Congress Confronts
Its
Contradictions,”
Guardian
(UK),
30 September 2008.
11. George Monbiot, “Congress Confronts
Its Contradictions,” ZNet, 30 September
2008; see also Sarah Anderson, Chuck
Collins,
and
Sam
Pizzigati,
“Beyond
the AIG Bonuses,” Institute for Policy Stud-
ies, 27 March 2009, http://www.ips-dc.org/
reports/#623.
12. Stephen Pizzo et al., Inside Job: The Loot-
ing
of
America’s
Savings
and
Loans
(HarperCollins, 1991).
13. Greg Spotts, Wal-Mart: The High Cost of
Low
Price
(Disinformation
Company,
2005); Anthony Bianco, Wal-Mart: The
Bully of Bentonville (Broadway Business,
2007); Bill Quinn, How Wal-Mart Is De-
stroying America (and the World) (Ten
Speed Press, 2005).
14. Greg LeRoy, The Great American Jobs
Scam (Berrett-Koehler, 2005).
15. See Chapter 17 for a discussion of the
Federal Reserve.
16. New York Times, 12 August 2009.
17. New York Times, 3 August 2009.
18. 18 Ryan Grim, “Goldman Sachs, Gam-
bling with Your Money?” 27 July 2009,
http://www.huffingtonpost.com/2009/07/
27/goldman-sachs-gambling-wi_n_245566.
html; John Carney, “Okay, This Time Matt
Taibbi Nails Goldman and the Bailout,”
16 July 2009, http://www.businessinsider.
com-2009-7.
19. New York Times, 11 August 2009.
20. New York Times, 10 August 2009; Brian
Ross and Tom Shine, “After Bailout, AIG
Execs Head to California Resort,” 7 October
2008,
http://abcnews.go.com/Blotter/story?
id=5973452&page=1.
21. New York Times, 24 July 2009.
22. New York Times, 14 July 2009.
23. San Francisco Chronicle, 17 November
2005.
24. New York Times, 23 March 2009.
25. Don Monkcrud, “U.S. Income Inequality
Continues
to
Grow,”
Capital
Times,
18 July 2009.
26. Quoted
in
San
Francisco
Chronicle,
12 December 2007; see also David Cay
Johnston,
Perfectly
Legal:
The Covert
Campaign to Rig Our Tax System to Ben-
efit the Super Rich—and Cheat Everyone
Else (Portfolio, 2003), 13ff.
294
Notes

27. Johnston,
Perfectly
Legal,
196–208,
221–275; New York Times, 20 June 2002.
28. “Offshore Tax Havens under Fire,” Wall
StreetJournalDigitalNetwork,11July2009.
29. Challenges Remain in Combating Abusive
Tax Shelters, GAO-04-104T, 21 October
2003; Tax Shelters: Services Provided by
External Auditors, GAO-05-171, 1 February
2005.
30. San Francisco Chronicle, 13 September
2002.
31. New York Times, 9 July 1996.
32. Wall Street Journal, 6 April 2004.
33. Just Taxes, September 2004; San Francisco
Chronicle, 21 February 2002.
34. “Are You Paying for Corporate Fat Cats?”
Parade, 13 April 2008.
35. David Leonhardt, “The Upside of Paying
More Taxes,” New York Times, 25 February
2009; Steve Harris, “Taxes on the Rich,” San
Francisco Chronicle, 22 April 2008.
36. David Cay Johnston, “How Rich Get Ri-
cher: All the Rest Pay More,” San Fran-
cisco Chronicle, 10 April 2005; Johnston,
Perfectly Legal, 162–168, 296–299.
37. Kevin McCoy, “IRS Cuts Back on Audits of
Large Firms,” USA Today, 14 April 2008.
38. Washington Post, 12 April 2004; New
York Times, 11 January 2006.
39. Who Pays? A Distributional Analysis of the
Tax Systems in All 50 States, 2nd edition,
Institute on Taxation and Economic Policy,
January 2003; CTJ Update, March 2003.
40. Johnston, Perfectly Legal, 73–93.
41. Washington Post, 12 October 2004; New
York Times, 12 May, 23 July, and 1 August
2006.
42. New York Times, 13 January 2006.
43. New York Times, 10 June 2009.
44. Karl Marx, Capital, vol. 1 (Penguin Books,
1976), 919.
CHAPTER d
7
HEALTH AND HUMAN
SERVICES: SACRIFICIAL LAMBS
1. “The War Against the Poor,” Justice Ex-
press, Winter 2002; Washington Post,
3 November 2005.
2. Marta Russell, “None Call it Cleansing,”
ZNet Commentary, 15 December 2005;
San Francisco Chronicle, 6 February 2006.
3. New York Times, 5 July 2009.
4. Reed Abelson, “Insured but Unprotected,
and Driven Bankrupt by Health Crises,”
New York Times, 1 July 2009.
5. James D. Scurlock, Maxed Out: Hard
Times in the Age of Easy Credit (Scribner,
2007); Richard Lord, American Night-
mare: Predatory Lending and the Foreclo-
sure of the American Dream (Common
Courage Press, 2004).
6. Jack Rasmus, “Stealing Social Security,”
Z Magazine, December 2004; Daniel Be-
land, Social Security: History and Politics
from the New Deal to the Privatization
Debate
(University
Press
of
Kansas,
2007).
7. For the latest alarm, see New York Times,
13 May 2009.
8. David
Cay
Johnston,
Perfectly
Legal
(Penguin, 2003), 119–130.
9. “Should We Prevent the Wall Street Rip-
Off
of
Social
Security?”
Solidarity,
October 2001.
10. On the various data given in the above par-
agraph, see Jim Hall, “First, Make No Mis-
takes,” Op-Ed, New York Times, 29 July
2009; “Making Hospitals Safer for Pa-
tients,” New York Times, 3 August 2009;
“Bills Focusing on Infections Are Not
Strong Enough,” Bay Area News Group,
2 January 2009; Paul O’Neill, “Health
Care’s Infectious Losses,” Op-Ed, New
York Times, 6 July 2009; New York Times,
21 July 2006.
11. Jessica Fraser, “Statistics Prove Prescrip-
tion Drugs Are 16,400% More Deadly
than
Terrorists,”
www.newstarget.com/
009278.html.
12. “Are We Poisoning Our Kids in the Name of
Protecting Their Health,” statement by Gen-
eration Rescue, USA Today, 12 February
2008.
13. New York Times, 30 January 2006.
14. Los Angeles Times, 28 July 1997.
15. See GAO report in New York Times, 2
March 2002.
16. Allen Myerson, “A Double Standard in
Health Coverage,” New York Times, 17
March 1996; “Hospital for the Rich,”
Solidarity, January/February 1997.
17. Donald Bartlett and James Steele, Critical
Condition: How Health Care in America
Became Big Business and Bad Medicine
(Doubleday, 2004).
18. Ron
Adler,
“Why
Your
Doctor
Isn’t
Happy to See You,” San Francisco Chron-
icle, 7 April 2000.
19. “Americans at Risk: One in Three Unin-
sured,” report by Families USA, March
2009,
http://www.familiesusa.org;
Billy
Notes
295

Wharton,
“The
Failure
of
Obama’s
Health-Care Reform,” Links, July 2009,
http://links.org.au/node/1159.
20. San Francisco Chronicle, 24 May 2009;
New York Times, 29 July 2009; Carl
Mankowitz, M.D., correspondence, New
York Times, 28 July 2009.
21. Reed Abelson, “Insured but Unprotected,
and Driven Bankrupt by Health Crises,”
New York Times, 1 July 2009.
22. Quoted in New York Times, 1 July 2009.
23. Paul Krugman, “Health Care Realities,”
New York Times, 31 July 2009.
24. Public Citizen Health Research Group,
Health Letter, February 2004; Paul Krug-
man’s
column,
New
York
Times,
18 November 2005.
25. See report by Kevin Sack and Marjorie Con-
nelly in New York Times, 21 June 2009.
26. “Prescriptions and Profit,” Health Letter,
Public Citizen Health Research Group,
April 2004; WHO report summarized by
Phineas Baxandall in Dollars and Sense,
May/June 2001.
27. Paul
Krugman
in
New
York
Times,
27 January 2006.
28. Bob
Herbert
in
New
York
Times,
18 August 2009.
29. C. A. Guerra and J. M. Moran, Pill
Pushers: A Big Pharma Battle for Market
Share
(BookSurge,
2007);
New
York
Times, 29 April 2009.
30. “Obscene Drug Mark Ups,” 2009, http://
blogs.healthfreedomalliance.org/blog/2009/
06/11/obscene-drug-mark-ups/.
31. Report by National Institutes of Health
cited in Solidarity, October 2001.
32. Baltimore Sun, 19 October 1996.
33. New York Times, 18 and 21 January and
30 July 2006.
34. Natasha Singer, “Ghosts in the Journals,”
New York Times, 19 August 2009.
35. New York Times, 15 April 1998; Los An-
geles Times, 30 June 2002.
36. Hilary
Varner,
“Milking
the
Public,”
Chicago Life Magazine, October 1995.
37. “FACT Calls for End to Farm Drug Abuse,”
annual report of Food Animal Concerns
Trust, Chicago, Winter 1999; Humane
Society statement: New York Times, 27 Feb-
ruary 1998; Public Citizen News, July/
August 2003; Report by Center for Food
Safety, 26 February 2003, http://www.cen
terforfoodsafety.org/page197.cfm.
38. Christopher
D.
Cook,
“Coal
Miners
Slaughter,”
25
January
2006,
http://
www.inthesetimes.com/site/main/article/
2478/; “New Efforts to KeepWorkers Safe,”
San Francisco Chronicle, 14 June 2009.
39. Christopher D. Cook, “Losing Life and
Limb on the Job,” Progressive, February
2000; New York Times, 8 January 2002.
40. U.S. Department of Labor, http://www.
dol.gov/esa/whd/flsa/.
41. New York Times, 2 September 2009.
42. Kim Bobo, Wage Theft in America: Why
Millions of Working Americans Are Not
Getting Paid and What We Can Do About
It (New Press: 2009).
43. See Jonathan Kozol, The Shame of the
Nation: The Restoration of Apartheid
Schooling
in
America
(Crown,
2005);
New York Times, 27 July 2000.
44. Joan Ryan, “Tripping Up Head start,” San
Francisco Chronicle, 11 February 2003;
“Concerning Pee-Wee,” Nation, 17 Febru-
ary 2003.
45. Linda Perlstein, Tested: One American
School Struggles to Make the Grade (Henry
Holt, 2008).
46. Gail Collins, column, New York Times,
28 May 2009.
47. Ellen Mutari and Melaku Lakew, “Class
Conflict,” Dollars and Sense, January/
February 2003; New York Times, 12 Decem-
ber 2005 and 7 February 2006.
48. New York Times, 9 November 2003.
49. Los Angeles Times, 18 April 1992.
50. Project Censored, “U.S. Faces National
Housing Crisis,” Censored 2003 (Seven
Stories Press, 2002).
51. “No
Second
Chance,”
Human
Rights
Watch, 18 November 2004.
52. “Making Home Affordable,” http://www.
treas.gov/press/releases/docs/05142009Fact
Sheet-MakingHomesAffordable.pdf.
53. Jane Holtz Kay, Asphalt Nation (Univer-
sity of California Press, 1997).
54. Kay, Asphalt Nation.
55. Greg LeRoy, “Subsidizing Sprawl,” Multi-
national Monitor, October 2003.
56. “Ground Zero for Zero Emission Vehicles,”
California Today (publication of Planning
and Conservation League), June 2000.
57. Alejandro Reuss, “Car Trouble,” Dollars
and
Sense,
March/April
2003;
Jeff
Nachtigal, “Unlocking Gridlock,” Terrain,
Fall 2004.
58. “More Money for Public Transit,” San
Francisco Chronicle, 14 June 2009; Jeff
Kosseff, “America Is Falling Apart,” Ore-
gonian, 29 June 2008.
296
Notes

CHAPTER d
8
THE LAST
ENVIRONMENT
1. Marquita K. Hill, Understanding Environ-
mental Pollution (Cambridge University
Press, 2004).
2. New York Times, 28 June 2003.
3. “Cutting the Heart Out of the Ancient
Redwoods,” Greenpeace Quarterly, Spring
1997.
4. Michael Brower and Leon Warren, The
Consumer’s Guide to Effective Environ-
mental
Choices
(Three
Rivers
Press,
1999).
5. Robert D. Bullard (ed.), The Quest for En-
vironmental Justice: Human Rights and
the
Politics
of
Pollution
(Sierra
Club
Books, 2005).
6. John Cushman Jr., “US Reshaping Cancer
Strategy as Incidence in Children Rises,”
New York Times, 29 September 1997;
“Toxic Chemical Pesticides Cause Cancer,”
Cancer Report, no. 726, Environmental
Research Foundation, 7 June 2001
7. Centers for Disease Control and Preven-
tion,
2009,
http://www.cdc.gov/nchs/
FASTATS/asthma.htm.
8. Vicki Haddock reporting in San Francisco
Chronicle, 28 March 2004.
9. Alexandra Rome in San Francisco Chroni-
cle, 28 March 2004; also Environmental
Working Group Web site, http://www.
ewg.org/reports/body burden/.
10. ChristopherBryson,The FluorideDeception
(Seven Stories Press, 2004); http://www.
FluorideAction.Net;
New
York
Times,
23 March 2006.
11. See studies by Environmental Working
Group, http://www.ewg.org/pesticides.
12. “The Costs of Pesticides,” Pesticide News,
no. 39, http://www.pan-uk.org/pestnews/
pn39/pn39p4.htm.
13. Pesticides in America, http://www.texasep.
org/html/pes/pes_1usa.html.
14. “Grain
Production,”
http://www.whole-
systems.org/grain.html.
15. Coalition for Clean Air, newsletter, June
2005; Los Angeles Times, 4 May 2001.
16. James Gustave Speth, The Bridge at the
Edge of the World: Capitalism, the Envi-
ronment, and Crossing from Crisis to Sus-
tainability (Yale University Press, 2009).
17. Maude Barlow, Blue Covenant: The Global
Water Crisis and the Coming Battle for the
Right to Water (New Press, 2009); California
Environmental News Service, July 2009
report.
18. According
to
a
report
by the
global
Humanitarian Forum, New York Times,
29 May 2009.
19. Bruce
Johansen,
“Global
Warming,”
Z
Magazine,
April
2005;
Washington
Post, 17 February 2006; New York Times,
3 March 2006.
20. For instance, James Lovelock, The Vanish-
ing Face of Gaia: A Final Warning (Basic
Books, 2009).
21. Washington Post, 11 February 2006.
22. David Perlman, “Decline in Oceans’ Phy-
toplankton Alarms Scientists,” San Fran-
cisco Chronicle, 6 October 2003.
23. Erik Reece, Lost Mountain (Riverhead
Books, 2006).
24. New York Times, 21 July 2009.
25. Matthew Shaffer, Wastelands: The Threat
of Toxic Fertilizer, CALPIRG Charitable
Trust, 3 May 2001, http://www.pirg.org/
toxics/reports/wastelands/;
David
Segal,
Washington Post, 27 May 1997.
26. Washington
Post,
23
February
2002;
“Living on Poisoned Ground,” People,
25 March 2002.
27. Robert Lieber and Lynn Elliot-Harding,
“Protect Our Most Vulnerable from Aerial
Spraying,” Berkeley Daily Planet, 9–15
April 2009.
28. Karl Grossman, “Three Mile Island,” Ex-
tra!, July/August 1993.
29. Christian Parenti, “What Nuclear Renais-
sance?” Nation, 12 May 2008.
30. Rochelle Becker, “Nuclear Emperor Has
NoClothes,”TurningPoints,Summer2001.
31. Russell Mokhiber, “Bush Polluter Pass,”
Multinational Monitor, October 2004.
32. Greenpeace Update, Fall 2003; survey of
scientists by Union of Concerned Scientists
and Public Employees for Environmental
Responsibility, reported in San Francisco
Chronicle, 10 February 2005.
33. National Priorities Project, http://national
priorities.org/issues/env/threatened/index.
html, 29 July 2004; Physician for Social Re-
sponsibility, PSR Reports, Spring/Summer
2005; New York Times, 28 August 2003.
34. Robert F. Kennedy Jr., Crimes Against
Nature (HarperCollins, 2004).
35. Marc Reisner, Cadillac Desert: The Amer-
ican West and Its Disappearing Water,
revised ed. (Penguin, 1993).
36. Alison Auld, “Farming with Fidel,” Sus-
tainable Times, Fall 1999; Hugh Warwick,
“Cuba’s Organic Revolution,” Third World
Resurgence, no. 118/119, n.d. (circa 2000).
Notes
297

37. Margaret Mellon, “Wholesome Harvest,”
Nucleus,
Winter
1997–1998;
Organic
Gardening, May/June 2000.
38. Cool Energy, The Renewable Solution to
Global Warming (publication of the Union
of Concerned Scientists), Cambridge, MA,
1990; New York Times, 15 February 2006.
39. Michelle Malkin, “Ethanol Is a Big Fraud,”
San Francisco Chronicle, 26 August 2002.
CHAPTER d
9
UNEQUAL BEFORE
THE LAW
1. Russell Mokhiber, “20 Things about Cor-
porate Crime,” Multinational Monitor,
January/February 2007; Joseph T. Wells,
Corporate
Fraud
Handbook,
2nd
ed.
(Wiley 2007).
2. Mokhiber, “20 Things about Corporate
Crime.”
3. New York Times, 11 May 1934 and
29 April 2000; Charles Higham, Trading
with the Enemy (Dell, 1983); Associated
Press report, 14 March 1998.
4. Los Angeles Times, 10 March 1990; Ash-
ville Global Report, 21–27 October 1999;
Internal Report of U.S. Department of
Interior Audit, Project on Government
Oversight, Washington, D.C., 13 April
1995.
5. David Friedrichs, Trusted Criminals: White
Collar Crime in Contemporary Society
(Wadsworth, 1996); New York Times,
9 November 1986; Washington Post, 6 March
1991;
Utility
Notes,
Washington,
D.C.,
30 December 1988.
6. Michael Waldman, Who Robbed America
(Random House, 1990).
7. New York Times, 9 and 11 November 2005.
8. Robert Sherrill, “A Year in Corporate
Crime,” Nation, 7 April 1997; New York
Times, 2 June 1992 and 22 August 1995.
9. New York Times, 4 August 2004; Associ-
ated Press report, 24 March 2005.
10. Los Angeles Times, 13 March 1996.
11. New York Times, 2 and 20 October 2005;
Bethany McLean and Peter Elkind, The
Smartest Guys in the Room (Portfolio,
2003); Roger Lowenstein, Origins of the
Crash (Penguin Press, 2004).
12. Nigel Jaquiss, “Craig’s List,” Willamette
Week (Online), 9 July 2008; Jeff Manning,
“Jurors: Why No Bergman Charges?” Or-
egonian, 29 June 2008.
13. Paul Krugman, column, New York Times,
7 August 2009.
14. For the trading firm cases, see New York
Times, 5 March 2009. The GE and AIG
cases are both in New York Times, 7 August
2009.
15. New York Times, 3 September 2009.
16. General Accounting Office, Financial In-
tegrity Act Report (U.S. Government Print-
ing Office, January 1990); Russell Mokhiber
and Robert Weissman, Corporate Predators
(Common Courage, 1999).
17. New York Times, 2 March 2002 and
2 March 2006.
18. James Stewart, Den of Thieves (Touch-
stone, 1992), 527 and passim; and New
York Times, 30 January 1993.
19. Jerry
Oppenheimer,
Madoff
with
the
Money (Wiley, 2009); Erin Arvedlund,
Too Good to Be True: The Rise and Fall
of Bernie Madoff (Portfolio, 2009).
20. New York Times, 9 and 14 July 2009.
21. Kenneth Harney, “Congress Goes to War
over Mortgage
Fraud,” San Francisco
Chronicle, 31 May 2009.
22. Harris and Roper polls reported in New
York Times, 9 December 2005.
23. Charles A. Intriago and Robert A. Butter-
worth, “Fund Government with Dirty
Money,” New York Times, 28 April 2009.
24. Intriago and Butterworth, “Fund Govern-
ment with Dirty Money.”
25. Judge Nicholas Cobella, quoted in San
Jose Mercury News, 23 January 2000.
26. David Burnham, Above the Law (Scribner,
1996); Ralph Nader and Wesley Smith,
No Contest: Corporate Lawyers and the
Perversion of Justice in America (Random
House, 1996).
27. “Too Many Lawsuits? Blame It on Busi-
ness,” Public Citizen News, November/
December 2004.
28. “Public Defender,” East Bay Express, 8–14
August 2001; “Harper’s Index,” Harper’s,
March 2004.
29. Barbara Ehrenreich, “Is It Now a Crime
to Be Poor?” New York Times, Op-Ed,
9 August 2009.
30. “Fewer Lawyers for the Poor,” Parade
Magazine, 26 April 2009; James F. Short
Jr., Poverty, Ethnicity, and Violent Crime
(Westview Press, 1997).
31. Los Angeles Times, 16 June 1990; Peo-
ple’s Daily World, 23 January 1990 and
7 October 1995; and documentary film,
Harlan County, USA.
32. San Francisco Chronicle, 24 February and
5 November 2002, and 30 December
298
Notes

2003; New York Times, 5 August 1984,
and 5 and 7 November 2002.
33. “The Impact of ‘Three Strikes and You’re
Out’ Laws,” Prison Focus, Winter 1997;
“Crime Drop Not Linked to Arrest Rates,”
Prison Focus, Winter 2000; and New York
Times, 5 July and 28 August 2000.
34. Report by U.S. Bureau of Justice Statistics,
7 November 2004; also Mikki Norris
et al., Shattered Lives (Creative Xpression,
1998).
35. San Francisco Chronicle, 23 November
2004; Clyde M. Taylor Jr. “Harsh Manda-
tory Sentences for Simple Drug Possession,”
September 2009, http://knowledgebase.find
law.com/kb/2009/Sep/32622.html.
36. Vincent Schiraldi and Rose Braz, “The
Choice Between Prison and Schools,” San
Francisco Chronicle, 21 January 2003.
37. “Congressional Family Drug Offenders Es-
cape Mandatory Sentences,” North Coast
Xpress, Spring 2000; Earl Ofari Hutchin-
son in San Francisco Chronicle, 19 October
2003.
38. Richard Moran, “FBI Scare Tactics,” New
York Times, 7 May 1996.
39. Bureau of Justice Statistics, http://www.ojp.
usdoj.gov/bjs/prisons.htm; CNN.com/crime,
“Study: Will Put7.3 Million in U.S. Prison
System in ’07,” 2 March 2009, http://www.
cnn.com/2009/CRIME/03/02/record.prison.
population; New York Times, 1 January and
23 July 2009.
40. New York Times, 20 August 2009; Senator
Jim Webb, “Why We Must Fix Our Pris-
ons,” Parade Magazine, 29 March 2009.
41. New York Times, 23 July and 20 August
2009.
42. San Francisco Chronicle, 3 July 2003 and
20 August 2005; T. J. Parcell, Fish: A Mem-
oir of a Boy in a Man’s Prison (Da Capo,
2007); New York Times, 23 June 2009.
43. Atul Gawande, “Hellhole,” New Yorker,
30 March 2009; Prison Focus, Summer 2004.
44. Audrey Bomse, “Congress Closes Court-
house Doors to Prison Litigation,” Legal
Journal (National Lawyers Guild), Winter/
Spring 1997.
45. WillieWisely,“WhyPrisonsCostSoMuch,”
North Coast Xpress, April/May 1995.
46. David McGowan, Derailing Democracy
(Common Courage, 2000), 136; Associ-
ated Press report, 6 July 2007.
47. Judith Greene, “Bailing Out Private Jails,”
The American Prospect, 10 September
2001.
48. New York Times, 23 February 2006; Keith
Carson, “The Worst Is Yet to Come,”
Daily Californian, 10 August 2009.
49. Ehrenreich, “Is It Now a Crime to Be
Poor?”
50. Ken Maguire, “Wrongly Jailed Man Gets
Apology,” Associated Press, 10 October
2003; “DNA to Freedom,” http://www.usin
court.2itb.com/;
“Three
LAPD
Officers
Convicted,” Prison Focus, Spring 2001;
Kay Lee’s report in Justice Xpress, Fall 2002.
51. Michael Radelet, et al., In Spite of Inno-
cence
(Northeastern
University
Press,
1992); Barry Scheck et al., Actual Inno-
cence (Doubleday, 1999).
52. New York Times, 22 November 2005.
53. “In
Spite
of
Innocence,”
newsletter
of Campaign to End the Death Penalty,
Chicago, 1998.
54. Report by Death Penalty Information Cen-
ter,
September
2009,
http://www.death
penaltyinfo.org/.
55. http://www.law.northwestern.edu/depts/
clinic/wrongful/.
56. See David Dow and Mark Dow (eds.),
Machinery of Death (Routledge, 2002).
57. Linda G. Mills, Insult to Injury: Rethink-
ing Our Responses to Intimate Abuse
(Princeton University Press, 2006).
58. Sarah Tofte, “Testing Justice: The Rape
Kit Backlog in Los Angeles City and
County,” Human Rights Watch report,
31 March 2009; Nicolas Kristof, column,
New York Times, 30 April 2009.
59. Bob Egelko in San Francisco Chronicle,
27 July 2005.
60. Chris
Lombardi,
“Justice
for
Battered
Women,” Nation, 15 July 2002; Lorraine
Dusky, Still Unequal: The Shameful Truth
About Women and Justice in America
(Crown, 1996).
61. Jennifer Gonnerman, “Welfare’s Domestic
Violence,” Nation, 10 March 1997.
62. Lorraine Dusky, Still Unequal (Random
House 1998).
63. National Abortion Reproductive Rights Ac-
tion League (NARAL), Pro-Choice America
report, July 2009; “Violence and harassment
at U.S. abortion clinics,” http://www.reli
gioustolerance.org/abo_viol.htm.
64. “Sexual Assault and Misconduct Against
Women in Prison,” report by Amnesty In-
ternational, n.d.; New York Times, 2 March
2006.
65. Christine Jose-Kampiner’s report in Diane
Adams (ed.), Health Issues for Women of
Notes
299

Color (Sage Publications, 1995); Arianna
Huffington in San Francisco Examiner,
25 June 2000.
66. See the annual reports of the National Gay
and Lesbian Task Force, Washington,
D.C.; San Francisco Chronicle, 30 November
2003; and the case of Sandy Nelson, news-
letter, National Lawyers Guild, Seattle chap-
ter, August 1995.
67. Lawrence et al. v. Texas (2003) overturn-
ing Bowers v. Hardwick (1986).
68. Kathy Belge, “Where Can Gays Legally
Marry?” July 2009, http://lesbianlife.about.
com/cs/wedding/a/wheremarriage.htm.
69. Child Maltreatment:
Summary
of Key
Findings, report by National Clearing-
house on Child Abuse and Neglect Infor-
mation, 2005.
70. “Statistics
Surrounding
Child
Sexual
Abuse,” Darkness to Light, 13 August
2008; Margaret-Ellen Pipe et al. (eds.),
Child Sexual Abuse: Disclosure, Delay,
and Denial (Lawrence Erlbaum, 2007).
71. New York Times, 7 October 2000; GAO
report on child labor, Washington, D.C.,
1 October 2002.
72. New York Times, 25 August 2009; Louise
Armstrong, And They Call It Help: The
Psychiatric Policing of America’s Children
(Addison-Wesley,
1993);
Jack
Carter,
“America’s Incarcerated Children Today,”
in Dwight Edgar Abbott, I Cried, You
Didn’t Listen (Feral House, 1991).
73. Peter Breggin, M.D., Medication Madness:
The Role of Psychiatric Drugs in Cases of
Violence, Suicide, and Crime (St. Martin’s
Griffin, 2009), 180–221; Martha Rosen-
berg, “Seroquel, Zyprexa and Geodon for
Kids?” http://dissidentvoice.org, 13 June
2009.
74. On the abuse of the mentally ill, see Ro-
bert Whitaker, Mad in America (Perseus,
2003).
75. Tim Wise, “Whites Swim in Racial Prefer-
ence,” Independent Political News, Spring
2003; New York Times, 17 June 2005.
76. Tim Wise summarizes these studies in his
“Sins of Omission,” ZNet Commentary,
7 July 2006.
77. New York Times, 27 November 2004;
Eileen
Poe-Yamagata
and
Michael
A.
Jones, And Justice for Some, National
Council on Crime and Delinquency, 2000.
78. “Racial Inequity and Drug Arrests,” New
York Times editorial, 10 May 2008; New
York Times, 30 April 2009; Claire Cooper,
“Cocaine Justice: Cracked and Broken,”
San Francisco Chronicle, 8 March 2009.
79. Richard Dieter, The Death Penalty in
Black and White, report by Death Penalty
Information Center, http://www.deathpe
naltyinfo.org/; Washington Post, 1 July
2002.
80. Jim Lane, “Racism in East Texas,” Peo-
ple’s Weekly World, 28 May 2005.
81. USA Today, 24 March 1998; Los Angeles
Times, 25 January 2000.
82. Tim Wise, “Sorry for the Inconvenience,”
ZNet Commentary, 18 February 2009.
83. Kristian Williams, Our Enemies in Blue:
Police and Power in America (South End
Press, 2007).
84. Quoted in Parade, 22 August 1976. How-
ever, even in the best of social circumstances
there are ruthlessly selfinterested people
who resort to violent and unlawful means
to get what they want. Not all crime is a
reaction to deprivation and class inequity.
CHAPTER d
10 POLITICAL REPRESSION
AND NATIONAL INSECURITY
1. David Burnham, A Law Unto Itself: The
IRS and the Abuse of Power (Vintage,
1989), 255–290.
2. For recent instances, see Robert Hurwitt’s
review, San Francisco Chronicle, 3 July
2007; and Benjamin Dangle, “In the Name
of the War on Terror,” Toward Freedom,
28 February 2006.
3. Los Angeles Times, 7 December 2004.
4. Kimberly Chase, “Speaking in ‘Approved’
Tongues,”
Christian
Science
Monitor,
11 March 2004.
5. Ellen Schrecker, Many Are the Crimes
(Princeton University Press, 1999); Ri-
chard Curry (ed.), Freedom at Risk (Tem-
ple University Press, 1988).
6. New York Times, 11 August 1996; Philip
Colangelo, “The Secret FISA Court,” Cov-
ertAction Quarterly, Summer 1995.
7. James
Dickerson,
Dixie’s
Dirty
Secret
(M.E. Sharpe, 1998); and Kenneth O’R-
eilly, Racial Matters, The FBI’s Secret File
on Black America (Free Press, 1989).
8. Quoted in Frank Donner, “The Theory
and Practice of American Political Intelli-
gence,” New York Review of Books,
22 April 1971, 28; see also Frank Donner,
The Age of Surveillance (Knopf, 1980).
9. New York Times, 22 December 2005;
Frank Donner, Protectors of Privilege:
300
Notes

Red Squads and Police Repression in
Urban America (University of California
Press, 1991).
10. Mumia Abu-Jamal, We Want Freedom
(South End Press, 2004), 156.
11. New York Times, 24 November 1974;
James Kirkpatrick Davis, Assault on the
Left (Praeger, 1997); Susie Day and Laura
Whitehorn, “Human Rights in the United
States: The Unfinished Story of Political
Prisoners and COINTELPRO,” New Po-
litical Science, vol. 23, 2001.
12. M. Wesley Swearingen, FBI Secrets: An
Agent’s Exposé (South End Press, 1995),
105–106; Brian Glick, War at Home
(South End, 1989).
13. Anthony Summers, Official and Confiden-
tial, The Secret Life of J. Edgar Hoover
(G. P. Putnam’s, 1993); Athan Theoharis
and John Stuart Cox, The Boss (Temple Uni-
versity Press, 1988); Michael Milan, The
Squad: The Government’s Secret Alliance
with Organized Crime (Shapolsky, 1989).
14. Ross Gelbspan, Break-ins, Death Threats,
and the FBI (South End Press, 1991).
15. New York Times, 23 and 27 November
2003, 20 December 2005, and 17 March
2006; Washington Post, 13 December
2003.
16. http://www.indgmedia.org, 18 April 2000;
http://www.a16.org/a16_notebook.cfm,
25 April 2000.
17. For a recent example of police suppression
of antiwar demonstrators, see Marjorie
Cohn, “Preemptive Strikes Against Protest
at RNC,” ZNet Commentary, 2 September
2008.
18. New York Times, 3 May 2006.
19. Cohn, “Preemptive Strikes Against Protest
at RNC.”
20. For an overview, see Geoffrey Stone, Peril-
ous Times: Free Speech in Wartime from
the Sedition Act of 1798 to the War on
Terrorism (Norton, 2005).
21. Robert J. Goldstein, Political Repression in
Modern America, From 1870 to the Pres-
ent (Schenkman/Hall, 1978); David Caute,
The Great Fear (Simon & Schuster, 1978).
22. Kenneth Heineman, Campus Wars (New
York University Press, 1993).
23. Theodore Becker and Vernon Murray
(eds.), Government Lawlessness in Amer-
ica (Oxford University Press, 1971), 153–
157; Shuford Defense Committee News-
letter, January 1978; Guardian (N.Y.),
3 August 1988.
24. John Wojcik, “Eddie Carthan and the
Struggle for Black Empowerment in the
Deep South,” People’s Weekly World,
21 February 2009.
25. On Washington, Bell, Bottom, Conway,
Woodfox, Wallace, and King, see various
updated Internet entries; also Legacy of
Torture: The War Against the Black Lib-
eration Movement (DVD, n.d.), Commit-
tee for the Defense of Human Rights,
http://www.cdhrsupport.org.
26. Jack Olsen, Last Man Standing: The Trag-
edy and Triumph of Geronimo Pratt (An-
chor, 2001).
27. http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Fred_Hampt
on,_Jr.;
http://www.providence.edu/afro/
students/panther/hamptonjr.html.
28. Mumia Abu-Jamal: A Case for Reasonable
Doubt? John Edginton, director and writer
(DVD, 2008); also “The Case for a New
Trial,” Equal Justice USA, Quixote Center,
n.d.; and http://www.iacenter.org/polpris
oners/maj_beverly3.htm.
29. Incident at Oglala—The Leonard Peltier
Story, produced by Robert Redford et al.
(DVD, 2004).
30. For a partial listing, see Can’t Jail the
Spirit, Prison Resource Activist Center,
3 April 2004.
31. Lawrence Wilkerson, “The Cuban Five”
(2007), http://www.thehavananote.com and
http://www.thecubanfive.org.
32. William
Reuben
and
Carlos
Norman,
“The Women of Lexington Prison,” Na-
tion, 27 June 1987. After serving almost
sixteen years, Evans and Susan Rosenberg
had their sentences commuted by President
Clinton in 2001. Marilyn Buck was still in
prison as of 2009.
33. Zero G Sound, “Silvia Baraldini is Free!”
8 October 2006, http://zerogsound.blogspot.
com/2006/10/silvia-baraldini-is-free.html.
34. http://www.freefreenow.org, February 2005.
35. Washington Post, 14 July 2005.
36. Jack Nelson and Jack Bass, The Orangeburg
Massacre (World, 1969); I. F. Stone, “Fabri-
cated Evidence in the Kent State Killings,”
New York Review of Books, 3 December
1970; Tim Spofford, Lynch Street: The
May 1970 Slayings at Jackson State College
(Kent State University Press, 1988).
37. Bud Schultz and Ruth Schultz, The Price
of Dissent (University of California Press,
2002).
38. For a full account of the Reuther assassi-
nation, see my “The Wonderful Life and
Notes
301

Strange Death of Walter Reuther,” in
Michael Parenti, Dirty Truths (City Lights,
1996), 192–207.
39. See Silenced by Death: Journalists Killed in
the United States (1976–1993), Committee
to Protect Journalists, New York, 1993;
New York Times, 26 October 1993.
40. Jeff Stein, “Inside Omega 7,” Village Voice,
10 March 1980; Peter Katel, “A Rash of
Media Murders,” Newsweek, 5 July 1993.
41. Steve
Grossman,
“Vietnamese
Death
Squads: Is
This
the
End?”
Indochina
Newsletter, May/June 1988.
42. Steve
Grossman,
“Vietnamese
Death
Squads in America?” Asia Insights, Asia
Resource Center, Summer 1986.
43. Daily World, 10 June 1983.
44. On the above list of cases, see Stephen
Singular, Talked to Death: The Life and
Murder of Alan Berg (Beech Tree, 1987);
http://www.azcentral.com/news/specials/
bolles/bollesindex.html;
Kate
Bronfen-
brenner, The Killing of Karen Silkwood,
2nd ed. (Cornell University Press, 2000);
David
MacMichael,
“The
Mysterious
Death of Danny Casolaro,” Village Voice,
15
October
1991;
http://www.immigra
tionshumancost.org/text/crimevictims.html;
Ace Hayes, “Col. Sabow Murder and
Cover-up,” Portland Free Press, July/Octo-
ber 1996.
45. Félix Jiménez, “The Killing of Filiberto
Ojeda Ríos,” 7 October 2005, http://
www.thenation.com; New York Times,
28 September 2005.
46. Ward Churchill and Jim Vander Wall,
Agents of Repression (South End Press,
1988); Donner, The Age of Surveillance,
444–445;
New
York Times,
12
May
1985 and 26 May 2006.
47. Ken Lawrence, “Klansmen, Nazis, and
Skin Heads,” CovertAction Information
Bulletin, Winter 1989.
48. James Ridgeway, “Looney Tune Terror-
ists,” Village Voice, 23 July 1985.
49. Robert Collier, “Charges Dropped for Cu-
ban Militant,” San Francisco Chronicle, 10
May 2007; Alicia A. Caldwell, “Cuban Ter-
rorist Luis Posada Carriles Indicted on New
Charges,” Cuba Journal, 8 April 2009.
50. Guardian (N.Y.), 4 February 1981; New
Age, July 1979.
51. “Who Bombed Judi Bari?” newsletter Red-
wood Summer Justice Project, April 1997,
and October and November 1997 updates;
San Francisco Chronicle, 23 April 2004.
52. Reported on “Democracy Now,” KPFA-
Pacifica, 9 November 2005.
53. James Bamford, The Puzzle Palace: A Re-
port on America’s Most Secret Agency
(Houghton Mifflin, 1982); Washington
Post, 9 October 1990.
54. David Wise, “The Spies Who Lost $4 Bil-
lion,” George, October 1998; New York
Times, 27 February 1996.
55. James Bamford, Body of Secrets: Anatomy
of
the
Ultra-Secret
National
Security
Agency (Anchor, 2002).
56. See http://www.dni.gov/nic/NIC_home.html
57. Angus Mackenzie, Secrets: The CIA’s War
at Home (University of California Press,
1997); Stuart Loory, “The CIA’s Use of
the Press,” Columbia Journalism Review,
September/October 1974; Sigmund Dia-
mond, Compromised Campus, The Collab-
oration of Universities with the Intelligence
Community
(Oxford
University
Press,
1992).
58. William Pepper, Orders to Kill (Carroll &
Graff, 1995), 9.
59. John Marks, The Search for the Manchur-
ian Candidate (Times Books, 1979).
60. James Risen, State of War: The Secret His-
tory of the CIA and the Bush Administra-
tion (Free Press, 2006).
61. Memorandum quoted in David McGo-
wan,
Derailing
Democracy
(Common
Courage, 2000), 80.
62. Ralph McGehee, Deadly Deceits (Ocean
Press, 1999); William Blum, Rogue State
(Common Courage, 2000); Lisa Haugaard,
“Textbook Repression: US Training Man-
uals Declassified,” CovertAction Quarterly,
Summer 1997. See also the discussion in
Chapter 11 on “Global Bloodletting.”
63. “CIA Advocates Assassinations,” Guate-
mala, Bulletin of the Guatemala Human
Rights Commission/USA, Spring/Summer
1997; “Interrogation Inc.,” New York
Times, 12 and 13 August 2009 and 4
March 2009.
64. United States of America—Rights for All,
Amnesty International, October 1998.
65. Howard Blum, Wanted: The Search for
Nazis in America (Quadrangle Books,
1977); Christopher Simpson, Blowback:
America’s Recruitment of Nazis and Its
Effects on the Cold War (Weidenfeld &
Nicolson, 1988).
66. Hal Gold, Unit 731 Testimony (Yen Books,
1996),
125–126,
173;
Sheldon
Harris,
Factories of Death (Routledge, 1994).
302
Notes

67. Washington Post, 16 September 1977;
William Schaap, “The 1981 Cuba Dengue
Epidemic,”
CovertAction
Information
Bulletin, Summer 1982; Centers for Dis-
ease Control, http://www.cdc.gov/ncidod/
dvbid/dengue.htm; “History of CIA Biolog-
ical Warfare Against Cuba, 1962–1997,”
Granma
International,
23
November
1997; Blum, Rogue State, 103–112.
68. Susan Lucas in Peacework, March 1995;
House Intelligence Committee report cited
in Nation, 20 May 1996.
69. Washington Post, 4 January 1978; Alfred
McCoy, “Drug Fallout: The CIA’s Forty
Year Complicity in the Narcotics Trade,”
Progressive, 1 August 1997.
70. Senate Committee on Foreign Relations,
Subcommittee on Terrorism, Narcotics,
and
International
Operations,
report,
“Drugs, Law Enforcement and Foreign
Policy” (U.S. Government Printing Office,
1989); Alfred McCoy, The Politics of Her-
oin (Lawrence Hill, 1991), 61–62; Leslie
Cockburn,
Out
of
Control
(Atlantic
Monthly Press, 1987); Peter Dale Scott
and Jonathan Marshall, Cocaine Politics
(University of California Press, 1991);
Tim Weiner, “AntiDrug Unit of CIA Sent
Ton of Cocaine to U.S. in 1990,” New
York Times, 20 November 1993; Walter
Pincus’s
report
in
Washington
Post,
4 November 1998.
71. Dennis Dayle, quoted in Scott and Mar-
shall, Cocaine Politics, x–xi.
72. Dennis Bernstein and Leslie Kean, “People
of the Opiate: Burma’s Dictatorship of
Drugs,” Nation, 16 December 1996.
73. Pete Brewton, The Mafia, CIA & George
Bush (Shapolsky, 1992); Jack Colhoun,
“BCCI: The Bank of the CIA,” Covert-
Action Quarterly, Spring 1993.
74. Here is a small sampling of the vast re-
search on the JFK assassination: Jim Mar-
ris, Crossfire (Carroll & Graf, 1989); Sylvia
Meagher, Accessories After the Fact (Vin-
tage, 1992); Jim Garrison, On the Trail of
Assassins (Sheridan Square Press, 1988);
Michael Kurtz, Crime of the Century (Uni-
versity of Tennessee Press, 1982); Mark
Lane, Rush to Judgment (Holt, Rinehart
& Winston, 1966); Mark Lane, Plausible
Denial (Thunder’s Mouth Press, 1991);
James DiEugenio and Lisa Pease (eds.),
The Assassinations (Feral House, 2003).
75. See Keith W. Olson, Watergate (University
Press of Kansas, 2003).
76. Jonathan Marshall, Peter Dale Scott, and
Jane Hunter, The IranContra Connection
(South End Press, 1988); Report of the
Congressional
Committee
Investigating
the IranContra Affair (U.S. Government
Printing Office, 1987).
77. Lawrence Walsh, Firewall: The Iran-Contra
Conspiracy and Cover-Up (Norton, 1997).
78. Washington Post, 10 and 14 April 2004;
Paul Thompson, “They Tried to Warn
Us,” Center for Cooperative Research,
1 January 2003, http://www.complete911ti
meline.org/; Richard Clarke, Against All En-
emies (Free Press, 2004); New York Times,
17 August and 14 September 2005.
79. Robert Parry, “Still No Habeas Rights for
You,” Consortium, 3 February 2007.
80. Emile Schepers, “Over 100 Cities Challenge
Patriot
Act,”
People’s
Weekly
World,
24 May 2003; Alex Jones, “Secret Patriot Act
II,” Rense.com, http://www.infowars.com.
81. Washington Post, 15 February 2008; New
York Times, 2 March 2008 and 3 Septem-
ber 2009.
82. New York Times, 2 March 2008 and
9 April and 13 August 2009.
83. New York Times, 4 March 2009.
84. The TSA survey quoted in San Francisco
Chronicle, 7 December 2003.
85. Stephen Flynn, America the Vulnerable
(HarperCollins, 2004); “Homeland Unse-
cured,” Public Citizen News, November/
December
2004;
New
York
Times,
6 December 2005 and 27 March 2006;
USA Today, 15 March 2006.
86. See Bob Herbert, column, New York
Times, 23 June 2009; New York Times,
25 August and 23 September 2009.
CHAPTER d
11 THE U.S. GLOBAL
MILITARY EMPIRE
1. Tom Gervasi, The Myth of Soviet Military
Supremacy (Harper & Row, 1986); Fred
Kaplan,
Dubious
Specter:
A
Skeptical
Look at the Soviet Nuclear Threat (Insti-
tute for Policy Studies, 1980).
2. Defense Monitor, newsletter of the Center
for
Defense
Information,
Washington,
D.C., September/October 2000.
3. See various issues of The Defense Monitor,
newsletter of the Center for Defense Infor-
mation, vol. 39.
4. George Monbiot, “Congress Confronts Its
Contradictions,” ZNet.com, 30 September
2008.
Notes
303

5. New York Times, 20 June 2000; “U.S.
Missile Defense Project May Spur China
Nuke Buildup,” Oakland Tribune, 10 Au-
gust 2000.
6. Quoted in Karl Grossman, “U.S. Violates
World Law to Militarize Space,” Earth Is-
land Journal, Winter/Spring 1999.
7. U.S. Space Command, Vision for 2020,
quoted in McGowan, Derailing Democ-
racy, 196 (italics added).
8. Gar Smith and Clare Zichuhr, “Project
HAARP:The Military’s PlantoAlter the Ion-
osphere,” Earth Island Journal, Fall 1994.
9. For Rumsfeld and Shanahan quotes, see
respectively “The War on Waste,” CBS
News Report, 29 January 2002, and De-
fense Monitor, May 2000; see also Donald
Barlett and James Steele, “Billions over
Baghdad,” Vanity Fair, October 2007.
10. “An Arms Race with Ourselves,” Business
Leaders for Sensible Priorities, New York,
n.d., http://www.businessleaders.org; New
York Times, 24 March 2005 and 22 July
2009; Michael Sherer, “Buy First, Fly Later,”
Mother Jones, January/February 2005; San
Francisco Chronicle, 24 May 2009.
11. New York Times, 29 December 2005 and
25 January 2006.
12. Reps. Henry Waxman and John Dingell,
“Whistleblowers Sound the Alarm on Hal-
liburton in Iraq,” Multinational Monitor,
March 2004; Army contracting officer
quoted
in
Associated
Press
report,
31 October 2004.
13. Tom
Condit,
“Halliburton
Has
an
$80,000 Lifeguard,” The Partisan, May/
June 2005.
14. Report by Russel Mokhiber, Multinational
Monitor, October 2004; The Pentagon
Follies, Council for a Livable World and
Taxpayers for Common Sense (Washing-
ton, D.C., 1996).
15. See The Pentagon Follies; New York Times,
6 August 1990, 1 April 1996, and 8 Octo-
ber 1999; Los Angeles Times, 18 February
2005.
16. New York Times, 9 March 2009.
17. Michael Sniffen, “No Open Bidding for
Most
Pentagon
Contracts,”
Associated
Press report, 30 September 2004; for an
overview see Jeffrey St. Clair, Grand Theft
Pentagon (Common Courage, 2005).
18. P. W. Singer, Corporate Warriors (Cornell
University Press, 2003); Nelson Schwartz,
“The Pentagon’s Private Army,” Fortune,
3 March 2003.
19. “The U.S. Employment Effects of Military
and Domestic Spending Priorities,” De-
partment of Economics and Political Econ-
omy
Research
Institute,
University
of
Massachusetts, Amherst, October 2007.
20. Robert
Scheer,
“Our
Rained-Out
Bomber,” Nation, 22 September 1997.
21. The U.S. Nuclear Weapons Cost Study Proj-
ect, Brookings Institution, Washington,
D.C., 2000.
22. Bob Feldman, “War on the Earth,” Dol-
lars and Sense, March/April 2003.
23. Washington Post, 9 June 1980; New
York Times, 29 November 1988, and 2
September
1998;
and
Tyrone
Savage,
“The
Pentagon
Assaults
the
Environ-
ment,” Nonviolent Activist, July/August
2000.
24. Seth Shulman, The Threat at Home: Con-
fronting the Toxic Legacy of the U.S. Mil-
itary (Beacon Press, 1992); New York
Times, 29 January 2000.
25. For all these various cases, see Department
of Defense, Worldwide U.S. Military Ac-
tive Duty Military Personnel Casualties,
Directorate for Information Operations
and Reports M07, n.d.; San Francisco
Chronicle, 12 June 1991; Michael Uhl
and Tod Ensign, G.I. Guinea Pigs (Put-
nam, 1980); Sam Smith, “Research and
Experiments on the Home Front,” Justice
Xpress, Summer 2002; Citizen Soldier
newsletter, January 2003.
26. Phil Maggitti, “Prisoners of War: The
Abuse of Animals in Military Research,”
Animal Agenda vol. 14, no. 3, 1994.
27. Christopher D. Cook, Diet for a Dead
Planet (New Press, 2004), 229–238.
28. Terry Collingsworth, “Child Labor in the
Global Economy,” policy brief, Interhemi-
spheric Resource Center and Institute for
Policy Studies, Washington, D.C., 1997;
Fingers to the Bone, report by Children’s
Rights Division of Human Rights Watch,
June 2000, http://www.hrw.org/campaigns/
crp/farmchild/index.htm.
29. New York Times, 16 March 1996.
30. For instance, William Hartung and Bridget
Moix, “Deadly Legacy: U.S. Arms to Africa
and the Congo War”: http://www.worldpo
licy.org/projects/arms/reports/congo.htm.
31. Graham Hancock, Lords of Poverty: The
Power, Prestige, and Corruption of the In-
ternational Aid Business (Atlantic Monthly
Press, 1989); Cook, Diet for a Dead
Planet, 229–238.
304
Notes

32. Monbiot, “Congress Confronts Its Con-
tradictions.”
33. Jacob G. Hornberger, “But Foreign Aid Is
Bribery! And Blackmail, Extortion, and
Theft Too!” Future of Freedom Foun-
dation, 26 September 2003; on Nicaragua,
see Council on Hemispheric Affairs press
release, 24 July 2009.
34. Susan George and Fabrizio Sabelli, Faith and
Credit: The World Bank’s Secular Empire
(Westview Press, 1994); William Greider,
“Time to Rein in Global Finance,” Nation,
24 April 2000.
35. William Blum, Rogue State (Common
Courage Press, 2000), 125–167.
36. Reed Brody, Contra Terror in Nicaragua
(South End Press, 1985); Holly Sklar, Wa-
shington’s War on Nicaragua (South End
Press, 1985); United Church of Christ
Commission for Racial Justice, “Why Is
the U.S. Prolonging War in Angola?” Wa-
shington Post, 5 October 1989; Augustus
Richard Norton, “The Renamo Menace:
Hunger and Carnage in Mozambique,”
New Leader, 16 November 1987.
37. On Grenada and Panama, see Michael
Parenti, Inventing Reality: The Politics of
News Media, 2nd ed. (St. Martin’s Press,
1993), 148–151, 159–163.
38. London Times, 3 March 1991; Ramsey
Clark et al., Challenge to Genocide (Inter-
national Action Center, 2000); Washington
Post, 23 June 2000.
39. For a fuller treatment, see Michael Parenti,
To Kill a Nation: The Attack on Yugosla-
via (Verso, 2000).
40. New York Times, 5 August and 30 Decem-
ber1996and26February1999;DanaPriest,
“Army Instructed Latins onExecutions,Tor-
ture,”WashingtonPost,21September1996;
David Kirsh, “Death Squads in El Salvador:
A Pattern of U.S. Complicity,” CovertAction
Quarterly, Summer 1990.
41. New York Times, 11 March 1999.
42. Ben Kiernan (ed.), Genocide and Democ-
racy in Cambodia, Yale University/South-
east Asia Students monograph series, no.
41, 1993; John Pilger, “Pol Pot: the Monster
We Created,” Guardian Weekly (UK), 26
April 1998.
43. “Mozambique: Privatization Costs Jobs,”
Peoples Weekly World, 16 November
2002; Michael Parenti, Blackshirts and
Reds (City Lights, 1997), 87–120.
44. Javier Giraldo, S.J., Colombia: The Geno-
cidal
Democracy
(Common
Courage,
1996);
Jeffrey
St.
Clair,
“Blueprints
for the Colombian War,” CounterPunch,
1 July 2001.
45. Arvind
Ganesan,
“Corporation
Crack-
downs, Business Backs Brutality,” Dollars
and Sense, May/June 1999; New York
Times, 27 November 2002.
46. Michael Parenti, Against Empire (City
Lights, 1995); Blum, Rogue State, 92ff;
George Lardner Jr., “Book Documents
U.S.-Backed Killings,” Washington Post,
28 July 2001.
47. John
Rice,
Associated
Press
report,
28 November 2001.
48. Parenti, Against Empire, 125–129; New
York Times, 8 March 1997.
49. See David Ray Griffin, The New Pearl
Harbor (Olive Branch Press, 2004).
50. Los Angeles Times, 11 April 2002; New
York Times, 5 May 2002.
51. “Mortality Before and After the 2003 In-
vasion of Iraq: Cluster Sample Survey,”
The Lancet 364, 2004; Charles Levinson,
“Ordinary
Iraqis
Feel
Pinch
of
Free-
Market Reforms,” San Francisco Chroni-
cle, 23 January 2006.
CHAPTER d
12 WHO GOVERNS?
ELITES, LABOR, AND GLOBALIZATION
1. Philip Burch Jr., Elites in American History,
vols. 1–3 (Holmes and Meier, 1980, 1981);
David Rothkopf, Superclass: The Global
Power Elite and the World They Are Mak-
ing (Farrar, Straus & Giroux, 2008).
2. Edward Pressen, The Social Background
of the Presidents (Yale University Press,
1984).
3. Peter Phillips, “Inside Bohemian Grove,”
14
August
2003,
http://www.counter
punch.org/phillips08142003.html; see also
Mike Hanson, Bohemian Grove: Cult of
Conspiracy (iUniverse, 2004).
4. Laurence Shoup, “Bush, Kerry, and the
Council on Foreign Relations,” Z Maga-
zine, October 2004.
5. Laurence Shoup and William Minter, Im-
perial Brain Trust: The Council on Foreign
Relations and United States Foreign Policy
(Monthly Review Press, 1977); Laurence
Shoup, “The Council on Foreign Relations
and the U.S. Invasion of Iraq.”
6. Stephen Gill, American Hegemony and the
Trilateral Commission (Cambridge Uni-
versity Press, 1991); Leslie Sklair, The
Transnational Capitalist Class (Blackwell
Notes
305

2001); Public Citizen News, November/
December 2004.
7. New York Times, 16 February 1999.
8. Chuck Fogel, “Spying on the Union,” Sol-
idarity, March 1988.
9. Don Monkcrud, “US Income Inequality
Continues
to
Grow,”
Capital
Times,
18 July 2009.
10. John J. Sweeney, “Can We Be a Democ-
racy if Democracy Ends at the Workplace
Door?” New Political Science, vol. 26,
March 2004; New York Times, 9 January
2006; Al Norman, The Case Against Wal-
Mart (Raphel Marketing, 2004).
11. New York Times, 24 October 2000 and
16 April 2006; Robert Michael Smith,
From Blackjacks to Briefcases: A History
of Commercialized Strikebreaking and Un-
ionbusting in the United States (Ohio Uni-
versity Press, 2003).
12. For a well-documented report on weak en-
forcement and anti-union bias in U.S. labor
laws, see Unfair Advantage, Human Rights
Watch:
http://www.hrw.org/reports/2000/
uslabor; Martin Jay Levitt, Confessions of
a Union Buster (Crown, 2003).
13. Dick Meister, “Bush’s Anti-Labor Rela-
tions
Board,”
ZNet
Commentary,
25 November 2005.
14. Joseph Carroll, “Sixty Percent of Ameri-
cans Approve of Labor Unions,” http://
www.gallup.com/poll/28570/Sixty-Percent-
Americans-Approve-Labor-Unions.aspx.
15. According to the nonpartisan Center for
Responsive
Politics;
see
San
Francisco
Chronicle, 11 October 2005.
16. Zeitlin referenced in James Petras, “Four
New York Intellectuals,” Z Magazine,
September 1998.
17. New York Times, 9 January 2005; Nathan
Newman, “How the Corporate Right Lies
about Union Corruption,” People’s Weekly
World, 25 March 2006.
18. Michael
Yates,
Why
Unions
Matter
(Monthly Review Press, 1998).
19. Richard
Freeman
and
James
Medoff,
What
Do
Unions
Do?
(Basic
Books,
1984); “The Real Union Facts,” Solidarity,
May/June 2006.
20. Laurie Jo Hughes, “AIFLD: American In-
tervention Against Free Labor Develop-
ment,”
Nicaragua
Monitor
(Nicaragua
Network Education Fund, Washington,
D.C.), December 1991/January 1992.
21. Quoted in New York Times, 21 May 1989.
22. See Lori Wallach and Michelle Sforza, The
WTO (Seven Stories Press, 2000); and
John R. MacArthur, The Selling of Free
Trade (Hill and Wang, 2000).
23. New York Times, 9 May 1997 and 6 Feb-
ruary 2006; Rachel’s Environment and
Health
Weekly,
18
November
1999;
Washington Post, 13 October 1998.
24. Quoted
in
People’s
Weekly
World,
7 December 1996.
25. Maude Barlow, Blue Gold (IFG, 2001);
Hidayat Greenfield, “Disneyland, Doha
and the WTO in Hong Kong,” Z Maga-
zine, January 2006.
26. International
Forum
on
Globalization,
IFG Bulletin, Summer 2001.
27. Elizabeth Malkin, “Nafta’s Promise, Unful-
filled,” New York Times, 24 March 2009.
28. The State of Food Insecurity in the World,
report by U.N. Food and Agriculture Or-
ganization, 2003; Vandana Shiva, “Open
Markets, Closed Minds,” Toward Free-
dom, Winter 2003.
29. Steven Shrybman, A Citizen’s Guide to the
World
Trade
Organization
(Canadian
Center for Policy Alternatives and James
Lorimer & Co., 1999).
CHAPTER d
13 MASS MEDIA:
FOR THE MANY, BY THE FEW
1. On media concentration, see Ben Bagdi-
kian, The New Media Monopoly (Beacon
Press, 2004).
2. Commission on Freedom of the Press,
quoted in Robert Cirino, Don’t Blame
the People (Vintage, 1972), 47.
3. San Francisco Chronicle, 12 July and
14
October
2004;
New
York
Times,
31 March 2003 and 4 May 2004.
4. Associated
Press
report,
23
November
2005;
New
York
Times,
6
September
2005; and see Outfoxed: Rupert Murdoch’s
War on Journalism, documentary by Robert
Greenwald, 2004.
5. Quoted in Eric Barnouw, The Sponsor
(Oxford University Press, 1978), 57.
6. Jonathan Kwitney, conversation with me,
March 1992.
7. “Where’s the Power: Newsroom or Board-
room?” Extra!, July/August 1998.
8. Karl Grossman, “Publisher Has Meltdown,”
Extra!, November/December 1991; Lynn
Ludlow,“It’saFreeCountry(You’reFired),”
San Francisco Chronicle, 7 October 2001.
306
Notes

9. “Workers’ Political Rights Under Attack,”
American Writer, Summer 2003; ZNet
Commentary by D. Schecter, 8 April 2006.
10. Mark Dowie, “A Teflon Correspondent,”
Nation, 7 January 2002.
11. Report by MediaMatters, http://mediamat
ters.org, 15 February 2006.
12. Report
by
MediaMatters,
18
January
2006; Ben Smith, “Beck, Fox Source Dis-
pute Vacation,” Politico, 20 August 2009,
http://www.politico.com/blogs/bensmith/
0809/Fox_caves.html.
13. As quoted in San Francisco Chronicle,
8 January 2006.
14. Robert Greenwald and Alexander Kitty,
Outfoxed: Rupert Murdoch’s War on Jour-
nalism (Disinformation Company, 2005).
15. David Croteau, “Challenging the ‘Liberal
Media’ Claim,” Extra!, July/August 1998;
Norman Solomon, “The ‘Liberal Media’—
a Phantom That Will Not Die,” Creators
Syndicate, 20 April 2002.
16. Rory O’Connor and Aaron Cutler, Shock
Jocks: Hate Speech and Talk Radio (Alter-
Net Books, 2008).
17. Todd
Purdum
in
New
York
Times,
13 January 1999.
18. Larry Beinhart, “New York Times Perpe-
tuates the Myth That George Bush Won
the 2000 Election,” in Peter Phillips and
Andrew
Roth
(eds.),
Censored
2009
(Seven Stories Press, 2008), 125–129.
19. According to Vincent Schiraldi, director of
Justice Policy Institute, cited in David
McGowan, Derailing Democracy (Com-
mon Courage, 2000), 60.
20. Robert Entman, “The Color Game: How
Media Play the Race Card,” Newswatch,
Summer 1999.
21. Quoted in Gordon Laxer, “Stop Rejecting
Sovereignty,”
Canadian
Dimension,
13 February 2003.
22. Norman Solomon, “New Media Heights
for a Remarkable Pundit,” Creators Syndi-
cate, 22 February 2002.
23. Luke Baker, “Iraq Conflict Has Killed a
Million, Says Survey,” 7 January 2008;
Matt Taibbi, “The Great American Swin-
dle,” Rolling Stone, 23 August 2007.
24. Helen Thomas, “Lap Dogs of the Press,”
Nation, 27 March 2006.
25. See, for instance, Eva Golinger, Bush ver-
sus Chavez (Monthly Review Press, 2007).
26. See the discussion and citations in Chapter 7;
also Michael Parenti, Inventing Reality,
2nd ed. (Wadsworth [St. Martin’s], 1993),
passim; and Howard Friel and Richard
Falk, The Record of the Paper: How the
New York Times Misrepresents U.S. Foreign
Policy (Verso, 2004).
27. Gary Webb, Dark Alliance (Seven Stories,
1998); LA Weekly, 16 December 2004.
28. “Tailwind,” posted 22 July 1998: http://
www.freedomforum.org/fpfp/specialprogr
ams/tailwind1.asp; also April Oliver and
Peter Arnet, “Did the U.S. Drop Nerve
Gas?” Time, 15 June 1998.
29. “Journalists at Work: Who’s Watching the
Watchdogs?,” Alternative Press Review,
Spring/Summer 1998.
30. Daniel Brandt, “Journalism and the CIA,”
Alternative Press Review, Spring/Summer
1998; Carl Bernstein, “The CIA and the
Media,” Rolling Stone, 20 October 1977.
31. New York Times, 8 July 1998.
32. Government Accountability Office report,
Associated Press, 29 January 2005; New
York Times, 1 October 2005 and 6 April
2006.
33. New York Times, 27 November 1988,
italics added.
34. Michael Parenti, Make-Believe Media: The
Politics
of
Entertainment
(Wadsworth
[St. Martin’s], 1992).
35. David Robb, Operation Hollywood: How
the Pentagon Shapes and Censors the Mo-
vies (Prometheus Books, 2004).
36. Parenti, Make-Believe Media, chapter 7 and
passim; also Lyric Wallwork Winik, “The
Toll of Violence,” Parade, 11 July 2004.
37. Parenti, Make-Believe Media, chapter 5.
38. PBS and the American Worker, Commit-
tee for Cultural Studies, City University of
New York, June 1990.
39. Sarah Posner, “Right-wing Radio,” Alter-
Net, 5 April 2005, http://www.alternet.
org/story/21639.
40. Federal
Communications
Commission,
“Applicability of the Fairness Doctrine in
the Handling of Controversial Issues of
Public Importance,” Federal Register 29,
25 July 1964, 10415ff.
41. Robert McChesney, Telecommunications,
Mass Media and Democracy: The Battle
for the Control of U.S. Broadcasting 1928–
1935 (Oxford University Press, 1993).
42. Arthur Stamoulis, “Slamming Shut Open
Access,”
Dollars & Sense,
September/
October
2002;
http://civic.moveon.org/
save_the_internet.
Notes
307

CHAPTER d
14 VOTERS, PARTIES,
AND STOLEN ELECTIONS
1. On voters’ ability to perceive differences in
candidates, see survey in New York Times,
25 July 2000.
2. Princeton Survey/Pew Research Center,
25 April 2006.
3. Richard
Winger,
“How
Many
Parties
Ought to Be on the Ballot?” Election Law
Journal, vol. 5, no. 2, 2006; Ballot Access
News, various monthly issues 1999 to
2009, http://www.ballot-access.org/2009.
4. Munro v. Socialist Workers Party (1986).
5. For a critical analysis of the winner-
take-all system, see Steven Hill, Fixing
Elections (Routledge, 2003).
6. Douglas Amy, Real Choices, New Voices:
How Proportional Representation Elec-
tions Could Revitalize American Democ-
racy, 2nd ed. (Columbia University Press,
2002).
7. Along with the United States, winner-
take-all is used in parts of Australia, and
in Britain and Canada (where it is called
“first-past-the-post”).
8. Kathleen Barber, Proportional Representa-
tion and Election Reform in Ohio (Ohio
State University Press, 1996); Martin Got-
tlieb, “The ‘Golden Age’ of the City Coun-
cil,” New York Times, 11 August 1991.
9. Ballot Access News, 8 December 1998;
Steven Hill, “Lessons on the Mechanics
of
Democracy,”
Los
Angeles
Times,
15 February 1996.
10. Named after Governor Elbridge Gerry of
Massachusetts, who employed it in 1812,
and “salamander,” from the odd shape of
some of the districts he concocted.
11. Barry Yeoman, “Virtual Disenfranchise-
ment,” Nation, 7 September 1998.
12. Edward Walsh,
“Texas
Redistricting—
Unprecedented Challenge to Democracy,”
Washington
Post,
2
November
2003;
Supreme Court citations in chapter 18,
note 67.
13. New York Times, 24 June 1998 and
27 August 1999.
14. Fredreka Shouten’s report in USA Today,
23 October 2008.
15. See Sam Pizzigati, “Bored by Politics? A
Primary
Reason,”
Too
Much,
Winter
2000. Only 739 contributors provided
two-thirds of the GOP’s $137 million of
soft money: Ellen Goodman in Boston
Globe, 7 August 2000.
16. Associated Press report, 21 August 2000.
17. USA Today, 28 July 2000.
18. Federal
Election
Commission,
January
2009, http://www.fec.gov/pages/brochures/
fecfeca.shtml#Contribution_Limits.
19. Report by the Center for Responsive Poli-
tics, Washington, D.C., in Anderson Val-
ley Advertiser, 27 November 1996; also
New York Times, 19 April 1992.
20. Capital Eye, Center for Responsive Politics,
Summer 2000, http://www.opensecrets.org;
“Soft Money, Big Stakes,” Newsweek,
28 October 1996.
21. Campaign Finance Institute, http://www.
cfinst.org/congress/.
22. New York Times, 7 November 1996; San
Francisco Chronicle, 19 May 1998.
23. Sharon Basco, “The Color of Money,” Na-
tion, 1 February 1999; Deidre Davidson, “As
Maine Goes …” Progressive Populist, 15 De-
cember 1999; see http://www.progressive
party.org/; USA Today, 15 November 2002.
24. New York Times, 25 November 1997. On
nonvoting see Vanishing Voter Project,
WashingtonPost.com
highlights,
http://
www.msnbc.com/news, 4 November 2000.
25. For a typical example of this view, see Sey-
mour Lipset, Political Man (Doubleday,
1960), 215–219.
26. Smith v. Allwright (1944).
27. See Harper v. Virginia State Board of Elec-
tions (1966) on poll taxes, and Dunn v.
Blumstein(1972)onresidencyrequirements.
28. “The Right Way to Register Voters,” New
York Times editorial, 24 July 2009.
29. New York Times, 12 May 2008 and 16
April 2009; Shasa Abramsky, “10 Ways
to
Steal
an
Election,”
Mother
Jones,
November/December 2008; Frances Fox
Piven and Richard Cloward, Why Ameri-
cans Don’t Vote (Pantheon, 1988).
30. Deborah Hastings, Associated Press re-
port, 16 June 2008; Los Angeles Times,
6 November 2005; Jeffrey Toobin, “Fraud
Alert,” New Yorker, 14 January 2008.
31. Cynthia Tucker, column in San Francisco
Chronicle, 26 March 2007.
32. These figures are based on a comprehen-
sive study by the calf cooperatives’ Con-
gressional
Election
Survey;
see
Ian
Urbina, “Hurdles to Voting Persisted in
2008,” New York Times, 11 March 2009.
33. Anthony Thompson, “Democracy Behind
Bars,” New York Times, Op-Ed, 6 August
2009.
34. For these various irregularities, see New
York Times, 30 November 2000 and
308
Notes

15
July
2001;
and
Boston
Globe,
30 November 2000 and 10 March 2001.
A relevant documentary is Unprecedented:
The 2000 Presidential Election, L.A. Inde-
pendent Media Center Film, 2004.
35. New York Times, 15 September 2002; the
investigators were from the California In-
stitute of Technology and Massachusetts
Institute of Technology.
36. Mark Crispin Miller, Fooled Again: How
the Right Stole the 2004 Election and Why
They’ll Steal the Next One Too (Basic
Books, 2005), 7–31, 262, and passim.
37. Miller, Fooled Again, 134–135.
38. All the various instances listed above are
from Miller, Fooled Again, passim; Bob
Fitrakis and Harvey Wasserman, How
the GOP Stole America’s 2004 Election
and Is Rigging 2008 (CICJ Books/www.
Freepress.org, 2005); Anita Miller (ed.),
What Went Wrong in Ohio: The Conyers
Report on the 2004 Presidential Election
(Academy
Chicago
Publishers,
2005);
Andy Dunn, “Hook & Crook,” Z Maga-
zine, March 2005; Greg Palast, “Kerry
Won: Here Are the Facts,” Observer,
5 November 2004; Robert Kennedy Jr.,
“Was the 2004 Election Stolen?” Rolling
Stone, 1 June 2006, http://www.rolling
stone.com/news/story/10432334/
39. Jonathan Simon and Ron Baiman, “The
2004
Presidential
Election:
Who
Won
the Popular Vote? An Examination of the
Comparative Validity of Exit Polls and
Vote Count Data,” Freepress.org, 2 January
2004; Steven Freeman, “The Unexplained
Exit Poll Discrepancy,” 29 December 2004,
stfreeman@sas.upenn.edu.;
Fitrakis
and
Wasserman, How the GOP Stole America’s
2004 Election, 48–51, 55–57.
40. Steven Levy, “Will Your Vote Count in
2006?” Newsweek, 29 May 2006; New
York Times, 12 May 2006; San Francisco
Chronicle, 26 April 2004.
41. Bev Harris, Black Box Voting Book: Bal-
lot Tampering in the 21st Century (Talion
Publishing, 2004), chapter 2, available at
http://www.BlackBoxVoting.org;
Steve
Moore, “E-Democracy,” Global Outlook,
Summer 2004; Associated Press report,
12 February 2005; Catherine Komp’s article
in Ashville Global Report, 17 November
2005.
42. Fitrakis and Wasserman, How the GOP
Stole America’s 2004 Election, 58; San
Francisco Chronicle, 19 November 2004.
43. Bruce Schneier, “Why Is It So Hard to Run
an
Honest
Election?”
San
Francisco
Chronicle, 31 October 2004.
44. New York Times editorial, 22 June 2009.
CHAPTER d
15 CONGRESS:
THE POCKETING OF POWER
1. Independent Politics News, Winter 2003;
Labor Party Press, July 1998.
2. Senator Daniel Patrick Moynihan (D-N.Y.)
quoted in New York Times, 25 November
1984.
3. Mark Green quoted in Steven Roberts,
“The Rich Get Richer and Elected,” New
York Times, 24 September 1985.
4. People’s Weekly World, 20 April 2002.
5. Center for Public Integrity cited in USA
Today, 24 March 1998; study by Cam-
paign for Tobacco-Free Kids reported in
Associated
Press
report,
2
September
1997; http://truesecurity.usaction.org/, July
2009.
6. George Monbiot, “Congress Confronts Its
Contradictions,” Guardian (UK), 30 Sep-
tember 2008; Kevin Phillips, Wealth and
Democracy (Broadway, 2003), 326.
7. Philip Stern, The Best Congress Money
Can Buy (Pantheon, 1988), 84–85.
8. MoveOn newsletter, 29 July 2008.
9. Senator James Abourezk, “Clear Out PACs,
Clean Up Congressional Campaigns,” re-
lease
by
Institute
for
Policy
Studies,
18 March 1986.
10. Quoted in “Business Battles Back,” Envi-
ronmental Action, 2 December 1978.
11. New York Times editorial, 19 January
2006; Emad Mekay, “Lobbyists Spend
Twice That of Campaigns,” Global Re-
port (Ashville, N.C.), 14 April 2005.
12. NPR special reports on lobbying, 5 and
8 December 2005.
13. Matthew Continetti’s Op-ed in New York
Times, 1 October 2005.
14. Quoted in D. Gilbarg, “United States Im-
perialism,” in Bill Slate (ed.), Power to the
People (Tower, 1970), 67.
15. New York Times, 29 April 1992.
16. Robert Winter-Berger, The Washington
Pay-Off (Dell, 1972), 14 and passim for
some astonishing eyewitness testimony.
17. USA Today, 10 November 1997.
18. Lester Milbrath, The Washington Lobby-
ists (Rand McNally, 1963), 345.
19. Environmental Working Group Report,
http://www.ewg.org/reports/Wet_PAC;
Notes
309

Wall Street Journal, 1 March 2004;
New York Times, 23 December 2005.
20. Nicholas
Kristof,
column,
New
York
Times, 27 June 2009.
21. New York Times editorial, 13 June 2006.
22. For an overall critique, see Mark Green, Sell-
ing Out: How Big Corporate Money Buys
Elections, Rams Through Legislation, and
Betrays Our Democracy (Harper, 2004).
23. New
York
Times,
13
March
and
15 December 2005.
24. Washington Post, 4 March 2006.
25. Russ Baker, “The House Flunks Ethics,”
Nation, 15 February 1999. Another lead-
ing example of moral turpitude was Rep.
Henry Hyde (R-Ill.), see Dennis Bernstein
and Leslie Kean, Henry Hyde’s Moral Uni-
verse (Common Courage, 1999).
26. Washington Post, 28 and 29 August 2007.
27. GAO investigation reported in Washing-
ton Post, 10 October 1981.
28. On corruption in the Reagan administra-
tion, see Washington Post, 5 February and
24 September 1988, and 17 January 1989;
New York Times, 27 July 1988 and 1 May
1990.
29. For instance, Peter deLeon, Thinking About
Political Corruption (M.E. Sharpe, 1993).
30. New York Times, 9 April 2003, and
9 February and 25 May 2006.
31. See John C. Berg, Unequal Struggle: Class,
Gender, Race and Power in the U.S. Con-
gress (Westview Press, 1994), for an over-
view and critique.
32. Jeremy Weir Alderson, “Spooks and Brass
Work the Hill,” CovertAction Quarterly,
Summer 1997.
33. Mark Green et al., Who Runs Congress?,
2nd ed. (Bantam Books, 1972), 56.
34. “Protecting
War
Profiteers,”
Multina-
tional Monitor, November 2003.
35. New York Times, 9 August 1987 and
8 April 1993; Washington Post, 17 June
1987 and 31 August 1991.
36. David E. RePass, “Make My Filibuster,”
New York Times, 2 March 2009.
37. Nate Silver and Andrew Gelman, “No
Country for Close Calls,” New York Times,
19 April 2009.
38. Robert Salladay’s report, San Francisco
Examiner, 26 July 1998; also B. Drum-
mond Ayres’s report, New York Times,
28 April 1997.
39. Both quoted in Mark Martin, “Term Limits
Contributed to State Assembly’s Disarray,”
San Francisco Chronicle, 25 July 2003.
40. “Legislative Term Limits: An Overview,”
National Conference of State Legislatures,
http://www.ncsl.org/default.aspx?tabid=
14849.
41. U.S. Term Limits v. Thornton (1995).
42. Quoted in St. Louis Post-Dispatch, 11
December 2003.
43. Norman Ornstein and Thomas E. Mann,
Op-Ed in New York Times, 19 January
2006; Washington Post, 9 July 2004 and
8 October 2005.
CHAPTER d
16 THE PRESIDENT:
GUARDIAN OF THE SYSTEM
1. Reagan quoted in Seattle Times, 15 Janu-
ary 1989; Clinton speaking on PBS News
Hour, 27 October 1992.
2. William
Shannon,
New
York
Times,
22 July 1975.
3. Washington Post, 1 April 1984; Common
Cause
Magazine,
April/May/June 1992;
Cox News Service report, 31 October 2003;
New York Times, 27 March 2006.
4. “Top
Contributors,”
http://www.opense
crets.org/pres08/contrib.php?cycle=2008&-
cid=N00009638.
5. Warren Lenhart, Ambassadorial Appoint-
ments, Congressional Research Service,
Report
91-385F,
Washington,
D.C.,
1 May 1991; Associated Press report,
1 November 1997; Public Citizen newslet-
ter, January 2004.
6. Quoted by David Eisenhower in People’s
Weekly World, 4 December 2004.
7. I refer to the president as “he” only because
every president thus far has been a male.
8. New York Times, 21, 22, and 25 June
1973, and 4 April 1974.
9. Maureen Dowd in New York Times,
11 July 2002. As a director of Harken,
Bush sold 212,000 company shares for a
large profit just before Harken announced
$22 million in losses and crashed in value.
His failure to report the sale to the SEC
was a violation of the law. But the chair
of the SEC, a Bush Sr. appointee, took no
action against him.
10. On how presidents have lied, see David
Model, Lying for Empire (Common Cour-
age Press, 2005); also Frank Browning,
“Jimmy Carter’s Astounding Lies,” In-
quiry, 5 May 1980.
11. James Nathan Miller, “Ronald Reagan
and the Techniques of Deception,” Atlan-
tic Monthly, February 1984; Washington
310
Notes

Post, 17 and 19 June 1984, 13 July 1984,
and 27 September 1986; New York Times,
27 December 1985.
12. New York Times, 20 February and 30 June
1990.
13. New York Times, 27 June 1997 and
16 March 1998.
14. San Francisco Chronicle, 26 April 2000.
15. Justin Lewis et al., “Polling Clinton’s Ap-
peal,” Nation, 9 March 1998. For one in-
sider’s disillusionment, see Robert Reich,
Locked in the Cabinet (Knopf, 1997).
16. Bush radio address, March 3, 2001; New
York Times, 6 February 2002; “Bush Let
Vets
Down,”
Solidarity,
November–
December 2004; Paul Krugman in New
York Times, 14 April 2006.
17. “Five
Failures,”
Public
Citizen
News,
November/December 2004; Osha Gray
Davidson, “Dirty Secrets,” Mother Jones,
September/October 2003.
18. Lucinda Marshall’s ZNet Commentary,
30 March 2006; Molly Secours’s ZNet
Commentary, 16 October 2005.
19. Molly Ivins in San Francisco Chronicle,
2 May 2001 and 5 February 2003; http://
www.misleader.org, March 2003.
20. “WMD: Who Said What?” Independent
Politics News, Summer 2003; Los Angeles
Times, 1 July 2004; Nichols Kristof in
New York Times, 6 May 2003.
21. Ron Daniels, “When Will Obama Stand
and Fight,” Zspace Page, 13 July 2009.
22. Washington Post, 24 and 25 June 2009;
New York Times, 25 August 2009.
23. Respectively New York Times, 23 Decem-
ber 2003 and 1 March 2006; Associated
Press report, 18 February 2005; Public
Citizen News, November/December 2003.
24. The Twenty-third Amendment gave the
District of Columbia a number of electors
equivalent to the least populous state (3),
which in addition to the number of sena-
tors (100) and representatives (435) brings
the Electoral College to 538. The Consti-
tution prohibits any member of Congress
or any other government official from
serving as an elector.
25. See George C. Edwards III, Why the Elec-
toral College Is Bad for America (Yale
University Press, 2005); also Theodore
Arrington and Saul Brenner, “Should the
Electoral College be Replaced by the Di-
rect Election of the President? A Debate,”
PS, Spring 1984.
26. United States v. Nixon (1974); Raoul Ber-
ger, Executive Privilege, A Constitutional
Myth (Harvard University Press, 1974).
27. Washington Post, 2 November 2001.
28. New York Times, 4 August 2009.
29. New York Times, 25 August and 23 Sep-
tember 2009.
30. Washington
Post,
9
September
2005;
“Declaration
of
National
Emergency
by Reason of Certain Terrorist Attacks” by
the President of the United States ofAmerica,
http://www.whitehouse.gov/news/releases/
2001/09/20010914-4.html.
31. The above examples are respectively from
New York Times, 25 March 1986; Los
Angeles Times, 4 November 1984; Gen-
eral Accounting Office report B-213137,
Washington, D.C., 22 June 1984; New
York Times editorial, 3 December 2002;
Washington Post, 28 December 2001; the
quote is from Matthew Daley, Associated
Press report, 19 April 2003.
32. New York Times, 5 May, 28 June, and
24 July 2006.
33. Elizabeth Kolbert, “Midnight Hour,” New
Yorker, 24 November 2008.
34. Reagan in Washington Post, 29 December
1986; Nixon interview, David Frost show,
19 May 1977.
35. Washington Post, 19 November 2002.
36. New York Times, 13 June 2006.
37. New York Times, editorial,
6 March
2006; Molly Ivins in San Francisco Chron-
icle, 10 June 2004.
38. For an overall critique, see Charlie Savage,
Takeover: The Return of the Imperial
Presidency and the Subversion of Ameri-
can Democracy (Little, Brown, 2007).
39. See David Swanson, Daybreak: Undoing
the Imperial Presidency and Forming a
More Perfect Union (Seven Stories, 2009).
40. Washington Post, 7 February 1988.
CHAPTER d
17 THE POLITICAL
ECONOMY OF BUREAUCRACY
1. See Max Weber’s classic statement, “Bu-
reaucracy,” in Hans Gerth and C. Wright
Mills (eds.), From Max Weber: Essays in
Sociology (Oxford University Press, 1958),
196–244.
2. Duane Lockard, The Perverted Priorities of
American Politics (Macmillan, 1971), 282.
3. See Charles Goodsell, The Case for Bu-
reaucracy, 4th ed. (CQ Press, 2003).
Notes
311

4. “Health Care Crisis Is Worse,” Solidarity,
April/May 1997.
5. San Francisco Bay Guardian, 10 October
2001 and 7 August 2002.
6. For these various examples, see New York
Times, 7 October and 7 November 1990,
and 9 November 1995; Goodsell, The
Case for Bureaucracy, passim.
7. See
Public
Citizen
News,
November/
December, 2003; and Margery Turner,
Rent Control and the Availability of Afford-
able Housing in the District of Columbia
(Urban Institute, 1988).
8. Christine Trianoand NancyWatzman, Voo-
doo Accounting, Public Citizen and OMB
Watch report, Washington, D.C., 1992;
San Francisco Chronicle, 8 September 2005.
9. Molly Ivins in Fort Worth Star-Telegram,
12 August 2000; see also Marilyn Showal-
ter, “Electricity Price Trends, Deregulated
vs. Regulated States,” Power in the Public
Interest report, 12 February 2008.
10. New York Times, 9 March 1997.
11. Daniel Schulman and James Ridgeway,
“The
Highwayman,”
Mother
Jones,
February 2007.
12. New York Times, 19 July 2006.
13. Washington Post, 5 December 2004.
14. John Hanrahan, Government by Contract
(Norton, 1983); Jeremy Scahill, Blackwa-
ter: The Rise of the World’s Most Powerful
Mercenary Army (Nation Books, 2007).
15. Michael Parenti, Blackshirts and Reds:
Rational Fascism and the Overthrow of
Communism (City Lights Books, 1997),
87–120.
16. Susan Fainstein and Norman Fainstein,
“The Political Economy of American Bu-
reaucracy,” in Carol Weiss and Allen Bar-
ton, eds., Making Bureaucracy Work (Sage,
1980), 286.
17. Jay M. Gould and Benjamin A. Goldman,
with
Kate
Millpointer,
Deadly
Deceit
(Four Walls Eight Windows, 1998); New
York Times, 1 and 5 January 1994, and
30 October 1996; Shiela Kaplan, “Great
Lakes: Danger Zones?” Center for Public
Integrity, March 2008.
18. Rebecca Carr, Cox News Service report,
23 November 2005.
19. New York Times, 21 February 2006.
20. For these various instances, see Boston
Globe
editorial,
20
February
2004;
Washington Post, 13 March 2004; New
York Times, 7 July 2004, 8 June 2005,
and 21 April 2006; http://www.bushgreen
watch.org, February 2004; Los Angeles
Times, 18 June 2005.
21. Washington Post, 18 October 2001; Bos-
ton Globe, 22 August 2002.
22. New York Times, 14 October 2002; USA
Today, 24 September 2008.
23. New York Times, 23 April 1986, and
Washington
Post,
27
March
1987,
respectively.
24. For these various instances, see Myron
Peretz Glazer and Penina Migdal Glazer,
The Whistleblowers (Basic Books, 1991);
San Francisco Examiner, July 25, 2000;
New York Times, 24 May 2000; Erik Lar-
sen, “Sailor Court Martialed,” On Guard
(Citizen Soldier, New York), no. 14, 1993;
Nation, 19 May 1997.
25. San Francisco Examiner, 3 August 1998.
26. Washington Post, 13 March and 24 No-
vember 2004; New York Times, 9 Novem-
ber 2003, 29 October 2004, 27 September
2005, and 17 February and 22 April 2006;
Associated Press, 31 July 2002 and 27
November 2004; Public Citizen News,
September/October 2004.
27. Siobhan McDonough, Associated Press re-
port, 27 November 2004.
28. New York Times, 5 May 2006.
29. Bruce
Barcott,
“Changing
the
Rules,”
New York Times Magazine, 4 April 2004.
30. Los Angeles Times, 28 February 2002; see
the report by Rep. John Conyers, The
Constitution in Crisis (Huffington Post,
2006), which points to the laws and
regulations violated by the Bush Jr. admin-
istration, http://www.house.gov/judiciary_
democrats/iraqrept2.html.
31. New York Times, 27 November 2004.
32. Hanna
Connor,
correspondence,
New
York Times, 24 September 2009; San
Francisco Chronicle, 10 December 2008.
33. New York Times, 25 March 2009.
34. Edwin Sutherland, White Collar Crime
(Holt, Rinehart & Winston, 1949), 232.
35. Michael Pertshuk, Revolt Against Regula-
tion (University of California Press, 1982);
Washington Post, 2 February 1989.
36. Suzanne Goldenberg, “White House Ac-
tion Puts on Hold Dozens of Mountaintop
Mining Projects,” Guardian (UK), 11 Sep-
tember 2009.
37. Shreema Mehta, “FDA Complicit in Push-
ing Prescription Drugs, Ad Critics Say,”
New Standard, 20 April 2007.
312
Notes

38. Ron Nixon, “The Corporate Assault on the
FDA,” CovertAction Quarterly, Winter
1995/96.
39. “Vote for Safer Food,” New York Times
editorial, 30 July 2009.
40. Gail Eisnitz, Slaughterhouse: The Shocking
Story of Greed, Neglect, and Inhumane
Treatment Inside the U.S. Meat Industry
(Prometheus Press, 2006).
41. “As Food Quality Drops, the USDA Just
Shrugs” and “National Organic Rules re-
vised by the USDA,” both in Organic
Gardening, May/June 2000.
42. “Something to Chew On,” statement by
Environmental Working Group, New York
Times, 23 February 1999; also http://www.
foodnews.org.
43. Child Labor Coalition, http://www.stop
childlabor.org/USchildlabor/#child%20lab
or%20laws%20and%20enforcement.
44. Roberta Wood’s report in People’s Weekly
World, 8 March 2003.
45. Christopher Cooper and Robert Block, Di-
saster: Hurricane Katrina and the Failure
of Homeland Security (Holt 2007); Jed
Horne, Breach of Faith: Hurricane Katrina
and the Near Death of a Great American
City (Random House, 2008).
46. San Francisco Chronicle, 20 September
2004; New York Times, 8 May and
19 August 2001.
47. Grant
McConnell,
Private
Power
and
American Democracy (Knopf, 1966), 210.
48. Frank Wallace and Stephen Clark, Truth
About Money: The Worst Fraud/Scandal/
SwindleCrimeinAmericanHistory:TheFed-
eral Reserve BankingAct (BookSurge,2008).
49. New York Times, 26 March 1996.
50. Jerry
Knight
in
Washington
Post,
26 September 1983.
CHAPTER d
18 THE SUPREMELY
POLITICAL COURT
1. Max Farrand, The Framing of the Consti-
tution of the United States (Yale University
Press, 1913), 156–157; Chief Justice John
Marshall’s argument for judicial review in
the landmark case, Marbury v. Madison
(1803).
2. Quoted in Felix Frankfurter, Mr. Justice
Holmes and the Supreme Court (Athe-
neum, 1965), 54.
3. Russell Galloway, The Rich and the Poor
in Supreme Court History, 1790–1982
(Paradigm Press, 1982), 163 and 180–181.
4. See the study by Community Rights Coun-
sel, reported in New York Times, 18 May
2006.
5. Washington Post, 5 August 2004.
6. Caperton v. A. T. Massey Coal Company.
7. Dexter Perkins, Charles Evans Hughes
(Little, Brown, 1956), 16.
8. Lee Epstein and Jeffrey A. Segal, Advice
and Consent:
The Politics
of Judicial
Appointments (Oxford University Press,
2007).
9. Sheldon Goldman, “Reorganizing the Ju-
diciary,” Judicature 68, April/May 1985.
10. Study by Robert Carp, Donald Songer,
and Ronald Stidham reported in New
York Times, 1 August 1996.
11. See http://www.huffingtonpost.com/2009/
04/19/jay-bybee-nyt-calls-for-i_n_188680.
html.
12. Epstein
and Segal, Advice and Consent:
The Politics of Judicial Appointments;
Christopher Eisgruber, The Next Justice:
Repairing the Supreme Court Appoint-
ment Process (Princeton University Press,
2009).
13. Gonzales v. Oregon (2006).
14. Jeffrey Toobin, “No More Mr. Nice Guy,”
New Yorker, 25 May 2009.
15. On this and the sanctity of contract, see
Allegeyer v. Louisiana (1897), Lochner v.
New York (1905), and Adair v. United
States (1908).
16. Santa Clara County v. Southern Pacific
Railroad (1886).
17. See Hammer v. Dagenhart (1918), Carter v.
Carter Coal Co. (1936), and Morehead v.
New York (1936).
18. In Bradwell v. State (1872), the Court de-
clared that women also had no right to
practice law.
19. Charles Goodell, Political Prisoners in
America (Random House, 1973).
20. Schenck v. United States (1919). Holmes
made a similar argument in Debs v. United
States (1919). In subsequent cases he
placed himself against the Court’s majority
and on the side of the First Amendment:
Abrams
v.
United
States
(1919)
and
Gitlow v. New York (1925).
21. Yates et al. v. United States (1957).
22. Lorillard Tobacco v. Reilly (2001).
23. First National Bank v. Bellotti (1978) and
Buckley v. Valeo (1976).
24. See Near v. Minnesota (1931), Dejonge v.
Oregon (1937), and McCollum v. Board
of Education (1948).
Notes
313

25. Laird v. Tatum (1972) and Greer v. Spock
(1976).
26. United States v. Caldwell (1972) and
Zurcher v. Stanford Daily (1978).
27. Members of the City Council of Los An-
geles et al. v. Taxpayers for Vincent et al.
(1984) and Clark v. Community for Crea-
tive Non-Violence (1984).
28. Saucier v. Katz (2001) and Humboldt
County v. Headwaters Forest Defense
(2001).
29. Hazelwood School District v. Kuhlmeir
(1988); Los Angeles Times, 6 October
1998.
30. Hustler Magazine v. Falwell (1988).
31. Will v. Michigan Department of State Po-
lice (1989). On the Court’s collusion with
state repression, see Alexander Charns,
Cloak and Gavel: FBI Wiretaps, Bugs, In-
formers, and the Supreme Court (Univer-
sity of Illinois Press, 1992).
32. J. Roderick McArthur Fund v. FBI (1996).
33. Federal Communications Commission v.
Fox Television Stations (2009).
34. For samples of this thinking, see the Vin-
son and Jackson opinions in Dennis et al.
v. United States.
35. On civil liberties: Gideon v. Wainwright
(1963), Escobedo v. Illinois (1964), and Mi-
randa v. Arizona (1966); on reapportion-
ment: Baker v. Carr (1962), Reynolds v.
Sims (1964), and Wesberry v. Sanders
(1964); on the economic rights of the poor:
King v. Smith (1968), Sniadich v. Family Fi-
nance
Corporation
(1969),
Shapiro
v.
Thompson (1969), and Hunter v. Erickson
(1969); see also Galloway, The Rich and the
Poor in Supreme Court History, 163.
36. Loving v. Virginia (1967).
37. For general critiques, see Tinsley Yarbrough,
The Rehnquist Court and the Constitution
(New
York:
Oxford
University
Press,
2000); Herman Schwartz, The Rehnquist
Court: Judicial Activism on the Right
(Hill & Wang, 2003); James MacGregor
Burns, Packing the Court: The Rise of Judi-
cial Power and the Coming Crisis of the Su-
preme Court (Penguin Press, 2009).
38. See respectively, Mentor Savings Bank, FSB
v. Vinson (1986), Franklin v. Gwinnett
County Public Schools (1992), and Davis v.
MonroeCountryBoardofEducation(1999).
39. See, respectively, Planned Parenthood v.
Casey (1992) and Hodgson v. Minnesota
(1990).
40. A Woman’s Choice-East Side Women’s
Clinic v. Newman (2003).
41. Lorance v. AT&T Technologies (1989),
City of Richmond v. J. A. Crosson Co.
(1989), Martin v. Wilks (1989), and Adar-
and Constructors v. Pena (1995).
42. Ward’s
Cove
Packing
Co.
v.
Atonio
(1989).
43. Missouri v. Jenkins (1995), Montgomery
County, Md., Public Schools v. Eisenberg
(2000), Reno v. Bossier Parish School Dis-
trict
(2000),
and
Texas
v.
Hopwood
(2001).
44. Desert Palace Inc. v. Costa (2003) and
Burlington Northern & Santa Fe Railway
Co. v. White (2006).
45. Rummel v. Estelle (1980). The Court re-
versed itself temporarily in Solem v. Helm
(1983).
46. Harmelin v. Michigan (1991) and Lockyer
v. Andrade (2003).
47. United States v. Watts (1997).
48. Johnson v. California (2005) and Miller El
v. Dretke (2005).
49. Cockrell v. Burdine (2002).
50. Ingraham v. Wright (1977) and De Shaney
v. Winnebago County Department of So-
cial Services (1989).
51. Maryland
v.
Blue
(1990),
Florida
v.
Bostick (1991), and County of Riverside
v. McLaughlin (1991).
52. On the right to appeal: McCleskey v. Zant
(1991)
and
Keeney
v.
Tamayo-Reyes
(1992); on inhumane conditions: Wilson
v. Seiter (1991).
53. Gonzales v. Raich (2005) and U.S. v. Oak-
land Cannabis Buyers Cooperative (2001).
54. San Antonio Independent School District
v. Rodriguez (1973).
55. Eric Nadler, “Supreme Court Backs Agri-
business,” Guardian, July 2, 1980.
56. Nordlinger v. Hahn (1992).
57. Mahan v. Howell (1973) and Davis v.
Bandemer (1986).
58. First National Bank of Boston v. Bellotti
(1978), Citizens Against Rent Control et al.
v. City of Berkeley et al. (1981), Buckley v.
Valeo (1976), and Colorado Republican
Committee v. Federal Election Commission
(1996).
59. Nixon v. Shrink Missouri Government
PAC (2000).
60. FEC
v.
Colorado
Republican
Federal
Campaign (2001) and McConnell v. FEC
(2004).
314
Notes

61. New York Times editorial, 11 September
2009, referring to Citizens United v. Fed-
eral Election Commission.
62. U.S. Term Limits v. Thornton (1995).
63. Timmons v. Twin Cities Area New Party
(1997).
64. Alexander v. Mineta (2000).
65. Crawford
v.
Marion
County
Election
Board (2008).
66. New York Times, 18 September 2009.
67. Travis County v. Perry (2006) and other
consolidated cases; see also the similar
Pennsylvania
case,
Vieth
v.
Jubelirer
(2004).
68. Exxon Shipping v. Baker (2008).
69. Coeur Alaska Inc. v. Southeast Alaska
Conservation Council (2009).
70. Crosby v. National Foreign Trade Council
(2000).
71. Quoted in Los Angeles Times, 28 April
2004.
72. Respectively, Gateway Coal Co. v. United
Mine
Workers
(1974),
First
National
Maintenance
Corp.
v.
NLRB
(1981),
Communications Workers of America v.
Beck (1988), and Trans World Airlines v.
Independent Federation of Flight Atten-
dants (1989).
73. Hoffman Plastic Compounds v. NLRB
(2003).
74. Respectively, State Farm Mutual Automo-
bile Insurance v. Campbell et al. (2003)
and Ford v. Romo (2003).
75. Murray v. Curlett (1963), Lemon v. Kurtz-
man (1971), and Walz v. Tax Commission
(1970).
76. Bowen v. Kendrick (1988), Mueller v.
Allen (1983), Rosenberger v. University
of Virginia (1995), and Mitchell v. Helms
(2000).
77. On creationism: Edwards v. Aguillard
(1987); on subsidies: Locke v. Davey
(2004).
78. In re Moore (2003) and Moore v. Glass-
roth (2003).
79. For a critical overview of conservative tactics
on the Court, see Lucas A. Powe Jr., The
Supreme Court and the American Elite,
1789–2008
(Harvard
University
Press,
2009).
80. Garrett Epps, “Black Robe Activism,” The
Nation, 5 May 1997.
81. Paul Gewirtz and Chad Golder, “So Who
Are
the
Activists?”
New
York
Times
Op-Ed, 6 July 2005.
82. See Vincent Bugliosi, The Betrayal of
America: How the Supreme Court Under-
mined the Constitution and Chose Our
President (Thunder’s Mouth Press, 2001).
CHAPTER d
19 DEMOCRACY
FOR THE FEW
1. For classic pluralist statements, see Earl
Latham, The Group Basis of Politics (Cor-
nell University Press, 1952); and Robert
Dahl, Who Governs? (Yale University
Press, 1961).
2. Max Lerner, America as a Civilization
(Simon & Schuster, 1957), 398.
3. Washington Post, 9 March 1980.
4. Frank Kofsky, Harry S. Truman and the
War Scare of 1948 (St. Martin’s Press,
1993), 190.
5. Brandeis quoted in David McGowan, De-
railing Democracy (Common Courage,
2000), 42; also H. H. Gerth and C. Wright
Mills (eds.), From Max Weber: Essays in
Sociology (Oxford University Press, 1958).
6. Paul Hawken, “Dreams of a Livable Fu-
ture,” Utne, May/June 2003.
7. “Reasons to Be Hopeful,” Independent
Politics News, Winter 2005.
8. Kate Sims et al., “The News Is Good! Stor-
ies of Hope and Change from 2007 and
2008,” Censored 2009 (Seven Stories,
2008), 175–186; also David Model, Halfa
Clue: Understanding and Challenging Cor-
porate Rule (Black Rose Books, 2002),
chapter 10.
9. Nicole Winfield, Associated Press report,
6 May 2007.
10. See the revealing documentary film, Who
Killed the Electric Car (2006).
11. Mark Hosenball, “False Starts for Star
Wars,” Newsweek, 16 March 2009.
12. Felix Rohatyn, Bold Endeavors: How Our
Government Built America, and Why It
Must Rebuild Now (Simon & Schuster,
2009).
13. For democratic economic alternatives, see
Gar Alperovitz, America Beyond Capital-
ism: Reclaiming Our Wealth, Our Liberty,
and Our Democracy (Wiley, 2006).
14. New York Times, 3 June 1987.
15. Jeremy
Rifkin,
The
European
Dream:
How Europe’s Vision of the Future Is Qui-
etly
Eclipsing
the
American
Dream
(Tarcher, 2005); Robert G. Kaiser, “Why
Can’t We Be More Like Finland?” Seattle
Notes
315

Times, 25 September 2005 (originally pub-
lished in the Washington Post).
16. See, for instance, Tor Wennerberg, “Un-
dermining the Welfare State in Sweden,”
Z Magazine, June 1995.
17. See Michael Parenti, Blackshirts and Reds:
Rational Fascism and the Overthrow of
Communism (City Lights Books, 1997),
chapters 6 and 7; and Parenti, To Kill a
Nation: The Attack on Yugoslavia (Verso,
2000), chapters 18 and 19.
316
Notes

Index
9/11, 134, 149
Abortion, 258–259. See Legal system, and
sexism
Abraham, Spencer, 245
Abramoff, Jack, 204
Advisory committees, 245
Affirmative action and civil rights,
259–260
Agribusiness, 35–37, 61–62
Agriculture, changes needed, 278–279
AIG, 52
Aldrich, Nelson, 246
Alito, Samuel, 164, 252
American
Clean Energy and Security Act of
2009, 94
Indian Movement, 124
Amtrak, 89
Arnold, Michael William, 117
Articles of Confederation, 6
Ashcroft, John, 134
Atkins v. Virginia, 261
Bailouts, 2008–2009 recession, 64–65
Banfield, Ashleigh, 165
Bank
of America (BOA), 65
bailout. See Bailouts, 2008–2009 recession
of New York Mellon, 64, 102
Baze v. Rees, 261–262
Beard, Charles, 12
Beck, Glenn, 166
Bennett, William, 166
Berg, Alan, 127
Berkman, Craig, 103
Bill of Rights, 15
Bin Laden, Osama, 149
Black
Hugo, 23, 105–106, 255
Panthers, 123–124, 125–126
Blackmun, Harry, 259
Boeing, 100
Bolles, Don, 127
Bosch, Orlando, 128
Brady, Nicholas, 33–34
Brandeis, Louis, 276
Brennan, William J., 256
Breyer, Stephen, 266
Brown, Sherrod, 213
Brown v. Board of Education, 258
Buchanan, Pat, 171
Budget
discretionary spending, 138
federal deficits, 71–73
mandatory spending, 138
Buffett, Warren, 66
Burdish, Dan, 193
Bureaucracy, 232–248
advisory committees, 245
deregulation, 235
and inefficiency, 232–235
and politics, 240–242
private control of, 245–247
privatization, 236–238
and regulation by government, 247–248
and regulations, 240–242
regulatory agencies, 242–245
and secrecy, 238–240
Burroughs, Richard, 243
Burton, Dan, 107, 204
Bush
George H.W., 86, 153, 201, 212, 217, 219,
226, 227, 228, 251
317

Bush (continued)
George W., 68, 75, 83, 85, 86, 94, 97, 103,
134, 139, 149, 153, 172, 184, 191,
192–194, 217, 218, 219–220, 223, 224,
226, 227, 228–229, 229, 238, 240, 241,
244, 245, 251, 252, 266
Jeb, 107, 192
Bush v. Gore, 266–267
Buying power, 37
Bybee, Jay, 251–252
Byrd, Harry, 223
Cantu, Ruben, 110
Capital gains, 66
Capitalism, 27–46
and labor, 27–29
and profits, 33–34
Cargill, 51
Carter, Jimmy, 2, 153, 218
Carthran, Eddie, 122–123
Casolaro, Danny, 127
Caveat emptor doctrine, 20
Census, 30, 42, 184
Central
American Free Trade Agreement (CAFTA),
160
Intelligence Agency (CIA), 131–133, 135, 172
Cerra, Frances, 164–165
Chandler v. Siegelman, 265
Changes needed for our democratic
society, 277–283
agriculture and ecology, 278–279
economic reform, 279
electoral system, 279–280
employment conditions, 280–281
fiscal policy, 281
gender, racial, and criminal justice, 281
health care and safety, 281
labor law, 281
military spending, 282
national security state, 282
news media, 282
Social Security and taxation, 282–283
transportation and infrastructure, 283
Chavez, Hugo, 149
Cheney, Dick, 54, 226, 250, 270
Cheney v. United States, 264
Cherney, Bari and Darryl, 128
Children and abuse. See Legal system, and
victimization of children
Cigna, 80
Citigroup, 65
Citizens United v. Federal Election
Commission, 262
Clarke, Richard, 134
Class
employee, 27
inequality, 29–33
and legal system, 105–108
power, early America, 5–7
Clean Air Act, 96
Climate change. See Global warming
Clinton, Bill, 70, 109, 147, 152, 153–154, 167,
171, 204, 215, 216, 219, 226, 251
Coca-Cola, 51
Coker v. Georgia, 261
Colombia, 148
Columbia/HCA, 103
Conference committee, 208–209
Congress, 197–214
and corruption, 203–205
demographics, 197–198
incumbents, 210–211
of Industrial Organizations (CIO), 23
and legislative process, 208–210
and lobbyists, 200–203
reform of, 211–214
special interests and secrecy, 206–208
term limits, 210–211
and wealth, 197–200
Conservative political ideology, 52–54
Constitution, 1, 5–16. See also Constitutional
Convention
Bill of Rights, 15
conservative design, 13
Eighth amendment, 260
Electoral College, 222–224
Fifteenth Amendment, 188
Fifth Amendment, 254
First Amendment, 255–257, 264–265
Fourteenth Amendment, 254, 262, 266–267
Fourth Amendment, 261
fragment of power, 10–12
framers’ interests, 12–14
and free trade, 161
Nineteenth Amendment, 188
and presidential power, 225
progressive features, 14–16
and propertyless majority, 5–16
ratification of, 14
Sixteenth amendment, 253
and slavery, 10
and Supreme Court, 249
Tenth Amendment, 254
Twenty-second Amendment, 225
Twenty-sixth Amendment, 188
Twenty-third Amendment, 188
and the wealthy, 9
writing of, 7–10
Constitutional Convention, 6, 216
Consumer debt, 75
Contract labor, 33
Cooperman, Edward, 126
Corporate
ownership of America, 31–33
owning class, 27
welfare, 60
Council on Foreign Relations (CFR), 152–153
Craig, Larry, 204
Crilles, Luis Posada, 128
Crime. See Legal system
Criminalization of poverty, 106–108
Cultural institutions, 47
Cunningham, Randy, 204
318
Index

Dean, John, 134
Death penalty. See Supreme Court, and death
penalty
Debs, Eugene, 122
Deficits in federal budget, 71–73
Deficit spending, 70–71
DeLay, Tom, 204, 205
Dellums, Ron, 206–207
Democracy
and capitalism, 58
changes needed, 277–283
criticism of, 59
definition, 57–59
early fears about, 7–10
form and content, 57–59
Democrats, 177–180
Dennis et al v. United States, 255
Department
of Agriculture (USDA), 243–244
of Defense. See Military, global empire
of Housing and Urban Development
(HUD), 86
Dialli, Amadou, 117
DiGrazia, Robert, 117
Discrimination. See Legal system, and sexism
Dissent, repression of, 119–122
Dividends, 66
Dole, Robert, 199
Douglas, William O., 255
Downgrading, 33
Downsizing, 33
Dred Scott v. Sandford, 253
Dreier, Marc, 104
DuPont, 100
Earmarks, 207
Ecology, changes needed, 278–279
Economic
imperialism, 143–146
reform needed, 279
Economics, 3
Education, 85–86. See also Universities and
plutocracy
Eisenhower, Dwight D., 60
Elections. See also Political system
Electoral College, 222–224, 266
Electoral system. See Supreme Court, and
electoral system
Electoral system, changes needed, 279–280
Eminent domain, 20
Employee class, 27
Employment
conditions, changes needed, 280–281
rates, 39–42
Endangered Species Act, 96
Environment, 90–99
alternative energy, 98–99
global warming, 93–94
government response and complicity in
eco-problems, 96–98
mining, 95
nuclear power, 96–97
orgnaics, 98
pollution, 94–96
solutions to problems, 98–99
and Supreme Court, 263
toxins, 90–93, 95
Environmental Protection Agency (EPA), 97
Ewing v. California, 260
ExxonMobil, 51, 63, 67
Exxon Valdez, 263
Farming monopolies, 35–37
Federal
Bureau of Investigation (FBI), 120–122
Election Campaign Act, 180
Election Commission, 180
Emergency Management Agency
(FEMA), 244
Reserve (the Fed), 246–247
Filibuster, 209
Firestone, 102
Fiscal policy, changes needed, 281
Fluoridation, compulsory, 92
Folkes, Lebert, 117
Food and Drug Administration (FDA), 83, 243
Ford
Gerald, 133, 216, 218
Henry, 23, 100
Ford v. Wainwright, 261
Foreign Intelligence Surveillance Act (FISA), 120
Fox News, 164
France, Anatole, 58
Franklin, Benjamin, 15
Free-market capitalism, 52
Free trade, 157–162
Friedman, Thomas, 170
Garcetti v. Ceballos, 257
Gates, Robert, 140
Geithner, Timothy, 154, 245
Gender
criminal justice changes needed, 281
and justice, 112–114
sexism in legal system, 112–14
General
Agreement on Tariffs and Trade (GATT),
157, 160
Electric, 101, 103
Motors, 68, 88, 100
Gergen, David, 171
Gerry, Elbridge, 8
Gerrymander, 182
Ginsberg, Ruth Bader, 266
Globalization, 157–162
Global warming, 93–94
Goldman Sachs, 52, 65
Gore, Al, 191, 192, 223, 224, 266
Government
Accountability Office (GAO), 140
assistance and job creation, 62–63
assistance to corporations, 62–63
funds and the wealthy, 60–62
subsidies, 60–62
Index
319

Government, textbook version of, 1
Great Depression, 21
Greenspan, Alan, 219
Grenada, 146
Griffin v. Illinois, 105–106
Grutter v. Bollinger, 259–260
Guthrie, Dan, 165
Gutting, Tom, 165
Haliburton, 102, 140
Hamdan v. Rumsfeld, 264
Hamilton, Alexander, 3, 4, 9
Harris, Kathleen, 191
Haymarket Square, 19
Head Start, 85
Health and environment, 90–93
Health care
and biomedical research, 83
costs, 81
drugs, 82–83
Food and Drug Administation (FDA),
83–84
Medicaid, 78–79
Medicare, 78–79, 80
occupational safety, 84
Occupational Safety and Health
Administation (OSHA), 84
orphan drugs, 83
profits, 79
and safety, changes needed, 281
and social democracies, 81–83
socialized, 81–83
toxins and health, 91–92
Veterans Health Administation (VHA), 82
Henry, Patrick, 13–14
Herrera, Leon Torres, 111
Hidden employment, 40
Hill, Joe, 122
Hobbes, Thomas, 3
Holder, Eric, 136, 226
Holmes, Oliver Wendell, 255
Homeland security, 134–136
Homelessness, 87
Honeywell, 101
Hoover
Herbert, 24
J. Edgar, 121
Hope v. Pelzer, 261
House of Representatives
formation of, 9
and propertyless majority, 11
Housing, 86–97
low-income, 86–87
public, 87
section 8, 87
Hughes
Charles Evan, 251
Harold, 200
Hulin, Rodney, 108
Human services, 74–89
decline in, 74–75
education, 85–86
health care, 77–79
health insurance, 79–81
housing, 86–87
privatization of, 76–77
Social Security, 76–77
state, 75
transportation, 87–89
Humphrey, Hubert, 200
Hunger, 44, 74
Hussein, Sadam, 149, 167
Ideological orthodoxy, 49–51
Ideologies, political, 52–56
Immigration and Customs Enforcement
(ICE), 119
Income tax. See Taxation
Individualism, 50
Inflation, 34–35
Infrastructure, changes needed, 283
Internal Revenue Service (IRS), 119,
236–237
International Monetary Fund (IMF),
145–146
Intervention by governement, international,
146–147
Iran-Contra, 133–134
Iraq, 146–147, 149
ITT, 100
Jackson, Andrew, 17
Jay, John, 4
Jazz Age, 22
Jefferson, Thomas, 15, 17, 286
Jobless recovery, 40
JohnsManville Corporation, 101
Johnson, Lyndon, 80, 152
JPMorgan Chase, 64
Junketing, 203
Kennedy
Anthony, 251
John F., 132–133, 223, 246
Kennedy v. Louisiana, 261
Kerry, John, 192–194
King, Martin Luther, Jr., 121
Kuhl, Carolyn, 251
Ku Klux Klan, 127–128
Labor
changes needed to laws, 281
contract, 33
corporate conflicts with, 17–19
government action against, 19–21
and rule by the wealthy, 154–155
and Supreme Court, 264
La Guardia, Fiorella, 22
Lansing, Robert, 22
Ledbetter v. Goodyear, 259
Legal system, 100–118
and class, 105–108
320
Index

crime, street, 100
crime, white-collar, 100–103
death penalty. See Supreme Court, and death
penalty
fallible nature of, 110–11
gender, racial, and criminal justice changes
needed, 281
and prisons, 108–10, 113–14
and racism, 115–18
and sexism, 112–14
Supreme Court. See Supreme Court
victimization of children, 114–15
white collar crime penalties, 103–105
Legislation, bicameral, 9
Letelier, Orlando, 128
Lewis, Anthony, 167
Liberal political ideologies, 54–55
Libertarian political ideology, 55–56
Life expectancy rate, 43
Limbaugh, Rush, 167
Lincoln, Abraham, 29
Lloyd Corporation v. Tanner, 120
Lobbying, 200–203
grassroots, 202–203
Lockard, Duane, 232
Locke, John, 3
Lockout, 155
Lozano, Rudy, 126–127
Ludlow Massacre, 19
Luers, Jeff, 125
Lynd, Staughton, 12
Madison, James, 3, 7, 10–11, 11, 13, 15, 229
Madoff, Bernard, 103–104
Majority rule, 1
Making Home Affordable (MHA) Program, 87
Market demand, 37–39
Marshall
John, 252–253
Thurgood, 251, 256
Marx, Karl, 3, 28, 250, 286
Mason, George, 13
Massey v. Washington, 260
McCain, John, 200
McCain-Feingold Act of 2002, 185
McHenry, James, 16
McNally v. United States, 261
Media, mass, 163–176
and affirmative action, 169
alternatives, 174–176
and bias, 167–170
and corporate wealth, 163–167
and crime, 169
and economy, 168
and elections, 168–169
and entertainment, 173–174
and global empire and war, 170
and government influence, 170–172
ideology, 167–168
and labor, 169
news, changes needed, 282
and political protests and globalization, 169
Medicaid, 78–79
Medicare, 75, 78–79, 233
Meese, Edwin, 205
Mercer, John, 11
Merck, 52
Military, global empire, 137–150
harm caused by, 142–143
kill capacity, 137–139
nuclear bombs, 142–143
Pentagon spending, 139–142
wars of attrition, 147–150
Military spending, changes needed, 282
Milken, Michael, 103
Minh, Lam Van, 126
Minor v. Happersett, 254
Mitchell, David, 165
Moderate political ideologies, 54
Moffit, Ronnie, 128
Mohamad, Mahathir, 159
Molecular scavenger, 93
Money primary, 184
Monsanto, 83, 92, 95, 243
Moore, Michael, 80, 164
Morris, Gouverneur, 6, 11
Mountaintop removal, 95
Murdoch, Rupert, 164
Nadel, David, 127
Nader, Ralph, 48, 192
National debt
explanations for, 71
remedies for, 73
National Labor Relations Board (NLRB), 25,
137, 154, 155
National security, 129–130
changes needed, 282
state, 129–130
New Deal, 23–26
problems with, 23–24
successes, 25
Nicaragua, 146
Nixon, Richard, 133, 134, 152, 171, 205, 217,
218, 228, 229
NLRB v. Kentucky River Community, 264
No Child Left Behind, 85
North American Free Trade Agreement
(NAFTA), 157, 160
Obama, Barack, 65, 66, 71, 87, 89, 94, 104,
136, 145, 149, 153, 154, 217, 220–221,
226, 229, 241, 245
Occupational safety, 84
Occupational Safety and Health
Administration (OSHA), 234
Oliver, April, 171
O’Reilly, Bill, 166
Ownership of America, 29–33
Owning class, 27, 28
Palmore v. Sidoti, 259
Pappageorge, John, 193
Patriot Act, 134–135, 210
Index
321

Perzel, John, 192
Pesticides. See Environment, toxins
Petraeus, David, 149
Pfizer, 103
Pinckney, Charles, 216
Pitt, Harvey, 245
Plessy v. Ferguson, 254
Plowshares, 124–125
Pluralism, 268–270
Plutocracy, 47–49, 151, 198, 269
and ideological orthodoxy, 49–51
and material success, 50–51
Policy advisory groups, 152
Political murder, 125–129
Political prisoners, 122–125
Political system, 2, 177–196
Democrats vs. Republicans, 177–179
and funding, 184–186
monopoly, two-party, 179–180
and the people, 196
representation system, 181–182
and rigging, 182–184
shady methods, 191–195
voter fraud, 189–191
voter turnout, 187–189
Politico-economic system, 3–4
Politics defined, 2
Pork barrel, 207
Potomac Electric Company, 101
Poverty, 42–44
criminalization of, 106–108
effects of, 44–46
line, 42–43
Powell, Lewis, 256
Power, 4
President, 215–231
autonomous power, 228–229
Congressional collaboration, 230–231
and Electoral college, 222–224
executive agreements, 230
executive order, 226–227
executive power and Supreme Court,
263–264
executive privilege, 225–226
and lies, 218–221
midnight regulations, 228
non-cooperation with Congress and court
rulings, 227
powers of, 225–231
role of, 215–218
signing statements, 227–228
and states’ rights, 222
war powers, 229–230
Press. See Media, mass
Prisons. See Legal system, and prisons
Privatization, 232–233. See Human services,
privatization of
Productivity, 37–39
gross domestic product (GDP), 38
Profits, 28–29
Progressive
Era, 21–23
political ideology, 55
Propertyless majority, 10–11
Proportional representation, 181–182, 183
Public
opinion, 56–57
ownership, 283–286
policy, 2
Racial profiling, 116
Racism and legal system, 115–18
Rain forests, 90
Reagan, Ronald, 70, 75, 133, 152, 153, 171,
189, 205, 212, 218, 219, 222, 225, 226,
227, 234, 238, 251
Reapportionment, 183
Red scare, 22
Reform in government, limits on, 271–272
Rehnquist, William, 260
Religion, 264–265
Republicans, 177–180
Right-to-work laws, 154
Ring v. Arizona, 261
Rios, Ojeda, 127
Roberts, John, 252
Rockefeller
David, 62, 169
John, 143
John D., 20, 29
John D., Jr., 246
Rogers, Will, 50, 199
Roosevelt
Franklin, 23
Teddy, 21
Roper v. Simmons, 261
Ruling class, 151–154
Rumsfeld, Donald, 139
Ryan, George, 111
Ryder, Winona, 107
Sabow, James, 127
Safe Drinking Water Act, 96
Savage, Michael, 167
Scalia, Antonin, 250, 266
Scheidler v. National Organization for
Women, 259
Schenk, Charles, 255
Shanahan, Jack, 139
Shays, Daniel, 7
Shays’s Rebellion, 7, 10
Sherman, Roger, 8
Shuford, Frank, 122
Silkwood, Karen, 127
Slavery, 10, 18
Smith
Adam, 3, 5, 28
Bradley, 245
Jack, 171
Nick, 213
Socialism, 283–286
322
Index

Social Security, 72, 76, 77, 233, 234
Act, 24
changes needed, 282–283
components of, 77
solvency of, 76
Soft money, 185
Sostre, Martin, 122
Speedups, 33
Spencer, Herbert, 250
Standard Oil, 88
Stanton, Frank, 164
Star Wars, 139
States, roles of, 275–277
State secrets privilege, 226
Stenberg v. Carhart, 259
Stenberg v. National Organization for
Women, 259
Stevens, John Paul, 261, 262
Stewart, Cyril, 157
Stogner v. California, 260–261
Stossel, Jon, 166
Struggle for democracy, 273–275
Student loans, 85–86
Suffrage, 20–21
Summers, Lawrence, 245
Suppplemental Security Income (SSI), 75
Supreme Court, 249–267
abortion and gender, 258–259
affirmative action and civil rights,
259–260
bias, 250–251
and Constitution, 249
and criminal justice, 260–261
and death penalty, 261–262
demographics, 249–250
direction of, 258–265
and economic inequality, 262
and electoral system, 262–263
and environment, 263
and executive power, 263–264
and First Amendment, 255–257
judicial activism, 252–255, 265–267
judicial interpretation, 249
judicial review, 249
and labor and corporate economy, 264
and revolutionaries, 257–258
selection of justices, 251–252
and separation of church and state,
264–265
Surplus value, 28
Taft, Howard, 21
Talent, Jim, 198
Tamimi, Ali Al, 125
Tauzin, Billy, 201
Taxation, 66–68. See also Internal Revenue
Service (IRS)
changes needed, 282–283
and corporations, 66–68
estate tax, 70
excise tax, 69
inheritance tax, 70
methods, 69–70
national sales tax, 69
and redistribution, 66
reforms, 70
regressive, 69
sales tax, 69
value added tax, 69
and wealthy, 66
Telecommunications Act of 1996, 163
Thibodaux, Lousiana massacre, 19
Third World investment, 143–144, 146
Thomas, Clarence, 251, 260, 266
Thornburgh v. Abbott, 256–257
Townley, Michael, 128
Trade, 72
Transportation, 87–89
changes needed, 283
mass, 87–89
motor vehicles, 88
Trustees of Dartmouth College v.
Woodward, 253
Turner, Ted, 62
UBS, 52, 66
Underemployed, 40
Unemployment, 40
Union Carbide, 102
Unions, 156–157
United
Auto Workers (UAW), 126
States Agency for International Development
(USAID), 145
Universities and plutocracy, 47–49
University of California v. Bakke, 259
Value added in manufacture, 28
Vanderlip, Frank, 23
Veterans Health Administration, 82
Vietnam, 147–148
Volcker, Paul, 275
Wage
minimum, 84
theft, 84–85
Wal-Mart, 51, 62, 63
Walt Disney Co., 164
War on drugs, 107
Warren, Earl, 258
Washington, George, 6, 8
Watergate, 133, 225, 270
Wealth and governing, 151–154,
273, 274
Webb, Gary, 170–171
Weber, Max, 276–277
Webster v. Reproductive Health
Services, 259
Weinberger, Caspar, 134
Welch, Jack, 32–33
Index
323

Whistleblowers, 239–240
White, Byron, 256
Wilson, Woodrow, 21, 246
Windsor, Queen Elizabeth, 61–62
Working class hardships, 39–42
Works Progress Administration (WPA), 24
World
Bank, 145–146
Trade Organization, 157–158
War I, impact on industry and
government, 22
War II, 25–26
Yarris, Nicholas, 110
Yugoslavia, 147
Zeitlin, Maurice, 156
Zelman v. Simmons-Harris, 265
324
Index

