Nicholas N.N. Nsowah-Nuamah
Demographic Statistics
Methods And Measures In Demography
Download free books at

2
﻿
NICHOLAS N.N. NSOWAH-NUAMAH
DEMOGRAPHIC 
STATISTICS
METHODS AND MEASURES 
IN DEMOGRAPHY
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com

3
Demographic Statistics: Methods And Measures In Demography
2n edition
© 2017 Nicholas N.N. Nsowah-Nuamah & bookboon.com
ISBN 978-87-403-1693-3
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com

DEMOGRAPHIC STATISTICS
4
contents
4
CONTENTS
	
Foreword	
9
	
Preface to the second edition 	
10
	
Preface to the first edition 	
11
	
Acknowledgement 	
13
1	
Introduction	
14
1.1	
History of demography	
14
1.2	
Definition of concepts	
15
1.3	
Types of demographic studies 	
20
1.4	
Branches of demography 	
21
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com
Click on the ad to read more
www.sylvania.com
We do not reinvent  
the wheel we reinvent 
light.
Fascinating lighting offers an infinite spectrum of 
possibilities: Innovative technologies and new  
markets provide both opportunities and challenges. 
An environment in which your expertise is in high 
demand. Enjoy the supportive working atmosphere 
within our global group and benefit from international 
career paths. Implement sustainable ideas in close 
cooperation with other specialists and contribute to 
influencing our future. Come and join us in reinventing 
light every day.
Light is OSRAM

DEMOGRAPHIC STATISTICS
5
contents
2	
Sources and uses of demographic data	
23
2.1	
Introduction	
23
2.2	
Population census 	
25
2.3	
Vital registration system 	
45
2.4	
Demographic sample survey	
51
2.5	
Population register	
59
2.6	
Errors in population data 	
60
3	
Basic analytical tools in demography	
65
3.1	
Introduction 	
65
3.2	
Ratios 	
65
3.3	
Rates 	
71
3.4	
Central rates 	
77
3.5	
Standardised rates 	
81
3.6	
Terminology usage in demography 	
85
4	
Population size and growth	
87
4.1	
The balancing equation 	
87
4.2	
Total population 	
90
4.3	
Mean population in a year 	
90
4.4	
Mean population of years 	
95
4.5	
The mid-year population 	
97
4.6	
Population growth 	
98
5	
Measures of population composition	
110
5.1	
Introduction 	
110
5.2	
Population composition by sex 	
111
5.3	
Population composition by age 	
117
5.4	
Population composition by age and sex 	
165
5.5	
Measures of population distribution 	
177
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com

DEMOGRAPHIC STATISTICS
6
contents
6	
Measures of mortality	
197
6.1	
Introduction 	
197
6.2	
Crude death rate 	
200
6.3	
Specific death rate 	
205
6.4	
Cause-specific death ratios and rates 	
214
6.5	
Mortality rates 	
219
6.6	
Infant mortality rates 	
222
6.7	
Measures of pregnancy wastage 	
234
6.8	
Perinatal mortality	
241
6.9	
Standardised death rate 	
246
6.10	
Other types of standardised mortality measures 	
269
6.11	
Standardised death indices 	
279
7	
Life table	
305
7.1	
Introduction 	
305
7.2	
Life table functions, definitions and their relationships 	
311
7.3	
Construction of life tables 	
318
7.4	
Abridged life table 	
327
8	
Measures of fertility	
333
8.1	
Introduction	
333
8.2	
Fertility measurement	
336
8.3	
Crude birth rate 	
338
8.4	
General fertility rate 	
341
8.5	
Age-specific fertility rate 	
343
8.6	
Total fertility rate 	
348
8.7	
Cumulative fertility rate 	
354
8.8	
Marital fertility rate 	
357
8.9	
Average age of childbearing 	
360
8.10	
Measures of fertility based on census and survey data	
367
8.11	
Standardised fertility rate 	
391
9	
Measures of reproductivity	
408
9.1	
Introduction	
408
9.2	
Types of reproductivity measures 	
408
9.3	
Gross reproduction rate 	
413
9.4	
Net reproduction rate 	
420
9.5	
Reproduction-survival ratio 	
431
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com

DEMOGRAPHIC STATISTICS
7
contents
10	
Nuptiality	
434
10.1	
Introduction 	
434
10.2	
Classification of marital status 	
436
10.3	
Sources of nuptiality data 	
436
10.4	
Crude marriage rate	
437
10.5	
General marriage rate 	
440
10.6	
Specific marriage rate 	
442
10.7	
Total marriage rate 	
452
10.8	
Standardised marriage rate 	
454
10.9	
Measures of marriage timing 	
455
10.10	
Divorce rates 	
457
10.11	
Widowhood	
458
11	
Measures of migration	
459
11.1	
Introduction 	
459
11.2	
Definition of concepts 	
461
11.3	
Types of migration 	
463
11.4	
International migration 	
464
11.5	
Internal migration 	
478
	
Bibliography 	
483
	
Endnotes	
486
	
Index	
489
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com

8
In Memory of my beloved Godson, the late  
Wisdom Ato Kwamina Otoo, alias Leftie
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com

DEMOGRAPHIC STATISTICS
9
FOREWORD
FOREWORD
In terms of demographic training, what has occurred at the University of Ghana is the most 
important development in tropical Africa. Teaching was developed by the university, at first 
within its Sociology Department and latter on, at the United Nations Regional Institute 
for Population Studies (RIPS). With the exception of Dr. Barclay’s book – “Techniques for 
Population Analysis” – most of the accepted texts in demographic methods available at that 
time were designed for the purpose of training actuaries. Dr. Barclay’s book was, on the 
other hand, intended for more general purpose of population analysis. It was not until the 
late 1980s that the late Professor G.M.K. Kpedekpo’s book – Essentials of Demographic 
Analysis for Africa – provided a course in techniques of demographic analysis with special 
emphasis on the use of these methods for analysing African population data. Nevertheless, 
there was still the need for a text that would be of immense value to students with limited 
background in mathematics or statistics. Professor Nsowah-Nuamah has now filled this need. 
This new book is intended both as a classroom text for courses in techniques of demographic 
analysis, aimed at instructing students in how to use African population data for analytical 
studies, and as reference for researchers who have the occasion to use population data.
The book provides an examination of the principles and assumptions underlying the specific 
methods that are needed for a formal analysis of population data of greatly varying quality 
and content. In particular, Professor Nsowah-Nuamah has gone out of his way to draw 
illustrations from the problems and statistics of the African countries.
Professor Nsowah-Nuamah takes nothing for granted in the previous training of his readers. 
As he points out, the techniques of demographic analysis are less formidable than they often 
seem to the uninitiated once the underlying logic of the method is understood. In the hope 
of making the book as widely useful as possible, he has presented the methodological material 
in the simplest mathematical form. With the exception of the chapter on the life tables the 
book is written to be comprehensible to readers without training in mathematics or statistics. 
In fact, students and researchers with diverse backgrounds, some of whom may have scarcely 
more than an elementary knowledge of algebra, will find the book extremely useful. 
University of Ghana	
Professor Samuel Kwesi Gaisie
April 2007
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com

DEMOGRAPHIC STATISTICS
10
PREFACE to the SECOND EDITION 
PREFACE TO THE SECOND EDITION 
I have been encouraged by the widespread use of the first edition and the positive comments 
received from students, lecturers and researchers. The need to update the book with current 
data and approaches had been identified for some time now but my status as the Rector 
of the Kumasi Polytechnic and then the Vice Chancellor of Kumasi Technical University 
coupled with the fact that I wanted to complete a book on Regression Analysis made me 
put off the writing of this edition for far too long. 
With humility, I am presenting this second edition, thoroughly revised and expanded taking 
into consideration the feedback from readers. One such feedback is the absence of a topic 
on “Nuptiality” and this have been included as Chapter 10. Most of the old chapters have 
been restructured to allow for easy comprehension. 
I wish to thank all those who in any way have given me assistance in completing this edition. 
This should include Dr John Agyei, a lecturer at Kumasi Technical University, who went 
through this edition and also Joshua Appiah at the Publication Unit of the University who 
drew and inserted all the diagrams in the main body of the book and also designed the cover. 
I also show appreciate to my wife Gladys and my children, Nicholas Jnr, Nicolina and 
Nicole who denied the family good to enable me complete this edition.
Kumasi
N.N.N. Nsowah-Nuamah
December, 2016
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com

DEMOGRAPHIC STATISTICS
11
PREFACE to the FIRST EDITION 
PREFACE TO THE FIRST EDITION 
This text aims at providing students and researchers with an insight into basic demographic 
techniques which will provide the quantitative background knowledge required in the 
modern environment.
The book is designed primarily for students whose major interest lies in applying statistical 
methods to problems in demography. These include graduate students who need a rapid and 
fairly intensive overview of the subject. It also has in mind students who are specialising 
in demography and need a basic introduction to the discipline. It is directed at researchers 
who are interested in the methods of calculation used by demographers. Finally it will 
be helpful to health workers and researchers in health who may require calculation and 
interpretation of health indicators.
The text is set up to serve either as terminal discussion or as an introduction to advanced 
demographic techniques. The emphasis is not on the statistical methods themselves, but 
their proper use in demography. While it has little to say of the art of the tool-maker (the 
mathematician or the statistician who invents the method for performing a certain type of 
demographic job), it takes great pains to make clear the use and limitations of each tool. 
In order to help researchers and students acquire a “feeling” of usefulness and to make 
them translate the concepts and formulas in demography into practice terms, the basic 
ideas of demographic techniques are presented clearly with worked examples illustrating 
their application. As much as possible, data for countries in Africa have been used in the 
examples. Much emphasis has been placed on demographic data for Mauritius because they 
are comprehensive and easily available. It must, however, be emphasised that the data used 
here are just for illustrating the application of techniques and not an attempt to analyse 
countries’ data. This explains why some data used are very old, sometimes modified to fit 
the illustration and sometimes hypothetical. This text is, therefore, not a good source of 
obtaining a country’s demographic data.
Most texts on demography ignore the interpretation of results. A distinctive feature of this 
text, therefore, is the proper demographic interpretation given to results obtained from 
calculations. What the text does not do always is describing trends and patterns depicted 
in tables.
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com

DEMOGRAPHIC STATISTICS
12
PREFACE to the FIRST EDITION 
With the exception of a few results, the book does not claim originality for its contents but 
for its style of presentation. It is user-friendly and the student may not need the help of 
any teacher to understand the content. No prior knowledge of demography and statistics 
is assumed. The approach is non-mathematical although some familiarity with the use of 
symbolic notation and elementary algebra is helpful in mastering the material presented. 
So far as mathematical and statistical prerequisites are concerned, this text is self-contained 
and self-explanatory.
A brief tour through the book. Chapter 1 gives the history of demography and introduces 
basic concepts in this field. Chapter 2 discusses the sources and uses of and the basic errors 
in demographic data. The basic analytical tools for measuring demographic phenomena and 
processes, such as the ratio and the rate are described in Chapter 3. Chapter 4 deals with 
the statistical methods of determining population size and growth. Measures of population 
composition by sex, age and by both sex and age are treated in Chapter 5. The remaining 
chapters discuss the measures of factors of population change: Chapters 6 and 7 on mortality 
and life tables, respectively; Chapters 8 and 9 on fertility and reproductivity, respectively; 
and Chapter 10 on migration. 
Although the text is designed principally for students of demography and statistics, the 
brevity and relative simplicity of this text and most importantly the wide coverage of 
methods and measures of demography make it a useful reference work for other researchers 
including sociologists, geographers, economists, planners, census and statistical officers and 
even the general public. 
Accra 	
N.N.N.Nsowah-Nuamah
February, 2007
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com

DEMOGRAPHIC STATISTICS
13
Acknowledgement 
13
ACKNOWLEDGEMENT 
First and foremost, I express my sincere thanks to the Almighty God both for the gift of 
writing He has endowed me with and for the stamina I always have to complete the books 
I write.
I would like to thank all those who had time to go through the text and made valuable 
comments and suggestions. Space will allow me to mention the names of only David Kombat, 
Victor Boadu and Anthony Pharin Amuzu. While the first two pointed out a number of 
typographical errors, the latter went through all the calculations and made corrections. 
In spite of careful checking by me and others some of whom I have acknowledged, it is 
possible that some occasional errors might have crept through. All such errors are, of course, 
my responsibility, including any flaws and inadequacies. I would appreciate if information 
about such mistakes or comments would be sent directly to me, (my email address is 
n3n_nuamah.yahoo.com) or via ACADEC Press (acadecpress@gmail.com).
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
360°
thinking.
© Deloitte & Touche LLP and affiliated entities.
Discover the truth at www.deloitte.ca/careers 

DEMOGRAPHIC STATISTICS
14
INTRODUCTION
1	
INTRODUCTION
1.1	
HISTORY OF DEMOGRAPHY
Interest in demography can be traced back to ancient times. In its early stages, demography 
was considered primarily as an enumeration of a population, and was documented as 
early as 3800 BC in Babylon. Oriental legends and biblical references indicate that an 
enumeration or census of a population by age and by locality was not uncommon. The 
Persian Empire’s military, for example, conducted a census in the year 500–499 BC for 
the purpose of issuing land grants and taxation. We also know of the directives by God 
to Moses to conduct censuses as captured in the Bible: Take a census of the whole Israelite 
community by their clans and families, listing every man by name, one by one. You and Aaron 
are to number by their divisions all the men in Israel twenty years old or more who are able to 
serve in the army (Numbers 1:1 in the Old Testament). A number of such counts abound 
in Chapter 4 of Numbers. In the New Testament of the Bible also, the counting of people 
around the birth of Jesus Christ is well documented.
The main objective of earliest census exercises was primarily for military records and 
manpower, as well as for taxation. It was, therefore, not surprising that the focus was on 
male adults only.
Besides enumeration, mortality was also a concern in ancient times. One of the earliest 
accountings of mortality can be traced back to the Stone Age where, from stone etchings 
it was determined that only 54 percent of the population reached the age of 5; and only 3 
percent of the population reached the age of 70. In the Bronze Age, a similar pattern was 
demonstrated with the peak of mortality occurring at 15 years of age.
Demography started with the Life table. The first mathematical formula in demography 
can be attributed to Girolamo Cardano (Cardan) in 1570 but the first substantive work 
in demography was published in 1662 by John Graunt who is often called the Father of 
Demography. The accomplishments of Graunt and Edmund Halley (the first to construct 
modern mortality table) had marked a cornerstone in the field of demography at the end 
of the seventeenth century. Modern censuses were started by the United States of America 
in 1790 and the United Kingdom in 1801.
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com

DEMOGRAPHIC STATISTICS
15
INTRODUCTION
1.2	
DEFINITION OF CONCEPTS
Demography is an interdisciplinary subject cutting across many academic disciplines, such as 
statistics, mathematics, medicine, biology, geography, sociology, economics, history, ecology, 
environment, health. For example, the study of mortality is the crossing over between formal 
demography and health sciences, the analysis of fertility is crossing over between formal 
demography on one side and biology and sociology on the other side. Again, demographers 
rely heavily on economics and geography in migration studies. Hence many demographers, 
have received training in other disciplines before specialising in demography.
Demography, as an interdisciplinary subject, has its own key terms, concepts and phrases 
and these are now clarified.
1.2.1  POPULATION 
Population, in a wider sense, is the totality of all persons living at a certain time within a 
territory demarcated by natural, cultural or political boundaries. The territory may be distinct 
social communities, whether a village, a nation, or the entire world. From the point of view 
of demographic studies, a greater importance is attached to the population of a country.
In demo-geography, population is all human generations in terms of their settlement and 
migration within a given territory. In philosophic-sociological terms, population is the 
subject and at the same time the object of social production. In political economy, it is the 
basic source of labour force, on one hand, and the subject of consumption, on the other. 
In demography, population is all human generations distinguished by their size, age and 
sex and other compositional variations. 
1.2.2  DEMOGRAPHY 
The term “demography” was introduced by a Belgian, Achille Guillard in 1855. The word 
was derived from two Greek words “demos” the people and “graphy” to draw or write.
Demography may, therefore, be defined simply as the science of human population. The 
population is viewed as an aggregate of persons, represented by certain types of statistics; 
and demography is concerned with the behaviour of the aggregate (or some of its parts), 
and not with the behaviour of individuals. According to the United Nations Multi-lingual 
Demographic Dictionary, demography is the scientific study of human populations, primarily 
with respect to their size, their structure, and their development.
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com

DEMOGRAPHIC STATISTICS
16
INTRODUCTION
In a narrower sense, demography is concerned with the size, distribution, structure, and 
change of human populations. In a broader sense, demography is a science that studies 
the size, territorial distribution, structure and composition of human populations, and of 
changes over time in these aspects, the causes and consequences of such changes, and the 
interrelationship of socio-economic factors and changes in the population. 
Size of Population 
The size of a population is simply the number of persons in a well defined area and at a 
particular point in time. It increases through births and immigration and decreases through 
deaths and emigration. 
Distribution of Population 
The distribution of a population refers to the arrangement of the population in space (that 
is, geographically or among various types of residential areas) at a given time. 
Structure of Population 
The structure of a population in its narrowest sense, is the distribution of the population 
among its sex and age groupings. 
Change of Population 
The change of a population is the growth or decline of the total population or one of its 
structural units. The components of change in total population are births, deaths, and 
net migration. 
1.2.3  DEMOGRAPHIC STATISTICS 
Demographic statistics, sometimes referred to as population statistics, actually has a dual 
meaning. It may be used in a singular or plural sense.
In the plural sense, the term “demographic statistics” is used to indicate the collections 
of numerical data on population. Here, demographic statistics are the population figures 
themselves, suitably classified and tabulated according to the size and territorial distribution of 
population of an area, distribution by sex, age, social class, kind of employment, nationality, 
level of education, marital status, etc. of the population. 
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com

DEMOGRAPHIC STATISTICS
17
INTRODUCTION
In a singular sense, the term “demographic statistics” is used to refer to a subject field of 
study concerned with methods and procedures for collecting, organising, presenting, analysing 
and interpreting demographic data relating to: 
1)	the size and composition of population; 
2)	factors of natural change (increase or decrease) of population (births and deaths); 
3)	factors of mechanical change of population (that is, migration and naturalisation). 
Population statistics is also meant to study the dissemination of these phenomena, and their 
changes in given economic and social conditions.
In this book we will not use the word “population statistics” in the plural sense. In reference 
to facts and figures about population the term population data or demographic data will 
be used. 
1.2.4  DEMOGRAPHIC EVENTS 
The factors of natural and mechanical change of population are all sequence of events, called 
demographic events. Thus, by demographic events, we mean such events that cause natural 
change (births and deaths) and mechanical change (migration and naturalisation). Events 
such as entry into school and entry into the labour market are of interest in demographic 
analysis because of their impact on population change, yet they are not categorised as 
demographic events. 
1.2.5  VITAL EVENTS 
Vital events deal with the individual’s entrance into life or exit from life and the changes in 
social and civil status that may occur during a specified duration of time among the members 
of a population residing within a country or any delimited territory during the same period. 
Thus, by vital events, we mean such events of human life as births, deaths1 and changes in 
civil status throughout lifetime (marriages, divorces, adoptions, legitimations, recognitions, 
annulments, and legal separations)2. Other demographic events, such as migration and 
naturalisation, are not generally considered as vital events.
1.2.6  VITAL STATISTICS 
The term vital statistics has dual meaning. In a singular sense, it refers to the numerical 
data pertaining to vital events occurring in a given section of a population. It is synonymous 
to vital data. In a singular sense, it is the methods and procedures that deal with the 
registration, compilation, analysis and reporting of aggregates of vital events that occur in 
a given section of a population during a specified period of time. 
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com

DEMOGRAPHIC STATISTICS
18
INTRODUCTION
18
1.2.7  VITAL STATISTICS SYSTEM 
Related to vital events and vital statistics is vital statistics system. A vital statistics system can 
be defined as the total process of legal registration, statistical recording, analysis, presentation 
and reporting of statistics pertaining to vital events. 
1.2.8  DEMOGRAPHIC PROCESS 
The demographic process is the sequence of changes that take place in a population as a 
result of the interplay of demographic events. It differs for the individual and for the group.
Demographic Process with respect to Individual 
The demographic process with respect to an individual can be considered as the continuous 
formation and re-formation of sub-groups in a population due to the occurrence of several 
events that can take place only in a definite natural sequence. It has the characteristics that: 
1)	Not all individuals will experience similar sequences; 
2)	Certain events cannot take place before others. Births, marriages and deaths occur 
in a definite sequence: a birth marks the beginning of life and death the end of 
life. Such events as entry to school, labour force, marriage and pregnancy, occur 
in-between births and deaths in a definite order. 
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
We will turn your CV into 
an opportunity of a lifetime
Do you like cars? Would you like to be a part of a successful brand?
We will appreciate and reward both your enthusiasm and talent.
Send us your CV. You will be surprised where it can take you.
Send us your CV on
www.employerforlife.com

DEMOGRAPHIC STATISTICS
19
INTRODUCTION
Demographic Process with respect to Group 
With respect to a group, if members from other groups are not being permitted to join 
it at any stage, then the size of the group will steadily reduce to zero or to values close to 
zero after a period of time. For example, a group of unmarried persons will slowly reduce 
in size if its members get married and, therefore, leave the group of unmarried persons. 
However, this phenomenon need not happen. This is because a group in a population could 
increase in size with every re-formation when during the period of observation, the group 
itself takes on new characteristics and become a new group, which again is exposed to a new 
set of events. In the process of group re-formation, the new group draws members from 
other identified groups as well. What, therefore, determine the basic unit for measuring the 
process of demographic change of a group are: 
1)	the information on the exposed group; 
2)	the number of demographic events occurring in the group during a unit of time. 
1.2.9  COHORT 
A cohort is a group of individuals who share together a particular event in their life 
histories during a particular time span. Examples are birth cohort and marriage cohort. A 
birth cohort or simply the cohort of a given year consist of all those born during that year. 
For example, those aged 10 years in 2000 are the survivors of the birth cohort of 1990. A 
marriage cohort means all those who were married during a given period.
Different cohorts are different in their characteristics because they would have passed through 
different social, economic and demographic conditions. For this reason, cohort analysis of 
demographic data seeks to understand the process of change over time.
1.2.10  CHARACTERISTICS OF POPULATION 
A characteristic of a population is any piece of personal information that can be ascertained 
in a consistent manner for everyone. It serves to classify each person in a statistical table. 
Examples of characteristics of a population that have been found to be generally satisfactory 
include: age, sex, marital status, occupation, residence, religion, race, ethnicity, place of 
birth, and perhaps number of children ever born. The distribution of most characteristics 
in a population is related to age and sex.
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com

DEMOGRAPHIC STATISTICS
20
INTRODUCTION
1.2.11  HOUSEHOLD 
A household may broadly be defined as a group of people living together under the headship 
of an individual who is mainly responsible for looking after the interest and daily needs of 
its members. The household head is a member of the household recognised as such by the 
other household members. The members may or may not be related to the head (by blood, 
marriage or adoption) because non-relatives (e.g. house helps) may form part of a household. 
In general, a household consists of a man, his wife, children and some other relatives or a 
house help who may be living with them. A household may also be a single member unit. 
In Ghana, a household is usually defined simply as a person or a group of persons, who live 
together in the same house or compound and share the same house-keeping arrangements.
The core of a household is a family. A family is usually defined as the group of people 
who are related by blood, marriage or adoption. Individual members of a family may live 
together as a single unit at a place or may be living separately at different places. A family 
is of two types, namely, the nuclear family and the extended family. 
The nuclear family system consists of the father, mother and children (adopted and/or 
biological). The extended family consists of the nuclear family, and parents, siblings, and 
other relatives. In both a household and a family, the head may be a male or female.
1.3	
TYPES OF DEMOGRAPHIC STUDIES 
There are two main aspects of human population that need to be studied: population static – 
composition of the population at a point in time, and population dynamics – changes in 
the population that occur during some period of observation. These two aspects of study 
have given rise to two methods for the collection of population data, namely, census taking 
and vital registration of events. These are discussed in Chapter 2. 
1.3.1  POPULATION STATIC 
The composition of the aggregate (or some of its parts) is described by the distribution of 
people among certain, more or less, standard categories, such as geographical, sex, age, racial, 
ethnic and economic. Here, the demographer deals with the study of demographic structure 
which is the status of persons at particular point in time. This aspect of demography, as stated 
earlier, is referred to as population static. To deal with population static, the demographer 
depends so much on general descriptive statistics with special ratios (such as, masculinity 
proportion and ratio, age dependency ratio and age ratio) and graphical devices (such as 
the population pyramid). 
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com

DEMOGRAPHIC STATISTICS
21
INTRODUCTION
1.3.2  POPULATION DYNAMICS 
Population is subject to constant changes. For example, the population present at the 
beginning of the year will not quite be the same as the population that will be present at 
the middle of the year.
Population changes are the result of “events”, which add to or take away members of the 
population. It is for this reason that births and deaths are called vital events. The demographic 
events that produce population changes do not happen all at once; they are spread throughout 
a period of time, and the length of the period must be specified. 
In this type of studies, demographers deal with the study of demographic processes. The focus is 
dynamics and occurrence of events over time. This aspect of demography is known as population 
dynamics and it includes, mortality, fertility, reproductivity, nuptiality and migration. For 
purposes of dealing with population dynamics, demographers have developed comprehensive and 
elaborate set of “rates” designed to measure demographic events or components of population 
dynamics. Finally, because population is changing, population composition must be reckoned 
with reference to some particular time which is usually taken as one year.
1.4	
BRANCHES OF DEMOGRAPHY 
In the broader sense, demography may be conceived as encompassing both “demographic 
analysis” and “population studies”. 
1.4.1  DEMOGRAPHIC ANALYSIS 
Demographic analysis studies the components of variation and change in demographic 
variables3 and the relationships between them. It is also known as formal demography or 
demographic methods and deals with the methods, techniques and measures used to study 
the mechanisms of population change in demography. This branch of demography uses 
simple or modest mathematics and statistics in dealing with fertility, mortality, migration 
and marriages/union formation. The focus is on relations within the demographic system.
The study of population, predominantly human population, achieved its mathematical 
character in the twentieth century and this has become known as mathematical demography 
or technical demography. It is the study of population and its analysis through sophisticated 
mathematics and mathematical models, dealing only with demographic variables in a 
mathematical way. The subject of mathematical demography can be viewed from either 
a deterministic viewpoint or from a stochastic viewpoint. Mathematical or technical 
demographers are, therefore, usually mathematicians or statisticians and they are interested 
in a question such as: What are the possible effects on the birth rate in the future if the 
number of women of child-bearing age is changing? 
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com

DEMOGRAPHIC STATISTICS
22
INTRODUCTION
1.4.2  POPULATION STUDIES 
Population studies is the systematic study of population trends and phenomena in relation to 
their social setting. It deals with the relationship between demographic and non-demographic 
variables. 
Population studies is often referred to as population analysis, social demography or 
substantive demography. Substantive demographers are usually non-mathematicians and 
non-statisticians. They are mostly social scientists, especially, sociologists, economists and 
geographers who use concepts, measures and methods of formal demography and statistics 
to determine the effect of non-demographic variables on a demographic variable on the 
basis of available data. Thus, unlike demographic analysis, population studies focuses on 
relations with other fields. It is interested in, say, how changes in income or education can 
affect fertility or mortality.
Though demography shares many of its methods with and depends so much on statistics, 
the techniques of data collection, data evaluation and adjustment and data analysis in 
demography are peculiar to it.
EXERCISES 
1.1	
What is demography in its narrower and broader senses?. 
1.2	
What is demographic statistics in its plural and singular senses? 
1.3	
Distinguish between the following terms as used in demography: 
a)	Demographic event and vital event; 
b)	Demographic statistics and vital statistics; 
c)	Population static and population dynamics. 
1.4	
Explain the term “demographic process”. 
1.5	
Explain the following terms as used in demography. 
a)	Characteristic; 
b)	Household. 
1.6	
Discuss in detail the two branches of demography. 
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com

DEMOGRAPHIC STATISTICS
23
SOURCES AND USES OF DEMOGRAPHIC DATA
23
2	
SOURCES AND USES OF 
DEMOGRAPHIC DATA
2.1	
INTRODUCTION
2.1.1  USES OF DEMOGRAPHIC DATA 
The size, territorial distribution, composition and changes in future of population form one 
of the most important sources of demographic data, needed for: 
1)	determining the parameters of the development of all spheres of human life; 
2)	allocating resources to various parts of the country; 
3)	allocating parliamentary seats; 
4)	estimating the future population (in terms of size and distribution) which are necessary 
for the planning of health, educational and manpower needs of the country, and 
also the social services of government or private organisations; 
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
AXA Global 
Graduate Program
Find out more and apply

DEMOGRAPHIC STATISTICS
24
SOURCES AND USES OF DEMOGRAPHIC DATA
Demographic data should, therefore, be sufficiently reliable, comprehensive and diverse, 
reflecting the real picture of the demographic events that are taking place in a country as 
a whole and in separate geographical areas. Consequently, they should be collected not 
incidentally but systematically.
2.1.2  CHARACTERISTICS OF DEMOGRAPHIC DATA 
Demography is one of the observational, as distinguished from the experimental sciences. 
Demographic data have the following characteristics: 
1)	They are “spread out” in time and space, and only some aspects of demographic 
events can be observed by any investigator at any one time. 
2)	They are dependent of observation and recording of events occurring in the external 
world rather than on experiments under more or less controlled conditions in 
the laboratory. 
3)	They may relate to totals (single personal data are not relevant), social, economic 
and health characteristics, and to geographical distribution; they may have references 
to one point in time or to changes in the course of time. 
4)	The primary statistical unit of observation in demography is the individual; the 
secondary unit is the family or the household. 
2.1.3  SOURCES OF DEMOGRAPHIC DATA 
Demographic secondary data may be obtained from Governmental and non-governmental 
agencies. They may also be obtained from publications of some international organisations, 
such as the United Nations and its allied agencies, such as the World Bank. The United 
Nations publish demographic data in documents including, the United Nations Demographic 
Yearbook, the United Nations Statistical Yearbook which includes only population data of 
general interest, World Population Prospects, Estimates and Projections. The World Bank 
publishes the World Bank Development Reports and Population Reference Bureau Data 
Sheet. The African Development Bank also publishes African Statistical Year Book. 
The limitation of these sources of demographic data is that they do not provide demographic 
data at the micro level. Information is available only for the country as a whole. The data 
are, therefore, useful if we require information at the national level and/or require to compare 
information with that of other countries of the world. 
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com

DEMOGRAPHIC STATISTICS
25
SOURCES AND USES OF DEMOGRAPHIC DATA
The major sources of demographic data of a country are censuses and vital registration. 
Certain countries maintain elaborate register where vital events and other details like 
movement of people are continuously recorded. Other sources, such as, school enrollment 
registers, national identification records, employment records, unemployment records and 
electoral registers, are secondary in nature and may provide the needed demographic data. 
When these data sources are not adequate or when we need to do an in-depth study on 
specific problems of demographic nature, special demographic sample surveys are carried out.
Basically there are four main sources of demographic primary data: 
1)	Population Censuses, 
2)	Vital Statistics Registration Systems, 
3)	Demographic Sample Surveys, 
4)	Population Registers. 
In developing countries, demographic data come mainly from censuses and surveys and, 
to a limited extent, from the vital registration system. These three data collection systems 
must be seen to be complementary to each other; no one system alone can adequately serve 
the needs of potential users.
In Africa, in particular, the non-conventional sources, such as, parish registers, school registers, 
labour registers, baptismal records, maternity clinic and child welfare service records, medical 
records, to a large extent, continue to serve as demographic data sources. However, it is 
not easy for these sources to serve as potential sources of useful demographic data for the 
study of the various components of demographic change because of poor coverage due to 
transport and communication difficulties, low literacy levels, inadequate funding and so on.
2.2	
POPULATION CENSUS 
The population census is the official survey conducted periodically by a government to count 
the people of its country and collect relevant information about them. 
2.2.1  DEFINITION OF POPULATION CENSUS 
The word “census” is derived from the Latin word “censere”, which means to assess. In 
modern usage, the term “census” refers to a nation-wide counting of population. According 
to the United Nations, A population census is the total process of collecting, compiling, 
evaluating, analysing and publishing or otherwise disseminating demographic, economic 
and social data pertaining, at a specified time, to all persons in a country or delimited 
part of a country (United Nations, 2006).
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com

DEMOGRAPHIC STATISTICS
26
SOURCES AND USES OF DEMOGRAPHIC DATA
2.2.2  PURPOSES OF POPULATION CENSUS 
A population census is the most comprehensive source of data on basic demographic 
characteristics at the macro and micro level for a country. It is aptly called the inventory of 
the human population of a country at a specified period of time. It collects information on 
1)	demographic and social characteristics; 
2)	educational characteristics; 
3)	migration; 
4)	economic characteristics; and 
5)	other characteristics. 
A population census which provides data on size, structure, composition and growth of 
population, are extremely rich database for: 
1)	Planning and for evaluating the various government policy intervention programmes 
at national, regional and district levels: 
2)	Providing governments the essential data required for: 
i)	 the provision of services for the people and 
ii)	determining the requirement of services from the people; 
3)	Monitoring progress toward the Millennium Development Goals (MDGs); 
4)	The study of social and economic trends by government, industry, the academic 
world, and individual private researchers; 
5)	Allowing sound estimates of the country as a whole to be made from sample surveys; 
6)	Providing the foundation for deciding on the structure for political representation. 
2.2.3  FEATURES OF CENSUS 
A modern population census has several essential features, five of them being considered 
as essential. 
Essential Features of Censuses
Individuality
The individual is the primary unit of enumeration and hence, each individual is enumerated 
separately and his/her characteristics recorded separately. For characteristics that are common 
to the whole households, or family, the unit of enumeration may be the household or the 
family itself. 
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com

DEMOGRAPHIC STATISTICS
27
SOURCES AND USES OF DEMOGRAPHIC DATA
Territoriality
The census covers a precisely defined territory (the entire country or well-delimited part of 
it) within which the population count is to be made. 
Universality
The census includes every person present and/or residing within its boundary, irrespective 
of their ethnic and socio-economic characteristics. Non-nationals temporarily residing in 
the country at the time of the census will have to be enumerated although they may not 
be included while defining the country’s population.
Simultaneity
The population is enumerated with respect to a well-defined reference period. That is, 
everybody is enumerated at a well-defined reference time, known as the census night. 
Other Features of Censuses
Government Sponsorship
Censuses have government sponsorship, that is, the conduct of a census rests on the national 
government. This is because it is only the government that has the adequate administrative 
apparatus, substantial financial resources and supreme legal authority over the entire population.
Defined Periodicity
Censuses are taken at regular intervals of time, usually ten years. Strict adherence to periodicity 
tends to improve the quality of data and makes analysis of data easier. 
Confidentiality
The census original record sheets and the raw data on the computer are treated confidential 
and are not given out even for legal purposes. 
Comparability
Census results must be comparable within a country overtime and among countries. To 
ensure maximum comparability on a national basis, a set of core questions are chosen and 
additional questions are added to suit regional or country needs. 
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com

DEMOGRAPHIC STATISTICS
28
SOURCES AND USES OF DEMOGRAPHIC DATA
28
Compilation and Publication
Plans are made towards compilation and publication of census results. Almost all modern 
population censuses, indeed, have resulted in some statistical publications. However, occasionally 
1)	the results are suppressed because they are unsatisfactory for technical or political 
reasons; 
2)	not all the planned tables are published especially when data on some subjects turn 
out to be too deficient. 
2.2.4  ORGANISATION OF POPULATION CENSUS 
The organisation of a census is very involving and, therefore, requires careful and long-term 
planning. Some of the activities start as far back as three to five years before the census is 
taken.4 We shall identify three phases of census organisation: the pre-enumeration (preparatory) 
phase, the enumeration phase and the post-enumeration phase. 
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
ibili
because 
e Graduate Programme  
for Engineers and Geoscientists
Month 16
I was a construction
supervisor in 
the North Sea 
advising and 
helping foremen 
solve problems
I was a
he
s
Real work 
International opportunities 

ree work placements
al 
Internationa
or

ree wo
I wanted real responsibili 
 I joined MITAS because 
www.discovermitas.com

DEMOGRAPHIC STATISTICS
29
SOURCES AND USES OF DEMOGRAPHIC DATA
Pre-enumeration Phase
The pre-enumeration phase involves the following preparatory activities: the establishment 
of legal basis, putting in place administrative arrangements, undertaking cartographic work, 
development of census questionnaire and forms and conducting pilot census. We discuss 
each in detail.
Establishing Legal Basis
Every census requires a legal backing. In some countries, laws are enacted prior to every 
census but in others there is a permanent legislation to that effect. 
1)	The law establishes the institutional framework. It specifies the primary administrative 
authority responsible for the conduct of the census. In most African countries, it 
is the National Statistical Offices and, in a few other countries, such as Nigeria, it 
is the Census Offices which conduct censuses. 
2)	The law determines the scope and timing of the census. The timing depends on the 
climatic conditions of the country and social and economic activities of the people. 
When the census date is found to be satisfactory in the first census, subsequent 
censuses are taken at the same time of the year, unless there is a strong cause to 
change it. In Ghana, censuses are undertaken in March even though the 2010 
census was taen in September because of some challenges. 
3)	The law gives the administrative power to place legal obligation on the public to 
cooperate with the census officials, especially the enumerators and to give them 
truthful answers. It also gives the administrative responsibility to the census officials 
and places legal obligation on the enumerators to record the responses faithfully and 
to ensure the confidentiality of the data. This aspect of the law cannot be taken for 
granted because the quality of census data depends on the public cooperation, the 
efficiency of enumerators and the arrangement done for the fieldwork. 
Putting in Place Administrative Arrangements
The activities involved in the conduct of a census is multifaceted and, therefore, its organisation 
is not left to only one institution. A national census planning committee with institutional 
and sectorial representation is, therefore, established to plan and direct the conduct of 
the census. The committee reviews and finalises the budget, mobilises funds, prepares the 
advocacy plan and draws up the time schedule for the various operations. This committee 
also sets up other committees and specifies their responsibilities. 
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com

DEMOGRAPHIC STATISTICS
30
SOURCES AND USES OF DEMOGRAPHIC DATA
Undertaking Cartographic Work
Census cartographic work is one of the major preparatory activities that require longer time 
and large proportion of the total census budget. The cartographic work: 
1)	helps determine the number of enumerators, supervisors and other personnel; 
2)	helps determine the amount of logistics needed for the enumeration. 
The main work here is the demarcation of internal boundaries and the detailed division 
and subdivision of areas into enumeration units, called enumeration areas. An enumeration 
area (EA) is the smallest areal unit that will be covered by a single enumerator. To ensure 
equality of workload among enumerators, the EAs are demarcated on the basis of:
1)	population distribution, 
2)	topography of the terrain, and 
3)	communication and transportation facilities available in the area. 
In each of the EAs, households are identified and numbered, and household members listed, 
indicating head of household. The respective locations of the households are appropriately 
recorded on maps. The list of EAs and the EA maps: 
1)	guide enumerators, during the enumeration phase, to dwellings and other places where 
people are likely to be during the enumeration period to ensure that every individual 
and housing unit in the area are enumerated without omission and duplication; 
2)	provide the basis for producing thematic maps for spatial analysis of the census; 
3)	provide statistical frame for future sample surveys. 
In addition to EAs, supervisory boundaries to contain the detailed division and subdivision of 
a group of EAs are also demarcated. These are referred to as supervisory areas. A supervisory 
area (SA) is a group of EAs put together that will be under one supervisor. The demarcation 
of SAs takes into consideration: 
1)	topography of the terrain, and 
2)	communication and transportation facilities available in the area. 
Similarly, supervisory maps are also drawn and these guide supervisors to the location of 
enumerators under their supervision and to ensure that every area under his or her supervision 
is canvassed and so properly done by the enumerator. 
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com

DEMOGRAPHIC STATISTICS
31
SOURCES AND USES OF DEMOGRAPHIC DATA
Development of Census Questionnaire and Forms
The census questionnaire is the principal document of the census. It is accompanied by 
instruction manuals for various categories of field workers and the quality control forms. 
These instruments are prepared and pretested sufficiently early to enable them to be used 
in the pilot census stage (see below). The preparation of the questionnaire is guided by the: 
1)	method of enumeration; 
2)	cultural and socio-economic set-up of the population; 
3)	educational level of the population; 
4)	exposure of the population to the type of information sought from them. 
The questionnaire, when completed has always to be pretested to allow defects to be rectified 
before it is finalised for the pilot census. The pretest assesses: 
1)	the number of questions; 
2)	the wording and sequence of questions; 
3)	the relative importance of questions; 
4)	the interpretation of questions into the local languages; 
5)	definition of concepts; 
6)	the shape, size and spacing between items of the questionnaire which now appears 
to have gained importance because of the use of the scanning technology for 
data processing. 
Sufficient training is given to the field workers in the use of the questionnaire, the meaning 
and definition of concepts used and the possible variations for each situation. 
The final topics included in the census is determined after consultations with data users and 
after the pretest. In some cases two types of questionnaires are produced: a short questionnaire 
(a questionnaire with a few core questions) and a long questionnaire (a questionnaire with 
detailed questions or special modules). The short questionnaire are administered to the entire 
population while the long one covers only a sample of the population. 
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com

DEMOGRAPHIC STATISTICS
32
SOURCES AND USES OF DEMOGRAPHIC DATA
Conducting Pilot Census 
At a point in time in the pre-enumeration phase, a pilot census, also called trial census, 
census test, experimental census or micro census, is conducted. It is a recent development 
and has now become an integral part of any modern census. A pilot census is a small-scale 
study organised to assess: 
1)	the suitability of the census instruments (questionnaires, manuals and control forms); 
2)	the quality of the EA and SA maps produced during the demarcation exercise; 
3)	the publicity level achieved; 
4)	the adequacy of the arrangements made for the field work, including the recruitment 
and training procedures for enumerators and supervisors; 
5)	the implementation of the method and system of enumeration, including the 
estimation of age from a list of historical events; 
6)	the data processing strategies, from data capture to tabulations, data analysis and 
report writing. 
After the pilot census has been completed, a subsample of EAs covered in the pilot census 
is taken for a re-interview, called pilot post enumeration survey (PPES). The PPES is 
undertaken to: 
1)	fully test all of the post enumeration survey operations, forms and manuals; 
2)	test the matching operation between the pilot census and the PPES questionnaire 
in order to finalise the matching procedures; 
3)	evaluate the pilot census; 
4)	estimate response error for several census questions; 
5)	provide an early indication of any coverage problems resulting from the census 
enumeration procedures. 
Census Enumeration Phase
The enumeration phase is the most crucial of the entire census-taking but lasts for only a few 
days. It involves the collection of information concerning each individual in households and 
recording it on the census questionnaire. It is required that when enumeration is completed, 
all persons of the country shall be counted once and only once without any exception. 
Methods of Census Enumeration
There are conventionally two main methods on census enumeration, namely, the canvasser 
method and the householder method. Sometimes some countries attempt to combine these 
two methods.
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com

DEMOGRAPHIC STATISTICS
33
SOURCES AND USES OF DEMOGRAPHIC DATA
33
In the canvasser (enumerator) method, a census official (a trained canvasser/enumerator) 
visits each of the households in the enumeration area assigned to him/her and collects 
information about all the persons in the household from one or more of the responsible 
members of the same household through interviews using the standard questionnaire. The 
advantages and disadvantages of this method is similar to those of the face-to-face interview 
(for detail, read Nsowah-Nuamh, 2005). In particular, the canvasser method is useful in 
largely illiterate populations such as we have in Africa. 
In the householder method, the census questionnaire with the corresponding instructions 
are distributed well in advance of the census date to all the households. The head or any 
responsible member of the household completes and returns the questionnaire to the census 
secretariat. The advantages and disadvantages of this method is similar to those of the self-
administered questionnaire (read Nsowah-Nuamh, 2005). The householder method is useful 
in largely literate populations
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
MASTER IN MANAGEMENT
mim.admissions@ie.edu
Follow us on IE MIM Experience
www.ie.edu/master-management
#10 WORLDWIDE
MASTER IN MANAGEMENT 
FINANCIAL TIMES
55 Nationalities
in class
5 Specializations
Personalize your program 
Length: 1O MONTHS
Av. Experience: 1 YEAR
Language: ENGLISH / SPANISH
Format: FULL-TIME
Intakes: SEPT / FEB
• STUDY IN THE CENTER OF MADRID AND TAKE ADVANTAGE OF THE UNIQUE OPPORTUNITIES
  THAT THE CAPITAL OF SPAIN OFFERS
• PROPEL YOUR EDUCATION BY EARNING A DOUBLE DEGREE THAT BEST SUITS YOUR
  PROFESSIONAL GOALS
• STUDY A SEMESTER ABROAD AND BECOME A GLOBAL CITIZEN WITH THE BEYOND BORDERS
  EXPERIENCE
93%
OF MIM STUDENTS ARE
WORKING IN THEIR SECTOR 3 MONTHS
FOLLOWING GRADUATION

DEMOGRAPHIC STATISTICS
34
SOURCES AND USES OF DEMOGRAPHIC DATA
Evaluation of Data
In census enumeration, there is a reference period called census moment. This is usually 
the midnight which is usually referred to as the census night. In view of this, census is 
considered as the photographic impression of the population of a country at a given instant 
of time as the count of individuals are made in reference to this night. 
The completed questionnaires and other census documents are collected and reviewed by 
supervisors and control centre supervisors and transported to the Head office for data processing. 
Post-enumeration Phase
The post-enumeration phase, which constitute the final phase of the census, includes the 
following: 
Post-enumeration Survey 
A post-enumeration survey (PES), undertaken shortly after enumeration and after all 
census documents have been returned to the census office, can be defined as the complete 
re-enumeration of a representative sample of the census population. Each individual who 
is enumerated in the post enumeration survey is matched with information from the main 
enumeration in order to estimate: 
1)	the error of coverage of the census at the national level and for major subnational 
domain or population sub-group; and 
2)	the error of content for specific census items. 
When a PES is designed to measure content error only, it is usually known as re-interview. 
Data Capture and Tabulation 
The technology of census data capture has shifted from manual to scanning to improve 
accuracy and speed and to reduce investment in terms of equipment, personnel and space. 
The Optical Mark Reader (OMR) scanner is the technology used by most countries. When 
the scanned data have been edited and validated, statistical tables are generated. 
Census Publication and Dissemination 
The final activities of the census-taking is the publication and dissemination of census 
reports. The publication programme is usually prepared during the pre-enumeration phase 
in consultation with data users. The numerous publications include: 
1)	highlights of census results for decision makers and general readers; 
2)	statistical tables; 
3)	special reports. 
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com

DEMOGRAPHIC STATISTICS
35
SOURCES AND USES OF DEMOGRAPHIC DATA
The type and number of special reports differ from countries to countries and also from 
one census to the other. For instance, the publcations from the 2000 and 2010 censuses 
of Ghnan were quite different as can be seen in Subsection 2.2.8. Census results may also 
be disseminated through 
1)	workshops and seminars; 
2)	press releases; 
3)	radio and TV discussions. 
Post-enumeration Cartographic Work
The actual formation of the national sample frame is undertaken after census work has been 
completed. At this stage, the EAs created during the pre-enumeration phase are checked 
against the population defining criteria of creating an EA, and where necessary, further 
segmentation or amalgamation of EAs is made. 
2.2.5  SYSTEMS OF POPULATION CENSUS-TAKING 
A census may be taken on either a de facto or a de jure basis. 
The De Facto Method 
Under the de facto method, persons are counted at the place where they are found at the 
census night, irrespective of whether or not they belong to the place. When a person has 
been counted once somewhere, he/she is not counted again. This method was more common 
in the English-speaking countries in Africa but of late most countries in the world uses 
this method. Ghana, for instance, has used the de facto method in all her modern censuses. 
Advantages of De Facto Method
The de facto method: 
1)	Provides a simple and clear-cut definition for enumerating persons; 
2)	Offers less chance of double-counting or omission of persons; 
3)	Is appropriate for a highly mobile population; 
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com

DEMOGRAPHIC STATISTICS
36
SOURCES AND USES OF DEMOGRAPHIC DATA
Disadvantages of the De Facto
The de facto method has the following disadvantages: 
1)	It is difficult to obtain information about persons in transit (persons travelling 
on census day or who work at night and consequently would not be found in 
any of the places where people usually live). This is because it does not make a 
distinction between the place at which a person is enumerated and the place where 
he/she maintains his/her residence which determines ones legal and political rights 
and obligations. 
2)	It provides incorrect picture of the usual population of a community. It tends to 
inflate or deflate a population due to temporary movements of population. But for 
administrative and other purposes, such as, taxation and delineation of constituencies, 
the usual population is essential. 
3)	The resident population is needed for many technical purposes like estimating vital 
rates. These rates may be distorted and would not agree with the definition of a rate 
since the population base for calculating them will include floating or non-resident 
population (for example, some persons normally return to their usual residence for 
the birth of a child). It is, therefore, necessary to identify individuals by their place 
of “usual residence” and include them as members of the population of the area. 
The De Jure Method 
Under the de jure method persons are counted according to their usual place of residence 
so that temporarily absent members/persons would be counted as if at home. Similarly, 
temporary visitors who have an usual residence elsewhere are excluded from the listing 
but are counted at their usual residence. Most of the French-speaking countries in Africa 
followed this system. However, of late all censuses conducted in Africa have tended to 
follow the de facto method. 
Advantage of De Jure Method
The de jure has two main advantages. 
1)	It gives a picture of the permanent population of the communities enumerated; 
2)	It gives more accurate estimates of vital rates. 
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com

DEMOGRAPHIC STATISTICS
37
SOURCES AND USES OF DEMOGRAPHIC DATA
Disadvantages of De Jure Method
The de jure method has the following disadvantages: 
1)	Some persons may be omitted from the count when they are absent from their 
usual residence (under-coverage). 
2)	Some persons could be counted twice, once at their temporary residence and again 
at their usual residence (over-coverage). 
3)	Foreigners and temporary visitors are excluded and this violates the universality 
condition of the census. 
4)	Secondhand information obtained about persons who are temporarily absent may 
be incomplete or incorrect. 
Combined Method 
As we have seen, both the de facto and de jure methods have their advantages and disadvantages 
so in modern censuses, the two systems are used to obtain maximum advantage. In the 
combined method, the following terms are used in place of de facto and de jure. 
1)	Place where found at census night
This is the geographic place where each individual spent the census night whether or not 
this was his usual place of residence. 
2)	Place of usual residence
This is the geographical place where the enumerated person usually resides. This may be the 
same as, or different from, the place where he spent the census night or his legal residence. 
2.2.6  PROBLEMS OF POPULATION COUNTS 
As stated earlier, population censuses are conducted to obtain the total population of an 
area but there are a whole lot of problems associated with achieving this. These include 
the following: 
1)	Persons may appear to have more than one usual residence. Examples of such 
category of people include: 
i)	 persons who maintain two or more residences; 
ii)	students living at a school away from their parental home; 
iii)	members of the armed forces living at a military installation but still maintaining 
private living quarters away from their installation; 
iv)	persons who sleep away from their homes during the working week but return 
home at the end of each week. 
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com

DEMOGRAPHIC STATISTICS
38
SOURCES AND USES OF DEMOGRAPHIC DATA
38
2)	Persons who stay at the place where they are enumerated for some time but do 
not consider themselves to be residents of this place because they intend to return 
to their previous residence at some future time. 
3)	Persons who have left the country temporarily but are expected to return after 
some time. 
In these instances, clearly stated time limits of presence in, or absence from, a particular place 
must be set, in accordance with the prevailing circumstances in the country, to determine 
whether or not the person is usually resident at that place. 
2.2.7  EXPERIENCES OF POPULATION CENSUSES IN AFRICA 
African societies had known and practised population counting even before their encounter 
with their colonial masters. The motives behind the headcounts were for military and 
taxation purposes. 
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more

DEMOGRAPHIC STATISTICS
39
SOURCES AND USES OF DEMOGRAPHIC DATA
In modern times, census-taking has been a characteristic feature of demographic data collection 
in non-French-speaking Africa (English, Portuguese and Swahili), at least since the fifties. 
Censuses were held in 1948 in the then British Africa countries, namely, Ghana, Uganda 
and Kenya. However, the first serious attempt to conduct a modern population census in 
Africa is the first population census of Ghana in 1960, three years after the country had 
attained political independence. In that year, a few other countries also conducted population 
censuses of some sort. Other English-speaking countries followed later (see Table 2.1).
Country 
1960 
Round 
(1955–64) 
1970 
Round 
(1965–74)
1980 
Round 
(1975–84)
1990 
Round 
(1985–95)
2000 Round 
(1995–2004)
2010 
Round 
(2005–14) 
English 
Botswana 
1964
1971
1981
1991
2001
2011
Gambia 
1963
1973
1983
1993
2000
2013
Ghana 
1960
1970
1984
– 
2000
Kenya 
1962
1969
1979
1989
1999
2009
Lesotho 
1956 
1966
1976
1986
1996
2006
Liberia 
1962
1974
– 
– 
– 
2008 
Malawi 
– 
1966
1977
1987
1998
2008
Mauritius 
– 
1972
1983
1990
2000
2011
Namibia 
1960
1970
1981
1991
2001
2011
Nigeria 
1963
1973
– 
1991
– 
2006
Sierra Leone 
1963
1974
– 
1985
2004
South Africa 
1960
1970
1980/85
1991/95
2001
2011
South Sudan* 
1955-56
1973
1983
1993
–
2008
St Helena 
1987
1998
2008
Swaziland 
1956 
1966
1976
1986
1997
2007
Tanzania 
1957 
1967
1978
1988
2002
2012
Uganda 
1959 
1969
1980
1991
2002
2014
Zambia 
– 
1969
1980
1990
2000
2010
Zimbabwe 
1962
– 
1982
1992
2002
2012 
TABLE 2.1 Inventory of Censuses in English-speaking African Countries  
∗ The Census of erstwhile Sudan covered South Sudan. 
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com

DEMOGRAPHIC STATISTICS
40
SOURCES AND USES OF DEMOGRAPHIC DATA
The French-speaking countries had, to a large extent, relied on administrative records and 
sample surveys for demographic data. It was only in the 1970s (during the 1980 round of 
censuses) that most of the Francophone countries conducted their first modern censuses 
(Table 2.2). Table 2.3 also gives the years in which population censuses were conducted in 
the Arab- and Portuguese-speaking countries. 
One main deficiency in the conduct of population censuses in Africa is that many of them 
have failed to maintain the 10-year periodicity. Many African countries postpone or do not 
conduct their census in some rounds of censuses because of: 
1)	Funding shortages or complete lack of it; 
2)	Lack of technical expertise; 
3)	Lack of political will or commitment to the development of statistics; 
4)	Desire to guard the status quo, that is, fear of the outcome of the population count 
(with respect to spatial distributions and the balance of power). 
Country 
1970 
Round 
(1965–74)
1980 
Round 
(1975–84)
1990 
Round 
(1985–95) 
2000 Round 
(1995–2004)
2010 
Round 
(2005–14)
Benin 
– 
1979
1992
2002
2013
Burkina Faso 
– 
1975
1985
1996
2006
Burundi 
– 
1979
1990
– 
2008 
Cameroun 
– 
1976
1987
– 
2005 
Central African Rep.
– 
1975
1988
2003
–
Chad 
– 
– 
1993
– 
2009 
Comoros 
– 
1980
1991
2003
–
Congo 
1974
1984
– 
1996
2007
Cote D’Ivoire 
– 
1975
1988
1998
2014
DR Congo 
– 
—-
– 
—-
–
Gabon 
– 
1980
1993
2003
2013
Guinea 
– 
1983
– 
1996
2014
Madagascar 
– 
1975
1993
–
– 
Mali 
– 
1976
1987
1998
2009
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com

DEMOGRAPHIC STATISTICS
41
SOURCES AND USES OF DEMOGRAPHIC DATA
Country 
1970 
Round 
(1965–74)
1980 
Round 
(1975–84)
1990 
Round 
(1985–95) 
2000 Round 
(1995–2004)
2010 
Round 
(2005–14)
Mauritania 
– 
1976–77
1988
2000
2013 
Niger 
– 
1977
1988
2001
2012
Rwanda 
– 
1978
1991
2002
2012
Senegal 
– 
1976
1988
2002
2013
Seychelles 
1987 
1997
2010 
Togo 
– 
1981
– 
–
2010 
TABLE 2.2 Inventory of Censuses in French-speaking African Countries
Country 
1960 
Round 
(1955–64)
1970 
Round 
(1965–74)
1980 
Round 
(1975–84)
1990 
Round 
(1985–95)
2000 Round 
(1995–2004)
2010 
Round 
(2005–14)
Arab 
Algeria 
1987
1998
2008
Comoros* 
1991
–
2003
Djibouti** 
2009
Egypt 
1986
1996
2006
Libya 
1995 
2006
Morocco 
1994
2004
2014
Somalia 
1987
–
–
Sudan*** 
1955-56
1973
1983
1993
–
2008
Portuguese 
Angola 
1960
1970
– 
– 
2014 
Cape Verde 
1960
1970
1980
1990
2000
2010
Guinea Bissau
1960
1970
1979
1991
2001
2009
Mozambique 
1960
1970
1980
– 
1997
2007
Sao Tomé 
and Principé
1991 
2001
2012
TABLE 2.3 Inventory of Censuses in Arab- and Portuguese-speaking African Countries 
∗ Comoros has three official languages including Comorian and French. 
∗ ∗ French is also official languages. 
∗ ∗ ∗ The Census of erstwhile Sudan covered South Sudan. 
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com

DEMOGRAPHIC STATISTICS
42
SOURCES AND USES OF DEMOGRAPHIC DATA
2.2.8  HISTORY OF POPULATION CENSUS IN GHANA 
The first population census in Ghana was undertaken in 1891 by the British Administration. 
Since then, censuses had been conducted at ten yearly intervals except in 1941 when the 
Second World War (1939–1945) interrupted the series. The census was conducted in 1948, 
the last to be conducted by the British Administration. It is worth noting that all these 
censuses were conducted in the same years censuses were conducted in the United Kingdom.
Post-independence Ghana chose to conduct its population censuses in the beginning of each 
calendar decade, that is, the years ending in “zero”. However, like other African countries, 
Ghana failed to maintain regularity. Beginning 1960, Ghana has had five instead of six 
population censuses by the year 2010. The census in 1960 was the first serious attempt to 
conduct a modern population census in Africa. Ten years later in 1970, there was another 
census. However, the next census was in 1984 after fourteen years time had elapsed. No 
population census was carried out in the 1990 decade because of political instability.
The principle of conducting a census in the beginning of each decade was restored in 2000 
when a census was taken in that year after sixteen years time lag. This was also the first 
time a housing census was conducted along side a population census in Ghana. That is, 
the 2000 Population and Housing Census (PHC) was the enumeration of all persons and 
all structures (permanent and temporary), including the occupied and unoccupied dwelling 
units and the occupants thereof in the country. The issues covered on housing included the 
type of dwelling, the number of occupied and unoccupied dwelling units, the main materials 
used in constructing houses, methods of waste disposal, utilities and household facilities.
The information obtained from the census on the materials used for constructing various 
housing units and the availability of facilities such as water and the practices of sanitation, 
serve as important indicators of the occupants’ quality of life, which can aid the government 
in designing housing improvement programmes. 
The information from housing censuses also serves as a basis for planners and policy makers to 
1)	formulate realistic and relevant housing policies and design appropriate programmes 
to meet Ghana’s housing needs; 
2)	plan housing and human settlement programmes and policies; 
3)	determine the adequacy of housing stock and assess the need for additional housing; 
4)	obtain information on living conditions of those residing in temporary or substandard 
housing at the national, regional and district levels; 
5)	evaluate and monitor housing conditions and needs of the population within the 
context of the Millennium Development Goal Seven (MDG 7). 
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com

DEMOGRAPHIC STATISTICS
43
SOURCES AND USES OF DEMOGRAPHIC DATA
43
The publications which came out of the 2000 Population and Housing Census of Ghana were: 
1)	Preliminary Report; 
2)	Summary Report of Final Results; 
3)	Special Report on 20 Largest Localities; 
4)	Special Report on Urban Localities; 
5)	Administrative Report; 
6)	Summary Report on Stock of Houses and Housing Conditions; 
7)	Gazetteer (list of all localities with available facilities) (3 volumes); 
8)	Demographic and Economic Characteristics (11 volumes – one for each of the 10 
regions and one for the total country); 
9)	Special Reports on Localities (10 volumes – one for each region); 
10)	Analysis of District Data and Implications for planning (10 volumes – one for 
each region); 
11)	Population Data Analysis Vol. 1 and 2. 
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
“The perfect start 
of a successful, 
international career.”
CLICK HERE 
to discover why both socially 
and academically the University 
of Groningen is one of the best 
places for a student to be 
www.rug.nl/feb/education
Excellent Economics and Business programmes at:

DEMOGRAPHIC STATISTICS
44
SOURCES AND USES OF DEMOGRAPHIC DATA
The latest PHC in Ghana was conducted in 2010 and this restored the decennial process of 
census taking, following the 2000 census. Just as the 2000 PHC, the 2010 PHC provided an 
official count of all living quarters (occupied and vacant) within the nation. In addition to 
repeating all the modules and concepts of the 2000 PHC, the 2010 PHC included five new 
modules, namely, Maternal mortality, Disability, Emigration, Information Communication 
Technology (ICT) and Agriculture.
The publications which came out of the 2010 Population and Housing Census of Ghana are: 
1)	Summary of Final Results; 
2)	National Analytical Report; 
3)	Regional Analytical Reports (for all 10 Regions); 
4)	Demographic, Social, Economic and Housing Report (mainly tables); 
5)	Census Atlas; 
6)	Women and Men in Ghana; 
7)	Children, Adolescents and Youth in Ghana; 
8)	The Elderly in Ghana; 
9)	Non-Monetary Poverty in Ghana; 
10)	Millennium Development Goals in Ghana; 
11)	Population Projections; 
12)	Post Enumeration Survey (PES) Report; 
13)	Housing; 
14)	Urbanisation; 
15)	Mortality; 
16)	Fertility;. 
17)	Migration; 
18)	Disability; 
19)	Economic Activities; 
20)	Education and Literacy. 
2.2.9  ADVANTAGES AND DISADVANTAGES OF CENSUSES 
Advantages of Censuses 
1)	Censuses are the best source of information for the total number of people present in 
an area at a particular time. Data from censuses are very comprehensive in coverage. 
2)	Census data combined with the Living Standards Measurement Survey (LSMS) are 
used to produce what has come to be termed poverty map of a country. 
3)	Censuses provide 
a)	data on size, structure, composition and growth of population which constitutes 
an extremely rich data base for planning and policy-making; 
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com

DEMOGRAPHIC STATISTICS
45
SOURCES AND USES OF DEMOGRAPHIC DATA
b)	data for population projections and calculation of vital rates; 
c)	adequate socio-economic data at the local level which can be used for grass-root 
planning and decision-making. 
d)	a sample frame for subsequent field inquiries. 
Disadvantages of Censuses 
1)	Censuses are gigantic and expensive operations and so most African countries face 
technical, financial and human resource problems. As a result, 
a)	data from censuses may not be timely (the complete report of the 1984 Census 
of Ghana, for example, came out only in 1991); 
b)	censuses have been carried out infrequently in most developing countries (for 
example, Ghana was unable to keep to the pattern of decennial census: 1960, 
1970, 1984, 2000). 
2)	A census provides data only as at the time of the census and fails to give any 
information about the population in the intercensal period. 
3)	There is no perfect or “correct” method for obtaining the total population. The two 
standard schemes for enumerating a population (de facto and de jure) may 
a)	yield a different size of population for the same subdivision of a country (for 
example, “people temporarily away from home” would be counted in one place 
by the de facto method and in another place by the de jure); 
b)	give slightly different total population figures for a country. The selection of 
either one of these standards (or, more commonly, some mixture of the two) 
has an effect which is present in every figure of the census. 
2.3	
VITAL REGISTRATION SYSTEM 
2.3.1  USES OF VITAL REGISTRATION 
Vital registration is the most important source of obtaining vital statistical data on birth 
and death. 
1)	When a country has a good system of registering births and deaths, it can estimate 
its population size at any given time, assuming that there is no effect of migration. 
2)	Vital statistics are also used as legal evidence. 
3)	In addition, the aggregates of vital events serve as basis for 
a)	planning public health administration, 
b)	implementing social welfare measures, and 
c)	for distributing public facilities. 
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com

DEMOGRAPHIC STATISTICS
46
SOURCES AND USES OF DEMOGRAPHIC DATA
The birth registration is the first legal acknowledgement of a child’s existence. 
1)	It is fundamental to the realisation of a number of rights, including the right to a 
name and the right to nationality; 
2)	It is used to ascertain the correct age of the individual to enroll in school, to engage 
in employment, to enter into marriage, to enjoy special protection under the law, etc. 
3)	Records on births are used in the generation of the numerator required in the 
calculation of some demographic rates. 
Equally important is the registration of deaths. 
1)	Death registration is important in demographic analysis. Records on deaths are 
used in the: 
i)	 Generation of the numerators required in the calculation of some demographic 
indicators, such as, mortality rates (crude death rate, infant mortality rate, age-
specific death rates); 
ii)	Construction of life tables. 
iii)	Estimation of life expectancy. 
2)	Governments and other stakeholders use the incidence and causes of death to: 
i)	 initiate measures and monitor interventions; 
ii)	prioritise health needs of the population. 
2.3.2  NATURE OF VITAL REGISTRATION SYSTEMS 
Vital registration system (synonymn is civil registration system) consists of continuous 
and permanent recording of vital events pertaining to births, adoptions, deaths, marriages, 
divorces, legal separations, and annulments, etc. The recording of vital events is done shortly 
after they occur and within a specific period of time (for example, one year) in order to 
facilitate the calculation of vital rates. 
Registration of births provides information on place of birth, sex, age and religion of the 
parents, legitimacy, number of previous births and their sexes, father’s occupation and birth 
place of parents. Similarly, death registration gives information on place of death, sex, 
age, marital status, number of births, birth place, occupation and cause of death. Similar 
information is obtained with respect to marriages, divorces, etc. This detail information 
may differ from country to country.
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com

DEMOGRAPHIC STATISTICS
47
SOURCES AND USES OF DEMOGRAPHIC DATA
By legal requirement, the data are usually recorded at the time of the occurrence of the 
event. In fact many countries require compulsory registration of births and deaths under 
the law, as for example, the 1965 Birth and Death Registration Act of Ghana. However, 
only a few African countries, mainly small island countries, like Mauritius, Sao Tome, 
Cape Verde, and Seychelles, have attained nation-wide registration coverage. A few other 
North African countries such as Algeria, Egypt, Tunisia and Libya have fairly satisfactory 
registration systems. In the rest of Africa vital registration is for selected areas, mainly towns 
or selected populations. 
In actual fact, in most developing countries, especially in sub-Saharan Africa, vital registration 
is at a rudimentary stage of development and the legislation of compulsory registration of 
vital events is not adhered to. This situation can be traced to: 
1)	the passive nature of registration systems; 
2)	prohibitive administrative costs of a vital registration system and insufficient funding 
by governments to cover such activities; 
3)	high illiteracy rate; 
4)	low quality of registration staff; 
5)	a large proportion of births and deaths which do not take place in hospitals or 
which are not attended by a doctor; 
6)	a sizeable rural population scattered throughout the country; 
7)	the general perception by individuals that they derive little or no benefit from the 
registration of births and deaths. 
Thus, statistics collected through the vital registration system remain deficient in content 
and coverage and for which reason its data are hardly quoted. 
2.3.3  METHODS OF COLLECTING VITAL REGISTRATION DATA 
There are two main methods of collecting vital registration data: the active and passive 
approaches. 
Active System of Registration 
For the active system of registration, the staff member visits households to collect information 
concerning births and deaths. In Africa, where illiteracy is very high, vital registration systems 
depend on active staff effort. Sometimes institutions, like hospitals, churches, or clinics 
record events and submit to a central agency. This is a semi-active approach. 
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com

DEMOGRAPHIC STATISTICS
48
SOURCES AND USES OF DEMOGRAPHIC DATA
48
Passive System of Registration 
In the passive system of registration, a member of the household or a person closely associated 
with the household, registers the event himself/herself at a registration centre. This approach 
can work well among a literate population which understands and appreciates the importance 
of registration of vital events. 
2.3.4  VITAL REGISTRATION SYSTEM IN GHANA 
Vital registration in Ghana (then called the Gold Coast) started with the passing of the 
Cemeteries Ordinance in 1888, which was limited to the registration of deaths, mostly of 
expatriate workers of the colonial government. It was amended in 1891, and in 1912, the 
Births, Deaths and Burials Ordinance was passed which was also amended in 1926. In 
1965, the Registration of Births and Deaths Act, Act 301, was passed to establish the Births 
and Deaths Registry within the Ministry of Local Government with the core business to 
“provide accurate and reliable information on all births and deaths occurring within Ghana 
for socio-economic development of the country through their registration and certification”.
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
American online      
LIGS University 
▶▶enroll by September 30th, 2014 and 
▶▶save up to 16% on the tuition!
▶▶pay in 10 installments / 2 years
▶▶Interactive Online education
▶▶visit www.ligsuniversity.com to 
      find out more!
is currently enrolling in the
Interactive Online BBA, MBA, MSc, 
DBA and PhD  programs:
Note: LIGS University is not accredited by any 
nationally recognized accrediting agency listed 
by the US Secretary of Education. 
More info here. 

DEMOGRAPHIC STATISTICS
49
SOURCES AND USES OF DEMOGRAPHIC DATA
Birth Registration Form 
In Ghana, the Birth Registration Form (“Form A”) asks information on particulars of child, 
mother and father. Information about the child includes full name, sex, date of birth, type 
of birth, place of delivery and detailed address of place of delivery, and name of district 
and region.
Information about mother and father includes full name, nationality, hometown, ethnicity 
and occupation. In addition, information is elicited on mother’s age, mother tongue and 
place and address of usual residence.
The Death Registration Form 
The Death Registration Form (“Form B”) elicits information about the deceased on full 
name, sex, date of death, age, nationality, full name of mother, place of death, detailed 
address of place of death, and usual place of residence of deceased. 
2.3.5  ADVANTAGES AND DISADVANTAGES OF VITAL REGISTRATION SYSTEM 
Advantages of Vital Registration System 
1)	It is a smaller task than a national census, since the clerical work is spread throughout 
the year and is more easily reduced to routine. 
2)	Vital registration data provide the flow data which are used to update the demographic 
profile of a country as it moves through time. 
Disadvantages of Vital Registration System 
1)	Vital statistics registration requires “permanent” structures and personnel, which 
increase cost. 
2)	A large part of information is obtained from people who were not immediately 
concerned with the event. For instance, a death is reported by someone other than 
the deceased, and there may be little incentive to give an accurate report. 
3)	Recording may be done by other officers (for example, physicians, nurses, etc.) only 
as subsidiary to their main schedules. 
4)	It is poor in coverage in most developing countries because 
i)	 registration of births and deaths is non-existent in most areas because there are 
no registration offices or reporting centres; 
ii)	even in areas with offices and centres some events are not reported because there 
is no rigid implementation of the legislation which makes registration of vital 
events and reporting of epidemics compulsory; 
iii)	people have a general tendency to withhold information regarding their diseases 
particularly in respect of infectious or contagious diseases; 
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com

DEMOGRAPHIC STATISTICS
50
SOURCES AND USES OF DEMOGRAPHIC DATA
iv)	people do not bother to report to registration offices (where they exist) vital 
events, such as, the ages of mothers at the time of marriage, at the birth of first 
child and of subsequent children. As a result of poor coverage vital statistics in 
developing countries suffer from errors of underestimation. 
5)	In vital registration system, the same person may be recorded several times during 
the year, or not at all, depending on the events which he has experienced. For 
example, one person may marry more than once a year while another may not 
experience any marriage at all within the same year. 
6)	Vital statistics registration may either be overloaded with many unnecessary facts or 
some vital information may be lost because it is collected also for other purposes 
(for example, legal). 
2.3.6  VITAL REGISTRATION SYSTEM AND CENSUS COMPARED 
Similarity Between Vital Registration System and Census 
Vital registration and the census as methods of getting demographic data are not so 
distinct because: 
1)	Both are types of record-taking; 
2)	Both are concerned with the individual and treat the one as the primary unit; 
3)	Both have government sponsorship and also the universality and territoriality features; 
4)	The results of both census and vital registration are published in aggregates and no 
individual particulars are ever published; 
5)	Vital statistics can be obtained from a census and the composition of a population 
can be determined from a registration system; 
6)	It is possible to obtain both kinds of information by means of special survey rather 
than total inventories on a national scale (see Subsection 2.4.1). 
Distinctions between Census and Vital Registration System 
1)	Method of Obtaining Data
Census implies a direct canvass but vital registration does not. The vital events are reported 
to the registration institution by an informant. Unless this is done, many vital events may 
go unregistered. 
2)	Difference in Results
As indicated earlier, there are two schemes for enumerating population at census: de facto 
population and de jure population; these two methods may give different results while 
vital registration may produce only one result. 
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com

DEMOGRAPHIC STATISTICS
51
SOURCES AND USES OF DEMOGRAPHIC DATA
3)	Unit of Analysis
Census data are records of persons but vital registration statistics are records of events. The 
census is concerned with what the individual is but the vital registration is interested in 
what happens to the individual. The vital event associated with the individual is, therefore, 
the unit of recording. 
4)	Simultaneity
Simultaneity is not an applicable feature of vital registration system. Vital events are 
spread over time and are recorded as and when they occur5. Thus, vital registration goes 
on continuously, but a census has a definite date, usually at regular intervals of five or ten 
years. Continuity is rather an essential feature of the vital registration system. 
5)	Confidentiality
Vital events cannot be kept completely confidential. In many instances, they serve as legal 
evidence or proof of the occurrence of the events.
2.4	
DEMOGRAPHIC SAMPLE SURVEY
2.4.1  USES OF DEMOGRAPHIC SAMPLE SURVEY 
Given the fact that in developing countries people do not willingly register vital events, 
the collection of vital event data requires active procedures such as household surveys in 
which trained interviewers visit dwelling units and follow a specific protocol to obtain 
demographic data. 
The demographic sample survey is used to: 
1)	Collect vital statistics; 
2)	Collect supplementary demographic and other data where it is not feasible to collect 
the same from the population census; 
3)	Test the accuracy of the traditional sources of demographic data (e.g. census 
pretesting of questionnaire and census post-enumeration of validity check in a 
sample of census block); 
4)	Conduct a sample census (e.g. collecting data for only 10 percent of the population, 
collecting age and sex data for the whole population but socio-economic data for 
only a sample of the population, processing only a part of the information collected 
to save time and money and provide a wider range of tabulation.) 
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com

DEMOGRAPHIC STATISTICS
52
SOURCES AND USES OF DEMOGRAPHIC DATA
The quality of studies from demographic sample surveys depends heavily on: 
1)	the size of the sample; 
2)	the design of the sample; 
3)	the way the survey is carried out. 
Unlike population censuses, the history of sample surveys as sources of demographic statistics 
in Africa is relatively recent; first employed in the Francophone countries and later in the 
Anglophone countries.
Three types of demographic sample surveys have been used in Africa: single round surveys, 
multi-round surveys, and dual record systems. 
2.4.2  SINGLE-ROUND SURVEY 
The term single round surveys (SRS) is used to refer to a one-time data collection effort. 
In this case, the selected respondents are interviewed once only. Single-round surveys are 
better known as single round retrospective surveys to emphasize that they ask questions 
about past events. The two approaches employed in a SRS for collecting birth and death 
data is the reference period procedure and the pregnancy/birth history procedure. 
The Reference Period Approach 
The reference period approach asks a knowledgeable adult member of a household to report 
information concerning events that occurred in the household within a fixed (specified) 
reference period, usually the 12 months preceding the survey. An example of a survey, referred 
to as retrospective survey that employs the reference period approach is the International 
Program of Laboratories for Population Statistics (POPLAB).
The main limitation of this procedure is the under-reporting of events, especially, infant 
and childhood death reporting due to errors of dating (reference period error and age 
misreporting) and, errors of omission (respondent’s forgetfulness or concealment of events). 
The Pregnancy/Birth History Approach 
The pregnancy/birth history approach attempts to record the time sequence and spacing of 
all pregnancies/births and their survivorship along with the date of death (or age at death) 
for births which did not survive. This information is usually collected from the women 
whose fertility experience is being documented.
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com

DEMOGRAPHIC STATISTICS
53
SOURCES AND USES OF DEMOGRAPHIC DATA
53
The World Fertility Survey (WFS), a major fertility and mortality measurement effort 
involving demographic surveys in about 40 developing countries follow the SRS format and 
rely on the pregnancy/birth history approach for data collection. Of late the Demographic 
and Health Survey (DHS) has been conducted in many countries. It uses both the reference 
period approach for some questions and the pregnancy/birth history approach for some 
other questions. This survey is conducted every five years. Ghana has already conducted six 
DHS in 1988, 1993, 1998, 2003, 2008 and 2013. The next Ghana DHS will be conducted 
in 2018.
The pregnancy/birth history approach is generally considered to collect more complete 
period-specific data than does the reference period approach because: 
1)	it attempts to obtain data pertaining to all reproductive events directly from the 
women concerned; 
2)	it employs probing questions to assist respondents in recalling events. 
Pregnancy history data, however, do not necessarily yield accurate period-specific estimates 
of fertility levels or time trends in fertility because it can suffer from the omission of events, 
and the misreporting of dates of occurrences.
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more

DEMOGRAPHIC STATISTICS
54
SOURCES AND USES OF DEMOGRAPHIC DATA
For the recent developments in the field of indirect estimation, SRS approach has been 
and will continue to be the primary source of fertility and mortality data in developing 
countries in the near future. 
Advantages of Single Round Survey 
1)	It has a short time span and is less expensive. 
2)	It is flexible and easy to administer. 
Disadvantages of Single-round Survey 
1)	Birth and deaths are seriously under-reported. 
2)	Non-sampling errors are high. 
2.4.3  MULTI-ROUND SURVEY 
The multi-round survey (MRS), also called follow-up survey is an attempt to overcome some 
of the sources of errors inherent in the single-round approach as regards the estimation of 
births, deaths and migration. Basically, the idea is to carry out a first round survey during 
which the enumerator prepares a list of persons to be followed by the survey (selected as 
a probability sample) and record the composition of the household and characteristics of 
household members. The enumerator visits the same sample after an interval to record the 
changes that have occurred in the household composition. In addition, the enumerator 
asks specific questions about events which have occurred since the previous round. Further 
visits may follow at appropriate intervals, so that the sample of households then becomes 
a sort of vital-rate “panel”.
MRS has been used in some African countries, for example, in Nigeria (Rural Demographic 
Sample Survey, 1965–66) and in Ghana (Ghana Living Standards Survey, 1987/88, 1988/89, 
1992/93, 1998/99, 2005/2006 and 2012/2013).
Advantages of Multi-round Survey 
1)	Since MRS approach collects information for a bundle, recall period errors of 
dating is reduced. 
2)	It allows information to be obtained on vital events, namely, deaths and births and 
also migration. 
3)	The follow-up procedures after the first round represent a very light burden for 
the enumerator and this makes it an ideal vehicle for other quite different types 
of enquiry. 
4)	Error of omission is reduced since the second and later rounds habitually reveal 
the existence of persons omitted at the first round. 
5)	It gives the age of a person as stated by him before he dies. 
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com

DEMOGRAPHIC STATISTICS
55
SOURCES AND USES OF DEMOGRAPHIC DATA
Disadvantages of Multi-round Survey 
1)	They are more costly than the single-round surveys. They require such scarce 
resources in Africa as: 
i)	 substantial inputs of money, 
ii)	skilled manpower, and 
iii)	high level of administrative organisation. 
2)	It is complex to design and administer (dwellings have to be clearly identified so 
that they can be located again, and instructions covering them are necessarily more 
complex, requiring longer training of enumerators). 
3)	The periodic visits to the same household may result in respondent or interviewer fatigue. 
4)	The quality of field work may vary from round to round, with the danger of 
interviewers reporting “no change” without serious interviewing. 
5)	There is no built-in mechanism for the measurement of coverage error. 
6)	In a highly mobile group such as populations of many urbans area in sub-Sahara 
Africa, there are difficulties in detecting events associated with persons who leave 
the sample area between rounds. 
2.4.4  DUAL RECORD SYSTEM
The dual record system (DRS) represents a further refinement in the effort to collect accurate 
and complete reference period data. It obtains data on events in well-defined areas by two 
independent data collection systems. These are registration system (civil registration or wholly 
new ones) and periodic household survey (or data gathered by any independent agency). 
It is often called “PGE” following its first large scale application in the Population Growth 
Estimation project in Pakistan. In Africa, the method has been experimented in countries 
including Liberia 1969–73, Kenya 1972–77 and Morocco 1970–75. The DRS is based 
on the principle that if two independent data collection operations are set up to cover the 
same areas, most of the events they collect will be the same; in relatively few cases will one 
operation not detect an event missed by the other.
The registration exercise involves the nomination of a local inhabitant as a registrar in each 
sample area. He is normally assisted by sub-registrars, each of whom is responsible for 
reporting all vital events in a small part of the area. Reports, including nil returns, must 
be made monthly by all registrars and sub-registrars. A multi-round survey is conducted 
in the same area at fixed intervals, generally every 3 or 6 months, using enumerators who 
operate independently of the registrars.
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com

DEMOGRAPHIC STATISTICS
56
SOURCES AND USES OF DEMOGRAPHIC DATA
Reported events must be identified in sufficient detail to allow “matching” between systems; 
the events reported by one system are matched against those reported by the other. Matching 
will help to avoid double counting. In case of discrepancy during the matching operation, 
a further visit to the household concerned may be made. 
Chandrasekaran-Deming Method
Several kinds of checks may be used to verify the accuracy of published reports of the 
DRS. These include the study of trends, use of balancing equations and census data (see 
Section 3.1), comparing with other records and sample surveys.
Chandrasekaran and Deming have suggested a method for evaluating the coverage of vital 
registration and for estimating the undercount. In this method, all events are classified into 
four categories: 
1)	events reported in both systems, denoted by a; 
2)	events reported in system 1 (civil registration), denoted by b; 
3)	events reported in system 2 (sample survey), denoted by c; 
4)	events missed by both systems, denoted by d. 
These categories may be represented in a 2 × 2 table shown in Table 2.4. Thus, (a+b) is 
the total number of events registered and (a+b) is the total number of events collected at 
the survey or by any independent agency. It is expected that a few events could have been 
missed by both the civil registration and the sample survey, and d is that unknown number. 
Once we estimate d, the amount of undercount could be estimated. The estimate of d is: 
d = bc
a
This formula is valid only when the chance of detecting an error is independent of not 
detecting that event for both systems.
Survey 
Civil Registration 
Total 
Yes 
No 
Yes 
a
c
a + c
No 
b
d
b + d
Total 
a + c
b + d
N = a + b + c + d
TABLE 2.4 Classification of Events in Dual Record System
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com

DEMOGRAPHIC STATISTICS
57
SOURCES AND USES OF DEMOGRAPHIC DATA
Advantages of Dual Record System 
1)	The DRS has a built-in mechanism for detecting and correcting coverage errors. 
2)	When the system continues to operate over a considerable period of time the 
accumulated experience from multiple repetitions of the same operations improves 
the system and results. 
Disadvantages of Dual Record System 
1)	The DRS approach can result in an incorrect (bias) estimate of the total number 
of events if the two systems are not independent, if events are geographically or 
temporarily out-of-scope, and if there are matching errors. 
2)	Like the MRS, DRS is complex to design and administer, and suffers from the 
problems of cost, skilled labour, respondent and interviewer fatigue, and other 
non-technical problems. 
3)	Matching is a problem in DRS. It is difficult to know what constitutes a match 
and results are sensitive to the match rate. 
4)	It takes much longer to publish results in DRS than it is with the multi-round survey. 
2.4.5  ADVANTAGES AND DISADVANTAGES OF SAMPLE SURVEY 
Advantages of Demographic Sample Survey 
1)	The principles of sampling open up new and more flexible possibilities in the 
gathering of statistical information. 
2)	By reducing the number of individuals to be surveyed, sampling survey reduces costs, 
provides greater emphasis on the accuracy of the information about each individual 
and enables much information to be collected for more comprehensive analysis. 
3)	Data from the special surveys are timely as the reports are published soon after 
the survey. 
4)	Some surveys of late, such as the World Fertility Survey (WFS) and the Demographic 
and Health Survey (DHS) have shown that though surveys are one time events it 
is possible to determine trends over time. 
5)	Surveys are used to discover errors in the census, to provide information between 
censuses at more frequent intervals, and, to provide information on topics not 
included in the census. 
Disadvantages of Demographic Sample Survey 
1)	The data from a sample survey are liable to some fluctuations owing to the incomplete 
coverage of the population. This adds another problem in reaching conclusions 
from sample data for, the “observed” figures may deviate from the “true” figures. 
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com

DEMOGRAPHIC STATISTICS
58
SOURCES AND USES OF DEMOGRAPHIC DATA
58
2)	When improperly drawn, samples are “biased” and will yield erroneous results. 
3)	Sample surveys are of an ad hoc nature and, therefore, provide data only for relatively 
short periods before censuses. 
4)	The data of a sample survey may not be detailed enough to cover the groups of 
interest in other later studies. For example, the nutritional data in Ghana Demographic 
and Health Survey (GDHS) covers only children aged 0–36 months. If interest in 
another study is children aged 0–5 years, the data are not appropriate. 
While surveys may usually be accurate on a national basis, they should be used with care 
on a sub-national basis. 
2.4.6  COMPARING SURVEY WITH CENSUS AND VITAL REGISTRATION 
Similarity Between Survey and Vital Registration System
A demographic survey may be nearly the same as census and vital registration system. 
1)	A sample survey may resemble a census, by asking respondents to report their 
characteristics. 
2)	These two methods of collecting demographic data are a record of persons while 
the vital registration is a record of events. 
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
 
  
 
                . 

DEMOGRAPHIC STATISTICS
59
SOURCES AND USES OF DEMOGRAPHIC DATA
3)	Sometimes a survey and a census ask respondents to record vital events, as for 
example, asking people to report the vital events of the past month or year in their 
own family or neighbourhood. 
4)	A survey may also set up a system for registering the events as they occur. 
Distinction Between Survey and Vital Registration System
A survey differs from a census and a vital registration system. A survey has a more specific 
purpose. Most surveys are designed to provide some definite statistical information, as 
opposed to the wider scope and larger scale of a census or vital registration system.
2.5	
POPULATION REGISTER
A population register is defined as a mechanism which provides for the continuous recording 
of information about the population in such a way that data on particular events that occur 
to each individual as well as selected characteristics describing him/her are maintained on a 
current basis. The information that is recorded include births, deaths, marriages, movements 
of people and other related events that have relevance to population size and change. 
2.5.1  PURPOSES OF POPULATION REGISTER 
Population registers are useful in providing a permanent up-to-date information for 
1)	administrative purposes, such as legal identification of persons, election rolls, and 
call for military services; 
2)	providing a comprehensive account of all changes in a population; 
3)	population estimates; 
4)	internal and international migration; 
5)	sampling for special studies; 
6)	genetic studies. 
2.5.2  WHEN IS POPULATION REGISTER FEASIBLE? 
Not all populations can maintain population registers so easily. Population registers are 
feasible for 
1)	sufficiently educated population; 
2)	motivated population; 
3)	small population. 
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com

DEMOGRAPHIC STATISTICS
60
SOURCES AND USES OF DEMOGRAPHIC DATA
This system was first started in Sweden in the 17th Century and developed successfully by 
the Church. Only few countries, including Italy, Israel, the Netherlands, Belgium, Germany, 
Bulgaria and the Scandinavian countries, maintain this system of continuous registration of 
their population. These countries, however, still conduct periodic censuses.
2.5.3  APPROACHES OF POPULATION REGISTER 
There are two approaches to this method: 
1)	The first approach operates on community basis. Each community keeps a permanent 
record of the characteristics of its population and is informed by registration of 
changes as they occur. 
2)	The second approach operates on a national basis. By means of a continuous 
population register, information is obtained at any time comparable to that derived 
from a census. This approach is rarely applied in practice. 
2.5.4  LIMITATIONS OF POPULATION REGISTER IN DEVELOPING COUNTRIES 
Population register is not appropriate for developing countries. 
1)	They are expensive to maintain and may become defective. 
2)	They are usually used only in countries with a high literacy rate and low migration. 
3)	Migration data are less credible because only information on legal immigrants and 
emigrants are collected at the point of entry or exit. 
2.6	
ERRORS IN POPULATION DATA 
2.6.1  TYPES OF ERRORS AND BIASES IN POPULATION DATA 
Any mistakes in judgment or any carelessness during the planning and preparation for a census 
affect the tabulated results. The extent of the planning feasible for accuracy and completeness 
is governed by economic and social factors and with due regard to budget limitations.
Errors in census and vital statistics are of two types: those of coverage and those of content. 
In the case of vital statistics, there is evidence that some births, deaths, marriages, and 
divorces escape registration. In taking a census of population, some individuals and even some 
households may be missed. Over-counts in population are possible by the de jure method 
as indicated earlier. The term errors of content refers to instances where the characteristics 
of a person counted in a census enumeration, sample survey or in the registration of vital 
event are incorrectly reported or tabulated. 
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com

DEMOGRAPHIC STATISTICS
61
SOURCES AND USES OF DEMOGRAPHIC DATA
2.6.2  SOURCES OF ERRORS IN POPULATION DATA 
Aside from errors due to carelessness or mistakes in judgment in planning, errors of coverage 
or content or both in census statistics, sample statistics and vital statistics can arise at any step 
from that requiring initiation of the original record to the publication of final tabulations. 
The five principal sources of errors are the respondent, the recorder, coding process, the 
editing process, and the data entry process. 
Respondent
In reporting on herself, the informant: 
1)	may actually be ignorant of facts pertaining to herself, such as her true age; 
2)	may purposely misrepresent facts for reasons of her own, such as the tendency of 
some widowed or divorced persons to report themselves as a single, and of some 
foreign-born to claim native birth; 
3)	may have a tendency toward upgrading, as in the statement of occupation or education; 
4)	may not remember certain events as in the case when data are sought regarding 
illness or medical care within some prior period; 
5)	is especially likely to make an error when reporting for someone else. 
Recorder
The quality of a census enumeration or a sample survey, including the recording, depends in 
part upon the care taken in the selection and training of the enumerators. The enumerator 
may also classify a person incorrectly even though the correct information has been given 
by the respondent. There is the possibility that physicians may sometimes state the cause of 
death incorrectly or incompletely on the death certificate. The local registrars are another 
possible source of recording error in the vital records, since they may not be carefully 
selected or supervised.
Coding Process
A particular source of error lies in the classification of verbal items, such as occupation, 
industry, or cause of illness or death, that require coding. In the classification of such verbal 
items, there may even be differences of opinion among experts in some instances. Much 
depends upon the detail of the coding system, that is, the number and arrangement of the 
classifications and also upon the training given to the coders. 
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com

DEMOGRAPHIC STATISTICS
62
SOURCES AND USES OF DEMOGRAPHIC DATA
Editing of Data
Clerical checking is an important stage in population data collection exercise. The analysis 
clerks scrutinise the returned questionnaire as they arrive to eliminate manifest absurdities. 
Some of the things to check would include: 
1)	uniformity in the interpretation of the questions by the enumerators and respondents; 
2)	completeness, that is, whether there is an answer to every question and that skips 
are obeyed strictly; when questionnaires are incomplete there may be the need to 
follow up; 
3)	adherence of instructions, that is, whether every instruction is obeyed; 
4)	omission of questions; 
5)	wrong answers; 
6)	proper ticking of codes, if the questions are precoded. 
The editing clerks may fail to do proper editing. For example, if a respondent or an enumerator 
forgets to fill the code for sex, but fills the code for “occupation” as “housewife”, it can 
be deduced that the respondent is a female. Of course, things do not always turn out this 
easy. So if necessary, validation is obtained by re-contacting subjects whose answers appear 
inconsistent or unusual. 
2.6.3  DETECTION OF ERRORS IN POPULATION DATA 
Basically, there are two ways of detecting errors in population data: comparison of tabulated 
data or comparison of individual records. These comparison approaches are useful before 
the data are published. 
Comparisons of Tabulated Data
There are three approaches of detecting errors in tabulated population data. 
1)	Internal comparisons may reveal inconsistencies among related data in tabulated 
results from a census and a sample survey. For instance, the ratios of males to 
females for ages at some stage of life may appear out of line. 
2)	Comparisons can be made with a preceding census and with vital statistics. For 
example, from the balancing equation (Chapter 3), it may be observed that the 
census tabulation may indicate more or fewer persons than expected. 
3)	Comparisons can be made with independent collateral data. The census data may 
be compared with the results of a post-enumeration survey for the same area. This 
is discussed in Section 2.6.4. 
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com

DEMOGRAPHIC STATISTICS
63
SOURCES AND USES OF DEMOGRAPHIC DATA
63
Comparisons of Individual Records
Comparisons of census data can be made with such independent collateral records as individual 
birth and death certificates, immigration files, income tax returns, social security files on a 
small sample basis. In such cases, special care must be taken to maintain the confidential 
nature of the records involved. 
2.6.4  POST-ENUMERATION SURVEY
Post-enumeration Surveys (PES), often referred to as re-enumeration survey or quality checks, 
are usually taken after a census to provide considerable information on the nature and causes 
of errors of reporting census data. Carefully selected interviewers are given special training 
and are directed to seek information from the best informed persons in the household. The 
reasons behind PES are to measure 
1)	the extent to which households are missed from the census; 
2)	the extent of error in 
i)	 omitting individuals from the household, 
ii)	including individuals in the household, 
iii)	the characteristics of those enumerated. 
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
www.mastersopenday.nl
Visit us and find out why we are the best!
Master’s Open Day: 22 February 2014
Join the best at
the Maastricht University
School of Business and
Economics!
Top master’s programmes
• 33rd place Financial Times worldwide ranking: MSc 
International Business
• 1st place: MSc International Business
• 1st place: MSc Financial Economics
• 2nd place: MSc Management of Learning
• 2nd place: MSc Economics
• 2nd place: MSc Econometrics and Operations Research
• 2nd place: MSc Global Supply Chain Management and 
Change
Sources: Keuzegids Master ranking 2013; Elsevier ‘Beste Studies’ ranking 2012; 
Financial Times Global Masters in Management ranking 2012
Maastricht
University is
the best specialist
university in the
Netherlands
(Elsevier)

DEMOGRAPHIC STATISTICS
64
SOURCES AND USES OF DEMOGRAPHIC DATA
Among all the errors in demography, errors in age data have probably been examined 
more intensively than the others. The three factors that account for this intensive study are 
the following: 
1)	Many of these errors are readily apparent; 
2)	Measurement techniques can be more easily developed for age data; 
3)	Actuaries have had a special practical need to identify errors and to refine the 
reported data for the construction of life tables. 
Errors in age data will, therefore, be discussed in much detail in this text (see Chapter 5).
EXERCISES 
2.1 What is demography in its narrower and broader senses?
2.2 What is demographic statistics in its plural and singular senses? 
2.3 Distinguish between the following terms as used in demography: 
a)	Demographic event and vital event; 
b)	Demographic statistics and vital statistics; 
c)	Population static and population dynamics. 
2.4 Explain the term “demographic process”. 
2.5 What is demographic statistics in its plural and singular senses? 
2.6 Explain the following terms as used in demography. 
a)	Characteristic; 
b)	Household. 
2.7 Discuss in detail the two branches of demography. 
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com

DEMOGRAPHIC STATISTICS
65
BASIC ANALYTICAL TOOLS IN DEMOGRAPHY
3	
BASIC ANALYTICAL TOOLS 
IN DEMOGRAPHY
3.1	
INTRODUCTION 
Depending on the nature of data available, purpose and elegance desired in interpretation, 
all statistical techniques of pictorial and tabular representation of data (refer to Nsowah-
Nuamah, 2005) are employed by demographers in the study of population. These techniques 
include the bar chart, pie chart, histogram, frequency polygon, bivariate table and other 
more sophisticated techniques. 
Generally, the vital statistics are available in the form of frequencies of the vital events. 
However, to compare characteristics and to study changes in demographic phenomena, 
frequencies (absolute numbers) can convey only limited meaning. For example, in 1989 in 
Mauritius, 6,949 persons died, 20,875 children were born and 11,197 persons got married. 
For such information to be meaningful to a statistician or a demographer, we need to use 
relative numbers. Relative numbers are obtained by relating two absolute numbers. In 
demographic analysis, the two main relative numbers often used are rates and ratios.
There is, however, a misunderstanding and misuse of these terms. It is necessary, therefore, 
to start by clarifying them before introducing any of the well-known measures. This chapter 
is devoted to this clarification.
3.2	
RATIOS 
To better understand ratios, we shall first discuss th terms “fraction”, “decimal”, “proportion” 
and “percentage”6. 
3.2.1  FRACTION 
When a number A is divided by another number B we obtain a fraction. That is, 
fraction = A
B
where A and B are measurable quantities (such as weight, age, height, volume, space, income) 
or frequencies (counts). 
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com

DEMOGRAPHIC STATISTICS
66
BASIC ANALYTICAL TOOLS IN DEMOGRAPHY
Example 3.1
Of an income of 10,000 Naira, a father spends 1,000 Naira to pay his child’s school fees. 
What fraction of his income is spent on school fees. 
Solution 
Let
A
=
1, 000
B
=
10, 000
Therefore, the fraction of income spent on school fees is: 
fraction = A
B =
1000
10, 000 = 1
10
Example 3.2
The population of Ghana in the 2010 Population and Housing Census was 24,658,823 out 
of which 12,024,845 were males. Calculate the fraction of the male population. 
Solution
Let
A = 12, 024, 845 be the population of males;
B = 24, 658, 823 be the total population.
Then
Fraction of male = a
b = 12, 024, 845
24, 658, 823
Decimals
A fraction is usually expressed in a decimal form. For example, we may express the results 
in Examples 3.1 and 3.2 as 0.01 and 0.488, respectively. 
3.2.2  RATIO
A ratio is a relative measure that expresses the size of one quantity to the size of another 
quantity of the same unit.
When the quantities are frequencies of two non-overlapping groups possessing some common 
characteristic, a ratio is the relative measure of the sizes of the two groups. Suppose there 
are a elements in group A and b elements in group B, then the quantity 
Ratio = a
b
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com

DEMOGRAPHIC STATISTICS
67
BASIC ANALYTICAL TOOLS IN DEMOGRAPHY
is called the ratio of the number of elements in group A to the number of elements in 
group B. 
A ratio, thus, may be expressed in three forms: 
In words:
a to b
odds notation:
a : b
fractional notation:
a
b
where a and b refer to two quantities measured in the same unit or the frequencies of two 
items with a common characteristic.
Example 3.3
The male population of Ghana in the 2010 Population and Housing Census was 12,024,845 
and that of the female was 12,633,978. Calculate the ratio of males to females. 
Solution
Let
a = 12, 024, 845 be the population of males;
b = 12, 633, 978 be the population of females.
Then
Ratio of male to female = a
b = 12, 024, 845
12, 633, 978 = 0.952
That is, the ratio of men to women in Ghana in 2010 was 0.952 to 1 or the male population 
in Ghana in 2010 was 0.952 of the female population. In other words, for every 95 males 
in Ghana in 2010, there were 100 females.
Note 
1)	The expression “the ratio of a to b is 40 to 80” means that the characteristic “a” 
corresponds to the number 40 and “b” to the 80. That is, whichever characteristic 
comes first, its number must come first. This order must be respected. 
2)	In demography, the fractional notation is the most common form used to express 
ratios. Thus, 
	
Ratio = a
b
That is, ratios are usually first expressed in fractions as may be seen in Examples 3.2. 
Here, A = a and B = b.
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com

DEMOGRAPHIC STATISTICS
68
BASIC ANALYTICAL TOOLS IN DEMOGRAPHY
68
3)	The ratio is usually expressed in its simplest form as a reduced fraction. Thus, the 
ratio expressed in (1) is: 
	
Ratio = a
b = 40
80 = 1
2 = 0.5
Advantages of a Ratio 
1)	A ratio is very easy to calculate. 
2)	It is an index used to compare the relative strength of each group in populations. 
3.2.3  PROPORTION 
A proportion is a relative number that expresses the size of one sub-group to the total of 
all sub-groups: 
Proportion =
Xi
ni

i=i
Xi
= ni
N
where 
Xi
=
the size of the sub-group i
ni

i=1
Xi = N
=
the total of the sizes of all the ni sub-groups
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more

DEMOGRAPHIC STATISTICS
69
BASIC ANALYTICAL TOOLS IN DEMOGRAPHY
Example 3.4
For the data in Example 3.3, calculate the proportion of males in the entire population 
of Ghana. 
Solution 
Let
a
=
12, 024, 845
be the population of males;
b
=
12, 633, 978
be the population of females.
Therefore, the entire population, N, is 
N
=
a + b
=
12, 024, 845 + 12, 633, 978 = 24, 658, 823
The proportion of men in the entire population is: 
Proportion of men in the population
=
a
a + b
=
12, 024, 845
24, 658, 823 = 0.488
That is, the proportion of males in the entire population of Ghana is 0.488.
Note 
1)	A proportion is a special type of ratio where the denominator is the total number 
in groups A and B: 
	
Proportion =
a
a + b
2)	A proportion is usually first expressed in a fraction as may be seen in Examples 3.4. 
Here, A = a and B = a + b.
3)	A proportion is usually finally expressed in decimals. 
Characteristics of a Proportion
1)	A proportion is a relative frequency. This is because the numerator and the 
denominator represent frequencies of certain events. 
2)	The numbers a and b are never negative, and thus a proportion is a number 
between 0 and 1. 
3)	In a large population, a proportion may determine the probability of a certain event; 
in a sample (experiment), a proportion can be used as an estimate of probability 
of an event. 
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com

DEMOGRAPHIC STATISTICS
70
BASIC ANALYTICAL TOOLS IN DEMOGRAPHY
3.2.4  PERCENTAGE 
A percentage is a relative number that expresses the size of one sub-group to the total of 
all sub-groups, which is equated to 100. Thus: 
Percentage =
Xi
n

i=i
Xi
× 100 = ni
N × 100
where 
Xi
=
the size (in absolute numbers) of the sub-group i;
ni

i=1
Xi = N
=
the total of the sizes of all the ni sub-groups.
Example 3.5
For the data in Example 3.4, calculate the percentage of males in the entire population. 
Solution
From Example 3.3, 
a = ni = 12, 024, 845;
and
N = 24, 658, 823
The percentage of males in the entire population is:
Percentage of males in the population
=
ni
N × 100
=
12, 024, 845
24, 658, 823 × 100 = 48.8%
Note 
1)	The term “percentage” is from the Latin “per centum”, that is, per hundred units. 
2)	A percentage is a special type of proportion, one in which the proportion is 
multiplied by 100: 
	
Percentage = Proportion × 100
3)	The choice of using proportions or percentages depends on the preference of the 
user. However, for interpretation of measures, percentages are used in which case 
the total is equal to 100. For mathematical manipulations, proportions expressed 
in decimals are used. In this case the total is maintained at 1. 
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com

DEMOGRAPHIC STATISTICS
71
BASIC ANALYTICAL TOOLS IN DEMOGRAPHY
3.3	
RATES 
Generally, ratios and proportions are useful measures for describing phenomena of a static 
population at a point in time (or over a specific, short period of time) that occurred under 
certain conditions. Particularly, in demography, the conditions are commonly determined 
by demographic factors such as age, sex, race, occupation, education, or ethnicity, and are 
often averaged over a definite period of time (usually over a year).
The process of living organisms, such as human beings, are dynamic, proceeding from birth 
to death. It is, therefore, important that we describe the rapidity of change. For example, 
we need to measure how fast a population is dying off and replenishing itself by new 
births and immigration. The appropriate measures that are used for such phenomena are 
probabilities and rates. 
3.3.1  DEFINITION OF RATES IN BROADER SENSE 
Generally, the term “rate” can be defined as a measure of change in one quantity (Y ) per 
unit of change of another quantity (X) on which (Y ) depends. Both Y  and X may be 
expressed in different units as for example, “monthly income of Gh/c4, 000 (Y ) per ten years 
of working experience (X)”.
In vital statistics, a rate expresses the number of events f that occurs in a population N 
in a given period of time which is usually a year. Rates, in a broader sense, are of two 
distinct types. 
1)	Those that are truly rates in the mathematical sense of measuring how rapidly some 
attribute of a population changes with time. Thus, for example, the crude death rate 
measures how fast or slow the size of a population is decreasing due to deaths and 
the birth rate measures how fast or slow it is increasing due to new births. Other 
examples of the true rates include the fertility rate, age (or sex) specific death rate 
and cause-specific death rate. 
2)	Those that are more correctly termed risks, as they are the probabilities of occurrence 
of certain events. Thus, the case fatality rate measures the risk that a person, having 
contracted a particular disease, will die from it. 
In practice, both types of measures are not differentiated. They all imply the probability of 
the occurrence of some event: 
A
N × k
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com

DEMOGRAPHIC STATISTICS
72
BASIC ANALYTICAL TOOLS IN DEMOGRAPHY
where 
N	
=	
the number of persons “exposed to the risk of” the event during some 
“specified period of time”;
A	
=	
the frequency with which an event has occurred during some “specified 
period of time”;
k	
=	
the radix (a larger multiple of 10 as it may apply).
As indicated above, both the numerator A and the denominator N are expressed in different 
units and that rates are usually expressed in terms of numerator-units per denominator-units. 
For example, the crude death rate, obtained by dividing number of deaths by mid-year 
population, is expressed as deaths per mid-year population.
For a better understanding of the formula, certain keywords have to be explained. 
Specified Period of Time
The standard “specified period of time” is usually taken as one year so that we deal with 
annual rates. The one-year period may be for: 
1)	the calendar year at the beginning of the period to which it refers. This is known 
as the probabilities, to be discussed in the sequel; 
2)	the 12-month period from July 1 to June 30, or at the middle of the period (or 
the average). These are rates in a narrower sense and known as central rates, also 
referred to as observed rates, to be discussed in the sequel. 
Exposed to the Risk of
The term “exposed to the risk of” specified in the denominator (N) is frequently used in 
relation to the estimation of rates. Here “exposed” means currently exposed. For example, the 
“population exposed to the risk of death” is the population currently alive who are exposed 
to the risk of dying; a child who is not born or a person who is dead has no exposure at 
all (he has no risk of dying). Persons who have not moved to a particular country are not 
exposed to the risk of dying in that country.
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com

DEMOGRAPHIC STATISTICS
73
BASIC ANALYTICAL TOOLS IN DEMOGRAPHY
73
It is not possible to have a group exposed to the risk of only one kind of event for a long 
period of time, like a year. The group will continue to be changing its membership due 
to various demographic events and a suitable adjustment will have to be made to obtain 
an appropriate exposed group. For example, a person who dies in the middle of the year 
is a member of the exposed group only for half a year, and so is to be counted as half a 
person. In other words, that person contributed half a ‘person-year’. That means, all those 
persons who leave or enter the group will have contributed only fractions of person-years. 
It is only those who live through the entire year will have contributed one person-year each. 
The person-year lived by each individual after it has been individually ascertained should 
be added. This total would be a good approximation of the size of the exposed group. It 
is equivalent to the average of the size of the group observed continuously at each pont of 
time from the beginning to the end of the year.
The number of person-years lived by a group of persons will be approximated by: 
Po + (P1 −Po)a
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Get Help Now
Go to www.helpmyassignment.co.uk for more info
Need help with your
dissertation?
Get in-depth feedback & advice from experts in your 
topic area. Find out what you can do to improve
the quality of your dissertation!

DEMOGRAPHIC STATISTICS
74
BASIC ANALYTICAL TOOLS IN DEMOGRAPHY
where 
Po	
=	
the initial population size of the group;
P1	
=	
the population size of the group at the end of the year;
a	
=	
the average fraction of years lived by those who entered or left the population 
during the course of the year.
Radix
Rates and ratios are expressed in fractions and may be very small. Such values can be 
confusing and meaningless for ordinary use which may give a false sense of accuracy. Rates 
and ratios are, therefore. conveniently express as per 100 persons or 1,000 persons instead 
of per person. The multiplier 100, 1,000, etc., used to round off decimals is called the 
radix. The purpose of the radix k is 
1)	to avoid results involving the very small numbers that may arise in the calculation 
of rates and ratios; 
2)	to facilitate understanding of the rate and ratios; 
3)	to provide a common base for comparing several rates and ratios. 
Unless otherwise specified, k is taken to be 1,000; for mathematical manipulation, the k 
is kept as one.
3.3.2  DEFINITION OF RATES IN NARROWER SENSE 
In a narrower sense, the rate of a vital event is defined as the ratio of the total number of 
occurrences of the demographic event in a given interval of time to the total number of 
persons “exposed to the risk of” occurrence of that event at the middle of that period. 
Mathematically, 
R(A) = A
N
×
k
where 
N	
=	
1
2(a + b) = number of persons “exposed to the risk of” the event at the 
middle of the period;
a	
=	
the number of persons “exposed to the risk of” the event at the beginning 
of the period;
b	
=	
the number of persons “exposed to the risk of” the event at the end of the 
period, (i.e. b = a −A).
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com

DEMOGRAPHIC STATISTICS
75
BASIC ANALYTICAL TOOLS IN DEMOGRAPHY
Example 3.5
If 10 people die in one year out of a population of 1,000 at the start of the year, calculate 
the crude death rate7. 
Solution
The population at the beginning of the year a = 1000.
The number of deaths during the year (total deaths at the end of the year) A = 10.
The population at the end of the year: 
b
=
a −A
=
1000 −10 = 990
The population in the middle of the year is, therefore, 
N = 1
2(1000 + 990) = 995
Hence the rate of death is: 
R(A)
=
A
N × 1, 000
=
10
995 × 1, 000 = 10.05
Interpretation
That is, the rate of dying for this population during that year was 10.05 per 1,000 population 
(if the deaths were evenly distributed).
3.3.3  PROBABILITIES 
In demography, a probability expresses the likelihood that an event will occur to a person 
or a group of persons in a particular population at risk during a particular period. Thus, 
the probability of a vital event is defined as the number of occurrences of the demographic 
event in a given interval of time divided by the total persons “exposed to the risk of” 
occurrence at the beginning of that period. Mathematically, 
P(A) = A
N
×
k
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com

DEMOGRAPHIC STATISTICS
76
BASIC ANALYTICAL TOOLS IN DEMOGRAPHY
where	 N	
=	
the number of persons “exposed to the risk of” the event at the 
beginning of the period;
	
A	
=	
the frequency with which an event has occurred during
It is important to note that a probability of a vital event is generally a proportion and, 
therefore, has all the characteristics of proportions. However, it differs from a proportion 
in the sense that probabilities must relate to a specified unit of time.
Commonly computed probabilities include mortality rates (see section 6.5). For example, 
infant mortality (probability of dying between birth and age one) is the probability that a 
child will die between birth and exact age one. 
Probabilities might answer the question, such as, “what is the likelihood that a newborn 
child will die before it reaches its first birthday?”.
Example 3.6
Refer to Example 3.5. Calculate the probability of death. 
Solution
The population at the beginning of the year, N = 1, 000.
The number of deaths during the year (total deaths at the end of the year) A = 10.
Therefore, the probability of death is 
P(A) =
10
1, 000 = 0.01000
Interpretation
The probability of dying for this population during that year was 0.01. This means that 1 
percent of the population was likely to die in that year.
3.3.4  COMPARISON BETWEEN PROBABILITIES AND RATES OF EVENTS 
Probabilities are similar to central rates. For short periods, there is not much difference 
between them for an open population. The differences are the following:
1)	In the case of probabilities, the denominator (“population at risk of experiencing the 
event during the period”) is composed of all those persons in the given population at 
the beginning of the period of observation but in the case of rates, the “population 
at risk” is the average number exposed (middle of the period). 
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com

DEMOGRAPHIC STATISTICS
77
BASIC ANALYTICAL TOOLS IN DEMOGRAPHY
2)	Since probabilities take as their base, populations or persons at the beginning of 
the year who are six months younger than in the central rate, they do not take 
into consideration the effect of seasonal or monthly variations on the comparability 
of rates. 
3)	The (central) rates assume that the event is evenly distributed but probabilities do not. 
3.3.5  TYPES OF RATES 
In demography, besides the observed rates (central rates and probabilities), we may identify 
another type of rates referred to as standardised rates. The distinction is only approximate. 
The observed rates are typically the simpler rates and computed directly from actual data in 
a single brief calculation. The standardised rates (synonym is adjusted rates), on the other 
hand, are more complex with respect to method of calculation and also to interpretation. 
The standardised rates are hypothetical representations of level of the demographic measures 
of interest for a given population sub-group, in a summary form based on a set of specific 
rates and various procedures of combining them.
In the following two sections (Sections 3.4 and 3.5), we shall discuss in detail the general 
concepts of central and standardised rates. 
3.4	
CENTRAL RATES 
Central (synonym is average) rates fall into one of two categories: crude (synonyms are total 
or overall) rates and specific rates. 
3.4.1  CRUDE RATES 
A crude rate (R) is usually used to describe the frequency of a demographic event across 
the total population, without regard to age or sex. It is defined as the ratio of the total 
number of a demographic event of a given type which occurred in a defined population 
in one calendar year, to the total population defined at a certain point in time (usually the 
mid-year population). Symbolically, it is given as: 
R = E
P × k
where E is the number of events during a year and P and k are as defined above.
The mid-year population is used to approximate the average size of the population over 
the year8 (see Chapter 4). It invariably will be an estimate, as a population is not counted 
at every mid-year. To avoid estimation of population, crude rates may be calculated by 
referring to the census date as the mid-year in a census year. 
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com

DEMOGRAPHIC STATISTICS
78
BASIC ANALYTICAL TOOLS IN DEMOGRAPHY
78
Advantages of Crude Rates
The crude rate is: 
1)	a simple index that is highly suitable for the study of annual rates; 
2)	the rate that is often used in national and international publications to compare 
roughly the levels of vital events in various populations. 
Disadvantages of Crude Rates
The crude rate is so called because of the following reasons. 
1)	It does not satisfy the conditions of an ideal rate; it is only an approximation. While 
the data for the numerator are usually obtained from registration of vital events 
as they occur throughout the year, the denominator represents the population for 
a fixed date. 
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
By 2020, wind could provide one-tenth of our planet’s 
electricity needs. Already today, SKF’s innovative know-
how is crucial to running a large proportion of the 
world’s wind turbines. 
Up to 25 % of the generating costs relate to mainte-
nance. These can be reduced dramatically thanks to our 
systems for on-line condition monitoring and automatic 
lubrication. We help make it more economical to create 
cleaner, cheaper energy out of thin air. 
By sharing our experience, expertise, and creativity, 
industries can boost performance beyond expectations. 
Therefore we need the best employees who can 
meet this challenge!
The Power of Knowledge Engineering
Brain power
Plug into The Power of Knowledge Engineering. 
Visit us at www.skf.com/knowledge

DEMOGRAPHIC STATISTICS
79
BASIC ANALYTICAL TOOLS IN DEMOGRAPHY
2)	It ignores the variations in the population structure and, therefore, includes in 
the denominator some individuals who are not susceptible to the event. By this, 
it presumes that all individuals in the population are equally exposed to the “risk” 
but this is not always true. A population is heterogeneous in its exposure to risk. 
For example, 
i)	 the very young and the very old are exposed to greater risk of death than those 
of the middle age group; 
ii)	the chances of childbearing among the first reproductive age (15–19) and the 
last few reproductive ages (40–44 and 45–49) are very low as compared to the 
other reproductive ages; 
iii)	among the unmarried women, the chances of getting married decreases as 
age increases. 
3)	It is misleading to make a comparison of crude rates between populations. 
3.4.2  SPECIFIC RATES 
Crude rates are not useful for comparison because of the variation in composition by age in 
different populations. As indicated above, the frequency of human death in a population, 
for example, varies considerably, other things being equal, with the population’s age 
composition. For the measure of risk to have greater validity, it is necessary to calculate 
rates for homogeneous sub-groups. Such rates are referred to as “specific rates.”
Specific rates for a characteristic X (say death or birth) are crude rates defined for special 
sub-groups j in a population (say, for age, sex, race, particular disease, or other classification 
variable). Thus, a specific rate is defined as: 
rj = Ej
Pj
× k
where
rj	
=	
the specific rate of the sub-group j;
Ej	
=	
number of events occurring in the sub-group j possessing the 
characteristic Xj;
Pj	
=	
mid-year population size of the sub-group j possessing the 
characteristic Xj.
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com

DEMOGRAPHIC STATISTICS
80
BASIC ANALYTICAL TOOLS IN DEMOGRAPHY
The term “specific” is used because the exposed population is so chosen that it is homogeneous 
with respect to the specified characteristic as far as exposure to risk to the given event is 
concerned. Examples of specific rates that will be discussed later include age-specific death 
rate and age-specific birth rate, where the sub-group j is the age group and the characteristic 
Xj are the death and birth, respectively.
Except in the case of age, which always defines a rate as specific, there is no clear dividing line 
between a crude rate and a specific rate; a rate is understood to be “crude” unless specifically 
indicated otherwise (e.g. sex-specific, urban-rural specific, race-specific, etc.) or unless it is 
specific with respect to age. Rates may be specific for more than one characteristic, as for 
example, age-sex specific death rate. 
Limitations of Specific Rates 
Unreliability
If some segments (strata) of the population consist of small numbers of people, the associated 
specific rates may be too imprecise and unreliable for use in detailed comparisons. 
Nonexistence
For some populations or for some groups of special interest, specific rates may not exist. 
The only available data may be number of events (for example, deaths) and not their 
subdivision by segment. 
3.4.3  RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN CRUDE AND SPECIFIC RATES 
A crude rate may be expressed in terms of specific rates as: 
R =
 Pjrj
 Pj
where the symbols are as defined above.
Thus, the crude rate is defined as a weighted mean of specific rates, where the populations 
in the sub-group j represent the weight.
3.4.4  ADVANTAGES AND DISADVANTAGES OF CENTRAL RATES 
Advantages of Central Rates 
1)	Central rates are easy to calculate and their meaning can easily be communicated. 
2)	They require minimum data for calculation. 
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com

DEMOGRAPHIC STATISTICS
81
BASIC ANALYTICAL TOOLS IN DEMOGRAPHY
Disadvantages of Central Rates 
The disadvantages of both the crude and specific rates discussed above are the disadvantages 
of the central rates.
3.5	
STANDARDISED RATES 
3.5.1  WHAT IS STANDARDISATION? 
Generally, standardisation is a technique which reduces variables to the same scale and thus 
allows for differences in the composition of groups to be compared in respect of a particular 
measure. In demography, standardisation is the process of adjusting the rates to eliminate 
from them the effect of differences in population composition with respect to age, sex, 
marital status, race, or other categories of the population. 
3.5.2  WHY STANDARDISATION? 
One of the most frequently occurring problems in vital statistics is the comparisons of the 
rate for some event or characteristic. The comparison may be: 
1)	across different populations (that is, comparison of rates of two or more communities 
at a point in time); 
2)	for the same population over time (that is, comparison of rates of a community 
over a period of time). 
If the populations were similar with respect to factors associated with the event under study 
(factors such as age, race, sex, or marital status), there would be no problem in comparing 
crude rates. If the populations are not similarly constituted, however, the direct comparison 
of the crude rates may be misleading. Crude rates, for example, will not be comparable if 
in one population there is a higher proportion of individuals in the older age groups, since 
most vital events (for instance, mortality and fertility) depend strongly on age. Thus, 
1)	crude death rate of a community may be relatively high merely because the 
community has a large proportion of persons in the older ages, where death rates 
are high; or may be relatively low because the community has a large proportion 
of children and young adults where death rates are low; 
2)	the crude death rate of a country may actually rise even though death rates at each 
age remain constant, if population is getting older. 
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com

DEMOGRAPHIC STATISTICS
82
BASIC ANALYTICAL TOOLS IN DEMOGRAPHY
Since differences in composition of the population will influence the total rates, it is 
preferable to use specific rates. Specific rates reconcile the population differences with 
respect to those associated with the event under study. Such investigation involves a mass 
of data and, although necessary for some purposes, produces more detail than the mind 
can conveniently grasp. Furthermore, comparisons using such a collection of rates quickly 
become awkward when they involve several countries. Unless there is a steady difference at 
all ages, a collection of rates does not let us rank a pair of populations.
For ready comparison, what is wanted is a single summary index which will use some acceptable 
standard of weights in averaging the rates for the various segments of the population. The 
index thus found is called the “standardised” (synonyms are “adjusted” or “corrected”) rate. 
The standardised rate, therefore, controls the influence of the composition of the various 
populations with respect to certain characteristics such as age, sex and marital status thus 
making it possible to compare rates in populations of different distributions. 
3.5.3  METHODS OF STANDARDISATION 
There are two common methods of standardisation, namely, direct and indirect standardisation9. 
In both cases, the object is to calculate the number of deaths or births to be expected in 
one population on the basis of some information from another population. 
Direct Standardisation 
Direct standardisation is a simple and straightforward method of adjusting rates (death 
and birth) for age and/or sex structure. The basic idea is to choose a standard population 
distributed by, say, age with a fixed structure of the characteristic under study. The specific 
rates for the study populations are then adjusted to allow for discrepancies in the distribution 
between the standard and the study populations. The result is the number of cases expected 
in the study population, if the standard population had the same population distribution 
as the study population. In so doing, we are assuming that the study population has the 
same structure as the standard. The total expected number of cases divided by the total 
number of people in the standard population gives the directly standardised rate for the 
study population. 
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com

DEMOGRAPHIC STATISTICS
83
BASIC ANALYTICAL TOOLS IN DEMOGRAPHY
83
Indirect Standardisation 
Non-availability of the specific rates of the study population presents difficulty in the use 
of the direct standardisation. In such cases, the technique of indirect standardisation is 
used. That is, to apply the indirect method of standardisation, it is not necessary to define 
a standard population but rather a standard set of specific rates. These standard specific 
rates are applied to the corresponding groups of the study population to determine the 
number of cases expected in each group. The expected cases in each group are summed to 
show how many cases would have occurred in the study population if it had experienced 
the rates of the standard population. Implicit in the method is the assumption that the 
study population experiences the specific condition as the standard rates. The ratio of the 
total observed cases to the total expected cases multiplied by the crude rate in the standard 
population gives the indirectly standardised rate. 
3.5.4  CHOICE OF METHOD OF STANDARDISATION 
The choice of method of standardisation is usually governed by the availability of data 
and by their (relative) accuracy. For example, in comparing mortality rates from different 
countries the indirect method will be preferable if it is difficult to obtain national data on 
age-specific mortality rates. In general indirect standardisation are more commonly employed 
for mortalities. 
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more

DEMOGRAPHIC STATISTICS
84
BASIC ANALYTICAL TOOLS IN DEMOGRAPHY
Table 3.1 summarises the characteristics of the two methods of standardisation.
Requirements 
Direct Standardisation 
Indirect Standardisation
1.	 Data Required 
Study Population 
Standard Population 
Age-sex specific rates 
Age-sex composition 
Age-sex composition + total 
number of events  
(deaths or births)
Age-sex specific rates 
(+ overall rate)
2.	 Method 
Study rates applied to 
standard population 
Standard rates applied to 
study population
3.	 Result 
Age-sex adjusted rate 
Age-sex adjusted rate
4.	 Extension 
To adjust for other factors 
besides age and sex, such as 
different ethnic composition 
of the study groups 
To adjust for other factors 
besides age and sex, such as 
different ethnic composition 
of the study groups
TABLE 3.1 Comparison of Direct and Indirect Methods of Standardisation 
3.5.5  INTERPRETATION OF STANDARDISED RATES 
A standardised rate, no matter which method of adjustment is used, has no direct meaning 
in itself. Its magnitude means little in and of itself. It is meaningful only in comparison with 
other similarly computed rates. Since standardised rates are useful only for comparisons, the 
commonest application of the procedure is to compute such rates for the areas or population 
groups whose characteristic is to be compared and to calculate the relative differences of 
the resulting rates. The meaningful measure then is a ratio, index, or percent difference 
between rates similarly adjusted.
Comparison of two standardised rates has some meaning only in connection with the standard 
population. The choice of a standard population should, therefore, be made with care.
3.5.6  SELECTION OF STANDARD POPULATION 
There is no population that can be considered as “standard” per se, because no two 
populations can be expected to have identical population composition in the real situation. 
Opinions differ as to what population should be used as the standard. There are a number 
of possible choices. The standard selected should have a fixed structure of the characteristic 
under study which may be the distribution (of the characteristics of interest) of one of the 
areas or dates (e.g., earliest, middle, or latest in a series) being compared or an “external” 
real or theoretical distribution of some sort.
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com

DEMOGRAPHIC STATISTICS
85
BASIC ANALYTICAL TOOLS IN DEMOGRAPHY
When the rates of two populations are to be compared, one of them is taken as the standard 
population. However, if the two populations exhibit wide variation in their structure, a 
third population which is similar to them is sometimes used. If such a population cannot 
be found, we use that average of the two populations as the standard population.
The problem of defining a standard population is similar to that of fixing a suitable base 
year for an index number in economic statistics. There is clearly no conceptual justification 
for choosing one standard over another. Theoretically, any population would do, as all 
comparisons are made relative to the standard. There are advantages, however, in choosing 
one which is representative of the general situation as it actually exists. Hence, the general 
rule is to select as a standard any distribution (of the characteristic) that is similar to the 
distribution of the various populations under study. 
All said and done, the choice of the standard population is eventually arbitrary and will 
completely be at the discretion of the researcher, recognising that the choice of a standard 
can markedly alter comparisons between populations.
Note
1)	Standardisation techniques are more common in mortality analysis than in any 
other branch of demographic analysis. 
2)	The most important and most common variable for which the adjustment or 
standardisation of rates is carried out is the age. 
3)	The standardised rate, a single summary measure, is more frequently compared with 
other summary measures than are the entire schedules of specific rates. However, 
when the specific rates in the groups being compared do not bear consistent relations 
across the segment, then any kind of overall standardisation is questionable; 
The methods of direct and indirect standardisation will be applied, in later chapters, to 
mortality, fertility and nuptiality (see Chapters 6, 8 and 10, respectively).
3.6	
TERMINOLOGY USAGE IN DEMOGRAPHY 
The distinction between the use of the ratio, rate, and probability of demographic or vital 
events is not always clear-cut. For various historical reasons and also because demographers 
come from many academic disciplines, the measures used by demographers are not always 
as we have so far described. 
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com

DEMOGRAPHIC STATISTICS
86
BASIC ANALYTICAL TOOLS IN DEMOGRAPHY
Rate
Restriction of the term “rate” to fractions, where the numerator is part of the denominator 
and relate to a specified unit of time, is not always observed in actual practice. By convention, 
some ordinary percentage figures are called rates as in “literacy rate” which is defined as: 
number of literates
number of literate + number of illiterates
×
100
This is simply the percentage of the population sub-group who are classified as literate in 
some specified language. The acquisition of literacy may have occurred many years back. 
Here, the term rate is loosely used to refer to the percentage of a population sub-group in 
the total population where the definition of the sub-group reflects a prior event.
Again, “total fertility rate” discussed in Chapter 8 are measures which are not rates in the 
sense defined earlier but are summary numbers that serve very adequately the purpose of 
comparison. Furthermore, in demography some probabilities are referred to as rates. These 
include mortality rates (e.g. maternal mortality rate and infant mortality rate). Though the 
term “rate” is commonly used, the measure in fact represents a probability of dying, and 
should appropriately be called the “maternal probability of dying” and the “infant probability 
of dying”, respectively. 
Ratio
Again, restriction of the term “ratio” to the fraction of two frequencies of occurrence is also 
not adhered to in practice. An example is the concentration ratio (see Chapter 5). Again, 
expectation of life discussed in Chapter 7 are measures which are not ratios in the sense 
defined earlier but are summary numbers that help us to very adequately make comparison.
Index
Sometimes,, the term “index” is used in situations where we are dealing with absolute 
differences, as in say, indices of concentration and dissimilarity. These may best be described 
as “measures”.
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com

DEMOGRAPHIC STATISTICS
87
POPULATION SIZE AND GROWTH
4	
POPULATION SIZE AND GROWTH
The basis of demographic analysis is the size of the population of the entire nation, of its 
sub-national areas or of particular sub-sections which possess certain characteristic. It is 
usually the first demographic fact that a government tries to obtain.
4.1	
THE BALANCING EQUATION 
In order to determine the population at any time ‘t’ after census or between two censuses 
a number of methods have been devised. We discuss here a suitable method which makes 
use of births, deaths and migration statistics. 
4.1.1  DECOMPOSITION OF POPULATION CHANGE
The population at time ‘t’ may be determined by the “balancing equation” or the demographic 
booking equation which is defined as:
Pt −Po = (B −D) + (I −O)
where 
Pt = the population at any time t (later date); 
Po = the population at the beginning of the period (earlier date); 
B = births during the period; 
D = deaths during the period; 
I = immigrants during the period; 
O = emigrants during the period. 
The balancing equation may be written as:
△P = NI + M
where
P = (Pt −Po) is the change in population between two dates (the current and initial dates)10;
NI = B −D is the natural change (increase or decrease) of population;
M = I −O is the net migration (mechanical change of population).
This method decomposes the population change into its components or conversely, the 
synthesis of the components to estimate the total population change. It is sometimes called 
the component equation or the inflow-outflow relationship.
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com

DEMOGRAPHIC STATISTICS
88
POPULATION SIZE AND GROWTH
88
When the population is closed11, the balancing equation is given as: 
Pt −Po = B −D
4.1.2  USES OF THE BALANCING EQUATION 
Estimation of Net Error in System of Demographic Statistics
The balancing equation may be used to estimate the net error in this system of demographic 
statistics when we have accurate information on the various components.
Thus, 
e = (Pt −Po) −(B −D) + (I −O)
or 
e = P −(NI + M)
where e is the residual error or error of closure. 
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more

DEMOGRAPHIC STATISTICS
89
POPULATION SIZE AND GROWTH
That is, the population change between two periods should be equal to the natural increase, 
NI, and net migration, M. Any difference is due to error, e. 
In a closed population, the error of closure is given as 
e = (Pt −Po) −(B −D)
Estimation of Post-censal Current Population
The balancing equation may be used to estimate a post-censal current population. Thus, 
Pt = Po + (B −D) + (I −O)
This equation may be referred to as the basic estimating equation. 
Example 4.1
A town had a population of 450,000 persons on 1st January, 1986. In that year, 6,000 
children were born and 2,000 persons died. In addition, 400 persons came to the town to 
farm and 250 school leavers left for the nearest city to work in the newly opened factory 
in that same year. Determine the population of the town at the end of the year. 
Solution
Population on 1st January 1986 	
Pt	
= 	
450, 000
Number of births 	
B	
= 	
6, 000
Number of deaths 	
D	
= 	
2, 000
Number of immigrants 	
I	
= 	
400
Number of emigrants 	
O	
= 	
250
Population at the end of the year (31st December, 1986): 
Pt
=
P0 + (B −D) + (I −O)
=
450, 000 + (6, 000 −2, 000) + (400 −250) = 454, 150
Estimation of Intercensal Net Migration for Small Subdivisions of Country
The balancing equation may be used to estimate the intercensal net migration for small 
subdivisions of a country when data on births and deaths are available and there is no 
statistics on internal migration. Thus, 
M = (Pt −Po) −(B −D)
where M is the net migration to or from the area.
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com

DEMOGRAPHIC STATISTICS
90
POPULATION SIZE AND GROWTH
4.2	
TOTAL POPULATION 
A census is usually the best source to determine the size of a population (total population) of 
an area at a particular time. As discussed earlier, there are two ideal types of total population 
counts – de facto and de jure counts (see Chapter 2).
The rates of vital events are ideally expressed in relation to the total population. For the 
census year, census counts of population are commonly employed. As has been pointed out 
earlier, censuses are taken at a long period of time, say 10 year intervals. The population 
Pt, of an area at any moment of time t, is not constant but keeps on changing from time 
to time due to births, deaths and migration. There are two ways of obtaining the total 
population at any given time t:
1)	To combine data on births, deaths and migration for the period between the census 
date and the estimated count from the last census (see Section 4.1). Such data are 
difficult to come by. In most developing countries, the estimates are questionable 
because information about births, deaths and migration is not reliable. 
2)	To estimate the population at time t from its initial size. Thus 
	
Pt = Po + △P
It is equally difficult to obtain the population after a lapse of △t 
Which population figure should be used then when census data are not available? The 
practice is to use the average annual population which is a sufficient approximation for the 
computation of annual rates.
The average annual population is defined in many ways depending on the type of data 
available.
4.3	
MEAN POPULATION IN A YEAR 
The mean annual population, when monthly data on births, deaths and migration within 
a year are not available, may be defined in one of the following ways. 
4.3.1  SIMPLE MEAN POPULATION 
When we have population data for only the beginning of the year (i.e. 1st January) and 
the end of that year (i.e. 31st December) or the beginning of the following year (i.e. 1st 
January) we find the simple mean population as: 
P = P0 + P1
2
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com

DEMOGRAPHIC STATISTICS
91
POPULATION SIZE AND GROWTH
where 
P 	
=	
mean population;
P0	
=	
population for January 1 of the year;
P1	
=	
population for January 1 of the following year.
This formula shows exactly what the mid-year population would be if all vital events were 
distributed evenly throughout the year. 
Example 4.2
The population of a country on 1st January, 1999 was 25 million and was 27 million on 
1st January, 2000. Find the annual mean population. 
Solution 
P0
=
25 million
P1
=
27 million
P
=
P0 + P1
2
=
25 + 27
2
= 26 million
Alternatively the mean population may also be interpolated as: 
P = P0 + 1
2 (P1 −P0)
Example 4.3
For the data of Example 4.2, calculate the annual mean population for the country using 
the interpolation approach. 
Solution 
P0
=
25 million
P1
=
27 million
P
=
25 + 1
2(27 −25)
=
26 million
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com

DEMOGRAPHIC STATISTICS
92
POPULATION SIZE AND GROWTH
4.3.2  CHRONOLOGICAL MEAN POPULATION 
When monthly population figures for the entire period of the year are available, then we 
use the chronological mean population defined as: 
P =
1
2P1 + P2 + · · · + P12−1 + 1
2P12
12 −1
or
P =
P1 + P12
2
+
12−1

i=2
Pi
12 −1
where 1, 2, · · · , 12 correspond to January, February, through to December.
In general, the chronological mean population for any period in a year may be obtained as: 
P
=
1
2P1 + P2 + · · · + Pm−1 + 1
2Pm
m −1
Or
P
=
P1 + Pm
2
+
m−1

i=2
Pi
m −1
where m is the number of the last month of the period with population figures in which 
we are interested. If the period of interest is January to December then m = 12.
Example 4.4
The population of an area (in millions) in 1985 is given in Table 4.2.
Jan 
Feb 
Mar 
Apr 
May 
Jun 
Jul 
Aug 
Sept 
Oct 
Nov 
Dec
4
6 
5 
3 
4 
6 
6 
8 
7 
5 
4 
6 
TABLE 4.2 Monthly Population of an Area in 1985 (in millions)
Find the annual mean population. 
Solution 
P
=
1
2P1 + P2 + · · · + Pm−1 + 1
2Pm
m −1
=
1
2(4) + 6 + 5 + 3 + 4 + 6 + 6 + 8 + 7 + 5 + 4 + 1
2(6)
12 −1
= 5.36
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com

DEMOGRAPHIC STATISTICS
93
POPULATION SIZE AND GROWTH
93
Alternatively, 
P
=
P1 + Pm
2
+
m−1

i=2
Pi
m −1
=
4 + 6
2
+ 6 + 5 + 3 + 4 + 6 + 6 + 8 + 7 + 5 + 4
12 −1
= 5.36
4.3.3  WEIGHTED MEAN POPULATION 
When some of the monthly figures are available and the intervals are not equal then the 
mean population is computed as:
P =
P1 + P2
2
t1 + P2 + P3
2
t2 + ... + P12−1 + P12
2
t12−1
t1 + t2 + ... + t12−1
This formula takes the form of a weighted mean:
P =
m−1

i−1
P iti
m−1

i=1
ti
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
EXPERIENCE THE POWER OF 
FULL ENGAGEMENT…
     RUN FASTER.
          RUN LONGER..
                RUN EASIER…
READ MORE & PRE-ORDER TODAY 
WWW.GAITEYE.COM
Challenge the way we run

DEMOGRAPHIC STATISTICS
94
POPULATION SIZE AND GROWTH
where 
P i	
=	
Pi + Pi+1
2
 = the mean population of two successive periods;
ti	
= 	
interval between two successive periods (in months).
Example 4.5
The population of an area (in thousand) in 2005 was 12 on 1st January; 13 on 1st May; 15 
on 1st November; 18 on 31st December. Find the mean population of the area for 2005. 
Solution
Table 4.3 illustrates the calculation of the mean population of the area. Thus 
P 1
=
12 + 13
2
= 12.5
P 2
=
13 + 15
2
= 14.0
P 3
=
15 + 18
2
= 16.5
Date 
Population 
(thousand) 
Period of time 
(months) 
P i = Pi + Pi+1
2
P iti
1
2 
3 
4 
5 = 3 × 4
01.01.85 
12
4 
12.5 
50.0 
01.05.85 
13
6 
14.0 
84.0 
01.11.85 
15
2 
16.5 
33.0 
31.12.85 
18
– 
– 
– 
Total 
12
167.0 
TABLE 4.3 Preliminary Calculation of Mean Population of Example 4.5
Hence 
P =
m−1

i−1
P iti
m−1

i=1
ti
= 167
12 = 13.9
Simplifying the formula we obtain the following: 
P = (P1 + P2) t1 + (P2 + P3) t2 + ... + (P12−1 + P12) t12−1
2 (t1 + t2 + ... + t12−1)
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com

DEMOGRAPHIC STATISTICS
95
POPULATION SIZE AND GROWTH
or 
P =
m−1

i=1
(Pi + Pi+1) ti
2
m−1

i=1
t1
Example 4.6
For the data of Example 4.5, calculate the mean population. 
Solution
Using the formula just stated, we have: 
P
=
(P1 + P2) t1 + (P2 + P3) t2 + ... + (P12−1 + P12) t12−1
2 (t1 + t2 + ... + t12−1)
P
=
(12 + 13)4 + (13 + 15)6 + (15 + 18)2
2(4 + 6 + 2)
= 13.9
4.4	
MEAN POPULATION OF YEARS 
4.4.1  MEAN POPULATION FOR TWO YEARS 
When data are available for two years (earlier and later years) of a long interval and changes 
are assumed to be linear, then we use the simple mean population (P ) defined as: 
P = P1 + Pn
2
where P1 and P2 are population for earlier and later years. 
Example 4.7
The population of Ghana was 18.9 million in 2000 and 24.7 million in 2010. Calculate 
the mean population for the 10-year period. 
Solution 
P = 18.9 + 24.7
2
= 21.8
When the interval between the initial year and the current year is long and the changes are 
assumed to follow a geometric progression12, then 
P =
Pn −P1
lnPn −lnP1
where ln = natural logarithm13. 
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com

DEMOGRAPHIC STATISTICS
96
POPULATION SIZE AND GROWTH
Example 4.8
Calculate the mean population of Ghana for the period 1984–2000 using the data in 
Example 4.7, assuming that the population changes follow a geometric progression. 
Solution 
P1
=
18.9;
Pn = 24.7
P
=
Pn −P1
ln Pn −ln P1
=
24.7 −18.9
ln 24.7 −ln 18.9 = 21.7
4.4.2  MEAN POPULATION FOR EQUAL INTERVALS 
When the population figures of years are available and the intervals between them are equal 
then we use the chronological mean, defined as:
P =
1
2P1 + P2 + · · · + 1
2Pn
n −1
=
P1 + Pn
2
+
n−1

i=2
Pi
n −1
where n = number of years in which population figures are available. 
Example 4.9
The population of an area on 1st January 1970 was 15,300 persons; on 1st January 1975 
was 16,800 persons; on 1st January 1980 was 18,200 and on 1st January 1985 was 22,000 
persons. Calculate the mean population for the period under study. 
Solution
P 1
=
15, 300;
P2 = 16, 800;
P3 = 18, 200;
P 4 = 22, 000
n
=
4 (that is, 1970, 1975, 1980, 1985)
The intervals between years are the same. Hence, 
P =
1
2(15, 300) + 16, 800 + 18, 200 + 1
2(22, 000)
4 −1
= 17, 883
4.4.3  MEAN POPULATION FOR UNEQUAL INTERVALS 
When population figures for years are available and the intervals between the years are not 
the same, then the weighted mean is used. Thus, 
P
=
n−1

i=1
P iti
n−1

i=1
ti
where	 P i	
= the average population of the two successive periods;
	
 ti	
= the interval between two successive periods (in years).
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com

DEMOGRAPHIC STATISTICS
97
POPULATION SIZE AND GROWTH
Example 4.10
The population of Ghana (in million) at censuses in 1960 was 6.7; 1970 was 8.6; 1984 
was 12.3; 2000 was 18.9 and 2010 was 24.7. Calculate the mean population for the period 
1960–2010. 
Solution 
P1
=
6.7;
P2 = 8.6,
P3 = 12.3;
P4 = 18.9
t1
=
1970 −1960 = 10 years
t2
=
1984 −1970 = 14 years
t3
=
2000 −1984 = 16 years
t4
=
2010 −2000 = 10 years
P 1
=
6.7 + 8.6
2
= 7.65
P 2
=
8.6 + 12.3
2
= 10.45
P 3
=
12.3 + 18.9
2
= 15.60
P 4
=
18.9 + 24.7
2
= 21.8
P
=
n−1

i=1
P iti
n−1

i=1
ti
=
7.65(10) + 10.45(14) + 15.60(16) + 21.8(10)
10 + 14 + 16 + 10
= 13.8
That is, the mean population of Ghana for the period 1960–2010 was 13.8 million.
4.5	
THE MID-YEAR POPULATION 
Vital rates have as their denominator the “population at risk”. This population is usually only 
approximate. As indicated earlier, for the census year, census data are taken as the population 
at risk, especially, if it was carried out close to June 30 (July 1). For the non census year, 
the mean population over the period to which the rate relates is used. However, data may 
not be available for calculating the mean population. In such a case it is usually appropriate 
to use the population at the middle of the period (which is roughly the average population 
during the period), or the population at the beginning of the period. In demography, rates 
are usually expressed in relation to the former usually referred to as the mid-year population 
taken as the population at 1st July of the year in question. The reasons for using the mid-
year population for calculating rates in demography are as follows: 
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com

DEMOGRAPHIC STATISTICS
98
POPULATION SIZE AND GROWTH
98
1)	The mid-year population would be exactly the same as the average population if the 
events that change the size of the population were evenly distributed throughout 
the year. Even though these events are not distributed evenly, but vary by season, 
sometimes in a very marked degree, the mid-year population gives a reasonable 
approximation of the average number of persons present during the year. 
2)	The middle of the year is the point at which roughly half of the year’s changes in 
the population would have occurred. 
3)	The mid-year population is very convenient to compute. 
4.6	
POPULATION GROWTH 
The rate of growth of a population is one of the most important single demographic facts 
about the population. The rate at which population is changing affects not only its size and 
numerical increase, but also its composition.14
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
PDF components for PHP developers
www.setasign.com
SETASIGN
This e-book  
is made with 
SetaPDF

DEMOGRAPHIC STATISTICS
99
POPULATION SIZE AND GROWTH
Population growth refers to the change in a population of a given area over a specific period 
of time. In simple terms, it is the change of population size between two dates. The term 
“growth” is used irrespective of whether the change is negative or positive. A population 
increasing in size is said to possess a positive growth rate and the one declining, to possess a 
negative growth rate. It has been generally observed that all large populations have registered 
increases over long periods of time. Any decreases of population are usually transient.
There are three types of growth associated with population – natural growth, mechanical 
growth and overall growth. Natural growth refers to the difference between the births and 
deaths in an area’s population and does not take into account migration. Mechanical growth 
refers to the difference between the immigration and emmigration of an area’s population 
and does not take into account births and deaths. Overall growth refers to the changes in 
the population of an area taking into consideration both natural and mechanical growth. 
The overall growth of a population may be computed in different ways and the rest of this 
chapter is devoted to them. 
4.6.1  ABSOLUTE POPULATION GROWTH 
The growth of a population at any given time t is largely determined by its own size at the 
moment. Suppose Pt is the population of a defined territory at time t, then the absolute 
population growth (change) at time t, denoted as △Pt, is 
Pt = Pt −P0
where P0 is the initial population. This measure enables us to know the absolute amount 
of population change that has taken place.
The simplest measure of absolute population change is the intercensal change, that is, the 
difference between two censuses: 
Pt = C1 −C0
where
C0 is the population of the earlier census;
C1 is the population of the later census. 
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com

DEMOGRAPHIC STATISTICS
100
POPULATION SIZE AND GROWTH
Example 4.11
The population figures of Ghana at two censuses in 2000 and 2010 were 18,912,079 and 
24,658,823, respectively. Calculate the absolute population growth in the period 2000–2010. 
Solution
P2000 = 18, 912, 079; P2010 = 24, 658, 823
Pt
=
Pt −P0
=
P2010 −P2000
=
18, 912, 079 −24, 658, 823 = 5, 746, 744
That is, the population of Ghana increased by about 5.7 million between 2000 and 2010. 
Limitation of the Absolute Population Growth
The estimates of the absolute population growth do not take into account the size of the 
population. We cannot, therefore, compare the growth of populations for different countries. 
Example 4.12
The population figures of Ghana at two censuses in 1984 and 2000 were 12,296,081 and 
18,912,079, respectively. The figures for censuses of the Republic of Mauritius (excluding 
Agalega and St. Brandon) in 1983 and 2000 were 999,945. and 1,178,848, respectively. 
Calculate the intercensal absolute population growth for each country and compare. 
Solution
For Ghana, 
P1984 = 12, 296, 081;
P2000 = 18, 912, 079
Hence 
Pt
=
P2000 −P1984
=
18, 912, 079 −12, 296, 081 = 6, 615, 998
For Mauritius, 
P1984 = 999, 945;
P2000 = 1, 178, 848
Hence 
Pt
=
P2000 −P1983
=
1, 178, 848 −999, 945 = 178, 903
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com

DEMOGRAPHIC STATISTICS
101
POPULATION SIZE AND GROWTH
The results are presented in Table 4.5.
Year 
Ghana census population 
Mauritius census population 
1984
12,296,081 
999,945 
2000
18,912,079 
1,178,848 
Change 
6,615,998 
178,903
TABLE 4.5 Calculation Intercensal Absolute Growth for two Countries
The Ghana’s population is far higher than that of Mauritius (more than ten times), and it 
is, therefore, logical to expect Ghana to have a larger absolute growth.
For comparison purposes, what is desired is a measure of growth relative to the size of the 
population. In the subsequent sections, we shall discuss various measures of relative growth 
of population. 
4.6.2  ARITHMETIC POPULATION GROWTH RATE 
The crudest measure of the growth rate of a population at the period t is the arithmetic 
growth rate (AGR) which is more appropriately referred to as rate of increase. AGR may 
be determined as relative growth or percentage change. 
Relative Growth 
The relative growth of population (RA) is given by 
RA = Pt
P0
RA = 1 denotes the same number of people at the two times;
RA > 1 denotes an increasing population;
RA < 1 denotes a decreasing population.
Example 4.13
For the data in Example 4.11, calculate the relative growth rate of the population of Ghana 
between the period 2000–2010. 
Solution
From Example 4.11, 
P2000 = 18, 912, 079; P2010 = 24.7
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com

DEMOGRAPHIC STATISTICS
102
POPULATION SIZE AND GROWTH
Hence, 
RA = 24, 658, 823
18, 912, 079 = 1.3039
That is, the population of Ghana in 2010 was about 1.3 times that in 2000. 
Arithmetic Percentage Growth Rate
The arithmetic percentage growth rate (APGR) is the change in the size of population during 
period t as a percentage of population at the beginning of the period. It is defined as: 
APGR = Pt −P0
P0
× 100
where the radix k is taken as 100.
The arithmetic growth rate between two census dates is called intercensal arithmetic growth 
rate and when the censuses are ten years apart it is called decadal arithmetic growth rate.
A simpler way to compute the percentage change of population may be expressed by: 
APGR =
 Pt
P0
−1

× 100
or 
APGR =
 Pt
P0

× 100 −100
That is, to divide the later date population by the earlier one, multiply the result by 100, 
and subtract 100.
APGR = 0 denotes the same number of people at the two times;
APGR > 0 denotes an increasing population;
APGR < 0 denotes a decreasing population.
Example 4.14
For the data in Example 4.11, calculate the intercensal arithmetic growth rate of the 
population of Ghana between the period 2000–2010, using both methods. 
Solution
From Example 4.11, 
P2000 = 18, 912, 079; P2010 = 24, 658, 823
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com

DEMOGRAPHIC STATISTICS
103
POPULATION SIZE AND GROWTH
103
Method 1: 
APGR
=
Pt −P0
P0
× k
=
P2010 −P2000
P2000
× 100
=
24, 658, 823 −18, 912, 079
18, 912, 079
× 100 = 30.39
Method 2: 
APGR
=
 Pt
P0
−1

× 100
=
P2010
P2000
−1

× 100
=
24, 658, 823
18, 912, 079 −1

× 100 = 30.39
That is, the population of Ghana increased by 30.4 percent between 2000 and 2010. Or 
the population of Ghana recorded an increase of 30.4 percent in the intercensal period 
2000–2010.
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
www.sylvania.com
We do not reinvent  
the wheel we reinvent 
light.
Fascinating lighting offers an infinite spectrum of 
possibilities: Innovative technologies and new  
markets provide both opportunities and challenges. 
An environment in which your expertise is in high 
demand. Enjoy the supportive working atmosphere 
within our global group and benefit from international 
career paths. Implement sustainable ideas in close 
cooperation with other specialists and contribute to 
influencing our future. Come and join us in reinventing 
light every day.
Light is OSRAM

DEMOGRAPHIC STATISTICS
104
POPULATION SIZE AND GROWTH
Annual Arithmetic Growth Rate
We may sometimes like to compare the growth of different populations or different periods. 
This can be done when the time interval between censuses is the same. When these intervals 
are not the same, the ratios must be put on a comparable basis. This is done by converting 
them into annual rates of growth (or the annualisation of growth rates), somehow 
distributing the observed growth through the intercensal period.
Suppose t is measured in years, then the mean annual arithmetic percentage growth rate, 
denoted by rA, is: 
rA = 1
t
Pt −P0
P0

× 100
where t is the interval between two periods;
P0 and Pt are the populations at the beginning and end of period t.
If P0 and Pt are the beginning and end of the same year, respectively, the formula for the 
annual rate of population growth is the same as that for the arithmetic rate of growth. 
Example 4.15
For the data in Example 4.11, calculate the average annual arithmetic growth rate of the 
population of Ghana between the period 2000–2010. 
Solution
From Example 4.11, 
P2000 = 18, 912, 079; P2010 = 24, 658, 823
The length of time between 2000 and 2010 is 10 years (t = 2010−−2000). Hence 
rA	
=
1
t
Pt −P0
P0

× 100
	
=
1
10
P2010 −P2000
P2000

× 100
	
=
1
10
24, 658, 823 −18, 912, 079
18, 912, 079

× 100 = 3.03
That is, the population of Ghana grew at an average arithmetic rate of 3.3 percent annually 
between 2000 and 2010. 
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com

DEMOGRAPHIC STATISTICS
105
POPULATION SIZE AND GROWTH
4.6.3  GEOMETRIC POPULATION GROWTH
In a population, every addition has the potential to change the size of the population. 
Increased population contributes to further increase during their lifetimes. This implies that 
the growth of population mimics the principle of compound interest rate, from which we 
can write the geometric growth equation as: 
Pt = P0(1 + rG)t
where rG is the average annual geometric (compound) growth rate. 
This formula calculates the future population given the current population and a growth 
rate, rG. We may obtain rG from the equation as: 
	
rG
=

exp
lnPt −lnP0
t

−1

× k
or	
rG
=

t

Pt
P0
−1

× k
where
the radix k is usually 100;
ln is the natural logarithm (see Section 4.4.1)15.
Example 4.16
For the data in Example 4.11, calculate the geometric growth rate, using both methods. 
Solution 
P2000 = 18, 912, 079; P2010 = 24, 658, 823;
t = 2010 −2000
Method 1: 
rG	
=

exp
ln Pt −ln P0
t

−1

× 100
	
=

exp
ln P2010 −ln P2000
10

−1

× 100
	
=

exp
ln 24, 658, 823 −ln 18, 912, 079
10

−1

× 100 = 2.69
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com

DEMOGRAPHIC STATISTICS
106
POPULATION SIZE AND GROWTH
Method 2: 
rG
=

t

Pt
P0
−1

× 100
=

10

24, 658, 823
18, 912, 079 −1

× 100 = 2.69
That is, the population of Ghana grew at an average geometric rate of 2.7 percent annually 
between 2000 and 2010. 
4.6.4  EXPONENTIAL POPULATION GROWTH 
Population data are usually available on an annual basis and the geometric growth rate is 
applicable since it assumes that t is a discrete variable. However, population growth is a 
continuous process, and we need to modify the geometric growth equation to take care of the 
instantaneous growth instead of annual growth. This gives the exponential growth equation: 
Pt = P0ert
where r is the annual average exponential growth rate defined as: 
r = ln Pt −ln P0
t
where the radix k is usually 1. 
The geometric growth rate rG and the exponential growth rate r would usually give values 
very close to each other, at a certain level of approximation. The geometric growth rate is 
for practical use and the one usually used to measure population growth. The exponential 
growth rate, on the other hand, is more of mathematical interest. 
Example 4.17
For the data in Example 4.11, calculate the exponential growth rate. 
Solution
P2000 = 18, 912, 079; P2010 = 24, 658, 823;
t = 2010 −2000
r =
ln Pt −ln P0
t
=
ln P2010 −ln P2000
10
=
ln 24, 658, 823 −ln 18, 912, 079
10
= 0.0265
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com

DEMOGRAPHIC STATISTICS
107
POPULATION SIZE AND GROWTH
That is, the population of Ghana grew at an annual exponential rate of 2.7 percent between 
2000 and 2010. 
4.6.5  DOUBLING TIME OF POPULATION 
Demographers are often interested in the time that will be taken for a population to double 
itself for a given population growth rate r. This is given by: 
t = ln 2
r
Example 4.18
Ghana’s population in 2010 was 24,658,823. Calculate the number of years required for 
Ghana’s population to double. 
Solution
From Example 4.17, r =. Hence 
t = ln 2
r
=
ln 2
0.0268 = 25.86 years
That is, Ghana’s population of 24,658,823 in 2010, growing at an exponential rate of 2.7 
percent annually, will double in 26 years time; that is, in the year 2036. 
Time of Population to Reduce to Half in Size
For a declining population, we can also estimate the number of years in which the population 
will reduce to half in size if the rate of decline is r. This is given as: 
t = ln 0.70
r
This has little significance in demography since it rarely happens in practice.
EXERCISES 
4.1	
The population of a certain country at the beginning of 2000 was 12 million. There 
were 960 births and 542 deaths in that year. If 120 people left the country but 305 
came to the country to stay for two years, what is the estimated population at the 
end of 2000. 
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com

DEMOGRAPHIC STATISTICS
108
POPULATION SIZE AND GROWTH
108
4.2	
The monthly population figures of an area (in million) in 1990 are shown below: 
Jan 
Feb 
Mar 
Apr 
May 
Jun 
Jul 
Aug 
Sept 
Oct 
Nov 
Dec 
50
52
52
55
57
65
67
68
77
75
65
88
Find the mean population of this area in 1990 using 
1)	the chronological approach; 
2)	the weighted approach. 
4.3	
The population of a community in 1992 was: 631,000 on 1st January; 715,000 
on 1st April; 700,000 on 1st August; 819 on 1st January 1993. Find the average 
population of the area for 1992. 
4.4	
The mid-year population of Togo in 1981 was 2,691,000 and 3,531,000 in 1990. 
Calculate the mean population of Togo for the period. 
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
360°
thinking.
© Deloitte & Touche LLP and affiliated entities.
Discover the truth at www.deloitte.ca/careers 

DEMOGRAPHIC STATISTICS
109
POPULATION SIZE AND GROWTH
4.5	
The mid-year population of the Gambia was 635,000 in 1982; 745,000 in 1985; 
and 861,000 in 1990. Calculate the mean population of the Gambia for the period 
1981–1990. 
4.6	
For the data in Exercise 4.4, calculate 
1)	relative growth; 
2)	arithmetic percentage growth; 
3)	annual arithmetic rate of population growth; 
4)	geometric growth rate; 
5)	exponential growth rate 
of the population in the period 1982–1990. 
4.7	
For the data in Exercise 4.5, calculate 
1)	relative growth;
2)	arithmetic percentage growth;
3)	average annual arithmetic rate of population growth;
4)	geometric growth rate;
5)	exponential growth rate 
of the population in the period 1982–1990. 
4.8	
Refer to Exercise 4.4. Estimate the number of years required for Togo’s population 
in 1990 to double. 
4.9	
Refer to Exercise 4.5. Estimate the number of years required for the Gambia’s 
population to double, using the growth rate between 1985 and 1990. 
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com

DEMOGRAPHIC STATISTICS
110
MEASURES OF POPULATION COMPOSITION
5	
MEASURES OF POPULATION 
COMPOSITION
5.1	
INTRODUCTION 
5.1.1  POPULATION COMPOSITION 
The population composition is the internal structure of a human population with respect 
to one or more demographic attributes or traits at a particular point of time. The traits 
which are of particular concern to demographers are sex, age, marital status, urban-rural 
residence, educational and economic characteristics, religion, and family types. In population 
literature, the term “population composition” is often used interchangeably with “population 
structure” or “population distribution”. 
In a broad sense, population distribution implies any division of the population entity into 
constituents arranged in a definite pattern. The term is used to include the distribution of 
other attributes (geographic, residential, marital, etc.). The term “population structure” is, 
however, usually used to relate only to age and sex composition of the population. 
In this text, we shall consider only population structure (i.e. composition of population) 
by age and sex. 
5.1.2  USES OF POPULATION COMPOSITION 
The study of population composition constitutes a basic and the most relevant field of study 
for demographers. It is helpful in 
1)	describing and comparing the make-up of a population 
i)	 at a given date with some other populations at the same date; 
ii)	at some previous dates with that of the same population; 
2)	determining the structural requirement of population at any time; 
3)	understanding and providing a more clearer vision of the dynamics of population 
change; 
4)	making population projections. 
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com

DEMOGRAPHIC STATISTICS
111
MEASURES OF POPULATION COMPOSITION
5.2	
POPULATION COMPOSITION BY SEX 
Sex is one of the important personal and natural characteristics of the population. It is the 
biological characteristic that divides the human race into males and females16. Unlike other 
demographic characteristics, sex 
1)	is determined at birth and it is dichotomous, 
2)	undergoes no change. 
The number of males and females in a population expressed either in absolute numbers or 
as percentages of the total, is called sex distribution of the population. 
5.2.1  USES OF POPULATION COMPOSITION BY SEX 
Population data tabulated by males and females are important for: 
1)	the evaluation of the completeness and accuracy of census counts of population; 
2)	drawing several inferences regarding the dynamics of demographic phenomena; 
3)	its bearing directly on: 
i)	 racial and ethnic composition, 
ii)	educational status, and 
iii)	citizenship status, 
iv)	fertility, mortality, migration, marital status, and economic characteristics; 
4)	the sole study of reproductivity; 
5)	the determination of family rights and responsibilities and the social status in a 
community, especially in Africa; 
6)	both public and private planning, such as military planning, planning of community 
institutions and services, particularly health services, and planning of sales programmes 
that require separate population data for males and females. 
It is customary to consider only the female segment of the population when analysis is 
being done in the demographic field. This is because 
1)	during the course of one year, a woman can be responsible for at most two birth 
cycles, while a man may be responsible for several cycles; 
2)	the childbearing years for a woman range approximately from 15 to 50 years of 
age, while that of a man may range from 15 to 80 years of age; 
3)	registration of births more than often includes the age of the mother than that of 
the father, especially in the case of illegitimate births. 
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com

DEMOGRAPHIC STATISTICS
112
MEASURES OF POPULATION COMPOSITION
5.2.2  DEMOGRAPHIC MEASURES OF SEX COMPOSITION 
Masculinity Proportion 
The masculinity proportion (MP) is the simplest and most commonly used measure of sex 
composition in nontechnical discussions. It is the percentage of males in the population. 
It is defined as: 
MP
=
Pm
Pt
=
Pm
Pm + Pf
where
Pm and Pf are population of males and females, respectively;
Pt is the total population.
MP = 0.5 denotes a balance of sexes;
MP > 0.5 denotes an excess of males;
MP < 0.5 denotes an excess of females. 
Feminity Proportion
Similarly, we may define feminity proportion as 
FP = Pf
P
or as a complement to the masculinity proportion: 
FP = 1 −MP
Example 5.1
The 2010 Population and Housing Census of Ghana recorded 12,024,845 males and 
12,633,978 females. Calculate the masculinity proportion. 
Solution 
Number of males	
(Pm)	
=
12, 024, 845
Number of females	 (Pf)	
=
12, 633, 978
Total population	
(Pt)	
=
Pm + Pf = 24, 658, 823
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com

DEMOGRAPHIC STATISTICS
113
MEASURES OF POPULATION COMPOSITION
113
	
	
	
MP 	
=
Pm
Pt
	
	
	
	
=
12, 024, 845
24, 658, 823 = 0.488
That is, there is an excess of 0.012 (0.5 −0.488) or 1.2 percent of females in Ghana in the 
2010 census.
Percent Excess (or Deficit) of Males 
The excess (or deficit) of males as a percentage of the total population, is given by the 
following formula: 
E = Pm −Pf
Pt
× 100
E = 0 denotes balance of the sexes;
E > 0 denotes an excess of males or deficit of females;
E < 0 denotes an excess of females or deficit of males.
Example 5.2
For the data in Example 5.1, calculate the excess or deficit of males as a percentage of the 
total population. 
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
We will turn your CV into 
an opportunity of a lifetime
Do you like cars? Would you like to be a part of a successful brand?
We will appreciate and reward both your enthusiasm and talent.
Send us your CV. You will be surprised where it can take you.
Send us your CV on
www.employerforlife.com

DEMOGRAPHIC STATISTICS
114
MEASURES OF POPULATION COMPOSITION
Solution
From Example 5.1, 
Pm = 12, 024, 845
Pf = 12, 633, 978
Pt = 18, 912, 079
Hence 
E
=
Pm −Pf
Pt
× 100
=
12, 024, 845 −12, 633, 978
24, 658, 823
× 100 = −2.47
The result indicates that the excess of females (deficit of males) amounts to about 2.5 percent 
of the total population.
Sex Ratio 
The sex ratio (SR), sometimes called masculinity ratio (MR), is the most widely used and 
principal measure of sex composition used in technical studies. It is used to compare the 
relative strength of the number of males and females in a population. It is usually defined 
as the number of males per 100 females in a population17: 
SR = Pm
Pf
× 100
where Pm and Pf are as defined above.
SR = 100 denotes balance of the sexes;
SR > 100 denotes an excess of males;
SR < 100 denotes an excess of females. 
Example 5.3
Using data in Example 5.1, calculate the sex ratio. 
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com

DEMOGRAPHIC STATISTICS
115
MEASURES OF POPULATION COMPOSITION
Solution
From Example 5.1, 
SR
=
Pm
Pf
× 100
=
12, 024, 845
12, 633, 978 × 100 = 95.2%
That is, the male population is about 95.2 percent of the female population in Ghana 
according to the 2010 census.
Sex Ratio by Segments
Sex ratio can be calculated for various groups or segments of the population: 
SRs = P s
m
Pf
× 100
where P b
m and P s
f  are number of males and females, respectively in population segment s. 
Sex Ratio at Birth
Of much importance and wide use, especially in mortality analysis is sex ratio at birth, 
defined as:
SRb = P b
m
P b
f
× 100
where P b
m and P b
f  are number of live births of males and females, respectively.
Note 
The sex ratio of any population is affected by past fertility, mortality and migration. The 
evidence available indicates that many more males than females are conceived, but that the 
proportion of males among foetal deaths is also high. 
Relationship among the Various Measures of Sex Composition
When basic data on the number of males and females are not available, it is possible when 
required, to convert the masculinity proportion into the masculinity ratio or the per cent 
excess (or deficit) of males, and the vice versa. 
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com

DEMOGRAPHIC STATISTICS
116
MEASURES OF POPULATION COMPOSITION
1)	Deriving Masculinity Proportion from Sex (Masculinity) Ratio 
The masculinity proportion may be defined from sex (masculinity) ratio as follows: 
	
MP =
SR
100 + SR
Example 5.4
For the data in Example 5.1, calculate the masculinity proportion from the masculinity 
ratio calculated in Example 5.2. 
Solution
From Example 5.2, SR = 95.2. Therefore, 
	
MP
=
SR
100 + SR
=
95.2
100 + 95.2 = 0.495
2)	Deriving Sex (Masculinity) Ratio from Masculinity Proportion 
The sex (masculinity) ratio may be derived from masculinity proportion as follows: 
	
SR =
MP
1 −MP × 100
Example 5.5
Calculate the masculinity ratio from the masculinity proportion calculated in Example 5.1. 
Solution
From Example 5.1, MP = 0.488. Hence, 
	
SR 	
=
MP
1 −MP × 100
	
	
=
0.488
1 −0.488 × 100 = 95.2
which is similar to the result in Example 5.2. 
3)	The percent excess or deficit of males may be derived from masculinity proportion as: 
	
E = [MP −(1 −MP)] × 100
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com

DEMOGRAPHIC STATISTICS
117
MEASURES OF POPULATION COMPOSITION
Example 5.6
Calculate the percent excess or deficit of males from the masculinity proportion calculated 
in Example 5.1. 
Solution
From Example 5.1, MP = 0.495. Hence 
	
E
=
[MP −(1 −MP)] × 100
=
[0.488 −(1 −0.488)] × 100
=
(0.488 −0.505) × 100 = −2.7
Comparing Results of Various Measures of Sex Composition
It is obvious that the various demographic measures of sex composition convey essentially 
the same information. Percent excess (deficit) is very useful in the sense that besides the 
information we get from masculinity proportion and sex ratio, it also tells us the quantum 
of the excess or deficit.
5.3	
POPULATION COMPOSITION BY AGE 
Age is an important study variable in any demographic, epidemiological18 and clinical 
research and analysis. Every individual is, invariably, a member of a temporary class of a 
generation, progeny or an age class. Age is, however, a complex variable because collection 
and analysis of age data is not straightforward, especially in Africa. 
5.3.1  DEFINITION OF CONCEPTS 
Age
Age reflects the duration of life as a biological phenomenon and at the same time is the 
main ordinate of man’s life. The age of an individual is defined as his duration of life from 
the moment of birth to the moment of death. A person’s exact age at any given time is the 
time elapsed since the person was born.
Age is usually measured as a discrete variable given in completed years. A person’s age in 
completed years is the greatest integral number (0, 1, 2, · · ·) less than the persons exact age. 
An age less than one year is considered as age zero. In a census, age is commonly defined 
in terms of the age of the person at his last birthday in years for people of more than one 
year, in months for children of less than one year but more than one month, and in days 
for children of less than one month. 
A class of individuals of the same age forms an age group. 
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com

DEMOGRAPHIC STATISTICS
118
MEASURES OF POPULATION COMPOSITION
118
Generation 
A generation is the progeny19 of individuals born during the entire reproduction period 
throughout the lifespan. The length of a generation corresponds to the average reproductive 
age of a given population. 
Cohort 
A cohort is a group of persons experiencing the same demographic event during the same 
time interval, usually during the same year. The most common and most important type 
of cohort considered in demographic studies is a birth cohort. A birth cohort is the set of 
individuals born during a particular time interval. Thus the newborns of the year 2000 is 
readily referred to as “the 2000 birth cohort”. Consequently, a population at a given time 
is the aggregate of the survivors of different cohorts of people born during different years. 
For the purpose of current life table (see Chapter 7), these surviving cohorts are pieced 
together to behave like a single cohort which is called a synthetic cohort.
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
AXA Global 
Graduate Program
Find out more and apply

DEMOGRAPHIC STATISTICS
119
MEASURES OF POPULATION COMPOSITION
The term cohort can be used in respect of other vital events also. Thus, a marriage cohort 
is a group of persons who married during the same year or period. Thus, the marriage 
cohort of 1998 refers to all marriages contracted in the year 1998. A labour force cohort is 
a group of persons entering a labour force during a year. Another example is a migration 
cohort – a group of persons who moved into (or out of) an area during a particular period. 
In a census, the population distribution contains various types of cohort, such as the birth 
cohort and marriage cohort. When a birth cohort is composed specifically of individuals 
born during the same calendar year, it is called a generation cohort. The size of this cohort 
in the life table is called the radix of the cohort and is denoted as l0 (refer to Chapter 7). 
Cohort Analysis 
Cohort analysis (synonym is longitudinal analysis or generation analysis) is the study of 
the sequence of events over time within a well defined cohort or group. Cohort analysis of 
demographic data is necessary to understand the process of changes over time. Data useful 
for cohort analysis may be obtained from any of the standard sources of demographic data. 
While the main source of data for cohort analysis is the survey, the other sources are not well 
developed, especially in Africa. Surveys can provide panel data (longitudinal), retrospective 
and repetitive observations. 
Period
A period is an interval of time (usually between two dates) within which different or the 
same vital events take place. Period data relate to a type of demographic event which 
occurred over a great number of years (i.e. involving many cohorts) but which is observed 
during a specified brief period of time (usually one year). This is also referred to as cross-
sectional data. 
Period Analysis 
Period analysis (synonyms are cross-sectional or current analysis) is the study of a category 
of events experienced by a group of cohorts during a given year, or in a period of years, 
covering different cohorts. For example, we may study deaths in the year 1990; these deaths 
take place among several different birth cohorts. 
5.3.2  USES OF AGE COMPOSITION 
The number of person against each age interval (1 year, 5 year, 10 year or any other 
equal or unequal classes) expressed in absolute numbers or as percentages is called the age 
composition of the population,
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com

DEMOGRAPHIC STATISTICS
120
MEASURES OF POPULATION COMPOSITION
1)	Age is the primary basis of demographic classification in vital statistics, census and 
survey work. 
2)	It is one of the most fundamental demographic characteristics interrelating all other 
characteristics of a person. 
3)	It is the most important variable in the study of mortality, fertility, nuptiality, 
migration, and certain areas of demographic analysis. 
4)	It determines the social role and place of a person in the society. 
5)	Age composition is important for the evaluation of the quality of the census counts 
of populations. 
6)	Age composition of a country has enormous socio-economic significance. It affects 
all spheres of life of its citizens: the level of consumptions, income, social services 
needed (schools, teachers, health services, food and housing), potential manpower, 
participation of people in productive work, taking part in reproduction process, 
potential voting population, etc. 
5.3.3  TABULATION OF AGE 
Detailed classification of age data collected in census or national sample surveys may 
consider intervals of a single year of age. Such classification consists of maximum position 
of 99 beginning from age 0 (0 is for persons of less than one year of age)20. The single-year 
distributions are necessary because 
1)	they allow a far more detailed scrutiny of the data for errors; 
2)	age data are highly demanded both for specific ages and special combinations of ages, 
making it also possible to re-group ages to minimize the effects of age misreporting; 
3)	age data are required for cross-classification with several characteristics which change 
sharply from age to age over parts of the age range (e.g. school enrollment, labour 
force status, marital status). 
When each single years of age are cross-classified with other categories, the table will be 
too cumbersome for most purposes. If overly condensed, the data would cease to be useful. 
For analysis of concrete empirical population for most cross-classifications (for example, sex, 
ethnic groups, socio-economic status) a more compact classification in 5-year age groups is 
often employed. The 5-year age groups: 
0 −4, 5 −9, 10 −14, ..., 90 −94, 95
have become almost a standard feature of demographic tables. Table 5.1 shows the population 
of Ghana by 5-year age groups for the five censuses.
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com

DEMOGRAPHIC STATISTICS
121
MEASURES OF POPULATION COMPOSITION
Age group 
1960 
1970 
1984 
2000
2010 
0–4 
1,296,625
1,563,130
2,030,082 
2,769,421
3,405,406 
5–9 
1,018,590
1,450,165
2,001,825 
2,775,206
3,128,952 
10–14
681,291 
1,002,670
1,503,209 
2,262,216
2,916,040 
15–19
541,076 
778,055
1,246,390 
1,883,753
2,609,989 
20–24
590,912 
681,131
1,056,001 
1,600,820
2,323,491 
25–29
584,930 
631,426
945,111 
1,487,299
2,050,111 
30–34
488,398 
560,497
742,803 
1,206,809
1,678,809 
35–39
377,413 
438,301
584,299 
1,029,765
1,421,403 
40–44
311,509 
350,046
473,254 
886,931
1,186,350 
45–49
218,346 
272,066
428,207 
720,357
938,098 
50–54
178,490 
231,437
352,684 
568,369
833,098 
55–59
107,719 
142,516
213,081 
355,842
523,695 
60–64
118,039 
146,378
225,776 
366,351
475,849 
65–69
60,958 
94,218
145,309 
258,709
293,871 
70–74
56,529 
82,392
128,866 
225,158
351,330 
75–79
30,961 
42,262
71,813 
144,830
205,953 
80–84
28,809 
40,255
70,427 
140,847
159,084 
85+ 
36,220 
52,368
76,944 
229,396
157,294 
Total
6,726,815 
8,559,313
12,296,081 
18,912,079
24,658,823 
Table 5.1 Population of Ghana by Age, 1960–2010  
Source: Various Population Censuses, GSS 
For certain specific purposes, the age intervals could, however, be broader by condensing 
some of them or even be unequal. For instance, to study mortality, age intervals as 
0, 1−4, 5−9, 10−19, 20−29 · · · would be more meaningful as risk and death is different 
among these age groups but is more, or less uniform within them. Similarly, age intervals 
0 −19, 20 −44, 45+ would be adequate to study migration as it is age selective.
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com

DEMOGRAPHIC STATISTICS
122
MEASURES OF POPULATION COMPOSITION
For fertility analysis, the age groups for females have been generally chosen as 0 −14, 15 −49, 50+. 
This broad division implies that these women under 15 and above 49 will not be generally 
able to give birth. For analysis of economic activities, the age groups are usually chosen as 
0 −14, 15 −64, 65+. This implies that those under 15 and 65 and above will not in general 
be engaged in economically productive activities and so will be normally dependent on the 
economically active population, namely, those in the age group 15 −64.
5.3.4  ERRORS IN AGE DATA 
Errors in age data occur in both census statistics and vital statistics. In each case there may 
be errors of coverage or of content, or a combination of both. 
Error of Coverage
Errors of coverage in age data are of two types. These are gross underenumeration, when 
individuals of a given age may have been missed by the census; and gross overenumeration, 
when individuals of a given age may have been erroneously included in it. The balance of 
these two types of coverage errors represent net underenumeration (since underenumeration 
usually exceeds overestimation). Underenumeration in many censuses occur mostly in the 
younger ages. 
Error of Content
Error of content are caused by misstatement of age of respondents and error by census 
officials. 
Misstatement of Age 
The ages of some individuals included in the census may have been 
1)	erroneously reported by the respondent owing to 
i)	 ignorance of correct age, 
ii)	a general age preference, 
iii)	a tendency to exaggerate length of life at advanced ages, 
iv)	a possibly subconscious aversion to certain numbers, 
v)	an economic, social, political or purely personal motive; 
2)	caused by the census enumerator by 
i)	 erroneous estimation of age; 
ii)	incorrect computation of age from the given information; 
iii)	not stating the age; 
3)	erroneously allocated by the census office in the course of correcting age misstatement. 
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com

DEMOGRAPHIC STATISTICS
123
MEASURES OF POPULATION COMPOSITION
123
A measure of misstatement or misreporting of age is referred to, in general, as response 
variability of age. The offsetting effect of reporting “into” and reporting “out of” a 
given age group is known as net misreporting or response bias. The combination of net 
underenumeration and net misreporting for a given age is known as net census undercount 
or net census overcount, if the number in the age is overstated, or generally termed net 
census error. 
Digit Preference
Age data have been found to be subject to tendentious error. There is a strong tendency 
among persons while reporting their age, to exhibit digit preference. Digit preference is 
the unexplained liking for numbers ending in certain digits. The result of such preference 
is that there will be unusually large number of persons at ages ending with the preferred 
digit. This is known as age heaping. The causes and patterns of age or digit preference 
vary from one culture to another, but preference for ages ending in “0” and “5” is quite 
widespread. Age heaping is most pronounced among populations or population subgroups 
having a low educational status.
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
ibili
because 
e Graduate Programme  
for Engineers and Geoscientists
Month 16
I was a construction
supervisor in 
the North Sea 
advising and 
helping foremen 
solve problems
I was a
he
s
Real work 
International opportunities 

ree work placements
al 
Internationa
or

ree wo
I wanted real responsibili 
 I joined MITAS because 
www.discovermitas.com

DEMOGRAPHIC STATISTICS
124
MEASURES OF POPULATION COMPOSITION
Age heaping is considered to be a measure of data quality and consistency. It is the principal 
type of error in single-year-of-age data, although single ages are also affected by other types 
of age misreporting, net underenumeration, and nonreporting or misassignment of age. 
Fortunately, age data are usually presented in the form of 5 or 10 year age groups and age 
heaping disappears to a large extent but other biases will not be canceled out. 
Another form of tendentious error is tendentious bias. A tendentious bias is the tendency 
for people to report an age closer to their actual age because of certain importance or 
emotional reasons attached to it. For example, the tendency of a Ghanaian near 17 to 
report the age as 18 because 18 is significant for voting or marriage rights in Ghana. We 
may observe from Table 5.2 that females in Ghana are very eager to move to age 18. The 
ratio of males to females reduces sharply from age 17 to 18. On the other hand, males are 
eager to be 21 years old.
Age-group 
1960 
1970 
1984 
2000
2010 
15
116.5
113.6
112.3
108.5
103.2 
16
111.8
112.1
106.4
101.1
99.5 
17
107.5
111.4
108.6
105.6
101.5 
18
95.5
94.6 
96.5
102.8
100.9 
19
89.9
95.1 
98.4
102.0
98.9 
20
79.8
78.8 
85.4
89.8
92.0 
21
85.0
88.3 
91.0
97.2
94.0 
22
80.9
78.5 
80.2
88.4
86.5 
23
88.3
89.4 
86.6
91.4
87.4 
24
85.5
76.5 
81.7
90.9
88.9 
Table 5.2 Ratio of Males per 100 Females (Sex Ratio) in Single Years from age 15 to 24, 1960–2010  
Source: Author’s calculation from various Population and Housing Censuses, GSS 
Ages Unknown or not Stated
Age tabulation from census and vital registration sources frequently contain a category of 
persons of unstated age. This occurs when an age is unknown, illegible, partially stated, 
inconsistent with other particulars on the enumeration schedule, or ambiguous, such as 
“over eighteen”. 
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com

DEMOGRAPHIC STATISTICS
125
MEASURES OF POPULATION COMPOSITION
The issue of unknown or unstated age is troublesome to those who use population data. It 
also adds to the expense of publishing census reports since they require the same amount of 
space in print as a known age class. To eliminate this expense, a method is devised by the 
census office to assign an age to each case in the enumeration schedule where the problem 
occurs. In doing this, two basic principles should be followed. That we should 
1)	be guided by any information on the census schedule that may be indicative of age; 
2)	ensure that the estimated age was not inconsistent with any reliable information 
on the schedule. 
5.3.5  DETECTION OF ERRORS IN AGE DATA 
Post enumeration surveys or a sample reinterview study is a means of detecting errors in 
census data. This is particularly useful in providing information and causes of errors of 
reporting in single years. However, in practice, the size of sample of the reinterview survey 
ordinarily precludes any evaluation in terms of single ages. Various arithmetic techniques 
have been developed to handle errors on age reporting. These include age ratios, sex ratios 
and age accuracy index. The extent of age heaping is measured by indices of digit preference.
There are several measures including Baachi’s Index and Ramachandran’s Index to measure 
age heaping but the four measures that will be discussed in this text include age ratios, age-
ratio-type index, Whipple’s index and Myers’ index. These measures are applicable where 
age is reported in single years. 
5.3.6  AGE RATIOS 
Age ratios (AR) are calculated from the census data to check the quality of the census returns 
by age groups. It may be defined as “the ratio of the population in the given age group to 
one half of the sum of the population in the two adjacent age groups multiplied by 100”. 
That is, the age ratio for a 5-year group, 5Px, is defined as: 
ARx =
5Px
1
2

5P(x−5) +5 P(x+5)

×
100
where 
5Px	
is the population in age group x + 4,
5P(x−5)	
is the population in the preceding age group,
5P(x+5)	
is the population in the following age group.
The lower the AR, the more adequate the census data on age. 
AR=100
This implies that there is no error in age reporting. 
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com

DEMOGRAPHIC STATISTICS
126
MEASURES OF POPULATION COMPOSITION
AR < 100
This implies either that members of the group were selectively underenumerated or that 
errors in age reporting resulted in mis-classifying persons who belonged to the age group. 
AR > 100
This implies either that members of the group were selectively overenumerated or that 
errors in age reporting resulted in mis-classifying persons into the age group who did not 
belong there, or both. 
Example 5.7
Refer to Table 5.1. Calculate for the year 2010 the age ratio of the population in 
1)	age group 10–14 years; 
2)	age group 20–24 years 
Solution
1)	To calculate age ratio for age group 5-9, we require population figures for age 
groups 0–4, 5–9 and 10–14 which we obtain from Table 5.1: 
	
Age-group
5 −9
=
5Px−5
=
3, 128, 952
Age-group
10 −14
=
5Px
=
2, 916, 040
Age-group
15 −19
=
5Px+5
=
2, 609, 989
Hence the age ratio of the population in the age group 10-14 years is 
	
AR5−9 =
2, 916, 040
1
2 (3, 128, 952 + 2, 609, 989)
×
100 = 101.62
About 1.6 percent of the members in the age group 10–14 were selectively over-
enumerated. 
Alternatively stated: “errors in age reporting resulted in 1.6 percent of mis-classifying 
persons in the age group 5–9 who did not belonged to that age group in the 2010 census.
2)	To calculate age ratio for age group 20–24, we require population figures for age 
groups 15–19, 20–24 and 25–29 which we obtain from Table 5.1: 
	
5Px
=
5P(20−24) = 2, 323, 491
5Px−5
=
5P(15−19) = 2, 609, 989
5Px+5
=
5P(25−29) = 2, 050, 111
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com

DEMOGRAPHIC STATISTICS
127
MEASURES OF POPULATION COMPOSITION
Hence the age ratio of the population in the age group 35-39 years is 
	
AR35−39	
=
5Px
1
2 (5Px−5 +5 Px+5)
×
100
	
	
	
=
2, 323, 491
1
2 (2, 609, 989 + 2, 050, 111)
×
100 = 99.22
About 0.8 percent of the members in the age group 20–24 were selectively 
underenumerated. 
We may atate it as: “errors in age reporting resulted in 0.8 percent of mis-classifying 
persons in the age group 20–24 who belonged to that age group in 2010.”
Generally, age ratios should be studied for a series of age groups, usually for the entire 
span of age up to, at least, age 70. Column 3 of Table 5.3 presents age ratios for all the 
age groups.
Alternative Definition of Age Ratios 
Alternatively, age ratios have been defined as the ratio of the population in the given age 
group to one-third of the sum of the populations in the age group itself and the two adjacent 
age groups, times 100. Thus, 
AR =
5Px
1
3

5P(x−5) +5 Px +5 P(x+5)
 × 100
This definition is preferred because it centres on the age group under study and heaps 
considerably on it. An index of 100 indicates no concentration on this age. The higher the 
index the greater the concentration on the age examined.
Age-group 
2010 Population
Age ratio
Age Ratio (Alternative definition)
1
2
3
4
0–4 
3,405,406 
– 
–
5–9 
3,128,952 
99.00 
99.33 
10–14 
2,916,040 
101.62 
101.08 
15–19 
2,609,989 
99.63 
99.75 
20–24 
2,323,491 
99.72 
99.81 
25–29 
2,050,111 
102.45 
101.62 
30–34 
1,678,809 
96.72 
97.79 
35–39 
1,421,403 
99.22 
99.48 
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com

DEMOGRAPHIC STATISTICS
128
MEASURES OF POPULATION COMPOSITION
128
Age-group 
2010 Population
Age ratio
Age Ratio (Alternative definition)
40–44 
1,186,350 
100.56 
100.37 
45–49 
938,098 
92.91 
95.16 
50–54 
833,098 
113.98 
108.91 
55–59 
523,695 
80.02 
85.73 
60–64 
475,849 
116.41 
110.37 
65–69 
293,871 
71.05 
78.64 
70–74 
351,330 
140.58 
123.83 
75–79 
205,953 
80.70 
86.25 
80–84 
159,084 
87.59 
91.37 
85+ 
157,294 
– 
–
Total 
24,658,823 
TABLE 5.3 Age Ratio of 2010 Population of Ghana  
Source: Author’s calculation from 2010 Population and Housing Census, GSS 
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
MASTER IN MANAGEMENT
mim.admissions@ie.edu
Follow us on IE MIM Experience
www.ie.edu/master-management
#10 WORLDWIDE
MASTER IN MANAGEMENT 
FINANCIAL TIMES
55 Nationalities
in class
5 Specializations
Personalize your program 
Length: 1O MONTHS
Av. Experience: 1 YEAR
Language: ENGLISH / SPANISH
Format: FULL-TIME
Intakes: SEPT / FEB
• STUDY IN THE CENTER OF MADRID AND TAKE ADVANTAGE OF THE UNIQUE OPPORTUNITIES
  THAT THE CAPITAL OF SPAIN OFFERS
• PROPEL YOUR EDUCATION BY EARNING A DOUBLE DEGREE THAT BEST SUITS YOUR
  PROFESSIONAL GOALS
• STUDY A SEMESTER ABROAD AND BECOME A GLOBAL CITIZEN WITH THE BEYOND BORDERS
  EXPERIENCE
93%
OF MIM STUDENTS ARE
WORKING IN THEIR SECTOR 3 MONTHS
FOLLOWING GRADUATION

DEMOGRAPHIC STATISTICS
129
MEASURES OF POPULATION COMPOSITION
Example 5.8
Refer to Table 5.1. Calculate for the year 2010 the age ratio of the population in 
1)	age group 5–9 years; 
2)	age group 20–24 years 
using the alternative definition 
Solution
1)	From Table 5.6, 
	
Age-group
5 −9
=
5Px−5
=
3, 128, 952
Age-group
10 −14
=
5Px
=
2, 916, 040
Age-group
15 −19
=
5Px+5
=
2, 609, 989
Hence 
	
AR
=
5P(5−9)
1
3

5P(5−9) +5 P(10−14) +5 P(15−19)
 × 100
=
2, 916, 040
1
3 (3, 128, 952 + 2, 916, 040 + 2, 609, 989) × 100 = 101.08
2)	From Table 5.1, 
	
5Px
=
5P(20−24) = 2, 323, 491
5Px−5
=
5P(15−19) = 2, 609, 989
5Px+5
=
5P(25−29) = 2, 050, 111
Hence 
	
AR
=
5P(20−24)
1
3

5P(15−19) +5 P(20−24) +5 P(25−29)
 × 100
=
2, 323, 491
1
3 (2, 609, 989 + 2, 323, 491 + 2, 050, 111) × 100 = 99.81
Column 4 of Table 5.3 presents age ratios of the alternative definition for all the age groups.
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com

DEMOGRAPHIC STATISTICS
130
MEASURES OF POPULATION COMPOSITION
5.3.7  AGE-RATIO-TYPE INDEX 
The age-ratio-type index of digit preference (ARTI) is based on the assumption that the 
true figures are uniformly distributed, that is, there are equal numbers in age over some 
age range which includes and, preferably, is centred on the age being examined. However, 
when the age range is large (for example, 11 years), the true figures may be assumed to 
be linear, that is, the true figures form an arithmetic progression, or that they decrease by 
equal amounts from age to age over the range. The age ranges often used are the 3-year, 
5-year, or 11-year.
The ARTI on age x may be calculated as: 
ARTI(3 year)
x
=
Px
1
3

P(x−1) + Px + P(x+1)
 × 100
for the 3-year age range and 
ARTI(5 year)
x
=
Px
1
5

P(x−2) + P(x−1) + Px + P(x+1) + P(x+2)
 × 100
for the 5-year age range.
The ARTI on age x for 11-year age range is similarly calculated. 
Example 5.10
Table 5.4 gives the 2010 population of Ghana for single ages from 20 to 70 years. 
Calculate the ARTI for 
1)	3-year range 
2)	5-year range 
3)	11-year range 
of the total population within the ages 23 to 62 inclusive. 
Solution
1)	Calculation of ARTI for 3-year range:
To calculate age-ratio-type index for age 24, we require population figures for ages 23, 
24 and 25: 
	
Age 23 :
P23
=
401, 890
Age 24 :
P24
=
412, 380
Age 25 :
P25
=
556, 140
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com

DEMOGRAPHIC STATISTICS
131
MEASURES OF POPULATION COMPOSITION
Hence the age-ratio-type index of the population in the age group 24 year is 
	
ARTI(3 year)
(24)
=
412, 380
1
3 (401, 890 + 412, 380 + 556, 140)
× 100 = 90.3
That is, 9.7 percent less than expected have been reported at age 24 (assuming a 3-year 
range uniform distribution).
Age 
Population
Age
Population 
20
650,177
36
264,250
21
398,945
37
227,508
22
460,099
38
294,871
23
401,890
39
173,747
24
412,380
40
467,054 
25
556,140
41
166,202
26
373,308
42
243,400
27
427,358
43
157,462
28
414,518
44
152,232
29
278,787
45
333,095
30
579,941
46
165,217
31
274,835
47
144,972
32
336,958
48
184,120
33
249,483
48
110,694
34
237,592
50
335,273
35
461,027
51
98,454
16
496,123
52
148,808
17
474,666
53
134,533
18
599,926
54
116,030
19
433,937
55
164,660
20
650,177
56
119,741
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com

DEMOGRAPHIC STATISTICS
132
MEASURES OF POPULATION COMPOSITION
Age 
Population
Age
Population 
21
398,945
57
81,770
22
460,099
58
102,315
23
401,890
59
55,209
24
412,380
60
221,708
25
556,140
61
55,469
26
373,308
62
80,380
27
427,358
63
63,296
28
414,518
64
54,996
29
278,787
65
124,53897
30
579,941
66
43,228
31
274,835
67
42,573
32
336,958
68
53,220
33
249,483
69
30,312
34
237,592
70
170,36
35
461,027
TABLE 5.4 2010 Population of Ghana for Single Ages from 20 to 70 years
To calculate age-ratio-type index for age group 25, we require population figures for age 
groups 24, 25 and 26: 
	
Age 24 :
P24
=
412, 380
Age 25 :
P25
=
556, 140
Age 26 :
P26
=
373, 308
Hence the age ratio of the population for age 25 is 
	
ARTI(3 year)
(25)
=
556, 140
1
3 (412, 380 + 556, 140 + 373, 308)
× 100 = 124.3
That is, 24.3 percent more than expected have been reported at age 25 (assuming a 3-year 
range uniform distribution).
The age-ratio-type indices of the remaining ages for 3-year range are similarly obtained. 
The results are presented in Table 5.5. 
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com

DEMOGRAPHIC STATISTICS
133
MEASURES OF POPULATION COMPOSITION
133
2)	Calculation of ARTI for 5-year range
To calculate age-ratio-type index for age 25, we require population figures for ages 23, 
24, 25, 26 and 27: 
	
Age 23 :
P23
=
401, 890
Age 24 :
P24
=
412, 380
Age 25 :
P25
=
556, 140
Age 26 :
P26
=
373, 308
Age 27 :
P27
=
427, 358
Hence the age-ratio-type index of the population in the age 25 for 5-year range is:
	
ARTI(5 year)
(25)
=
556, 140
1
5 (401, 890 + 412, 380 + 556, 140 + 373, 308 + 427, 358)
× 100 = 128.1
That is, 28.1 percent more than expected have been reported at age 25 (assuming a 5-year 
range uniform distribution).
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more

DEMOGRAPHIC STATISTICS
134
MEASURES OF POPULATION COMPOSITION
To calculate age-ratio-type index for age 26, we require population figures for age groups 
24, 25, 26, 27 and 28:: 
	
Age 24 :
P24
=
412, 380
Age 25 :
P25
=
556, 140
Age 26 :
P26
=
373, 308
Age 27 :
P27
=
427, 358
Age 28 :
P28
=
319, 570
Hence the age ratio of the population in the age 26 for the 5-year range is 
	
ARTI(5 year)
(26)
=
373, 308
1
5 (412, 380 + 448, 420 + 373, 308 + 427, 358 + 414, 518)
× 100 = 85.5
The age-ratio type indices of the remaining ages for the 5-year range are similarly obtained. 
The results are presented in Table 5.5.
The indices for 11-year old age are similarly calculated and given in Table 5.5. 
5.3.8  WHIPPLE’S INDEX 
The Whipple’s Index (WI) has been developed to detect preference for or avoidance of a 
particular terminal digit or each terminal digit. It measures the intensity of concentration 
at multiples of 5, namely, age heaping at the digits 5 and 0. The index dwells on the ages 
between 23 and 62 years inclusive. The choice of this age range is standard, but largely 
arbitrary. The two main reasons for this choice are: 
1)	Heaping was most evident within this period of life for a study in 1910 in the 
United States; 
2)	Ages of early childhood and extreme old age are more strongly affected by other 
types of errors of reporting than by preference for specific terminal digits. 
The WI is defined as the ratio of the sum of the populations at the ages ending in ‘0’ or 
‘5’ to one-fifth of the total population in the range 23 to 62. That is, 
WI =
P25 + P30 + P35 + P40 + P45 + P50 + P55 + P60
1
5(P23 + P24 + P25 + P26 + · · · + P59 + P60 + P61 + P62) × 100
Pa is the number of persons reporting their age as a.
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com

DEMOGRAPHIC STATISTICS
135
MEASURES OF POPULATION COMPOSITION
In a more compact form, 
WI =
60

a=25
P 05
a
1
5
62

a=23
Pa
× 100
where P 05
a  is the number of persons reporting ages ending in ‘0’ or ‘5’; 
Age 
2000 Population
3-year 
5-year
11-year 
23
401,890 
– 
– 
– 
24
412,380 
90.3 
– 
– 
25
556,140 
124.3 
128.1 
– 
26
373,308 
82.5 
85.5 
– 
27
427,358 
105.5 
104.2 
105.9 
28
414,518 
111.0 
99.9 
174.1 
29
278,787 
65.7 
70.6 
7152.3
30
579,941 
153.5 
153.8 
177.6 
31
274,835 
69.2 
79.9 
798.8
32
336,958 
117.4 
100.4 
975.8
33
249,483 
90.8 
80.0 
777.3
34
237,592 
75.2 
76.7 
7142.2
35
461,027 
143.6 
160.1 
192.2 
36
264,250 
83.2 
89.0 
980.2
37
227,508 
86.8 
80.0 
8110.2
38
294,871 
127.1 
103.3 
167.2 
39
173,747 
55.7 
65.3 
6174.7
40
467,054 
173.6 
173.6 
169.1 
41
166,202 
56.9 
68.8 
6106.0
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com

DEMOGRAPHIC STATISTICS
136
MEASURES OF POPULATION COMPOSITION
Age 
2000 Population
3-year 
5-year
11-year 
42
243,400 
128.8 
102.6 
169.8 
43
157,462 
85.4 
74.8 
672.9
44
152,232 
71.0 
72.4 
7149.0
45
333,095 
153.6 
174.8 
186.9 
46
165,217 
77.1 
84.3 
876.9
47
144,972 
88.0 
77.3 
7103.1
48
184,120 
125.6 
97.9 
163.3 
48
110,694 
52.7 
63.4 
6190.5
50
335,273 
184.8 
191.1 
162.9 
51
98,454 
50.7 
59.5 
699.9
52
148,808 
116.9 
89.3 
992.7
53
134,533 
101.1 
101.5 
987.0
54
116,030 
83.8 
84.8 
8114.7
55
164,660 
123.4 
133.5 
1101.4 
56
119,741 
98.1 
102.4 
170.2 
57
81,770 
80.7 
78.1 
7
58
102,315 
128.3 
88.1 
– 
59
55,209 
43.7 
53.4 
– 
60
221,708 
200.1 
215.2 
– 
61
55,469 
46.5 
— 
– 
62
80,380 
– 
– 
– 
Total
9,803,391
TABLE 5.5 Age-ratio-type Indices of the 2010 Population of Ghana  
Source: Author’s calculation from 2000 Population and Housing Census, GSS 
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com

DEMOGRAPHIC STATISTICS
137
MEASURES OF POPULATION COMPOSITION
Interpretation of WI
The Whipple’s Index lies in the range 100 and 500, that is 
100 ≤WI ≤500
A value of WI = 100
Suppose there is no age heaping at 0 and 5, that is, there is no universal tendency to report 
ages as 25, 30, 35, 40, 45, 50, 55, 60. Assuming that the ages from 23 to 62 years are 
equally reported among the population. But the numerator of Whipple’s index gives ages 
ending in only 2 digits (‘0’ and ‘5’), out of the 10 (0, 1, 2,· · ·, 9) digits. This represents 
approximately 1
5 of the total population in that range, equivalent to the denominator, 
resulting in WI  being equal to 100.
Thus, WI = 100 is the theoretical minimum which implies no age heaping at 0 and 5. 
That is, there is no preference for 0 or 5. 
A value of WI = 500
Suppose there is a complete age heaping, that is, the entire population is concentrated at 
ages 25, 30, 35,· · ·, 60 with none reporting their ages as 23, 24, 26· · ·, 29, 31,· · ·, 59. The 
numerator should be approximately the same as the total population in the range 23 to 62 
years given in the denominator.
Thus, WI = 500 is the theoretical maximum which means that there is complete age heaping, 
that is, a preference for only 0 and 5 (everbody reporting ages ending in 0 and 5). 
A value of 100 < WI < 500
That is, when the value of WI  is greater than 100 but less than 500. Table 5.6 shows what 
meaning may be assigned to any value of WI  within that range. 
Whipple’s Index 
Quality of the Data 
Less than 105
Highly accurate 
105–109.9 
Fairly accurate 
110–124.9 
Fairly acceptable 
125–174.9 
Inaccurate 
175–499.9 
Highly inaccurate
TABLE 5.6 Scale for detecting the reliability of the data
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com

DEMOGRAPHIC STATISTICS
138
MEASURES OF POPULATION COMPOSITION
138
Example 5.11
Refer to Table 5.5. Calculate the Whipple’s Index of digit preference. 
Solution
The calculation of the Whipple’s Index requires population in the age range 23 to 62 years. 
Preliminary calculations are in Table 5.12.
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
“The perfect start 
of a successful, 
international career.”
CLICK HERE 
to discover why both socially 
and academically the University 
of Groningen is one of the best 
places for a student to be 
www.rug.nl/feb/education
Excellent Economics and Business programmes at:

DEMOGRAPHIC STATISTICS
139
MEASURES OF POPULATION COMPOSITION
Age 
2010 Population 
25
556,140 
30
579,941 
35
461,027 
40
467,054 
45
333,095 
50
335,273 
55
164,660 
60
221,708 
Total
3,118,898 
TABLE 5.7 Preliminary calculation of Whipple’s Index for Ghana, 2010 
Source: Computed from 2010 Population and Housing Census, GSS 
From Table2 5.5 and 5.7, 
62

a=23
=
P23 + P24 + P25 + P26 + · · · + P59 + P60 + P61 + P62 = 9, 803, 391
60

a=25
=
P25 + P30 + P35 + P40 + P45 + P50 + P55 + P60 = 3, 118, 898
Hence, 
WI =
3, 118, 898
1
5(9, 803, 391) × 100 = 159.1
That is, reporting of age data in the 2010 census was inaccurate. 
Special Case of Whipple’s Index
A special case of the WI is the case when we assume a uniform distribution in a 10-year 
range defined as: 
WI0 =
P30 + P40 + P50 + P60
1
10(P23 + P24 + P25 + P26 + · · · + P59 + P60 + P61 + P62) × 100
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com

DEMOGRAPHIC STATISTICS
140
MEASURES OF POPULATION COMPOSITION
for an age ending in ‘0’; or 
WI5 =
P25 + P35 + P45 + P55
1
10(P23 + P24 + P25 + P26 + · · · + P59 + P60 + P61 + P62) × 100
for an age ending in ‘5’.
Limitations of Whipple’s Index
Whipple’s Index has the following limitations. 
1)	Heaping occurs on digits other than 5 and 0, usually with no particular pattern 
but WI  is applicable when preference for age is limited to 0 and 5. Hence, WI  
is not an efficient method. 
2)	WI  considers only the arbitrary interval 23 to 62 years and not the entire life span 
of 0 to ω where ω is the last age attainable. 
3)	WI  does not take into account the decreasing nature of the age distribution due 
to depletion by death. That is, population at younger ages would receive greater 
weight than at the older ages which would bias the index.
5.3.9  MYERS’ INDEX
Myers has suggested a modified index to overcome the limitations of Whipple’s Index. It is 
the most widely known index among the more complex measures. Similar to the Whipple’s 
Index, Myers’ Index has been developed to reflect preferences or dislikes of terminal digits. 
Unlike Whipple’s Index, Myers’ Index is for each of the ten digits from 0 to 9. 
A modification of the WI is to ascertain what proportion of the total population reports at 
an age ending in each of the digits, x (x = 0, 1, 2, 3, · · · , 9). The bias developed by starting 
only at a particular digit is minimised by beginning the count at each of the 10 digits in 
turn and then average the results. The method derives a blended population for the digit at 
age x which is essentially a weighted sum of the number of persons reporting ages ending 
in each of the ten terminal digits, denoted by Px. The underlying assumption is that if there 
are no systematic irregularities in the reporting of age, the blended sum at each terminal 
digit should be approximately equal to 10 percent of the total blended population.
The blended population at each of the ten digits (bP
x ) can be compared with the total of 
the blended population, called the blended sum, to obtain the percentage distribution of 
the blended sum (BSDx): 
BSDx =
bP
x
9

x=0
bP
x
× 100
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com

DEMOGRAPHIC STATISTICS
141
MEASURES OF POPULATION COMPOSITION
BSDx is the percentage of the total population reporting on the given terminal digit. Any 
bP
x  must therefore be 10 percent of 
9

x=0
bP
x  when there is no preference for any digit x. 
Interpretation of BSDx
The blended sum BSDx lies in the range 0 and 100, that is, 
0 ≤BSDx ≤100
The point of balance of heaping is 10. 
A value of BSDx = 10
When BSD = 10, then there is no age heaping. 
A value of BSDx > 10
When BSDx > 10, it indicates a tendency towards preference for a particular digit. 
A value of BSDx < 10
When BSDx < 10  it indicates a tendency towards avoidance for a particular digit. 
Overall Measure of Preference for all Terminal Digits
An overall measure of preference for all terminal digits, the Myers’ Index, is one-half the 
sum of the absolute deviations from 10. That is21: 
MI = 1
2

9

x=0
BSDx −10

Interpretation of Myer’s Index
The MI lies in the range 0 and 90, that is, 
0 ≤MI ≤90
A value of MI = 0
When MI = 0, there is no age heaping, that is, an indication of excellent age reporting. 
A value of MI = 90
When MI = 90, then all recorded ages end in the same digit. 
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com

DEMOGRAPHIC STATISTICS
142
MEASURES OF POPULATION COMPOSITION
Steps in Computing Myers’ Index
The intermediate calculations of Myers’ Index are usually presented in two tables. The first 
table contains the first set of calculations which are done in three steps (steps 1–3). The 
second table starts with the first column (column 1) and the last two columns (columns 
11–12) of the first table which are obtained in steps (2) and (3). What follow in this table 
are based on steps (4)–(8).
Step 1
Put the terminal (or preferred) digits from 0 to 9 in column (1) of the table and indicate 
the populations with ages ending in each of the terminal digits in nine subsequent columns 
(columns 2–10). 
Step 2
Sum the populations with the ages ending in each digit over the whole range, starting with 
the lower limit of the range, namely, 10. Put the results in column (11). 
Step 3
Sum the populations with the ages ending in each digit over the whole range, starting with 
the next lower limit of the range, namely, 20. Put the results in column (12).
Note
The results in steps (2) and (3) are transferred to columns (2) and (3) respectively of another 
table. Column (1) of this second table is transferred from column (1) of the first table. 
Step 4
Assign weights to the sums in steps (2) and (3). For the terminal digits 0 to 9, the 
corresponding weights for the sums in step (2) are 1 to 10 while those for the sums in step 
(3) are 9 to 0. Thus, for each of the preferrred digits we have the corresponding “blended 
population”. The weights represent the number of times the combination of ages in step 
(2) or (3) is included when the starting age is varied from 10 to 19. 
Step 5
Apply the weights in step (4) to the sums in steps (2) and (3), that is, multiply the weights 
by their corresponding sums to obtain the weighted sums. The total of the weights is same 
for each digit. 
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com

DEMOGRAPHIC STATISTICS
143
MEASURES OF POPULATION COMPOSITION
143
Step 6
Add the two weighted sums in step (5) to obtain the blended sum.
Step 7
Calculate percentage distribution of the blended sum. 
Step 8 
Subtract each percentage in step (7) from 10 to obtain the extent of concentration on or 
avoidance of a particular digit. 
Example 5.12
Table 5.8 shows the 2010 total population of Ghana for single ages. Calculate the Myers’ 
Index of digit preference.
Age 
Total Population
Age 
Total Population
Age 
Total Population 
0
731,201
 34 
237,592
68 
53,220
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
American online      
LIGS University 
▶▶enroll by September 30th, 2014 and 
▶▶save up to 16% on the tuition!
▶▶pay in 10 installments / 2 years
▶▶Interactive Online education
▶▶visit www.ligsuniversity.com to 
      find out more!
is currently enrolling in the
Interactive Online BBA, MBA, MSc, 
DBA and PhD  programs:
Note: LIGS University is not accredited by any 
nationally recognized accrediting agency listed 
by the US Secretary of Education. 
More info here. 

DEMOGRAPHIC STATISTICS
144
MEASURES OF POPULATION COMPOSITION
Age 
Total Population
Age 
Total Population
Age 
Total Population 
1
622,871
 35 
461,027
69 
30,312
2
680,641
 36 
264,250
70 
170,36
3
684,823
 37 
227,508
71 
44,162
4
685,870
 38 
294,871
72 
57,196 
5
653,006
 39 
173,747
73 
38,695
6
656,286
 40 
467,054
74 
40,911
7
629,007
 41 
166,202
75 
93,439
8
625,319
 42 
243,400
76 
34,621
9
565,334
 43 
157,462
77 
24,228
10
731,610
 44 
152,232
78 
34,680
11
506,549
 45 
333,095
79 
18,985
12
607,796
 46 
165,217
80 
94,740
13
538,356
 47 
144,972
81 
14,390
14
531,729
 48 
184,120
82 
21,499
15
605,337
 48 
110,694
83 
14,341
16
496,123
 50 
335,273
84 
14,114
17
474,666
 51 
98,454
85 
237,902
18
599,926
 52 
148,808
86 
13,613
19
433,937
 53 
134,533
87 
10,849
20
650,177
 54 
116,030
88 
11,106
21
398,945
 55 
164,660
89 
9,600
22
460,099
 56 
119,741
90 
34,228
23
401,890
 57 
81,770
91 
24,098
24
412,380
 58 
102,315
92 
6,388 
25
556,140
 59 
55,209
93 
13,258
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com

DEMOGRAPHIC STATISTICS
145
MEASURES OF POPULATION COMPOSITION
Age 
Total Population
Age 
Total Population
Age 
Total Population 
26
373,308
 60 
221,708
94 
3,109
27
427,358
 61 
55,469
95 
610,309
28
414,518
 62 
80,380
96 
24,973
29
278,787
 63 
63,296
97 
12,951
30
579,941
 64 
54,996
98 
34,910
31
274,835
 65 
124,538
99 
16432
32
336,958
 66 
43,228
 
33
249,483
 67 
42,573
 
TABLE 5.8 Total Population of Ghana for Single Ages, 2010 
Solution
Step 1
Column (1) of Table 5.9 shows all the terminal digits from 0 to 9. Columns (2)–(10) are 
the populations with ages ending in each of the terminal digit. For example the terminal 
digit 0, has ages 10, 20, 30, · · · , 80, 90. Also the terminal digit 1, has ages 11, 21, 31,· · · , 
81, 91. Finally, the terminal digit 9, has ages 19, 29, 39, · · · , 89, 99. 
Terminal 
digit 
10–19 
20–29 
30–39
40–49
50–59
60–69 
70–79 
80–89
90–99
Total 
Total 
x
(10+x) 
(20+x) 
(30+x)
(40+x)
(50+x)
(60+x) 
(70+x) 
(80+x)
(90+x)
(10+x) +
 (20+x)+ 
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
0
557,528
476,467
489,751
394,941
269,635
199,256
133,417
80,737
32,144
2,633,876
4,710,224
1
383,529
247,983
134,853
84,440
52,604
36,675
18,413
13,509
6,643
1,115,119
1,710,239
2
503,320
333,629
266,155
177,915
105,010
52,901
34,021
18,500
7,289
1,552,948
2,548,368
3
414,386
267,135
154,745
140,264
67,841
39,474
21,377
14,294
5,753
1,094,412
1,805,295
4
403,453
275,606
161,305
89,371
73,279
38,045
17,930
13,807
5,413
1,178,076
1,852,832
5
465,317
448,420
367,789
306,235
131,707
125,276
72,378
37,154
13,036
1,916,381
3,418,376
6
360,009
276,284
196,335
111,798
77,179
31,461
21,793
18,589
8,008
1,144,900
1,886,347
7
333,064
249,139
135,229
83,096
41,479
29,819
12,527
11,216
4,191
1,032,013
1,598,709
8
425,225
319,570
208,158
139,399
66,702
45,698
23,700
20,476
9,513
1,193,225
2,026,441
9
300,138
193,886
122,254
79,829
38,775
26,455
14,432
20,123
29,848
858,666
1,384,268
TABLE 5.9 Preliminary calculation of Myer’s Index 
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com

DEMOGRAPHIC STATISTICS
146
MEASURES OF POPULATION COMPOSITION
Steps 2 and 3
The last two columns are the totals. Column (11) is the sum of the populations with ages 
ending in each terminal digit over the whole range, starting with age 10. Column (12) is 
the sum of the populations with ages ending in each terminal digit over the whole range, 
starting with age 20. 
Step 4
Columns (11) and (12) of Table 5.9 are transferred to columns (2) and (3) of Table 5.10. 
Column (4) are the weights for column (2) (that is, the sum of the ages at each terminal 
digit x starting from age 10). Column (5) are the weights for column (3) (that is, the sum 
of the ages at each terminal digit x starting from age 20). As indicated earlier, the sum of 
the weights in column (4) and column (5) (even though not shown in the table) are the 
same for each digit. 
Terminal 
digit, 
Sum 
Sum 
Weights 
for Sum 
Weights 
for Sum 
Weighted 
Sum
Weighted 
Sum 
x
(10 + x) 
(20 + x) 
(10 + x) 
(20 + x) 
(10 + x) 
(20 + x) 
1
2
3
4
5
6=(2) × (4)
7=(3) × (5) 
0
2,633,876 
2,076,348 
1 
9
2,633,876 
18,687,132 
1
978,649 
 595,120 
2 
8
1,957,298 
4,760,960 
2
1,498,740 
 995,420 
3 
7
4,496,220 
6,967,940 
3
1,125,269 
 710,883 
4 
6
4,501,076 
4,265,298 
4
1,078,209 
 674,756 
5 
5
5,391,045 
3,373,780 
5
1,967,312 
1,501,995 
6 
4
11,803,872 
6,007,980 
6
1,101,456 
 741,447 
7 
3
7,710,192 
2,224,341 
7
899,760 
 566,696 
8 
2
7,198,080 
1,133,392 
8
1,258,441 
 833,216 
9 
1
11,325,969 
833,216 
9
825,740 
 525,602 
10 
0
8,257,400 
- 
Total 
 
 
 
 
 
TABLE 5.10 Final calculation of Myer’s Index 
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com

DEMOGRAPHIC STATISTICS
147
MEASURES OF POPULATION COMPOSITION
Steps 5–8
The remaining calculations are shown in the table. Thus, 
MI = 1
2

9

x=0
BSDx −10
 = 1
2(30.6) = 15.3
Since MI > 0 it indicates that there is age heaping. 
The next step is to locate the digit preference. From column (8), BSD0 = 18.8 > 10,  
BSD5 = 15.7 > 10 and so also are BSD2 and BSD8 which are slightly greater than 10. 
Therefore, age heaping is at ages 0, 2, 5 and 8.
 Blended Sum 
Percentage 
Distribution 
Deviation from 10
Absolute Deviation 
from 10 
BSDx=
bP
x

bP
x
× 100
BSDx −10
|BSDx −10| 
8=(6)+(7)
9
10=(9) −10 
(11)=|(10)| 
21,321,008
18.8 
8.8 
8.8
6,718,258 
5.9 
-4.1
1.4
11,464,160
10.1 
0.1 
0.1
8,766,374 
7.7 
-2.3
w2.3
8,764,825 
7.7 
-2.3
2.3
17,811,852
15.7 
5.7 
5.7
9,934,533 
8.8 
-1.2
1.2
8,331,472 
7.3 
-2.7
3.7
12,159,185
10.7 
0.7 
0.7
8,257,400
7.3 
-2.7
2.7
113,529,067
100.0 
 0 
30.6 
TABLE 5.10 (Continued) Final calculation of Myer’s Index
Note 
In Exercise 5.4, the reader is asked to calculate the Myers’ Index for the 2000 population. 
Compare that result with the result for this example. If the Myers’ Index for the 2010 is 
smaller, then there is improvement of reporting of age data over time and vice versa. 
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com

DEMOGRAPHIC STATISTICS
148
MEASURES OF POPULATION COMPOSITION
148
Limitations of Myers’ Index 
1)	Myers’ Index is more complex to calculate than the Whipple’s Index. 
2)	Similar to the Whipple’s Index, Myers’ Index too does not have any sound 
theoretical basis. 
3)	Myers’ Index assesses only digit preference but we know that digit preference is not 
the only tendentious bias in reported age. 
In spite of the limitations of Myers’ Index, it is the simplest among other measures and is 
still in common use particularly because other indices have not established their superiority. 
It provides an overall measure of age heaping as well as an index of preference for each digit. 
5.3.10  DEMOGRAPHIC MEASURES OF AGE COMPOSITION 
Sometimes we may want to compare age distributions for different areas, for population 
subgroups in a single area, and for the same area at different dates. Caution must, however, 
be taken in making comparisons over populations, as they depend not only on the size of 
the differences but also on the number of age categories used.
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more

DEMOGRAPHIC STATISTICS
149
MEASURES OF POPULATION COMPOSITION
A detailed representation of a society’s age structure can be based on a division of its 
population into three main age groups: the child population, the active population and the 
aged population. For international comparisons, the child population is taken to be persons 
under 15 years, the active population to be 15–64 years and the aged population as persons 
of 65 years and over. The child population and the aged population are usually referred 
to as the dependent population and the active population as the productive population.
Various measures that are used for this purpose include computing percentages in various age 
groups, age dependency ratio, the average age, index of ageing, index of relative difference 
and index of dissimilarity. 
In the following six sections, we shall discuss these measures in detail.
5.3.11  PERCENTAGE AGE DISTRIBUTION 
We can compare two populations over space and time in terms of their age structure. This 
can be done by comparing the percentage of numbers in various age categories, defined 
arbitrarily or defined on the purpose it serves.
A convenient way of showing the age distribution that provides sufficient information is to 
present the percentage distribution of the child population, the active population and the 
aged population. The percentage distribution of the three population segments are defined as: 
Percent Child Population	
=
C0−14
P
× 100
Percent Active Population	
=
A15−64
P
× 100
Percent Aged Population	
=
O65+
P
× 100
where
C0−14 are population under 15 years;
A15−64 are population aged 15–64 years;
O65+ are population aged 65 years and over;
P is total population. 
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com

DEMOGRAPHIC STATISTICS
150
MEASURES OF POPULATION COMPOSITION
Example 5.13
The population in the 2010 Population and Housing Census of Ghana by age is given in 
Table 5.11. Calculate percent 
1)	Child population, 
2)	Active population, 
3)	Aged population. 
Solution
From Table 5.11, the population aged 0–14 years was 7,806,843 in 2010, those 15–64 
years was 10,106,296 and those aged 65 years and over was 998,940. Thus 
C0−14
=
9, 450, 398
A15−64
=
14, 040, 893
O65+
=
1, 167, 532
Consequently, 
Percent Child Population	
=
C0−14
P
× 100
	
	
	
	
=
9, 450, 398
24, 658, 823 × 100 = 38.3%
Percent Active Population	
=
A15−64
P
× 100
	
	
	
	
=
14, 040, 893
24, 658, 823 × 100 = 56.9%
Percent Aged Population	
=
O65+
P
× 100
	
	
	
	
=
1, 167, 532
24, 658, 823 × 100 = 4.7%
That is, the population of Ghana in 2010 constituted 38.3 percent child population, 
56.9 percent active population and 4.7 percent aged population.
5.3.12  AGE DEPENDENCY RATIO 
The dependency ratio is an index of the age distribution. It is usually employed to stress 
the economic implications of the age distribution. 
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com

DEMOGRAPHIC STATISTICS
151
MEASURES OF POPULATION COMPOSITION
Child Dependency Ratio 
The child dependency ratio describes the number of children that are supported by the 
active members of the population. It is defined as 
DRc = C0−14
A15−64
× 100
where C0−14 and A15−64 are as defined above.
Old Age Dependency Ratio 
The old age dependency ratio describes the number of the aged population that are supported 
by the economically active members of the population. It is defined as 
DRo = O65+
A15−64
× 100
where O65+ and A15−64 are as defined above.
This ratio shows the burden of those in advanced ages on those in the working age group.
Total Dependency Ratio 
The age dependency ratio or simply the dependency ratio (DR) shows the relative predominance 
of persons in the dependent ages in relation to those in the productive ages. It is defined 
as the number of youths under 15 years of age and the old aged of 65 years and over to 
the adults aged 15–64 years. That is, 
DRt = C0−14 + O65+
A15−64
× 100
where C0−14, O65+ and A15−64 are as defined above. 
Alternatively, the total dependent ratio may be calculated by adding the child dependent 
ratio and the old age dependent ratio. Thus, 
DRt
=  Child Dependency Ratio + Old Age Dependency Ratio
=
DRc + DRo
Example 5.14
For the data in Table 5.11, calculate 
1)	the child dependency ratio; 
2)	the old age dependency ratio; 
3)	the total dependency ratio. 
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com

DEMOGRAPHIC STATISTICS
152
MEASURES OF POPULATION COMPOSITION
Solution
From Example 5.13, 
C0−14
=
9, 450, 398
A15−64
=
14, 040, 893
O65+
=
1, 167, 532
1)	Child Dependency Ratio 
	
DRc
=
C0−14
A15−64
× 100
=
9, 450, 398
14, 040, 893 × 100 = 67.3%
That is, there were about 67 child dependents per 100 persons in the working ages (i.e., 
in the 15–64 age group). That is to say that for every 100 productive persons there were 
about 67 child dependents in 2010. 
2)	Old Age Dependency Ratio 
	
DRo
=
O65+
A15−64
× 100
=
1, 167, 532
14, 040, 893 × 100 = 8.3%
That is, there were about 8 old aged dependents per 100 persons in the working ages. That 
is to say that for every 100 productive persons there were about 8 old aged dependents 
in 2010.
3)	Total Dependency Ratio 
	
DR
=
C0−14 + O65+
A15−64
× 100
=
9, 450, 398 + 1, 167, 532
14, 040, 893
× 100 = 75.6%
Alternatively, 
DR	 =	
Child Dependency Ratio + Old Age Dependency Ratio 
	
=	
67.3 + 8.3 = 75.6	
percent
That is, there were about 76 dependents per 100 persons in the working ages. That is to 
say that for every 100 productive persons there were about 76 dependents in 2010. 
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com

DEMOGRAPHIC STATISTICS
153
MEASURES OF POPULATION COMPOSITION
153
Note 
1)	In a typical African country 80 ≤ DR ≤ 100; 
2)	In a typical developed country 50 ≤ DR ≤ 70. 
In most African countries, where retirement from workforce typically comes early, it is 
more applicable to employ the population aged 60 and over for the adult dependents and 
population 15 to 59 for adults of working age. 
5.3.13  MEASURES OF AGEING POPULATION 
Unlike an individual person who always grows older over time, the population of the 
aggregate may grow older or younger. The ageing of population can be described as the 
increase in the relative number of older people in the population. It may be measured by: 
1)	Percent aged population, discussed in 5.3.11; 
2)	Old age dependency ratio, discussed in 5.3.12, which shows the burden of those 
in advanced ages on those in the working age group; 
3)	Age-specific Sex Ratio, discussed in Section 5.4.3, for the elderly population which 
shows how relatively more serious the problem of ageing is impacting on one of 
the sexes. 
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
 
  
 
                . 

DEMOGRAPHIC STATISTICS
154
MEASURES OF POPULATION COMPOSITION
4)	Index of Ageing; 
5)	Average age of population (the mean and the median). 
When there is an increase in a measure of ageing over time, then it means that the population 
is ageing. On the other hand, when the measure has a decreasing trend, we say that the 
population is rejuvenating. 
5.3.14  INDEX OF AGEING 
The index of ageing is defined as 
IA = O65+
C0−14
× 100
where O65+ and C0−14 are as defined above. 
Example 5.15
Refer to Table 5.11. Calculate the index of ageing for the population of Ghana in 2010. 
Solution
From Example 5.13, 
O65+ = 1, 167, 532;
C0−14 = 9, 450, 398
Hence the index of ageing is 
IA
=
O65+
C0−14
× 100
=
1, 167, 532
9, 450, 398 × 100 = 12.4%
Interpretation
The older population of Ghana in 2010 was about 12 percent that of the child population. 
This implies that for every 100 children there were about 12 older persons in 2010. 
Limitation of Index of Ageing 
The index of ageing does not bring out the current ageing problem, rather the potential 
problem. It is influenced by two main factors, namely, fertility and mortality. 
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com

DEMOGRAPHIC STATISTICS
155
MEASURES OF POPULATION COMPOSITION
1)	The decline in fertility may cause a population to grow older and vice versa. This 
factor, however, affects only the denominator of the ageing index and does not 
disturb the numerator for a long period of time. 
2)	The decline of mortality at younger ages makes the age distribution younger while 
mortality decline at older ages makes the age distribution older. But the decline of 
mortality at all ages produces only a marginal effect on the ageing of population. 
5.3.15  MEAN AGE OF POPULATION 
The mean age of population, X, may be defined as
X =

a=1
PaXa

a=1
Pa
where Xa is a single age or the mid-point of the age interval a, if age groups are used; Pa 
is the population for age group a. 
Example 5.16
Refer to Table 5.1. Calculate the mean age for the 2010 population of Ghana. 
Solution
Table 5.11 presents the preliminary calculations for obtaining the mean value.
Age group
Mid-point 
Pa
Population 
Xa
 
PaXa
1
2
3
4 = (2) × (3)
0–4 
2
3,405,406
6,810,812
5–9 
7
3,128,952
21,902,664
10–14
12
2,916,040
34,992,480
15–19
17
2,609,989
44,369,813
20–24
22
2,323,491
51,116,802
25–29
27
2,050,111
55,352,997
30–34
32
1,678,809
53,721,888
35–39
37
1,421,403
52,591,911
40–44
42
1,186,350
49,826,700
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com

DEMOGRAPHIC STATISTICS
156
MEASURES OF POPULATION COMPOSITION
Age group
Mid-point 
Pa
Population 
Xa
 
PaXa
45–49
47
938,098
44,090,606
50–54
52
833,098
43,321,096
55–59
57
523,695
29,850,615
60–64
62
475,849
29,502,638
65–69
67
293,871
19,689,357
70–74
72
351,330
25,295,760
75–79
77
205,953
15,858,381
80–84
82
159,084
13,044,888
85+ 
87
157,294
13,684,578
Total 
24,658,823
605,023,986
TABLE 5.11 Preliminary calculation of Mean Age of 2010 Population of Ghana  
Source: Author’s calculation from 2010 Population and Housing Census, GSS 
Thus, 
X
=

a=1
PaXa

a=1
Pa
=
605, 023, 986
24, 658, 823 = 24.5
That is, the mean age of the population of Ghana in 2010 was 24.5 years. 
Limitation of Mean Age of Population 
There are two main limitations of computing the mean for the age distribution. 
1)	Age distributions are usually skewed to the left but the mean is appropriate if the 
distribution is bell-shaped. 
2)	In many cases, the age composition will have only an open interval for the last 
group as we have in Table 5.1, which makes it inappropriate to calculate the mean. 
As we might have noted, we made appropriate adjustment to the last group. 
To overcome these limitation, the median is often used as the appropriate measure of the 
average age. 
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com

DEMOGRAPHIC STATISTICS
157
MEASURES OF POPULATION COMPOSITION
5.3.16  MEDIAN AGE OF POPULATION 
The median age of population, Mage, is the most useful single figure summarising a 
population’s age structure. It is the value which divides the total population into two equal 
parts, half older and half younger. It may be defined as22:
Mage = Lme +
N
2 −F
Pme
× h
where 
Lme	 = lower class boundary of the median class, i.e the class interval upon which the 
median lies;
N
2 	
= one-half the total population; N =  Pa is total population;
Pme	 = the number of persons in the age group containing the median;
F 	
= total population up to the class immediately before the median class;
h	
= width (size of age interval) of median class.
Example 5.17
Refer to Table 5.1. Calculate the median age for the 2010 population of Ghana. 
Solution
Table 5.12 presents the preliminary calculations for obtaining the median value.
Age group (Class Interval)
Population Pa
Cumulative frequency cf
1
2 
3 
0–4 
3,405,406
2,769,421
5–9 
3,128,952
6,534,358
10–14
2,916,040
9,450,398
15–19
2,609,989
12,060,387
20–24
2,323,491
14,383,878
25–29
2,050,111
16,433,989
30–34
1,678,809
18,112,798
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com

DEMOGRAPHIC STATISTICS
158
MEASURES OF POPULATION COMPOSITION
158
Age group (Class Interval)
Population Pa
Cumulative frequency cf
35–39
1,421,403
19,534,201
40–44
1,186,350
20,720,551
45–49
938,098 47
21,658,649
50–54
833,098 52
22,491,747
55–59
523,695 57
23,015,442
60–64
475,849 62
23,491,291
65–69
293,871 67
23,785,162
70–74
351,330 72
24,136,492
75–79
205,953 77
24,342,445
80–84
159,084 82
24,501,529
85+ 
157,294 87
24,658,823
Total 
24,658,823 
TABLE 5.12 Preliminary calculation of Median Age of 2010 Population of Ghana
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
www.mastersopenday.nl
Visit us and find out why we are the best!
Master’s Open Day: 22 February 2014
Join the best at
the Maastricht University
School of Business and
Economics!
Top master’s programmes
• 33rd place Financial Times worldwide ranking: MSc 
International Business
• 1st place: MSc International Business
• 1st place: MSc Financial Economics
• 2nd place: MSc Management of Learning
• 2nd place: MSc Economics
• 2nd place: MSc Econometrics and Operations Research
• 2nd place: MSc Global Supply Chain Management and 
Change
Sources: Keuzegids Master ranking 2013; Elsevier ‘Beste Studies’ ranking 2012; 
Financial Times Global Masters in Management ranking 2012
Maastricht
University is
the best specialist
university in the
Netherlands
(Elsevier)

DEMOGRAPHIC STATISTICS
159
MEASURES OF POPULATION COMPOSITION
We determine the class boundary that contains the median.
1)	From column 2, 
	
N =

Pa = 24, 658, 823
Hence 
	
N/2 =

Pa/2 = 12, 329, 411.5
and the median lies in the class interval of the distribution which has 12,329,411.5 
population.
2)	Beginning at the first class interval and adding up the Pa in order (column 3), we 
find that class interval 15–19, inclusive, contains the median. This is the median class.
To convert the lower class limit of 15 to lower class boundary, we need to subtract 0.5 
from 15 to get 14.5. Thus, 
	
Lme = 14.5; Pme = 2, 609, 989; F = 9, 450, 398; h = 5
Consequently, 
	
Me
=
Lme +
N
2 −F
Pme
× h
=
14.5 + 12, 329, 411.5 −9, 450, 398
2, 609, 989
× 5 = 20.02
That is, half of the population of Ghana in 2010 were less than 20 years and half were 
more than 20 years23. 
5.3.17  INDEX OF RELATIVE DIFFERENCE 
The index of relative difference (IRD) can be used to compare the composition of several 
populations with respect to age and other demographic characteristics such as marital status, 
economic, educational, social and ethnic characteristics. 
In relation to age, the IRD is defined as 
IRD = 1
2 ×
n

a=1

ra2
ra1
× 100

−100

n
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com

DEMOGRAPHIC STATISTICS
160
MEASURES OF POPULATION COMPOSITION
where
ria (i = 1, 2) refers to the proportion in ith population in age group a to the total number 
of persons in all age groups (total population);
n is the number of age groups and it is used as the divisor to derive the mean of the percent 
differences at each age.
If the age distributions are the same, IRD = 0. The larger the IRD the bigger the difference 
between the two age distributions. 
Steps in Computing Index of Relative Difference
Step 1
Calculate the proportion of the two populations in each age group to the total population: 
ria =
Pai
n

a=1
Pai
,
i = 1, 2
Step 2
Divide the proportions in each age group of the later year (population 2) by those of the 
previous year (population 1) to obtain the relatives: 
r = ra2
ra1
Step 3
Multiply the values in Step 2 by 100 to obtain percentages. 
Step 4
Subtract 100 from the percentage values in Step 3 and sum the absolute values (i.e. ignoring 
sign) to obtain total relative percentage. 
Step 5
Divide the total relative percentage in Step 4 by the number of age groups, n, to obtain 
the mean of the relative percentage at each age, which is the index of relative difference. 
Example 5.18
The population of Ghana for 2000 and 2010 censuses by age group is given in Table 5.1. 
Calculate the index of relative difference of the composition of the two populations. 
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com

DEMOGRAPHIC STATISTICS
161
MEASURES OF POPULATION COMPOSITION
Solution
Table 5.13, columns (1)–(6) show the preliminary calculations of index of relative difference.
Age-group 
1984 
Population 
2000 
Population 
Proportion 
distribution 
of 1984 
Population 
(ra1)
Proportion 
distribution 
of 2000 
Population 
(ra2)
ra2
ra1
1
2 
3 
4 
5 
6=(5)/(4) 
0–4 
2,769,421
3,405,406 
0.1464
0.1381
0.9431
5–9 
2,775,206
3,128,952 
0.1467
0.1269
0.8647
10–14 
2,262,216
2,916,040 
0.1196
0.1183
0.9886
15–19 
1,883,753
2,609,989 
0.0996
0.1058
1.0626
20–24 
1,600,820
2,323,491 
0.0846
0.0942
1.1132
25–29 
1,487,299
2,050,111 
0.0786
0.0831
1.0572
30–34 
1,206,809
1,678,809 
0.0638
0.0681
1.0669
35–39 
1,029,765
1,421,403 
0.0545
0.0576
1.0586
40–44 
886,931 
1,186,350 
0.0469
0.0481
1.0259
45–49 
720,357 
938,098 
0.0381
0.0380
0.9988
50–54 
568,369 
833,098 
0.0301
0.0338
1.1242
55–59 
355,842 
523,695 
0.0188
0.0212
1.1287
60–64 
366,351 
475,849 
0.0194
0.0193
0.9962
65–69 
258,709 
293,871 
0.0137
0.0119
0.8712
70–74 
225,158 
351,330 
0.0119
0.0142
1.1967
75–79 
144,830 
205,953 
0.0077
0.0084
1.0906
80–84 
140,847 
159,084 
0.0074
0.0065
0.8663
85+ 
229,396 
157,294 
0.0121
0.0064
0.5259
Total 
18,912,079 
24,658,823
1.0000
1.0000
17.9793
TABLE 5.13 Preliminary calculations of Index of Relative Difference
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com

DEMOGRAPHIC STATISTICS
162
MEASURES OF POPULATION COMPOSITION
Hence, 
IRD
=
1
2 ×
n

a=1

ra2
ra1
× 100

−100

n
=
1
2 × (17.99 × 100) −100
18
= 46.94%
Interpretation
The average relative difference of the age structure of the population of Ghana between 2000 
and 2010 was 46.9 percent. That is, the percentage age distribution of the 2010 population 
of Ghana differs from that of 2000 by about 47 percent in relative terms. 
5.3.18  INDEX OF DISSIMILARITY 
The index of dissimilarity (ID) is another summary measure of the difference between two age 
distributions and can also be used to compare the composition of several populations with 
respect to other demographic characteristics such as marital status, economic, educational, 
social and ethnic characteristics. It is a measure of absolute percentage difference of any two 
comparable population distributions. It indicates the percent of one population that needs 
to be redistributed to have the age distribution of the other. When a spatial comparison 
is made for two dates, the index may be interpreted as the percentage of the population 
of the latter date that would have to be relocated to attain the spatial distribution of the 
population of earlier date. 
The ID is defined as: 
ID = 1
2 ×
n

a=1
|ra2 −ra1| × 100
Example 5.19
Refer to Table 5.1. Calculate index of dissimilarity of the composition of the 2000 and 
2010 populations and interpret the result. 
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com

DEMOGRAPHIC STATISTICS
163
MEASURES OF POPULATION COMPOSITION
163
Solution
Table 5.14 (Col (7)) shows the preliminary calculations of index of dissimilarity. Hence, 
ID
=
1
2 ×

|ra2 −ra1| × 100
=
1
2 × 0.08070 × 100 = 4.0%
Interpretation
The absolute difference of the age structure of the population of Ghana between 2000 and 
2010 was 4 percent. That is, the percentage age distribution of the 2010 population of 
Ghana differs from that of 2000 by about 4 percent in absolute terms.
The implication of this result is that 4 percent of the population of Ghana in 2010 had 
to be redistributed to attain the age distribution of the population in 2000. This implies 
that the age distribution of population of Ghana had changed very little between the two 
census (2000 and 2010). This is due to the fact that neither fertility, mortality nor migration 
streams have changed drastically during this period.
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more

DEMOGRAPHIC STATISTICS
164
MEASURES OF POPULATION COMPOSITION
Age-group 
2000 
Population 
2010 
Population 
Proportion 
distribution 
of 1984 
Population 
(ra1)
Proportion 
distribution 
of 2000 
Population 
(ra2)
|ra2 −ra1|
1
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 = |(5) −(4)| 
0–4 
2,769,421
3,405,406 
0.1464
0.1381
0.0083
5–9 
2,775,206
3,128,952 
0.1467
0.1269
0.0199
10–14 
2,262,216
2,916,040 
0.1196
0.1183
0.0014
15–19 
1,883,753
2,609,989 
0.0996
0.1058
0.0062
20–24 
1,600,820
2,323,491 
0.0846
0.0942
0.0096
25–29 
1,487,299
2,050,111 
0.0786
0.0831
0.0045
30–34 
1,206,809
1,678,809 
0.0638
0.0681
0.0043
35–39 
1,029,765
1,421,403 
0.0545
0.0576
0.0032
40–44 
886,931 
1,186,350 
0.0469
0.0481
0.0012
45–49 
720,357 
938,098 
0.0381
0.0380
0.0000
50–54 
568,369 
833,098 
0.0301
0.0338
0.0037
55–59 
355,842 
523,695 
0.0188
0.0212
0.0024
60–64 
366,351 
475,849 
0.0194
0.0193
0.0001
65–69 
258,709 
293,871 
0.0137
0.0119
0.0018
70–74 
225,158 
351,330 
0.0119
0.0142
0.0023
75–79 
144,830 
205,953 
0.0077
0.0084
0.0007
80–84 
140,847 
159,084 
0.0074
0.0065
0.0010
85+ 
229,396 
157,294 
0.0121
0.0064
0.0058
Total 
18,912,079 
24,658,823
1.0000
1.0000
0.0764
TABLE 5.14 Preliminary calculations of Index of Relative Difference
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com

DEMOGRAPHIC STATISTICS
165
MEASURES OF POPULATION COMPOSITION
5.4	
POPULATION COMPOSITION BY AGE AND SEX 
The age-sex composition of the population is one of the most important characteristics of 
the population. It is the net result of the past trends of fertility, mortality and migration 
operating in an area at any specified time. It has many social and economic implications. It 
is rather this factor that significantly influences mortality and fertility, and socio-economic 
development of the society.
The sex composition, for example, of Ghana’s population in 2010 was 12 million males and 
12.6 million females. While this information may be important, it provides no information 
on the detailed structure of the Ghana population for that year. If, however, the population 
was presented not only according to sex, but also by age category, then there would be a 
new dimension of interpretation for this population. With this, certain vital analysis on the 
population, such as, reproductivity issues can be done. Table 5.15 shows the distribution of 
the population of Ghana in the 2000 census by age and sex. It shows 19 strata belonging 
to this population. 
5.4.1  TYPES OF AGE-SEX POPULATION STRUCTURE 
The age-sex population structure may be depicted using absolute numbers or percentages. 
The structure on the population figures themselves (see Table 5.15) can show differences 
or changes in the overall size of the total population and in the numbers at each age group 
by sex.
Age-group 
Total 
Male 
Female
Less than 1 year 
525,258
262,041
263,217
1–4 
2,244,163
1,117,729
1,126,434
5–9 
2,775,206
1,390,652
1,384,554
10–14 
2,262,216
1,151,131
1,111,085
15–19 
1,883,753
961,162
922,591
20–24 
1,600,820
763,051
837,769
25–29 
1,487,299
695,494
791,805
30–34 
1,206,809
566,439
640,370
35–39 
1,029,765
490,864
538,901
40–44 
886,931
443,284
443,647
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com

DEMOGRAPHIC STATISTICS
166
MEASURES OF POPULATION COMPOSITION
Age-group 
Total 
Male 
Female
45–49 
720,357
377,315
343,042
50–54 
568,369
279,950
288,419
55–59 
355,842
182,843
172,999
60–64 
366,351
177,347
189,004
65–69 
258,709
129,090
129,619
70–74 
225,158
106,513
118,645
75–79 
144,830
74,268
70,562
80–84 
140,847
66,941
73,906
years and over
229,396
121,268
108,128
Total 
18,912,079
9,357,382
9,554,697
TABLE 5.15 Population Composition of Ghana in 2000 by Age and Sex 
Source: 2000 Population and Housing Census, GSS 
For comparison purpose, however, percentages are calculated at each age group for both 
male and female on the respective totals of each sex (see Table 5.16).
Age-group 
Total 
Male 
Female
Less than 1 year 
525,258
262,041
263,217
1–4
2,244,163
1,117,729
1,126,434
5–9
2,775,206
1,390,652
1,384,554
10–14
2,262,216
1,151,131
1,111,085
15–19
1,883,753
961,162
922,591
20–24
1,600,820
763,051
837,769
25–29
1,487,299
695,494
791,805
30–34
1,206,809
566,439
640,370
35–39
1,029,765
490,864
538,901
40–44
886,931
443,284
443,647
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com

DEMOGRAPHIC STATISTICS
167
MEASURES OF POPULATION COMPOSITION
Age-group 
Total 
Male 
Female
45–49
720,357
377,315
343,042
50–54
568,369
279,950
288,419
55–59
355,842
182,843
172,999
60–64
366,351
177,347
189,004
65–69
258,709
129,090
129,619
70–74
225,158
106,513
118,645
75–79
144,830
74,268
70,562
80–84
140,847
66,941
73,906
years and over
229,396
121,268
108,128
Total 
18,912,079
9,357,382
9,554,697
TABLE 5.16 Population Composition of Ghana in 2000 by Age and Sex  
Source: Author’s Calculation from the 2000 Population and Housing Census, GSS 
There are basically two types of age-sex population structure, namely, progressive and 
retrogressive population structure. 
The progressive population structure, (also referred to as the pyramidal structure or 
expansive structure) characterises a high proportion of young population (0–14 years) and 
low proportion of old population (50 years and above). This indicates that every generation of 
newly born babies outnumbers the previous generation as a result of high fertility while the 
generation vanishes fast as a result of high mortality. This is typical of developing countries.
The retrogressive population structure (also referred to as the cylindrical structure stable 
structure), characterises low proportion of young persons (0–14) and relatively higher 
proportion of old (aged 50 years and over). This is an indication of a stable number of 
births in every year with all the newly born babies having the chance of living, and the 
chance of moving from one age to another because of low mortality rate. Each age cohort is 
approximately the same size. Also, with low mortality, every woman who reaches child bearing 
age lives at least until she exceeds childbearing age. This is typical of developed countries. 
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com

DEMOGRAPHIC STATISTICS
168
MEASURES OF POPULATION COMPOSITION
168
5.4.2  POPULATION PYRAMID 
The age-sex composition of population is usually represented graphically by what is called a 
population pyramid or an age pyramid, or simply a pyramid. A population pyramid, also 
referred to as age-sex graph, therefore, is a special type of graph that shows the distribution 
of the population of an area in terms of age groups, called cohorts, and sex. It consists of 
a number of bars representing successive age groups from the lowest age at bottom to the 
highest age at top by sex. It depicts a back-to-back histogram for ages of males and females 
in a given group. 
Uses of the Population Pyramid 
A population pyramid is one of the most widely used graphical displays in demography. 
1)	It displays and compares national and regional populations; 
2)	It conveys, at a glance, the entire shape of the age-sex structure; 
3)	It shows gross irregularities due to: 
i)	 widespread omission of people of some age group by the census enumeration, 
ii)	special past events (such as war, epidemic or age-selective migration), fluctuations 
of fertility, inaccurate reporting of age. 
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Get Help Now
Go to www.helpmyassignment.co.uk for more info
Need help with your
dissertation?
Get in-depth feedback & advice from experts in your 
topic area. Find out what you can do to improve
the quality of your dissertation!

DEMOGRAPHIC STATISTICS
169
MEASURES OF POPULATION COMPOSITION
Types of Population Pyramid
Since pyramids are just the graphical representation of age-sex population structure, Pyramids 
may be constructed on the population numbers themselves or on the percentages. For 
the purpose of comparing different population sizes, it is better to construct population 
pyramids using percentages. The percentages can either be percentages of men and women 
separately or percentages of the total population; the diagram should make clear which is 
intended. Pyramids on percentages are based on grand total of the population show the 
proper proportion of the size of each age-sex group to the total. This type of pyramid shows 
the differences or changes in the proportional size of each age-sex group.
To compare different pyramids, the pyramids should have the same scale or at least the 
same ratio between the units on the vertical scale and the units on the horizontal scale. If 
this relation is altered, even the same population looks very different.
With appropriate selection of scale, percent and absolute population pyramids are identical. 
Construction of Population Pyramids 
For the purposes of comparison, population pyramids are constructed in a standard manner. 
The technique of construction is as follows. 
1)	The abscissa (horizontal axis) indicates the population. 
2)	The ordinate (vertical axis) indicates the age groups. 
3)	A central vertical axis perpendicular to the horizontal axis indicates zero. On the left 
of the central axis is a correspondence of the male population and on the right is 
the female population. The central vertical axis may be marked with the age groups 
either at the right or left of the pyramid or on both the right and left. Most often 
pyramids show 5-year age groups though it can also be made in age groups of 10 
or in single years of age. For some reasons, pyramids are truncated at an age group 
where the data begin to run thin. 
4)	A horizontal bar (rectangle) which is proportional to the population of the group 
is drawn from the central axis to correspond to each age group of each sex. The 
bars are placed on one another in ascending order (from the lowest to the highest 
age), that is, the age groups are arranged in strata, youth at the bottom, and old 
age at the top. The heights of these bars are proportional to the number of years 
in the age groups. 
Example 5.20
For the data in Table 5.15, construct the population pyramid of Ghana. 
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com

DEMOGRAPHIC STATISTICS
170
MEASURES OF POPULATION COMPOSITION
Solution
The pyramid is displayed in Fig. 5.1.
1,600,000
1,400,000
1,200,000
1,000,000
800,000
600,000
400,000
200,000
1,600,000
1,400,000
1,200,000
1,000,000
800,000
600,000
400,000
200,000
Male
Female
75 +
65 - 69
60 - 64
55 - 59
50 - 54
45 - 49
40 - 44
35 - 39
30 - 34
25 - 29
20 - 24
15 - 19
10 - 14
5 - 9
0 - 4
Fig. 5.1 Age-Sex Population Pyramid of Ghana, 2000 
5.4.3  FORMS OF POPULATION PYRAMIDS 
Three factors, which may vary within broad limits, determine the form of a population 
pyramid. These factors are fertility, mortality and migration.
The general shape of the population pyramid is a triangle from which its name is derived. 
It is broad at the base, tapering upward according to the past numbers of births and deaths 
that have formed it. This is simply because of the high fertility factor which increases the 
number at the base while the mortality factor progressively reduces the numbers of the 
generations as they get older, or, in other words, as they move towards the upper parts of 
the population pyramid. However, many other factors do intervene which explain the more 
or less irregular shape of these population pyramids.
The two forms of population structure discussed in Section 5.4.1, result in two forms of 
pyramids: progressive and retrogressive pyramids. 
Progressive Population Pyramid
The classical progressive population pyramid, is a triangular pyramid, with: 
1)	a broad base, 
2)	an acute base angle, 
3)	unbroken lateral sides, and 
4)	a rapid narrowing vertex. 
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com

DEMOGRAPHIC STATISTICS
171
MEASURES OF POPULATION COMPOSITION
The classical progressive population pyramid is illustrated in Fig. 5.2 (a).
50
15
0
50
15
0
(a) Classical 
(b) Typical
Fig. 5.2 Progressive Pyramid 
However, as pointed out earlier, certain factors do intervene and we obtain a typical 
progressive pyramid as shown in Fig.5.2 (b).
The progressive population pyramid is typical of developing countries. The population pyramid 
for the population of Ghana in Figure 5.1 is an example of a typical progressive pyramid. 
Retrogressive Population Pyramid
The classical retrogressive population pyramid is a cylindrical pyramid that has: 
1)	a narrow base with the middle section having the same dimensions, 
2)	right angle at the base, 
3)	smooth lateral sides, and 
4)	a slow narrowing vertex. 
The classical retrogressive population pyramid is illustrated in Fig.5.3 (a). It assumes 
unchanging age population structure, that is, there is equal proportion of the young and 
the old ages. However, in practice we obtain a typical retrogressive pyramid that is narrower 
at the base than at the middle section (see Fig.5.3(b).
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com

DEMOGRAPHIC STATISTICS
172
MEASURES OF POPULATION COMPOSITION
50
15
50
15
0
0
(a) Classical
(b) Typical
Fig. 5.3 Retrogressive Pyramid 
This is typical of developed countries. Figure 5.4 shows the pyramid for the population of 
Switzerland, a developed country, in 2002. The classical shape appears in this case but has 
been perceptively modified, especially owing to the intervention of a multitude of factors 
in the past.
Male
350,000
300,000
250,000
200,000
150,000
100,000
50,000
0
350,000
300,000
250,000
200,000
150,000
100,000
50,000
0
0-4
5-9
10-14
15-19
20-24
25-29
30-34
35-39
40-44
45-49
50-54
55-59
60-64
65-69
70-74
75-79
80-84
85-89
90-94
95+
Female
Fig. 5.4 Age-Sex Population Structure of Switzerland 
5.4.4  MEASURES OF AGE-SEX COMPOSITION 
Age-specific Sex Ratios
One measure for evaluating census age data is the age-specific sex ratios. This ratio is simply 
the number of males per 100 females at age x or in each age group a24. That is
SRx = 5P m
x
5P f
x
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com

DEMOGRAPHIC STATISTICS
173
MEASURES OF POPULATION COMPOSITION
173
where	 5P m
x  is number of males in a 5-year interval of age group x;
	
5P f
x  is number of females in a 5-year interval of age group x.
Usually, more males are born than females. But in life more males die than females. The 
continual higher mortality of males throughout most of life is due to the fact that 
1)	males are generally more susceptible to disease, 
2)	vocations of males are typically more dangerous. 
So under normal situations25 we would expect that the sex ratio would decline by age but 
very gradually. Any deviation from this trend or pattern suggests 
1)	relative under-enumeration or over-enumeration of ages of males relative to females, or 
2)	a tendency of the two sexes shifting in opposite directions; males usually exaggerate 
while females understate their ages. 
The value less or more than 100 percent by 10 percent is a serious issue. This means that 
sex ratio is poorly recorded or reported. 
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
By 2020, wind could provide one-tenth of our planet’s 
electricity needs. Already today, SKF’s innovative know-
how is crucial to running a large proportion of the 
world’s wind turbines. 
Up to 25 % of the generating costs relate to mainte-
nance. These can be reduced dramatically thanks to our 
systems for on-line condition monitoring and automatic 
lubrication. We help make it more economical to create 
cleaner, cheaper energy out of thin air. 
By sharing our experience, expertise, and creativity, 
industries can boost performance beyond expectations. 
Therefore we need the best employees who can 
meet this challenge!
The Power of Knowledge Engineering
Brain power
Plug into The Power of Knowledge Engineering. 
Visit us at www.skf.com/knowledge

DEMOGRAPHIC STATISTICS
174
MEASURES OF POPULATION COMPOSITION
Example 5.21
Refer to Table 5.15. Calculate the age-specific sex ratios for the 2000 population of Ghana. 
Solution 
The sex ratio by age is defined similar to the sex ratio given earlier (refer to Section 5.2.3). 
Thus:
SRx = 5P m
x
5P f
x
× 100
Thus, for the various age groups we have: 
SR<1
=
5P m
<1
5P f
<1
× 100 = 262, 041
263, 217 × 100 = 99.6%
SR1−4
=
5P m
1−4
5P f
1−4
× 100 = 1, 117, 729
1, 126, 434 × 100 = 99.2%
...
...
SR80−84
=
5P m
80−84
5P f
80−84
× 100 = 66, 941
73, 906 × 100 = 90.6%
SR85+
=
5P m
85+
5P f
85+
× 100 = 66, 941
73, 906 × 100 = 112.2%
Age-Sex Accuracy Index
The age-sex accuracy index (ASAI) is an overall measure of the accuracy of an age distribution.
Let SRx be tha sex ratio at age or age group x, ARm
x  and ARf
x the age ratios for males and 
females, respectively, at age x. Then ASAI is defined as: 
ASAI = (3 × SR∗) + ARm
x + ARf
x
where 
SR∗
=
n

x=1
|SRx −SRx+1|
n
ARm
=
n

x=1
|ARm
x −100|
n
ARf
=
n

x=1
ARf
x −100

n
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com

DEMOGRAPHIC STATISTICS
175
MEASURES OF POPULATION COMPOSITION
This ASAI is not very exact and is usually regarded as an “order of magnitude” rather than 
as a precise measurement. The lower this index, the more adequate the census data on age. 
Table 5.16 shows the UN definition of ASAI.
ASAI 
Quality of Reporting 
Less than 20 
Accurate
20–40
Inaccurate 
More than 40 
Highly inaccurate 
TABLE 5.16 Scale for interpreting Age-Sex Accuracy Index 
Steps in Computing Age-Sex Accuracy Index
Step 1
Calculate the age ratios for males ARm
x  and females ARf
x in each age group, x (see 
Section 5.3.6). 
Step 2
Calculate the sex ratios for each age, SRx. 
Step 3
Take the first difference of the sex ratios, that is, subtract each sex ratio from the sex ratio 
before it. 
Step 4
Find the mean of the first difference of the sex ratios by summing the values in step 3 and 
dividing it by the number of age groups, n. This gives SR∗. 
Step 5
Take the deviation of the age ratios in step 1 from 100 and find the mean by dividing by 
n. This gives ARm  and ARf . 
The values obtained in steps 3 and 4 should be put in the age-sex accuracy formula.
Example 5.22
Refer to Table 5.15. Calculate the age-sex accuracy index for the 2000 population of Ghana. 
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com

DEMOGRAPHIC STATISTICS
176
MEASURES OF POPULATION COMPOSITION
Solution 
The preliminary calculations are given in Table 5.17.
For example, the age ratio for males for age group 5–9 is: 
ARm
10−14
=
5P(10−14)
1
2

5P(5−9) +5 P(15−19)
 × 100
=
1, 1, 151, 131
1
2 (1, 390, 652 + 961, 162) × 100 = 97.89
per cent
ARm
10−14
=
5P(10−14)
1
2

5P(5−9) +5 P(15−19)
 × 100
=
1, 1, 151, 131
1
2 (1, 390, 652 + 961, 162) × 100 = 97.89
per cent
The following values for ARm
x  are similarly calculated and the results given in col. 3 of 
the table. 
Similarly, the age ratio for females, ARf
x, are calculated and given in col. 6.
Now, 
ARm
=
n

i=1
|ARm
x −100|
n
= 81.51
13
= 6.27
ARf
=
n

i=1
ARf
x −100

n
= 120.31
13
= 9.25
SR∗=
n

x=1
|SRx −SRx+1|
n
= 91.23
18
= 6.52
Hence, the age-sex accuracy index is 
ASAI
=
(3 × SR∗) + ARm + ARf
=
(3 × 6.52) + 6.27 + 9.25 = 35.08
By the UN definition, the age-sex accuracy index of 35.3 indicates that the reporting of 
ages by sex is inaccurate.
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com

DEMOGRAPHIC STATISTICS
177
MEASURES OF POPULATION COMPOSITION
Age 
group 
Male 
Age Ratio 
for Males, 
ARm
x  
|ARm
x −100|
Female
Age 
Ratio for 
Females, 
ARf
x
|ARm
x −100|
Sex 
Ratio, 
SRx
|SRx −SRx+
1
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
7 
8 
9
0–4 
1,379,770
– 
– 
1,389,651 
– 
– 
99.29 
1.15 
5–9 
1,390,652
109.89
9.89 
1,384,554 
110.73
10.73
100.44
3.16 
10–14 
1,151,131
97.89 
2.11 
1,111,085 
96.32
3.68 
103.60
0.58 
15–19 
961,162 
100.43
0.43 
922,591 
94.68
5.32 
104.18
13.10 
20–24 
763,051
92.12 
7.88 
837,769 
97.73
2.27 
91.08
3.24 
25–29 
695,494
104.63
4.63 
791,805 
107.14
7.14 
87.84
0.62 
30–34 
566,439
95.49 
4.51 
640,370 
96.25
3.75 
88.45
2.63 
35–39 
490,864
97.23 
2.77 
538,901 
99.43
0.57 
91.09
8.83 
40–44 
443,284
102.12
2.12 
443,647 
100.61
0.61 
99.92
10.07 
45–49 
377,315
104.34
4.34 
343,042 
93.72
6.28 
109.99
12.93 
50–54 
279,950
99.95 
0.05 
288,419 
111.78
11.78
97.06
8.63 
55–59 
182,843
79.97 
20.03 
172,999 
72.47
27.53
105.69
11.86 
60–64 
177,347
113.71
13.71 
189,004 
124.91
24.91
93.83
5.76 
65–69 
129,090
90.95 
9.05 
129,619 
84.26
15.74
99.59
9.82 
70+ 
106,513
– 
– 
118,645 
– 
– 
89.77
– 
Total 
9,357,382 
– 
81.51 
9,554,697 
– 
120.31
97.9
91.23 
TABLE 5.17 Preliminary Calculations Age-Sex Accuracy Index  
Source: Author’s calculation from 2000 Population and Housing Census, GSS 
5.5	
MEASURES OF POPULATION DISTRIBUTION 
The distribution of population within a country is important for social and economic 
planning. The basic information needed for the study of population distribution is the census 
enumeration of population by geographic subdivisions. The measures of population distribution 
over an area include population density, concentration ratio and concentration index. 
5.5.1  POPULATION DENSITY 
The density of population is the ratio of population to land and gives the population per 
square kilometre of the area. The area may be a country, a region, a district or a community. 
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com

DEMOGRAPHIC STATISTICS
178
MEASURES OF POPULATION COMPOSITION
178
The population density (PD) is defined as: 
PD = Population
Area
Example 5.23
The population of Ghana at the 2000 census was 18,912,079 and the surface area is 238,533 
square kilometres. Calculate the population density for Ghana in 2000. 
Solution 
Total population	
=
18, 912, 079
Total area	
	
=
238, 533
Population Density	
=
Population
Area
	
	
	
=
18, 912, 079
238, 533
= 79.3
That is, in 2000 there were approximately 79.3 persons per one square kilometre in Ghana. 
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more

DEMOGRAPHIC STATISTICS
179
MEASURES OF POPULATION COMPOSITION
Example 5.24
Burundi with a surface area of 27,834 square kilometres had a mid-year population of 
5,458,000 in 1990. Calculate the population density.
Solution 
Total population	
=
5, 458, 000
Total surface area	
=
27, 834
Population Density	 =
5, 458, 000
27, 834
= 196.1
For any subdivision of a country the population density is defined as: 
PDi = Pi
Ai
where
Pi	
=	
the number of persons in the subdivision i of the area;
Ai	
=	
the area of the same subdivision i
Example 5.25
Table 5.18(a) shows the population and land area of the ten regions in Ghana in 2000. 
Calculate the population density for all the regions.
Region 
Population 
Area (sq. km.) 
Western 
1,924,577 
23,921 
Central 
1,593,823 
9,826 
Greater Accra 
2,905,726 
3,245 
Volta 
2,106,696 
20,570 
Eastern 
1,635,421 
19,323 
Ashanti 
3,612,950 
24,389 
Brong Ahafo 
1,815,408 
39,557 
Northern 
1,820,806 
70,384 
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com

DEMOGRAPHIC STATISTICS
180
MEASURES OF POPULATION COMPOSITION
Region 
Population 
Area (sq. km.) 
Upper West 
920,089 
18,442 
Upper East 
576,583 
8,876 
Total 
18,912,079 
238,533 
TABLE 5.18(a) Population and Land Area of Regions in Ghana, 2000  
Source: Obtained from 2000 Population and Housing Census, GSS 
Solution 
	
PD(Western)
=
1, 924, 577
23, 921
= 80.5
	
 PD(Central)
=
1, 593, 823
9, 826
= 162.2
PD(Greater Accra)
=
2, 905, 726
3, 245
= 895.5
...
...
PD(Upper East)
=
576, 583
8, 876
= 31.2
The population density for the other regions are similarly calculated. The results are presented 
in Table 5.18(b). The table indicates that there are variations in density among the various 
regions of Ghana. The density is lowest in the Northrn Region and highest in the Greater 
Accra Region. 
Region 
Population 
Area (sq. km.) 
Population Density 
Western 
1,924,577 
23,921 
80.2 
Central 
1,593,823 
9,826 
162.2 
Greater Accra 
2,905,726 
3,245 
895.4 
Volta 
1,635,421 
20,570 
79.5 
Eastern 
2,106,696 
19,323 
109.0 
Ashanti 
3,612,950 
24,389 
148.1 
Brong Ahafo 
1,815,408 
39,557 
45.9 
Northern 
1,820,806 
70,384 
25.9 
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com

DEMOGRAPHIC STATISTICS
181
MEASURES OF POPULATION COMPOSITION
Region 
Population 
Area (sq. km.) 
Population Density 
Upper East 
920,089 
8,842 
104.1 
Upper West 
576,583 
18,476 
31.2 
Total 
18,912,079 
238,533 
79.3 
TABLE 5.18(b) Calculation of Population Density of Example 14 
Population density, defined above as population per square kilometre of land area, is often 
referred to as crude because it takes into consideration the gross area (land and water). 
Usually, density is computed as population per square kilometre of land area. However, 
countries with considerable parts of land area in deserts, mountains, tropical rain forest, 
icecaps, and so on may still have very low densities even though they may have a small 
land for agriculture. Hence, for some purposes, more meaningful densities are obtained 
for a country or region by relating the size of its population to the amount of agricultural 
(arable) land; that is, 
PD =
Population
Area of Agricultural Land
Example 5.26
For the data in Example 5.23, it is also known that the agricultural land of Ghana is 
136,282 square kilometres. Calculate the population density of Ghana in relation to its 
agricultural land. 
Solution 
Total Population	
	
=
18, 912, 072
Total agricultural land	
=
136, 282
Population density	
	
=
18, 912, 072
136, 282
= 138.8
That is, there are about 139 persons per one square kilometre of agricultural land of Ghana 
in 2000. 
5.5.2  CONCENTRATION RATIO 
The concentration ratio (CR) measures the degree of unevenness of population distribution 
or the concentration of the population at a point in time. Suppose the areas or group of 
areas are arranged in order of increasing density.
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com

DEMOGRAPHIC STATISTICS
182
MEASURES OF POPULATION COMPOSITION
Let 
Pi	
Cumulative percentage distribution of the population in area i;
Ai	
Cumulative percentage distribution of area i or group of areas; 
n	
Total number of geographical subdivisions of the population.
Then, the concentration ratio may be defined as: 
CR =
 n

i=1
PiAi+1 −
n

i=1
Pi+1Ai

× k
where k = 100. 
The concentration ratio may be interpreted as the proportion of the population that would 
have to be redistributed in order to attain a completely uniform distribution of persons 
over the area. 
Example 5.27
For the data in Example 5.25, calculate the index of concentration and interpret the result.
Solution
Table 5.19 shows the preliminary calculations of the concentration ratio.
Region 
Area (sq. 
km.) (in 
order of 
increasing 
size) 
Population 
Proportion 
of Area 
(ai)
Proportion 
of 
Population 
(pi) 
Cumulative 
Proportion 
of Total 
Area 
(Ai)
Cumulative 
Proportion 
of Total 
Population 
(Pi) 
1
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
7 
G. Accra
3,245
2,905,726 
0.01360
0.15364
0.01360
0.15364
U. East 
8,842
920,089 
0.03707
0.04865
0.05067
0.20229
Central 
9,826
1,593,823 
0.04119
0.08428
0.09187
0.28657
U. West 
18,476
576,583 
0.07746
0.03049
0.16932
0.31706
Eastern 
19,323
2,106,696
0.08101
0.11139
0.25033
0.42845
Volta 
20,570
1,635,421
0.08624
0.08647
0.33657
0.51493
Western 
23,921
1,924,577
0.10028
0.10176
0.43685
0.61669
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com

DEMOGRAPHIC STATISTICS
183
MEASURES OF POPULATION COMPOSITION
183
Region 
Area (sq. 
km.) (in 
order of 
increasing 
size) 
Population 
Proportion 
of Area 
(ai)
Proportion 
of 
Population 
(pi) 
Cumulative 
Proportion 
of Total 
Area 
(Ai)
Cumulative 
Proportion 
of Total 
Population 
(Pi) 
Ashanti 
24,389
3,612,950
0.10225
0.19104
0.53910
0.80773
B. Ahafo 
39,557
1,815,408
0.16583
0.09599
0.70493
0.90372
Northern 
70,384
1,820,806
0.29507
0.09628
1.00000
1.00000 
Total 
238,533
18,912,079
1.00000
1.00000
TABLE 5.19 Preliminary Calculations of Concentration Ratio of Example 5.18(a) 
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more

DEMOGRAPHIC STATISTICS
184
MEASURES OF POPULATION COMPOSITION
Region
(ai)Ai+1
Pi+1
PiAi+1
Pi+1Ai
8 
9
10 = (7) × (8) 
11 = (9) × (6) 
Greater Accra 
0.05067
0.20229
0.00779
0.00275
Upper East 
0.09187
0.28657
0.01858
0.01452
Central 
0.16932
0.31706
0.04852
0.02913
Upper West 
0.25033
0.42845
0.07937
0.07255
Eastern 
0.33657
0.51493
0.14420
0.12890
Volta 
0.43685
0.61669
0.22495
0.20756
Western 
0.53910
0.80773
0.33246
0.35286
Ashanti 
0.70493
0.90372
0.56939
0.48719
B. Ahafo 
1.00000
1.00000
0.90372
0.70493
Northern 
Total 
2.32898
2.00038 
TABLE 5.19 (Continued) Preliminary Calculations of Concentration Ratio of Example 5.18(a) 
Therefore the concentration ratio is:
CR
=
 n

i=1
PiAi+1 −
n

i=1
Pi+1Ai

× k
=
(2.32898 −2.00038) × 100 = 32.9
Interpretation
About 33 percent of the population of Ghana in 2000 will have to be redistributed in order 
to attain a completely uniform distribution.
5.5.3  INDEX OF CONCENTRATION 
The index of concentration (IC) is another technique for measuring the degree of population 
concentration. It is defined as 
IC = 1
2 ×
n

i=1
|pi −ai| × k
where pi and ai are uncumulated proportions of population and area respectively; and n 
are the number of geographical subdivisions of the population.
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com

DEMOGRAPHIC STATISTICS
185
MEASURES OF POPULATION COMPOSITION
The IC is algebraically equivalent to the index of dissimilarity. Interpretation of this index 
is same as the concentration ratio. 
Example 5.28
For the data in Example 5.25, calculate the index of concentration. 
Solution
Table 5.20 shows the preliminary calculations of index of concentration.
Region 
Population 
Area  
(sq. km.) 
Proportion 
of Total 
Population 
(pi)
Proportion 
of Total 
Area (ai)
|pi −ai|  
1
2 
3 
4 
5 
6=(4)-(5) 
Western 
1,924,577 
23,921 
0.10176
0.10028
0.00148 
Central 
1,593,823 
9,826 
0.08428
0.04119
0.04308 
Greater Accra 
2,905,726 
3,245 
0.15364
0.01360
0.14004 
Volta 
1,635,421 
20,570 
0.08647
0.08624
0.00024 
Eastern 
2,106,696 
19,323 
0.11139
0.08101
0.03039 
Ashanti 
3,612,950 
24,389 
0.19104
0.10225
0.08879 
Brong Ahafo 
1,815,408 
39,557 
0.09599
0.16583
0.06984 
Northern 
1,820,806 
70,384 
0.09628
0.29507
0.19879 
Upper East 
920,089 
8,842 
0.04865
0.03707
0.01158 
Upper West 
576,583 
18,476 
0.03049
0.07746
0.04697 
Total 
18,912,079 
238,533 
1.00000 
1.00000 
0.63121 
TABLE 5.20 Preliminary Calculations of Index of Concentration 
Therefore the index of concentration is 
IC
=
1
2 ×
n

i=1
|pi −ai| × k
=
1
2(0.63121) × 100 = 31.6
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com

DEMOGRAPHIC STATISTICS
186
MEASURES OF POPULATION COMPOSITION
Interpretation
About 32 percent of the population of Ghana in 2000 would have to be redistributed in 
order to attain a completely uniform distribution of the population.
EXERCISES
5.1	
The 1985 population census of Burkina Faso showed that there were 3,833,237 
males and 4,131,468 females. Calculate the 
1)	masculinity proportion; 
2)	masculinity ratio; 
3)	excess or deficit of males as a percentage of the total population. 
5.2	
The population in the 1987 population census of Cameroon aged 0–14 years was 
1,946,123, those aged 65 years and over was 387,366 and those aged 15–64 years 
was 8,112,920. For the given data, calculate 
1)	the child dependency ratio; 
2)	the old age dependency ratio; 
3)	the total dependency ratio; 
and interpret your results. 
5.3	
The population of Congo in 1984 aged 15–19 years was 211,294; those aged 20–24 
years was 172,226; and those aged 25–29 years was 136,523. Calculate the age ratio 
of the population in the age group 20–24.
5.4	
The following is the 1984 population of Ghana by age. Construct a population 
pyramid. Comment on the structure of the pyramid.
Age-group 
1984 Population 
0–4 
2,030,082 
5–9 
2,001,825 
10–14 
1,503,209 
15–19 
1,246,390 
20–24 
1,056,001 
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com

DEMOGRAPHIC STATISTICS
187
MEASURES OF POPULATION COMPOSITION
Age-group 
1984 Population 
25–29 
945,111 
30–34 
742,803 
35–39 
584,299 
40–44 
473,254 
45–49 
428,207 
50–54 
352,684 
55– 59 
213,081 
60– 64 
225,776 
65– 69 
145,309 
70–74 
128,866 
75– 79 
71,813 
80– 84 
70,427 
85+ 
76,944 
Total 
12,296,081 
5.5	
The table below shows the 2000 population of Ghana for single ages 20 to 62 years. 
Calculate for the male and the female populations: 
1)	age ratio; 
2)	the age-ratio-type indices for 3-year and 5-year ranges; 
3)	the Whipple’s index; 
Comment on your results.
Age 
Male
Female
Total 
20
225,446 
251,021 
476,467
21
122,227 
125,756 
247,983
22
156,551 
177,078 
333,629
23
127,599 
139,536 
267,135
24
131,228 
144,378 
275,606 
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com

DEMOGRAPHIC STATISTICS
188
MEASURES OF POPULATION COMPOSITION
188
Age 
Male
Female
Total 
25
206,931 
241,489 
448,420
26
128,952 
147,332 
276,284
27
120,942 
128,197 
249,139
28
145,334 
174,236 
319,570
29
93,335 
100,551 
193,886
30
217,548 
272,203 
489,751
31
68,281 
66,572 
134,853
32
125,865 
140,290 
266,155
33
76,549 
78,196 
154,745
34
78,196 
83,109 
161,305
35
172,670 
195,119 
367,789
36
93,591 
102,744 
196,335
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
EXPERIENCE THE POWER OF 
FULL ENGAGEMENT…
     RUN FASTER.
          RUN LONGER..
                RUN EASIER…
READ MORE & PRE-ORDER TODAY 
WWW.GAITEYE.COM
Challenge the way we run

DEMOGRAPHIC STATISTICS
189
MEASURES OF POPULATION COMPOSITION
Age 
Male
Female
Total 
37
66,821 
68,408 
135,229
38
98,109 
110,049 
208,158
39
59,673 
62,581 
122,254
40
184,795 
210,146 
394,941
41
44,808 
39,632 
84,440
42
90,285 
87,630 
177,915
43
75,845 
64,419 
140,264
44
47,551 
41,820 
89,371 
45
154,179 
152,056 
306,235
46
59,789 
52,009 
111,798
47
45,775 
37,321 
83,096 
48
73,233 
66,166 
139,399
48
44,339 
35,490 
79,829 
50
120,093 
149,542 
269,635
51
29,312 
23,292 
52,604 
52
54,823 
50,187 
105,010
53
37,602 
30,239 
67,841 
54
38,120 
35,159 
73,279 
55
62,975 
68,732 
131,707
56
40,366 
36,813 
77,179 
57
23,199 
18,280 
41,479 
58
34,227 
32,475 
66,702 
59
22,076 
16,699 
38,775 
60
87,040 
112,216 
199,256 
61
20,821 
15,854 
36,675 
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com

DEMOGRAPHIC STATISTICS
190
MEASURES OF POPULATION COMPOSITION
Age 
Male
Female
Total 
62
27,037 
25,864 
52,901 
63
34,227 
32,475 
66,702 
64
22,076 
16,699 
38,775 
65
87,040 
112,216 
199,256 
66
15,854 
20,821 
36,675 
67
25,864 
27,037 
52,901 
68
17,828 
21,646 
39,474 
69
17,242 
20,803 
38,045 
90
67,660 
57,616 
125,276 
5.6	
The table below shows the 2010 female population of Ghana for single ages. 
Calculate for the female population: 
1)	age ratio; 
2)	the age-ratio-type indices for 3-year and 5-year ranges; 
3)	the Whipple’s index; 
4)	the Myers’ index; 
Comment on your results.
Age 
Female 
Population
Age 
Female 
Population
Age 
Female 
Population 
0
360,881
34
121,623
68
27,710
1
304,769
35
242,672
69
15,544
2
333,189
36
137,396
70
104,315
3
337,341
37
118,476
71
21,985
4
337,439
38
155,762
72
31,367
5
319,387
39
90,329
73
21,699
6
322,287
40
247,444
74
22,452
7
308,865
41
82,158
75
55,084
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com

DEMOGRAPHIC STATISTICS
191
MEASURES OF POPULATION COMPOSITION
Age 
Female 
Population
Age 
Female 
Population
Age 
Female 
Population 
8
311,013
42
123,415
76
19,588
9
277,768
43
81,285
77
13,028
10
358,714
44
79,428
78
18,882
11
248,500
45
173,824
79
10,222
12
296,652
46
84,669
70
60,194
13
268,959
47
73,989
81
7,722
14
265,690
48
95,606
82
12,366
15
297,835
48
57,035
83
8,217
16
248,652
50
181,754
84
8,228
17
235,558
51
50,688
85
23,974
18
298,693
52
77,302
86
8,156
19
218,139
53
69,019
87
6,258
20
338,590
54
59,735
88
6,350
21
204,737
55
88,630
89
5,395
22
246,677
56
59,849
90
21,995
23
214,499
57
39,907
91
2,359
24
218,261
58
49,950
92
3,946
25
303,014
59
26,777
93
1,941
26
199,990
60
124,564
94
1,836
27
230,097
61
26,449
95
6,517
28
225,134
62
39,951
96
2,998
29
148,663
63
30,458
97
1,719
30
317,248
64
27,377
98
3,159
31
139,455
65
70,742
99
16432
32
178,517
66
22,097
33
131,665
67
21,534
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com

DEMOGRAPHIC STATISTICS
192
MEASURES OF POPULATION COMPOSITION
5.7	
The table below shows the population of Ghana and Mauritius in 2000 by age. 
Calculate 
1)	index of relative difference; 
2)	index of dissimiliarity; 
of age distribution of the populations of Ghana and Mauritius and comment on 
your results.
Age-group (years) 
Population of Ghana
Population of Mauritius 
0–4 
2,769,421
94,303 
5–9 
2,775,206
105,189 
10–14 
2,262,216
97,740 
15–19 
1,883,753
102,088 
20–24 
1,600,820
110,892 
25–29 
1,487,299
93,797 
30–34 
1,206,809
99,515 
35–39 
1,029,765
101,946 
40–44 
886,931 
90,406 
45–49 
720,357 
77,931 
50–54 
568,369 
56,939 
55–59 
355,842 
40,491 
60–64 
366,351 
33,097 
65–69 
258,709 
25,768 
70–74 
225,158 
21,694 
75–79 
144,830 
14,910 
80–84 
140,847 
7,132 
85+ 
229,396 
5,010 
Total 
18,912,079 
1,178,848
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com

DEMOGRAPHIC STATISTICS
193
MEASURES OF POPULATION COMPOSITION
193
5.8	
The table below shows the population of Ghana in 2000 and 2010 by regions.
Region 
2000 Population
2010 Population 
Western 
1,924,577 
2,376,021 
Central 
1,593,823 
2,201,863
Greater Accra 
2,905,726 
4,010,054
Eastern 
1,635,421 
2,118,252
Volta 
2,106,696 
2,633,154
Ashanti 
3,612,950 
4,780,380
Brong Ahafo 
1,815,408 
2,310,983
Northern 
1,820,806 
2,479,461
Upper West 
920,089 
1,046,545
Upper East 
576,583 
702,110
Total 
18,912,079 
24,658,823
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
PDF components for PHP developers
www.setasign.com
SETASIGN
This e-book  
is made with 
SetaPDF

DEMOGRAPHIC STATISTICS
194
MEASURES OF POPULATION COMPOSITION
Calculate 
1)	index of relative difference; 
2)	index of dissimiliarity; 
of population distribution of Ghana in 2000 and 2010 and comment on your results.
5.9	
The table below shows the population and area of Ghana in 1984 by regions.
Region 
Population 
Area ( sq. km.) 
Western 
1,157,807 
23,921 
Central 
1,142,335 
9,826 
Greater Accra 
1,431,099 
3,245 
Volta 
1,211,907 
20,570 
Eastern 
1,680,890 
19,323 
Ashanti 
2,090,100 
24,389 
Brong Ahafo 
1,206,608 
39,557 
Northern 
1,164,583 
70,384 
Upper East 
772,744 
8,842 
Upper West 
438,008 
18,476 
Total 
12,296,081 
238,533 
Calculate 
1)	population densities for all the regions; 
2)	concentration ratio; 
3)	index of concentration; 
of Ghana in 1984 and comment on your results.
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com

DEMOGRAPHIC STATISTICS
195
MEASURES OF POPULATION COMPOSITION
5.10	
Refer to the table in Exercise 5.3. Calculate 
1)	the child dependency ratio; 
2)	the old age dependency ratio; 
3)	the total dependency ratio; 
of Ghana in 1984 and interpret your results.
5.11	
Refer to the table in Exercise 5.3. Calculate 
1)	index of ageing; 
2)	average age of population; 
3)	age-sex accuracy index. 
and comment on the result in each case.
5.12	
The table below shows the population of Ghana in 1960 by age and sex. 
1)	Construct the pyramid; 
2)	Calculate age-specific sex ratios; 
3)	Calculate age-sex accuracy index. 
Age-group 
Total 
Male 
Female
0–4 
1,296,625
642,367
654,258
5–9 
1,018,590
515,520
503,070
10 -14 
681,291
357,831
323,460
15–19 
541,076
275,542
265,534
20–24 
590,912
268,336
322,576
25–29 
584,930
278,601
306,329
30–34 
488,398
242,515
245,883
35–39 
377,413
198,231
179,182
40–44 
311,509
165,937
145,572
45–49 
218,346
122,756
95,590
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com

DEMOGRAPHIC STATISTICS
196
MEASURES OF POPULATION COMPOSITION
Age-group 
Total 
Male 
Female
50–54 
178,490
96,775
81,715
55–59 
107,719
59,307
48,412
60–64 
118,039
63,467
54,572
65–69 
60,958
32,377
28,581
70–74 
56,529
29,796
26,733
75–79 
30,961
16,183
14,778
80–84 
28,809
15,022
13,787
85+ 
36,220
19,707
16,513
Total 
6,726,815
3,400,270
3,326,545
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com

DEMOGRAPHIC STATISTICS
197
MEASURES OF MORTALITY
6	
MEASURES OF MORTALITY
6.1	
INTRODUCTION 
Mortality is the negative component in the balance of the vital process and it is the first 
of the demographic processes we shall consider. 
Mortality may be described as that branch of demography which deals with the total process 
of deaths and the changes it brings about in the population. It is a continuous force of 
attrition, tending to reduce population having its effect countervailed by the force of fertility. 
The analytical study of mortality in demography can simply be described as the study of 
the “risk of dying” as it varies from one population to another and within a population 
from one sub-group to another. Compared to other demographic phenomena, its study is 
relatively simple: all persons die and, therefore, the intensity of the process is always equal to 
unity in every cohort. With regard to the tempo of events, humanity has tried, in general, 
to raise the expectation of life. 
6.1.1  DEFINITION OF CONCEPTS IN MORTALITY MEASUREMENT
Death
The meaning of death may seem to be obvious, at least in a physical sense, to most people. 
However, recent developments in the medical field have gone a long way to blur even 
the clinical distinction between life and death. It is, therefore, important to formalise the 
definition of death at least for statistical purposes.
Death is the permanent disappearance of all evidence of life at any time after birth has taken 
place (that is, post-natal cessation of vital functions without capability of resuscitation). This 
definition of “death” excludes foetal deaths (i.e. deaths prior to live birth).
Foetal death 
Foetus is a product of conception which takes about nine months or 280 days to develop 
in the womb before live birth can take place.
Foetal death is defined as a product of conception that shows no sign of life after complete 
birth. Death is indicated by the fact that after such separation the foetus does not breathe 
or show any other evidence of life, such as beating of the heart, pulsation of the umbilical 
cord, or definite movement of voluntary muscles. Foetal deaths are excluded from both 
“live births” and deaths.
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com

DEMOGRAPHIC STATISTICS
198
MEASURES OF MORTALITY
198
In present demographic practice the term foetal death is employed to embrace the events 
variously called stillbirths, miscarriages, and abortions in popular, medical, or legal usage. 
Stillbirth 
Although the term stillbirth is sometimes employed to refer to all foetal deaths, it is often 
employed to refer to foetal death of at least 28 completed weeks of gestation. A period of 
gestation (gestation age) is defined as the number of completed weeks which have elapsed 
between the first day of the last menstrual period and the date of delivery of the foetus.
Abortion 
Technically, abortion is defined, with reference to the woman, as any interruption of 
pregnancy before 28 weeks of gestation with a dead foetus. There are two major categories 
of abortion – spontaneous and induced.
Spontaneous abortion is popularly employed to refer to spontaneous or accidental terminations 
of foetal life occurring early in pregnancy. This is popularly referred to as miscarriage.
Induced abortion involves deliberate action undertaken with the intention of terminating 
pregnancy. The term abortion is popularly used to refer to this category, whether it was 
done legally or illegally. 
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
www.sylvania.com
We do not reinvent  
the wheel we reinvent 
light.
Fascinating lighting offers an infinite spectrum of 
possibilities: Innovative technologies and new  
markets provide both opportunities and challenges. 
An environment in which your expertise is in high 
demand. Enjoy the supportive working atmosphere 
within our global group and benefit from international 
career paths. Implement sustainable ideas in close 
cooperation with other specialists and contribute to 
influencing our future. Come and join us in reinventing 
light every day.
Light is OSRAM

DEMOGRAPHIC STATISTICS
199
MEASURES OF MORTALITY
6.1.2  USES OF STUDY OF MORTALITY 
The level and pattern of mortality is a reflection of the health status of a population and is 
a fundamental indicator of socio-economic development. The study of mortality, therefore, 
is important to a wide range of people and professionals. 
1)	Demographers
It is an instrument for demographers 
a)	to measure the growth potential of a population; 
b)	to look into the probable changes in population composition; 
c)	in the study of other demographic variables; 
d)	in the construction of population projections. 
The concepts and methods developed for mortality analysis are needed to build the systems 
for the analysis of marriage, fertility and migration. 
2)	Medical Professionals 
a)	It helps the medical professionals to understand the prevailing patterns of the 
various causes of deaths with varying dominance 
b)	It guides the Health Ministry in the formulation of policies, implementation 
and evaluation of public health and disease control programmes and projects. 
3)	Undertakers
It is of use to undertakers and to those concerned with estimating the cemetery space 
needed in the country. 
4)	Actuaries
Mortality data are used by actuarial scientists to calculate probable life span of population 
which insurance companies require to set premiums. 
5)	Researchers
It is of vital interest to researchers involved in public programmes. 
6)	Policy Makers
It is important to the government and other agencies who are concerned with taking 
policy-decisions in relation to the levels and variation of mortality. 
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com

DEMOGRAPHIC STATISTICS
200
MEASURES OF MORTALITY
6.2	
CRUDE DEATH RATE 
The simplest, commonest and crudest way of obtaining death rates is to express deaths per 
unit of the population. This gives a measure of totality, describing the frequency with which 
the deaths occur in a population in a specified period. 
6.2.1  DEFINITION OF CRUDE DEATH RATE 
The crude death rate is defined as the number of deaths from all causes in one calendar 
year per 1,000 of the mid-year population; that is: 
d = D
P × k
where
D
=  total number of deaths occuring during a calendar year (January 1 to December 31);
P
=  mid-year total population (that is total population as of
=  July 1);
k
= the radix, usually chosen as 1, 000.
The crude death rate for any period gives the rate at which the population is depleted 
through deaths over the course of the period. Crude death rate usually lies between 8 and 
30 per thousand and female crude death rate is generally less than male crude death rate. 
Example 6.1
The mid-year population of the Republic of Mauritius in 2004 was 1,233,386. The number 
of deaths in that year was 8,475. Calculate the crude death rate of the country. 
Solution
P = 1, 233, 386; D = 8, 475
d
=
D
P × 1, 000
=
8, 475
1, 233, 386 × 1, 000 = 6.9
That is, 6.9 out of every 1,000 people died in the Republic of Mauritius in 2004.
Alternatively, we may say that “the death rate of Mauritius in 2004 was about 6.9 per 1,000 
people”, or 69 per 10,000 people. 
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com

DEMOGRAPHIC STATISTICS
201
MEASURES OF MORTALITY
6.2.2  AVERAGE CRUDE DEATH RATES 
We may sometimes be interested in computing the mean of crude death rates which, covering 
data for two or three years. This is done in order to: 
1)	represent the longer period with a single figure, 
2)	add stability to rates based on small numbers, 
3)	use it in extensive comparative analysis. 
These annual average rates may be computed in several different ways. For lack of appropriate 
terminology, we have adopted expressions “mean annual rate”, “annual average rate”, and 
“mid-period rate” to describe the methods for computation. 
Method 1: Mean Annual Crude Death Rate 
Crude death rates are computed for each year and averaged, i.e.:
¯d
=
1
n
D1
P1
× 1, 000 + D2
P2
× 1, 000 + · · · + Dn
Pn
× 1, 000

=
1
n
D1
P1
+ D2
P2
+ · · · + Dn
Pn

× 1, 000
=
1
n
n

t=1
Dt
Pt
× 1, 000
=
1
n
n

t=1
dt × 1, 000
where 
¯d 	 	
	
=	
mean annual crude death rate covering data for n years;
n 	
	
	
=	
number of years;
D1, D2, · · · , Dn 	
=	
total number of deaths of year 1, year 2, · · ·, year n, 
respectively;
P1, P2, · · · , Pn 	
=	
mid-year population of year 1, year 2, · · ·, year n, respectively;
dt
	 	
	
=	
crude death rate of year t (t = 1, 2, · · · , n).
This procedure takes into consideration the deaths in relation to the population in each year. 
However, in computing the composite rate (mean annual crude death rate), equal weight 
is given to the annual crude death rates for the n  years. Consequently, the mean annual 
crude death rate is an “unweighted” average.
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com

DEMOGRAPHIC STATISTICS
202
MEASURES OF MORTALITY
This procedure may be viewed as more exact than the subsequent procedures for measuring 
mortality in the period. 
Example 6.2
The mid-year population of a country was 16 million in 1985, 18 million in 1986 and 19.5 
million in 1987. In these years the number of people who died were 250,000; 245,000 
and 240,000, respectively. Find the mean annual crude death rate for the entire period 
(1985–1987). 
Solution 
1985
=
D1985
P1985
× k
=
250, 000
16, 000, 000 × 1000 = 15.6
That is, the death rate of the country in 1985 was about 16 per 1,000 people. 
d1986
=
D1986
P1986
× k
=
245, 000
18, 000, 000 × 1000 = 13.6
That is the death rate of the country in 1986 was about 14 per 1,000 people. 
d1987
=
D1987
P1986
× k
=
240, 000
19, 500, 000 × 1, 000 = 12.3
That is, the death rate of the country in 1987 was about 12 per 1,000 people.
Therefore, the mean annual death rate of the country for the period 1985–1987 is: 
¯d
=
1
n
n

t=1
di
=
1
3 (15.6 + 13.6 + 12.3) = 13.83
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com

DEMOGRAPHIC STATISTICS
203
MEASURES OF MORTALITY
203
That is, on the average, about 13.8 per 1,000 people died each year in the country in the 
three-year period (1985–1987). 
Method 2: Annual Mean Crude Death Rate 
The mean number of deaths is divided by the mean population: 
d
=
1
n (D1 + D2 + · · · + Dn)
1
n (P1 + P2 + · · · + Pn) × 1, 000
=
D1 + D2 + · · · + Dn
P1 + P2 + · · · + Pn
× 1, 000
=
n

t=1
Dt
n

t=1
Pt
× 1, 000
Example 6.3
Refer to Example 6.2. Calculate the annual mean death rate for the period 1985–1987. 
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
360°
thinking.
© Deloitte & Touche LLP and affiliated entities.
Discover the truth at www.deloitte.ca/careers 

DEMOGRAPHIC STATISTICS
204
MEASURES OF MORTALITY
Solution 
=
250, 000 + 245, 000 + 240, 000
16, 000, 000 + 18, 000, 000 + 19, 500, 000 × 1, 000
=
735000
53500, 000 × 1, 000 = 13.73
Method 3: Mid-period Crude Death Rate 
Often, reliable figures for the total population are not available for each individual year and 
so it becomes customary to use the mean number of deaths for the n years and divide the 
results by the mid-period population: 
¯d =
1
n (D1 + D2 + · · · + Dn)
Pn/2
× 1000
where Pn/2 =  the mid-period population (or usually a census figure).
The mid-period crude death rate is a “weighted” average because a large (or small) number 
of deaths in one year will have a large (or small) influence on the value of the rate. It is the 
most commonly used and most convenient procedure even though it is somewhat less precise. 
Example 6.4
Compute the mid-period crude death rate for the data in Example 6.2. 
Solution 
¯d
=
1
n (D1 + D2 + D3)
Pn/2
× k
=
1
3 (250, 000 + 245, 000 + 240, 000)
18, 000, 000
× 1, 000 = 13.6
These three procedures may be expected to give approximately the same results unless there 
are sharp fluctuations in the size of the population. 
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com

DEMOGRAPHIC STATISTICS
205
MEASURES OF MORTALITY
6.2.3  ADVANTAGES AND DISADVANTAGES OF CRUDE DEATH RATE 
Advantages of Crude Death Rate 
1)	It is easy and quick to compute, requiring the barest minimum of data for a vital 
rate: it requires only the total deaths and total mid-year population in a given 
period of time. 
2)	It is an average and so a suitable measure that indicates the general level of mortality 
and its changes in an entire population. 
3)	It is easy to understand and its meaning can be communicated to the general public. 
Disadvantages of Crude Death Rate 
1)	It is affected by many factors, such as, age, sex and other characteristics. These 
characteristics, especially, age and sex, are fundamental to the study of mortality 
because the risk of death is very different at different ages and for different sexes. 
It is for this reason that this measure is called “crude”. 
2)	The crude death rates of an area for a period of time are not comparable unless 
the area’s population characteristics, such as, age and sex remain unchanged or 
change slowly. 
3)	The crude death rate is not a reliable index for comparing mortality of two areas in 
the same year unless, besides the health conditions, the areas are comparable with 
respect to other demographic characteristics, such as, age and sex. 
4)	It does not measure only the rates of occurrence of events, but mixes them up 
together with changes in population size. For example, birth refers to the addition 
of one person to the total population, while a death is the removal of one person 
from the population. 
5)	The numerator is taken from registration of vital events as they occur throughout 
the year, but the denominator represents the total number of people with reference 
to a fixed date in the year, usually, the mid-year. Hence the crude death rate does 
not measure the risk factor in the probability sense. 
6.3	
SPECIFIC DEATH RATE 
6.3.1  DEFINITION OF SPECIFIC DEATH RATE 
The crude death rate gives only a very general indication of the level of mortality and its 
changes. In this wise, it is usually referred to as general crude death rate. There is also the 
need for measures that describe the death rate for any population group in a community 
such as the female population, or the rural population over a period. Such measures are 
referred to as specific death rates. They are of interest both in themselves and for their value 
in the analysis of the total number of deaths and the crude rate.
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com

DEMOGRAPHIC STATISTICS
206
MEASURES OF MORTALITY
Specific death rate is defined as 
dj = Dj
Pj
× k
where 
dj
=  specific death rate for the jth  segment of the population;
Dj
= total number of deaths in the jth  specified segment of the population in the 
given year;
Pj
=  population of the jth  specified segment as at July 1;
k
=
1, 000;
j
=
1, 2, ..., S (S  is number of segments of the population).
Note
The formula calls for dividing the deaths in the jth  sub-group during a year by the mid-
year population of the jth  sub-group. The sub-groups for which specific death rates may 
be computed include subdivisions of the population according to sex, age, occupation, 
educational level, ethnic group, cause of death, etc. 
Example 6.5
The (census) population of the Republic of Mauritius in 2004 was 1,233,386, with 610,108 
males and 623,278 females. In that year, 4,716 deaths were recorded in the male population 
while 3,759 deaths were recorded in the female population. Calculate sex-specific death rate. 
Solution
Population:	 Male	
	
(Pm)
=
610, 108
	
	
Female		
(Pf)
=
623, 278
Deaths:	
Male	
	
(Dm)
=
4, 716
	
	
Female		
(Df)
=
3, 759
Sex-specific death rate (dj) = Dj
Pj
× k
For male:
(dm)
=
Dm
Pm
× 1, 000
=
4, 716
610, 108 × 1, 000 = 7.7
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com

DEMOGRAPHIC STATISTICS
207
MEASURES OF MORTALITY
For female:
(df)
=
Df
Pm
× 1, 000
=
3, 759
623, 278 × 1, 000 = 6.0
That is, for every 1,000 males who lived in Mauritius in 2004, 7.7 died during the year; 
for every 1,000 females, 6 died during the year.
Specific rates may be computed for two or more characteristics simultaneously. For example, 
we may compute the death rate for Hausa females, thus obtaining an ethnicity-sex specific 
rate. As pointed out earlier, there is no clear dividing line between a crude death rate and 
a specific death rate except in the case of age, which always defines rate as specific. For 
example, death rate for the rural population may be considered crude if we are interested 
in that population only. If interest is its relationship with the whole country’s population, 
the death rate becomes specific. 
Example 6.6
The census population of Malawi in 1977 was 5,547,460 out of which 5,076,802 lived in 
the rural areas and 470,658 in the urban areas. In that year, 133,705 deaths were recorded 
in the rural areas and 4,989 deaths in the urban areas. Calculate 
1)	the death rate of the rural community; 
2)	the death rate of the rural community as part of the whole country. 
Solution
1)	Consider the rural community as an entity in itself. 
	
P
=
5, 076, 802
D
=
133, 705
d
=
D
P × 1, 000
=
133, 705
5, 076, 802 × 1, 000 = 26.3
This is the crude death rate for the rural community of Malawi in 1977. 
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com

DEMOGRAPHIC STATISTICS
208
MEASURES OF MORTALITY
208
Consider the rural community as a component of the country. The resulting death rate 
becomes specific. 
	
Pr
=
5, 076, 802
Dr
=
133, 705
dr
=
Dr
Pr
× 1, 000
=
133, 705
5, 076.802 × 1, 000 = 26.3.
That is, on the average, for every 1,000 people living in rural areas in Malawi in 1977, 
26.3 died during the year. 
Note 
1)	The results in cases (1) and (2) above are the same though they have different names. 
2)	As a consequence from (1) unless specifically indicated otherwise, by specific death 
rate we mean the age-specific death rate. 
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
We will turn your CV into 
an opportunity of a lifetime
Do you like cars? Would you like to be a part of a successful brand?
We will appreciate and reward both your enthusiasm and talent.
Send us your CV. You will be surprised where it can take you.
Send us your CV on
www.employerforlife.com

DEMOGRAPHIC STATISTICS
209
MEASURES OF MORTALITY
6.3.2  AGE-SPECIFIC DEATH RATES 
The crude death rate helps us to arrive at the conclusion that mortality exerts a much more 
greater force on some populations than on others and that its force may change quickly 
over time. To explore these ideas in more detail and to understand more clearly the socio-
demographic implications of mortality, we must recognise that the relative frequency of 
deaths varies with age. It is high in the youngest and the oldest members of the population.
The amount of loss to a society, in terms of potential population growth and of financial 
loss is determined to a greater extent by the age at which death takes place. Thus, we 
must begin the intensive study of mortality by learning its age pattern, which begins by 
computing death rates separately for each age or age group. These are called age-specific 
death rates (ASDRs). 
The age-specific death rate is the number of deaths per k persons of a specific age (group): 
da = Da
Pa
× k
where 
da
= specific death rate for age-group a;
Da
=  total number of deaths in age-group a;
Pa
=  mid-year population in age-group a;
k
=
1, 000
a
=
1, 2, ..., n  (where n  is the number of single ages or age groups).
Note 
1)	The age-specific death rate is simply a crude death rate computed for each age 
group individually 
2)	Age-specific death rates may be computed for single years of age, or for any age 
interval. Death rates for five-year age groups are the ones most frequently computed. 
3)	Death rates specific for age are generally calculated separately for the two sexes, so 
as to exhibit the variation by sex. 
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com

DEMOGRAPHIC STATISTICS
210
MEASURES OF MORTALITY
Example 6.7
Table 6.1 (a) shows the mid-year population and the number of deaths in Mali in 1976 
for each age group. Calculate the age-specific death rates.
Age-groups (year)
Mid-year Population 
(thousand)
Number of deaths 
(thousand)
0–19
345.8
8.4
20–39
169.0
8.8
40–59
845.8
10.4
60 or more
399.6
13.2
TABLE 6.1(a) Mid-year Population and Number of Deaths in Mali in 1976 
Solution 
d0−19
=
D0−19
P0.19
× k
=
8.4
345.8 × 1, 000 = 24.3
d20−39
=
D20−39
P20−39
× k
=
8.8
169.0 × 1, 000
= 52.1
d40−59
=
D40−59
P40−56
× k
=
10.4
845.8 × 1, 000 = 12.3
d60+
=
D60+
P60+
× k
=
13.2
399.6 × 1, 000 = 33.0
The results are presented in Table 6.1(b).
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com

DEMOGRAPHIC STATISTICS
211
MEASURES OF MORTALITY
Age-groups (year)
Mid-year Population 
(thousand)
Number of deaths
Age-specific death 
rate per 1,000 
population
0–19
345.8
8.4
24.3
20–39
169.0
8.8
52.1
40–59
845.8
10.4
12.3
60 or more
399.6
13.2
33.0
TABLE 6.1(b) Age-Specific Death Rates of Example 6.7 
6.3.3  AGE CURVE OF MORTALITY 
The incidence of mortality by age follows a similar pattern (curve) in every human population. 
It shows “bath tub” -shaped curve, that is, a ∪-shape. The two sides of the ∪ represent high 
mortality of infancy and old-age with the base of ∪ shape widening as the reduced mortality 
becomes a characteristic of increased span of life. Thus, the general pattern of the age curve 
of mortality is as follows: mortality is high in the first year of life, it declines rapidly in the 
second and third years until by age 9, when it is very low. It remains low until the mid-
thirties, when it gradually begins to increase at an accelerating rate. Thereafter, it rises at an 
ever increasing pace until by age 60 when it becomes high and by age 70 extremely high.
In countries where mortality in the past has reduced, the observation is that the risk of 
mortality reduces first (or to a larger extent) at the infancy and child-ages where it was 
extremely high and produces a nearly J-shaped curve. 
The age-specific death rates for males and females differ from developing and developed 
countries. In the developed countries, where mortality is usually low, ASDRs for females are 
generally found to be lower at all ages than for males. On the other hand, in developing 
countries, where mortality is usually high, there are various typical differences in ASDRs 
for the two sexes. One such typical pattern is that of higher female mortality than of male’s 
at infant and reproductive ages and vice versa at other ages. 
Example 6.8
Table 6.2 shows the age-specific death rates of the Republic of Mauritius for 2004 by sex. 
Construct the age mortality curves and give comments.
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com

DEMOGRAPHIC STATISTICS
212
MEASURES OF MORTALITY
Age-groups (year)
Male Population
Female Population
Total Population
0
1–4
5–9
10–14
15–19
20–24
25–29
30–34
35–39
40–44
45–49
50–54
55–59
60–64
65–69
70–74
75–79
80–84
85+
16.2
0.5
0.2
0.3
0.8
0.9
1.4
2.1
3.6
5.1
8.2
10.8
15.3
26.1
37.7
54.0
85.1
120.6
215.2
12.9
0.5
0.3
0.1
0.3
0.5
0.5
0.9
1.2
1.8
3.6
5.7
8.5
15.9
24.0
34.8
52.2
81.6
174.5
14.6
0.5
0.3
0.2
0.6
0.7
0.9
1.5
2.4
3.5
5.9
8.2
11.7
20.7
30.1
43.1
65.5
96.0
186.2
TABLE 6.2 Age-Specific Death Rates of Republic of Mauritius, 2004 (per 1,000 population) 
Source: Central Statistical Office, Annual Digest of Statistics of the Republic of Mauritius (excluding Agalega 
and St. Brandon), Port Louis, 2004. Author’s calculation 
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com

DEMOGRAPHIC STATISTICS
213
MEASURES OF MORTALITY
213
Solution
Figure 6.1 shows the age mortality curves for Mauritius in 2004. As expected, they follow 
the usual “bath tub” shape.
Figure 6.1 Age Mortality Curve for Mauritius, 2004
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
AXA Global 
Graduate Program
Find out more and apply

DEMOGRAPHIC STATISTICS
214
MEASURES OF MORTALITY
6.3.4  ADVANTAGES AND DISADVANTAGES OF SPECIFIC DEATH RATES 
Advantages of Age-specific Death Rates 
1)	Specific death rates overcome the drawback of the crude death rates, since, to a 
large extent, they are computed by taking into consideration the composition of 
the population. 
2)	Specific death rates are essential because it is only through the analysis of specific 
rates that an accurate and detailed study can be made of the variation (of the 
phenomenon under study) among population classes. 
3)	For general analytical purposes the death rate specific for age and sex is one of the 
most important and widely applicable types of death rates. 
4)	The death rate specific for age and sex supplies one of the essential components 
required for the computation of net reproduction (see Chapter 9). 
Disadvantages of Age-specific Death Rates 
1)	Specific death rates are not of much utility for overall comparison of mortality 
conditions prevailing in two different communities, say A and B. For certain 
age-groups the mortality rate for say, community A may be greater than that for 
community B and vice-versa for other age-groups. 
2)	When specific death rates are calculated for one demographic factor, say age or 
sex, other demographic factors (social, occupational and topographical factors) are 
completely ignored resulting in what is called differential mortality. 
3)	To examine the trend of mortality using specific rates over a series of years, one 
would have to look at a very large number of figures and it might become difficult 
to see any of the broad general trends that are in operation. 
6.4	
CAUSE-SPECIFIC DEATH RATIOS AND RATES 
Mortality by cause of death is a matter of concern in the control of diseases. It may be 
analysed in terms of two observed measures, namely, cause-specific death rate and cause-
specific death ratio. In both cases, they are computed by including in the numerator only 
those deaths due to a particular cause of death, say, hypertension, cancer, diabetes, heart 
disease, malaria, or accidents. 
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com

DEMOGRAPHIC STATISTICS
215
MEASURES OF MORTALITY
6.4.1  USES OF CAUSE-SPECIFIC DEATH RATIO AND RATE 
The study of mortality by cause provides researchers, planners and the policy maker a detailed 
picture of the general state of health and mortality situation prevailing. Cause-specific death 
ratio and rate are used to: 
1)	Compare the causes of deaths in different areas in the same yrar, or in different 
years for the same area; 
2)	Prepare multiple decrement life tables (refer to Chapter 7) by causes of death and 
to describe how much sensitive the expectation of life at a specified age is for the 
changes in mortality due to one or more causes. 
6.4.2  CAUSE-SPECIFIC DEATH RATIO
Cause-specific death ratio (C) represents the percentage of all deaths due to a particular 
cause or group of causes in a given year. This is defined as: 
C = Dc
D × 100
wheres
Dc =  deaths from a cause or group of causes c;
D =  Dc =  total number of deaths from all causes;
Cause-specific death ratio (C) gives the relative risk due to any particular cause of death. 
Example 6.9
The mid-year population of Egypt in 1987 was 49,089,000 and in that year there were 
466,161 deaths out of which 3,319 died of hyperplasia of prostate. Calculate the cause-
specific death ratio. 
Solution 
D
=
466, 161
Dc
=
3, 319
C
=
Dc
D × 100
=
3, 319
466, 161 × 100 = 0.7
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com

DEMOGRAPHIC STATISTICS
216
MEASURES OF MORTALITY
That is, there are 0.7 deaths of hyperplasia prostate per 100 deaths or 7 deaths of hyperplasia 
prostate per 1,000 deaths in Egypt in 1987. 
Advantage of Cause-specific Death Ratio The cause-specific death ratio is used to measure 
the relative importance of a given cause of death in an area and over time.
6.4.3  CAUSE-SPECIFIC DEATH RATE 
Cause-specific death rate (CSDR) is defined as the number of deaths from a given cause or 
group of causes during a year per 100,000 of the mid-year population: 
CSDR = Dc
P × k
where k = 100, 000.
This rate employs a larger k  than a crude death rate or an age-specific death rate because 
there are relatively few deaths from many of the causes. 
Note 
The cause-specific death rates in a set covering all causes sum up to the crude death rate. 
Example 6.10
For data in Example 6.9, calculate 
1)	the crude death rate; 
2)	the cause-specific death rate. 
Solution 
Mid-year population (P)	
	
	
	
	
= 49, 089, 000
Number of deaths (D)	
	
	
	
	
= 466, 161
Population who died of hyperplasia of prostate (Dc) 	
= 3319
1)	The crude death rate is: 
	
d
=
D
P × 1, 000
=
466, 161
49, 089, 000 × 1, 000 = 9.5
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com

DEMOGRAPHIC STATISTICS
217
MEASURES OF MORTALITY
2)	The cause-specific death rate is: 
	
CSDR
=
Dc
P × k
=
3319
49, 089, 000 × 100, 000 = 6.8
That is, there were about 6.8 deaths of hyperplasia of prostate per 100,000 population in 
Egypt in 1987. 
Advantage of Cause-specific Death Rate 
The cause-specific death rate is used to compare the relative frequency of particular cause 
of death of two areas “adjusted for” the size of the population in each area. We can say, 
for example, that the death rate from heart disease in area A (50 per 1,000 population) is 
twice the rate in area B (25 per 1,000 population). 
Disadvantages of Cause-specific Death Rate 
1)	Unlike other types of death rates, (for example, the age-specific death rate, where 
the deaths at a given age are related to the population at that age), in this rate the 
base population logically is not limited to the population at risk of death from 
the given cause. 
2)	Certain causes of death have relevance only to a very restricted part of the age 
distribution or to only a particular sex. For example, deaths due to measles and 
whooping cough are largely confined to childhood; deaths due to diabetes, nephritis, 
etc. affect largely the adult population, deaths due to complications of pregnancy 
are confined to women. 
6.4.4  AGE AND CAUSE-SPECIFIC DEATH RATE 
As we have observed, the general cause-specific death rates have no significance in disease, 
which are peculiar to age or sex. For such diseases, it is important to calculate cause-specific 
rates specific for age and/or sex. 
An age and cause-specific death rate (ACSDR) is defined as: 
ACSDR = Dca
P
× 1, 000
where Dca= deaths at age a due to cause c. 
Similarly, sex and cause-specific death rates may be defined. 
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com

DEMOGRAPHIC STATISTICS
218
MEASURES OF MORTALITY
218
6.4.5  CASE-FATALITY RATE 
Case-fatality rate (CFR) measures the risk that a person having contracted a particular 
disease, will die from it. It is defined as: 
CFR = Dd
Cd × 100
where Dd
= number of deaths due to a particular disease;
Cd
= number of cases of that disease.
Example 6.11
At the University of Ghana hospital, 955 malaria cases were reported in 1999. Out of this 
number 54 persons died from this disease. Calculate the case-fatality rate for malaria. 
Solution
Cd = 955;	
Dd = 54
CFR = 54
955 × 100 = 5.7
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
ibili
because 
e Graduate Programme  
for Engineers and Geoscientists
Month 16
I was a construction
supervisor in 
the North Sea 
advising and 
helping foremen 
solve problems
I was a
he
s
Real work 
International opportunities 

ree work placements
al 
Internationa
or

ree wo
I wanted real responsibili 
 I joined MITAS because 
www.discovermitas.com

DEMOGRAPHIC STATISTICS
219
MEASURES OF MORTALITY
That is, there were 5.7 deaths per 100 malaria cases at University of Ghana in 1999. 
6.4.6  PROPORTIONAL MORTALITY RATIO 
The proportional mortality ratio (PMR) has been suggested as a single measure for comparing 
the overall health conditions of different communities over a period. It is defined as: 
PMR = D50
D × 100
where D50
=  number of deaths of persons 50 years of age and over.
Example 6.12
There were 230,522 deaths in Algeria in 1982 out of which 56,979 were people of 50 years 
and above. Calculate the proportional mortality ratio. 
Solution 
D
=
230, 522;
D50 = 56, 979
PMR
=
56, 979
230, 522 × 100 = 24.7
That is, in Algeria in 1982, 24.7 out of 100 deaths occurred among persons 50 years or more.
6.5	
MORTALITY RATES 
Mortality rates are probabilities of death which are specific by age and relate to a one-year 
period. The most commonly computed probabilities of death are specified by the following. 
1)	Age relating to a one-year period
An age-specific probability of dying might answer the question, for example, what is the 
chance that a new-born child will die before it reaches its first birthday? 
2)	Age-sex relating to child-bearing age of females
An age-sex specific probability of dying might answer the question, for example, what 
is the chance that a pregnant woman will die of complications of pregnancy, childbirth, 
and puerperium? 
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com

DEMOGRAPHIC STATISTICS
220
MEASURES OF MORTALITY
6.5.1  MATERNAL MORTALITY 
Maternal Death 
Maternal death is defined as the death of a woman while pregnant or within 42 days of 
the termination of pregnancy, irrespective of the duration and the size of the pregnancy, 
from any cause related to or aggravated by the pregnancy or its management but not from 
accident or incidental causes. All maternal deaths should be subdivided into two groups: 
1)	Direct Obstetric Deaths
Direct obstetric deaths are deaths resulting from obstetric complications of the pregnant 
state (pregnancy, labour, and puerperium) from interventions, omissions, incorrect 
treatment, or from a chain of events relating to any of the above. 
2)	Indirect Obstetric deaths
Indirect obstetric Deaths are deaths resulting from previous existing diseases or diseases 
not developed during pregnancy and that was not due to direct obstetric causes but that 
was aggravated by physiologic effects of pregnancy. 
Maternal Mortality Rate
Maternal mortality rate (MMR), also referred to as mortality of reproductive ages is a 
widely used type of cause-specific mortality rate representing approximately the risk of dying 
as a result of “deliveries and complications of pregnancy, childbirth, and the puerperium”. 
This rate is conventionally defined as the number of deaths due to puerperal causes per 
100,000 live births over a given period. Symbolically, 
MMR = Dp
B × k
where 
Dp
=  deaths from all puerperal causes during a year;
B
=  total live births during the year;
k
=
100, 000
Note 
The preferred denominator for this rate is the number of women who were pregnant during 
the year. This denominator, however, is impossible to determine. 
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com

DEMOGRAPHIC STATISTICS
221
MEASURES OF MORTALITY
Example 6.13
There were 16,000 live births in a country in 2005. During childbirth, 300 pregnant women 
died; before giving birth, 200 of them died and immediately after giving birth 100 of them 
died. Calculate the maternal mortality rate. 
Solution 
Number of live births B 	
	
	
=
16, 000
Deaths from all puerperal causes Dp	
=  300 + 200 + 100 = 600
Maternal mortality rate	
	
	
=
Dp
B × 100, 000
	
	
	
	
	
=
600
16, 000 × 100, 000 = 3, 750
That is, the maternal mortality rate in the country in 2005 is 3,750 per 100,000 live births. 
Example 6.14
The maternal deaths of Mauritius in 1987 was 19. In that year, there were 19,152 live 
births. Calculate the maternal mortality rate. 
Solution 
Maternal deaths	
	
= 19
Live births	
	
	
= 19, 152
Maternal mortality rate	
= 
19
19, 152 × 100, 000 = 99
That is, for every 100,000 women who had live births in 1987 in Mauritius, 99 of them 
died from puerperal causes. 
Limitations of Maternal Mortality Rate 
1)	Foetal deaths (see Section 6.6) are not included in the denominator. This results in 
an inflated rate, since a mother can die from a puerperal cause without producing 
a live birth. 
2)	Under-registration of live births, which results in too small a denominator, causes 
the rate to be too large. 
3)	Maternal death may occur in a year later than the year in which the birth occurred. 26 
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com

DEMOGRAPHIC STATISTICS
222
MEASURES OF MORTALITY
6.5.2  UNDER FIVE MORTALITY 
If a child dies the day it is born or during the early period of life, its death has far greater 
demographic implications than does the death of an elderly person. In demographic and 
health analysis, deaths occurring during the first five years of life is of great concern. This 
is usually referred to as under five mortality and its rate measures the risk of dying during 
the first five years of life.
The under five mortality is usually decomposed into infant mortality and child mortality 
(see Figure 6.2 in Section 6.6.4). Infant mortality consists of deaths occurring during the 
first year of life while child mortality refers to death before age 5 years after surviving the 
first year of life. In the subsequent section, we shall discuss infant mortality because of its 
interest in mortality analysis.
6.6	
INFANT MORTALITY RATES 
6.6.1  USES OF INFANT MORTALITY 
Estimates of infant mortality are useful for health planning, and fertility analysis, as well as 
in the forecasting of social needs for amenities for the future. In particular, infant mortality 
has the following uses. 
1)	It is one of the most sensitive indicators of the medical and health facilities in a 
population; 
2)	There is some sort of statistical relationship between the infant mortality and birth 
rates. Consequently, infant mortality becomes one of the important parameters to 
understand the mechanism of fertility change in a population; 
3)	Any mortality in general affects the infant mortality and it is through this that it 
influences the age distribution. 
Infant mortality “rate” measures the risk of dying during the first year of life. i.e. from 
birth to exact age 1.
We shall distinguish between conventional infant mortality rates and adjusted infant 
mortality rates. 
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com

DEMOGRAPHIC STATISTICS
223
MEASURES OF MORTALITY
223
6.6.2  CONVENTIONAL INFANT MORTALITY RATE 
Conventional Infant Mortality Rate (CIMR) is defined as the number of infant deaths per 
1,000 live births during the year27: 
CIMR
=
D0
B × k
where 
CIMR
= Conventional Infant Mortality Rate;
D0
= number of deaths of children under 1 year of age during a year;
B
=  total number of live births during the year;
k
=  base taken generally as 1,000.
Example 6.15
There were 1,902,604 live births in Egypt in 1987 out of which 25,284 children died 
before the age of 4 weeks and 94,044 died before their first birthday. In addition, there 
were 12,020 late foetal deaths in that year. Calculate the CIMR. 
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
MASTER IN MANAGEMENT
mim.admissions@ie.edu
Follow us on IE MIM Experience
www.ie.edu/master-management
#10 WORLDWIDE
MASTER IN MANAGEMENT 
FINANCIAL TIMES
55 Nationalities
in class
5 Specializations
Personalize your program 
Length: 1O MONTHS
Av. Experience: 1 YEAR
Language: ENGLISH / SPANISH
Format: FULL-TIME
Intakes: SEPT / FEB
• STUDY IN THE CENTER OF MADRID AND TAKE ADVANTAGE OF THE UNIQUE OPPORTUNITIES
  THAT THE CAPITAL OF SPAIN OFFERS
• PROPEL YOUR EDUCATION BY EARNING A DOUBLE DEGREE THAT BEST SUITS YOUR
  PROFESSIONAL GOALS
• STUDY A SEMESTER ABROAD AND BECOME A GLOBAL CITIZEN WITH THE BEYOND BORDERS
  EXPERIENCE
93%
OF MIM STUDENTS ARE
WORKING IN THEIR SECTOR 3 MONTHS
FOLLOWING GRADUATION

DEMOGRAPHIC STATISTICS
224
MEASURES OF MORTALITY
Solution 
Number of live births	
B 	
= 1, 902, 604
Deaths before first birthday D0	
= 94, 044
	
CIMR	
= 
D0
B × 1, 000
=
94, 044
1, 902, 604 × 1, 000 = 49.4
That is, 49.4 infants per 1,000 births in Egypt in 1987 died before attaining their first 
birthday. 
Limitation of Conventional Infant Mortality Rate
The conventional infant mortality rate is not a true probability. The infants who die in a 
given calendar year were born either in that year or in the previous year; and similarly, some 
children born in a given calendar year will die during the following year. If the number of 
births does not fluctuate much from year to year, the conventional infant mortality rate for 
a year will represent rather well the probability of an infant dying during the year. If there 
are sharp fluctuations in the number of births between years and within years, however, the 
conventional infant mortality rate will give a distorted indication of the level and trend of 
infant mortality. In periods of rapid change, therefore, some adjustment should be made. 
6.6.3  ADJUSTED INFANT MORTALITY RATES
As noted earlier, total infant deaths in a given year t, D0,  occur to births of that year, B(t), 
and also to births of the previous year, B(t −1). That is:
D0 = D′
0(t −1) + D0(t)
where
D0
=  Total infant deaths in a given year t;
D′
0(t −1)
=  infant deaths in year t  which occurred to year t −1  birth cohort, B(t −1).
D0(t)
= infant deaths in a year t  which occurred to year t  birth cohort, B(t);
Again, some infant deaths occur in the following year, D0(t + 1), from birth cohort of the 
given year, B(t):
D0(t + 1) = D
0(t + 1) + D∗
0(t + 1)
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com

DEMOGRAPHIC STATISTICS
225
MEASURES OF MORTALITY
where 
D0(t + 1)
=  Total infant deaths in year t + 1 ;
D′′
0(t + 1)
= infant deaths which occurred in year t + 1  from year t  birth cohort, B(t);
D∗
0(t + 1)
=  infant deaths in year t + 1  which occurred to year t + 1  birth cohort.
Table 6.3 shows this concept to reflect the true population exposed to risk of death. 
From the understanding of the idea in the table, we shall discuss three techniques used to 
adjust Infant Mortality Rate: 
1)	Cohort probability; 
2)	Weighted Birth Cohort probability; 
3)	Data by year and cohort; 
Vital 
Event
Previous 
Year 
(Year t-1)
Given Year (Year t)
Following Year (Year t+1) 
Year t −1 
Cohort
Year t  
Cohort
Total
Year t  
Cohort
Year t + 1 
Cohort
Total 
Births
B(t −1)
 
B(t)
B
 
B(t + 1)
B(t + 1)
Infant 
Deaths
D0(t −1)
D′
0(t −1)
D0(t)
D0
D′′
0 (t+1)
D∗
0(t + 1)
D0(t + 1)
TABLE 6.3 Data Requirement for Computing Adjusted Infant Mortality Rate
Cohort Probability
The adjusted infant mortality rate using the Cohort Probability technique is defined as: 
AIMRc = D0(t) + D′′
0(t + 1)
B(t)
× k
Weighted Birth Cohort Probability (Separated Factors)
The adjusted infant mortality rate using the Weighted Birth Cohort Probability technique 
(AIMRw) is defined as: 
AIMRw = D′
0(t −1) + D0(t)
α′B(t −1) + αB(t) × k
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com

DEMOGRAPHIC STATISTICS
226
MEASURES OF MORTALITY
where
α = D0(t)
B(t)
and
α′ = 1 −α
When information on deaths from the previous year birth cohort is not known, we apply 
the assumption that one-third of the death in year t was from the previous year birth 
cohort. That is 
α′ = 1
3
and
α = 2
3
so that: 
AIMRw = D′
0(t −1) + D0(t)
1
3B(t −1) + 2
3B(t) × k
Data by Year and Cohort of birth
The adjusted infant mortality rate using the data by year and cohort of birth (AIMRyc) is 
defined as: 
AIMRyc =
D′
0(t −1)
B(t −1) + D0(t)
B(t)

× k
Example 6.16
A certain country experienced 1,600,000 births in 2011 and 1,800,000 in 2012. There were 
710 infant deaths in 2011 and 800 in 2012. Out of the deaths in 2012, 580 were born in 
that year and 220 in the previous year. It was also reported that there were 250 deaths in 
2013 from the births in 2012. 
Calculate 
1)	the conventional (unadjusted) infant mortality rate (CIMR) 
2)	the adjusted infant mortality rate (AIMR) using the following techniques: 
a)	Cohort probability; 
b)	Weighted Birth Cohort probability; 
c)	Data by year and cohort of birth; 
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com

DEMOGRAPHIC STATISTICS
227
MEASURES OF MORTALITY
Solution
We summarise the information in Table 6.4.
Vital Event
2011
2012
2013 
2011 
Cohort
2012 
Cohort
Total
2012 
Cohort
2013 
Cohort
Total 
Births
1, 600, 000
 
1,800,000
1,800,000
 
B(t + 1)
B(t + 1)
Infant 
Deaths
710
220 
580
800
250
D∗
0(t+1)
D0(t + 1)
TABLE 6.4 Summary information of Example 6.16
1)	The conventional (unadjusted) infant mortality rate (CIMR) 
	
CIMR
=
D0
B × 1, 000
=
800
18, 000 × 1, 000 = 4.44
That is, 4.62 infants per 1,000 live births died in 2004 before reaching their first birthday. 
2)	The adjusted infant mortality rate (AIMR) 
a)	AIMR using Cohort probability
	
D0(t) = 580;
D′′
0(t + 1) = 250
B(t) = 1800
Hence 
	
AIMRc
=
D0(t) + D′′
0(t + 1)
B(t)
× k
=
580 + 250
1800000 × 1000 = 4.61
b)	AIMR using Weighed Birth Cohort
	
B(t −1) = 1, 600, 000;
B(t) = 1, 800, 000
D0(t −1) = 710;
D′
0(t −1) = 220;
D0(t) = 580;
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com

DEMOGRAPHIC STATISTICS
228
MEASURES OF MORTALITY
228
Therefore 
	
= 220
710 = 0.309859;
α′ = 1 −0.309859 = 0.690141
Hence 
	
AIMRw
=
D′
0(t −1) + D0(t)
αB(t −1) + (1 −α)B(t) × k
=
220 + 580
0.309859(1, 600, 000) + 0.690141(1, 800, 000) × 1, 000
=
4.60
Alternatively:
	
AIMRw
=
D0(t) + D0(t−1)
2
3B(t) + 1
3B(t−1)
× 1, 000
=
220 + 580
2
3(1, 800, 000) + 1
3(1, 600, 000) × 1, 000
=
800
1, 200, 000 + 533, 333.33 × 1, 000 = 4.62
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more

DEMOGRAPHIC STATISTICS
229
MEASURES OF MORTALITY
c)	AIMR using Data by Year and Cohort o Birth
	
g
y
B(t −1) = 1, 600, 000;
D′
0(t −1) = 220;
B(t) = 1, 800, 000;
D0(t) = 580;
Therefore
	
AIMRyc
=
D′
0(t −1)
B(t −1) + D0(t)
B(t)

× k
=

220
1, 600, 000 +
580
1, 800, 000

× 1000 = 4.60
6.6.4  DECOMPOSITION OF INFANT MORTALITY 
Infant mortality may usefully be broken down into a death covering the first month (called 
the neonatal mortality) and a death for the remainder of the year (called the post-neonatal 
mortality) (see Figure 6.2) and there are two main reasons for doing that: 
1)	There is a very high level of mortality in the first hours, days, and weeks of life 
2)	There is a difference in the causes accounting for infant deaths at the earlier and 
later ages of infancy. 
We may also observe from Figure 6.2 that neonatal mortality can further be decomposed as 
early neonatal (EN) mortality and late neonatal (LN) mortality. Early neonatal mortality 
(ENNM), denoted by D<1week,  occurs within the first week (under 7 days) of life and 
late neonatal mortality (LNNM), denoted by D1−3weeks,  takes place after the first week of 
life but before the end of the first four weeks (from 7 to 27 days) of life. Related to early 
neonatal mortality is perinatal mortality. This includes still births from the seventh month 
of pregnancy to deaths occurring within the first week of life (see details in the sequel).
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com

DEMOGRAPHIC STATISTICS
230
MEASURES OF MORTALITY
Figure 6.2 Decomposition of Infant Mortality
Early neonatal deaths may further be disaggregated into deaths recorded within the first 24 
hours of birth, referred to as day one (DO) mortality (D<1day) and deaths recorded after 
day one but before the seventh day, called post-day one (PDO) mortality. 
For each of the components of neonatal mortality, the denominator used to calculate the 
rate is the live birth. 
Neonatal Mortality Rate 
Neonatal mortality rate (NNMR) refers to the probabilities of child in a cohorts of 1,000 
live births dying within the first month. It is defined as the number of deaths of infants 
under 4 weeks of age (28 days or under 1 month of age) during a year per 1,000 live births 
during the year: 
NNMR =
D0−3 weeks
B
×
k
where
D0−3weeks is the number of infants under 4 weeks;
k
= 1,000.
Or 
	
NNMR = D<1 month
B
×
k
where D<1 month  is the number of infants under one month. 
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com

DEMOGRAPHIC STATISTICS
231
MEASURES OF MORTALITY
Example 6.17
For the data in Example 6.15, calculate the neonatal mortality rate (NNMR). 
Solution
B
=
1, 902, 604
D0−3 weeks
=
25, 284
NNMR
=
D0−3weeks
B
× 1, 000
=
25, 284
1, 902, 604 × 1, 000 = 13.3
That is, out of 1,000 children born in 1987, 13.3 died before the age of one month. 
Example 6.18
In the Republic of Mauritius in 2004, among the 19,230 live births, 55 deaths occurred 
within one day; 152 died within one week while 207 died within four weeks. Calculate the 
1)	Day one mortality rate (DOMR); 
2)	Neonatal mortality rate (NNMR); 
3)	Early neonatal mortality rate (ENNMR); 
4)	Late neonatal mortality rate (LNNMR); 
Solution
B = 19, 343;
D<1day = 55;
D<1week = 152;
D0−3weeks = 207
Hence, 
D1−3weeks
=
D0−3weeks −D<1weeks
=
207 −152 = 55
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com

DEMOGRAPHIC STATISTICS
232
MEASURES OF MORTALITY
Therefore 
1)	Day one mortality rate is: 
	
DOMR
=
D<1day
B
× 1, 000
=
55
19, 230 × 1, 000 = 2.9
2)	Neonatal mortality rate is: 
	
NNMR
=
D0−3weeks
B
× 1, 000
=
207
19, 230 × 1, 000 = 10.8
3)	Early neonatal mortality rate is: 
	
ENNMR
=
D<1week
B
× 1, 000
=
152
19, 230 × 1, 000 = 7.9
4)	Late neonatal mortality rate is: 
	
LNNMR
=
D1−3weeks
B
× 1, 000
=
55
19, 230 × 1, 000 = 2.9
That is, in a cohort of 1,000 children born in Mauritius in 2004, 2.9 died within the first 
day, 7.9 within the first week, 2.9 survived the first week but died before one month. In 
general, 10.8 children died before reaching one year. 
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com

DEMOGRAPHIC STATISTICS
233
MEASURES OF MORTALITY
233
Post-Neonatal Mortality Rate
Post-neonatal mortality rate (PNMR) is defined as the number of infant deaths at 4 through 
51 weeks of age (or 1 through 11 months of age) during a year per 1,000 live births. It 
is given by: 
PNMR
=
D4−51weeks
B
× k
or
PNMR
=
D1−11months
B
× k
Example 6.19
Refer to Example 6.18. It was known that there were 277 infant deaths, calculate the post-
neonatal mortality rate (PNMR). 
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
“The perfect start 
of a successful, 
international career.”
CLICK HERE 
to discover why both socially 
and academically the University 
of Groningen is one of the best 
places for a student to be 
www.rug.nl/feb/education
Excellent Economics and Business programmes at:

DEMOGRAPHIC STATISTICS
234
MEASURES OF MORTALITY
Solution
From Examples 6.18, 
B
=
19, 230
D0
=
277
D0−3 weeks
=
207
D4−51weeks
=
D0 −D0−3weeks
=
277 −207 = 70
Therefore, 
PNMR
=
D4−51weeks
B
× 1, 000
=
70
19, 230 × 1, 000 = 3.6
That is, out of 1,000 live births in Mauritius in 2004, 3.6 of them died before reaching 
their first birthday, after surviving the first month. 
Note
The formula for the post-neonatal mortality rate is quite far from expressing a true probability 
because more than a third of the infant deaths over one month of age in a year may occur 
to births of the previous year. 
6.7	
MEASURES OF PREGNANCY WASTAGE 
If a woman becomes pregnant but the pregnancy does not result in a live birth, then 
pregnancy wastage or foetal mortality has occurred. The United Nations and the World 
Health Organisation recommend that the events, miscarriages, abortions and stillbirths, be 
grouped under “foetal death” and be classified as early, intermediate, and late according to 
months of gestation. 
6.7.1  CLASSIFICATION OF FOETAL DEATHS 
Foetal deaths tabulated by periods of gestation may be grouped into the following classes 
and illustrated in Figure 6.3: 
Under 20 weeks’ gestation	
–	
“early” foetal deaths;
20 to 27 weeks’ gestation	
–	
“intermediate” foetal deaths;
28 weeks’ gestation or more	 –	
“late” foetal deaths.
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com

DEMOGRAPHIC STATISTICS
235
MEASURES OF MORTALITY
Figure 6.3 Events during Pregnancy and First Year of life 
For measuring the reproductive loss due to foetal deaths we use the foetal death ratio or 
the foetal death rate. For the computation of these measures, we may define foetal deaths 
to include all foetal deaths or late foetal deaths only.
6.7.2  FOETAL DEATH RATIO
Foetal Death Ratio with Respect to All Foetal Deaths
Foetal death ratio with respect to all foetal deaths (FDrA) is defined as: 
FDrA = Df
Del × k
where Df = total number of all foetal deaths during a year;
Del = total deliveries during the year;
k = 1, 000.
Deliveries should not be confused with live births. Live births include only births which 
survived, that is, premature or full term births. Deliveries include live births and stillbirths. 
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com

DEMOGRAPHIC STATISTICS
236
MEASURES OF MORTALITY
Example 6.20
There were 4,000 premature births and 12,000 full term births in a country in a certain 
year. Table 6.3 also shows the distribution of the foetal deaths of the country in the same 
year, given that there were 40 stillbirths:
Period of Gestation (weeks)
Number of foetal deaths
below 20
125
20–27
75
28 or more
40
TABLE 6.3 Distribution of Foetal Deaths of a Country 
Calculate the foetal death ratio. 
Solution 
Df
=
125 + 75 + 40 = 240
B
=
4, 000 + 12, 000 = 16, 000
Stillbirths = 40
Therefore, 
Hence	
Del
=
B + Stillbirths
=
16, 000 + 40 = 16, 040
FDrA
=
Df
Del × 1, 000
=
240
16, 040 × 1, 000 ≈15
That is, for every 1,000 deliveries in the country in that year, there are approximately 15 
foetal deaths.
Limitation of Foetal Death Ratio with Respect to All Foetal Deaths
The main problem associated with the use and interpretation of the foetal death ratio is the 
variation among reporting areas with respect to the duration of gestation. Some areas report 
all foetal deaths regardless of length of gestation while others have a minimum gestation 
period that must be reached before reporting is required. 
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com

DEMOGRAPHIC STATISTICS
237
MEASURES OF MORTALITY
Foetal Death Ratio with Respect to Late Foetal Deaths
To overcome the problem associated with the foetal death ratio with respect to all foetal 
deaths (FDrA), the foetal death ratio is computed on the basis of late foetal deaths only 
(FDrℓ). It is defined as the number of foetal deaths reported in a year per k live births in 
the same year. Thus: 
FDr = Df
B × k
where		
Df	
= total number of late foetal deaths during a year;
	
B	
= total live births in the same year;
	
k	
= 1, 000.
This ratio is preferable from the point of view of international comparability. By foetal death 
ratio, we shall refer to this ratio, that is, foetal death ratio with respect to late foetal deaths. 
Example 6.21
Calculate the foetal death ratio for the data in Example 6.20. 
Solution 
From Example 6.18, 
Df
=
40
B
=
16, 000
FDr
=
Df
B
× 1, 000
=
40
16, 000 × 1, 000 = 2.5
That is, in the country in that year, 2.5 per 1,000 births after 28 weeks of gestation showed 
no sign of life after birth. 
Example 6.22
For the data in Example 6.15, calculate the foetal death ratio. 
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com

DEMOGRAPHIC STATISTICS
238
MEASURES OF MORTALITY
238
Solution 
B
=
1, 902, 604;
Df
=
12, 020
FDr
=
Df
B
× 1, 000
=
12, 020
1, 902, 604 × 1, 000 = 6.3
That is, the foetal death rate in Egypt in 1987 was 6.3 per 1,000 births.
Limitation of Foetal Death Ratio
The foetal death ratio does not closely relate to the “population at risk” because the 
denominator does not include the foetal deaths. 
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
American online      
LIGS University 
▶▶enroll by September 30th, 2014 and 
▶▶save up to 16% on the tuition!
▶▶pay in 10 installments / 2 years
▶▶Interactive Online education
▶▶visit www.ligsuniversity.com to 
      find out more!
is currently enrolling in the
Interactive Online BBA, MBA, MSc, 
DBA and PhD  programs:
Note: LIGS University is not accredited by any 
nationally recognized accrediting agency listed 
by the US Secretary of Education. 
More info here. 

DEMOGRAPHIC STATISTICS
239
MEASURES OF MORTALITY
6.7.3  FOETAL DEATH RATE
To overcome the shortcoming of the foetal death ratio, the foetal death rate is calculated.
Foetal Death Rate with Respect to All Foetal Deaths
Using all foetal deaths, foetal death rate (FDRA) is defined as: 
FDRA =
Df
B + Df
where Df  and B have their usual meanings. Similarly, by foetal death rate, we shall refer 
to this one. 
Example 6.23
Calculate the foetal death rate for the data in Example 6.20. 
Solution
From Example 6.18 
Df
=
125 + 75 + 40 = 240
B
=
16, 000
FDRA
=
Df
B + Df
× 1, 000
=
240
16, 000 + 240 × 1000 = 14.8
That is, there were 14.8 foetal deaths per 1,000 cases of pregnancy. 
Foetal Death Rate with Respect to Late Foetal Deaths
Using late foetal death, the late foetal death (FDRℓ) is defined as 
FDR =
Df
B + Df
where Df and B have their usual meanings. 
Example 6.24
Calculate the foetal rate for data in Example 6.20.
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com

DEMOGRAPHIC STATISTICS
240
MEASURES OF MORTALITY
Solution
From Example 6.20, 
Df
=
40
B
=
16, 000
FDRf
=
Df
B + Df
× 1, 000
=
40
16, 000 + 40 × 1, 000 = 2.49
That is, there were 2.5 late foetal deaths per 1,000 cases of pregnancy. 
Example 6.25
For the data on Egypt in Example 6.15, calculate the foetal death rate. 
Solution 
B
=
1, 902, 604
Df = 12, 020
FDRf
=
Df
B + Df
× 1, 000
=
12, 020
1, 902, 604 + 12, 020 × 1, 000 = 6.3
6.7.4  RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN FOETAL DEATH RATIO AND RATE 
We may calculate foetal death rate (FDR) from foetal death ratio (FDr) as:
FDR =
FDr × B
Late Foetal deaths + B × 1, 000
Example 6.26
For the data in Example 6.20, calculate the FDR from FDr computed from late foetal deaths. 
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com

DEMOGRAPHIC STATISTICS
241
MEASURES OF MORTALITY
Solution
From Examples 6.20 and 6.21, 
B
=
16, 000;
Foetal deaths
=
40
FDrℓ
=
2.5 per 1, 000
FDrℓ
=
0.0025
FDRℓ
=
FDrℓ× B
Late Foetal deaths + B
=
0.0025 × 16, 000
40 + 16, 000
× 1, 000 = 2.49
This result is the same as in Example 6.24. 
Similarly, we can calculate FDRA from FDrA and Exercise 6.5 illustrates this case. 
6.7.5  FOETAL DEATH RATIO AND RATE COMPARED
1)	The foetal death rate relates the foetal deaths more closely to the population at risk 
than the foetal death ratio, i.e. it is more a probability than a rate. 
2)	The denominator in the foetal death rate makes it possible to include all pregnancies 
in the computation of the rate. 
3)	In spite of the above, the foetal death ratio may be considered preferable for 
international comparisons. The registration of foetal deaths is irregular and the 
effect of this irregularity is compounded when foetal deaths are included with the 
births in the denominator of the foetal death rate. 
6.8	
PERINATAL MORTALITY
For medical research into causes of death, the distinction made between stillbirth (foetal 
death which occurs late in the woman’s pregnancy) and death following soon after live birth 
is not very meaningful because both are related to the same set of causes arising during 
the pregnancy. It has been suggested, therefore, that the two be combined to obtain what 
is known as the perinatal deaths. The combination of these deaths also eliminates the 
conflicting judgments as to whether a foetus showed any sign of life and whether or not 
to classify it as foetal death, birth, and neonatal death. 
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com

DEMOGRAPHIC STATISTICS
242
MEASURES OF MORTALITY
6.8.1  WHAT IS PERINATAL MORTALITY? 
Variations in the precise definition of the perinatal mortality exist specifically concerning the 
issue of inclusion or exclusion of early fetal and late neonatal fatalities. Perinatal describes 
the period surrounding birth, and traditionally includes the time from foetal viability from 
about 22 weeks of pregnancy up to either 7 or 28 days of life or deaths of foetuses weighing 
1,000 grams.
The World Health Organization defines perinatal mortality as the “number of stillbirths and 
deaths in the first week of life per 1,000 live births, the perinatal period commences at 22 
completed weeks of gestation and ends 7 completed days after birth”, but other definitions 
have been used, such as the period between the end of the 28th week of pregnancy and the 
first month of life. 
The combined risk of dying during the period near parturition (i.e., just before, during, 
and just after birth) is measured by perinatal mortality ratios and rates. 
6.8.2  PERINATAL MORTALITY RATIO 
Perinatal Mortality Ratio with Respect to Neonatal Deaths
Perinatal mortality ratio with respect to neonatal deaths (PMrN) is defined as the number 
of late foetal deaths and neonatal deaths per 1,000 live births in a year: 
MrN =
Df + D0−3weeks
B
× 1, 000
where the symbols have the same meaning as in foetal death rate. 
Example 6.27
For the data in Examples 6.15, calculate the perinatal mortality ratio with respect to neonatal 
deaths. 
Solution 
Df
=
12, 020
D0
=
94, 044
D0−3weeks
=
25, 284
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com

DEMOGRAPHIC STATISTICS
243
MEASURES OF MORTALITY
243
B
=
1, 902, 604
PMrN
=
Df + D0−3weeks
B
× 1, 000
=
12, 020 + 25, 284
1, 902, 604
× 1, 000 = 19.6
That is, for every 1,000 live births in Egypt in 1987, there were 19.6 late foetal and 
neonatal deaths. 
Perinatal Mortality Ratio with Respect to Early Neonatal Deaths
Perinatal mortality ratio with respect to early neonatal deaths (PMrEN) is defined as the 
number of late foetal deaths and deaths under one week of age per 1,000 live births in a year: 
PMrEN = Df + D<1week
B
× 1, 000
where the symbols have the usual meanings. 
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more

DEMOGRAPHIC STATISTICS
244
MEASURES OF MORTALITY
Example 6.28
In addition to data in Example 6.22, it was observed that 13,185 children died in the first 
week. Calculate the perinatal mortality ratio with respect to early neonatal deaths. 
Solution
From Example 6.22, Df = 12, 020  
D<1week
=
13, 185
B
=
1, 902, 604
PMrEN
=
Df + D<1week
B
× 1, 000
=
13, 185 + 12, 020
1, 902, 604
× 1, 000 = 13.2
That is, for every 1,000 live births there were 13.3 late foetal deaths together with deaths 
under one week of age, that occur.
6.8.3  PERINATAL MORTALITY RATE 
Similar to perinatal mortality ratio (PMr), the perinatal mortality rate (PMR) may also be 
defined with respect to neonatal or early neonatal deaths. Unlike PMr, PMR includes in the 
denominator also the late foetal deaths (Df), besides the births in a year, thus approximating 
the probability more closely. 
Perinatal Mortality Rate with Respect to Neonatal Deaths
PMR with respect to neonatal deaths is defined as:
PMRN =
Df + D0−3weeks
Df + B
Example 6.29
For the data in Example 6.15, calculate the perinatal mortality rate with respect to 
neonatal deaths. 
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com

DEMOGRAPHIC STATISTICS
245
MEASURES OF MORTALITY
Solution
From Example 6.15, 
Df
=
12, 020
D0−3weeks
=
25, 284
B
=
1, 902, 604
˙. .
PMRN
=
Df + D0−3weeks
Df + B
× 1, 000
=
12, 020 + 25, 284
12, 020 + 1, 902, 604 × 1, 000 = 19.483
Perinatal Mortality Rate with Respect to Early Neonatal Deaths
Perinatal mortality rate with respect to early neonatal deaths is defined as: 
PMREN = Df + D<1week
Df + B
× 1, 000
Example 6.30
Using the data in Example 6.15, calculate the perinatal mortality rate with respect to early 
neonatal deaths. 
Solution
From Example 6.15, 
Df
=
12, 020
D<1week
=
13, 185
B
=
1, 902, 604
˙. .
PMREN
=
Df + D<1week
Df + B
× 1, 000
=
12, 020 + 13, 185
12, 020 + 1, 902, 604 × 1, 000 = 13.2
6.8.4  RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN PERINATAL MORTALITY RATIO AND RATE
We may calculate perinatal mortality rate (PMR) from perinatal mortality ratio (PMr) as: 
PMR =
PMr × B
Foetal deaths + B × 1, 000
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com

DEMOGRAPHIC STATISTICS
246
MEASURES OF MORTALITY
Example 6.31
For the data in Example 6.15, calculate the perinatal mortality rate from the perinatal 
mortality death ratio calculated from neonatal deaths. 
Solution
From Examples 6.15, 
B
=
1, 902, 604;
FDrf
=
19.6 per 1, 000
or
FDrf
=
0.0196
Foetal deaths (Df)
=
12, 020
˙. .
PMRN
=
PMr × B
Foetal deaths + B × 1, 000
=
0.0196 × 1, 902, 604
12, 020 + 1, 902, 604 × 1, 000 = 19.477
This result is similar to that in Example 6.29 except for rounding error. Similarly, PMREN 
can be computed from PMREN and Exercise 6.6 illustrates this case.
6.9	
STANDARDISED DEATH RATE 
In Chapter 3, standardisation has been defined as the process of adjusting rates to eliminate 
from them the effect of differences in population composition with respect to age, sex, 
marital status, race, or other categories of the population. The reasons for standardisation 
have also been given in that chapter. 
Death rates may, therefore, be standardised (adjusted) with respect to say, age, sex, marital 
status. However the commonest is the age-adjusted. Hence standardised death rate and the 
age-adjusted death rate will be used interchangeably in this text. 
6.9.1  DIRECT STANDARDISED DEATH RATE 
The simplest and most straightforward measure of the standardised death rate is the one 
derived by the direct method, defined as: 
DSDR =
 daP s
a
 P sa
× k
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com

DEMOGRAPHIC STATISTICS
247
MEASURES OF MORTALITY
where 
DSDR	
= direct standardised death rate;
da	
= age-specific death rate for the age group a for the study population;
P s
a	
= mid-year population of the age-group a for the standard population;
daP s
a	
= number of expected deaths in the standard population for each age group a.
The suffix s refers to the standard population28; otherwise it is the population under study.
This formula indicates that DSDR is the weighted mean of the age-specific death rate, da, 
of the study population, where the weight is the mid-year standard population by age, P s
a. 
That is, the age distribution of the standard population is used as a base for adjustment. 
Using another population as standard may change our conclusions. 
Note
The sum of the weights of each age group, 
 P s
a, is equal to the total standard population; 
that is, 

P s
a = P s
We may re-write DSDR as 
DSDR = DE
P s × k
where DE =  daP s
a.
The physical meaning of a directly standardised death rate of a population becomes clearer. It 
is a crude death rate that would result if the age-specific death rates of the population under 
study (da) apply to a population with the age distribution as that of the standard population. 
Data Requirement for Computing DSDR
The data necessary for the implementation of direct standardised rate are the following: 
1)	Age-specific death rates for the populations being studied, (da); 
2)	Population distribution across the various segments for a standard population (P s
a). 
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com

DEMOGRAPHIC STATISTICS
248
MEASURES OF MORTALITY
248
Assumption
It is assumed that the study population has the same age structure as the standard population. 
Note
The term direct refers to working directly with the specific rates of the population being 
studied. 
Example 6.32
Table 6.4 (a) shows the 1982 and 1984 populations and 1982 deaths for Algeria.
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
 
  
 
                . 

DEMOGRAPHIC STATISTICS
249
MEASURES OF MORTALITY
Age Group (Years)
1982 Population 
(’000)
Deaths in 1982
1984 Census 
Population as 
Standard (’000)
0–4
5–9
10–14
15–19
20–24
25–29
30–34
35–39
40–44
45–49
50–54
55–59
60–64
65–69
70–74
75 +
3,526.6 
3,028.2
2,605.2
2,214.1
1,729.5
1,439.6
1,102.1
763.7
701.0
667.2
552.0
424.9
357.4
270.1
234.3
268.1
113,762 
5,955
3,195
3,998
4,748
4,248
4,015
3,837
4,032
4,258
4,969
5,721
7,003
8,245
9,546
21,495
3,698.0
3,138.0
2,752.0
2,329.0
1,814.0
1,516.0
1,142.0
766.0
754.0
707.0
579.0
448.0
380.0
286.0
247.0
285.0
Total
19,884.0
209,027
20,841.0
TABLE 6.4(a) Distribution of Population and Deaths in Algeria by Age, 1982–1984
Source: United Nations Demographic Yearbook (1980–1991), 
(New York: Statistics Office, Department of Economic and Social Affairs) 
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com

DEMOGRAPHIC STATISTICS
250
MEASURES OF MORTALITY
1)	Calculate the crude birth rate for Algeria in 1982. 
2)	Use the direct method to obtain the 1982 adjusted death rate for Algeria if her 
1984 population was used as the standard. Interpret your result. 
3)	Comment on your results in (1) and (2). 
Solution
1)	The crude death rate of Algeria in 1982: 
d
=
D
P × k
=
209, 027
19, 884, 000 × 1000
=
10.5
deaths per 1,000 population.
2)	The steps for calculating a standardised death rate by the direct method are illustrated 
in Table 6.4 (b).
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com

DEMOGRAPHIC STATISTICS
251
MEASURES OF MORTALITY
Age Group 
(years) 
1982 
Population 
(’000) 
Deaths 
in 1982 
Age-Specific 
Death Rate 
for Algeria 
for 1982 
1984 
Population 
Census As 
Standard 
(’000)
Number of 
Expected 
Deaths in 
Standard 
Population
P
D
da
P s
a
daP s
a
1
2 
3 
4 = (3)/(2)
5 
6 = (4) × (5)
0–4
5–9
10–14
15–19
20–24
25–29
30–34
35–39
40–44
45–49
50–54
55–59
60–64
65–69
70–74
75+
3,526.6 
3,028.2
2,605.2
2,214.1
1,729.5
1,439.6
1,102.1
736.7
701.1
667.2
552.0
424.9
357.4
270.1
234.3
268.1
113,762 
5,955
3,195
3,998
4,748
4,248
4,015
3,837
4,032
4,258
4,969
5,721
7,003
8,245
9,546
21,495
0.03226 
0.00295
0.00197
0.00123
0.00181
0.00275
0.00364
0.00502
0.00575 
0.00638
0.00900
0.01346
0.01959
0.03053
0.04074
0.08018
3,698.0 
3,138.0
2,752.0
2,329.0
1,814.0
1,516.0 
1,142.0
766.0
754.0
707.0
579.0
448.0
380.0
286.0
247.0
285.0
119,291 
6,171
3,375
4,205
4,980
4,473 
4,160
3,849
4,337
4,512
5,212
6,032
7,446
8,730
10,063
22,687
Total 
19,884.0 
209,027 
 
20,841.0
219,828
TABLE 6.4(b) Preliminary Calculation of Direct Standardised Death Rate
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com

DEMOGRAPHIC STATISTICS
252
MEASURES OF MORTALITY
a)	The study population (population of interest) is listed (column 2) according to age 
group (column 1). 
b)	The deaths in the study population are listed (column 3) by age group. 
c)	The age-specific death rates (column 4) for each age group are calculated by dividing 
column 3 by column 2. 
d)	The standard population (column 5) is listed by age group. 
e)	 The expected number of deaths in the standard population for each age group 
(column 6) is computed by multiplying column 4 by column 5. 
f)	The entries in column 6 are summed to obtain the total number of expected deaths 
in the standard population. 
Note 
The entries in column 6 indicate the number of deaths per 1,000 population that would 
have been expected if the death rates had prevailed for one year in the standard population. 
The study population death rate by direct method is: 
DSDR
=
DE
P s × k
=
219, 687
20, 841, 000 × 1, 000 = 10.54
Interpretation
The death rate for Algeria that could have been expected in 1982 if the age composition 
of the 1982 population had remained the same as that of the 1984, was 10.5 per 1,000 
population. 
(3) Comment
The crude death rate of Algeria has remained the same at about 10.5 per 1,000 population 
by adjusting its 1982 population to the age distribution of her 1984 (standard ) population. 
This stability in the death rate following adjustment reflects the fact that the age structure 
of the population in both years remained almost the same. For example, in both years, 5.7 
per 10,000 of the country’s population was 60 years of age or older.
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com

DEMOGRAPHIC STATISTICS
253
MEASURES OF MORTALITY
253
Alternative Formula For Direct Standardised Death Rate
An alternative formula for computing direct standardised death rate is: 
DSDR =

a
daps
a × k
where	 ps
a
=	 the proportion of population for each age group a in the standard population, 
defined as:
ps
a = P s
a
P s
with

a
ps
a = 1
daps
a = expected age-specific death rate for the standard population.
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
www.mastersopenday.nl
Visit us and find out why we are the best!
Master’s Open Day: 22 February 2014
Join the best at
the Maastricht University
School of Business and
Economics!
Top master’s programmes
• 33rd place Financial Times worldwide ranking: MSc 
International Business
• 1st place: MSc International Business
• 1st place: MSc Financial Economics
• 2nd place: MSc Management of Learning
• 2nd place: MSc Economics
• 2nd place: MSc Econometrics and Operations Research
• 2nd place: MSc Global Supply Chain Management and 
Change
Sources: Keuzegids Master ranking 2013; Elsevier ‘Beste Studies’ ranking 2012; 
Financial Times Global Masters in Management ranking 2012
Maastricht
University is
the best specialist
university in the
Netherlands
(Elsevier)

DEMOGRAPHIC STATISTICS
254
MEASURES OF MORTALITY
Example 6.33
Re-work Example 6.32 using the alternative formula for computing direct standardised 
death rate. 
Solution
The preliminary calculations are done in Table 6.4(c). 
DSDR
=
n

a=1
daps
a × k
=
0.01054 × 1, 000 = 10.54
Direct Standardised Death Rate for Two Variables 
All along we have assumed that standardisation is done for only one variable, age. However, 
it is possible to do standardisation for two or more variables. For example, the age-sex direct 
standardised death rate (ASDSDR) may be defined as: 
ASDSDR =
 dm
a P sm
a
+  df
aP sf
a
 P sm
a
+  P sf
a
× k
where the superscripts m and f refer to male and female populations, respectively; the other 
notations have the usual meaning; and in particular, 

dm
a P sm
a
= the expected number of male deaths in the standard population;

df
aP sf
a
=  the expected number of female deaths in the standard population.
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com

DEMOGRAPHIC STATISTICS
255
MEASURES OF MORTALITY
Age Group 
(years) 
Age-Specific 
Death Rate 
for Algeria 
for 1970 
1984 
Population 
Census As 
Standard (’000)
Proportion 
of members 
of Standard 
Population 
Proportion 
of Expected 
deaths in 
Standard 
Population
da
P s
a
ps
a
daps
a
1
2
3
4
5 = (2) × (4)
0–4
5–9
10–14
15–19
20–24
25–29
30–34
35–39
40–44
45–49
50–54
55–59
60–64
65–69
70–74
75+
0.03226
0.00197
0.00123
0.00181
0.00275
0.00295
0.00364
0.00502
0.00575
0.00638
0.00900
0.01346
0.01959
0.03053
0.04074
0.08018
3,698
3,138
2,752
2,329
1,814
1,516
1,142
766
754
707
579
448
380
286
247
285
0.17744
0.15057
0.13205
0.11175
0.08704
0.07274
0.05480
0.03675
0.03618
0.03392
0.02778
0.02150
0.01823
0.01372
0.01185
0.01367
0.00572
0.00030
0.00016
0.00020
0.00024
0.00021
0.00020
0.00028
0.00021
0.00022
0.00025
0.00029
0.00036
0.00042
0.00048
0.00110
Total 
20,841
1.0000
0.010639
TABLE 6.4(c) Calculation of Direct Standardised Death Rate
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com

DEMOGRAPHIC STATISTICS
256
MEASURES OF MORTALITY
Example 6.34
Table 6.5(a) shows the distribution of population and deaths in the Republic of Mauritius 
in 2000 and 2004 by age and sex.
1)	Calculate the crude death rate for 2004 for the 
a)	Male population, 
b)	Female population. 
2)	Calculate the DSDR for 2004 for the 
a)	Male population, 
b)	Female population. 
3)	Calculate the age-sex DSDR for the 2004 population, using the census male and 
female populations of 2000 as standard. Interpret the result. 
4)	Comment on the results in (1) to (3). 
Age-
group 
(Years)
2000 Population 
(Standard)
2004 Population 
(Study)
2004 Deaths 
(Study)
Male 
Female
Male 
Female
Male 
Female 
0
9,574
9,341
9,708 
9,289 
157
120 
1–4
38,066
37,322
39,994 
38,657 
20 
20 
5–9
53,037
52,152
50,440 
49,357 
11 
14 
10–14
49,428
48,312
55,251 
53,698 
14 
6 
15–19
51,671
50,417
48,008 
46,955 
37 
16 
20–24
55,108
55,784
54,276 
53,308 
49 
27 
25–29
46,749
47,048
52,798 
53,955 
73 
26 
30–34
49,964
49,551
46,256 
46,591 
96 
43 
35–39
51,621
50,325
49,955 
49,954 
178
59 
40–44
45,798
44,608
49,907 
49,072 
257
89 
45–49
39,133
38,798
42,880 
42,597 
352
152 
50–54
27,790
29,149
36,847 
37,382 
397
212 
55–59
19,228
21,263
24,029 
26,521 
367
226 
60–64
15,301
17,796
16,375 
18,826 
428
300 
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com

DEMOGRAPHIC STATISTICS
257
MEASURES OF MORTALITY
Age-
group 
(Years)
2000 Population 
(Standard)
2004 Population 
(Study)
2004 Deaths 
(Study)
Male 
Female
Male 
Female
Male 
Female 
65–69
11,758
14,010
12,714 
15,851 
479
380 
70–74
9,491 
12,203
9,035 
11,734 
488
408 
75–79
6,047 
8,863 
6,675 
9,882 
568
516 
80–84
2,584 
4,548 
3,408 
5,799 
411
473 
85+
1,408 
3,602
1,552 
3,850 
334
672 
Total 
583,756
595,092
610,108 
623,278
4,716
3,759 
TABLE 6.5(a) Age-sex Distribution of Population and Deaths in Republic of Mauritius
Source: Central Statistical Office, Annual Digest of Statistics of the Republic of Mauritius (excluding Agalega 
and St. Brandon), Port Loius, 2004. 
Solution
The preliminary calculations are done in Table 6.5(b). 
1)	Calculation of crude death rate 
a)	Male population
From column 2, the male population in 2004 is: 
	
P m =

P m
a = 610, 108
From column 6, number of male deaths in 2004 is: 
	
Dm = 4, 716
Hence, the crude death rate for the male population is: 
	
dm =
4, 716
610, 108 × 1, 000 = 7.730
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com

DEMOGRAPHIC STATISTICS
258
MEASURES OF MORTALITY
258
Age 
group 
2000 Population 
(Standard)
2004 Population 
(Study)
2004 Deaths 
(Study)
Age-specific Death 
Rate (Study)
Expected Deaths
(Years) 
Male 
Female
Male 
Female
Male 
Female
Male
Female
Male
Female 
1
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
7 
8=(6)/(4)
9=(7)/(5)
10=(8)(2)
11=(9)(3)
0
9,574
9,341
9,708 
9,289 
157
120
0.01617
0.0.01292
154.834
120.672
1–4
38,066
37,322
39,994 
38,657 
20 
20 
0.00050
0.0.00052
19.036 
19.309
5–9
53,037
52,152
50,440 
49,357 
11 
14 
0.00022
0.0.00028
11.566 
14.793
10–14
49,428
48,312
55,251 
53,698 
14 
6 
0.00025
0.0.00011
12.525 
5.3982
15–19
51,671
50,417
48,008 
46,955 
37 
16 
0.00077
0.0.00034
39.823 
17.180
20–24
55,108
55,784
54,276 
53,308 
49 
27 
0.00090
0.0.00051
49.751 
28.254
25–29
46,749
47,048
52,798 
53,955 
73 
26 
0.00138
0.0.00048
64.636 
22.672
30–34
49,964
49,551
46,256 
46,591 
96 
43 
0.00208
0.0.00092
103.696
45.732
35–39
51,621
50,325
49,955 
49,954 
178
59 
0.00356
0.0.00118
183.936
59.438
40–44
45,798
44,608
49,907 
49,072 
257
89 
0.00515
0.0.00181
235.840
80.904
45–49
39,133
38,798
42,880 
42,597 
352
152
0.00821
0.0.00357
321.241
138.444
50–54
27,790
29,149
36,847 
37,382 
397
212
0.01077
0.0.00567
299.417
165.309
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more

DEMOGRAPHIC STATISTICS
259
MEASURES OF MORTALITY
Age 
group 
2000 Population 
(Standard)
2004 Population 
(Study)
2004 Deaths 
(Study)
Age-specific Death 
Rate (Study)
Expected Deaths
(Years) 
Male 
Female
Male 
Female
Male 
Female
Male
Female
Male
Female 
55–59
19,228
21,263
24,029 
26,521 
367
226
0.01527
0.0.00852
293.673
181.194 
60–64
15,301
17,796
16,375 
18,826 
428
300
0.02614
0.0.01594
399.928
283.587
65–69
11,758
14,010
12,714 
15,851 
479
380
0.03768
0.0.02397
442.983
335.865
70–74
9,491 
12,203
9,035 
11,734 
488
408
0.05401
0.0.03477
512.630
424.307
75–79
6,047 
8,863 
6,675 
9,882 
568
516
0.08509
0.0.05222
514.561
462.792
80–84
2,584 
4,548 
3,408 
5,799 
411
473
0.12060
0.0.08157
311.627
370.962
85+
1,408 
3,602
1,552 
3,850 
334
672
0.21521
0.0.17455
303.010
628.713
Total 
583,756
595,092
610,108 
623,278
4,716
3,759
 
 
4,274.713
3,405.523
TABLE 6.5(b) Age-sex Distribution of Population and Deaths in Republic of Mauritius
b)	Female population
From column 3, the female population in 2004 is: 
	
P f =

P f
a = 623, 278
From column 7, the number of female deaths in 2004 is: 
	
Df = 3, 759
Hence, the crude death rate for the female population is: 
	
df =
3, 759
623, 278 × 1, 000 = 6.031
2)	Calculation of direct standardised death rate 
a)	Male population:
From column 10, the expected number of male deaths is: 
	
Dm
E =

dm
a P sm
a
= 4, 274.71326
From column 2, the male population in 2000 (standard): 
	
P 2000(m) = 583, 756
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com

DEMOGRAPHIC STATISTICS
260
MEASURES OF MORTALITY
Hence, the direct standardised death rate for the male population is: 
	
Dm
E
P 2000(m) = 4, 274.71326
583, 756
× 1, 000 = 7.323
b)	Female population:
From column 7, the expected number of female deaths is: 
	
Df
E =

df
aP sf
a
= 3, 405.52304
From column 3, the female population in 2000 (standard): 
	
P 2000(f) = 595, 092
Hence, the direct standardised death rate for the female population is: 
	
Df
E
P 2000(f) = 3, 405.52304
595, 092
× 1, 000 = 5.723
3)	Calculation of age-sex standardised death rate (ASDSDR)
From previous calculations, we have: 
	
ASDSDR
=
 dm
a P sm
a
+  df
aP sf
a
 P sm
a
+  P sf
a
× 1, 000
=
 dm
a P 2000(m)
a
+  df
aP 2000(f)
a
 P 2000(m)
a
+  P 2000(f)
a
× 1, 000
=
4, 274.71326 + 3405.52304
583, 756 + 595, 092
× 1, 000 = 6.5
That is, the death rate for Mauritius that could have been expected in 2004 if the age-sex 
composition of the census population in 2000 had remained the same in 2004, was 6.5 
per 1,000 people. 
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com

DEMOGRAPHIC STATISTICS
261
MEASURES OF MORTALITY
4)	Comment
Table 6.5 (c) summarises the results for Example 6.34.
Death Rate 
Male 
Female 
Age-sex
CDR
7.7
6.0 
DSDR
7.3
5.7 
ASDSDR
 
 
6.5 
TABLE 6.5(c) Crude and Standardised Death Rates for Mauritius, 2004
We observe that the crude death rates (CDR) in the male and female populations differ 
very much. The DSDRs for the male and female populations still remain different even 
when the effect of the differences in the age distribution in both sexes were supposed to 
have been removed after standardisation. This can be explained by th fact that both sexes 
have similar population structure in 2000 (standard population).
If the age distribution in the male and female populations was quite different, the effect of 
standardisation would have been noticed and the DSDR for both sexes would have then 
been close to each other. 
Advantages of Direct Standardised Death Rate 
1)	It is easy to compute; in the same manner as a crude death rate. 
2)	It is easy to explain. It is the weighted average of the age-specific death rates in a 
given community, using as weights the age distribution of the standard population. 
3)	If the same standard population is employed, as required, all the rates are directly 
comparable. 
Disadvantage of Direct Standardised Death Rate
The choice of the standard population is subjective and may influence the comparison of 
adjusted rates. 
6.9.2  INDIRECT STANDARDISED DEATH RATE
In practice, not all the data required for direct standardisation are always available. Often 
only the crude total rate for the study population is available with its age-specific death 
rates unknown. Such a situation permits only indirect standardisation to be carried out. 
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com

DEMOGRAPHIC STATISTICS
262
MEASURES OF MORTALITY
Data Requirement
For indirect standardised death rate (ISDR) to be computed, the following information 
must be available. 
1)	For study population: 
a)	The population distribution across the various segments (in this case across ages); 
b)	Crude death rate (or total number of deaths). 
2)	For standard population: 
a)	Age specific death rates; 
b)	Crude death rate. 
or population and death by age distribution. 
Assumption
It is assumed that the age-specific death rate for the study population experiences the specific 
conditions as for the standard population. 
Method
The technique is to first compute the ratio of actual deaths in the study population (D) to 
the number of deaths expected in the study population (DE) on the basis of age-specific 
death rates in a standard population (ds
a). This ratio multiplied by the crude death rate of 
the standard population yields the adjusted death rate by indirect method: 
ISDR
=
D
DE
× ds
=
Number of actual deaths in the study population
Expected number of deaths in the study population
where ds is the crude death rate of the standard population, which may be defined as: 
ds =
 ds
aP s
a
 P s
× k = Ds
P s × k
Noting that in defining the ISDR, 
D
=

daPa
DE
=

ds
aPa
we may rewrite the formula of ISDR as: 
ISDR =
 daPa
 dsaPa
× ds
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com

DEMOGRAPHIC STATISTICS
263
MEASURES OF MORTALITY
263
Example 6.35
Table 6.6(a) shows the 1989 populations of Mauritius and Tunisia and the distribution 
of deaths by age in Mauritius in 1989. The total number of deaths in Tunisia in 1989 
was 20,650. 
Calculate the indirect standardised rate for Tunisia using the age-specific death rates for 
Mauritius as standard. 
Solution 
1)	For the standard population, i.e, for Mauritius, we calculate: 
a)	Crude death rate for Mauritius (dM):
	
dM
=
DM
P M × k
=
6, 946
1, 026, 813 × 1, 000
=
6.76462 per 1000
b)	Age-specific death rate (dM
a ), see column 4 of Table 6.6(b). 
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Get Help Now
Go to www.helpmyassignment.co.uk for more info
Need help with your
dissertation?
Get in-depth feedback & advice from experts in your 
topic area. Find out what you can do to improve
the quality of your dissertation!

DEMOGRAPHIC STATISTICS
264
MEASURES OF MORTALITY
Age Group 
Population 
of Mauritius 
in 1989
Population of 
Tunisia in 1989
Number of 
Deaths in 
Mauritius in 1989
Number of 
Deaths in 
Tunisia in 1989
0–4
93,983
1,014,143
516
Not
5–9
107,047
1,022,505
39
available
10–14
107,128
963,423
41
15–19
93,887
832,231
66
20–24
104,312
769,184
92
25–29
104,450
645,086
150
30–34
88,918
533,030
164
35–39
76,563
418,015
215
40–44
54,048
305,403
252
45–49
43,483
273,963
299
50–54
39,327
288,823
374
55–59
31,206
256,087
473
60–64
30,558
200,605
779
65–69
22,268
150,564
858
70–74
14,314
100,199
807
75 +
15,321
136,294
1,821
Total 
1,026,813
7,909,555
6,946
20,650
TABLE 6.6(a) Distribution of Population Mauritius and Tunisia and of Deaths by Age in Mauritius, 1989
Source: United Nations Demographic Yearbook (1980–1993), (New York: Statistics Office, Department of 
Economic and Social Affairs) 
2)	For the study population, i.e, Tunisia, we calculate its expected death for each age 
group, DaE using age-specific death rate dM
a  of Mauritius: 
	
DaE = dM
a Pa
These are given in column 6 of Table 6.6 (b). The sum of these values gives the total 
expected deaths in Tunisia: 
	
DE =

dM
a Pa = 53, 555.5
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com

DEMOGRAPHIC STATISTICS
265
MEASURES OF MORTALITY
3)	Finally, we calculate the indirect standardised death rate
From column 6 of Table 6.6(b), DE = 53, 346.4. Hence, 
	
ISDR
=
Total observed deaths for Tunisia
Total expected deaths in Tunisia × dM
	
=
D
DE
× dM
=
20, 650
53, 346.4 × 6.76462 = 2.62
Age Group 
(Years) 
Standard Country (Mauritius)
Study Country (Tunisia)
Standard 
Population 
in 1989 
(P M
a )
Number of 
Deaths in 
1989 (DM
a )
Age Specific 
Deaths 
in 1989 
Study 
Population 
in 1989 (Pa)
Expected 
Deaths 
in 1989 
(DE = dM
a Pa)
1
2 
3 
4 = (3)/(2)
5 
6 = (4) × (5)
0–4
93,983
516
0.00549
1,014,143
5,568.00
5–9
107,047
39
0.00036
1,022,505
372.53
10–14
107,128
41
0.00038
963,423
368.72
15–19
93,887
66
0.00070
832,231
585.04
20–24
104,312
92
0.00088
769,184
678.40
25–29
104,450
150
0.00144
645,086
926.40
30–34
88,918
164
0.00184
533,030
983.12
35–39
76,563
215
0.00281
418,015
1,173.85
40–44
54,048
252
0.00466
305,403
1,423.95
45–49
43,483
299
0.00688
273,963
1,883.84
50–54
39,327
374
0.00951
288,823
2,746.71
55–59
31,206
473
0.01516
256,087
3,881.60
60–64
30,588
779
0.02549
200,605
5,113.92
65–69
22,260
858
0.03853
150,564
5,801.33
70–74
14,314
807
0.05638
100,199
5,649.06
75 +
15,320
1,821
0.11886
136,294
16,199.90
Total 
1,026,813
6,946
0.11886
7,909,555
53,346.42
TABLE 6.6(b) Calculation of Indirect Standardised Death Rate for Example 6.35
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com

DEMOGRAPHIC STATISTICS
266
MEASURES OF MORTALITY
Interpretation
The death rate for Tunisia that could have been expected if its age-specific death rate had 
been the same as that of Mauritius is 2.62 per 1,000 population. 
Alternative Formula for Indirect Standardised Death Rate
Suppose that the data available are: 
1)	For study population: 
a)	the population distribution across the various segments (in this case across ages); 
b)	the crude death rate, d. 
2)	For standard population: 
a)	age-specific death rates, ds
a;
b)	the crude death rate, ds. 
Then the indirect standardised death rate is given by: 
ISDR =
d
Pa
P × ds
a
× ds × k
or 
ISDR =
d
 pa × dsa
× ds × k
where pa is as defined above. 
Example 6.36
For the data in Table 6.6(a), use the alternative formula to calculate the indirect standardised 
death rate for Tunisia using the age-specific death rate of Mauritius as standard. 
Solution
Death rate of Mauritius, dM = 6.76 per 1,000 population;;
Number of deaths in Tunisia, D = 20, 650.
The death rate of Tunisia is: 
d
=
D
 Pa
× k
=
20, 650
7, 909, 555 × 1000 = 2.61
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com

DEMOGRAPHIC STATISTICS
267
MEASURES OF MORTALITY
The preliminary calculations are done in Table 6.7. 
The indirect standardised death rate, ISDR, is 
ISDR
=
d
Pa
P × dM
a
× dM
=
2.61
6.75 × 6.76 = 2.61
The result is the same as that in Example 6.35. This is because it was just a reformulation 
of that example in another way to enable us use the alternative formula. 
Age Group 
(Years)
Age-Specific 
Death rate 
of Mauritius 
in 1989 
Population of 
Tunisia in 1989
Proportion 
of Population 
of Tunisia for 
Tunisia for a
Expected Age-
specific Death 
Rate for Tunisia
dM
a
Pa
pa = Pa
P
dM
a ps
a
2 
3 
4 
5 = (2) × (4)
0–4
0.00549
1,014,143
0.12822
0.00070
5–9
0.00036
1,022,505
0.12927
0.00005
10–14
0.00038
963,423
0.12180
0.00005
15–19
0.00070
832,231
0.10522
0.00007
20–24
0.00088
769,184
0.09725
0.00009
25–29
0.00144
645,086
0.08156
0.00012
30–34
0.00184
533,030
0.06739
0.00012
35–39
0.00281
418,015
0.05285
0.00015
40–44
0.00466
305,403
0.03861
0.00018
45–49
0.00688
273,963
0.03464
0.00024
50–54
0.00951
288,823
0.03652
0.00035
55–59
0.01516
256,087
0.03238
0.00049
60–64
0.02547
200,605
0.02536
0.00065
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com

DEMOGRAPHIC STATISTICS
268
MEASURES OF MORTALITY
268
Age Group 
(Years)
Age-Specific 
Death rate 
of Mauritius 
in 1989 
Population of 
Tunisia in 1989
Proportion 
of Population 
of Tunisia for 
Tunisia for a
Expected Age-
specific Death 
Rate for Tunisia
dM
a
Pa
pa = Pa
P
dM
a ps
a
65–69
0.03854
150,564
0.01904
0.00073
70–74
0.05638
100,199
0.01267
0.00071
75 +
0.11886
136,294
0.01723
0.00205
Total 
7,909,555
1.00000
0.00675
TABLE 6.7 Calculation of ISDR for Example 6.35
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
By 2020, wind could provide one-tenth of our planet’s 
electricity needs. Already today, SKF’s innovative know-
how is crucial to running a large proportion of the 
world’s wind turbines. 
Up to 25 % of the generating costs relate to mainte-
nance. These can be reduced dramatically thanks to our 
systems for on-line condition monitoring and automatic 
lubrication. We help make it more economical to create 
cleaner, cheaper energy out of thin air. 
By sharing our experience, expertise, and creativity, 
industries can boost performance beyond expectations. 
Therefore we need the best employees who can 
meet this challenge!
The Power of Knowledge Engineering
Brain power
Plug into The Power of Knowledge Engineering. 
Visit us at www.skf.com/knowledge

DEMOGRAPHIC STATISTICS
269
MEASURES OF MORTALITY
Advantages of Indirect Standardised Death Rate 
1)	ISDR for comparison is more easily employed than DSDR because 
a)	it requires only knowledge of the population by age and the total number of 
deaths in the study population; 
b)	it involves fewer computations; 
c)	it does not require schedules of specific rates for all the population involved in 
the comparison; 
d)	its results may have smaller sampling errors. 
2)	The indirect method of standardisation is particularly appropriate when we wish to 
locate the relative level of mortality of quite a small population for which calculation 
of age-specific rates would make no sense because of the small number involved.
Disadvantages of Indirect Standardised Death Rate 
1)	Unlike DSDR, the ISDR is dependent upon the age distribution of the study 
population. As a consequence, the rates for a number of study populations are 
not comparable among themselves since the study populations will usually differ 
in their age distributions. 
2)	To compute rates for specific causes of death, it is necessary to have available age-
specific death rates for each such cause in the standard population. This is not a 
requirement for age adjustment by the direct method. 
6.10	 OTHER TYPES OF STANDARDISED MORTALITY MEASURES 
There are other types of standardised death measures which are used to compare mortality 
between two populations. These include the standardised mortality ratio, the comparative 
mortality figure and the comparative mortality index. 
6.10.1  STANDARDISED MORTALITY RATIO 
If we look at the definition of ISDR, we may observe that the first term alone is sufficient 
for purposes of comparison. This gives what is called the standardised mortality ratio. Thus, 
the standardised mortality ratio (SMR) is defined as the ratio of the observed and expected 
deaths in the study population: 
SMR = Observed (actual) deaths in the study population
Expected deaths in the study population
× k
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com

DEMOGRAPHIC STATISTICS
270
MEASURES OF MORTALITY
That is, 
SMR
=
D
DE
× k
=
 daPa
 dsaPa
× k
where the symbols have the usual meaning and k = 100.
Example 6.37
For the data of Example 6.35, calculate SMR. 
Solution
From Example 6.35, 
D = 34, 930
DE = 53, 36.42
Hence 
SMR
=
D
DE
× 100
=
34, 930
53, 346.42 × 100 = 65.5
That is, the actual deaths in Tunisia in 1989 was 65.5 percent of its expected deaths based 
on Mauritius’s age-specific death rates in 1989. 
Note
The indirect standardised death rate is simply the SMR multiplied by the crude death rate 
of the standard population: 
ISDR = SMR × ds
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com

DEMOGRAPHIC STATISTICS
271
MEASURES OF MORTALITY
Uses of Standardised Mortality Ratio
The standardised mortality ratio (SMR) may be used to: 
1)	Compare the general level of mortality in an occupation or industry with the general 
level of mortality in the total population; 
2)	Compare mortality due to a particular cause in an occupation or industry with the 
mortality due to a particular cause in the total population. 
SMR for Particular Occupation
For a particular occupation o, the SMR is defined as: 
SMRo =
Do
 dsaP oa
× 100
where 
Do
= the observed deaths in occupation o;
P o
a
= the population at age a in occupation o;
ds
a
= the age-specific death rate at age a in the total population (standard population).
Taking note that 
 ds
aP o
a is expected number of deaths in an occupation or industry o, we 
may write SMRo as: 
SMRo = Do
Do
E
= Number of observed deaths in occupation o
Expcted number of deaths in occupation o × 100
Thus, SMRo may be interpreted as the ratio of observed deaths to the expected number 
of deaths in an occupation or industry o had the age-specific death rate for the entire 
population prevailed in that occupation or industry. 
Example 6.38
Table 6.8(a) gives the data on a particular province of a country. Suppose that 42 civil 
servants died in that year, calculate SMR for the civil servants.
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com

DEMOGRAPHIC STATISTICS
272
MEASURES OF MORTALITY
Age Group (Years)
Total Population
Population of 
Civil Servants
Number of Deaths 
in Total Population 
15–19
94,963 
29,128 
53 
20–24
107,584
26,921 
76 
25–29
106,753
22,578 
99 
30–34
92,847 
18,656 
139
35–39
99,909 
14,630 
237
40–44
98,979 
10,689 
346
45–49
85,477 
9,588 
504
50–54
74,229 
10,108 
609
55–59
50,550 
8,963 
593
Total
811,291
151,261
2656
TABLE 6.8(a) Age Distribution of Total Population, Civil Servants’ Population and Deaths of Civil Servants in 
an Area
Solution
Total number of observed deaths of the Civil Servants Do = 42. The preliminary calculations 
are in Table 6.8(b). 
Age Group 
(Years)
Total 
Population
Population 
of Civil 
Servants
Deaths 
in Total 
Population
Age-specific 
Death Rate 
in Total 
Population
Expected 
Number of 
Deaths of 
Civil Servants
P s
a
P o
a
D
ds
a
ds
aP o
a
(1)
(2)
(3) 
(4) 
(5)=(4)/(2) 
(6)=(6) × (3) 
15–19
94,963 
29,128 
53 
0.00056
16.25669
20–24
107,584 
26,921 
76 
0.00071
19.01766
25–29
106,753 
22,578 
99 
0.00093
20.93826
30–34
92,847 
18,656 
139
0.00150
27.92965
35–39
99,909 
14,630 
237
0.00237
34.70468
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com

DEMOGRAPHIC STATISTICS
273
MEASURES OF MORTALITY
273
Age Group 
(Years)
Total 
Population
Population 
of Civil 
Servants
Deaths 
in Total 
Population
Age-specific 
Death Rate 
in Total 
Population
Expected 
Number of 
Deaths of 
Civil Servants
P s
a
P o
a
D
ds
a
ds
aP o
a
40–44
98,979 
10,689 
346
0.00350
37.36544
45–49
85,477 
9,588 
504
0.00590
56.53394
50–54
74,229 
10,108 
609
0.00820
82.92948
55–59
50,550 
8,963 
593
0.01173
105.14459
Total
811,291
151,261
 2656
 
400.832039
TABLE 6.8(b) Calculation of SMRo for Example 6.38
The expected deaths of the civil servants is: 

ds
aP o
a = 400.82039
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more

DEMOGRAPHIC STATISTICS
274
MEASURES OF MORTALITY
That is, if deaths of civil servants were to follow the prevailing age-specific death rates of 
the entire population, about 400.8 deaths would occur among the civil servants. However, 
this was not the case and only 42 civil servants died in that year. 
Hence, 
SMRo
=
Do
 dsaP oa
× 100
=
42
400.82039 × 100 = 10.48
That is, the observed deaths of civil servants in the province was about 10.5 percent of its 
expected deaths, based on the age-specific death rates prevailing in the province. 
SMR for Particular Cause of Death
For a particular cause of death c in occupation o, SMR is expressed as: 
SMRoc =
Doc
 dsc
a P oa
× 100
where 
Doc
= total number of observed deaths in occupation o due to cause c;
dsc
a
= age-cause-specific death rate at age a in total population (standard population).
Example 6.39
Table 6.9(a) gives the data on a particular province of a country. Suppose that 23 drivers 
died from malaria in that year, calculate SMR of drivers who died from malaria. 
Solution
Total number of observed deaths of drivers from malaria, Doc = 23. 
From the preliminary calculations in Table 6.9(b), expected number of deaths of drivers 
from malaria is: 

dsc
a P o
a = 16.8
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com

DEMOGRAPHIC STATISTICS
275
MEASURES OF MORTALITY
Age Group (Years)
Total Population
Population 
of Drivers
Number of Deaths 
in Total Population
15–19
4,963 
111 
16
20–24
7,584 
1,269 
8 
25–29
6,753 
1,225 
5 
30–34
9,284 
2134 
10
35–39
9,990 
2231 
11
40–44
9,897 
1106 
23
45–49
8,547 
927 
34
50–54
7,422 
897 
9 
55–59
5,055 
890 
12
Total
69,495
10,790
128
TABLE 6.9(a) Age Distribution of Total Population, Drivers’ Population and Deaths of Drivers in an Area
Age Group 
(Years)
Total 
Population
Population 
of Drivers
Deaths due 
Malaria 
in Total 
Population
Cause-specific 
Death Rate 
in Total 
Population
Expected 
Number of 
Deaths of 
Drivers
P s
a
P o
a
D
dsc
a
dsc
a P o
a
(1) 
(2) 
(3) 
(4) 
(5)=(4)/(2) 
(6)=(6) × (3)
15–19
4,963 
111 
16
0.00322
0.35785
20–24
7,584 
1,269 
8 
0.00105
1.33861
25–29
6,753 
1,225 
5 
0.00074
0.90700
30–34
9,284 
2,134 
10
0.00108
2.29858
35–39
9,990 
2,231 
11
0.00110
2.45656
40–44
9,897 
1,106 
23
0.00232
2.57027
45–49
8,547 
927 
34
0.00398
3.68761
50–54
7,422 
897 
9 
0.00121
1.08771
55–59
5,055 
890 
12
0.00237
2.11276
Total
69,495
10,790
128
 
16.81695
TABLE 6.9(b) Calculation of SMRo for Example 6.39
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com

DEMOGRAPHIC STATISTICS
276
MEASURES OF MORTALITY
That is, if deaths of drivers from malaria followed the distribution by age of deaths from 
malaria of the entire population, only 16.8 drivers would die from the disease. But this was 
not so. The number of deaths from malaria that occurred among drivers was 23.
Hence, 
SMRo
=
Do
 dsc
a P oc
a
× 100
=
23
16.81695 × 100 = 136.8
That is, the observed deaths of drivers from malaria was about 136.8 percent of the expected 
deaths of drivers from malaria, based on the age-specific death rates of the population in 
the province.
6.10.2  COMPARATIVE MORTALITY FIGURE
The comparative mortality figure (CMF) is defined as the ratio of the directly standardised 
death rate of the study population to the crude death rate of the standard population. That is, 
CMF =
 daP s
a
 P sa
/
 ds
aP s
a
 P sa
× k
This definition can be simplified to: 
CMF =
 daP s
a
 dsaP sa
× k
which can be expressed as: 
CMF = DE
Ds × k = Expected deaths in standard population
Observed deaths in standard population × k
Similarly, we define the comparative mortality figure for the study population as:
CMF
=
 ds
aPa
 daPa
× k
=
Dstudy
E
Dstudy × k = Expected deaths in study population
Observed deaths in study population × k
Example 6.40
For the data in Table 6.10 (a), calculate the CMF for Mauritius. 
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com

DEMOGRAPHIC STATISTICS
277
MEASURES OF MORTALITY
Solution
Preliminary calculations are given in columns 6 and 7 in Table 10 (b).
The observed deaths in Mauritius Ds = 8,475;
The expected deaths in Mauritius DE = 13,015.
Age Group 
(Years)
South Africa (Study)
Mauritius (Standard) 
Populatio*
Deaths 
Population 
Deaths 
0–4
4,436,683
 5,957 
94,303 
317 
5–9
4,898,700
 4,344 
105,189 
25 
10–14
5,190,005
 3,336 
97,740 
20 
15–19
5,263,274
 8,977 
102,088 
53 
20–24
4,392,357
21,883 
110,892 
76 
25–29
4,100,416
41,571 
93,797 
99 
30–34
3,422,110
46,982 
99,515 
139 
35–39
3,216,513
43,177 
101,946 
237 
40–44
2,794,291
36,771 
90,406 
346 
45–49
2,241,976
31,733 
77,931 
504 
50–54
1,779,225
29,674 
56,939 
609 
55–59
1,249,427
25,290 
40,491 
593 
60–64
1,127,147
28,751 
33,097 
728 
65–69
795,652 
26,936 
25,768 
859 
70–74
691,433 
29,150 
21,694 
896 
75+
830,614 
23,862 
14,910 
1,084 
Total 
46,429,823
499,268 
1,178,848 
8,475 
TABLE 6.10(a) Age-sex Distribution of Population and Deaths in South Africa and Republic of Mauritius in 2002
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com

DEMOGRAPHIC STATISTICS
278
MEASURES OF MORTALITY
278
Age Group 
(Years)
South Africa (Study)
Mauritius (Standard) 
South Africa
Population
Deaths 
Age-
specific 
death 
rates
Population 
Deaths 
Age-
specific 
death 
rates
Expected 
Deaths in 
Mauritius 
population 
1
2 
3 
4=(3)/(2) 
5 
6 
7=(6)/(5) 
8=(4) × (5) 
0–4
4,436,683
45,957
0.01036
94,303 
317 
0.00336
976.83 
5–9
4,898,700
4,344 
0.00089
105,189 
25 
0.00024
93.28
10–14
5,190,005
3,336 
0.00064
97,740 
20 
0.00020
62.82
15–19
5,263,274
8,977 
0.00171
102,088 
53 
0.00052
174.12
20–24
4,392,357
21,883
0.00498
110,892 
76 
0.00069
552.47
25–29
4,100,416
41,571
0.01014
93,797 
99 
0.00106
950.94
30–34
3,422,110
46,982
0.01373
99,515 
139 
0.00140
1366.24
35–39
3,216,513
43,177
0.01342
101,946 
237 
0.00232
1368.48 
40–44
2,794,291
36,771
0.01316
90,406 
346 
0.00383
1189.68 
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more

DEMOGRAPHIC STATISTICS
279
MEASURES OF MORTALITY
Age Group 
(Years)
South Africa (Study)
Mauritius (Standard) 
South Africa
Population
Deaths 
Age-
specific 
death 
rates
Population 
Deaths 
Age-
specific 
death 
rates
Expected 
Deaths in 
Mauritius 
population 
45–49
2,241,976
31,733
0.01415
77,931 
504 
0.00647
1103.04 
50–54
1,779,225
29,674
0.01668
56,939 
609 
0.01070
949.63 
55–59
1,249,427
25,290
0.02024
40,491 
593 
0.01465
819.59 
60–64
1,127,147
28,751
0.02551
33,097 
728 
0.02200
844.23 
65–69
795,652 
26,936
0.03385
25,768 
859 
0.03334
872.35 
70–74
691,433 
29,150
0.04216
21,694 
896 
0.04130
914.59 
75+
830,614 
23,862
0.02873
27,052 
2,974 
0.10994
777.15238.81 
Total 
46,429,823
448,394
 
1,178,848 
8,475 
 
13,015 
TABLE 6.10(b) Preliminary calculations of Comparative Mortality Figure for Example 6.40 
Then, 
CMF
=
DE
Ds × 100
=
13, 015
8, 475 × 100 = 153.6
That is, the death rate in Mauritius in 2002 that could be expected if South Africa age-
specific death rates were applied to the age composition of the population of Mauritius in 
2002 was 153.6 percent of the actual death rate in Mauritius. 
6.11	 STANDARDISED DEATH INDICES 
6.11.1  TYPES OF STANDARDISED DEATH INDICES 
Another measure that is used to directly summarize the differences between two schedules 
of specific rates is the standardized index. The standardized death index is used to 
1)	Monitor changes in mortality levels over time; 
2)	Compare different sets of mortality over time; 
3)	Compare sets of mortality among different populations. 
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com

DEMOGRAPHIC STATISTICS
280
MEASURES OF MORTALITY
Following the theory of price index in economic statistics, we may define various form 
of standardised death indices. Suppose in the calculation of CMF, the study and standard 
populations are taken to be the populations at two time points of the same area. Then 
CMF provides a suitable measure to study relative change in mortality between the two 
periods. We shall refer to this measure as comparative mortality index (CMI), in line with 
index numbers as defined in economic statistics. It measures the relative level of mortality 
in an area in current (later) year, as compared with the level of mortality in same area in 
some past specified (earlier) year. A value greater than 100 indicates an increasing trend in 
mortality between the two periods.
Suppose, the age-specific death rate da is used as price and the population Pa as quantity 
in the current (study) year. Suppose also that P s
a and ds
a are population and age-specific 
death rates respectively of earlier (base) year, which is considered the standard year. When 
in the calculation of CMI, 
1)	the current year of the population is the study population, 
2)	the base year of the population is the standard population, 
then we shall obtain the Laspeyre-type mortality29 and the Paasche-type30, depending which 
period of the population is used as weight.
6.11.2  LASPEYRE-TYPE COMPARATIVE MORTALITY INDEX 
When the base year of the population is used to weight the age specific death rate then we 
have the Laspeyre-type CMI (CMIL, also refered to as “base-weighted” or “fixed-weighted” 
mortality index, defined as: 
CMIL =
 daP s
a
 dsaP sa
× 100
where 
da
= the age-specific death rate of the current (study) year;
ds
a
= the age-specific death rate of the base (standard) year;
P s
a = the population of the base (standard) year.
That is, the Laspeyre-type CMI is the ratio of the weighted sum of the age-specific death 
rates in current (study) year to the weighted sum of the age-specific death rates in base 
(standard) year, where the weight is the base (standard) year population.
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com

DEMOGRAPHIC STATISTICS
281
MEASURES OF MORTALITY
The distinctive feature of the Laspeyres-type CMI is that it uses the population in the 
base period as the basis for comparison as against the Paasche-type CMI which uses the 
population in the current period as the basis for comparison (discussed in the sequel). In 
other words, in computing the CMI, the relative age specific death rate (the ratio of the 
current age specific death rate to the base-period age specific death rate) is weighted by 
the population’s relative importance to all deaths during the base period. Similar to the 
Laspeyre’s price index in economic statistics, we may write CMIL as: 
CMIL =
 d1P0
 d0P0
× 100
where 
d0 and d1 	 the age-specific death rates for base (standard) year and current (study) year, 
respectively;
P0 	
	
the population of the base (standard) year.
Example 6.41
For the data of Table 6.11 (a), calculate the Laspeyre-type CMI.
Age Group 
(years)
1989 (Standard)
1999 (Study) 
Population 
Deaths
Population
Deaths 
0–4
93,983 
516
99,949 
440 
5–9
107,047
39 
108,571 
27 
10–14
107,128
41 
95,478 
29 
15–19
93,887 
66 
109,075 
56 
20–24
104,312
92 
108,841 
92 
25–29
104,450
150
94,045 
116 
30–34
88,918 
164
101,212 
147 
35–39
76,563 
215
100,482 
253 
40–44
54,048 
252
86,804 
347 
45–49
43,483 
299
76,031 
468 
50–54
39,327 
374
53,125 
462 
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com

DEMOGRAPHIC STATISTICS
282
MEASURES OF MORTALITY
Age Group 
(years)
1989 (Standard)
1999 (Study) 
Population 
Deaths
Population
Deaths 
55–59
31,206 
473
38,056 
509 
60–64
30,558 
779
31,691 
710 
65–69
22,268 
858
24,836 
780 
70–74
14,314 
807
22,085 
1,012 
75+
15,321 
1,821
24,136 
2,496 
Total 
1,026,813
6,946
1,174,417
7,944 
TABLE 6.11(a) Population and Deaths in Republic of Mauritius (1989–1999)
Source: United Nations Demographic Yearbook (1992–2002), (New York: Statistics Office) 
Solution
The preliminary calculations are given in Table 6.11 (b).
Age 
Group 
Standard Year (1989)
Study Year (1999) 
Age-specific 
Death Rate
Actual 
deaths in 
standard 
year
Expected 
deaths in 
study year
(Years) 
Population 
(P0)
Deaths 
(D0)
Population 
(P1)
Deaths 
(D1)
1989 
(d0)
1999 (d1
 d0P0
 d1P0
1
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
7 
8=(6) × (2) 
9=(7) × (2) 
0–4
93,983
516
99,949
440
0.00549
0.00440
516.00
413.74
5–9
107,047
39
108,571
27
0.00036
0.00025
39.00
26.62
10–14
107,128
41
95,478
29
0.00038
0.00030
41.00
32.54
15–19
93,887
66
109,075
56
0.00070
0.00051
66.00
48.20
20–24
104,312
92
108,841
92
0.00088
0.00085
92.00
88.17
25–29
104,450
150
94,045
116
0.00144
0.00123
150.00
128.83
30–34
88,918
164
101,212
147
0.00184
0.00145
164.00
129.14
35–39
76,563
215
100,482
253
0.00281
0.00252
215.00
192.78
40–44
54,048
252
86,804
347
0.00466
0.00400
252.00
216.06
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com

DEMOGRAPHIC STATISTICS
283
MEASURES OF MORTALITY
283
Age 
Group 
Standard Year (1989)
Study Year (1999) 
Age-specific 
Death Rate
Actual 
deaths in 
standard 
year
Expected 
deaths in 
study year
(Years) 
Population 
(P0)
Deaths 
(D0)
Population 
(P1)
Deaths 
(D1)
1989 
(d0)
1999 (d1
 d0P0
 d1P0
45–49
43,483
299
76,031
468
0.00688
0.00616
299.00
267.65
50–54
39,327
374
53,125
462
0.00951
0.00870
374.00
342.01
55–59
31,206
473
38,056
509
0.01516
0.01338
473.00
417.38
60–64
30,558
779
31,691
710
0.02549
0.02240
779.00
684.62
65–69
22,268
858
24,836
780
0.03853
0.03141
858.00
699.35
70–74
14,314
807
22,085
1,012
0.05638
0.04582
807.00
655.91
75+
15,321
1,821
24,136
2,496
0.11886
0.10341
1821.00
1584.41
Total
1,026,813
6,946
1,174,417
7,944
6946.00
5927.40
TABLE 6.11 (b) Preliminary calculations of Laspeyre-type Comparative Mortality Index for Example 6.41
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
EXPERIENCE THE POWER OF 
FULL ENGAGEMENT…
     RUN FASTER.
          RUN LONGER..
                RUN EASIER…
READ MORE & PRE-ORDER TODAY 
WWW.GAITEYE.COM
Challenge the way we run

DEMOGRAPHIC STATISTICS
284
MEASURES OF MORTALITY
Thus, the Laspeyre-type CMI is: 
CMIL
=
 d1P0
 d0P0
× 100
=
5927.40
6946.00 × 100 = 85.3
Interpretation
If the deaths in Mauritius in 1999 were adjusted by the age composition by the country’s 
1989 population, the expected number of death rate in 1999 would be only 85.3 percent 
of the observed number of deaths in 1989. 
Comment
We have observed that the number of deaths in 1999 was 14.4 percent (7,944/6,946=1.144) 
higher than that in 1989. However, when the 1999 deaths were adjusted by the age 
composition of the 1989 population, the expected number of deaths in 1999 was 14.7 
percent lower than in 1989. The observation is supported also by the pattern of the age-
specific death rates which were consistently lower in 1999 than in 1989.
This result further re-emphsises the importance of adjusted death rate. 
Limitation of Laspeyre-type Comparative Mortality Index
As the tendency is for population to increase and mortality to decrease, Laspeyre-type CMI 
will tend to under-estimate the index. This is because if mortality is declining, we will have 
P s
a ≤Pa and ds
a > da at least for a large number of age groups particularly of the younger 
brackets. The reverse is also true. That is, if mortality is rising, Laspeyre-type CMI would 
tend to over-estimate the differences in mortality. 
In Example 6.41, mortality declined in all age groups except in the last one. It is, therefore, 
not surprising that the Laspeyre-type CMI is lower than the Paache-type (see Example 6.42).
6.11.3  PAASCHE-TYPE COMPARATIVE MORTALITY INDEX 
Suppose in the calculation of CMI, we use as weight the current (study) year population, then 
we have the Paasche-type CMI (CMIP ), also called a “current weighted index”, defined as: 
 daPa
 dsaPa
× 100
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com

DEMOGRAPHIC STATISTICS
285
MEASURES OF MORTALITY
where 
da 	 =	
the age-specific death rate of the current (study) year;
ds
a 	
=	
the age-specific death rate of the base (standard) year;
Pa 	 =	
the population of the current (study) year.
That is, the Paasche-type CMI is the ratio of the weighted sum of the age specific death 
rates in current (study) year to the weighted sum of the age specific death rates in a base 
(standard) year, where the weight is the current (study) year population.
Similar to the Paasche’s price index in economic statistics, we may 
CMIP =
 d1P1
 d0P1
× 100
where 
d0 and d1
= as defined above;
P1
= the population of the current (study) year.
Example 6.42
For the data of Example 6.41, calculate Paasche-type CMI. 
Solution
The preliminary calculations are given in Table 12. Thus the Paasche-type CMI is: 
CMIP
=
 d1P1
 d0P1
× 100
=
9289.67
7944.00 × 100 = 85.5
Note that this index, as expected, is higher than CMIL.
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com

DEMOGRAPHIC STATISTICS
286
MEASURES OF MORTALITY
Age 
Group 
(Years) 
Standard Year (1989)
Study Year (1999) 
Age-specific 
Death Rate
Actual 
deaths in 
standard 
year
Expected 
deaths in 
study year
Population 
Deaths 
Population 
Deaths 
1989 
1999 
 
 
(P0)
(D0)
(P1)
(D1)
(d0)
(d1
d0P1
d1P1
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8=(6) × (2)
9=(7) × (2)
0–4
93,983
516
99,949
440
0.00549
0.00440
548.76
440.00
5–9
107,047
39
108,571
27
0.00036
0.00025
39.56
27.00
10–14
107,128
41
95,478
29
0.00038
0.00030
36.54
29.00
15–19
93,887
66
109,075
56
0.00070
0.00051
76.68
56.00
20–24
104,312
92
108,841
92
0.00088
0.00085
95.99
92.00
25–29
104,450
150
94,045
116
0.00144
0.00123
135.06
116.00
30–34
88,918
164
101,212
147
0.00184
0.00145
186.68
147.00
35–39
76,563
215
100,482
253
0.00281
0.00252
282.17
253.00
40–44
54,048
252
86,804
347
0.00466
0.00400
404.73
347.00
45–49
43,483
299
76,031
468
0.00688
0.00616
522.81
468.00
50–54
39,327
374
53,125
462
0.00951
0.00870
505.22
462.00
55–59
31,206
473
38,056
509
0.01516
0.01338
576.83
509.00
60–64
30,558
779
31,691
710
0.02549
0.02240
807.88
710.00
65–69
22,268
858
24,836
780
0.03853
0.03141
956.95
780.00
70–74
14,314
807
22,085
1,012
0.05638
0.04582
1245.12
1012.00
75+
15,321
1,821
24,136
2,496
0.11886
0.10341
2868.72
2496.00
Total
1,026,813
6,946
1,174,417
7,944
9289.67
7944.00
TABLE 6.12 Preliminary calculations of Paasche-type Comparative Mortality Index for Example 6.41
Interpretation
If deaths in Mauritius in 1989 was adjusted by the age composition of the 1999 population, 
then actual number of deaths in Mauritius in 1999 was 85.5 percent of the expected number 
of deaths of the country in 1989. 
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com

DEMOGRAPHIC STATISTICS
287
MEASURES OF MORTALITY
Limitation of Paasche-type Comparative Mortality Index
When mortality is declining in a country, Paasche-type CMI would tend to over-estimate 
the index. The reverse is also true.
Marshall-Edgeworth-type Comparative Mortality Index 
Marshall-Edgeworth-type CMI uses, as weight (wa), and is defined as the average of the 
proportions of persons of corresponding age groups in the base (standard) year (P s
a) and 
current (study) year (Pa). Thus, 
wa = 1
2
 P s
a
 P sa
+
Pa
 Pa

where
 P s
a = P s is total standard population;
 Pa = P is total study population.
Thus, 
wa = 1
2 (ps
a + pa)
where
ps
a is the proportion of population in age group a in current (study) year;
ps
a is the proportion of population in age group a in base (standard year.
When we replace P s
a  or Pa in Laspeyre- and Paasche-type CMI formulas by (wa), we obtain 
the Marshall-Edgeworth-type CMI (CMIME):
CMIME =
 dawa
 dsawa
× 100
where da and ds
a are as earlier defined. 
Example 6.43
For the data of Example 6.41, calculate Marshall-Edgeworth-type CMI. 
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com

DEMOGRAPHIC STATISTICS
288
MEASURES OF MORTALITY
288
Solution
The preliminary calculations are given in Table 13.
Age 
Group 
(Years) 
Age-specific 
Death Rate
ps
a =
P s
a

P s
P
P
p
a
a
∑
=
w = 1
2 (ps
a + pa)
ds
awa
da
a
w
1989 
(d0)
1999 
(d1)
1
2 
3 
4 
5 
6
7=(1) × (6)
8=(2) × (6)
0–4
0.00549
0.00440
0.09153
0.08511
0.08832
0.00048
0.00039
5–9
0.00036
0.00025
0.10425
0.09245
0.09835
0.00004
0.00002
10–14
0.00038
0.00030
0.10433
0.08130
0.09281
0.00004
0.00003
15–19
0.00070
0.00051
0.09144
0.09288
0.09216
0.00006
0.00005
20–24
0.00088
0.00085
0.10159
0.09268
0.09713
0.00009
0.00008
25–29
0.00144
0.00123
0.10172
0.08008
0.09090
0.00013
0.00011
30–34
0.00184
0.00145
0.08660
0.08618
0.08639
0.00016
0.00013
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
PDF components for PHP developers
www.setasign.com
SETASIGN
This e-book  
is made with 
SetaPDF

DEMOGRAPHIC STATISTICS
289
MEASURES OF MORTALITY
Age 
Group 
(Years) 
Age-specific 
Death Rate
ps
a =
P s
a

P s
P
P
p
a
a
∑
=
w = 1
2 (ps
a + pa)
ds
awa
da
a
w
1989 
(d0)
1999 
(d1)
35–39
0.00281
0.00252
0.07456
0.08556
0.08006
0.00022
0.00020
40–44
0.00466
0.00400
0.05264
0.07391
0.06327
0.00030
0.00025
45–49
0.00688
0.00616
0.04235
0.06474
0.05354
0.00037
0.00033
50–54
0.00951
0.00870
0.03830
0.04524
0.04177
0.00040
0.00036
55–59
0.01516
0.01338
0.03039
0.03240
0.03140
0.00048
0.00042
60–64
0.02549
0.02240
0.02976
0.02698
0.02837
0.00072
0.00064
65–69
0.03853
0.03141
0.02169
0.02115
0.02142
0.00083
0.00067
70–74
0.05638
0.04582
0.01394
0.01881
0.01637
0.00092
0.00075
75+
0.11886
0.10341
0.01492
0.02055
0.01774
0.00211
0.00183
Total 
0.00734
0.00627
TABLE 6.13 Preliminary calculations of Marshall-Edgeworth-type Comparative Mortality Index for Example 6.41
Columns 2 and 3 are taken from columns 6 and 7 of Table 6.11 (b). Thus the composite 
CMI is: 
CMIME
=
 dawa
 dsawa
× 100
=
0.00627
0.00734 × 100 = 85.4
Fisher’s Ideal-type Comparative Mortality Index 
Fisher’s Ideal-type CMI (CMIF ) is defined as the geometric mean of Laspeyre-type and 
Paasche-type CMI. Thus, 
CMIF =

CMIL × CMIP
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com

DEMOGRAPHIC STATISTICS
290
MEASURES OF MORTALITY
Or
CMIF =
 d1P0
 d0P0
×
 d1P1
 d0P1
× 100
The CMIF gives a close approximation of the unknown (CMI) and will be between the 
Laspeyres and Paasche indices. The CMIL is normally the upper bound and the CMIP the 
lower bound indices.
Example 6.44
For the data of Example 6.41, calculate Fisher’s Ideal-type CMI.
Solution
From Example 6.41, CMIL = 85.3.
From Example 6.42, CMIP = 85.5.
Hence, 
CMIF
=

CMIL × CMIP
=
√
85.3 × 85.5 = 85.4
Alternatively,
From Example 6.41, 
 d1P0
 d0P0
= 6946.00
5927.40
From Example 6.42, 
 d1P1
 d0P1
= 9289.67
7944.00
Hence,
CMIF
=
 d1P0
 d0P0
×
 d1P1
 d0P1
× 100
=
6946.00
5927.40 × 9289.67
7944.00 × 100 = 85.4
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com

DEMOGRAPHIC STATISTICS
291
MEASURES OF MORTALITY
EXERCISES
6.1	
The following table (from Central Statistics Office of Mauritius) shows the mid-year 
population and the number of deaths in the Republic of Mauritius for the period 
2000–2004. 
Year 
Mid-year Population
Number of Deaths
2000
1,186,873 
7,982 
2001
1,199,881 
7,983 
2002
1,210,196 
8,310 
2003
1,222,811 
8,520 
2004
1,233,86
8,475 
Compute the: 
1)	Crude death rate for each year; 
2)	Mean annual crude death rate for the period; 
3)	Annual mean crude death rate for the period; 
4)	Mid-period crude death rate for the period. 
6.2	
Distinguish between crude death and standardised death rates? Why is this distinction 
necessary?
6.3	
The table below shows the distribution of the mid-year population and the number 
of deaths in a certain country in 2002. 
1)	Calculate the age-specific death rates for the country. 
2)	Construct an age curve of mortality and comment on the shape. 
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com

DEMOGRAPHIC STATISTICS
292
MEASURES OF MORTALITY
Age Group (year) 
Population 
Number of Deaths 
0–4
109,900
572
5–9
118,500
39
10–14
106,300
33
15–19
97,950
77
20–24
74,400
83
25–29
50,400
90
30–34
44,500
158
35–39
37,600
252
40–44
40,100
374
45–49
35,350
600
50–54
26,150
613
55–59
23,800
670
60–64
16,150
724
65–69
14,300
762
70–74
11,500
825
75–79
10,000
925
80–84
9,600
635
85+
8,200
975
6.4	
The following were data on a certain community in 2000. The live births for the 
previous year was 2,200 including 1,500 males and 700 females. In that year 150 
children under one year of age died out of which 85 were males and 65, females.
	
Compute for the total population and by sex the following: 
1)	Crude death rate; 
2)	Specific death rates; 
3)	Maternal mortality rate; 
4)	Conventional infant mortality rate; 
5)	Adjusted infant mortality rate; 
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com

DEMOGRAPHIC STATISTICS
293
MEASURES OF MORTALITY
293
6)	Neonatal mortality rate; 
7)	Post-neonatal mortality rate; 
8)	Foetal death ratio with respect to: 
i)	 all foetal deaths, 
ii)	late foetal deaths; 
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
www.sylvania.com
We do not reinvent  
the wheel we reinvent 
light.
Fascinating lighting offers an infinite spectrum of 
possibilities: Innovative technologies and new  
markets provide both opportunities and challenges. 
An environment in which your expertise is in high 
demand. Enjoy the supportive working atmosphere 
within our global group and benefit from international 
career paths. Implement sustainable ideas in close 
cooperation with other specialists and contribute to 
influencing our future. Come and join us in reinventing 
light every day.
Light is OSRAM

DEMOGRAPHIC STATISTICS
294
MEASURES OF MORTALITY
Vital Events 
Number
Total 
Male 
Female
Estimated population as of July 1
100,000
60,000
40,000
Births
	
Full term births
2,000
2,000
5,000
	
Pre-mature births
500
360
240
	
Total
2,500
2,300
5,240
Foetal deaths 
	
Under 20 weeks gestation 
55
30
25
	
20 to 27 weeks gestation 
34
28
6
	
28 weeks and more 
11
18
3
	
Total 
100
66
34
Deaths 
	
Under 1 year 
160
100
60
	
Under 28 days 
120
75
55
	
50 years or older 
25
16
9
	
Maternal Deaths 
8
6
2
	
Total of all ages 
1,500
1,000
500
Cause of death 
	
AIDS 
50
40
10
	
Heart diseases 
1,100
850
250
9)	Foetal death rate with respect to: 
i)	 all foetal deaths, 
ii)	late foetal deaths, 
iii)	all foetal deaths from foetal death ratio, 
iv)	late foetal deaths from foetal death ratio; 
10)	Perinatal mortality ratio; 
11)	Perinatal mortality rate; 
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com

DEMOGRAPHIC STATISTICS
295
MEASURES OF MORTALITY
12)	Perinatal mortality rate from perinatal mortality ratio; 
13)	Cause-of-death rates for AIDS and heart diseases; 
14)	Cause-of-death ratios for AIDS and heart diseases; 
6.5	
For data in Example 6.20, calculate foetal death rate from foetal death ratio computed 
for all foetal deaths. 
6.6	
For data in Example 6.22, calculate perinatal mortality rate from the perinatal 
mortality ratio computed for all foetal deaths.
6.7	
The table below shows the population of an area in 2000 and 2003 and the number 
of deaths of the same area in 2003. 
1)	Use the direct method to obtain the 2003 adjusted death rate for the area if its 
2000 population is used as the standard population. 
2)	Comment on your result. 
Age Group (years) 
Population in 2000 
Deaths in 2003 
Population in 2003 
0–4
109,900
734
216,787
5–9
118,500
133
219,206
10–14
106,300
77
152,665
15–19
97,950
80
138,274
20–24
74,400
110
111,318
25–29
50,400
95
89,029
30–34
44,500
108
73,724
35–39
37,600
131
61,709
40–44
40,100
208
68,686
45–49
35,350
171
47,843
50–54
26,150
289
47,120
55–59
23,800
414
34,398
60–64
16,150
500
27,262
65–69
13,300
571
14,572
70–74
8,500
604
18,414
75+
9,230
1,003
17,823
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com

DEMOGRAPHIC STATISTICS
296
MEASURES OF MORTALITY
6.8	
The table below shows the population and deaths in Mauritius in 2000 and the 
popultion of Ghana in the same year. 
1)	Calculate the age-specific death rate for Mauritius in 2000; 
2)	Construct the mortality curve for the data and comment on the shape; 
3)	Using the direct method of standardisation, 
a)	Obtain the standardised death rate for Mauritius for 2000 if the 2000 population 
of Ghana is used as the standard population. 
b)	Comment on your result; 
4)	Construct the age-specific mortality curve for Mauritius based on the expected 
deaths. Compare it with the one constructed in (2) and comment. 
Age Group (years) 
Population of 
Mauritius in 2000 
Deaths in Mauritius 
in 2000 
Population of 
Ghana in 2000
0–4
94,303
368
2,769,421
5–9
105,189
26
2,775,206
10–14
97,740
32
2,262,216
15–19
102,088
61
1,883,753
20–24
110,892
87
1,600,820
25–29
93,797
124
1,487,299
30–34
99,515
152
1,206,809
35–39
101,946
220
1,029,765
40–44
90,406
353
886,931
45–49
77,931
424
720,357
50–54
56,939
503
568,369
55–59
40,491
521
355,842
60–64
33,097
681
366,351
65–69
25,768
840
258,709
70–74
21,694
1,033
225,158
75–79
14,910
991
144,830
80–84
7,132
706
140,847
85+
5,010
860
229,396
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com

DEMOGRAPHIC STATISTICS
297
MEASURES OF MORTALITY
6.9	
The following table shows the distribution of mid-year population and deaths in 
South Africa in 2003 and 2004 by age and sex.
1)	Calculate crude death rate for South Africa in both years for: 
a)	Male population, 
b)	Female population. 
2)	Using its 2003 population as standard, calculate, for 2004, the direct standardised 
death rate for South Africa for the 
a)	Male population, 
b)	Female population. 
3)	Calculate the age-sex direct standardised death rate for 2004, using its male and 
female populations in 2003 as standard. 
4)	Comment on the results in (1) to (3). 
Age 
Group 
(Years) 
2003 Population of 
South Africa (Standard)
2004 Population of 
South Africa (Study)
2004 Deaths in South 
Africa (Study)
Male 
Female
Male 
Female
Male 
Female 
0–4
2,216,840
2,219,843
2,616,514
2,559,951
29,454
26,280
5–9
2,446,939
2,451,761
2,583,940
2,535,525
3,129
2,765
10–14
2,584,438
2,605,567
2,545,484
2,506,130
2,105
1,744
15–19
2,594,731
2,668,543
2,475,651
2,448,341
4,602
4,533
20–24
2,156,680
2,235,677
2,358,355
2,320,855
10,188
14,759
25–29
1,979,090
2,121,326
2,179,953
2,111,636
19,479
26,978
30–34
1,633,298
1,788,812
1,852,780
1,843,665
27,977
30,040
35–39
1,492,181
1,724,332
1,401,549
1,449,763
27,751
24,638
40–44
1,305,199
1,489,092
1,226,582
1,312,067
26,034
20,134
45–49
1,022,352
1,219,624
1,056,100
1,157,891
22,702
15,955
50–54
833,726
945,499
834,806
927,175
20,778
13,840
55–59
574,985
674,442
636,046
733,172
17,756
11,844
60–64
478,705
648,442
475,193
575,222
16,712
13,185
65–69
304,126
491,526
329,787
437,665
14,973
13,611
70–74
245,710
445,723
206,198
308,319
13,277
15,199
75+
281,308
549,306
325,280
567,263
18,558
29,447
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com

DEMOGRAPHIC STATISTICS
298
MEASURES OF MORTALITY
298
6.10	
The following table shows the distribution of population and deaths in the Republic 
of Mauritius in 2000 by age and sex and the distribution of population of Ghana 
by sex in the same year.
1)	Calculate the crude death rate for the Republic of Mauritius for the 
a)	Male population, 
b)	Female population. 
2)	Calculate the direct standardised death rate for the Republic of Mauritius for the: 
a)	Male population, 
b)	Female population, 
using the male and female population of Ghana in 2000 as standard. 
3)	Calculate the age-sex direct standardised death rate for the the Republic of Mauritius 
population, using the population of Mauritius as standard. Interpret the result. 
4)	Comment on the results in (1) to (3). 
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
360°
thinking.
© Deloitte & Touche LLP and affiliated entities.
Discover the truth at www.deloitte.ca/careers 

DEMOGRAPHIC STATISTICS
299
MEASURES OF MORTALITY
Age 
Group 
(Years) 
Population of Ghana 
by Sex in 2000
Population of Mauritius 
by Sex in 2000
Deaths by Sex in 
Mauritius in 2000
Male 
Female
Male 
Female
Male 
Female 
0–4
1,379,770
1,389,651
47,640
46,663
228
139
5–9
1,390,652
1,384,554
53,037
52,152
17
9
10– 14
1,151,131
1,111,085
49,428
48,312
21
11
15–19
961,162
922,591
51,671
50,417
37
24
20–24
763,051
837,769
55,108
55,784
66
21
25–29
695,494
791,805
46,749
47,048
80
44
30–34
566,439
640,370
49,964
49,551
106
46
35–39
490,864
538,901
51,621
50,325
162
58
40–44
443,284
443,647
45,798
44,608
254
99
45–49
377,315
343,042
39,133
38,798
295
129
50–54
279,950
288,419
27,790
29,149
324
179
55–59
182,843
172,999
19,228
21,263
310
211
60–64
177,347
189,004
15,301
17,796
404
277
65–69
129,090
129,619
11,758
14,010
521
319
70–74
106,513
118,645
9,491
12,203
555
478
75–79
74,268
70,562
6,047
8,863
499
492
80–84
66,941
73,906
2,584
4,548
311
395
85+
121,268
108,128
1,408
3,602
298
562
6.11	
What is an age-standardised death rate and why is it necessary in demographic 
analysis? Discuss the various methods for obtaining such a rate and under what 
conditions is each method applicable?
6.12	
How is it different from the comparative mortality figure? Why would you choose 
the Marshall-Edgeworth-type over the other types.
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com

DEMOGRAPHIC STATISTICS
300
MEASURES OF MORTALITY
6.13	
The table below shows the distribution by age, the populations of Country A and 
Country B in 2000 and the number of deaths in Country A in 2000. Assuming 
the total number of deaths in Country B in 2000 was 98,000, calculate the indirect 
standardised death rate for Country B using the age-specific death rates of Country 
A as standard.
Age Group 
(year) 
Population of 
Country A
Population of 
Country A
Number of 
Deaths in 
Country A
Number of 
Deaths in 
Country A
0–4
93,983
2,769,421
516
Not
5–9
107,047
2,775,206
39
available
10–14
107,128
2,262,216
41
15–19
93,887
1,883,753
66
20–24
104,312
1,600,820
92
25–29
104,450
1,487,299
150
30–34
88,918
1,206,809
164
35–39
76,563
1,029,765
215
40–44
54,048
886,931
252
45–49
43,483
720,357
299
50–54
39,327
568,369
374
55–59
31,206
355,842
473
60–64
30,558
366,351
779
65–69
22,268
258,709
858
70–74
14,314
225,158
807
75–79
15,321
144,830
1,821
Total 
1,026,813
18,912,079
6,946
98,000
6.14	
For the data in Example 6.40, calculate the comparative mortality figure for South 
Africa and interpret the result.
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com

DEMOGRAPHIC STATISTICS
301
MEASURES OF MORTALITY
6.15	
The table below shows the distribution of population and deaths by age in 2004 for 
South Africa and Mauritius.
Age Group 
(Years) 
South Africa (Study)
Mauritius (Standard) 
Population 
in 2004
Deaths in 2004
Population 
in 2004
Deaths in 2004 
0–4
5,176,465
55,734
97,648
317
5–9
5,119,465
5,894
99,797
25
10–14
5,051,614
3,849
108,949
20
15–19
4,923,992
9,135
94,963
53
20–24
4,679,210
24,947
107,584
76
25–29
4,291,589
46,457
106,753
99
30–34
3,696,445
58,017
92,847
139
35–39
2,851,312
52,389
99,909
237
40–44
2,538,649
46,168
98,979
346
45–49
2,213,991
38,657
85,477
504
50–54
1,761,981
34,618
74,229
609
55–59
1,369,218
29,600
50,550
593
60–64
1,050,415
29,897
35,201
728
65–69
767,452
28,584
28,565
859
70–74
514,517
28,476
20,769
896
75–79
312,251
25,527
16,557
1,084
80–84
580,292
20,331
9,207
884
85+
24,101
27,674
5,402
1,006
Total 
46,586,607
565,954
1,233,386
8,475
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com

DEMOGRAPHIC STATISTICS
302
MEASURES OF MORTALITY
Calculate the comparative mortality figure for: 
1)	South Africa; 
2)	Mauritius. 
6.16	
The table below gives data on a particular area in 2003. Suppose that 50 teachers 
died from cholera in that year, calculate the standard mortality ratio for teachers 
who died from cholera in that area.
Age Group (Years) 
Total Population
Population of 
Teachers 
Number of Deaths 
in Total Population 
20–24
17,584
269
4
25–29
16,753
225
6
30–34
19,284
134
10
35–39
19,990
231
15
40–44
19,897
136
19
45–49
18,547
109
28
50–54
17,422
108
17
55–59
15,055
90
15
Total
69,495
10,790
128
6.17	
The following table shows the age distribution of population and deaths in South 
Africa in 2003 and 2004. 
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com

DEMOGRAPHIC STATISTICS
303
MEASURES OF MORTALITY
303
Age Group 
(years)
2003 (Standard)
2004 (Study) 
Population 
Deaths
Population
Deaths 
0–4
4,436,683
51,123
5,176,465
55,734
5–9
4,898,700
4,948
5,119,465
5,894
10–14
5,190,005
3,613
5,051,614
3,849
15–19
5,263,274
9,309
4,923,992
9,135
20–24
4,392,357
24,246
4,679,210
24,947
25–29
4,100,416
45,709
4,291,589
46,457
30–34
3,422,110
55,015
3,696,445
58,017
35–39
3,216,513
48,613
2,851,312
52,389
40–44
2,794,291
42,718
2,538,649
46,168
45–49
2,241,976
36,195
2,213,991
38,657
50–54
1,779,225
33,198
1,761,981
34,618
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
We will turn your CV into 
an opportunity of a lifetime
Do you like cars? Would you like to be a part of a successful brand?
We will appreciate and reward both your enthusiasm and talent.
Send us your CV. You will be surprised where it can take you.
Send us your CV on
www.employerforlife.com

DEMOGRAPHIC STATISTICS
304
MEASURES OF MORTALITY
55–59
1,249,427
27,986
1,369,218
29,600
60–64
1,127,147
30,481
1,050,415
29,897
65–69
795,652
28,397
767,452
28,584
70–74
691,433
30,686
514,517
28,476
75+
830,614
78,677
892,543
48,005
Total 
46,429,823
540,427
46,586,607
550,914
Calculate and interpret: 
1)	Laspeyre-type CMI 
2)	Paasche-type CMI 
3)	Marshall-Edgeworth-type CMI 
4)	Fisher’s Ideal-type CMI. 
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com

DEMOGRAPHIC STATISTICS
305
LIFE TABLE
7	
LIFE TABLE
7.1	
INTRODUCTION 
7.1.1  WHAT IS LIFE TABLE? 
The life table is another and effective way of expressing the death rates experienced by a 
population during a chosen period of time. 
The death rates we have discussed so far are “observed rates” and “standardised rates”. The 
problem in using these rates as levels of death rates is that they reflect the effects of the age 
distribution of an actual population (as in the case of central rates) or requires the adoption 
of a standard population for acceptable comparisons of levels of mortality in different 
populations (as in the case of standardised rates). Besides, both are not true probabilities. 
The mortality rates (see Sections 6.5–6.7) though are probabilities and are specific by age, 
relate to a one-year period, but as it will be indicated in the next chapter, reproductivity is 
expressed in terms of a generation. Again, the discussions in Chapter 6 show the mortality 
conditions of individual groups or of total populations. To overcome the problems discussed 
above, the life table is used. It best expresses the pattern of human mortality. It presents a 
detailed picture of a population that systematically gets depleted through deaths at each age.
Keyfitz (1968) defines the life table as “…a scheme for expressing the form of mortality in 
terms of probabilities”. He further states “It is also a population model, covering the simplest 
case which is worth discussing: a cohort or group of people born at the same moment, 
closed to migration and followed through successive ages until they die. Like other successful 
models, the life table has given its shape to the natural world; we are incapable of thinking 
of population change and mortality from any other starting point.”
The life table (sometimes referred to as the mortality table), is one form of combining 
mortality rates of a population at different ages into a single statistical model. Ramakumar 
(1986) defines a life table as “a statistical history of a hypothetical cohort of persons born 
at an instant of time, followed through till all the members of the cohort are no more”. 
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com

DEMOGRAPHIC STATISTICS
306
LIFE TABLE
Mathematically, suppose P0 individuals are born at an instant of time. Suppose that these 
individuals are observed at the end of each year. What would happen is that the number 
in the cohort would decrease to P1, P2, · · · , Pω, where Pω is zero, if ω is the highest number 
of years the last person lived. The sequence P0, P1, P2, · · · , Pω describes the death process 
in a cohort. That is, the life table model conceptually traces a cohort of new-born babies 
through their entire life under the assumption that they are subject to the current observed 
schedule of age-specific mortality rates. The cohort of new-born babies, called the radix of 
the table, is usually taken to be 100,000. 
7.1.2  HISTORICAL BACKGROUND OF LIFE TABLE 
The first published table of mortality or life table expectancies is attributed to the Roman 
jurisconsulate Æ milius Macer, who authored a table to capitalise annuities. The table dates 
to about the year 225 A.D. Macer’s table, though used for its simplicity, was considered 
arbitrary. A more correct schedule was developed by Ulpian. Ulpian’s table was considered 
more correct than that of Macer because it reflected actual life expectancies. In 1570, 
Girolamo Cardano proposed that the expectancy of life is a linear decreasing function of 
age x. In 1662, John Graunt tabulated the number of deaths based on the study “Bill of 
Mortality” on the city of London in 1658. This was a rudimentary life table which became 
the origin of the concept of life table as we know it today. However, Graunt’s life table was 
defective because it was based on mortality experience alone. 
The first ‘modern’ mortality table is usually credited to Edmund Halley who in 1693 
constructed a life table based on data from the city of Breslau in Poland. Halley’s Table was 
thought to be “…the best as well as the first of its kind”. It was based on birth and death 
data during the years 1687 to 1691 and contained most of the columns of the modern life 
table. It set the stage for a new era of applications which extended to annuities, pensions 
and insurance, and had replaced Ulpian’s Table after 1600 years of use. Halley’s Table became 
the accepted standard of its time. However, Halley’s life table could not be correct because 
it was based on the assumption that the population had remained stationary31 which was 
not entirely correct.
Various attempts at constructing life tables were made in the 17th and 18th centuries on 
the basis of limited data. Antoine de Parcieux (1746) is well known for his development and 
calculations of life expectancies. The first to prepare a scientifically correct life table based on 
both population and death data classified by age was by Milne and was published in 1815. 
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com

DEMOGRAPHIC STATISTICS
307
LIFE TABLE
7.1.3  USES OF LIFE TABLE 
Although the basic objectives of life table is to give a clear picture of the age distribution 
of mortality in a given population group, it has been used widely in a large number of 
spheres. Today, life table is widely accepted as an important basic material in demographic 
and public health studies. In the words of William Farr, life table is the ‘Biometer’ of the 
population. Among the uses of the life table are the following.
1)	The life table is designed essentially for the purpose of measuring mortality, 
survivorship, and life expectation. It has proved to be the most useful and reliable 
model to date in the study of these phenomena even though the assumptions 
underlying its use may not be reasonable in real life situation. There has been no 
superior method suggested so far. The life table provides answers to questions such 
as the following: 
a)	What is the probability of dying within one year of persons at each age? 
b)	What is the probability that persons of specified age will survive a specified 
number of years? 
c)	How many persons, out of selected number of persons living at some initial age, 
survive on the average to each attained age? 
2)	The life table is used by demographers, actuaries and many others to: 
a)	study longevity, fertility, reproductivity, migration, and population growth, 
b)	make projections of population size and characteristics, 
c)	make relative comparison of various measures of mortality such as, death rate, 
expectation of life for two or more different groups of populations, 
3)	The life table readily permits making mortality allowances for age cohort, eliminating 
the burden of compiling data on death for age cohorts from annual death statistics 
by age even when the latter are available. 
4.	The life table, based on the scientific use of statistical methods, is the pivot on 
which the whole science of life assurance hinges to: 
a)	form the basis for determining the rates of premium necessary to various amount 
of life assurance; 
b)	provide the actuarial scientist with a sound foundation, for converting the 
insurance business from a mere gambling in human lives to the ability to offer 
well calculated safeguard in the event of death. 
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com

DEMOGRAPHIC STATISTICS
308
LIFE TABLE
308
7.1.4  TYPES OF LIFE TABLE 
Life Table Classified According to Reference Year
Life tables may be classified as cohort or current according to the reference year of the table. 
Cohort Life Table
The cohort life table, also called longitudinal life table or generation life table, takes a 
real cohort (group of people) that began life during a specified interval and follows them 
in subsequent years, until all have died. Thus, the cohort life table is constructed on basis 
of the sequence P0, P1, P2, · · · , Pω.
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
AXA Global 
Graduate Program
Find out more and apply

DEMOGRAPHIC STATISTICS
309
LIFE TABLE
The main advantage of the cohort life tables is its conceptual simplicity. In fact it is the 
cohort life table that agrees with the definition of a life table. Its main disadvantage is the 
very long time for which data are required and to which mortality risks are referred. The 
upper limit of human life is about 100 years, that is, the life span of a cohort represented 
by ω can be anywhere near 100 years or more. Therefore, the study of the sequence of 
death process till the last person in the cohort is dead requires long period of waiting. This 
makes the cohort life table limited in use and only suitable to study mortality of insects and 
plants that have short life span. Furthermore, even when such tables can be constructed, 
they represent an amalgam of the mortality experience over a very long period. 
Current Life Table
A current life table, also referred to as cross sectional life table, period life table or time-
specific life table, employs data for a single cross section of time to represent an entire 
generation. In current life table, a sequence l0, l1, l2, · · · , lω depicting current mortality 
pattern of a given population is constructed to represent the death process P0, P1, P2, · · · , Pω 
in the cohort.
The main advantage of the current life tables is that it provides measures localised in time. 
For example, it helps us answer a question such as: “What is the change in expectation of 
life at birth from one year to the next”. Its main disadvantage is its conceptual complexity. 
In fact we need to make several adaptations to get current life table approximated to the 
definition of a life table. One approximation is to consider a population as a synthetic 
cohort (see Section 5.3). The approximations, however, do not belittle the usefulness of the 
current life table and, in practice, for human populations it is the current life tables that 
mostly are constructed. Consequently, in this text, by life table, unless otherwise specified, 
we mean current life table. 
Life Table Classified According to Length of Age Interval
Life tables may also be classified according to the length of the age interval in which the data 
are presented. By this classification, there are two types of life tables: complete (unabridged) 
and abridged. 
Complete Life Table
A complete life table contains data for every single year of age from birth to the last 
applicable age. Sometimes, to economise on space, the basic values from complete life tables 
are presented only for every fifth age.
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com

DEMOGRAPHIC STATISTICS
310
LIFE TABLE
Abridged Life Table
An abridged life table, on the other hand, contains data by intervals of 5 or 10 years, 
except in the initial years. It is the abridge life tables that most users frequently encounter. 
Life Table Classified According to Number of Characteristics Considered
Life tables may be classified as single decrement or multiple decrement according to the 
number of characteristics considered in the table. 
Single Decrement Table
In a single decrement life table, only one cause of death and only one characteristic are 
considered at a time. This table is concerned with the general experience of a cohort by age. 
Multiple Decrement Table
In a multiple decrement life table, the separate and combined effects of more than one 
characteristic are described. This table may consider more than one causes of death and/or 
more than one characteristics at a time.
7.1.5  STATIONARY AND STABLE POPULATIONS 
The concepts of stationary and stable populations are important in the discussion of life 
tables and we introduce them now.
Stationary Population
A population is said to be stationary if it is of constant size and constant age-sex composition 
over time. Such a population may be conceived of under the following conditions. 
1)	If every year, the number of births is exactly l0 (say) and is equal to the number 
of deaths and these are distributed uniformly throughout the year, and 
2)	if the population is not affected by emigration or immigration. 
That is, for a stationary population, the growth rate is zero. This condition cannot remain 
the same for a long period of time and so no human population remains stationary, either 
in its size or in its structure. Populations continue to grow because birth and death rates 
tend to differ and consequently the age structure too will be constantly changing.
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com

DEMOGRAPHIC STATISTICS
311
LIFE TABLE
Stable Population
The concept of a stable population is due to A.J. Lotka. A population is said to be stable 
1.	if it has a fixed age and sex distribution32, 
2.	if constant but different death and birth rates are experienced at each age, and 
3.	if the population is closed to emigration or immigration. 
In other words, for a stable population, the overall rates of births and deaths remain constant 
but different from each other and consequently such a population increases at a constant 
rate, thus supporting the Malthus Law (Compound Interest Law) of population growth. 
In particular, if the constant overall birth and death rates are equal, then the population 
size remains fixed and in this case stable population becomes stationary population. That 
is, a stationary population is a special case of stable population when the rate of growth of 
stable population is zero.
7.2	
LIFE TABLE FUNCTIONS, DEFINITIONS AND THEIR 
RELATIONSHIPS 
Consider a single individual, aged 0, who lives through age x to an ultimate possible age 
ω. We define the following life table functions and establish their relationships.
Age: x
Age x means exact age, however, in other tables, it may refer to age interval.
Radix: l0
It is an assumed number of births at age 0. It is usually called the cohort or radix of the 
life table, and usually taken as 100,000. This is to make a convenient comparison of various 
life tables. For mathematical purposes, l0 is taken as one33. 
Survivors at Age x: lx
It is the number of persons living at any specified age x in any year out of an assumed 
number of births l0. It is referred to as number of survivors. 
Survivors at Age x + 1: lx+1
It is the number of persons living at age (x + 1) in any year; 
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com

DEMOGRAPHIC STATISTICS
312
LIFE TABLE
Number of Deaths34: dx
It is the number of persons among the lx persons (attaining a precise age x) who die before 
reaching the age (x + 1), that is, 
dx = lx −lx+1
Probability of Survivorship: px
It is the probability that a person aged x survives up to his/her next birthday x + 1. This 
is computed as 
px = lx+1
lx
Mortality Rate: qx
It is the probability that a person of exact age x will die within one year following the 
attainment of that age. This is obtained as: 
qx = lx −lx+1
lx
= 1 −px
Thus, qx is the complementary to the probability of survival, px.
It may also be defined as: 
qx = dx
lx
so that 
dx = lxqx
That is, dx is equal to the number of people who reach age x, multiplied by the probability 
of dying before reaching the next higher age x + 1. Since 
dx = lx −lx+1
by definition 
lx+1
=
lx −dx
=
lx −lxqx
=
lx(1 −qx)
=
lxpx
so that lx
=
l0px
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com

DEMOGRAPHIC STATISTICS
313
LIFE TABLE
313
Person Years: Lx
It is the number of years lived in the aggregate by the cohort of lx persons between exact 
age x and exact age (x + 1) of persons alive at age x. It is referred to as person-years lived 
and is equivalent to the population. It is, therefore, called the life-table population.35
Under the stationary conditions, Lx in each year will always be the same. If lx is assumed 
linear, that is, when deaths at any age x (except first few years) are assumed to be uniformly 
distributed, Lx becomes the mid-year population and is given by:
Lx = 1.lx + 0.5(lx −lx+1)
Hence, 
Lx = 1
2(lx + lx+1),	
for x ≥2
That is, it is assumed that a person dying between the age x and (x + 1), on an average, 
lives 0.5 years.
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
ibili
because 
e Graduate Programme  
for Engineers and Geoscientists
Month 16
I was a construction
supervisor in 
the North Sea 
advising and 
helping foremen 
solve problems
I was a
he
s
Real work 
International opportunities 

ree work placements
al 
Internationa
or

ree wo
I wanted real responsibili 
 I joined MITAS because 
www.discovermitas.com

DEMOGRAPHIC STATISTICS
314
LIFE TABLE
We may also define Lx as: 
Lx = lx −1
2dx
For ages 0 and 1, the linearity assumption is not valid and in these cases, other approximations 
are applied. 
For age 0, the approximate value of Lx is given by: 
L0
=
1.l1 + 0.3(l0 −l1)
=
0.3l0 + 0.7l1
That is, it is assumed that a person dying before the age of one year, on an average, lives 
0.3 years. 
For age 1, the approximate value of Lx is given by: 
L1
=
1.l1 + 0.4(l1 −l2)
=
0.4l1 + 0.6l2
That is, it is assumed that a person dying between the age one year and two, on an average, 
lives 0.4 years.
It is important to note that the weights adopted for ages 0 and 1 are not to be taken as 
universally applicable. Even though these may be used typically for developing countries, 
it is important to derive one for each individual case. 
For the older ages, the probabilities of dying tend to be erratic, since they are computed 
from small populations. Generally, therefore, the probabilities of dying at an old age are 
obtained by graduation method.36 However, it is also quite adequate to end the life table 
with an open age interval, say 75 years and over (75+), without estimating the probabilities 
of dying, and other life table functions at high ages (over 75 years). 
Person Years Lived After x: Tx
It is the number of years lived by the cohort lx (persons alive at age x) after attaining the 
age x, that is, the total number of years remaining to the cohort when it reaches age x until 
the last person dies at age ω. It is usually considered as the total future life time of the lx 
persons who reach age x. 
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com

DEMOGRAPHIC STATISTICS
315
LIFE TABLE
The value of Tx for any age x is obtained by cumulating Lx from x to ω. Thus, 
Tx =
w

y=x
Ly
where ω is the highest age attainable.
That is, 
Tx = Lx + Lx+1 + Lx+2 + · · · + Lw
We also have the following relation: 
Lx = Tx −Tx+1
Tx = Lx + Tx+1
If we consider the approximation Lx = 1
2(lx+lx+1), Tx can also be written as: 
Tx =
w−1

y=x
1
2(lx + lx+1)
Survival “Rate”: Px
The survival rate, is in fact, the probability of surviving between two completed years. It 
is defined as 
Px = Lx+1
Lx
where Lx, as noted earlier, are the survivors at completed age x.
Using Lx equal to 1
2(lx + lx+1), we can write 
Px = lx+1 + lx+2
lx + lx+1
The probability of surviving from birth (Pb) is 
Pb = L0
l0
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com

DEMOGRAPHIC STATISTICS
316
LIFE TABLE
Expectation of Life:
The expectation of life, which is commonly referred to as the life expectancy, is one of the 
indicators of the health status of a country. It is the expected number (in statistical sense) 
of years of life remaining at a given age, assuming constant mortality rates.. 
Curtate Expectation of Life: ex
The curtate expectation of life, which may be referred to as curtate life expectancy, is the 
average number of complete years of life lived by the cohort l0 after age x by each of lx 
persons attaining that age. It is defined as 
ex = lx+l + lx+2 + · · · + lw
lx
It is called curate expectation of life in the sense that it ignores the actual or average years 
really lived.
The curtate expectation of life is related to the probability of survivorship by the following 
relation: 
px =
ex
1 + ex
Complete Expectation of Life: e0
x
The complete expectation of life, which may be referred to as complete life expectancy, is the 
average number of additional years a person aged x is expected to live under the prevailing 
mortality conditions. It is defined as 
e0
x = Tx
lx
It is called the complete expectation of life in the sense that it gives the number of years of 
life entirely completed under the prevailing mortality conditions thus including the fraction 
of the year survived in the year in which death occurs, which on the average can be taken 
to be 
1
2 year. Hence 
e0
x = Tx
lx
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com

DEMOGRAPHIC STATISTICS
317
LIFE TABLE
In general, the expectation of life at age x decreases with age x. However, it is often observed 
in populations with high infant mortality that the expectation of life at age one year is 
higher than that at birth. This is due to the fact that in such populations, the risk of dying 
is extremely high in the first year of life and once the child attains the age of one year, the 
chance of survival increases. 
Expectation of Life at Birth: e0
x
The expectation of life at birth, also called life expectancy at age zero or the mean length 
of life, is the number of years of life a new born child can expect to live. It is defined as: 
e0
0 = T0
l0
Note 
1)	The higher the expectation of life, the better the health of the country. 
2)	Expectation of life is higher in developed countries than in developing countries. 
3)	Women usually have higher expectation of life than men. 
The mean length of life is of special significance because it is used to measure 
1)	the average longetivity of a person in a given community;
2)	the average age at death, an index of mortality conditions. 
Note 
1)	Life expectancy is different from longevity. Life expectancy is a statistical concept as 
defined above. Problems such as war, diseases, famine and poor health can reduce 
expectation of life while improvements in health and welfare increases it. Besides, 
life expectancy is an average, and so a particular person may die many years before 
or many years after their “expected” survival. Longevity refers to the characteristics 
of the relatively long life span of some members of a population. 
2)	In actual population observed during a certain period of time, the average age at 
death is not equal to the mean length of life because of 
a)	the impact of migration; 
b)	differential mortality experiences; 
c)	differential cohort population numbers. 
It is only in a stationary population that the two measures are identical. 
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com

DEMOGRAPHIC STATISTICS
318
LIFE TABLE
318
Life Table Birth and Death Rates 
In a stationary population, where the number of births (B) and the number of deaths (D) 
are equal, the life table crude birth rate (b∗) is also equal to the life table death rate (d∗)
and computed as: 
b∗= d∗= l0
T0
where l0 =
ω

x=0
dx and T0 =
ω

x=0
Lx.
Thus, in a stationary population, the crude death and birth rates are the reciprocal of the 
expectation of life at birth.
7.3	
CONSTRUCTION OF LIFE TABLES 
The life table is constructed from census data (which provides the mid-year population) and 
death registration data from vital registration or retrospective surveys. They are generally 
constructed for age or for different population subgroups. For example, life tables may be 
constructed for different sexes, ethnic groups and occupational groups, etc. 
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
MASTER IN MANAGEMENT
mim.admissions@ie.edu
Follow us on IE MIM Experience
www.ie.edu/master-management
#10 WORLDWIDE
MASTER IN MANAGEMENT 
FINANCIAL TIMES
55 Nationalities
in class
5 Specializations
Personalize your program 
Length: 1O MONTHS
Av. Experience: 1 YEAR
Language: ENGLISH / SPANISH
Format: FULL-TIME
Intakes: SEPT / FEB
• STUDY IN THE CENTER OF MADRID AND TAKE ADVANTAGE OF THE UNIQUE OPPORTUNITIES
  THAT THE CAPITAL OF SPAIN OFFERS
• PROPEL YOUR EDUCATION BY EARNING A DOUBLE DEGREE THAT BEST SUITS YOUR
  PROFESSIONAL GOALS
• STUDY A SEMESTER ABROAD AND BECOME A GLOBAL CITIZEN WITH THE BEYOND BORDERS
  EXPERIENCE
93%
OF MIM STUDENTS ARE
WORKING IN THEIR SECTOR 3 MONTHS
FOLLOWING GRADUATION

DEMOGRAPHIC STATISTICS
319
LIFE TABLE
7.3.1  ASSUMPTIONS IN CONSTRUCTION OF LIFE TABLE 
The following are a few simplified assumptions which are used in the construction of the 
life tables. 
1)	The cohort is closed to migration. In other words, death is the only factor causing 
number of members in the cohort at various ages to reduce. 
2)	Individuals die at each age according to pre-determined mortality schedule which 
is fixed and unchanged. 
3)	the cohort originates from some standard number of births, say 10,000 or 1,000,000 
which is called the radix of the life table. 
4)	Except for the first few years, the deaths are distributed uniformly over the period 
(x, x + 1) for each x. In other words, deaths are uniformly distributed between one 
birthday and the next. 
7.3.2  CONSTRUCTING LIFE TABLE 
A typical life table has generally the following columns:
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
x
lx
dx
qx
Lx
Tx
e◦
x
The various symbols entering in this table are as defined above. 
Data on lx are Available 
Suppose we have age x and lx alone, we can use the relations in Section 7.2 to construct 
the entire life table. 
Example 7.1
The following is the part of a life table for the young population of a community.
x
0 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6
lx 
100 
95 
80 
75 
55 
40 
0 
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com

DEMOGRAPHIC STATISTICS
320
LIFE TABLE
Complete the columns for dx, qx, Lx, Tx, and e0
x.
Solution
Computation of dx:
dx
=
lx −lx+1
d0
=
l0 −l1
=
100 −95
=
5
...
...
...
...
d6
=
l6 −l7
=
40 −0
=
40
The remaining dx are given in column (3) of Table 7.1. 
Computation of qx: 
qx
=
dx
lx
q0
=
d0
l0
=
5
100
=
0.05
...
...
...
...
q5
=
d5
l5
=
40
40
=
1.00
The remaining qx are given in column (4) of Table 7.1. 
Computation of Lx: 
Lx
=
1
2 (lx + lx+1)
L0
=
1
2 (l0 + l1)
=
1
2(100 + 95)
=
97.5
...
...
...
...
L5
=
1
2 (l5 + l6)
=
1
2(40 + 0)
=
20.0
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com

DEMOGRAPHIC STATISTICS
321
LIFE TABLE
Computation of Tx: 
Tx
=
Lx + Lx+1 + Lx+2 + · · ·
T0
=
Lx + Lx+1 + Lx+2 + Lx+3 + Lx+4 + Lx+5
=
97.5 + 87.5 + 77.5 + 65 + 47.5 + 20
=
395.0
T1
=
Lx+1 + Lx+2 + Lx+3 + Lx+4 + Lx+5
=
87.5 + 77.5 + 65 + 47.5 + 20
=
297.5
T2
=
Lx+2 + Lx+3 + Lx+4 + Lx+5
=
77.5 + 65 + 47.5 + 20
=
210.0
...
...
...
T5
=
Lx+5
=
20.0
Alternatively, after obtaining T0, we can calculate the remaining values of Tx+1 as follows: 
Tx+1
=
Tx −Lx
T1
=
T0 −L0
=
395 −97.5
=
297.5
T2
=
T1 −L1
=
297.5 −87.5
=
210.0
...
...
...
...
T5
=
T4 −L4
=
67.5 −47.5
=
20.0
Computation of e◦
x: 
e◦
x
=
Tx
lx
e◦
0
=
T0
l0
=
395
100
=
3.95
e◦
1
=
T1
l1
=
297.5
95
=
3.13
...
...
...
...
e◦
5
=
T5
l5
=
20
40
=
0.5
The remaining e◦
x are given in column (7) of Table 7.1.
The complete life table for the above data is given in Table 7.1.
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com

DEMOGRAPHIC STATISTICS
322
LIFE TABLE
Age x
lx
dx = lx −lx+1
qx
Lx = lx+lx+1
2
Tx
e◦
x = Tx
lx
(1) 
(2) 
(3) 
(4)=(3)/(2) 
(5) 
(6) 
(7)=(6)/(2)
0
100 
5 
0.05 
97.5 
395.0 
3.95
1
95 
15 
0.16 
87.5 
297.5 
3.13
2
85 
5 
0.06 
77.5 
210.0 
2.63
3
75 
20 
0.27 
65.0 
132.5 
1.77
4
55 
15 
0.27 
47.5 
67.5 
1.23
5
40 
40 
1.00 
20.0 
20.0 
0.50
6
0 
 – 
 – 
 – 
 – 
 – 
TABLE 7.1 Construction of Complete Life Table for Example 7.1
Data on lx are Not Available
Except l0 which is arbitrarily chosen, the problem is to obtain the lx, the reason for which 
we resort to current life table. In general, the mortality rate qx is the basic function in the 
table through which a current life table establishes its connection with real life. It, therefore, 
serves as the initial function from which all other life table functions are derived. The only 
other data which are needed are, of course, the radix l0. The qx column is thus called the 
pivotal column of the life table. Starting with radix l0 and qx, (x = 0, 1, 2 · · ·) we have 
d0
=
l0q0
and
l1 = l0 −d0
d1
=
l1q1
and
l2 = l1 −d1
...
=
...
dx
=
lxqx
and
lx = lx−1 −dx−1
and so on. From these values of lx, (x = 0, 1, 2 · · ·) the column Lx, Tx and e◦
x of the table can 
now be completed using the relationship in Section 7.2.
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com

DEMOGRAPHIC STATISTICS
323
LIFE TABLE
323
Example 7.2
Fill in the blanks in a portion of life table given below:
Age in 
years 
lx 
x
d  
xp  
x
q  
x
L  
xT  

xe
4
92,000 
480 
? 
? 
? 
3,500,300
?
5
? 
400 
? 
? 
? 
? 
?
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more

DEMOGRAPHIC STATISTICS
324
LIFE TABLE
Solution
In the usual notations, we have 
l5
=
l4 −d4
=
92, 000 −480
=
91, 520
p4
=
l5
l4
=
91, 520
92, 000
=
0.9948
q4
=
1 −p4
=
1 −0.9948
=
0.0052
l6
=
l5 −d5
=
91, 520 −400
=
91, 120
p5
=
l6
l5
=
91, 120
91, 520
=
0.9956
q5
=
1 −p5
=
1 −0.9956
=
0.0044
L4
=
l4 + l5
2
=
92, 000 + 91, 520
2
=
91, 760
L5
=
l5 + l6
2
=
91, 520 + 91, 120
2
=
91, 320
e◦
4
=
T4
l4
=
3, 500, 300
92000
=
38.05
T5
=
T4 −L4
=
3, 500, 300 −91, 760
=
3, 408, 540
e◦
5
=
T5
l5
=
3, 408, 540
91, 520
=
37.24
There results are presented in Table 7.2.
Age in 
years 
xl
x
d  
xp  
x
q  
x
L  
xT  

xe
4
92,000 
480 
0.9947 
0.0052 
91760 
3,500,300 
38.05
5
91,520 
400 
0.9956 
0.0044 
91320 
3,408,540 
37.24
TABLE 7.2 Construction of a Portion of Complete Life Table for Example 7.2
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com

DEMOGRAPHIC STATISTICS
325
LIFE TABLE
Example 7.3
Complete the life table of the population of a certain community for the first 9 years 
(l0 = 1, 000).
x
0 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
7 
8 
qx
0.118 
0.016 
0.030 
0.080 
0.150 
0.700 
0.900
0.920 
0.980 
Solution
Since we are given the values of qx in order to complete the life table, first of all we shall 
find the values of lx (x = 0, 1, 2, · · · , 8) by using the relations
qx = dx
lx  and lx+1 = lx −dx
We are given l0 = 1000.
d0
=
l0q0
=
1000 × 0.118
=
118.00
l1
=
l0 −d0
=
1000 −118.000
=
882.00
d1
=
l1q1
=
882 × 0.016
=
14.11
l2
=
l1 −d1
=
882 −14.110
=
867.89
d2
=
l2q2
=
867.89 × 0.030
=
26.04
...
=
...
l8
=
l7 −d7
=
19.75 −18.170
=
1.58
d8
=
l8q8
=
1.58 × 0.980
=
1.55
The values of lx and dx (x = 0, 1, 2, · · · 8) obtained are given in Table 7.3. The remaining 
columns of the life table, namely, Lx, Tx and e◦
x can now be completed as discussed in 
Example 7.1. This is given as an exercise.
We have seen above that the complete life table can be constructed if we know the values 
of l0 and qx, (x = 0, 1, 2, · · ·). The values of qx are obtained from the central mortality rate. 
The central mortality or death rate is the probability that a person whose exact age is not 
known but lies in between x and (x+1) will die within one year following the attainment 
of that age.
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com

DEMOGRAPHIC STATISTICS
326
LIFE TABLE
x
qx
lx
dx = lxqx
0
0.118
1000.000
118.000
1
0.016
882.000
14.112
2
0.030
867.888
26.037
3
0.080
841.851
67.348
4
0.150
774.503
116.175
5
0.700
658.328
460.829
6
0.900
197.498
177.748
7
0.920
19.750
18.170
8
0.980
1.580
1.548
TABLE 7.3 Calculation of the Functions lx and dx of Example 7.3
Age-specific Death Rates are Available
The age specific death rate is denoted by mx and is given by the expression 
mx = dx
Lx
= Numer of deaths within age interval x to (x +1)
Average lx of the cohort in that interval
where the mean population Lx replaces the population exposed to risk in the denominator 
Lx in the definition qx = dx
lx .
The mx are computed on the basis of census record and death registration data. From mx, 
we obtain qx as: 
qx =
2mx
2 + mx
It should be borne in mind that the construction of the life table from the death registers 
as outlined above will yield reliable results only if the population has been stationary over 
a period at least equal to the age of the oldest survivor.
In practice, mx is not easy to obtain and in its place we use the age specific death rates 
Mx defined as37 
Mx =
Deaths in a year at age x
Mid-year population at age x
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com

DEMOGRAPHIC STATISTICS
327
LIFE TABLE
The formula rests on the assumption that deaths between ages x and 
1
+
x
 are evenly 
distribution. This assumption is not satisfied for early ages especially for x = 0, since the 
risk of dying is generally very high in the first few weeks after birth and continues to be 
high in the early ages, say, x = 0, 1, 2 but declines sharply thereafter. 
7.3.3  LIMITATIONS OF COMPLETE LIFE TABLE 
The discussions so far concern complete life tables, that is, life tables constructed for every 
single year of age from birth to the last applicable age. Complete life tables 
1)	are unwieldy and their computations are tedious; 
2)	can be constructed at the expense of reliability when single year data are inaccurate 
or are unavailable. 
7.4	
ABRIDGED LIFE TABLE 
7.4.1  WHY ABRIDGED LIFE TABLE? 
We have discussed so far what is called a complete life table in which the age interval is a 
year throughout the table and life table functions such as lx, qx, mx  etc., are given for all 
integral values of x. We construct the abridged life table to overcome the problems faced 
in the construction of complete life table. Abridge life tables 
1)	Are less burdensome to prepare and are often more convenient to use. Few people 
have either the time or the skill for the detailed computation of the complete life table 
2)	Are found to be adequate and useful in most of the situations encountered in 
demographic analysis. 
3)	Require less exact data. Most often data are not adequate to compute a complete 
life table. The data usually available to us are the specific death rates for sub-groups 
of the population; 
4)	Reduce the systematic and random errors by suitably grouping the values of x; 
5)	Are alternative ways of overcoming graduation using Gompertz or Makehams Law 
or by some other summation formula.
In an abridged life table, as the name suggest, the values of these functions are given either for 
1)	some integral values of x which are at some distance apart, usually 5 years or 10 
years; or 
2)	age groups of values of x, usually of width 5 years or 10 years. 
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com

DEMOGRAPHIC STATISTICS
328
LIFE TABLE
328
7.4.2  RELATIONSHIPS AMONG VARIOUS ABRIDGED LIFE TABLE FUNCTIONS 
In an abridged life table, the functions carry two subscripts, for example, ndx. The first 
subscript, n, indicates the number of completed years over which the interval extends. The 
second subscript, x, indicates the exact age at which the interval commences. Thus ndx 
indicates the deaths experienced within the interval extending from x to x + n.  Similar to 
the complete life table, a typical abridged life table consist of the following columns.38
1)	 x to (x + n) – exact age interval; 
2)	lx+n – the number of persons out of a cohort of lx persons; living at the beginning 
of the interval x to x + n.  
3)	npx – the probability that a person aged x survives up to age x + n and is given by 
	
npx = lx+n
lx
implying that 
	
lx+n = lx ×n px
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
“The perfect start 
of a successful, 
international career.”
CLICK HERE 
to discover why both socially 
and academically the University 
of Groningen is one of the best 
places for a student to be 
www.rug.nl/feb/education
Excellent Economics and Business programmes at:

DEMOGRAPHIC STATISTICS
329
LIFE TABLE
4)	 nqx – the probability of the person dying in the age interval (x to x + n) and is 
given by 
	
nqx = 1 −n px
or 
	
nqx = 1 −lx+n
lx
From the age specific death rate of the age group, assuming that lx is linear, 
	
nqx =
2n ·n mx
2 + n ·n mx
where nmx is the death rate of age group (x to x + n) 
5)	ndx – the number of deaths in the interval (x to x + n) and is given by 
	
We may also deduce that 
	
nqx = ndx
lx
so that 
	
ndx = lx ×n qx
6)	nLx – the number of person-years lived by the cohort during the interval between 
x and x + n and is given by 
	
nLx = n
2 (lx + lx+n)
under the condition of linearity of lx.
If we assume that those who died during an n-year interval live on the average n/2 years, 
then 
	
nLx = nlx −1
2(ndx)
or 
	
nLx = nlx+1 −n
2 (ndx)
ndx = lx −lx+n
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com

DEMOGRAPHIC STATISTICS
330
LIFE TABLE
7)	Tx – the number of persons lived after age x, defined as:
	
Tx =n Lx +n Lx+n +n Lx+2n + · · · +n Ly
8)	eo
x – complete expectation of life at age x and is given by 
	
eo
x = Tx
lx
or 
	
eo
x = n
2
n(lx+n + lx+2n + lx+3n + · · ·)
lx
9)	 nPx –  probability of surviving between two groups of completed years is given by 
	
nPx = lx+n + lx+2n
lx + lx+n
The probability of surviving from birth (nPb) is 
	
nPb = nL0
nl0
7.4.2  METHODS FOR CONSTRUCTING ABRIDGED LIFE TABLE 
The method of constructing the abridge life table discussed above assumes that lx is linear. 
It has been verified that when nmx > 0.4 for n = 5, nqx > 1, which is clearly incompatible 
since nqx is a probability. Other methods suggested among them are: 
1)	Reed-Merrell’s Method; 
2)	Greville’s Method; 
3)	King’s Method; 
4)	Keyfitz-Frauenthal’s Method; 
5)	Chieng’s. 
These have not been discussed here. Refer to other text (Pressat, 1972; Shryock, et al, 1976; 
Ramakumar, 1986). 
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com

DEMOGRAPHIC STATISTICS
331
LIFE TABLE
All these methods suffer from one defect or another. The Reed – Merrel’s method on the 
whole, gives fairly accurate results and to date, it is widely adopted for constructing abridge 
life tables. King’s method is old and has practically no use in the present day context.
EXERCISES
7.1	
Refer to Example 7.2. Compute Lx, Tx and eo
x. 
7.2	
The following is part of a life table. Complete dx, qx, Lx, Tx and eo
x.
x 
0 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
lx
100 
95 
85 
70 
65 
35 
0 
7.3	
Fill in the blanks in a portion of the life table given below:
Age in 
years 
lx
dx 
px 
qx 
Lx 
Tx 
e◦
x
4
954,445 
? 
? 
? 
? 
48,500,256 
?
5
920,491 
 
? 
? 
? 
? 
?
7.4	
Fill in the blanks which are marked with question marks in the following table:
Age x 
lx 
dx 
qx 
px 
Lx 
Tx
e◦
x
34
450,000
?
?
?
?
?
26
35
420,000
-
-
-
-
?
7.5	
Show that 
1)	 eo
x = ex + 1
2
eo
x = 1
2 + w
n=1 npx
2)	 eo
x = ex + 1
2
eo
x = 1
2 + w
n=1 npx
where npx is the probability of survival from age x to n + x 
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com

DEMOGRAPHIC STATISTICS
332
LIFE TABLE
7.6	
Show that 
mx =
2mx
2 + mx
7.7	
The complete expectation of life at age 25 and 26 for a particular group of people 
are, respectively, 20.54 and 21.44 years and that the number living at age 25 is 
32,345. Find the number that attains the age 26.
7.8	
Complete the life table of the population of a certain community for the first 9 
years (l0 = 1, 000):
x 
0 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
7 
8 
qx 
0.236 
0.032 
0.060 
0.160 
0.300 
0.800 
0.500
0.710 
0.850 
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com

DEMOGRAPHIC STATISTICS
333
MEASURES OF FERTILITY
333
8	
MEASURES OF FERTILITY
8.1	
INTRODUCTION
The term “fertility”, “natality”, and “birth”, are often used synonymously even though 
“natality” is more general referring to the demographic phenomena in connection with 
birth. In particular, it may be considered from the point of view of the individuals who 
are born or from the point of view of mothers who give birth to a child (or of couples 
who conceive). On the other hand, we use the term “fertility” when we are studying the 
circumstances of human procreation in more detail. In fertility analysis, we often refer to 
total births, which include live births and “stillbirths”. However, since it is only a live birth 
that augments the existing population, only live births are considered in measuring fertility, 
thus excluding stillbirths. Unless otherwise specified, in this and subsequent chapters, the 
word “births” will be used to mean “live births”.
8.1.1  DEFINITION OF CONCEPTS IN FERTILITY MEASUREMENT
We shall give definitions of certain vital events as are recommended by the Statistical 
Commission of the United Nations (1955) and World Health Organisation (1950). 
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
American online      
LIGS University 
▶▶enroll by September 30th, 2014 and 
▶▶save up to 16% on the tuition!
▶▶pay in 10 installments / 2 years
▶▶Interactive Online education
▶▶visit www.ligsuniversity.com to 
      find out more!
is currently enrolling in the
Interactive Online BBA, MBA, MSc, 
DBA and PhD  programs:
Note: LIGS University is not accredited by any 
nationally recognized accrediting agency listed 
by the US Secretary of Education. 
More info here. 

DEMOGRAPHIC STATISTICS
334
MEASURES OF FERTILITY
Live Birth
Live birth is the complete expulsion or extraction from its mother of a product of conception, 
irrespective of the duration of pregnancy, which, after such separation, breathes or shows 
any other evidence of life, such as beating of the heart, pulsation of the umbilical cord or 
definite movement of voluntary muscles, whether or not the umbilical cord has been cut 
or the placenta is attached. 
In order to have live birth, a woman has to pass through three stages, namely, sexual union, 
conception and parturition. 
Sexual Union
In order to become pregnant, a woman must first have sexual intercourse with a man39. An 
arrangement between a man and a woman where sexual intercourse takes place is called a 
sexual union. The frequency of sexual intercourse is called coital frequency. 
Conception
In order to give birth to a child, a woman must become pregnant. The state of pregnancy 
is what is called conception. 
Parturition
A woman must successfully complete the period of pregnancy (or gestation) and give birth to 
the child. The desire to bring forth or the process of giving birth is referred to as parturition.
Fertility
Fertility refers to the actual bearing of children or occurrence of live births. It is more 
easily measured for women because they and not men actually have the babies. Fertility 
rate, therefore, refers to the relative frequency with which births actually occur within a 
given population. 
Natality
Natality is the study of the total process of fertility and the way it affects population change. 
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com

DEMOGRAPHIC STATISTICS
335
MEASURES OF FERTILITY
Fecundity 
Fecundity refers to the physiological capacity to bear children, irrespective of whether or not 
children have been brought forth. It is, therefore, a measure of the probability that a woman 
will conceive within a menstrual cycle in the absence of contraceptives and postpartum 
abstinence. In fact, fecundity is a biological maximum value and, therefore, provides an 
upper bound for fertility. A partial reduction in fecundity means that the potential for 
offspring has declined but is not eliminated. A fecund woman may not necessarily be 
fertile, for example, if she is regulating her fertility by abstaining from sexual intercourse, 
or using contraceptive.
Sterility 
Sterility or infecundity is the lack of ability by a man, woman, or a couple to conceive or 
procreate. In such a situation no offsprings or further offsprings are possible. Sterility may 
be voluntary or involuntary.
Involuntary sterility is mainly caused by age. Fecundity, as well as age-specific fertility rates, 
reach a peak for women aged 20–29 years, then fecundity declines until menopause, around 
age 50, when the woman becomes permanently sterile. Involuntary sterility may also be 
caused by impairment of the reproductive system. At the beginning of the reproductive 
period women may be less fecund because their ovulation is irregular, and this contributes 
towards adolescent sterility. Involuntary sterility can also be related to extreme hunger and 
to venereal diseases.
Voluntary sterility is largely the result of a contraceptive or medical operation on one of 
the marital partners. Amongst the kinds of operations usually performed for contraceptive 
reasons are the vasectomy for men and tubal ligation for women.
Sterility may also be classified as primary or secondary. Primary sterility is when a person 
has never been able to produce a child. Secondary sterility is when a person, after one or 
more children have been born, is not able to produce a child. 
Puberty 
Puberty is the period of life when the sexual organs of a girl or a boy mature so that he or 
she becomes able to have children.
Menstruation
Menstruation is a period of physiologic bleeding of a woman, occurring at approximately 
4-week intervals, and having its source from the uterine inner lining. 
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com

DEMOGRAPHIC STATISTICS
336
MEASURES OF FERTILITY
Menarche 
Menarche is the first menstrual period of a girl. The age of menarche is the age at which 
a girl has her first menstrual period. 
Menopause 
A woman is said to have reached menopause when she stops having menstrual periods. 
Reproductivity 
Reproductivity is the extent to which a group is replacing itself by natural processes. The 
reproductive period (also called childbearing age or fertility age) of a woman is the period 
from menarche to menopause. For purpose of demographic analysis, the reproductive period 
is generally defined as beginning at age 15 and ending at age 50 or completed age 49.
Gravidity
Gravidity is the number of pregnancies a woman has had whether or not they resulted in 
live births.
8.2	
FERTILITY MEASUREMENT
Fertility is ascertained from the data collected by registration of births and is measured as 
the frequency of births in a population. 
8.2.1  USES OF FERTILITY MEASUREMENTS
The measures of fertility are necessarily the devices to quantify the birth performance of a 
population. They are important in determining the size and structure of the population. 
Information on fertility is, therefore, critical for the management of the population for 
social and economic development. 
Fertility measures are used to:
1)	compare the fertility levels of a number of populations during a particular time 
interval; 
2)	exhibit a time trend in fertility in a population. 
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com

DEMOGRAPHIC STATISTICS
337
MEASURES OF FERTILITY
8.2.2  COMPARISON OF FERTILITY AND MORTALITY MEASUREMENTS 
The measurement of fertility is not as direct as in the case of mortality. 
1)	Fertility deals with only a section of the population. 
i)	 It deals with only the female population. Mortality deals with both males and 
females. 
ii)	Even among the female population, fertility affects only those in the reproductive 
age. Mortality affects population of all ages. 
3)	Fertility does not deal with all women in the reproductive age group because 
fecundity is a varying factor. With regard to mortality, all sections of the population 
are subject to mortality, that is, everybody succumbs to mortality. 
4)	Fertility may be “controlled” or “natural”. Controlled fertility is when the woman 
consciously adopts contraception or other means to prevent births while natural 
fertility is fertility in the absence of any form of contraception. With regard to 
mortality, lifestyle helps to control it only to a limited extent. Death will definitely 
take place no matter what. 
5)	Unlike mortality where it is easy to establish a one-to-one correspondence between 
deaths and persons, it may not be possible to do so between births and women. 
This is because 
i)	 a conception may result in foetal wastage (abortion or still birth) or in single 
or multiple live births; 
ii)	a woman can give birth to more than one child during her life time. 
3)	Unlike mortality which can occur at any age, although the force of mortality is 
greater at the very young and older ages, fertility causes an increase of population 
at only one point, that is, births of persons aged zero. 
8.2.3  TYPES OF FERTILITY MEASURES 
Fertility measures can be classified into “period” measures and “cohort” measures. 
Period measures are based on a cross-section of the population in one year. They include 
Crude birth rate (CBR), General fertility rate (GFR) and Child-Woman Ratio (CWR). 
Cohort measures are based on data which follow the same people over a period of time. 
They include Age-specific fertility rate (ASFR), Total fertility rate (TFR), Gross Reproduction 
Rate (GRR) and Net Reproduction Rate (NRR).
The details are discussed in this and the next chapters.
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com

DEMOGRAPHIC STATISTICS
338
MEASURES OF FERTILITY
338
8.3	
CRUDE BIRTH RATE 
The crude birth rate (CBR) is one measures used to calculate the frequency or speed by 
which population is increasing. It is the direct measure of population change due to fertility. 
It is the simplest and commonest measure of fertility. 
8.3.1  DEFINITION OF CRUDE BIRTH RATE 
The crude birth rate measures the number of births in a year per 1,000 population. It is 
defined as: 
b = B
P
×
k
where 
b
= crude birth rate;
B
= total number of live births during a year;
P
= mid-year population;
k
= 1, 000
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more

DEMOGRAPHIC STATISTICS
339
MEASURES OF FERTILITY
The CBR usually lies between 10 and 55 per thousand population. 
Example 8.1
The mid-year population of Mauritius in 1989 was 1,064,000. In that year 20,875 children 
were born. Calculate the crude birth rate. 
Solution
P = 1, 064, 000
and
B = 20, 875
b
=
B
P × 1, 000
=
20, 875
1, 064, 000 × 1000 = 19.6
Interpretation
There were 19.6 births per 1,000 mid-year population in Mauritius.
8.3.2  AVERAGE CRUDE BIRTH RATE 
There are variations in the number of births from year to year even when the potential risk 
remains the same. For example, if, on one hand, a few number of births take place in a 
particular year, there is the tendency that there will be more births in the following year. On 
the other hand, if in a year, a large number of births is experienced in the population, many 
women will not be able to give birth in the following year because the exposed population 
gets reduced owing to biological causes such as postpartum amenorrhea, secondary sterility 
and gestation period. Consequently, the number of births will be reduced even when the size 
of the population might not have changed much. To overcome this difficulty in measurement, 
we calculate the average birth rate. Similar to the crude death rate (Section 6.2), we may 
calculate the following averages: 
Method 1: Mean Annual Crude Birth Rate 
¯b = 1
n
B1
P1
+ B2
P2
+ · · · + Bn
Pn

× 1, 000
Method 2: Annual Average Birth Rate 
¯b = B1 + B2 + · · · + Bn
P1 + P2 + · · · + Pn
× 1, 000
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com

DEMOGRAPHIC STATISTICS
340
MEASURES OF FERTILITY
Method 3: Mid-period Crude Birth Rate 
¯b =
1
n (B1 + B2 + · · · + Bn)
Pn/2
× 1000
where Pn/2 = the mid-period population (or usually a census figure). 
Exercise 8.1 is meant to illustrate these three methods and the reader is asked to work 
through it based on Examples 6.2, 6.3 and 6.4. 
8.3.3  ADVANTAGES AND DISADVANTAGES OF CRUDE BIRTH RATE 
The crude birth rate is analogous to the crude death rate (subsection 6.2.1), and shares the 
same advantages and shortcomings. 
Advantages of Crude Birth Rate 
1)	It is simple to calculate. 
2)	It is a simple concept and can easily be explained to laymen. 
3)	It provides an index of the relative speed at which additions are being made through 
child birth. 
Disadvantages of Crude Birth Rate 
The crude birth rate suffers from similar limitations as those of the crude death rate.
1)	It is a crude indicator of fertility because the denominator (mid-year population) 
is not really the population at risk as it includes men, children or women who are 
not in the reproductive ages. 
2)	It is not a good index for comparing levels of fertility because it is affected by the 
composition of the population with regard to age, sex and marital status. Thus, 
i)	 If there is another unusually large proportion of the population at the childbearing 
ages, we would expect birth rate to be high, even though each mother was having 
relatively few children. Such a high birth rate would be deceptive, because as 
the structure of the population changes and the proportion at the childbearing 
ages drops, the birth rate will fall, even though the same number of children 
born per mother remains the same; 
ii)	All things being equal, a population with an unusual concentration of women in 
the childbearing ages will have higher crude birth rates than another population 
that may have the same rate of childbearing per woman but that has small 
proportion of women in the childbearing ages. 
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com

DEMOGRAPHIC STATISTICS
341
MEASURES OF FERTILITY
3)	Crude birth rate would tend to underplay changes in fertility because: 
i)	 It does not tell whether changes are due to a tendency for people to have 
more or less children or merely reflects a temporary change in the ratio of the 
childbearing population to the total; 
ii)	Every birth is counted directly as an event and therefore as an addition to the 
population; consequently, both the numerator and the denomerator of the 
crude birth rate get increased and the rate will not reflect the actual chance 
of childbearing. 
In the subsequent sections we shall discuss the term “fertility rates” to refer to the incidence 
of births within the female population aged 15–49.
8.4	
GENERAL FERTILITY RATE 
The crude birth rate, as indicated earlier, suffers from the limitation that it relates the 
total number of live births to the total mid-year population. But we know that the total 
number of live births depends on the population of women of the fertile age and not on 
the entire population.
To overcome this limitation, we use the term “fertility rates” to refer to the incidence of 
births within the female population aged 15–49. One of such rates is the general fertility rate. 
8.4.1  DEFINITION OF GENERAL FERTILITY RATE 
General fertility rate (GFR), simply referred to as “fertility rate”, f, is a single ratio of all 
births to the number of women of fertile age (childbearing age): 
GFR
=
B
Wx
×
k
where	 	
B  = as defined above;
	
	
Wx  = mid-year population of women of childbearing age
(x = 15 to 44 or x = 15 to 49);
	
	
k  = 1,000.
In this text, unless otherwise stated, by women of fertile age (childbearing age) we mean 
women from 15 to 49 years of age.
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com

DEMOGRAPHIC STATISTICS
342
MEASURES OF FERTILITY
GFR is a “general” ratio in the sense that it attributes all births to all women within these 
age limits, without further distinctions among them. This places it somewhere between 
crude birth rate and age-specific fertility rate (see below).
It is important to note that GFR can be computed in situations in which the registration 
of births and the enumeration of population are satisfactory. 
Example 8.2
Using the data in Example 8.1, it was observed that the mid-year population of women 
between the ages 15 and 49 in Mauritius in 1989 was 284,229. Calculate the general 
fertility rate. 
Solution 
GFR
=
B
W15−49
×
1, 000
=
20, 875
284, 229
×
1, 000 = 73.4
There were 73.4 births per 1,000 women of childbearing age in Mauritius in 1989. 
8.4.2  ADVANTAGES AND DISADVANTAGES OF GENERAL FERTILITY RATE
Advantages of General Fertility Rate 
1)	The denominator of the GFR, when compared to the crude birth rate, approximates 
the number of persons actually exposed to the risk of bearing a child. 
2)	GFR is a typical type of standardised rate, standardised for the proportion of 
women in reproductive ages. 
3)	GFR is useful in situations in which direct evidence of births by age of parents is 
lacking. 
4)	GFR is mainly useful in comparing populations with quite dissimilar age compositions. 
5)	GFR is particularly useful in the case of studies and comparisons of small human 
groups (for example, small geographic units). 
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com

DEMOGRAPHIC STATISTICS
343
MEASURES OF FERTILITY
343
Disadvantages of General Fertility Rate 
1)	GFR is not adequate for a very detailed examination of fertility patterns because it 
ignores the age distribution of women in the reproductive age-group. It, therefore, 
conceals a large amount of variation according to age. Among the various populations 
with similar pattern of fertility, a population with higher proportion of fertile age 
(women in the ages of fertility) peak will produce a higher value of GFR and 
vice versa. 
2)	It is rather crude because all unmarried women are included in the denominator. Of 
course, in most part of the world it is not uncommon to have unmarried women 
giving birth to children. 
8.5	
AGE-SPECIFIC FERTILITY RATE 
Although the GFR is an improvement over CBR, it gives only a general view of the fertility 
of the childbearing age group (15 to 49 years). But the rate of childbearing is not uniform 
throughout childbearing ages. A detailed and more meaningful analysis of the pattern of 
fertility in a population is provided by the fertility rates calculated for different childbearing 
ages. This gives what is being referred to as age-specific fertility rates (ASFR). 
The ASFR may be calculated separately for single ages x or for age groups a.
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
 
  
 
                . 

DEMOGRAPHIC STATISTICS
344
MEASURES OF FERTILITY
8.5.1  DEFINITION OF AGE-SPECIFIC FERTILITY RATES FOR SINGLE AGES 
The ASFR, calculated separately for single ages x, are given as: 
fx = Bx
Wx
× k
where 
fx 	
=	
age-specific fertility rate for single age x;
Bx	
=	
number of births to women of age x;
Wx 	 =	
mid-year population of women in age x;
k 	
=	
1,000.
Limitation of Age-specific Fertility Rates for Single Ages
A set of fertility rates calculated by single years is: 
1)	too detailed and clumsy for comparative purposes, and 
2)	affected by the misreporting of ages by mothers. 
8.5.2  DEFINITION OF AGE-SPECIFIC FERTILITY RATES FOR AGE GROUPS
The 5–year age groups are more commonly used in demographic literature in calculating 
age-specific rates and hence ASFR is defined as the number of births to women of a given 
age group per k women in that age group a440:
fa = Ba
Wa
× k
where	 	
fa 	
= age-specific fertility rate for age group a;
	
	
Ba	
= number of births to women of age group a;
	
	
Wa 	
= mid-year population of women in age group a;
	
	
k 	
= 1,000.
Example 8.3
Table 8.1(a) shows the mid-year population and the number of births by age of women in 
Mauritius in 1989. Calculate the age-specific fertility rates.
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com

DEMOGRAPHIC STATISTICS
345
MEASURES OF FERTILITY
Age group
Mid-year Women Population
Number of Births
15–19
46,417
2,028
20–24
51,462
6,927
25–29
51,580
6,408
30–34
44,906
3,460
35–39
39,286
1,393
40–44
27,741
303
45–49
22,841
19
TABLE 8.1(a) Number of Births by Age of Women in Mauritius, 1989
Solution
f15−19
=
B15−19
W15−19
× 1, 000 = 2, 028
46, 417 × 1, 000 = 43.7
f20−24
=
B20−24
W20−24
× 1, 000 = 6, 927
51, 462 × 1, 000 = 134.6
...
...
.
.
f40−44
=
B40−44
W40−44
× 1, 000 =
303
27, 741 × 1, 000 = 10.9
f45−49
=
B45−49
W45−49
× 1, 000 =
19
22, 841 × 1, 000 = 0.8
The results are presented in Table 8.1(b).
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com

DEMOGRAPHIC STATISTICS
346
MEASURES OF FERTILITY
Age-group (Years) 
Mid-year women 
Population
Number of births
Age-specific fertility 
rate per 1,000
1
2
3
4 = (3)/(2) × 1, 000
15–19
46,417
2,028
43.7
20–24
51,462
6,927
134.6
25–29
51,580
6,408
124.2
30–34
44,906
3,460
77.0
35–39
39,286
1,393
35.5
40–44
27,741
303
10.9
45–49
22,841
19
0.8
TABLE 8.1(b) Age-specific Fertility Rates for Example 8.3
Interpretation
If 1,000 women started their childbearing periods together at age 15, among them they 
would produce 43.7 babies every year for the five years until they were 20, then 134.6 
babies every year for the five years until they reached 25 and so forth.
8.5.3  PATTERN OF AGE-SPECIFIC FERTILITY RATES 
In human populations, the fertility rate appears to have a standard pattern. It is an 
asymmetrical bell-shape. It varies markedly with age, indicating zero value before age 10, low 
but increasing positive values between 15–19 but increasing sharply to a peak mostly in the 
25–29 age group and sometimes in age group 20–24 and ultimately declining, thereafter, 
to zero at age around 50 years. 
Example 8.4
For the age-specific fertility rates for Mauritius computed in Example 8.3, construct a line 
graph (fertility curve) and comment on the shape. 
Solution
The fertility curve is depicted in the Figure 8.1.
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com

DEMOGRAPHIC STATISTICS
347
MEASURES OF FERTILITY
The fertility curve for Mauritius follows the standard pattern described above. It is comparatively 
low before age 20 but increases faster thereafter and declines after age group 30–34 till it 
gets to almost zero at age group 45–49.
Figure 8.1 Age-specific Fertility Curve for Data in Example 8.3 
8.5.4  ADVANTAGES AND DISADVANTAGES OF AGE-SPECIFIC FERTILITY RATES 
Advantages of Age-specific Fertility Rates 
1)	For a given data and population group, the age-specific fertility rates serve as a basis 
for a detailed comparison, with corresponding rates for other population groups 
that are unaffected by difference between the groups in age-sex compositions. 
2)	ASFRs reveal the distribution of frequencies of births among women according 
to age. 
3)	ASFRs represent the most useful single step in analysing the fertility performance of 
a calendar year. It permits the study of fertility in terms of real cohorts of women, 
tracing out their fertility behaviour as they passed through life. 
4)	It is a large improvement in precision, because these rates are not significantly 
distorted by variations of age composition either in the total population or among 
the women of childbearing ages. 
5)	ASFRs are the raw materials for computing other important measures, such as the 
total fertility rate (Section 8.6), the average age of childbearing (Section 8.9), the 
standardised fertility rates (Section 8.11), and the net reproduction rate (Chapter 9). 
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com

DEMOGRAPHIC STATISTICS
348
MEASURES OF FERTILITY
Disadvantages of Age-specific Fertility Rates 
There are the same objections to the use of specific fertility rates as there are to the use of 
specific mortality rates. 
1)	ASFR are difficult to interpret as they involve referring to a different stage for each 
age group of women. 
2)	One has to look at several number of figures to make comparisons over a series 
of years. 
8.6	
TOTAL FERTILITY RATE 
The total fertility rate (TFR) is one of the most important fertility measures in understanding 
a population. It summarises the pattern of fertility exhibited by the age-specific fertility 
rates and presents a single index of total fertility which answers as nearly as possible the 
question: “How many children are women having nowadays”? It assumes that 
1)	mortality is constant, that is, women will survive through their childbearing years; 
2)	fertility is constant, that is, women will have the same birth rates over their lifetimes 
as women in different age cohorts in that same population have had in that year; and 
3)	there is no migration. 
TFR may be computed using single years x or age groups a and may be expressed as per 
woman or per a cohort of 1,000 women. 
8.6.1  DEFINITION OF TFR FOR SINGLE AGES 
TFR for single ages x is defined simply as the sum of the age-specific fertility rates of women 
over their reproductive span (i.e., all ages of the childbearing period): 
TFR =
 Bx
Wx
where Bx = the number of births to women aged x, denoted as Wx in a given year 
(x = 15, 16, 17, · · · , 49).
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com

DEMOGRAPHIC STATISTICS
349
MEASURES OF FERTILITY
349
Total fertility rate, as defined above, indicates “the average number of children a woman 
would have at the end of the reproductive years if she were to bear children at prevailing 
age-specific fertility rates while living through the entire reproductive period”. To put it in 
another way, the TFR of a given year indicates the total number of children who would 
be born by a woman, if she were to behave throughout her childbearing age the way all or 
other women did in that year (i.e., if she experienced that year’s fertility rates for women 
aged 15, for women aged 16, for women aged 17, etc., all the way up to age 49. 
For a cohort of 1,000 women, the TFR for single age x may be computed as: 
	
TFR
=
 Bx
Wx
× 1, 000
or	
TFR
=
49

x=15
fx
where fx is as defined above.
This definition of TFR gives an estimate of the number of children a cohort of 1,000 
women would bear in their life time at the prevailing age-specific fertility rates, if none of 
them dies before crossing the childbearing age. 
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
www.mastersopenday.nl
Visit us and find out why we are the best!
Master’s Open Day: 22 February 2014
Join the best at
the Maastricht University
School of Business and
Economics!
Top master’s programmes
• 33rd place Financial Times worldwide ranking: MSc 
International Business
• 1st place: MSc International Business
• 1st place: MSc Financial Economics
• 2nd place: MSc Management of Learning
• 2nd place: MSc Economics
• 2nd place: MSc Econometrics and Operations Research
• 2nd place: MSc Global Supply Chain Management and 
Change
Sources: Keuzegids Master ranking 2013; Elsevier ‘Beste Studies’ ranking 2012; 
Financial Times Global Masters in Management ranking 2012
Maastricht
University is
the best specialist
university in the
Netherlands
(Elsevier)

DEMOGRAPHIC STATISTICS
350
MEASURES OF FERTILITY
8.6.2  DEFINITION OF TFR FOR EQUAL INTERVAL OF AGE-GROUPS 
Usually TFR is calculated for age groups. If the age groups have equal intervals 
(a = 15 −19, 20 −24, · · · , 44 −49),  then TFR per woman is computed as: 
TFR = n
m

a=15−19
Ba
Wa
where	 	
n 	
= common interval width of the age-groups,
	
	
m 	
= age-group 45–49;
	
	
Ba	
= number of births in age group a;
	
	
Wa 	
= mid-year population of women of childbearing age 15–49.
For a cohort of 1,000 women, the TFR for equal interval of age groups may be computed as: 
TFR = n
m

a=15−19
Ba
Wa
× 1, 000
or
TFR = n
m

a=15−19
fa
where fa = age-specific fertility rate for age group a. 
Example 8.5
For the data in Example 8.3, calculate the total fertility rate. 
Solution
Since the age-specific fertility rates are for 5-year age groups 
TFR = 5
m

a=15−19
fa
But from Example 8.3, 
m

a=15−19
fa
=
43.7 + 134.6 + 124.2 + 77.0 + 35.5 + 10.9 + 0.8 = 426.7
˙. .
TFR
=
5(426.7) = 2, 134
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com

DEMOGRAPHIC STATISTICS
351
MEASURES OF FERTILITY
Interpretation
If 1,000 women in Mauritius started their childbearing periods together at age 15 they 
would produce 2,134 babies before they reached age 50 if the 1989 age-specific fertility 
rates were to continue. 
Alternative Interpretation
If the 1989 age-specific fertility rates in Mauritius were to continue, a woman in Mauritius 
on the average would give birth to about 2 children during her childbearing years. 
8.6.3  DEFINITION OF TFR FOR UNEQUAL INTERVAL OF AGE-GROUPS 
If the age groups are not of equal intervals then 
TFR =
m=45−49

a=15−19
nafa
where na = interval width of the age-group a.
That is, for unequal intervals, the TFR is the sum of the age-specific fertility rates for all 
ages multiplied by the size of the class interval into which the ages were grouped. 
Example 8.6
Table 8.2 (a) shows the data on the age-specific fertility rates of Ghana as of 1983–1988. 
(For illustration purposes, some age groups have been combined so as to have unequal class 
intervals). Calculate the total fertility rate.
Age group
Age-specific fertility rate 
per 1,000 women, fa
1
2
15–19
124.0
20–24
258.0
25–34
263.0
35–39
195.0
40–49
118.5
TABLE 8.2 (a) Age-specific Fertility Rates of Ghana, 1983–88
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com

DEMOGRAPHIC STATISTICS
352
MEASURES OF FERTILITY
Solution
Table 8.2 (b) shows the preliminary calculations of the total fertility rate.
From column 4, we obtain TFR as the sum of the age-specific fertility rates: 
TFR =
m=45−49

a=15−19
nafa = 6, 700
That is, if the age-specific fertility rates observed in Ghana in 1983–1988, were to continue, 
a hypothetical group of 1,000 women would have a total of 6,700 children by the time 
they reached the end of the reproductive period taken as 49 years, assuming all of them 
survived to that age.
Age-group (Years)
Age-specific 
fertility rate per 
1,000 women, fa
Class width na
Weighted age-
specific fertility rate 
per 1,000 women
1
2
3
4 = (2) × (3)
15–19
124.0
5
620
20–24
258.0
5
1,290
25–34
263.0
10
2,630
35–39
195.0
5
975
40–49
118.5
10
1,185
Total
6,700
8.6.4  ADVANTAGES AND DISADVANTAGES OF TFR 
Advantages of TFR
TFR is generally regarded as the best single cross-sectional measure of fertility, because 
1)	it is rather closely restricted to the childbearing population; and 
2)	it is not influenced by differences in the age composition between childbearing 
populations. 
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com

DEMOGRAPHIC STATISTICS
353
MEASURES OF FERTILITY
Disadvantage of TFR
TFR is constructed to be independent of the age distribution both of women in the 
reproduction age and the births. It assumes the number of women to be one (k = 1) for 
each age x. This implies that the measure ignores the impact of mortality as well as growth 
of population which would have persisted in an unequal number of persons at each age x, 
usually as a decreasing function of age. 
8.6.5  RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN TFR, GFR AND CBR 
We have defined Ba as the number of births to women in age group a, Wa as the number 
of women in age group a and Pa as the population in age group a. We may then define: 
CBR = B
P =
 Ba
 Pa
and 
GFR = B
W =
 Ba
 Wa
compared with 
TFR =
 Ba
Wa
Though these rates differ in their construction, they represent similar concepts which we 
now discuss. 
Relationship between TFR and GFR
Similarity between TFR and GFR
Both GFR and TFR represent similar concepts, namely, the average number of children per 
woman. GFR is the average number of births per woman per year while TFR is the total 
number of births per woman over the interval of the reproduction period.
Difference between TFR and GFR
While GFR ignores the age distribution of women in the age group 15−49, the TFR is 
constructed to be independent of the age distribution. 
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com

DEMOGRAPHIC STATISTICS
354
MEASURES OF FERTILITY
Relationship between TFR and CBR
Similarity between TFR and CBR
1)	Conceptually, both TFR and CBR are similar. 
2)	Both TFR and CBR ignore the age distribution.
Difference between TFR and CBR
CBR refers to the rate of incidence in the total population but TFR refers to the rate of 
incidence in the female population. 
Relationship between GFR and CBR
While CBR defines the denominator as total population, GFR defines the denominator as 
the number of women in fertile age group which is the actual population exposed to the risk. 
8.6.6  CURRENT FAMILY SIZE 
We have observed that in defining TFR, we applied a uniform weight of one to fx. If we, 
however, apply appropriate weights at each age x to represent decrease (or increase) in the 
number of persons, we could obtain a more realist picture of the current status of family 
size, referred to as the current family size (CFS). Thus, 
CFS =

fx
Wx
W0
where
Wx represents the reproductive age x or age group a; 
W0 represents women in the beginning of the reproductive age (x = 15) or age group 
(a = 15 −19).
Instead of Wx, we may use the actual population (Px) or the life table population (Lx). 
CFS will always be different from TFR, and depending on the weights used, would give 
a better approximation of completed family size (discussed in the sequel) of the current, 
stationary or stable population.
8.7	
CUMULATIVE FERTILITY RATE 
The fertility rates for cohort l may be cumulated from the earliest reproductive age to any 
higher age. This sum is the cumulative fertility rate (CFR). It is defined as: 
CFR =
l

h
nafa
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com

DEMOGRAPHIC STATISTICS
355
MEASURES OF FERTILITY
355
where l is the desired age group, (l ≤m),  and m  is as defined above. 
The cumulative fertility rate represents the total past fertility (or children ever born) to the 
survivors in the cohort up to that age. 
Note 
1)	The cumulative fertility rate is computed in the same manner as the total fertility rate 
except that the adding process can terminate at the end of any desired age group. 
2)	The final entry in the CFR column is termed the completed fertility rate for the 
cohort and it corresponds to TFR based on age-specific fertility rates for a calender 
year or period. 
Example 8.7
For the data in Example 8.6, calculate the cumulative fertility rate for the 
1)	age group 25–34; 
2)	age group 35–49. 
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more

DEMOGRAPHIC STATISTICS
356
MEASURES OF FERTILITY
Solution 
i)	 The age-specific fertility rates for Example 8.5 are given in column 2 of the table 
of that example.
Age-group (years)
Weighted Age-
specific fertility rate 
per 1,000 women
Cumulative fertility rate
1
2
3
15–19
620
620 = 620
20–24
1,290
620 + 1, 290 = 1, 910
25–34
2,630
2, 630 + 1, 910 = 4, 540
The cumulative fertility rate for the age group 25–34 is 4,540.
Age-group (years)
Weighted Age-
specific fertility rate 
per 1,000 women
Cumulative fertility rate
1
2
3
15–19
620
620 = 620
20–24
1,290
620 + 1, 290 = 1, 910
25–34
2,630
2, 630 + 1, 910 = 4, 540
35–39
975
4, 540 + 975 = 5, 515
The cumulative fertility rate for the age group 35–39 is 5,515. 
Completed Cumulative Fertility
We have indicated that the cumulative fertility may be computed up to any age. For 
ages 45 to 49 and over, it refers to completed fertility, for beyond this age there is no 
more childbearing. 
The completed cumulative fertility states the average size of family (including deceased 
children) that would result from a given schedule of age-specific fertility rates.
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com

DEMOGRAPHIC STATISTICS
357
MEASURES OF FERTILITY
8.8	
MARITAL FERTILITY RATE 
Marriage is the act, ceremony or process, by which the legal relationship of husband and 
wife is constituted. The legality of the union may be established by civil, religious or other 
means as recognised by the laws of the given country. The final legal dissolution of a 
marriage is divorce, that is, the separation of husband and wife which confers on the parties 
the right to remarriage under civil, religious and/or other provisions, according to the laws 
of the country.
Marriage plays an important role in fertility analysis. In fact, it is next to age as a differentiating 
factor in fertility. In most societies these days, childbearing occurs mostly within the marital 
union. However some women do not enter into it at all yet a number of them give birth. 
Of the married women some become widows or divorcees and do not marry again. Others 
though married, do not give birth at all.
In this section we shall discuss fertility measures that take into account the marital status 
of women. 
8.8.1  GENERAL MARITAL FERTILITY RATE 
The general marital fertility rate (GMFR) is defined as the total number of live births in a 
year per 1,000 population of ever married women of childbearing age: 
GMFR =
B
W em × 1, 000
where W em = women, ever married, of childbearing age as at July 1.
By “ever married women”, we mean women currently in active marriage and those previously 
married (including widowed, separated and divorced ones). 
Example 8.8
The 1985 mid-year population of ever married women of childbearing age of a community 
was 8,000. There were 130 births in that year. Calculate the general marital fertility rate.
Solution 
W em
=
8, 000
B
=
130
GMFR
=
B
W em × 1, 000
=
130
8, 000 × 1, 000 = 16.3
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com

DEMOGRAPHIC STATISTICS
358
MEASURES OF FERTILITY
That is, in that community in 1985, there were 16.3 births per 1,000 women ever married 
of childbearing age. 
8.8.2  TOTAL MARITAL FERTILITY RATE 
The total marital fertility rate (TMFR) is defined as the total number of live births in a 
year per 1,000 population of married women of childbearing age: 
TMFR = Bm
W m × 1, 000
where
W m = married women of childbearing age as at 1st July;
Bm = total number of births among currently married women.
The TMFR41 indicates the number of births a woman would have had at the end of the 
reproductive years if she were to bear children at prevailing age specific marital fertility rates 
and to remain married during the entire reproductive period. 
Example 8.9
For the data of Example 8.8, calculate the total marital fertility rate if it was known that 
only 7,110 women were then in active marriage.
Solution 
W m
=
7, 110
B
=
130
TMFR
=
B
W m × 1, 000
=
130
7, 110 × 1, 000 = 18.3
That is, there were 18.3 births per 1,000 married women of childbearing age in 1985 in 
that community. 
8.8.3  AGE-SPECIFIC MARITAL FERTILITY RATE 
The proportion of married women within each age group is a deciding factor on the level 
of fertility. More unmarried women in the younger ages and more separated, divorced and 
widowed women in the older age brackets is characteristic of any society.
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com

DEMOGRAPHIC STATISTICS
359
MEASURES OF FERTILITY
The age-specific marital fertility rate is defined as: 
ASMFRx = Bm
x
W m
x
× k
where
Bm
x = total number of births among currently married women aged x;
W m
x = mid-year (average) population of married women age x.
The age-specific marital fertility rate may also be defined as: 
ASMFRx = fxmx
where
fx = age-specific fertility rate for single ages;
mx = reciprocal of proportion of married women at age x.
8.8.4  BIRTH OUTSIDE MARRIAGE 
In demography, births may be classified as legitimate and illegitimate. By legitimate births, 
we mean births given by a legally married couple; and by illegitimate births, we mean 
births outside a legal marriage. Corresponding to total marital fertility rate, we may calculate 
total illegitimate fertility rate. 
In most developing countries, however, especially in Africa the problem of legitimacy or 
illegitimacy of births actually does not exist even though childbirth can and does take 
place outside marriage. Marriage is a long process and not a clearly defined event. The 
result of such a long process is that a pregnancy outside marriage can end up as a birth 
within marriage. This creates difficulty in the classification of birth and consequently the 
measurement. Again, there is nothing called illegitimate child in sub-Saharan Africa. The 
reason is that once the paternity of a child is acknowledged he/she is legitimate under the 
Customary Law. A more appropriate concept to use, therefore, is birth outside marriage.
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com

DEMOGRAPHIC STATISTICS
360
MEASURES OF FERTILITY
360
8.9	
AVERAGE AGE OF CHILDBEARING 
The average age of childbearing is the average age of mothers at the birth of their children 
if they were subjected throughout their lives to the age-specific fertility rates observed in 
a given year. It measures differences in the age pattern of childbearing. It describes the 
age pattern of childbearing of synthetic cohort of women, that is, a hypothetical group of 
women who are viewed as having in their lifetime the (fertility) experience recorded in a 
single calendar year.
8.9.1  METHOD OF COMPUTING AVERAGE AGE OF CHILDBEARING 
The term average is a general term applying to three kinds of measures of central location, 
namely, the mean, median and the mode. Therefore, by average age of childbearing (also 
referred to as average age of mother), we refer to the mean age of childbearing, the median 
age of childbearing and the modal age of childbearing. From the knowledge of age pattern 
of fertility, it is possible to calculate the average age of childbearing in its usual sense. 
The calculations are, however, based on the age-specific fertility rates (ASFR) than actual 
numbers of births in age groups. This is to eliminate the effect of differences in the age-sex 
composition of the populations being compared. 
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Get Help Now
Go to www.helpmyassignment.co.uk for more info
Need help with your
dissertation?
Get in-depth feedback & advice from experts in your 
topic area. Find out what you can do to improve
the quality of your dissertation!

DEMOGRAPHIC STATISTICS
361
MEASURES OF FERTILITY
8.9.2  MEAN AGE AT CHILDBEARING 
The mean age of childbearing may be calculated using 
1)	the actual age-specific fertility rates, fa, or 
2)	the relative age-specific fertilities of the distributions, f(r)
a . 
When data are from a survey (sample or census), the class intervals for the age groups are 
14.5–19.5, 19.5–24.5, · · ·, 44.5–49.5. This is because the women were half a year younger 
at the time of the birth of their children. The mid-points, Xma, therefore become 17, 22,
· · ·, 47. It is important to note that this method of defining class intervals is the same as 
defining class boundaries in statistical methods (refer to Nsowah-Nuamah, 2005). 
When data are from vital registration, the mid-points, Xma, of the age group should be 
17.5, 22.5,· · ·, 47.5, because the registration should have taken place at the time of birth 
of a child. 
Mean Age of Childbearing in Terms of Age-specific Fertility 
The mean age of childbearing (X) may be defined as: 
X =
45−49

a=15−19
faXma
45−49

a=15−19
fa
where
Xma is the mid-point for each age interval42;
fa is the age-specific fertility rates for women whose age corresponds to age group a of 
which X is the mid-point. 
Note 
1)	The formula follows the form of a weighted mean ages, the weights being the age-
specific fertility rates, fa. 
2)	The formula may be written as: 
	
X =
45−49

a=15−19
fa(l + 2.5)
45−49

a=15−19
fa
l is the lower limit of each age interval.
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com

DEMOGRAPHIC STATISTICS
362
MEASURES OF FERTILITY
3)	In populations where there is early childbearing which continues till late ages 
and where the peak of fertility is also high, it is observed that the mean age of 
childbearing is usually high and a large fraction of fertility relates to the latter 
years of childbearing. On the other hand, in the population where childbearing 
starts and terminates early and where fertility is low, the mean age of childbearing 
is lower and a small fraction of total fertility occurs in latter years of childbearing. 
Example 8.10
For the data in Example 8.3, calculate the mean age of childbearing, using the age-specific 
fertility rates, f(a)
a . 
Solution
Since the data were taken from vital registration, the mid-points are 17.5, 22.5, · · ·, 47.5.
Table 8.3 shows the preliminary calculations of the mean age of childbearing using the 
actual age-specific fertility rates.
Age-group 
Mid-year 
women 
Population, Pa 
Number of 
births, Ba 
ASFR (fa) 
per 1,000 
Mid-point 
of age 
group, Xma
faXma
1
2 
3 
4 = (3)
(2) 
5
6 = (4) × (5) 
15–19 
46,417 
2,028 
43.7 
17.5 
764.8
20–24 
51,462 
6,927 
134.6
22.5 
3,028.5
25–29 
51,580 
6,408 
124.2 
27.5 
3,415.5
30–34 
44,906 
3,460 
77.0 
32.5 
2,505.6
35–39 
39,286 
1,393 
35.5 
37.5 
1331.3
40–44 
27,741 
303 
10.9 
42.5 
463.3
45–49 
22,841 
19
0.8 
47.5 
38
Total 
284233 
20,538 
426.7 
- 
11,543.8
TABLE 8.3 Calculation of mean age of childbearing
Thus, 
X = 11, 543.8
426.7
= 27.0
That is, the mean age of childbearing in Mauritius in 1984 was 27 years. 
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com

DEMOGRAPHIC STATISTICS
363
MEASURES OF FERTILITY
Mean Age of Childbearing in Terms of Relative Age-specific Fertility
The mean age of childbearing may be given as: 
X =
49

a=15
f(r)
a Xma
where f(r)
a  is the relative age-specific fertility of the distribution, defined as: 
f(r)
a
=
fa
 fa
Example 8.11
For the data in Example 8.3, calculate the mean age of childbearing, using the relative age-
specific fertility of the distributions, f(r)
a .
Solution
Table 8.4 shows the preliminary calculations of the mean age of childbearing using the 
relative age-specific fertility of the distributions.
Age-group 
ASFR (fa) 
per 1,000 
Mid-point of 
age group, 
Xma
fr
a =
fa

fa  
fr
aXma 
1
2 
3 
4 
5 = (3) × (4) 
15–19 
43.7 
17.5 
0.10241 
1.79218
20–24 
134.6
22.5 
0.31544 
7.09740
25–29 
124.2 
27.5 
0.29107 
8.00443
30–34 
77.1 
32.5 
0.18046 
5.86495
35–39 
35.5 
37.5 
0.08320 
3.12000
40–44 
10.9 
42.5 
0.02554 
1.08545
45–49 
0.8 
47.5 
0.00187 
0.08883
Total 
426.8 
- 
1.00000 
27.05323
TABLE 8.4 Calculation of mean age of childbearing
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com

DEMOGRAPHIC STATISTICS
364
MEASURES OF FERTILITY
From column 6, 
X =
45−49

a=15−19
f(r)
a Xma = 27.1
8.9.3  MEDIAN AGE AT CHILDBEARING 
The median age of childbearing may be defined as (Nsowah-Nuamah, 2005):
Me = Lme +
fa
2 −F
fme
× h
where 
Me	
=	
median age of childbearing;
Lme	 =	
lower boundary of the median class (the median class is the age group upon 
which the median lies;
fa
2 	
=	
one-half the ASFR;
fme	 =	
ASFR of the median class;
F 	
=	
cumulative ASFR immediately before the median class, that is, sum of the 
observations on all age groups above Lme
h	
=	
width of median class.
Example 8.12
For the data in Example 8.3, calculate the median age of childbearing. 
Solution
Table 8.5 shows the preliminary calculations of the median age of childbearing.
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com

DEMOGRAPHIC STATISTICS
365
MEASURES OF FERTILITY
365
Age-group 
Mid-year 
women 
Population 
Number 
of births 
ASFR (fa) 
per 1,000 
Cumulative 
frequency 
of ASFR
1
2 
3 
4 = (3)
(2)  
6 
15–19 
46,417 
2,028 
43.7 
43.7
20–24 
51,462 
6,927 
134.6 
178.3
25–29 
51,580 
6,408 
124.2 
302.5
30–34 
44,906 
3,460 
77.0 
379.5
35–39 
39,286 
1,393 
35.5 
415.0
40–44 
27,741 
303 
10.9 
425.9
45- 49 
22,841 
19
0.8 
426.7
Total 
284,233 
20,538 
426.7 
–
TABLE 8.5 Calculation of median age of childbearing
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
By 2020, wind could provide one-tenth of our planet’s 
electricity needs. Already today, SKF’s innovative know-
how is crucial to running a large proportion of the 
world’s wind turbines. 
Up to 25 % of the generating costs relate to mainte-
nance. These can be reduced dramatically thanks to our 
systems for on-line condition monitoring and automatic 
lubrication. We help make it more economical to create 
cleaner, cheaper energy out of thin air. 
By sharing our experience, expertise, and creativity, 
industries can boost performance beyond expectations. 
Therefore we need the best employees who can 
meet this challenge!
The Power of Knowledge Engineering
Brain power
Plug into The Power of Knowledge Engineering. 
Visit us at www.skf.com/knowledge

DEMOGRAPHIC STATISTICS
366
MEASURES OF FERTILITY
We determine the class boundary that contains the median. 
1)	Since there are 
 fa = 426.7,  fa/2 = 213.4, and the median is that point in our 
distribution which has 213.4 age-specific fertility rate on each side of it. 
2)	Beginning at the first class boundary43 and adding up the fa in order, we find that 
class boundary 24.5–29.5, inclusive, contains the median. This is the median class. 
Hence, 
Lme = 24.5,
fme = 124.2,
F = 178.3,
h = 5
Consequently, 
Me
=
Lme +
fa
2 −F
fme
× h
=
24.5 + 213.4 −178.3
124.2
× 5 = 25.9
That is, half of the women of childbearing age were less than 26 years and half more than 
that in Mauritius in 1984. 
8.9.4  MODAL AGE AT CHILDBEARING 
The modal age of childbearing may be defined as: 
Mo
=
Lm0 +
fm0 −fm0−1
(fm0 −fm0−1) + (fm0 −fm0+1)h
Or
M0
=
Lm0 +
fm0 −fm0−1
2fm0 −(fm0−1 + fm0+1) × h
where 
Mo	 	
= mode age of childbearing;
Lm0	 	
= lower boundary of the modal class;
h	
	
= width of the age group;
fm0	 	
= ASFR of the modal class;
fm0−1		
= ASFR of the class before the modal class;
fm0+1	
= ASFR of the class after the modal class.
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com

DEMOGRAPHIC STATISTICS
367
MEASURES OF FERTILITY
Example 8.13
For the data in Example 8.3, calculate the modal age of childbearing. 
Solution
Step 1 
a)	The modal class is 19.5–24.5 since this interval has the highest age-specific fertility 
rate, 134.6. 
b)	The lower boundary of the age group is Lme = 19.5. 
c)	The width of the age group is h = 5. 
d)	The ASFR of the modal class is fm0 = 134.6. 
e)	 The ASFR of the class before the modal class is fm0−1 = 43.7.. 
f)	The ASFR of the class after the modal class is fm0+1 = 124.2. 
Step 2
Using the formula we obtain: 
Mo = 19.5 +
134.6 −43.7
(134.6 −43.7) + (134.6 −124.2) × 5 = 24.0
That is, the modal age of childbearing was about 24 years in Mauritius in 1984.
8.10	 MEASURES OF FERTILITY BASED ON CENSUS AND 
SURVEY DATA
In developing countries, especially in Africa, where vital registration system is inefficient, 
some measures of fertility can be derived from the census or survey data, using retrospective 
questions. In Africa, the Demographic and Health Surveys (DHS) and the Multiple Indicator 
Cluster Surveys (MICS) are two main national sample sample surveys together with the 
census where a special question is asked to women on the number of children born alive. 
From this question we can calculate the current fertility and lifetime fertility.
8.10.1  CHILD-WOMAN RATIO 
The age and sex distribution of a population is the result of past force of fertility, mortality 
and migration. However, the overriding factor in giving shape to age distribution is the 
fertility. This is due to the fact that at the national level, migration is very negligible and 
also the mortality reduction in general does not relate to one or more specific age groups 
but affects the whole population. Consequently, the level and pattern of fertility in the past 
can, with reasonable accuracy, be inferred from the census age distribution with the help 
of analytical population models. 
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com

DEMOGRAPHIC STATISTICS
368
MEASURES OF FERTILITY
The measure of fertility calculated from census age-sex returns which is commonly used is 
the child-woman ratio (sometimes referred to as general fertility ratio or ratio of children 
to women). It is defined as the ratio of the number of children to the number of women in 
reproductive age group. Various ages have been used, but the ages of children usually used 
are 0–4, 5–9 or 0–9 years while the ages of women are 15–44, 20–49 or 15–49 years. The 
child-woman ratio (CWR) then may be defined symbolically as follows:
a)	 CWR
=
C0−4
W15−44
× k
b)	CWR
=
C5−9
W20−49
× k
c)	 CWR
=
C0−9
W15−49
× k
Example 8.14
In the 2000 census of Ghana, children under 5 years and those between 5 and 9 years inclusive 
were 2,769,421 and 2,775,206 respectively. The distribution of women of childbearing age 
is given in Table…. 
Calculate all the variants of the child-woman ratio. 
Solution
The number of children in the various age groups are: 
C0−4 = 2, 769, 421; C5−9 = 2, 775, 206; C0−9 = 5, 544, 627
The number of women in the various age groups are: 
W15−44
=
4, 175, 083
W20−49
=
3, 595, 534
W15−49
=
4, 518, 125
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com

DEMOGRAPHIC STATISTICS
369
MEASURES OF FERTILITY
Age group 
Women Population 
15–19 
922,591 
20–24 
837,769 
25–29 
791,805 
30–34 
604,370 
35- 39 
538,901 
40–44 
443,647 
45–49 
343,042 
TABLE 8.5 Number of Women in Ghana by Age of Childbearing in 2000
Hence the three variants of the child-woman ratio are: 
1)	CWR
=
C0−4
W15−44
× k
=
2, 769, 421
4, 175, 083 = 663.3
2)	 CWR
=
C5−9
W20−49
× k
=
2, 775, 206
3, 595, 534 = 771.8
3)	 CWR
=
C0−9
W15−49
× k
=
5, 544, 627
4, 518, 125 = 1, 227.2
That is, in Ghana in 2000, there were 663 children per 1,000 women aged 15–44 years, 
772 children per 1,000 women aged 20–49 years or 1,227 children per 1,000 women aged 
15–49 years. 
Advantages of Child-Woman Ratio 
The child-woman ratio has a number of advantages as a measure of fertility. 
1)	It is simple, requires minimum data and is easily understandable. 
2)	It is a useful index where vital registration data are lacking; it reflects fertility 
performance in the five years preceding the census. 
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com

DEMOGRAPHIC STATISTICS
370
MEASURES OF FERTILITY
370
3)	It does not require a special question or tabulation plan in census. 
4)	It can be calculated for various socio-economic and ethnic groups of the population 
and also for small areas (regions, districts, etc.).
5)	It can be considered as the measure of effective fertility, as it does not consider the 
births of children dying early in life. 
Disadvantages of Child-Woman Ratio 
1)	Like general fertility rate, the child-woman ratio is affected by distribution of women 
by age in the reproductive period. The broad range of ages used for women does 
not take into consideration the age distribution within this range. 
2)	It is affected by the under/over enumeration of children and women in reproductive 
ages. This comes about from the fact that 
i)	 ages of children and women may be mis-stated: ages of children in age group 
0–4 are usually underenumerated while ages of children in age group 5–9 are 
overenumerated. 
ii)	no consideration is given to mortality of children and women; 
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more

DEMOGRAPHIC STATISTICS
371
MEASURES OF FERTILITY
8.10.2  CHILDREN EVER BORN 
The number of children ever born to a particular woman is a measure of her lifetime fertility 
experience up to the moment at which the data are collected. The number includes all live-
born children44, whether born in or out of marriage, whether born in the present or prior 
marriage, or in a de facto union45, or whether living or dead at the time of the census.
Children ever born (CEB) to women in a particular age group is the mean number of 
children born alive to women in that age group. In most cases, it is computed as the ratio 
of the number of children born alive to all women in a particular age group to the number 
of women. In cases where the total number of children born to women in the age group 
is not provided but a tabulation is available on the distribution of women by age group 
and number of children ever born, the mean number of children ever born to women in 
the age group is obtained as: 
CEB =

jPj
where
j is the number of children;
Pj is the proportion of women in that age group who have given birth to a total of j children. 
8.10.3  PARITY 
Parity refers to the number of live births a woman has given birth to. In other text, it is 
referred to as the number of children ever born. A woman is said to be of the ith parity if 
she has given birth to i children. A woman who has no children has zero parity, a woman 
who has given birth to only one child has one parity and so on. The children are identified 
by their order of birth (that is, first, second, and so forth). 
Women can be classified according to their parity on the basis of the number of children 
ever born such as follows
Number of women
W0
W1
W2
· · ·
Wi
· · ·
Wh 
Parity 
0
1
2
· · ·
i
· · ·
h 
The average parity of women also referred to as the average number of children ever born per 
woman by age can be calculated as: 
pa = pa
Wa
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com

DEMOGRAPHIC STATISTICS
372
MEASURES OF FERTILITY
where 
pa = total number of children ever born to women in age group a; 
Wa= is the total number of women in age-group a.
The average parity, pa, provides the indication of cumulative fertility of women. It is 
expected to increase with age of mothers with the fertility performance of the youngest age 
group (15–19 years) almost negligible. When it happens that some of the higher age groups 
have lower average parity, we may attribute it to low quality of reporting of data on either 
children ever born or the age of mothers or both. The low quality of data on children ever 
born is usually a deliberate misreporting by mothers who have had live births which have 
later died. Usually people are not comfortable reminding themselves of such events and 
when asked to indicate total live births that have taken place, they try to conceal this fact. 
Example 8.15
Table 8.7 (a) gives number of women older than 14 years and the total number of children 
ever born by them in a certain community.
Age Group (Years) 
Total Number of Women 
Total Number of Children Ever Born 
15–19 
82,356 
39,889 
20–24 
75,919 
152,366 
25–29 
75,688 
259,373 
30–34 
59,646 
265,451 
35–39 
47,425 
237,562 
40–44 
38,352 
188,642 
45–49 
29,993 
170,077 
TABLE 8.7 (a) Number of Women and Number of Children Ever Born of a Community
Calculate the mean number of children ever born per woman and comment on the distribution. 
Solution
For the age group 15–19, the mean number of children ever born per woman by age is 
p(15−19) = 39, 889
82, 356 = 0.4843
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com

DEMOGRAPHIC STATISTICS
373
MEASURES OF FERTILITY
For the age group 20–24, the mean number of children ever born per woman by age is 
p(20−24) = 152, 366
75, 919 = 2.007
and so on.
For the age group (45–49), the mean number of children ever born per woman by age is 
p(45−49) = 170, 077
29, 993 = 5.6706
Column 4 of Table 8.7 (b) gives the results for all the other age groups.
We may observe from Table 8.7 (b) that the mean number of children per woman does not 
increase with age of mothers. For example, the number of children ever born to women 
in the age group 40–44 is 4.9 which is lower than those born to women in the age group 
35–39 which is 5.
Age Group (Years) 
Total Women 
Total number of 
children ever born 
Mean number of 
children per woman 
1
2 
3 
4=(3)/(2) 
15–19 
82,356 
39,889 
0.4843
20–24 
75,919 
152,366 
2.0070
25–29 
75,688 
259,373 
3.4269
30–34 
59,646 
265,451 
4.4504
35–39 
47,425 
237,562 
5.0092
40–44 
38,352 
188,642 
4.9187
45–49 
29,993 
170,077 
5.6706
TABLE 8.7 (b) Calculation of Mean Number of Children per Woman
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com

DEMOGRAPHIC STATISTICS
374
MEASURES OF FERTILITY
Uses of Average Parity 
Measure of Completed Family Size
The completed family size, also referred to as cohort fertility rate or completed fertility 
rate, is the average size of completed fertility. It is the number of children a woman would 
have ever borne when she completes her reproductive period of life, usually taken to be 
the age 50. Statistically, this involves following a group of women born in a particular year 
(birth cohort) or married in a particular year (marriage cohort) throughout their lifetime 
and recording the number of children they produce. By adding these period rates we obtain 
the average total number of children for the cohort. 
The completed family size is equivalent to total fertility rate (TFR) of a calendar year and 
it exhibits much more stability than do age-specific rates from year to year. It is measured 
by the average parity in age group 40–44 or 45–49 if the values are equal or nearly equal 
or slightly higher in the age group 45–49.
If fertility remains unchanged for a long period (30 years or more), completed family size 
would be equal to TFR, assuming that the women who died had the same fertility as those 
who were alive. 
Symbolically, the completed family size (cfs) is given as: 
cfs =
35

i=0
fz+i
x+i
where fz+i
x+i = the age-specific fertility rate of age x + i (x = 15) during the calender year z + i.
If the average parity in age group 45–49 is significantly lower than that in the age group 
40–44, TFR may be estimated as: 
TFR = p2
3
p2
where p2 and p3 are the average parity in the age groups 20–24 and 25–29, respectively. 
Example 8.16
For the data in Example 8.15, estimate the TFR. 
Solution
From Example 8.15, 
p2 = 4.9188;
p3 = 5.6706
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com

DEMOGRAPHIC STATISTICS
375
MEASURES OF FERTILITY
375
Hence, 
fs
=
TFR = p2
3
p2
=
(5.6706)2
4.9188
= 6.54
This estimate can better represent the average parity than the values in the age group 40–44 
or 45–49. 
It is important to note that the completed family size is not an indicator of current fertility 
because the births to these women had occurred in the past at varying times in a period 
extending about 30 years. 
In most developing countries, data on lifetime fertility by the ages of women show that it 
tends to rise steadily with age, reaching a maximum in the 45–49 age group, then a slight 
but generally consistent fall in the figures for the women over the age of 50 years. 
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more

DEMOGRAPHIC STATISTICS
376
MEASURES OF FERTILITY
Mean Age of Fertility Schedule
We may estimate the mean age of fertility schedule (fs) from the average parity as:
fs = 2.25 p3
p2
+ 23.95
where p2 and p3 are as already defined. 
Example 8.17
For the data in Example 8.15, calculate the mean age of fertility schedule. 
Solution
From Example 8.15, 
p2 = 4.9188;
p3 = 5.6706
Hence,
¯fs
=
2.25 p3
p2
+ 23.95
=
2.25 × 5.6706
4.9188 + 23.95 = 26.54
8.10.4  BIRTH ORDER 
When a woman is of the ith parity, the birth itself is referred to as ith-order birth 
(i = 1, 2, · · · , h). Higher order births ought to be fewer in number. The order of birth receives 
much attention in modern times of high contraceptive usage. To evaluate the progress of 
birth control programmes, we use the birth order specific rates. 
General Order Specific Fertility Rate
A simple way of analysing the order of birth statistics is to obtain the distribution of births 
by order, referred to as the general order specific fertility rate (GOSFR). The GOSFR is 
defined as: 
GOSFRi =
Bi
W15−49
× k
where
Bi = the number of births of order i born to women aged (15–49); 
W15−49 = the mid-year (average) population of females in reproductive ages (15–49).
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com

DEMOGRAPHIC STATISTICS
377
MEASURES OF FERTILITY
We may observe that the sum of all the GOSFR is nothing but the GFR. Thus 
GFR =
h

i=1
GOSFRi
Example 8.18
Table 8.8 (a) shows live birth order by age of mother and female population in the reproductive 
ages in the Republic of Mauritius in 2004. Calculate the general order specific fertility rate. 
Age group 
(Years) 
Mid-year women 
Population
Live Birth Order
First
Second 
Third
Fourth 
Fifth
Sixth 
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
15–19 
46,955
1473
277
28
1
0
1
20–24 
53,308
3655
1853
341
53
10
5
25–29 
53,955
2404
2626
837
181
32
18
30–34 
46,591
778
1342
794
249
92
41
35–39 
49,954
277
512
537
190
94
77
40–44 
49,072
87
101
98
57
46
31
45–49 
42,597
4
4
8
5
5
6
TABLE 8.8 (a) Live Birth Order by Age of Mother and Female Population in Reproductive Ages in Republic of 
Mauritius, 2004
Solution 
GOSFR1
=
B1
W15−49
× 1, 000 =
8, 678
34, 2432 × 1, 000 = 25.3
GOSFR2
=
B2
W15−49
× 1, 000 =
6, 715
34, 2432 × 1, 000 = 19.6
GOSFR3
=
B3
W15−49
× 1, 000 =
2, 643
34, 2432 × 1, 000 = 7.7
GOSFR4
=
B4
W15−49
× 1, 000 =
736
34, 2432 × 1, 000 = 2.1
GOSFR5
=
B5
W15−49
× 1, 000 =
279
34, 2432 × 1, 000 = 0.8
GOSFR6
=
B6
W15−49
× 1, 000 =
179
34, 2432 × 1, 000 = 0.5
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com

DEMOGRAPHIC STATISTICS
378
MEASURES OF FERTILITY
The results are presented in the last row of Table 8.8 (b).
Age 
group 
(Years) 
Mid-year 
women 
Population
Live Birth Order
First
Second 
Third
Fourth 
Fifth
Sixth 
Total 
Births
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
15–19 
46,955
1473
277
28
1
0
1
1,780
20–24 
53,308
3655
1853
341
53
10
5
5,917
25–29 
53,955
2404
2626
837
181
32
18
6,098
30–34 
46,591
778
1342
794
249
92
41
3,296
35–39 
49,954
277
512
537
190
94
77
1,687
40–44 
49,072
87
101
98
57
46
31
420
45–49 
42,597
4
4
8
5
5
6
32
Total 
34,2432
8678
6715
2643
736
279
179
19,230
GOSFR 
25.3
19.6
7.7
2.1
0.8
0.5
56.2
TABLE 8.8 (b) Calculation of General Order Specific Fertility Rate
We verify that, the sum of GOSFR is equal to GFR. Thus, 
GFR
=
B
Wa
× 1, 000
	
 =
19, 230
34, 2432 × 1, 000 = 56.2
which is the same as the sum of GOSFRi in the the last row in Table 8.8 (b).
Age and Order Specific Fertility Rate
The age and order specific fertility rate (AOSFR) is given by 
AOSFRai = Ba,i
Wa
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com

DEMOGRAPHIC STATISTICS
379
MEASURES OF FERTILITY
where
Ba,i = the number of births of order i to women at age group a; 
Wa = the mid-year (average) population of women at age group a. 
If we sum all the AOSFR of births over all the orders of birth at a particular age group we 
get the age specific fertility rate. Thus 
fa =
h

i=1
AOSFRa,i
Example 8.19
For the data in Example 8.14, calculate the age and order specific fertility rate. 
Solution
We calculate the AOSFR for the age group 15–19: 
AOSFR(15−19),1
=
B(15−19),1
W15−19
× 1, 000 = 8, 678
46, 955 × 1, 000 = 25.3
AOSFR(15−19),2
=
B(15−19),2
W15−19
× 1, 000 = 6, 715
46, 955 × 1, 000 = 19.6
AOSFR(15−19),3
=
B(15−19),3
W15−19
× 1, 000 = 2, 643
46, 955 × 1, 000 = 7.7
AOSFR(15−19),4
=
B(15−19),4
W15−19
× 1, 000 =
736
46, 955 × 1, 000 = 2.1
AOSFR(15−19),5
=
B(15−19),5
W15−19
× 1, 000 =
279
46, 955 × 1, 000 = 0.8
AOSFR(15−19),6
=
B(15−19),6
W15−19
× 1, 000 =
179
46, 955 × 1, 000 = 0.5
For the remaining age group, the results are presented in Table 8.9.
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com

DEMOGRAPHIC STATISTICS
380
MEASURES OF FERTILITY
380
Age group 
(Years) 
Mid-year 
women 
Population
Live Birth Order
Total 
First
Second 
Third
Fourth 
Fifth
Sixth 
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
15–19 
46,955
31.4
5.9
0.6
0.0
0.0
0.0
37.9
20–24 
53,308
68.6
34.8
6.4
1.0
0.2
0.1
111.0
25–29 
53,955
44.6
48.7
15.5
3.4
0.6
0.3
113.0
30–34 
46,591
16.7
28.8
17.0
5.3
2.0
0.9
70.7
35–39 
49,954
5.5
10.2
10.7
3.8
1.9
1.5
33.8
40–44 
49,072
1.8
2.1
2.0
1.2
0.9
0.6
8.6
45–49 
42,597
0.1
0.1
0.2
0.1
0.1
0.1
0.8
Total 
34,2432
25.3
19.6
7.7
2.1
0.8
0.5
56.2
TABLE 8.9 Calculation of Age and Order Specific Fertility Rate 
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
EXPERIENCE THE POWER OF 
FULL ENGAGEMENT…
     RUN FASTER.
          RUN LONGER..
                RUN EASIER…
READ MORE & PRE-ORDER TODAY 
WWW.GAITEYE.COM
Challenge the way we run

DEMOGRAPHIC STATISTICS
381
MEASURES OF FERTILITY
We can verify that the 
h
i=1 AOSFRai is equal to the age specific fertility rate for age group 
a. Thus for age group 15–19, 
fa
=
Ba
Wa
× 1, 000
=
1, 780
46, 955 × 1, 000 = 37.9
which is the same as the sum of AOSFR(15−19) given in column 9 of Table 8.9. We can 
verify this to be true for all the other age groups.
8.10.5  BIRTH INTERVALS 
The interval between births provides a useful information on birth spacing patterns and is, 
therefore, useful for measuring family planning trends. Studies have shown that: 
1)	Maternal health is threatened by rapid childbearing; 
2)	Short (less than 24 months) birth intervals are detrimental to the health of both 
the mother and child. 
Intervals between births may be closed or open. Intervals between two successive parities 
are called inter birth closed intervals. Intervals between the last parity of the mother and 
the time of observation (sample survey or census) are called open birth intervals. The 
average of these two intervals specified for parity indicates spacing between children and 
postponement of pregnancies. 
8.10.6  PARITY PROGRESSION RATIO 
Most often, in population analysis, we want to know what proportion of women of a 
particular parity will have an additional child. The measure that can be used to achieve 
this is the parity progression ratio (PPR). That is, PPR is designed to show the proportion, 
among the women who have had at least some specified number of births, who go on to have 
one more birth. It can be calculated from a special question asked in a census or survey on 
number of children ever born to all the women or to married women only. It is defined as 
PPRp = Wp+1
Wp
where
Wp is the number of women of parity p and above;
p + 1 is the number of women of parity p + 1 and above.
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com

DEMOGRAPHIC STATISTICS
382
MEASURES OF FERTILITY
Thus, 
PPR0
=
W1
W0
PPR1
=
W2
W1
...
...
PPRp−1
=
Wp
Wp−1
Example 8.21
Table 8.10 (a) gives the number of children ever born and the number of married women 
who gave birth to such children in an area as obtained in a census in 2004. Calculate the 
parity progression ratio and interpret the results.
Number of Live Born Children 
Number of Married Women 
0
29,777 
1
42,593 
2
39,489 
3
26,242 
4
20,452 
5
15,983 
6
12,809 
7
10,563 
8
5,480 
9
3,007 
Total 
206,395
TABLE 8.10 (a) Number of Married Women and Live Births of an Area
Solution
There are 3,007 women who have had 9 children (column 3 of Table 8.10 (b).
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com

DEMOGRAPHIC STATISTICS
383
MEASURES OF FERTILITY
Next we have 8487 (3,007+5,480) women who have had at least 8 children, 19,050 
(8,487+10,563) women who have had at least 7 children; and so on till we get to 176,618 
women who have had at least 1 child and finally 206,395 which is the total number of 
married women. Column (3) of Table 8.10 (b) gives the number of women who have had 
at least some specified number of births. 
The proportion of the total number of married women who have had at least 1 child is: 
PPR0 = W1
W0
= 176, 618
206, 395 = 0.856
Number of Live 
born Children 
Number of Married 
Women, Wm
“Greater than 
or equal to” 
(Cumulative 
Number of Women)
Parity Progression 
Ratio 
1
2 
3 
4 
0
29,777 
206,395 
- 
1
42,593 
176,618 
0.856
2
39,489 
134,025 
0.759
3
26,242 
94,536 
0.705
4
20,452 
68,294 
0.722
5
15,983 
47,842 
0.701
6
12,809 
31,859 
0.666
7
10,563 
19,050 
0.598
8
5,480 
8,487 
0.446
9
3,007 
3,007 
0.354 
Total 
206,395 
TABLE 8.10(b) Calculation of Parity Progression Ratio
The proportion of the total number of married women having had (at least) 1 child, who 
had (at least) a second child is: 
PPR1 = W2
W1
= 134, 025
176, 618 = 0.759
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com

DEMOGRAPHIC STATISTICS
384
MEASURES OF FERTILITY
That is, there is a 75.9% chance that a woman aged 45–49 has a second birth given that 
she already has had a first birth.
The proportion of the total number of married women who have had (at least) 2 children, 
having had (at least) a third child is 
PPR2 = W3
W2
= 94, 536
134, 025 = 0.705
and so forth to finally:
The proportion of the total number of married women who have had (at least) 8 children, 
having had (at least) a ninth child is 
PPR8 = W9
W8
= 3, 007
8, 487 = 0.354
Column (4) of Table 8.10 (b) gives the entire results. 
Interpretation of PPR
That is 85.6 percent of the women having married gave birth to 1 child; 75.9 percent of 
the women having given birth to a first live-birth child also had a second live-birth child; 
and so on. 
Uses of PPR 
We may calculate from the PPR’s the probability that a (married) woman will have in her 
life time at least n number of children. This can be obtained as:
Prob(n children) = PPR0 × PPR1 × · · · × PPRn
Example 8.21
For the data in Example 8.21, find the probability of a woman having 4 children in her 
life time. 
Solution
This probability is given by 
Prob(4 children)	
=
PPR0 × PPR1 × PPR2 × PPR3 × PPR4
	
	
	
=
0.856 × 0.759 × 0.705 × 0.722
	
	
	
=
0.3307
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com

DEMOGRAPHIC STATISTICS
385
MEASURES OF FERTILITY
385
Interpretation
That is, it is expected that out of 1,000 women born in the area in 2004, only 331 will 
have at least 4 children 
Note 
1)	PPR can be considered in terms of age cohort and marital cohort. We can also 
make PPR specific for both age and marriage duration. 
2)	The parity progression ratio is not specific to calender year and hence it can only 
be meaningfully interpreted when applied to women who have completed their 
fertility behaviour. Consequently, it only measures cohort fertility. It is of limited 
value as a measure of period fertility. 
Period Parity Progression Ratios 
When we calculate PPR for cohorts that are yet to complete the reproductive span, we have 
period parity progression ratio (PPPR): 
PPPR = W t
p+1
W tp
× k
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
PDF components for PHP developers
www.setasign.com
SETASIGN
This e-book  
is made with 
SetaPDF

DEMOGRAPHIC STATISTICS
386
MEASURES OF FERTILITY
where
W t
p = Number of women in a cohort who were of the ith parity at the beginning of the 
year t.
W t
p+1 = Number of women of a cohort who had their (i+1)th order births in a year t;
This measure can be considered as the probability that an ith parity woman of a given 
cohort gives birth to the (i+1)th order child in a year. 
Generally, PPRs are always less than unity but the PPPR can sometimes be greater than 
unity, especially, at the lower parities of 1 and 2. This situation arises if spacing between 
ith and (i+1)th parity differs widely among cohorts, thus making the (i+1)th order births 
of several cohorts to overlap. This will present a larger figure than the ith parity women of 
the youngest cohort resulting in a value greater than one for the PPPR. 
8.10.7  DISTRIBUTION OF FAMILY SIZE 
The PPR’s characterise the distribution of childbearing in a population. From Table 8.7, we 
can know how different family sizes are distributed, namely, the number of women with 
at least Bi children and the number of women with exactly Bi children. In both cases we 
do the computation either through the PPR or directly from the data. 
Computation through PPR
The number of women with at least Bi children PP at least
i+1
= PPi may be obtained from 
PPR as 
PP at least
i+1
= PPi × PPRi+1
The number of women with exactly Bi children may be obtained as 
PP exactly
i+1
= PPi −PPi+1
Example 8.22
Refer to Example 8.18. Calculate 
1)	the number of women with at least Bi children; 
2)	the number of women with exactly Bi children; 
with the aid of PPR and interpret the results. 
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com

DEMOGRAPHIC STATISTICS
387
MEASURES OF FERTILITY
Solution
1)	The number of women with at least Bi children.
In Table 8.7 (b) of Example 8.21, PPR1 = 0.856.
This indicates that out of 1,000 women, 856 had had at least 1 child. 
PPR2 = 0.759 indicates that among the 856 women who had at least 1 child, 649 
(856 × 0.759) had at least 2 children. 
PPR3 = 0.705 indicates that among the 649 women who had at least 2 child, 458 
(649 × 0.705) had at least 3 children. 
and so forth and;
PPR9 = 0.354 indicates that among the 41 women who had at least 8 children, 15 
(41 × 0.354) had at least 9 children.
In a more systematic manner, among 1,000 married women we have 
	
PP0 :
1000
1000 had at least 0 children;
PP1 :
1000 × 0.856
856 had at least 1 child;
PP2 :
1000 × 0.856 × 0.759
649 had at least 2 children;
...
PPR9 :
1000 × 0.856 × 0.759 × · · · × 0.354
15 had at least 9 children;
The results are given in Column (5) of Table 8.11. 
2)	The number of women with exactly Bi children.
There were 1,000 married women and 856 had 1 child. Therefore 144 (1, 000 −856) 
women never had a child. Similarly, among the 856 women who had at least 1 child, 
207 (856 −649) had exactly 1 child. Among the 649 women who had at least 2 children, 
191 (649 −458) had exactly 2 children; and so on. Finally, among the 41 women who 
had at least 9 children, 26 (41 −15) had exactly 8 children. Fifteen women had 9 or 
more children.
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com

DEMOGRAPHIC STATISTICS
388
MEASURES OF FERTILITY
Number of 
Live born 
Children 
Number 
of Women
Greater than 
or equal to 
Cumulative 
Number of 
Women
Parity 
Progression 
Ratio 
Number 
of Women 
with at 
least Bi 
children
Number of 
Women with 
exactly Bi 
children 
1
2
3
4
5
6
0
29,777
206,395
-
1000
144
1
42,593
176,618
0.856
856
207
2
39,489
134,025
0.759
649
191
3
26,242
94,536
0.705
458
127
4
20,452
68,294
0.722
331
99
5
15,983
47,842
0.701
232
78
6
12,809
31,859
0.666
154
62
7
10,563
19,050
0.598
92
51
8
5,480
8,487
0.446
41
26
9
3,007 
3,007 
0.354 
15
15
Total 
206,395 
TABLE 8.11 Calculation of Parity
Direct Computation
The number of women with at least Bi children may be obtained directly as 
PPi =
W c
i
 Wi
where W c
i  is the cumulative number of women at i number of live children born.
The number of women with exactly Bi children may be obtained as: 
PP =
Wi
 Wi
× k
where Wim is the total number of (married) women.
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com

DEMOGRAPHIC STATISTICS
389
MEASURES OF FERTILITY
Example 8.23
Refer to Example 8.21. Calculate 
1)	the number of women with at least Bi children; 
2)	the number of women with exactly Bi children; 
using the direct method. 
Solution
1)	The number of women with at least Bi children.
We can obtain the results in column (5) of Table 8.8 directly by dividing each of the 
numbers in Column (3) by the total number of the married women which is 206,395. 
That is 
	
PP0
=
206, 395
206, 395 × 1000 = 1000
PP1
=
176, 618
206, 395 × 1000 = 856
	
PP2
=
134, 025
206, 395 × 1000 = 649
...
...
PP9
=
3007
206, 395 × 1000 = 15
2)	The number of women with exactly Bi children.
Similarly, we can obtain the results in column (6) of Table 8.8 directly by dividing each of 
the numbers in column (2) by the total number of (married) women which is 206,395. 
Thus, 
	
PP0
=
29, 777
206, 395 × 1000 = 144
PP0
=
42, 593
206, 395 × 1000 = 206
	
PP0
=
39, 489
206, 395 × 1000 = 191
...
...
PP0
=
3007
206, 395 × 1000 = 15
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com

DEMOGRAPHIC STATISTICS
390
MEASURES OF FERTILITY
390
8.10.8  PREGNANCY RATE 
The pregnancy rate (PR) may be defined as: 
PR = C
M × k
where
C = Number of conceptions;
M = Number of months of exposure to risk;
k = 1, 200 taken as equivalent to 100 years.
PR has significance because it provides a new approach to measuring risk. It agrees closely 
with the definition of a rate (see Chapter 3). To obtain data for both the numerator and 
the denominator is difficult and this makes its application difficult.
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
www.sylvania.com
We do not reinvent  
the wheel we reinvent 
light.
Fascinating lighting offers an infinite spectrum of 
possibilities: Innovative technologies and new  
markets provide both opportunities and challenges. 
An environment in which your expertise is in high 
demand. Enjoy the supportive working atmosphere 
within our global group and benefit from international 
career paths. Implement sustainable ideas in close 
cooperation with other specialists and contribute to 
influencing our future. Come and join us in reinventing 
light every day.
Light is OSRAM

DEMOGRAPHIC STATISTICS
391
MEASURES OF FERTILITY
8.10.9  FECUNDABILITY 
Fecundability (F) is a measure of fecundity (see Section 8.1). It is the probability that a 
woman in a given group will conceive during a month, assuming that she completes a 
menstrual cycle during the month. Fecundability is defined as:
F = W c
W e
where
W c = Number of women conceiving during the month;
W e = Number of women exposed to becoming pregnant during the month.
8.11	 STANDARDISED FERTILITY RATE 
Generally, the rate of childbearing, as indicated earlier, varies with age. It is low before 
age 20 and after age 35 with a peak at about 25 to 29. If two populations were to differ 
radically in the way their female population is distributed between ages 15 and 49, it would 
affect the GFR; the population with the greatest proportion in the ages 20 to 29 would 
tend to have a higher GFR. Just as crude death rate may be standardised or adjusted, so is 
general fertility rate to control differences in age composition of the female population of 
childbearing age by the process of direct and indirect standadisation46.
By the interpretation of standardised rate, we may use any population distribution as the 
standard for standardised fertility rate. Thus, even though we shall be using the women 
population as the standard population, we could also use the distribution of the total 
population in the specified age group (15–49) as the standard population. 
8.11.1  DIRECT STANDARDISED FERTILITY RATE 
Standardised fertility rate, by the direct procedure, is defined as: 
DSFR =
 faW s
a
 W sa
× k
where 
fa	
= age-specific fertility rate for age group a,
W s
a	
= mid-year population of women in age group a in the standard population.
Or 
DSFR =
BE
W s × k
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com

DEMOGRAPHIC STATISTICS
392
MEASURES OF FERTILITY
BE = total number of expected births defined as: 
BE =

faW s
a
W s = total number of women in the standard population, which is the sum of women in 
all the age groups a: 
W s =

W s
a
Example 8.24
Table 8.12 (a) shows the births and estimated mid-year population of women by age for 
Mauritius in 1989. The table also includes the distribution of the Tunisia’s women population 
by age for the same year.
Compute the direct standardised fertility rate for Mauritius using her total population as 
standard.
Age group of 
women (years) 
Number of women 
in Mauritius 
population in 1989 
Number of births to 
women of specified 
age groups 
Number of 
women in Tunisia 
population in 1989
1
2
3
4
15–19
46,417
2,028
409,337
20–24
51,462
6,927
379,663
25–29
51,580
6,408
324,720
30–34
44,906
3,460
266,050
35–39
39,286
1,393
217,155
40–44
27,741
303
157,295
45–49
22,841
19
140,143
Total
284,233
20,538
1,894,363
TABLE 8.12 (a) Number of Women, Number of Births and Total Population of Mauritius in 1989
Solution
The procedure is illustrated in Table 8.12 (b).
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com

DEMOGRAPHIC STATISTICS
393
MEASURES OF FERTILITY
Age group 
of women 
(years) 
Number of 
women in 
Mauritius 
population 
in 1989 
Number 
of birth to 
women of 
specified 
age group 
in Mauritius 
Age specific 
fertility rate 
per woman 
in Mauritius 
Number 
of women 
in Tunisia 
Population 
in 1989 
(Standard) 
Number of 
Expected birth 
in Mauritius 
based on 
Tunisia Women 
population
Wa 
Ba 
fa 
W s
a  
fa
1
2 
3 
4 = (3)/(2) 
5 
6 = (4) × (5) 
15–19 
46,417 
2,028 
0.0437 
409,337 
17,884.3
20–24 
51,462 
6,927 
0.1346 
379,663 
51,104.2
25–29 
51,580 
6,408 
0.1242 
324,720 
40,341.3
30–34 
44,906 
3,460 
0.0770 
266,050 
20,499.1
35–39 
39,286 
1,393 
0.0355 
217,155 
7,699.9
40–44 
27,741 
303 
0.0109 
157,295 
1,718.0
45–49 
22,841 
19
0.0008 
140,143 
116.6
Total 
284,233 
20,538 
1,894,363 
139,363.5
TABLE 8.12 (b) Calculation of Direct Standardised Fertility Rate.
Direct standardised fertility rate is: 
DSFR
=
Total number of expected births
Total standard population
× 1, 000
=
139, 363.5
1, 894, 363 × 1, 000 = 73.6
Interpretation
The fertility rate in 1989 that could have been expected in Mauritius if the age composition 
of the women of the country had been the same as that of Tunisia was 73.6 per 1,000 
standard population. 
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com

DEMOGRAPHIC STATISTICS
394
MEASURES OF FERTILITY
Alternative Formula for Computing DSFR
Similar to direct standardised death rate, an alternative formula for computing direct 
standardised fertility rate may be defined as: 
DSFR =

a
faws
a × k
where	 fa	
=	
age-specific fertility rate for the population being studied;
	
ws
a	
=	
the proportion of female population of the standard population for 
each age group a, defined as
ws
a = W s
a
W s
Note that 

a
ws
a = 1
Example 8.25
Re-work Example 8.24 using the alternative formula for computing direct standardised 
fertility rate. 
Solution
The preliminary calculations are done in Table 8.13. 
DSFR
=
n

a=2
faws
a × k
=
0.07357 × 1000 = 73.6
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com

DEMOGRAPHIC STATISTICS
395
MEASURES OF FERTILITY
395
Age group of 
women (Year) 
Age specific 
fertility rate 
per woman 
Number of women 
in Tunisia Population 
in 1989 (Standard) 
ws
a = W s
a
W s  
ws
a × fa
fa 
W s
a  
1
2 
3 
4 
5 = (2) × (4)
15–19 
0.0437 
409,337 
0.21608 
0.00944 
20–24 
0.1346 
379,663 
0.20042 
0.02698 
25–29 
0.1242 
324,720 
0.17141 
0.02130 
30–34 
0.0770 
266,050 
0.14044 
0.01082 
35–39 
0.0355 
217,155 
0.11463 
0.00406 
40–44 
0.0109 
157,295 
0.08303 
0.00091 
45–49 
0.0008 
140,143 
0.07398 
0.00006 
Total 
1,894,363 
1.00000 
0.07357 
TABLE 8.13 Calculation of Direct Standardised Fertility Rate of Example 8.24
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
360°
thinking.
© Deloitte & Touche LLP and affiliated entities.
Discover the truth at www.deloitte.ca/careers 

DEMOGRAPHIC STATISTICS
396
MEASURES OF FERTILITY
8.11.2  INDIRECT STANDARDISED FERTILITY RATE 
When only the number of total births is available and a tabulation of births by age of 
mother is lacking we use an indirect procedure to compute the fertility rate. The formula is: 
ISFR =
B
 fsaWa
× bs × 1, 000
where 
B	
= observed births (total births) in the study population;
fs
a	
= “standard” set of age-specific fertility rates;
Wa	
= women population by age for the study population;
bs	
= crude birth rate for the standard population;
Note
fs
aWa = expected number of births in the particular population on the basis of the standard 
set of age-specific birth rates.
The indirect standardised fertility rate is computed in the same way as the indirect standardised 
death rate. 
Example 8.26
Table 8.14 (a) contains women populations for Mauritius and Tunisia in 1989 and the 
number of births in Mauritius by age for the same year.
Compute the indirect standardised fertility rate for Tunisia using Mauritius’ age specific 
fertility rate as standard if the total number of births in Tunisia in 1989 was 199,095.
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com

DEMOGRAPHIC STATISTICS
397
MEASURES OF FERTILITY
Age group of 
women (year) 
Number of women 
in Population of 
Mauritius in 1989 
Number of births 
to women in 
Mauritius in 1989 
Number of women 
population in 
Tunisia in 1989 
1
2 
3 
4
15–19 
46,417 
2,028 
409,337
20–24 
51,462 
6,927 
379,663
25–29 
51,580 
6,408 
324,720
30–34 
44,906 
3,460 
266,050
35–39 
39,286 
1,393 
217,155
40–44 
27,741 
303 
157,295
45–49 
22,837 
19 
140,143
Total 
284,229 
20,538 
1,894,363
TABLE 8.14 (a) Number of Women Mauritius and Tunisia, and Number of Births in Mauritius in 1989
Solution
The calculations are shown in the Table 8.14 (a).
Crude birth rate for Mauritius (standard population): 
bM
=
BM
W M
a
=
20, 538
284, 299 × 1, 000 = 72.3
The observed births in Tunisia (study population) in 1989 is 199,095.
The procedure for computing the indirect standardised fertility rate for Tunisia (study 
population) is illustrated in Table 8.14 (b).
ISFR
=
Observed birth in Tunisia
Expected birth in Tunisia × bs
=
199, 095
139, 342.4 × 72.3 = 103.3
Interpretation
The fertility rate for Tunisia that could have been expected if its age-specific death rate had 
been the same as that of Mauritius is 103.3 per 1,000 population.
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com

DEMOGRAPHIC STATISTICS
398
MEASURES OF FERTILITY
Age group 
of women 
(year) 
Number 
of women 
Population 
of Mauritius 
in 1989 
Number of 
births to 
women in 
Mauritius 
in 1989 
Age-specific 
fertility 
rate for 
Mauritius 
(standard) 
Number of 
women in 
Population 
of Tunisia 
in 1989 
Number of 
Expected 
births in 
Tunisia based 
on Mauritius 
Age specific 
fertility rate
W M
a  
BM 
fM
a  
Wa 
fM
a Wa
1
2 
3 
4 = (3)/(2) 
5 
6 = (4) × (5) 
15–19 
46,417 
2,028 
0.0437 
409,337 
17,888.0
20–24 
51,462 
6,927 
0.1346 
379,663 
51,102.6
25–29 
51,580 
6,408 
0.1242 
324,720 
40,330.2
30–34 
44,906 
3,460 
0.0770 
266,050 
20,485.0
35–39 
39,286 
1,393 
0.0355 
217,155 
7,709.0
40–44 
27,741 
303 
0.0109 
157,295 
1,714.5
45–49 
22,837 
19
0.0008 
140,143 
112.1
Total 
284,229 
20,538 
1,894,363 
139,342.4
TABLE 8.14 (b) Preliminary Calculation of Indirect Standardised Fertility Rate
Alternative Formula for Indirect Standardised Birth Rate
Similar to indirect standardised death rate, suppose that the data available are: 
1)	for study population: 
i)	 composition of female across the various segments (in this case across ages), Wa; 
ii)	the crude birth rate, b. 
3)	for standard population: 
i)	 age specific fertility rates, fsa; 
ii)	the crude birth rate, bs. 
Then the indirect standardised birth rate is given by: 
ISFR =
b
 Wa
W × fs
a
× bs × k
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com

DEMOGRAPHIC STATISTICS
399
MEASURES OF FERTILITY
or 
ISFR =
b
 wa × fsa
× bs × k
where wa is as defined above. 
Example 8.27
Suppose that in addition to the Table 8.11 (a), we were given the crude birth rate of 
Mauritius to be 0.0723 and the number of births in Tunisia to be 199,095. Calculate the 
indirect standardised fertility rate for Tunisia using the age-specific birth rate of Mauritius 
as standard.
Solution
The birth rate of Tunisia is: 
b =
199, 095
1, 894, 363 = 0.10510
The preliminary calculations are done in Table 8.15.
Age Group 
(Years) 
Age-Specific 
Fertility rate 
of Mauritius 
Population 
of Women 
in Tunisia 
fM
a
Wa
Wa
W
Wa
W × fM
a
1
2 
3 
4 
5 = (2) × (4)
15–19 
0.0437
409,337
0.21608 
0.00944
20–24 
0.1346
379,663
0.20042 
0.02698
25–29 
0.1242
324,720
0.17141 
0.02129
30–34 
0.0771
266,050
0.14044 
0.01081
35–39 
0.0355
217,155
0.11463 
0.00407
40–44 
0.0109
157,295
0.08303 
0.00091
45–49 
0.0008
140,143
0.07398 
0.00006
Total 
1,894,363
1.00000 
0.07356
TABLE 8.15 Calculation of ISDR for Example 8.24
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com

DEMOGRAPHIC STATISTICS
400
MEASURES OF FERTILITY
400
Therefore, the indirect standardised fertility rate, ISFR, is 
ISFR
=
b
 Wa
W × bM
a
× bM × k
=
0.10510
0.07356 × 0.0723 × 1, 000 = 103.3
8.11.3  UNITED NATIONS SEX-AGE ADJUSTED BIRTH RATE 
In other situations, all the data available to us are only: 
1)	the total number of births, and 
2)	the age distribution of women in the reproductive span. 
In such a case we resort to a practical application of the indirectly standardised rate which 
is the United Nations sex-age adjusted birth rate (UNSAABR). It is defined as 
UNSAABR =
B
 qaWa
× k
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
We will turn your CV into 
an opportunity of a lifetime
Do you like cars? Would you like to be a part of a successful brand?
We will appreciate and reward both your enthusiasm and talent.
Send us your CV. You will be surprised where it can take you.
Send us your CV on
www.employerforlife.com

DEMOGRAPHIC STATISTICS
401
MEASURES OF FERTILITY
where qa’s are the standard weights 1, 7, 7, 6, 4, 1 representing the relative fertility rates by 
age for the five-year age groups 15–19, 20–24, 25–29, 30–34, 35–39, 40–44, respectively. 
These weights were deduced by the United Nations Population Division, on the basis of 
observations of the age-specific fertility rates of 52 countries, representing both the low and 
high fertility populations. The UNSAABR is expressed as the number of births per 1,000 
of the weighted sum of women in the reproductive ages (15–44).
Example 8.27
For the data in Example 8.3, calculate the UNSAABR. 
Solution
The preliminary results are presented in Table 8.16.
Therefore the UNSAABR is: 
UNSAABR
=
B
 qaWa
× k
	
	
 =
20, 538
1, 222, 032 × 1, 000 = 16.8
Age group 
Mid-year Women 
Population 
Number 
of Births
Standard 
Weights wa
 waWa
1
2 
3 
4
5=(3) × (4) 
15–19 
46,417 
2,028
1
46,417
20–24 
51,462 
6,927
7
360,234
25–29 
51,580 
6,408
7
361,060
30–34 
44,906 
3,460
6
269,436
35–39 
39,286 
1,393
4
157,144
40–44 
27,741 
303
1
27,741
45–49 
22,841 
19
· · ·
· · ·
Total 
284,233 
20,538 
1,222,032
TABLE 8.16 Number of Births by Age of Women in Mauritius, 1984
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com

DEMOGRAPHIC STATISTICS
402
MEASURES OF FERTILITY
EXERCISES
8.1	
The mid-year population of the Republic of Mauritius in 2002 was 1,210,196; in 
2003 was 1,222,811 and in 2004 was 1,233,386. In these years the number of live 
births were 19,799; 19,165 and 19,230 respectively. Calculate: 
1)	Crude birth rate for each year; 
2)	Mean annual crude birth rate for the entire period; 
3)	Annual average crude birth rate for the entire period; 
4)	Mid-period crude birth rate for the entire period. 
8.2	
The mid-year population of a community is 50,000 with 25,500 women in the ages 
15 and 49 years. In that year 800 children were born. Calculate the: 
1)	crude birth rate; 
2)	general fertility rate. 
8.3	
The following were data for a community in a certain year: 
Vital Events 
Number
Total 
Black 
White
Estimated population 
Total as of July 1 
100,000 
60,000 
40,000 
Women between ages 15–49 
as given by the census 
49,000 
28,000 
21,000 
Women between ages 25–29 
8,000 
5,000 
3,000 
Women ever married of 
ages between 15–49 
38,000 
20,000 
18,000 
Married women 
34,500 
18,000 
16,500 
Births 
Total of all ages 
4,000 
3,000 
1,000 
Births outside marriage 
3,700 
2,800 
900 
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com

DEMOGRAPHIC STATISTICS
403
MEASURES OF FERTILITY
Calculate, for the each of the racial group and combined, the following: 
1)	the crude birth rate; 
2)	the general fertility rate; 
3)	the general marital fertility rate; 
4)	the general legitimate fertility rate; 
5)	the general illegitimate fertility rate; 
6)	the illegitimacy ratio. 
8.4	
The following table shows the mid-year female population and the number of births 
of the Republic of Mauritius by age of women in 2004:
Age-group 
Mid-year Women Population 
in Mauritius in 2004 
Number of births in 
Mauritius in 2004
15–19 
46,955 
1,735
20–24 
53,308 
5,900
25–29 
53,955 
6,080
30–34 
46,591 
3,287
35–39 
49,954 
1,682
40–44 
49,072 
419 
45–49 
42,597 
27
Calculate the: 
1)	General fertility rate; 
2)	Age-specific fertility rates; 
3)	Cumulative fertility rate for: 
i)	 Age group 25–34, 
ii)	Age group 35–49, 
3)	Total fertility rate; 
4)	Mean age at childbearing; 
5)	Median age at childbearing; 
6)	Child-woman ratio: 
	
CWR =
C0−4
W15−44
× k
7)	Children ever born; 
8)	Parity Progression Ratio. 
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com

DEMOGRAPHIC STATISTICS
404
MEASURES OF FERTILITY
8.5	
The table below shows live birth order by age of mother and female population in 
the reproductive ages in the Republic of Mauritius in 2003. Calculate: 
1)	General order specific fertility rate; 
2)	Age and order specific fertility rate. 
Age group 
(Years) 
Mid-year Women 
Population 
in Mauritius 
in 2003
Live Birth Order in Mauritius in 2003
First
Second 
Third
Fourth 
Fifth
Sixth 
1
2 
3 
4
5
6 
7
8
15–19 
46,391 
1481 
225 
14
2 
0 
1
20–24 
55,496 
3721 
1975 
334
54
5 
0
25–29 
52,327 
2167 
2616 
770
172 
45
17
30–34 
45,784 
764 
1288 
835
267 
90
43
35–39 
51,452 
348 
580 
531
210 
100 
72
40–44 
47,563 
91
71
103
54
43
48
45–49 
41,402 
7 
3 
5 
3 
3 
5
8.6	
The following table shows the births and estimated mid-year women population by 
age for Mauritius in 2003. It also includes the estimated mid-year women population 
of South Africa in the same year.
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com

DEMOGRAPHIC STATISTICS
405
MEASURES OF FERTILITY
405
Age group of 
women (year) 
Number of women 
Population in 
Mauritius in 2003 
Number of births 
to women in 
Mauritius in 2003 
Number of women 
Population in South 
Africa in 2003 
15–19 
46,391 
1,692 
2,448,341
20–24 
55,496 
6,077 
2,320,855
25–29 
52,327 
5,776 
2,111,636
30–34 
45,784 
3,281 
1,843,665
35–39 
51,452 
1,837 
1,449,763
40–44 
47,563 
411 
1,312,067
45–49 
41,402 
26
1,157,891
Total 
40,415 
19,130 
12,644,218
Compute the direct standardised fertility rate for the Republic of Mauritius using the female 
population of South Africa as standard.
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
AXA Global 
Graduate Program
Find out more and apply

DEMOGRAPHIC STATISTICS
406
MEASURES OF FERTILITY
8.7	
The following table shows the births and women population of reproductive ages for 
Mauritius as enumerated in 2000. The table also includes the women population of 
reproductive ages for Ghana as enumerated in 2000. Compute the direct standardised 
fertility rate for Mauritius using the Ghana’s women population as standard. 
Age group of 
women (year) 
Women Population 
in Mauritius in 2000 
Births to women of 
Mauritius of specified 
age group in 2000 
Women Population 
in Ghana in 2000 
15–19 
50,424
1,682 
922,591 
20–24 
55,790
6,607 
837,769 
25–29 
47,054
5,493 
791,805 
30–34 
49,557
3,368 
640,370 
35–39 
50,331
1,810 
538,901 
40–44 
44,613
389 
443,647 
44–49
38,803
24
343,042
Total 
336,572 
19,373 
4,518,125
8.8	
The data below show some demographic data on two areas A and B in 2002.
Age group of 
women (year) 
Number of women 
Population in 
Area A in 2002 
Births to Women of 
reproductive age 
group in Area A 
Number of women 
population in 
Area B in 2002
15–19 
1,350 
640 
6,540
20–24 
1,320 
750 
6,440
25–29 
1,290 
760 
5,300
30–34 
1,230 
620 
4,190
35–39 
1,180 
510 
3,900
40-44 
1,080 
405 
3,600
45-49 
1,500 
120 
1,750
Compute the indirect standardised fertility rate for Area B using Area A’s age specific fertility 
rate as standard if the total number of births in Area B was 989.
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com

DEMOGRAPHIC STATISTICS
407
MEASURES OF FERTILITY
8.9	
The table below shows some demographic data on Mauritius and South Africa 
for 2004.
Age group of 
women (year)
Mid-year Women 
Population in 
Mauritius in 2004 
Births in Mauritius to 
Women of reproductive 
age group in 2004
Mid-year Women 
Population in South 
Africa in 2004
15–19 
46,955 
1,735
2,448,341
20–24 
53,308 
5,900
2,320,855
25–29 
53,955 
6,080
2,111,636
30–34 
46,591 
3,287
1,843,665
35–39 
49,954 
1,682
1,449,763
40–44 
49,072 
419 
1,312,067
45–49 
42,597 
27
1,157,891
Compute the indirect standardised fertility rate for South Africa, using the Mauritius age 
specific fertility rate as standard if the total number of live births registered in South Africa 
in 2004 was 1,475,809.
8.10	
For the table below, calculate the UN sex-age adjusted birth rate.
Age group 
Mid-year Women Population 
Number of Births 
15–19 
546,417
5,683
20–24 
651,462
8,665
25–29 
651,580
7,932
30–34 
544,906
5,671
35–39 
439,286
3,306
40–44 
327,741
2,001
45–49 
322,841
900
8.11	
For the data in Exercise 8.9, calculate the UN sex-age adjusted birth rate for Mauritius.
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com

DEMOGRAPHIC STATISTICS
408
MEASURES OF REPRODUCTIVITY
9	
MEASURES OF REPRODUCTIVITY
9.1	
INTRODUCTION
So far we have considered the measures of mortality and fertility separately. But fertility 
and mortality rates are inadequate in giving us any idea about the extent at which the 
population is replacing itself since they ignore the sex of the newly born children and their 
mortality. How then can fertility and mortality be combined so that we can assess whether 
one is more or less offsetting the other, whether fertility is sufficient to balance mortality. 
Measures that are appropriate for this purpose are reproductivity rates.
Reproductivity or population replacement refers to the extent to which a cohort is replacing 
its own numbers by the natural processes. It is the net force of fertility and mortality and is 
usually expressed in terms of a generation rather than a year or other brief period of time.
9.2	
TYPES OF REPRODUCTIVITY MEASURES 
Reproductivity may be measured using simple and conventional rates. 
9.2.1  SIMPLE MEASURES OF REPRODUCTIVITY 
Simple measures of reproductivity are measures of comparing the number of births and 
deaths on an annual (instead of a generation) basis. These measures include; 
1)	natural increase; 
2)	crude rate of natural increase; 
3)	vital index. 
Natural Increase 
Natural increase (NI) is the change in population due to the net effect of fertility and 
mortality. It is defined as the difference between the number of births and the number of 
deaths in a given year. Thus, 
where
B = births during a calendar year;
D = deaths during a calendar year.
NI = B −D
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com

DEMOGRAPHIC STATISTICS
409
MEASURES OF REPRODUCTIVITY
When the B −D is negative, the change is referred to as natural decrease. 
Example 9.1
In Mauritius, 20,875 children were born and 6,946 people died in 1989. Calculate the 
natural increase. 
Solution 
B
=
20, 875;
D = 6, 946
NI
=
B −D
	
=
20, 875 −6, 946 = 13, 929
That is, the population of Mauritius increased naturally by 13,929 people in 1989. 
Crude Rate of Natural Increase 
The crude rate of natural increase (CRN), also referred to as crude rate of reproductive 
change, is the simplest measure of population growth. It is defined as the (algebraic) excess 
of births over deaths per 1,000 of the population, that is, 
CRN = B −D
P
×
1, 000
Example 9.2
In addition to the data in Example 9.1, the mid-year population of Mauritius was 1,064,000. 
Calculate the crude rate of natural increase. 
Solution 
B
=
20, 875;
D = 6, 946;
P = 1, 064, 000
CRN
=
B −D
P
× 1, 000
=
20, 875 −6, 946
1, 064.000
×
1, 000 = 13.1
That is, the population of Mauritius increased naturally by 13.1 per 1,000 persons in 1989. 
Alternative Definition of Crude Rate of Natural Increase
Depending on the data at hand the crude rate of natural increase may also be defined as 
the difference between the crude birth rate and the crude death rate: 
CRN = b −d
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com

DEMOGRAPHIC STATISTICS
410
MEASURES OF REPRODUCTIVITY
410
where
b = the birth rate;
d = the death rate.
Example 9.3
Refer to Example 9.Calculate the crude rate of natural increase. 
Solution 
	
	
P
=
1, 064, 000
B = 20, 875
D = 6, 946
b
=
20, 875
1, 064, 000 × 1, 000 = 19.619
	
	
d
=
6, 946
1, 064, 000 × 1, 000 = 6.528
˙. .
CRN
=
b −d
=
19.619 −6.528 = 13.1
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
ibili
because 
e Graduate Programme  
for Engineers and Geoscientists
Month 16
I was a construction
supervisor in 
the North Sea 
advising and 
helping foremen 
solve problems
I was a
he
s
Real work 
International opportunities 

ree work placements
al 
Internationa
or

ree wo
I wanted real responsibili 
 I joined MITAS because 
www.discovermitas.com

DEMOGRAPHIC STATISTICS
411
MEASURES OF REPRODUCTIVITY
Advantages of Crude Rate of Natural Increase 
1)	It is simple and easy to compute. 
2)	The rate of natural increase is the most direct indication of how rapidly a given 
population actually grew during a given year as a result of vital processes. It is the 
current annual rate of growth, exclusive of migration. If births exceed deaths, there 
is growth and the rate is positive. If deaths outnumber births, the population fails 
to increase during the year, and the rate is negative. 
Disadvantages of Crude Rate of Natural Increase 
1)	This rate represents only the change due to the balance of births and deaths 
and does not include the effect of migration. Hence it does not give the actual 
population change. 
2)	It suffers from the drawbacks of crude birth rate and crude death rate. 
3)	The rate of natural increase may be affected indirectly by migration. If migrants 
have higher or lower fertility and mortality than the remainder of the population 
their movement will have some influence on the annual birth and death rates. 
In the absence of migration, although the rate of natural increase and the rate of growth 
both represent the same thing, they are not identical. They are calculated differently. The 
rate of natural increase is based on the mid-year population while the rate of growth is 
based on the population at the beginning of the year. 
Vital Index 
The vital index (VI) is the ratio of the number of births to the number of deaths, times 
100, that is, 
V I = B
D × 100
or equivalently, the ratio of the birth rate to the death rate times 100: 
V I = b
d × 100
Example 9.4
Refer to Example 9.3 and calculate the vital index. 
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com

DEMOGRAPHIC STATISTICS
412
MEASURES OF REPRODUCTIVITY
Solution 
B
=
20, 875;
D = 6, 946
V I
=
B
D × 100
=
20, 875
6, 946 × 100 = 300.5
Or from Example 9.3 
b
=
19.619
d = 6.528
V I
=
b
d × 100
=
19.619
6.528 × 100 = 300.5
That is, for every 100 deaths in Mauritius in 1989, there were about 301 births. 
Advantages of Vital Index
The vital index has some advantages. 
1)	It is simple and easy to calculate. 
2)	It is regarded as a fairly reliable statistical constant reflecting the net biological 
status of the population as a whole. Thus: 
i)	 If the ratio V I > 100 then the population is regarded as having good medical care. 
ii)	If V I > 100 then the population is not holding its own. 
3)	It can be computed for an area for which post-censal population estimates are not 
available. 
4)	It does indicate the extent to which the force of fertility exceeds that of mortality 
at a given time. 
Disadvantages of Vital Index
There are two main disadvantages of vital index. 
1)	It merely gives a measure of whether births exceed deaths or not. It certainly fails 
to give us any idea about the trend in the population growth, that is, it does not 
tell us anything about whether population has a tendency to increase or decrease. 
2)	It suffers from the drawbacks of crude birth and crude death rate. 
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com

DEMOGRAPHIC STATISTICS
413
MEASURES OF REPRODUCTIVITY
9.2.2  CONVENTIONAL REPRODUCTION RATES 
The simple measures discussed in section 9.1 may be highly misleading since such figures, 
as we have explained, may be influenced by temporary factors. For example, if owing to 
high birth rates in the past there is a relatively young population, for the time being, there 
will be a low death rate and relatively few deaths and abnormally large number of births 
because of the high proportion of young marriageable people in the population. We may 
want to know whether births will balance deaths given the continuation of fertility and 
mortality trends, once this abnormality has passed.
The earliest and most commonly used measure is that which eliminates only age and sex 
structure. This can be done easily by combining figures of total fertility and the measurement 
of mortality as calculated in a life table. The total fertility rate shows how many children 
would be born to a group of women if they experienced the specific fertility rates of the 
year or series of years which are being examined. These children born will include both male 
and female, but if we are considering whether births are sufficient to replace the existing 
generation of women we must include only female births. 
Conventional reproductivity measures attempt to eliminate such “abnormalities” and tell us 
whether each generation will replace itself on the basis of the fundamental factors influencing 
mortality and fertility. Conventional reproduction rates measure the replacement of the 
female population only. Such measurements of replacement tell us only whether in the 
long run the population will increase or decrease, given existing mortality or fertility rates. 
Conventional reproduction rates are usually expressed per woman, however they could be 
expressed per 100 or 1,000 women. The conventional reproduction rates include the gross 
reproduction rates and the net reproduction rates.
9.3	
GROSS REPRODUCTION RATE 
9.3.1  CONCEPT AND INTERPRETATION OF GROSS REPRODUCTION RATE 
Gross reproduction rate (GRR) is a measure of population replacement which describes the 
rate of increase of population over a generation. It tackles directly the problem of estimating 
how quickly a population is reproducing itself. Exhibiting the rate at which mothers would 
be replaced by daughters and the old generation by the new, it assumes that, 
1)	all newly born daughters survive to the end of the childbearing period, 
2)	all newly born daughters experience throughout the reproductive period, the current 
level of fertility. 
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com

DEMOGRAPHIC STATISTICS
414
MEASURES OF REPRODUCTIVITY
GRR can be interpreted as: 
1)	the average number of daughters that a woman would bear by the time she reaches 
her forty-ninth birthday period if she conforms to the age-specific fertility rates of 
a given year; 
2)	the average number of daughters that a group of k females starting life together 
would bear if all the initial group of females survived the childbearing period. 
9.3.2  METHODS OF CALCULATING GROSS REPRODUCTION RATE 
GRR is the ratio of the hypothetical total of female babies, who would be born to a group 
of women who start their childbearing period together and who neither die nor migrate 
until they have reached the end of that period, to the total number of women considered. 
It is the age specific fertility rates calculated from female births for each single year of 
childbearing age. 
Definition of GRR for Single Years of Age
If the data are for single years of age then 
GRR
=
m=49

a=15
Bw
a
Wa
× k
where k = 1; 100 or 1,000.
Definition of GRR for Equal Interval of Age-groups
GRR for equal class interval is computed as: 
GRR = n
m=45−49

a=15−19
Bw
a
Wa
× k
where 
Bw
a 	
= female live births to mothers of childbearing age;
Wa	
= mid-year population of women of the childbearing age;
n	
= class width for the age group.
If the data are for 5-year age group, as is usually the case (n = 5) then 
GRR = 5

fw
a × 1, 000
where fw
a = fertility rate for female births. 
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com

DEMOGRAPHIC STATISTICS
415
MEASURES OF REPRODUCTIVITY
415
Example 9.5
Refer to Table 9.1 (a).
Age-group (years) 
Mid-year women population 
Female births
15–19 
46,417 
993
20–24 
51,462 
3,424
25–29 
51,580 
3,129
30–34 
44,906 
1,660
35–39 
39,286 
706
40–44 
27,741 
142
45–49 
22,837 
6
TABLE 9.1 (a) Mid-year Women Population and Female Live Births of Mauritius, 1989  
Source: United Nations Demographic Yearbook (1980–1993), (New York: Statistics Office, Department of 
Economic and Social Affairs) 
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
MASTER IN MANAGEMENT
mim.admissions@ie.edu
Follow us on IE MIM Experience
www.ie.edu/master-management
#10 WORLDWIDE
MASTER IN MANAGEMENT 
FINANCIAL TIMES
55 Nationalities
in class
5 Specializations
Personalize your program 
Length: 1O MONTHS
Av. Experience: 1 YEAR
Language: ENGLISH / SPANISH
Format: FULL-TIME
Intakes: SEPT / FEB
• STUDY IN THE CENTER OF MADRID AND TAKE ADVANTAGE OF THE UNIQUE OPPORTUNITIES
  THAT THE CAPITAL OF SPAIN OFFERS
• PROPEL YOUR EDUCATION BY EARNING A DOUBLE DEGREE THAT BEST SUITS YOUR
  PROFESSIONAL GOALS
• STUDY A SEMESTER ABROAD AND BECOME A GLOBAL CITIZEN WITH THE BEYOND BORDERS
  EXPERIENCE
93%
OF MIM STUDENTS ARE
WORKING IN THEIR SECTOR 3 MONTHS
FOLLOWING GRADUATION

DEMOGRAPHIC STATISTICS
416
MEASURES OF REPRODUCTIVITY
Calculate the gross reproduction rate. 
Solution
The procedure is illustrated in Table 9.1 (b):
Age-group (years) 
Mid-year women 
population 
Female births 
Age-specific fertility 
rate of females
Wa 
Bw
a  
1
2 
3 
4 = (3)/(2)
15–19 
46,417 
993 
0.02139
20–24 
51,462 
3,424 
0.06653
25–29 
51,580 
3,129 
0.06066
30–34 
44,906 
1,660 
0.03697
35–39 
39,286 
706 
0.01797
40–44 
27,741 
142 
0.00512
45–49 
22,837 
6 
0.00026
Total 
284,229 
10,060 
0.2089
TABLE 9.1 (b) Preliminary Calculation of Gross Reproduction Rate
GRR
=
5

fw
a × 1, 000
=
5(0.2089)(1, 000) = 1045
Interpretation
That is, 1,045 daughters per 1,000 women would be born by a group of females starting 
life together if all the initial group of females survived the childbearing periods. or 1.045 
daughters per woman if she survived the childbearing periods. 
Definition of GRR for Unequal Interval of Age Groups
If the age-groups do not have equal intervals, then 
GRR =
m=45−49

a=15−19
na × Bw
a
Wa
× k
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com

DEMOGRAPHIC STATISTICS
417
MEASURES OF REPRODUCTIVITY
Example 9.6
Table 9.2 (a) presents Table 9.1 (a) by unequal age-groups. Calculate the gross reproduction rate.
Age-group (years) 
Mid-year women population 
Female births
15–19 
46,417 
993
20–24 
51,462 
3,424
25–34 
96,486 
4,789
30–49 
89,864 
854
TABLE 9.2 (a) Mid-year Women Population and Female Live Births of Mauritius by Unequal Age-group, 1989
Solution
The procedure is illustrated in Table 9.2 (b).
Age-group 
(years) 
Mid-year 
women 
population 
Class width 
Birth rates 
of Daughters 
only 
Expected 
female births 
per woman 
Bw
a
na
fw
a = Bw
a
Wa
na × Bw
a
Wa
1
2 
3 
4 
5 
(5)
(4)
=
6
×
15–19 
46,417 
993 
5 
0.02139 
0.10695
20–24 
51,452 
3,424 
5 
0.06653 
0.33265
25–34 
96,486 
4,789 
10 
0.04963 
0.49630
30–49 
89,864 
854 
15 
0.00950 
0.14250
Total 
284,229 
10,060 
1.07840
TABLE 9.2 (b) Preliminary calculation of the gross reproduction rate
GRR
=
m=45−49

a=15−19
na × Bw
a
Wa
× 1, 000
=
1.07840 × 1, 000 = 1078.4
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com

DEMOGRAPHIC STATISTICS
418
MEASURES OF REPRODUCTIVITY
Interpretation
That is, 1,078.4 daughters would be born by a group of 1,000 women at the current fertility 
level if all the initial group of 1,000 women survived the childbearing age; or about one 
daughter on the average would be born by a woman if she survived the childbearing age 
at the current fertility levels.
Computation of GRR from the TFR
The GRR is a special case of the TFR In fact, it is a modified form of TFR for an one-
sex model. TFR has been defined in Chapter 8 as “the sum of age-specific fertility rates 
of women of childbearing ages”. GRR is the sum of age-specific fertility rates of women 
of childbearing ages, restricted to female births only. Hence, whereas the numerator of the 
TFR is based on total births, the numerator of the GRR is based on female births only. 
Otherwise, this rate is essentially the same as the total fertility rate. It is, therefore, easy to 
convert TFR to a GRR simply by multiplying TFR by the proportion of the total births 
(during the corresponding period) that were female. Thus, 
GRR = δ TFR
where 
δ = Bw
B
That is, δ is the proportion of all births B which are females Bw under the assumption 
that the sex-ratio at birth remains more or less constant at all the ages of the women in 
the reproductive period.
Alternatively, 
δ
=
1
1 + Sex Ratio at birth
Example 9.7
Using the data in Example 9.5, compute GRR if 49 percent of the births by women in the 
reproductive period were females. 
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com

DEMOGRAPHIC STATISTICS
419
MEASURES OF REPRODUCTIVITY
Solution
For convenience we reproduce the data here as Table 9.3.
TFR
=
5

fw
a
=
5(0.42678) = 2.1339 babies per woman
Not all these babies are females. The proportion of female births δ = 0.49, hence 
GRR = 0.49(2.1339) = 1.0456
Age-group 
Mid-year women 
population 
Total births 
Age-specific 
fertility rate
1
2
3
4 = (3)/(2)
15–19 
46,417
2,028
0.04369
20–24 
51,462
6,927
0.13460
25–29 
51,580
6,408
0.12423
30–34 
44,906
3,460
0.07705
35–39 
39,286
1,393
0.03546
40–44 
27,741
303
0.01092
45–49 
22,837
19
0.00083
Total 
284,229
20,538
0.42678
TABLE 9.3 Preliminary calculation of the Gross Reproductive Rate
Note
GRR may be computed for males on the basis of male births rather than female births 
though such a measure is rather rare. 
9.3.3  ADVANTAGES AND DISADVANTAGES OF GRR 
Advantage of Gross Reproduction Rate 
1)	GRR, as a measure of fertility, is quite useful for comparing the fertility in different 
regions or in the same region at different periods of time. 
2)	GRR can be considered as a replacement index 
3)	Implicit in GRR is the concept of growth. 
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com

DEMOGRAPHIC STATISTICS
420
MEASURES OF REPRODUCTIVITY
420
Disadvantage of Gross Reproduction Rate 
GRR would overestimate growth as it takes no account of the deaths of females at all ages 
from 15–49. It is computed on the hypothesis that mortality through the childbearing period 
is zero, that is, none of the newly born female babies is subject to the risk of mortality till 
the end of the reproductive period. This is a very serious limitation of GRR since all the 
girls born do not survive till the end of the childbearing span. Accordingly, GRR leads to 
fallacious conclusions as it inflates the number of potential mothers.
9.4	
NET REPRODUCTION RATE 
9.4.1  CONCEPT OF NET REPRODUCTION RATE 
As already pointed out, the principal drawback of GRR is that it completely ignores the 
current mortality and takes into account only the current fertility. This limitation is overcome 
in net reproduction rate (NRR).
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more

DEMOGRAPHIC STATISTICS
421
MEASURES OF REPRODUCTIVITY
NRR is nothing but GRR adjusted for the effects of mortality. NRR takes into account 
the fact that out of a number of girls born to 1,000 women some die in infancy or before 
completing their childbearing years (either before attaining the age of reproduction or 
during the reproductive span). Others will live to complete their reproductive life. NRR 
consists of a hypothetical cohort of women, their deaths and all their female births during 
the childbearing period. It measures the number of daughters that a cohort of newborn 
female babies will bear during their lifetime assuming a fixed schedule of age-specific fertility 
rates and a fixed set of mortality rates; in other words, NRR measures the extent to which 
a generation of newly born girls survive to reproduce themselves as they pass through the 
childbearing age group under given schedules of age-specific fertility and mortality rates. 
Some girls will die before attaining the age of reproduction, others will die during the 
reproductive span, and others will live to complete their reproductive life. Also some of 
the women do not give birth at all and it is only the remaining females who pass through 
the reproductive period and thus add to the population growth. 
Interpretation of Net Reproduction Rate47 
NRR may be interpreted as the 
1)	average number of daughters who will be born by a woman if she survived the 
childbearing age conforming to the age-specific fertility and mortality rates of a 
given year. 
2)	average number of daughters who will be born by a cohort of k females starting 
life together with fixed age-specific fertility and mortality rates of a given year. 
If all the new born girls survive at least till the end of the reproductive period NRR = 
GRR. Otherwise NRR < GRR. Since NRR ≤ GRR then GRR provides an upper limit 
to NRR. Consequently, 
0 ≤NRR ≤5
NRR = 1 (or 100 or 1,000), depending on the value of k means exact replacement, that 
is, if the current fertility and female mortality rates prevail in future, then a cohort of new 
born girls will exactly replace itself in the next generation. In other words, present female 
generation will exactly maintain itself. The population, therefore, has a tendency to remain 
more or less constant. 
NRR > 1 indicates that the women are bearing more than adequate daughters to represent 
them in the next generation of mothers. That is, the population is more than replacing 
itself, having a tendency to increase. 
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com

DEMOGRAPHIC STATISTICS
422
MEASURES OF REPRODUCTIVITY
NRR < 1 means that the women are not bearing adequate daughters to represent them in 
the next generation of mothers. That is, the population is not replacing itself, indicating a 
declining population. 
9.4.2  METHODS OF CALCULATING NET REPRODUCTION RATE 
NRR computed from Unabridged Life Table
When the data available are for single years of age NRR is defined as: 
NRR =
m=49

a=15
fw
a × Lw
a
lwo
× k
where	 fw
a 	
=
Bw
a
Wa 	
is age-specific female fertility rate at each age a;
	
lw
o 	
=
100, 000	
(a benchmark called the radix of the life table);
	
Lw
a 	
=
1
2(lw
a + lw
a+1)
	
	
= the number of person-years that would be lived within the indicated age 
interval (a to a + 1) by the cohort of 100,000 female births assumed, that 
is, the number of years lived by the females who have reached age a, before 
they reach the next higher age;
	
lw
a 	
= female survivors at age a;
	
lw
a+1	
= number of female survivals from age-group a to a + 1;
	
Lw
a
lwo
	
= life-table female survival rate.
This formula means “the sum of the daughters per k women in the cohort, beginning at 
age 15, up to the end of age 49”. 
NRR Computed from Abridged Life Table
Using age in completed years
When 5-year age groups are used (n = 5), the NRR may be defined using the conventional 
rate that relates to women of the same age in completed years. The numbers of survivors 
are related to 15 years, 20 years, 25 years, 30 years, 35 years, 40 years, 45 years, and 50 
years, respectively from the unabridged life table.
We have 
NRR =
m=45−49

a=15−19
fw
a × 5Lw
a
lwo
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com

DEMOGRAPHIC STATISTICS
423
MEASURES OF REPRODUCTIVITY
where 
5Lw
a = 5
2

lw
a + lw
(a+5)

or 
NRR
=
m=45−49

a=15−19
fw
a × 5Lw
a
lwo
× k
for a cohort of k daughters. 
Example 9.8
The mid-year women population, and the number of female births (all in thousands) and 
the life table female survivors of a country for 1986 are shown in the table below. If female 
survivors for age group 50–54 are 81,000 per 100,000 women calculate the net reproduction 
rate. (Hint: l0 = 100, 000).
Age-group (years) 
Mid-year women 
population 
Female births 
Life table survivors 
15–19 
4,000 
210 
93,200 
20–24 
3,800 
240 
91,500 
25–29 
3,500 
230 
89,400 
30–34 
3,400 
200 
86,600 
35–39 
3,100 
150 
85,300 
40–44 
3,000 
100 
84,000 
45–49 
2,500 
70 
82,700 
TABLE 9.4 (a) Hypothetical Data for Calculation of Net Reproductive Rate
Solution
The calculations are illustrated in Table 9.4 (b). In column 5, for example, 
5Lw
15−19
=
5
2(93, 200 + 91, 500) = 461, 750
5Lw
20−24
=
5
2(91, 500 + 89, 400) = 452, 250
...
...
5Lw
20−24
=
5
2(82, 700 + 81, 000) = 409, 250
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com

DEMOGRAPHIC STATISTICS
424
MEASURES OF REPRODUCTIVITY
Hence, 
NRR =
m=45−49

a=15−19
5fw
a × 5Lw
a
lwo
× 1, 000 = 1, 528.2
Interpretation
That is, 1,528.2 daughters will be born by a group of 1,000 females starting life together, 
assuming a fixed schedule birth rates and death rates.
Age 
group 
(year)
Mid-year 
women 
population
Female 
births
Life table 
survivors 
for 
females 
Age-
specific 
female 
fertility 
rate per 
Expected 
Survival 
rate per 
woman 
Expected 
female 
births per 
woman
Lw
a
lw
a
5fa
5Lw
a
5Lw
a
lw
o
5fa × 5Lw
a
lw
o
1
2 
3 
4 
5 
6
7 = (6)/(4) 
8 = (5) × (7)
15–19 
4,000 
210 
93,200 
0.0525 
461,750 
4.6175 
0.2424
20–24 
3,800 
240 
91,500 
0.0632 
452,250 
4.5225 
0.2858
25–29 
3,500 
230 
89,400 
0.0657 
440,000 
4.4000 
0.2891
30–34 
3,400 
200 
86,600 
0.0588 
429,750 
4.2975 
0.2527
35–39 
3,100 
150 
85,300 
0.0484 
423,250 
4.2325 
0.2049
40–44 
3,000 
100 
84,000 
0.0333 
416,750 
4.1675 
0.1388
45–49 
2,500 
70 
82,700 
0.0280 
409,250 
4.0925 
0.1146
Total 
0.3499 
1.5282 
TABLE 9.4 (b) Preliminary calculation of the Net Reproductive Rate
Note 
Though, throughout, NRR has been expressed per 1,000 woman, it is usually expressed per 
woman. Thus, the total of column 8 gives the average number of daughters per woman, 
that is, an average of 1.5 daughters per woman would be born.
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com

DEMOGRAPHIC STATISTICS
425
MEASURES OF REPRODUCTIVITY
425
NRR at age group “a” for women who reach age group “a + n”
We consider the NRR at age group “a” for women who reach age group “a + n” during the 
year in question. The number of survivors are those relating to 17, 22, 27, 32, 37, 42, and 47 
years from the unabridged table. That is, we use the female survival rate to the mid-point 
of each age interval lw(a + n)
lwo
. For example, the survival rate of age 17 is 
lw
(17)
lwo
= 93, 200
100, 000 = 0.932
In addition, the fertility rate for the 5-year age group is a mean fertility rate valid for 5 
years. Therefore, in this approach, the result needs to be multiplied by 5 to produce the 
NRR. Hence the NRR is defined as 
NRR = 5
m=45−49

a=15−19
fw
a × Lw
a
lwo
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
“The perfect start 
of a successful, 
international career.”
CLICK HERE 
to discover why both socially 
and academically the University 
of Groningen is one of the best 
places for a student to be 
www.rug.nl/feb/education
Excellent Economics and Business programmes at:

DEMOGRAPHIC STATISTICS
426
MEASURES OF REPRODUCTIVITY
Explanation of Technique
It is assumed that during the five years the women spend in the age group of, say, 30–34 
years, 1,000 women will bring, on the average, 58.8 (multiplying column 3 by 1,000) 
female children into the world each year but according to the life table, only 866 of the 
1,000 women (i.e. 86,600 of 100,000) at birth will have female children while in this age 
group (column 4). Consequently, it is necessary to correct the number of female births 
that will occur ((0.0588 × 0.866). Thus, we have 0.05092 births per female births or 50.9 
births per 1,000 female births. Continuing in this way, for all the age groups and adding 
the results, we obtain 0.30883 daughter per woman (from birth) per year. However, as the 
women remain fixed in each 5-year age group, it is necessary to multiply these 0.30883 
female births by 5, to give 1.54414 total female births per woman per cohort or 1,5441.4 
daughters per 1,000 women. 
Example 9.9
For the data in Example 9.8, calculate the net reproduction rate. 
Solution
The calculations are in Table 9.5 (b).
NRR
=
5
m=45−49

a=15−19
fwa × Lw
a
lwo
=
5(0.30883) = 1.54415
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com

DEMOGRAPHIC STATISTICS
427
MEASURES OF REPRODUCTIVITY
Age group 
(year) 
Life table 
survivors for 
females 
Lw
a
Age-specific 
female 
fertility rate 
Life table 
Survival rate 
per woman 
Expected 
female births 
per woman
lw
o = 100, 000
5fa
5Lw
a
lw
o
5fa × 5Lw
a
lw
o
1
2 
3 
4 = (2)/100, 000
5 = (3) × (4)
15–19 
93,200 
0.0525 
0.932 
0.04893
20–24 
91,500 
0.0632 
0.915 
0.05783
25–29 
89,400 
0.0657 
0.894 
0.05874
30–34 
86,600 
0.0588 
0.866 
0.05092
35–39 
85,300 
0.0484 
0.853 
0.04129
40–44 
84,000 
0.0333 
0.840 
0.02797
45–49 
82,700 
0.0280 
0.827 
0.02316
Total 
0.3499 
0.30883
TABLE 9.5 Preliminary calculation of the Net Reproductive Rate
Note 
The two methods for computing NRR from the abridged life table may be used depending 
on which of nLw
a  or Lw
a  is available. The results may not be exactly the same but very close. 
Computation of NRR from Total Population 
Sometimes instead of female births (faw) being given, only the total births (fa) and total 
number of the general population are given. In this case NRR will be computed as: 
NRR = δ
m=45−49

a=15−19
fa × La
l0
× k
where 
fa	
= Ba
Pa
− age-specific fertility rate at age a;
δ	
= proportion of all births which are females;
La	
= the number of years lived by the persons who have reached age a, before they 
reach the next higher age.
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com

DEMOGRAPHIC STATISTICS
428
MEASURES OF REPRODUCTIVITY
Example 9.10
Table 9.6 (a) gives the population and number of total births of a country for 1988. The 
life table survivors for age group 50–54 were 80,026.
Age-group (year) 
Total Pop- ulation 
Total births 
Life Table Survivors 
100,000
=
0l
15–19 
495,426 
6,200 
94,888
20–24 
491,378 
17,520 
93,750
25–29 
486,260 
14,840 
92,218
30–34 
480,300 
10,850 
90,255
35–39 
471,121 
9,870 
87,829
40–44 
465,967 
5,050 
84,734
45–49 
360,703 
4,200 
80,802
TABLE 9.6 (a) Data for calculation of the Net Reproductive Rate
Calculate the net reproduction rate, assuming that the sex-ratio at birth was 103.4 males 
to 100 females. 
Solution
In this example if we are assuming that the age groups are in completed years then the 
calculations are similar to those of Example 9.8.
NRR = δ
m=45−49

a=15−19
fa × 5La
l0
where 
δ =
1
1.034 + 1 = 0.492
All preliminary calculations are given in Table 9.6 (b).
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com

DEMOGRAPHIC STATISTICS
429
MEASURES OF REPRODUCTIVITY
From column 8, 
a=15−−19

45−−49
fa × 5La
l0
= 0.648
˙. .
NRR = 0.492(0.648) = 0.3188
That is, an average of 318.8 daughters will be born by 1,000 women starting life together, 
assuming a fixed schedule of birth and death rates.
NRR for Males
NRR may be computed similarly for males on the basis of male mortality and fertility. 
However, NRR for the two sexes for the same period t will generally not be alike and, 
therefore, there will be two figures for current population growth. Such difficulty may be 
attributed to the following: 
1)	Factors affecting the proportions of married people in the two sexes are different 
and they will provide fortuitous influences in their current fertility rates. 
2)	Since the NRR measures the rate of growth per generation, it can hardly be expected 
that the current situation for the two sexes will yield the same result simply because 
the length of the male generation is generally greater than the female. 
Note
NRR, though is derived from the data of a loose period, is not the same as vital-statistics 
rate of births or deaths “per year”. It covers the whole reproductive period of the hypothetical 
cohort and might be regarded as a rate “per cohort” or “per generation” of these women. 
9.4.3  ADVANTAGES AND DISADVANTAGES OF NRR 
Advantage of Net Reproduction Rate 
NRR takes into account both the current mortality and current fertility in its computation. 
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com

DEMOGRAPHIC STATISTICS
430
MEASURES OF REPRODUCTIVITY
430
Age 
group 
(year) 
Total 
population 
Total 
births 
Life 
table 
survivors 
Age-
specific 
fertility 
rate per 
person 
Survival 
rate per 
person
Expected 
birth 
survived 
per person
l0 = 100, 000
fa
5La
p
5La
l0
fa × 5La
l0
1
2 
3 
4 
5 = (3)/(2)
6 
7 
8 = 5 × 7
15–19 
495,426 
6,200 
94,888 
0.0125 
471,595 
4.71595 
0.059
20–24 
491,378 
17,520 
93,750 
0.0357 
464,920 
4.64920 
0.166
25–29 
486,260 
14,840 
92,218 
0.0305 
456,183 
4.56183 
0.139
30–34 
480,300 
10,850 
90,255 
0.0226 
445,210 
4.45210 
0.101
35–39 
471,121 
9,870 
87,829 
0.0210 
431,408 
4.31408 
0.091
40–44 
465,967 
5,050 
84,734 
0.0108 
413,840 
4.13840 
0.045
45–49 
360,703 
4,200 
80,802 
0.0116 
402,070 
4.02070 
0.047
Total 
0.1447 
0.648
TABLE 9.6 (b) Preliminary calculation of the Net Reproductive Rate
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
American online      
LIGS University 
▶▶enroll by September 30th, 2014 and 
▶▶save up to 16% on the tuition!
▶▶pay in 10 installments / 2 years
▶▶Interactive Online education
▶▶visit www.ligsuniversity.com to 
      find out more!
is currently enrolling in the
Interactive Online BBA, MBA, MSc, 
DBA and PhD  programs:
Note: LIGS University is not accredited by any 
nationally recognized accrediting agency listed 
by the US Secretary of Education. 
More info here. 

DEMOGRAPHIC STATISTICS
431
MEASURES OF REPRODUCTIVITY
Disadvantages of Net Reproduction Rate 
1)	NRR assumes that current mortality and fertility rates prevail in future. In practice, 
this assumption is not valid because the rates are changing from time to time. 
2)	Changes in 
i)	 the proportion of the population who marry, 
ii)	the age and rate of marriage and 
iii)	the rate of family building, will influence specific fertility rates and therefore the 
NRR, even though the size of family which each married woman has during 
the whole course of her married life remains unchanged. 
3)	Net migration may affect population growth but NRR overlooks the factor of 
migration. 
4)	It is not desirable to use NRR to forecast future population changes. This is evident 
from (a) and (c), above. 
9.5	
REPRODUCTION-SURVIVAL RATIO 
The reproduction-survival ratio (RSR) is defined as 
RSR = NRR
GRR
It is interpreted as the proportion of potential reproductivity that survived the effects of 
mortality. 
Example 9.10 
For the data in Example 9.8, calculate 
1)	Gross reproductive rate; 
2)	Net reproduction rate; 
3)	Reproduction-survival ratio. 
Comment on your results. 
Solution
The preliminary calculations are in Table 9.4 (b).
From column 5 of 9.4 (b), 
GRR
=
5

fw
a
=
5 × 0.3499 = 1.7495
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com

DEMOGRAPHIC STATISTICS
432
MEASURES OF REPRODUCTIVITY
From column 8 of 9.4 (b), 
1.5283
=
NRR
.
Therefore, 
RSN
=
NRR
GRR
=
1.5282
1.7495 = 0.87
That is, if 1986 fertility levels were to continue, a woman in that country would produce 1.7 
daughters, on the average, during her childbearing age. However only 1.5 of the daughters 
would survive through the childbearing years. That is, 87 percent of the daughters would 
survive the effects of mortality at their childbearing age.
EXERCISES 
9.1	
The mid-year population of Egypt in 1987 was 49,089,000. In that year 1,902,604 
children were born and 466,261 people died. Calculate the 
1)	Natural increase; 
2)	Crude rate of natural increase; 
3)	Vital index. 
9.2	
The following table shows the mid-year women population and female live births 
of a country in 2003 by age.
Age-group (years) 
Mid-year women population 
Female births 
15–19 
1,289,437 
2,544
20–24 
1,369,423 
14,424
25–29 
1,352,571 
15,390
30–34 
1,282,809 
9,076
35–39 
1,226,915 
1,706
40–44 
1,035,037 
502
45–49 
962,356 
109
Calculate the gross reproduction rate and interpret the result.
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com

DEMOGRAPHIC STATISTICS
433
MEASURES OF REPRODUCTIVITY
9.3	
The following are data on the distribution of mid-year women population and the 
female live births of Mauritius in 1989 by unequal age-group:
Age-group (years) 
Mid-year women population 
Female births
15–19 
640,510 
1,803
20–24 
769,521 
6,209
25–34 
778,739 
7,683
30–49 
573,939 
1,001
Calculate the gross reproduction rate and interpret the result.
9.4	
The mid-year population and the number of births and deaths of a country for 1986 
are shown in the table below.
Age-group (years) 
Mid-year women 
population 
Female births 
Life table female 
survivors
(lo = 100, 000)
15–19 
587,000 
3,892 
96,400
20–24 
683,800 
4,840 
94,800
25–29 
679,100 
4,730 
91,500
30–34 
684,900 
4,690 
89,600
35–39 
630,000 
3,870 
88,200
40–44 
593,000 
1,300 
86,900
45–49 
568,200 
860 
83,800
Calculate the: 
1)	Total fertility rate; 
2)	Gross reproduction rate; 
3)	Net reproduction rate if 
i)	 from the unabridged life table the average female survivors for age group 50-54 
are 81,000 per 100,000 women; 
ii)	the female survivors are taken from the abridged life table. 
4)	Reproduction-survival ratio. 
Interpret the results in each case.
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com

DEMOGRAPHIC STATISTICS
434
NUPTIALITY
10	 NUPTIALITY
10.1	 INTRODUCTION 
Nuptiality is the study of the entire process of marriages and their dissolutions as a population 
phenomenon. It includes the rate at which marriages occur, the characteristics of people united 
in marriage, and the dissolution of such unions through divorce, separation, widowhood, 
and annulment. Marriage is a milestone stage in the growth of human evolution and it 
remains the social requirement for the formation of family48. It is generally considered a 
primary indicator of exposure to the risk of pregnancy and, therefore, a relevant factor in 
the analysis of demographic changes (mortality, fertility and migration). 
In Chapter 1, we have defined family as the group of people who are related by blood, 
marriage or adoption. It is the residential, social and economic set-up in which children 
are born and raised. Again, in the previous chapter on fertility, we considered marital status 
as a characteristic essential for identifying groups of women exposed to the risk of child 
bearing. The need to construct rates specific for marital status was also pointed out. We 
shall here discuss some of the important measures. 
10.1.1  DEFINITION OF CONCEPTS IN NUPTIALITY 
The definition of the concept of marriage and divorce as recommended by the Statistical 
Commission of the United Nations (1955) and World Health Organisation (1950) may 
not satisfy most African countries as customs differ from culture to culture. In this book, 
we shall attempt to confine ourselves to the concepts that are widely understood in most 
African countries. They are sufficient for statistical purposes. 
Marriage
The definition of marriage as the “union of a man and woman” by social consent, whatever 
be the form, contract or obligations is giving way to a new one with the recognition of 
same sex marriage in some countries.
Marriage may, therefore, be defined as the act, ceremony or process by which the legal 
relationship of husband and wife is constituted. The legality of the union may be established 
by civil, religious, or other means as recognized by the laws of the country. In some countries, 
especially in Africa, an informal union, also known as consensual union, or cohabitation is 
also permitted. Both marriage and cohabitation are generally considered primary indicators 
of exposure to the risk of pregnancy. However, in most African countries, a union is not 
necessarily a prerequisite to child bearing as some child bearing occurs outside marital union. 
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com

DEMOGRAPHIC STATISTICS
435
NUPTIALITY
435
Divorce
Divorce is the final legal dissolution of a marriage through legal procedure, simple consent or 
other means according to the laws of the country. It is the separation of husband and wife 
which confers on the parties the right to remarry under civil, religious and/or other provisions.
Widowhood
Widowhood is the resulting marital status when one of the spouses dies. The surviving 
husband is known as the widower and the surviving wife the widow.
10.1.2  USES OF STUDY OF NUPTIALITY 
The study of nuptiality helps us to understand the social dynamics of a society and how 
it changes over time. 
1)	Marriage is the major determinant of fertility, especially in a country where the 
large majority of children are born in wedlock. Knowing the age at which people 
tend to get married and how many people are in union enables us to understand 
more about the dynamics of the population. 
2)	The comparison of the distribution of marital status at different periods provides 
information on how a society is evolving. 
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more

DEMOGRAPHIC STATISTICS
436
NUPTIALITY
10.2	 CLASSIFICATION OF MARITAL STATUS 
The concept of marital status starts with unmarried person. Every person starts life as an 
unmarried person until his or her status changes to married. In-between these occurrences 
(unmarried and married) are common classification used to study marital composition of 
the population. 
In a narrower sense, marital status may be classified as never married and ever married. The 
never married indicates that the person’s marital status has never changed since birth. Ever 
married includes people who are currently married, separated, or once married but currently 
divorced or widowed. In a broader sense, marital status may be classified as unmarried (not 
married) or married. Unmarried, also referred to as single includes persons who have never 
married, are divorced or widowed. Married includes currently married as well as separated 
but not divorced or widowed. The discussion so far identifies marital status as a stock with 
proportion as the appropriate tool for analysis. Thus, we can calculate the proportion ever 
married, proportion unmarried and so forth. 
Marriage is an event as opposed to marital status which is stock as indicated earlier. The 
marital event leads to a transition from one marital state to another and this includes 
first marriage, divorce, death of a marital partner and remarriage. As vital events, we can 
construct certain rates which will be discussed in this chapter.
10.3	 SOURCES OF NUPTIALITY DATA 
Data on marital status of persons are obtained from census. The question usually asked for 
those of particular ages is: “What is the current marital status of [NAME]?” For instance, 
the 2010 Population and Housing Census of Ghana asked a question on the current marital 
status for those who were 12 years or older. 
Data on marital events in a year, on the other hand, are obtained from civil registration 
system since marriages and divorces have to be registered. Data on divorces may also be 
obtained from court records, following national practice. However, in most developing 
countries, especially those in Africa, marriages are not always registered and divorces do not 
usually end in court. The high incidence of consensual unions in some developing countries 
presents special difficulties for the analysis of marriage patterns. 
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com

DEMOGRAPHIC STATISTICS
437
NUPTIALITY
The third source of nuptiality data is the sample survey. A survey, as a source of data on 
nuptiality, has an advantage over census and registration systems:
1)	Survey questionnaires are able to deal with the marital history of persons in much 
more detail. 
2)	Surveys are more capable of relating nuptiality to issues such as fertility, economic 
status, etc. 
The Demographic and Health Survey is one major sample survey which provides information 
on nuptiality.
Table 10.1 shows the Nigeria population by the marital status classification. It is important 
to note that the information in the table cannot be used to calculate the Marriage rates 
discussed in this text. It is better used to calculate the proportion of marital status.
It is difficult to obtain data on marital events and we generate a hypothetical data from 
Table 10.1 with the assumptions that:
1)	20% of the marital status in 1991 took place in that year; 
2)	the population is the mid-year population for 199
We then obtain Table 10.2 for the purpose of illustration in this chapter.
10.4	 CRUDE MARRIAGE RATE
10.4.1  DEFINITION OF CRUDE MARRIAGE RATE 
The crude marriage rate (CMR) is the number of marriages per 1,000 mid-year population 
in a given year. It is given as:
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com

DEMOGRAPHIC STATISTICS
438
NUPTIALITY
Age Group
Males
Females
Both Sexes
Never
Married
Currently
Married
Separated
Divorced
Widowed
Total
0 - 4
7344,454
6,999,435
14,343,889
5 - 9
7,374,314
7,126,144
14,500,458
10 14
5,812,538
5,336,143
11,148,681
10,497,408
595,938
8,945
17,119
29,271
11,148,681
15 19
4,528,811
4,806,977
9,335,788
7,290,725
1,965,218
21,617
29,897
28,331
9,335,788
20 24
3,314,303
4,357,267
7,671,570
3,865,139
3,687,304
45,370
46,657
27,100
7,671,570
25 29
3,304,739
4,006,932
7,311,671
2,117,690
5,020,333
70,265
61,883
41,500
7,311,671
30- 34
2,808,629
3,105,298
5,913,927
771,863
4,915,265
81,029
72,702
73,068
5,913,927
35 39
2,206,871
2,008,062
4,214,933
287,504
3,709,519
66,817
59,210
91,883
4,214,933
40 44
1,971,197
1,874,721
3,845,918
158,604
3,374,718
73,479
71,429
167,688
3,845,918
45 49
1,355,101
1,061,602
2,416,703
79,862
2,073,576
50,436
48,409
164,420
2,416,703
50 54
1,388,650
1,182,149
2,570,799
72,113
2,107,143
60,092
60,354
271,097
2,570,799
55 59
638,375
481,394
1,119,769
28,962
883,185
26,442
25,811
155,369
1,119,769
60 64
898,801
791,573
1,690,374
44,982
1,238,726
46,136
46,163
314,367
1,690,374
65 69
408,540
387,400
703,040
18,110
528,216
19,567
19,141
178,906
763,940
70 74
492,186
394,116
886,302
26,608
587,851
25,424
25,447
220,972
886,302
75 79
195,455
156,368
351,823
9,587
224,248
8,940
8,741
100,307
351,823
80 84
258,059
222,627
480,686
15,467
294,754
14,402
14,435
141,628
480,686
85+
230,585
194,404
424,989
14,199
239,073
12,534
11,773
147,410
424,989
Total
44,531,608
44,492,612
88,931,320
25,298,823
31,445,067
631,495
619,171
2,153,317
60,147,873
TABLE 10.1 Population Distribution of Nigeria by Marital Status, Age and Sex, 1991  
Source: Annual Abstract of Statistics 2006, (Nigeria: National Population Commission) 
Age Group
Males
Females
Both Sexes
Never
Married
Marital Events in 1991
Marriages
Separation
Divorce
Widowhood
15 19
4,528,811
4,806,977
9,335,788
7,290,725
393,044
4,323
5,979
5,666
20 24
3,314,303
4,357,267
7,671,570
3,865,139
737,461
9,074
9,331
5,420
25 29
3,304,739
4,006,932
7,311,671
2,117,690
1,004,067
14,053
12,377
8,300
30- 34
2,808,629
3,105,298
5,913,927
771,863
983,053
16,206
14,540
14,614
35 39
2,206,871
2,008,062
4,214,933
287,504
741,904
13,363
11,842
18,377
40 44
1,971,197
1,874,721
3,845,918
158,604
674,944
14,696
14,286
33,538
45 49
1,355,101
1,061,602
2,416,703
79,862
414,715
10,087
9,682
32,884
50 54
1,388,650
1,182,149
2,570,799
72,113
421,429
12,018
12,071
54,21
55 59
638,375
481,394
1,119,769
28,962
176,637
5,288
5,162
31,074
60 64
898,801
791,573
1,690,374
44,982
247,745
9,227
9,233
62,873
65 69
408,540
387,400
703,040
18,110
105,643
3,913
3,828
35,781
70 74
492,186
394,116
886,302
26,608
117,570
5,085
5,089
44,194
75 79
195,455
156,368
351,823
9,587
44,850
1,788
1,748
20,061
80 84
258,059
222,627
480,686
15,467
58,951
2,880
2,887
28,326
85+
230,585
194,404
424,989
14,199
47,815
2,507
2,355
29,482
Total
24,000,302
25,030,890
48,938,292
14,810,415
6,169,826
124,510
120,410
424,809
TABLE 10.2 Population Distribution of Nigeria by Hypothetical Marital Events: Age and Sex, 1991
CMR = M
P × k
where 
M = the number of marriages during a calendar year;
P = the mid-year population;
k = the radix, usually taken as 1,000. 
The number of marriages M in a calendar year includes both first marriages and remarriages 
after divorce, widowhood or annulment. 
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com

DEMOGRAPHIC STATISTICS
439
NUPTIALITY
Example 10.1
For data in Tables 10.1 and 10.2, calculate the crude marriage rate.
Solution
Number of marriages during the year (from Table 10.2), M = 6, 169, 826;
Mid-year population (from Table 10.1), P = 88, 931, 320
Thus the crude marriage rate is: 
CMR
=
M
P × k
=
6, 169, 826
88, 931, 320 × 1, 000 = 70.8
Interpretation
For every 1,000 population of Nigeria in 1991, there were 71 marriages.
10.4.2  ADVANTAGES AND DISADVANTAGES OF CRUDE MARRIAGE RATE
Advantages of Crude Marriage Rate 
Similar to the crude birth rate, the crude marriage rate:
1)	is simple to calculate; 
2)	is a simple concept and can easily be explained to laymen; 
3)	gives a general overview of marriage in an area. 
Disadvantages of Crude Marriage Rate 
CMR suffers from the usual defects of a crude rate in addition to the following. 
1)	There is no complete correspondence between the numerator and the denominator. 
A marriage involves two persons so it would be better to represent the numerator 
and denominator by only one sex, usually the female. 
2)	It does not take into account people who cannot marry. The denominator (mid-
year population) includes the very young and those who are already married (in 
the case where one woman for one man is the situation). 
3)	It is influenced by population age structure. Husbands tend to be older than wives 
in general, so the age specific rates will be different for the sexes. 
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com

DEMOGRAPHIC STATISTICS
440
NUPTIALITY
440
10.5	 GENERAL MARRIAGE RATE 
The crude marriage rate, as indicated earlier, suffers from the limitation that it relates the 
total number of marriages to the total mid-year population. But we know that the total 
number of marriages depends on the population of marriageable ages and not on the entire 
population. To overcome this limitation, we calculate general marriage rate. 
10.5.1  DEFINITION OF GENERAL MARRIAGE RATE 
General marriage rate (GMR) is a single ratio of all marriages to the number of persons of 
marriageable age (15 years and older): 
GMR =
M
P15+
×
k
where 
M	
= as defined above;
P15+	 = mid-year population of persons of marriageable age (15 years and older);
k	
=
1, 000.
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
 
  
 
                . 

DEMOGRAPHIC STATISTICS
441
NUPTIALITY
Example 10.2
For the data in Example 10.1, calculate the general marriage rate.
Solution 
Number of marriages during the year,	
M =
6, 169, 826;
Mid-year population of marriageable age,	
P15+ =
48, 938, 292.
The general marriage rate is: 
GMR
=
M
P15+
× k
=
6, 169, 826
48, 938, 292 × 1, 000 = 128.6
Interpretation
For every 1,000 marriageable population of Nigeria in 1991, there were 129 marriages.
10.5.2  ADVANTAGES AND DISADVANTAGES OF GENERAL MARRIAGE RATE 
Advantage of General Marriage Rate 
If marital status distributions are available, GMR can specify with greater accuracy. 
Disadvantages of General Marriage Rate 
1)	GMR is not adequate for a very detailed examination of marriage patterns because 
it ignores the age distribution of married persons. 
2)	The denominator includes all married persons who are not at risk of marriage and 
remarriage. In the one woman for one man situation,49 the general marriage rate 
may be refined as: 
	
GMRu =
M
P u
15+
× k
where 
GMRu	
= the refined general marriage rate for unmarried persons;
P u
15+	 	
= the mid-year population of unmarried persons of nubile age.
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com

DEMOGRAPHIC STATISTICS
442
NUPTIALITY
Example 10.3
For the data in Table 10.2, calculate the refined general marriage rate.
Solution
Number of marriages during a year, M = 6, 169, 826;
Total population of unmarried persons of nubile age50: 
P u
15+
=
NM15+ + DV15+ + WD15+
=
14, 801, 415 + 120, 410 + 424, 809 = 15, 346, 635
where NM = never married, DV = divorced and WD = widowed
Hence, the refined general marriage rate is: 
GMRu
=
M
P u
15+
× k
=
6, 169, 826
15, 346, 635 × 1, 000 = 410.1
Interpretation
For every 1,000 unmarried population aged 15 years and above, there were 410 marriages.
10.6	 SPECIFIC MARRIAGE RATE 
The defects of the CMR and GMR call for calculating a marriage rate specific for age, sex 
and order of marriage. However, the information in Table 10.2 is not sufficient to calculate 
these rates because there are no data on marriage according to male and female separately. 
Let us generate a hypothetical data from the data in Table 10.2 on the assumption that 
1)	a man can marry more than one but a woman cannot; 
2)	there is 40% to 60% marriages of men to women up to age 39 and the reverse is 
the case thereafter; 
3)	80% of all marriages in the year were first marriages. 
This produces Table 10.3. We remind readers that this information is for illustration purpose 
only as it does not represent real data.
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com

DEMOGRAPHIC STATISTICS
443
NUPTIALITY
Age Group
Mid-year Population 
Marriages
Order of Marriages
Males 
Females 
Males 
Females 
First 
Marriages
Second 
Marriages 
15–19
4,528,811
4,806,977
157,217
235,826
373,391 
19,652 
20–24
3,314,303
4,357,267
294,984
442,476
700,588 
36,873 
25–29
3,304,739
4,006,932
401,627
602,440
953,863 
50,203 
30–34
2,808,629
3,105,298
393,221
589,832
933,900 
49,153 
35–39
2,206,871
2,008,062
296,762
445,142
704,809 
37,095 
40–44
1,971,197
1,874,721
404,966
269,977
641,196 
33,747 
45–49
1,355,101
1,061,602
248,829
165,886
393,979 
20,736 
50–54
1,388,650
1,182,149
252,857
168,571
400,357 
21,071 
55–59
638,375 
481,394 
105,982 
70,655 
167,805 
8,832 
60–64
898,801 
791,573 
148,647 
99,098 
235,358 
12,387 
65–69
408,540 
387,400 
63,386 4
2,257 
100,361 
5,282 
70–74
492,186 
394,116 
70,542 4
7,028 
111,692 
5,879 
75–79
195,455 
156,368 
26,910 1
7,940 
42,607 
2,242 
80–84
258,059 
222,627 
35,370 2
3,580 
56,003 
2,948 
85+ 
230,585 
194,404 
28,689 1
9,126 
45,424 
2,391 
Total 
24,000,302
25,030,890
2,929,990
3,239,836
5,861,335
308,491
TABLE 10.3 Population Distribution of Nigeria by Hypothetical Marital Events: Age, Sex and Order for 
Marriage, 1991
10.6.1  ORDER-SPECIFIC MARRIAGE RATE 
The order-specific marriage (first and remarriage) rate is another refinement of the marriage 
rate. We shall observe that the denominator in the formula for calculation the first marriage 
and remarriage rates are different. 
First Marriage Rate
The first marriage rate is defined as:
FMR = M1
P n
15+
× k
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com

DEMOGRAPHIC STATISTICS
444
NUPTIALITY
where 
M1	
= the number of first marriages in a calendar year;
P n
15+	 = the mid-year nubile (never married) population of age 15 years and older in a 
calendar year.
Example 10.4
For the data in Table 10.3, calculate the first marriage rate.
Solution
From Table 10.2, P n
15+ = 14, 810, 415.
From Table 10.3, M1 = 5, 861, 335.
Hence 
FMR
=
M1
P n
15+
× k
=
5, 861, 335
14, 810, 415 × 1, 000 = 395.8
There were 396 marriages among every 1,000 persons who had never married in 1991.
Remarriage Rate
The remarriage rate is defined as:
RMR = M2+
P d+w
15+
× k
where 
M2+	 = the number of second or more marriages in a calendar year;
P d+w
15+ 	= the mid-year divorced and widowed populations of age 15 years and older in a 
calendar year.
Example 10.5
For the data in Table 10.3, calculate the remarriage marriage rate.
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com

DEMOGRAPHIC STATISTICS
445
NUPTIALITY
445
Solution
From Table 10.2, 
P d+w
15+ = 120, 410 + 424, 809 = 545, 219
From Table 10.3, M2 = 308, 491.
Hence 
RMR
=
M2+
P d+w
15+
× k
=
308, 491
545, 219 × 1, 000 = 565.8
There were 566 remarriages among every 1,000 divorced and widowed persons in 1991.
10.6.2  SEX-SPECIFIC MARRIAGE RATE 
The GMR are usually calculated separately for both sexes s (males and females) because men 
can be in union with more than one woman in some part of the world but women cannot.
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
www.mastersopenday.nl
Visit us and find out why we are the best!
Master’s Open Day: 22 February 2014
Join the best at
the Maastricht University
School of Business and
Economics!
Top master’s programmes
• 33rd place Financial Times worldwide ranking: MSc 
International Business
• 1st place: MSc International Business
• 1st place: MSc Financial Economics
• 2nd place: MSc Management of Learning
• 2nd place: MSc Economics
• 2nd place: MSc Econometrics and Operations Research
• 2nd place: MSc Global Supply Chain Management and 
Change
Sources: Keuzegids Master ranking 2013; Elsevier ‘Beste Studies’ ranking 2012; 
Financial Times Global Masters in Management ranking 2012
Maastricht
University is
the best specialist
university in the
Netherlands
(Elsevier)

DEMOGRAPHIC STATISTICS
446
NUPTIALITY
This rate which may also be referred to as sex-specific marriage rate, is given as: 
SSMRs = Ms
P s
15+
×
k
Example 10.6
For the data in Table 10.3, calculated the sex-specific marriage rates.
Solution
For the male population: 
SSMRm
=
Mm
P m × k
=
2, 929, 990
24, 000, 302 × 1, 000 = 122.1
For the female population: 
SSMRf
=
Mf
P f × k
=
3, 239, 836
25, 030, 890 × 1000 = 129.4
There were 122 and 129 marriages among 1,000 marriageable male and female populations, 
respectively.
10.6.3  AGE-SPECIFIC MARRIAGE RATE 
The GMR may be calculated separately for each single age x or each age group a because 
timing of marriage is different for the various age groups. This may be referred to as age-
specific marriage rate (ASMR) and is given as: 
ASMRa = Ma
Pa
× k
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com

DEMOGRAPHIC STATISTICS
447
NUPTIALITY
Example 10.7
For the data in Table 10.2, calculate the age-specific marriage rates.
Solution
For age group 15–19: 
ASMR15−19
=
M15−19
P15−19
× k
=
393, 044
9, 335, 788 × 1, 000 = 42.1
For age group 20–24: 
ASMR20−24
=
M20−24
P20−24
× k
=
737, 461
7, 671, 570 × 1000 = 96.1
The age specific marriage rates for the other age groups are similarly calculated and the 
results presented in Table 10.4. We observe from the table that the rates increase steadily 
to age 40–44 before it starts reducing. 
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com

DEMOGRAPHIC STATISTICS
448
NUPTIALITY
Age Group
Population
Married
Age specific Marriage 
Rate (ASMR(a))
15–19 
9,335,788 
393,044 
42.1
20–24 
7,671,570 
737,461 
96.1 
25–29 
7,311,671 
1,004,067 
137.3 
30–34 
5,913,927 
983,053 
166.2 
35–39 
4,214,933 
741,904 
176.0 
40–44 
3,845,918 
674,944 
175.5 
45–49 
2,416,703 
414,715 
171.6 
50–54 
2,570,799 
421,429 
163.9 
55–59 
1,119,769 
176,637 
157.7 
60–64 
1,690,374 
247,745 
146.6 
65–69 
703,040 
105,643 
150.3 
70–74 
886,302 
117,570 
132.7 
75–79 
351,823 
44,850 
127.5 
80–84 
480,686 
58,951 
122.6 
85+ 
230,585 
47,815 
112.5 
Total 
48,938,292
6,169,826
2,079 
TABLE 10.4 Age-specific Marriage Rate of Hypothetical Data of Nigeria, 1991 
10.6.4  AGE-SEX SPECIFIC MARRIAGE RATE 
The age-specific marriage rate is usually calculated for both sexes (women and men) separately 
because timing of marriage is different for both sexes.
The age-sex specific marriage rate (ASSMR) calculated separately for single ages x can be 
defined as: 
ASSMRs
x = Ms
x
P sx
× k
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com

DEMOGRAPHIC STATISTICS
449
NUPTIALITY
where 
Ms
x	
= the number of marriages among a specific sex s (male or female) for single age 
x in a calendar year;
P s
x	
= the mid-year population of the specific sex s and single age x category in a 
calendar year.
Limitation of Age-Sex Specific Marriage Rates for Single Ages
A set of marriage rates calculated by single years is: 
1)	too detailed and clumsy for comparative purposes, and 
2)	affected by the misreporting of ages by spouses. 
The age-sex specific marriage rate (ASSMRs
a) calculated for age-groups, usually the 5-year 
age groups a is given as: 
ASSMRs
a = Ms
a
P sa
× k
where Ms
a  and P s
a are as defined earlier but for age group a.
We observe that the age-specific marriage rate is calculated as the ratio of the number 
of women contracting marriages and all the women in the age group and not only the 
unmarried ones.
Example 10.8
For the data in Table 10.2, calculate the age-sex specific marriage rates.
Solution
For age group 15–19 for males: 
ASSMRm
15−19
=
Mm
15−19
P m
15−19
× k
=
157, 217
4, 528, 811 × 1, 000 = 35
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com

DEMOGRAPHIC STATISTICS
450
NUPTIALITY
450
For age group 15–19 for females: 
ASSMRf
15−19
=
Mf
15−19
P15−19
× k
=
235, 826
4, 806, 977 × 1, 000 = 49
The age-sex specific marriage rates for the others are similarly calculated and the results 
presented in Table 10.5. 
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more

DEMOGRAPHIC STATISTICS
451
NUPTIALITY
Age 
Group
Mid-year Population 
Marriages
Age-sex specific 
Marriage Rates (ASMRs
a)
Males 
Females 
Males 
Females 
Males 
Females 
15–19
4,528,811
4,806,977
157,217
235,826
35 
49 
20–24
3,314,303
4,357,267
294,984
442,476
89 
102 
25–29
3,304,739
4,006,932
401,627
602,440
122
150 
30–34
2,808,629
3,105,298
393,221
589,832
140
190 
35–39
2,206,871
2,008,062
296,762
445,142
134
222 
40–44
1,971,197
1,874,721
404,966
269,977
205
144 
45–49
1,355,101
1,061,602
248,829
165,886
184
156 
50–54
1,388,650
1,182,149
252,857
168,571
182
143 
55–59
638,375 
481,394 
105,982 
70,655 
166
147 
60–64
898,801 
791,573 
148,647 
99,098 
165
125 
65–69
408,540 
387,400 
63,386 4
2,257 
155
109 
70–74
492,186 
394,116 
70,542 4
7,028 
143
119 
75–79
195,455 
156,368 
26,910 1
7,940 
138
115 
80–84
258,059 
222,627 
35,370 2
3,580 
137
106 
85+ 
230,585 
194,404 
28,689 1
9,126 
124
98 
TOTAL 
24,000,302
25,030,890
2,929,990
3,239,836
TABLE 10.5 Population Distribution of Nigeria by Hypothetical Marital Events: Age and Sex, 1991
10.6.5  AGE-SEX-ORDER SPECIFIC MARRIAGE RATE 
The age-sex-order specific marriages rate (ASOSMR) can be defined as: 
ASOSMR =
Ms
ia
P s
(i−1)a
× k
where 
Ms
ia	 	
= the number of ith marriage among a given sex, s (male or female) in the 
age group a;
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com

DEMOGRAPHIC STATISTICS
452
NUPTIALITY
P s
(i−1)a	
= the mid-year population of the same sex and of the same age group a 
but whose (i −1)th marriage remains dissolved.
Limitation of Age-sex-order Specific Marriage Rate
It is difficult to get appropriate data for its calculation. However, when i −1, then P s
0a 
identifies the number of unmarried single individuals and the rate can be easily obtained. 
In particular, 
ASOSMR = Ms
1a
P s
0a
× k
are the sth (female or male) first marriage rates among those in age group a.
10.7	 TOTAL MARRIAGE RATE 
10.7.1  DEFINITION OF TOTAL MARRIAGE RATE 
The total marriage rate (TMR) is an important marriage measure which summarises the 
pattern of marriage exhibited by the age-sex specific marriage rates. It gives an indication 
of the extent of marriages in the population, based on the marriage trends according to 
age at a specific time. It presents a single index of total marriage which answers as nearly 
as possible the question: “How many marriages are being contracted nowadays”? 
The total marriage rate describes the proportion of women (generally per 1,000 persons) 
that contract marriage in their lives, on condition that 
1)	none of them die; 
2)	the marriage rate in the pertinent cohort remains constant throughout the period; 
3)	these persons belong to the age groups of 15 to 49 years. 
In other words, it measures the total number of marriages a person will have at the end of 
his/her marriageable age (before age 50) if he/she follows the given schedule of marriage.
TMR is computed by adding up the age-specific marriage rates of first marriages in the 
whole age period. It may be computed using single years x or age groups a and may be 
expressed as per marriage or per 1,000 marriages.
For single years, x: 
TMRs
(x) =
49

x=15
Ms
x
P sx
× k
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com

DEMOGRAPHIC STATISTICS
453
NUPTIALITY
For age groups a with equal interval:
TMRs
(a) =
45−49

a=15−19
Ms
a
P sa
× k
or 
TMRs
(a) = n
45−49

a=15−19
ASSMRs
a
and for age groups with unequal interval:
TMRs
(a) =
∞

a=15−19
na
Ms
a
P sa
× k
10.7.2  TOTAL FIRST MARRIAGE RATE 
Total first marriage rate (TFMR) is the proportion of men or women who would have 
married at least once by age 50 if they had been subject throughout their lives to the age 
specific first marriage rates observed in a given year. 
TFMR is calculated the same way as the TMR except that, in the case of TFMR, only 
first marriages are taken into account. Similar to TMR, TFMR may be computed using 
single years x or age groups a: 
TFMRns
(x)
=
49

x=15
M1
x
P sx
× k
TFMRns
(a)
=
45−49

a=15−19
Ma
P sa
× k
where TFMRn(s)
(a)  is the total first marriage rate of the never married n for age a and for 
sex s. 
Note 
1)	TFMR may be expressed as the number of first marriages per person. A TFMR = 1 
for women, for instance, indicates that all women in the population will contract 
a marriage before their 50th birthday if present trends should prevail. Since the 
TFMR is sensitive to changes in the timing of marriage, it may exceed 1. 
2)	 TFMRns
a = 5 × (ASFMRn(s)
(15−19) + · · · + ASFMRn(s)
(45−49))
where ASFMRn(s)
(a)  is the age-specific first marriage rate among the never married n for 
age a and for sex s. It is multiplied by 5 if 5-year age group are used. 
3)	 TMRa = TFMRn(s)
a
+ TRMRn(s)
(a)
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com

DEMOGRAPHIC STATISTICS
454
NUPTIALITY
10.8	 STANDARDISED MARRIAGE RATE 
Marriages rates can be standardised using the direct and indirect methods, depending on 
which data are available. 
10.8.1  DIRECT STANDARDISED MARRIAGE RATE 
The direct standardised marriage rate (DSMR)is defined as:
DSMR =
45−49

15−19
ASMRs
aP ∗s
a
45−49

15−19
P ∗s
a
× k
where 
DSMR	
= the direct standardised marriage rate;
ASMRs
a	
= the age-specific marriage rate population for sex s of age 15 years and 
older of the study population;
P ∗s
a 	 	
= the mid-year population of male or female or both for age group a in 
the standard population;
ASMRs
aP ∗s
a 	 = the number of expected marriages of male, female or both for age group 
a in the standard population;
k	
	
=
1, 000.
10.8.2  INDIRECT STANDARDISED MARRIAGE RATE 
The indirect standardised marriage rate (ISMR)is defined as:
ISMR =
M
 ASMR∗s
a Pa
× CMR∗× 1, 000
where 
M	
	
= observed marriages (total marriagess) in the study population;
ASMR∗s
a 	
= “standard” set of age-specific fertility rates for sex s;
Pa	
	
= mid-year population by age for the study population;
CMR∗	
= crude marriage rate for the standard population;
k	
	
=
1, 000.
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com

DEMOGRAPHIC STATISTICS
455
NUPTIALITY
455
If we observe that ASMR∗s
a Pa is the expected number of marriages in the particular 
population on the basis of the standard set of age-specific marriage rates, then the indirect 
standardised marriage rate may be defined as:
ISMR = M
ME
= Observed birth in the study population
Expected birth in the study population × CMR∗s
10.9	 MEASURES OF MARRIAGE TIMING 
10.9.1  AGE AT MARRIAGE 
Age at marriage usually refers to first marriages and whenever remarriages are involved, that 
has to be specified. 
Age at first marriage is probably the most useful fact about women’s marital history for 
the study of their fertility. It is a better measure of marriages for the study of demographic 
trends in a society with universal marriage51 than some of the earlier marriage rates discussed.
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Get Help Now
Go to www.helpmyassignment.co.uk for more info
Need help with your
dissertation?
Get in-depth feedback & advice from experts in your 
topic area. Find out what you can do to improve
the quality of your dissertation!

DEMOGRAPHIC STATISTICS
456
NUPTIALITY
10.9.2  AVERAGE AGE AT FIRST MARRIAGE 
The average age at marriage for each year in a population usually concerns first marriages, 
as indicated earlier, and whenever remarriages are involved a separate average is calculated 
for each order. It is derived from the distribution of first marriages by age group of husband 
or wife derived from civil registration data. It is usually computed separately for males and 
females, because females typically marry at younger ages.
The study of the average age at first marriage depicts in the population 
1)	the marriage pattern; and 
2)	the possible trends in fertility52. 
Two of the averages often used in demography, namely, the arithmetic mean (or simply the 
mean) and the median.
Mean Age at First Marriage
Mean age at first marriage is the average age at which men or women marry. 
There will always be a few who will not get married at all and hence the mean age at 
marriage may not be completely meaningful. In such situations the median age at marriage 
may be calculated.
Median Age at First Marriage
The median age at first marriage indicates that half the people marrying for the first time 
in a given year got married before the median age and half after.
10.9.3  SINGULATE AGE AT FIRST MARRIAGE 
It is easy to calculate the average age of first marriage if the relevant reliable data are available 
from civil registration. These data, however, are difficult to obtain, especially in Africa. It 
is rather easy to obtain data on marital status by age from census data and for this, the 
singulate mean age at marriage (SMAM) is calculated.
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com

DEMOGRAPHIC STATISTICS
457
NUPTIALITY
10.10	
DIVORCE RATES 
All the various marriage rates earlier defined have their corresponding divorce rates. The 
numerator for calculating the rates are the number of divorces in a calendar year. The 
denominator can be: 
1)	Mid-year population; 
2)	Total number of marriages during the same year; 
3)	Total number of married people at the middle of the year; 
4)	Total number of currently married couples at the middle of the year. 
The radix k is usually taken as 100.
It is difficult to define an ideal measure for divorce where the risk of divorce is properly 
determined.
1)	It is better to calculate divorce rates for men and women separately because ages 
of husband an wife need not be equal. 
2)	In most cases, the order of the divorce is important in calculating the divorce rate; 
otherwise there will be confusion with the calculation of rates as defined here when 
one or both partners get remarried during the very year the divorce took place. 
3)	The appropriate divorce rate should be for marriage cohorts or equivalently for 
duration of marriage since marriage has to take place before a divorce can happen.
A suitable measure for divorce will be 
D
MC
where
D as defined above and MC is the number of a marriage cohort.
This measure requires that we have data on each marriage as to whether the marriage 
1)	ended in divorce; or 
2)	got terminated due to death of either or both the spouses; and 
3)	the time and ages of the spouses at divorce. 
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com

DEMOGRAPHIC STATISTICS
458
NUPTIALITY
This type of information required for calculating standard divorce rates is rarely collected 
because of the waiting time involved in following through the marriage cohorts. Whenever 
the need arises, an appropriate rates should be derived. 
Total Divorce Rate
Total divorce rate (TDR) is the number of divorces that men or women would have gone 
through by age 50 if the age-specific divorce rates observed in a given year applied throughout 
their life. This measure is expressed as number of divorces per person. 
10.11	
WIDOWHOOD
The difficulties encountered in the construction of divorce rates are applicable as such in the 
case of widowhood also. A useful measure to study widow will be the age at widowhood. 
The difficulty, as before is the paucity of relevant data. And, hence these areas remain 
inadequately measured.
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com

DEMOGRAPHIC STATISTICS
459
MEASURES OF MIGRATION
11	 MEASURES OF MIGRATION
11.1	 INTRODUCTION 
Migration is the third vital process which alters the size of a population, the other vital 
process being births and deaths already discussed. These two processes do not take into 
consideration space. Population change through these natural increase has been viewed 
independently from the area in which the population lives. Migration considers area, since 
it implies moving from one area to another. However, the records of migration do not lend 
themselves so well to study as those of births and deaths.
11.1.1  USES OF MIGRATION 
1)	Migration influences the socio-demographic structure of a population. As a 
consequence, it 
i)	 influences the growth of population by influencing fertility and mortality of 
the areas of origin and destination (for example, it can influence birth rates by 
altering the proportion of women of child-bearing ages in the population); 
ii)	affects the characteristics of the labour force of the areas of origin and destination. 
2)	The measurement and analysis of migration are important in the preparation of 
population estimates and projections for a nation or parts of a nation. 
3)	Migration data (sex, age, citizenship, etc, of the migrant) are required together with 
census data and vital statistics for 
i)	 analysing changes in the structure of the population and labour force of an area; 
ii)	the assessment of other basic demographic characteristics. 
3)	Migration facilitates an understanding of the nature and magnitude of the social 
and cultural problems that often result in areas with heavy immigration. 
11.1.2  CHARACTERISTICS OF MIGRATION 
1)	Like death, migration can occur at any age. However, its study is fundamentally 
different from the study of natality and mortality. 
i)	 Migration takes into account both time and space; 
ii)	Migration is an event which may be repeated several times within the lifetime 
of an individual. 
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com

DEMOGRAPHIC STATISTICS
460
MEASURES OF MIGRATION
460
2)	The terminology in migration is not yet as well standardised as that in fertility and 
mortality; the present definitions are mostly supported by the consensus of users. 
3)	In most developed countries, there is a permanent system of recording births and 
deaths, as well as marriage dissolutions in registers, such as registers of births and 
deaths. In the case of migration, specific registers usually do not exist, though 
changes of residence are recorded in some countries having population registers. 
4)	Most of the vital processes in demography are slow, and take a considerable amount 
of time in working out the consequences. Migration, on the other hand, can vary 
rapidly in its effects (transferring millions of persons in a matter of months, and 
altering significantly the distribution of people and their activities). With these 
potentialities, migration is associated with large and rather sudden changes. For 
this reason it is often unpredictable and difficult to study. 
11.1.3  CHARACTERISTICS OF MIGRATION STUDIES IN AFRICA 
The records of migration do not lend themselves so well to study as those of birth and 
deaths for the reason that collection of migration data is poorly organised.
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
By 2020, wind could provide one-tenth of our planet’s 
electricity needs. Already today, SKF’s innovative know-
how is crucial to running a large proportion of the 
world’s wind turbines. 
Up to 25 % of the generating costs relate to mainte-
nance. These can be reduced dramatically thanks to our 
systems for on-line condition monitoring and automatic 
lubrication. We help make it more economical to create 
cleaner, cheaper energy out of thin air. 
By sharing our experience, expertise, and creativity, 
industries can boost performance beyond expectations. 
Therefore we need the best employees who can 
meet this challenge!
The Power of Knowledge Engineering
Brain power
Plug into The Power of Knowledge Engineering. 
Visit us at www.skf.com/knowledge

DEMOGRAPHIC STATISTICS
461
MEASURES OF MIGRATION
In the first place, migration data are collected by various agencies and are seldom kept 
together with ordinary vital registration. Secondly, migration data are not given enough 
attention to maintain a high standard of quality because they are collected as a minor by-
products of administration. Thirdly, Governments interest themselves primarily in recording 
the migrants from other countries and do little to keep data on movement from place to 
place within the same country. Consequently much is written on international migration and 
rather little about internal migration. Finally, information recorded on international migrants 
is inaccurate and inconsistent, especially if data from different countries are compared.
11.2	 DEFINITION OF CONCEPTS 
11.2.1  PROBLEMS IN DEFINITION OF MIGRATION 
The definition and analysis of migration present some peculiar problems. 
1)	Migration is a vague statistical concept with few uniform criteria to distinguish who 
is a migrant and who is not. A migrant, first of all, is a person who travels. This 
is the only unambiguous element in the entire subject. “Migrants” are obviously 
some smaller category of travellers, but the difficulty is encountered whenever the 
limits of that category are to be defined. 
2)	Although a single individual may make several moves within his or her lifetime, 
most censuses and surveys only record one of these moves. Even if all moves are 
described in some sample surveys, the data are incomplete because a person remains 
a potential migrant until death. Thus, the analysis of population movement from 
any type of data source can only provide an extremely complex phenomenon. 
In spite of these difficulties we shall attempt to define some concepts in migration.
11.2.2  MOBILITY 
Some writers suggest that since migration cannot be defined exactly, it should be considered 
as part of a continuum covering all types of population movements. 
Population Mobility
Population mobility or spatial mobility is defined as the ability to move in space. These 
movements may be either 
1)	daily commuting53 journeys (between a given place of residence and some other 
point in space), from a few metres to thousands of kilometres, or 
2)	long run shifts of residence (the length of stay at destination from minutes to the 
remainder of lifetime). Since commuting does not directly affect the level and 
the structure of the population of a given territory, it is not, strictly speaking, a 
demographic phenomenon and will not be considered further in this chapter. 
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com

DEMOGRAPHIC STATISTICS
462
MEASURES OF MIGRATION
Mover 
A mover is a person who moved from one address (house or apartment) to another. 
Short-distance mover 
A short-distance or local mover is a person who moved only within a political or 
administrative area. 
Mover from abroad
A mover from abroad is a person who has moved from outside the country.
11.2.3  MIGRATION 
Migration
Not all geographic movements qualify as migration. Moves which are included in the 
migration process are generally considered to be at least semi-permanent and to take place 
across definite geographical boundaries. The operational definition of migration is that 
“migration is a change from one administrative spatial unit to another, made between two 
points in time”. The concept of residence is of particular significance to the definition of 
migration for it combines the two elements on which the definition must hinge. There are, 
however, some changes of residence which we exclude from migration. These are 
1)	Temporary changes which do not involve changes in usual residence: these are 
usually excluded from “migration”, which include brief visits, excursions, vacation, 
or business travels even across national boundaries; 
2)	Other changes in residence although permanent are short-distance movements, and 
hence, are also excluded from “migration”. 
Thus, the term migration has, in general usage, been restricted to relatively permanent 
changes in residence between specifically designated political or statistical areas or between 
type-of-residential areas. (Shryock, H.S. et al, 1970). 
Migrant 
A migrant is a person who changes the political area of his usual place of residence. 
Area of Origin (Departure)
The area of origin is the area from which a migrant moves. It may be either (a) the area 
of residence at the beginning of the migration interval, or (b) the area of residence from 
which the move was made. 
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com

DEMOGRAPHIC STATISTICS
463
MEASURES OF MIGRATION
Area of Destination (Arrival)
The area of destination (sometimes referred to as the receiving area) is the area to which a 
migrant moves. 
Migration Stream 
A migration stream (sometimes referred to as migration flow or the dominant stream) 
consists of all moves or all migrants having a common area of origin and destination in 
a given migration period. Thus, a migration stream from i to j, denoted by Mij, is the 
movement of people from an area of origin i to the area of destination j during a given 
interval of time. 
Counterstream 
A counterstream (also referred to as reverse stream) consists of movement in the opposite 
direction to a migration stream. Thus, if the migration stream is from area of origin i to 
area of destination j, the counterstream is that from j to i during the same period and 
denoted by Mji. In general sense, we can think of a counterstream as the smaller of the 
two movements. 
Net Stream 
The net stream (also referred to as net interchange) between two areas is the difference 
between a stream and its counterstream. 
Gross Stream 
The gross stream (or gross interchange) between two areas is the sum of the stream and 
the counterstream. 
Return Migrant 
A return migrant is a person who moved back to the area where he formerly resided.
11.3	 TYPES OF MIGRATION 
Migration may be classified by the following types: 
1)	By type of boundary, namely, 
i)	 international migration; 
ii)	internal migration. 
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com

DEMOGRAPHIC STATISTICS
464
MEASURES OF MIGRATION
2)	By duration, that is, 
i)	 regular (daily or periodic) migration which is a regular trip to place of work or 
studies beyond the person’s place of residence; 
ii)	seasonal migration; 
iii)	temporary migration; 
iv)	permanent migration. 
3)	By direction: 
i)	 rural-rural migration; 
ii)	rural-urban migration; 
iii)	urban-rural migration; 
iv)	urban-urban migration. 
4)	According to decision to migrate: 
i)	 voluntary migration; 
ii)	involuntary migration. 
The sources of data, the type of data available, and the techniques of estimation and 
analysis are sufficiently different for international and internal migration, and so we shall 
treat them separately. 
11.4	 INTERNATIONAL MIGRATION 
11.4.1  DEFINITION OF CONCEPTS
International Migration 
International migration is the movement of people across national boundaries. This movement 
may be designated emigration or immigration.
Immigration 
Immigration (I) is a movement of people into a country.
Immigrant 
An immigrant is a person who has resided abroad for a year or more and on entering the 
country has declared an intention to stay for a year or more.54 
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com

DEMOGRAPHIC STATISTICS
465
MEASURES OF MIGRATION
465
Emigration 
Emigration (E) is a movement of people out of a country. 
Emigrant 
An emigrant is a person who has resided in a place for a year or more and on leaving the 
country has declared an intention to stay away for a year or more.
It should be noted that every international migrant is an emigrant with respect to the 
country of departure and an immigrant with respect to the country of arrival. 
Net Migration 
Net migration (NM) is the balance of immigration and emigration for a country. It may 
be referred to as net immigration (NI) if immigration is larger than emigration and net 
emigration (NE), if emigration is larger than immigration. That is, 
NI
=
I −E,
if I > E,
NE
=
E −I,
if E > I
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more

DEMOGRAPHIC STATISTICS
466
MEASURES OF MIGRATION
The term “net migrant” as far as possible must be avoided because it is not reasonable to 
think of a group of people as being net migrant. 
Gross Migration 
Gross migration (GM) is the sum of total immigration and total emigration. That is, 
= I + E
This figure, also called migration turnover, is intended to represent the total movement 
across the borders of a country during a period of time. 
Example 11.1
In 1986, the number of persons who departed from Nigeria to various countries was 635,397, 
while in that same year 647,763 persons arrived in Nigeria.
Calculate: 
a)	net migration; 
b)	gross migration.
Solution
I = 647, 763;
E = 635, 397
1)	The net migration is
	
NM
=
I −E
=
647, 763 −635, 397 = 12, 366
That is, in 1986 the Nigerian population increased by 12,366 through migration.
2)	Gross migration is
	
GM
=
I + E
=
647, 763 + 635, 397 = 1, 283, 160
That is, the migration turnover of Nigeria in 1986 was 1,283,160. In other words, 
1,283,160 people crossed the Nigerian border in 1986.
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com

DEMOGRAPHIC STATISTICS
467
MEASURES OF MIGRATION
11.4.2  SOURCES OF INTERNATIONAL MIGRATION DATA 
International migration data may be obtained from a variety of different sources such as 
the following: 
1)	Administrative Records 
Administrative records may be: 
i)	 Statistics collected by immigration officials at national frontiers but these are 
rarely disseminated. 
ii)	Passenger statistics obtained from lists of passengers on sea and air transport 
manifests. 
iii)	Population registers tracing the movements of foreigners. 
2)	Population Censuses 
Migration related questions included in the census questionnaire: country of birth, country 
of citizenship, country of usual residence, or country of residence at a previous specific date. 
3)	Sample Surveys
Sample surveys may be periodic or special. 
i)	 Periodic surveys such as the Demographic and Health Survey (DHS), the Living 
Standards Measurement Survey (LSMS), the Core Welfare Indicators Questionnaire 
(CWIQ) Survey may have specific questions regarding migration: previous and 
present residence, or citizenship. 
ii)	Special inquiries on migration. 
11.4.3  METHODS OF ANALYSIS OF INTERNATIONAL MIGRATION DATA 
Intercensal Component Equation
In Chapter 4, we stated the intercensal component equations as: 
P1 = P0 + (B −D) + (I −E)
or 
(P1 −P0) = (B −D) + (I −E)
where 
(P1 −P0)	
is net change in population during the period;
(B −D)	
is natural increase/decrease during the period;
(I −E)	
is mechanical increase/decrease (net immigration) during the period.
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com

DEMOGRAPHIC STATISTICS
468
MEASURES OF MIGRATION
The general formula for estimating the total volume of net migration is, therefore, to 
rearrange the elements of the intercensal component equation as: 
M = (P1 −P0) −(B −D)
where M = I −E is the net migration.
Thus, net migration equals population change during the intercensal period minus natural 
increase during that period. The result is the difference between the total number of persons 
moving into a country and the number moving out from the country during a given 
intercensal period.
Although there is an interest in separate figures on immigration and emigration, this formula 
does not permit making adequate estimates of immigration and emigration separately. 
Example 11.2
The census population of a country was 5,668,000 in 1982 and 6,986,000 in 1992. Estimate 
the country’s net migration for the period if the number of births and deaths within the 
period were 2,235,000 and 1,347,000 respectively. 
Solution 
P0
=
5, 668, 000; P1 = 6, 986, 000; B = 2, 235, 000; D = 1, 347, 000
I −E
=
(P1 −P0) −(B −D)
=
(6, 986, 000 −5, 668, 000) −(2, 235, 000 −1, 347, 000)
=
1, 318, 000 −888, 000 = 430, 000.
The population of the country in 1992 increased by 430,000 through migration. 
Migration Ratios and Proportions 
Migration Index
Migration Index (MI) may be defined as 
MI = E
I ,
where
E > I
or 
MI = I
E ,
where
I > E
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com

DEMOGRAPHIC STATISTICS
469
MEASURES OF MIGRATION
Example 11.3
For the data in Example 11.1, calculate the migration index. 
Solution 
I = 647, 763;
E = 635, 397
MI
=
I
E
=
647, 763
635, 397 = 1.019
That is, for every 100 persons that left Nigeria in 1986 about 102 persons entered it. 
Net Migration Ratio
Net Migration Ratio (NMR) may be defined as: 
NMR = I −E
I
,
where
I > E
This definition is used to measure the proportion of immigration which is not compensated 
by emigration.
Net migration ratio may also be defined as 
NMR = E −I
E
,
where
E > I
This definition is used to measure the proportion of emigration that is not compensated 
by immigration. 
Example 11.4
Using the data in Example 11.1, calculate the net migration ratio. 
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com

DEMOGRAPHIC STATISTICS
470
MEASURES OF MIGRATION
470
Solution
I = 647, 763;
E = 635, 397;
I > E
NMR
=
I −E
I
=
647, 763 −635, 397
647, 763
= 0.019
Migration Effectiveness Ratio
Migration Effectiveness Ratio (MER) is defined as the ratio of net migration to gross 
migration (migration turnover): 
MER = I −E
I + E
This ratio measures the relative difference between the effective addition or loss of population 
through migration and the overall gross movement. 
Example 11.5
For the data in Example 11.1, calculate the migration effectiveness ratio. 
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more

DEMOGRAPHIC STATISTICS
471
MEASURES OF MIGRATION
Solution 
I = 647, 763;
E = 635, 397
MER
=
I −E
I + E
=
647, 763 −635, 397
647, 763 + 635, 397 = 0.01
Immigration Proportion
Immigration Proportion (IP) is defined as 
IP =
I
I + E
Emigration Proportion
Emigration Proportion (EP) is defined as: 
EP =
E
I + E
Example 11.6
For the data in Example 11.1, calculate immigration and emigration proportions. 
Solution 
I = 647, 763;
E = 635, 397
IP
=
I
I + E
=
647, 763
647, 763 + 635, 397 = 0.505
EP
=
E
I + E
=
635, 397
647, 763 + 635, 397 = 0.495
Crude Migration Rates 
The crude immigration rate (CIR) is defined as: 
CIR = I
P × 1, 000
where P is the mid-year population.
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com

DEMOGRAPHIC STATISTICS
472
MEASURES OF MIGRATION
The crude emigration rate (CER) is defined as 
CER = E
P × 1, 000
Example 11.7
For the data in Example 11.1, calculate 
1)	the crude immigration rate; 
2)	the crude emigration rate. 
if the mid-year population of Nigeria in 1986 was 98,168,000. 
Solution 
I = 647, 763;
E = 635, 397;
P = 98, 168, 000
1)	The crude immigration rate is 
	
CIR
=
I
P × 1, 000
=
=
647, 763
98, 168, 000 × 1, 000 = 6.599
That is, there were about 6.6 new immigrants to Nigeria per 1,000 mid-year population. 
2)	The crude emmigration rate is 
	
CER
=
E
P × 1, 000
=
635, 397
98, 168, 00 × 1, 000 = 6.473
That is, there are about 6.6 new emigrants from Nigeria per 1,000 mid-year population. In 
other words, for every 1,000 mid-year population, about 6.5 persons left Nigeria in 1986.
The net migration rate (NMR) is defined as: 
	
NMR = I −E
P
× 1, 000
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com

DEMOGRAPHIC STATISTICS
473
MEASURES OF MIGRATION
The gross migration rate (GMR) is defined as: 
	
GMR = I + E
P
× 1, 000
Example 11.8
For the data in Example 11.7, calculate: 
1)	the net migration rate; 
2)	the gross migration rate. 
Solution 
I = 647, 763;
E = 635, 397;
P = 98, 168, 000
1)	
	
NMR
=
I −E
P
× 1, 000
=
647, 763 −635, 397
98, 168, 000
× 1, 000 = 0.12597
That is, in 1986, Nigeria experienced a net increase of 0.13 person per 1,000 (or 13 per 
100,000)) population through migration. 
2)	
	
GMR
=
I + E
P
× 1, 000
=
647, 763 + 635, 397
98, 168, 000
× 1, 000 = 13.07.
That is, about 13 per 1,000 Nigerian population crossed the Nigerian border in 1986. 
Specific Migration Rates 
Migration rates may also be specific for, say, age, sex, race, or other characteristics of the 
migrants. For example, an age-specific net migration rate is: 
NMR(a) = I(a) −E(a)
P(a)
× 1, 000
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com

DEMOGRAPHIC STATISTICS
474
MEASURES OF MIGRATION
where
I(a) and E(a) represent immigration and emigration, respectively at age a;
P(a) is the mid-year population at age a. 
Measures of Migrantion Based on Place of Birth Data
Migrant Component
The migrant component of a population (MC) is the total number of persons living in an 
area who are migrants in relation to the total population at a given time. It is given by: 
MC = Mt
Pt
× 100
where
Mt are migrants at time t in a population; Pt is the size of the population at time t.
This measure is useful when studying: 
1)	Rate of migration; 
2)	Rate of life-time migration. 
Example 11.9
An area had a migrant population of 590 in the population of 12,000 in 2001. What is 
the migrant component of a population. 
Solution 
P2001 = 12, 000;
M2001 = 590
Therefore, 
MC
=
M2001
P2001
× 100
=
590
12, 000 × 100 = 4.9 percent
Rate of Migration
The rate of migration from area i to area j is defined as: 
RM = Mij
Pi
× 100
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com

DEMOGRAPHIC STATISTICS
475
MEASURES OF MIGRATION
475
where
Mij = Migration stream from area of origin i to area of destination j;
Pi = Population of the area of origin i. 
Example 11.10
Suppose that 63 out of an estimated population of 1,800 left area A to settle in area B in 
2003. Calculate the rate of migration from area A to area B. 
Solution 
MAB = 63;
PA = 1, 800
Therefore, 
RM
=
MAB
PA
× 100
=
63
1, 800 × 100 = 3.5 percent
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
EXPERIENCE THE POWER OF 
FULL ENGAGEMENT…
     RUN FASTER.
          RUN LONGER..
                RUN EASIER…
READ MORE & PRE-ORDER TODAY 
WWW.GAITEYE.COM
Challenge the way we run

DEMOGRAPHIC STATISTICS
476
MEASURES OF MIGRATION
Efficiency of Streams
The efficiency of migration stream (EMS) from i to j is defined as the ratio of stream to 
counter stream. 
EMS = Mij
Mji
× 100
where Mij is as defined above and Mij is the counterstream from area of origin j to area 
of destination i.
Example 11.11
Refer to Example 11.10. Suppose that in that year, 39 persons went from area B to settle 
in area A. Calculate the efficiency of streams. 
Solution 
MAB = 63;
MBA = 1, 800
Therefore, 
EMS
=
Mij
Mji
× 100
=
63
39 × 100 = 161.5 percent
That is, the migration stream from area A in 2003 was 62 percent more than the counterstream. 
In other words, for every person who migrated from area B to area A, there were 1.6 persons 
who migrated from area A to area B. 
We notice that EMS is net migration between two areas in relative term. The advantage of 
this measure is that it is useful for studying “push-pull” factors between areas, for example, 
rural to urban migration. The measure has one main disadvantage. The ratio using absolute 
numbers of migrants can be misleading when the population of areas i and j are vastly 
different in which case it may not exactly reflect the power of attraction. 
Relative Efficiency of Streams
To overcome the deficiency associated with the efficiency streams defined above, we weight 
the streams by their base population. This gives a measure called relative efficiency of 
migration stream (REMS), defined as: 
REMS = Mij
Mji
× Pj
Pi
× 100
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com

DEMOGRAPHIC STATISTICS
477
MEASURES OF MIGRATION
Example 11.12
Refer to Example 11.11. Suppose that the population of area A was 850 and that of area 
B was 5,000 in 2003. Calculate the relative efficiency of stream. 
Solution 
MAB = 63;
PA = 850
MBA = 1, 800;
PB = 5, 000
Therefore, 
REMS
=
Mij
Mji
× Pj
Pi
× 100
=
63
39 × 5000
850 × 100 = 950.2 percent
Index of Preference
The index of preference of migrants (IPM) from area i to area j is the number of emmigrant 
from area i to area j in relation to all emmigrants from area i: 
IPM = Mij
Mi
× 100
Example 11.13
Refer to Example 11.10. Suppose that in all only 96 people had migrated from area i.
Calculate the index of preference of migrants for area B. 
Solution 
MAB = 63;
MA = 96
Therefore, 
REMS
=
IPM = Mij
Mi
× 100
=
63
96 × 100 = 65.6 percent
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com

DEMOGRAPHIC STATISTICS
478
MEASURES OF MIGRATION
11.5	 INTERNAL MIGRATION 
11.5.1  DEFINITION OF CONCEPTS 
Internal Migration 
Internal migration refers to changes of residence within the boundaries of a given nation. 
Residential moves are considered to have taken place across the boundary of minor subdivisions 
of districts or regions of the country. Residential moves which do not result in crossing such 
a boundary are usually termed mobility. Thus, with internal migration not only intent of 
movement but also the distance is considered. 
Internal migration may be designated out-migration or in-migration.
Out-migration 
Out-migration is a movement of people out of a migration-defining area to a place outside 
it but within the same country during the time period under consideration. 
Out-migrant 
An out-migrant is a person who leaves a migration-defining area by crossing its boundary for 
a point outside it, but within the same country during the time period under consideration. 
In-migration 
In-migration is a movement of people into a migration-defining area by crossing its boundary 
from some point outside the area but within the same country during the time period 
under consideration. 
In-migrant 
%vspace11pt An in-migrant is a person who enters a migration-defining area by crossing 
its boundary from some point outside the area, but within the same country during the 
time period under consideration. 
Note
It should be noted that every internal migrant is an out-migrant with respect to the area 
of departure and an in-migrant with respect to the area of arrival. 
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com

DEMOGRAPHIC STATISTICS
479
MEASURES OF MIGRATION
Net Migration 
Net migration is the balance between in-migration and out-migration. It may be characterised as 
1)	net in-migration if in-migration is greater than out-migration, and 
2)	net out-migration if out-migration is greater than in-migration. 
Migration turnover 
Migration turnover (in relation to internal migration) is the sum of in-migration and out-
migration with respect to a given area. That is,
Migration turnover = in-migration + out-migration. 
11.5.2  SOURCES OF INTERNAL MIGRATION DATA 
Generally, the sources of internal migration data are the following. 
1)	Administrative Records 
i)	 Continuous population register (deployed in a few developed countries including 
Denmark, Netherlands, Norway, Japan, Sweden); 
ii)	Miscellaneous sources that include the national social security records, some of 
the other partial population registers (compulsory military service, aliens, etc.), 
electoral rolls, employment records, school records, public utility records, and 
city directory listings. 
2)	National Population Census
The census is for most countries the only way to obtain, either directly or indirectly, some 
information on internal migration. 
3)	Sample Surveys
Demographic surveys for collecting internal migration data generally take two forms: 
specialised migration surveys and general demographic surveys that include questions 
on migration. 
In Africa, however, the national population census and, to a limited extent, the sample 
surveys are the most important internal migration data sources. Together with the evidence 
from censuses, sample surveys provide a much more complete description of the operation 
of internal migration, and ideally the two approaches should be used together.
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com

DEMOGRAPHIC STATISTICS
480
MEASURES OF MIGRATION
480
In both the population censuses and sample surveys, data on internal migration are obtained 
directly or indirectly. The usual direct questions on internal migration relate to: 
1)	place of birth; 
2)	place of last residence; 
3)	duration of residence in the place of enumeration; 
4)	last prior residence; 
5)	mobility history; and so forth. 
Generally, if place of residence is different from place of birth then migration has taken 
place, or if current place of residence is different from usual place of residence. There are 
other similar definitions that make use of the questions listed above.
Migration data obtained indirectly are through estimation procedures that use data presumably 
obtained for other purposes. 
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
PDF components for PHP developers
www.setasign.com
SETASIGN
This e-book  
is made with 
SetaPDF

DEMOGRAPHIC STATISTICS
481
MEASURES OF MIGRATION
Advantages of Census data on migration
Census data are 
1)	potentially the most important source of data on internal migration in Africa since 
nearly all the countries now take censuses; 
2)	fairly standard in form; 
3)	most suitable for macro-analysis since they cover the national population; 
4)	used for both direct and indirect estimation of migration. 
Disadvantages of Census data on migration 
1)	Censuses do not show the extent of return migration. 
2)	Censuses underestimate the significance of short distance movement. 
Advantages of Sample Survey Data on migration 
1)	Small sample surveys adopt more flexible definitions in space and time and therefore 
can describe the entire migration process for each individual. 
2)	Well-designated migration surveys would provide both macro and micro-level data 
for development planning. 
Disadvantage of Sample Survey Data on migration 
Though some small sample surveys are based on random samples, most have been conducted 
among highly specific groups and, hence, the results cannot be generalised. 
11.5.3  METHODS OF ANALYSIS OF INTERNAL MIGRATION 
Statistics on internal migration are quite limited in most countries. It is however, possible 
to estimate internal migration as a residual, similar to international migration. Thus, 
IM = (P1 −Po) −(B −D)
In-, out-, gross and net migration rates may be expressed by formulae analogous to those 
for international migration.
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com

DEMOGRAPHIC STATISTICS
482
MEASURES OF MIGRATION
EXERCISES
11.1	
52,536 persons in 1990 left a certain country to various parts of the world while 
54,442 persons entered the country. Calculate the: 
1)	net migration; 
2)	gross migration; 
3)	migration rate; 
4)	net migration ratio; 
5)	migration effectiveness; 
6)	immigration proportion; 
7)	emigration proportion. 
112	
If the mid-year population of the country in Question 1 was 14,674,000, calculate 
1)	the crude immigration rate; 
2)	the crude emigration rate; 
3)	the net migration rate; 
4)	the gross migration rate. 
11.3	
The mid-year population of a country in 1985 was 17,146,553 and 19,885,132 in 
1990. Estimate the country’s net migration for the period 1985–1990 if the number 
of births and deaths within the period were 2,001,442 and 1,957,603 respectively. 
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com

DEMOGRAPHIC STATISTICS
483
BIBLIOGRAPHY 
BIBLIOGRAPHY 
Arjun, L. et. al, (1980), Recent Trends in the methodology of Demographic Surveys in 
Developing Countries, Systems of Demographic Measurement Data Collection Systems, 
The University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill.
Barclay, G.W. (1958), Techniques of Population Analysis, New York, John Wiley & Sons.
Benjamin, B. (1959), Elements of Vital Statistics, London, George Allen & Unwin Ltd.
Boyarsky A.Y. (1980),(ed), Fundamentals of Demography, Moscow, Statistika.
Boyarsky A.Y. (1985),(ed), A Course in Demography, Moscow, Finance and Statistics.
Chou, Ya-Lun (1975). Statistical Analysis with Business Applications, Second Edition, Holt, 
Rinehart and Winston, New York.
Elandt-Johnson, R.C. and Johnson L.N. (1980), Survival Models and Data Analysis, John 
Wiley & Sons.
Goldberg, A.M. & Kozlov, V.S. (1985), (ed), The General Theory of Statistics, Moscow, 
Finance and Statistics.
Haupt, A. & Kane, T.T. (1980), Population Handbook, Washington D.C., Population 
Reference Bureau, Inc.
Henry, L. (1976), Population: Analysis and Models, Edward Arnold Publishers.
Keyfitz, N., (1968), Introduction to the Population Mathematics, Addison-Wesley.
Kozlov, V.S. et. al., (1975), (ed), The General Theory of Statistics, Moscow, Statistika.
Kpedekpo, G.M.K. (1982), Essentials of Demographic Analysis for Africa, Nigeria, Hienemann.
Lucas, D., et.al (1980), Beginning Population Studies, Canberra, Austrailian National University.
Nuamah, N.N.N.N., (1994), Statistical and Demographic Measures for Population Studies, 
Accra, Ghana Universities Press.
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com

DEMOGRAPHIC STATISTICS
484
BIBLIOGRAPHY 
Nsowah-Nuamah, N.N.N., (2005), Basic Statistics: A Handbook of Descriptive Statistics, 
Accra, Acadec Press.
Ott, L; Mendenhall, W; Larson, R.F. (1978), Statistics: A Tool for the Social Sciences (Second 
Edition), North Scituate, Massachausetts, Duxbury Press.
Pressat, R. (1972), Demographic Analysis, Chicago, Aldine Atherton.
Ramakumar, R. (1986) Technical Demography, New Delhi, New Age International Publisher.
Scott, Christopher (1973), Technical Problems of Multiround Demographic Surveys, Chapel 
Hill, The University of North Carolina.
Shryock, H.S., Siegel J. and Associates (1976), The Methods and Materials of Demography, 
New York, Academic Press.
Siegel, S. (1956), Nonparametric Statistics for the Behavioral Sciences, New York, McGraw-Hill.
Spiegelman, M. (1968), Introduction to Demography, Cambridge, Havard University Press.
Steshenko S.G. & Kozachenko I. (1984), Demographic Statistics, Kiev, Visha Skola.
United Nations (1953), Principles for a Vital Statistics System; Statistical Papers, Series M, 
No. 19.
United Nations (1955), Handbook on Vital Statistics Methods, Studies in Methods, Series 
F, No. 7.
United Nations (1958), Principles and Recommendations for National Population Censuses, 
Statistical Papers, Series M, No. 27.
United Nations (2006), Principles and Recommendations for Population Population and Housing 
Censuses, Revision 2.
United Nations Demographic Yearbooks (1980–1991), (New York: Statistics Office, 
Department of Economic and Social Affairs).
World Health Organisation (1950), Official Records of the World Health Organisation, No. 
28, Third World Health Assembly, Geneva, 8 to 27 May, 1950.
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com

DEMOGRAPHIC STATISTICS
485
BIBLIOGRAPHY 
485
Wunsch, G.J. and Termote, M.G. (1978), Introduction to Demographic Analysis: Principles 
and Methods, New York, Plenum Press
Zuberi, T. and Bangha, M. (2007) History and Future of the African Census Analysis 
Project, 2007 Africa Symposium on Statistical Development, Kigali, Rwanda, 15–18 January.
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
www.sylvania.com
We do not reinvent  
the wheel we reinvent 
light.
Fascinating lighting offers an infinite spectrum of 
possibilities: Innovative technologies and new  
markets provide both opportunities and challenges. 
An environment in which your expertise is in high 
demand. Enjoy the supportive working atmosphere 
within our global group and benefit from international 
career paths. Implement sustainable ideas in close 
cooperation with other specialists and contribute to 
influencing our future. Come and join us in reinventing 
light every day.
Light is OSRAM

DEMOGRAPHIC STATISTICS
486
Endnotes
ENDNOTES
1.	
Births and deaths are vital events because of their direct biological relevance to life itself.
2.	
Marriages and dissolutions are sometimes considered vital events because of their relationship to 
childbearing and reproduction, even though they are not directly connected to population changes.
3.	
Demographic variables include mortality, fertility, age at first birth, age at first marriage and sex. Non-
demographic variables include income, education, occupation, ethnicity and religion.
4.	
For details on the organisation of census, we refer the reader to the UN Handbook on Census (2006).
5.	
Retrospective Surveys may be used to collect vital statistics.
6.	
As we shall observe later, ratios and proportions are concepts for describing vital events while fractions, 
decimals and percentages are ways of expressing ratios and proportions.
7.	
To be discussed further in Chapter 6.
8.	
The population is usually not the same at the beginning and end of the year, hence the use of the 
average of the population at the beginning and end of the one year period.
9.	
The concepts of direct and indirect standardization, as well as the term standard population were first 
to introduced by Neison in 1844.
10.	 The interval of time taken to study population change in a fairly large population is usually one year.
11.	 A population is said to be closed when it is not subject to immigration and emigration; otherwise it 
is open.
12.	 A sequence of population figures 
P1, P2, · · · , Pn
	
follows a geometric progression if there exists a nonzero constant r, called a common ratio, such that
Pn
Pn−1 = r
	
That is,
Pn = rPn−1
for every n ≥1
13.	 The logarithm of a number N  is the exponent to which a base b must be raised to obtain N . The base 
is usually the number 10. This is denoted as log10 or simply log. When the base used is the number 
e ≈2.718, then it is called natural log, written loge  or usually as ln .
14.	 In demography, the word “growth” is used to mean “change” because of the fact that most populations 
are increasing in size.
15.	 We may also use logarithm base 10 instead and this is denoted by log10.
16.	  Sex is not the same as gender. Gender refers to the roles and relationships of men and women in a 
specific society or culture. Society assigns roles based on a person’s sex. Some of these roles are arbitrarily 
assigned and others are shaped by history, ideology, culture, religion and economic development
17.	 In other texts, it is defined as ratio of females per 100 males in the population.
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com

DEMOGRAPHIC STATISTICS
487
Endnotes
18.	 Epidemiology is the study of the distribution of health and diseases in groups of people and the factors 
that influence this distribution.
19.	 A progeny is an individual born simultaneously to a definite set of parents.
20.	 The figure 98 may sometimes be reserved as a code for “age 98 or older”.
21.	 In some text, MI is defined without 1
2,  in which case, the maximum value of the index is 180.
22.	 For details, see Nsowah-Nuamah, 2005.
23.	 We may observe that the mean age and the median age are not the same. They will be the same only 
when the age composition data are normally distributed, that is, bell-shaped.
24.	 In this text x is used for single age x and a for age group a. However, we may use x to refer to both 
single ages or age groups.
25.	 By normal situations we mean that there is neither irregular demographic events such as wars, epidemics 
nor differential migration. Hence, unless the history of the population is well documented, there is a 
likelihood of misinterpretation of irregular sex ratios and age ratios.
26.	 Although there are exceptions, in most cases the transfer of maternal deaths will balance out in a given 
year.
27.	 We may define infant death rate under one year as: 
IDR = D0
P
	
but this is a crude rate and we shall not advise its usage.
28.	 The standard population may be the population of one of the area segment or date of the population 
being studied or a different external population.
29.	 Ernst Louis tienne Laspeyres, 1834–1913, was a German economist and statistician.
30.	 Hermann Paasche was a German economist.
31.	 That is that the population and the numbers in each age and sex group did not change over many decades.
32.	 Stable age distribution means that the proportion of persons at each age group in respect of the total 
population will remain constant despite the growth in absolute numbers.
33.	 The values of the life table functions are dependent on the value of the radix chosen; otherwise they 
do not have any absolute meaning.
34.	 The symbol dx is a standard one in life tables for number of deaths. Unfortunately, it has also been 
used in Chapter 6 to represent age specific death rate. We implore the reader not to confuse the two. 
35.	 If a person lives one complete year from the beginning of the year to the end of the year he/she has 
lived one person-year. But if a person lived at the beginning of the year and died at the end of March, 
that person would have lived 
31 + 28 + 31
365
= 0.25 person-year
	
The total of all person-years lived by all lx persons is Lx
36.	 For a brief account, see Spiegelman, 1968, pages 127–128.
37.	 We use Mx to represent age-specific death rate, instead of the usual symbol dx used in Chapter 6 just 
to avoid confusion.
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com

DEMOGRAPHIC STATISTICS
488
Endnotes
38.	 In a complete life table, all intervals are equal to 1 and it is dropped so that we have, say, dx.
39.	 Medical science has made it possible to ignore this stage in some cases.
40.	 a = 15 −19; 20 −24; 25 −29; 30 −34; 35 −39; 40 −44; 45 −49.
41.	 In other texts, this rate is referred to as total legitimate fertility rate.
42.	 As a convention, the following seven five-year age groups are utilized: 15 to 19; 20 to 24; 25 to 29; 
30 to 34; 35 to 39; 40 to 44; and 45 to 49. Hence the mid-points for the age intervals are 17.5, 22.5, 
27.5, 32.5, 37.5, 42.5, 47.5).
43.	 To determine a class boundary from the class interval 25–29, refer to Example 5.17.
44.	 Stillbirths, stepchildren, and adopted children are excluded from the number of children ever born.
45.	 A de facto union is a marriage in practice or actuality, but not officially established. The individuals 
reside together and represent themselves as spouses to the outside world.
46.	 TFR is also a standardised rate, because it refers to a constant base of 1,000 women at each age group 
(equal weight). Therefore, all TFR have the same age composition and, therefore, are not affected by 
differences in age composition. In the study of differential fertility, it is desirable to use either TFR or 
age standardised GFR.
47.	 The net reproduction rate, though is derived from the data of a loose period, is not the same as vital-
statistics rate of births or deaths “per year”. It covers the whole reproductive period of the hypothetical 
cohort and might be regarded as a rate “per cohort” or “per generation” of these women.
48.	 This is not always the case in most African countries where people can form families without marriage.
49.	 Of course, in most part of the world especially in Africa, it is not uncommon to have married men 
going into another marriage.
50.	 When a couplennis separated, they are, in principle, not single.
51.	 Universal marriage is when all women in get married before age 50.
52.	 This is because delayed marriages tend to delay pregnancies.
53.	 Commutating involves the daytime population (for instance, the population at its place of work, 
whereas the night time population (i.e., the population at its place of residence) is the one commonly 
recorded as the de jure population and the one to which demographic analysis refers. As long as there 
is no migration (no change in the place of residence), the level and the structure of the night time 
population do not change by definition.
54.	 The cut-off point varies from country to country. In some countries, a 6-month period is used to 
identify migrants.
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com

DEMOGRAPHIC STATISTICS
489
Endnotes
489
INDEX
A
Abortion  198
induced  198
spontaneous  198
Abridged Life Table  310, 327, 328, 330, 422
Absolute Population Growth  99, 100
active population  122, 149, 150
Active System of Registration  47
Age
Tabulation  34, 120
Age composition
uses  12, 21, 35, 53, 222, 281, 287, 307
age curve of mortality  211, 291
Age data
Alternative Definition  127, 409
errors in  12, 57, 62, 64, 125, 126, 127
errors of coverage  61, 122
age dependency ratio  20, 149, 151, 153, 186, 195
aged population  149, 150, 151, 153
age heaping  123, 124, 125, 134, 137, 141, 147, 148
age in completed years  117, 422
Ageing Population  153
age ratio  20, 125, 126, 127, 129, 132, 134, 176, 
186, 187, 190
Age-Sex Accuracy Index  174, 175, 177
Age-sex composition  84
age-sex standardised death rate  260
age-specific
advantage  36, 216, 217, 419, 429, 441
definition  25, 71, 74, 117, 127, 197, 200, 205, 
333, 338, 341, 344, 348, 350, 351, 409, 
414, 416, 434, 437, 440, 452, 461, 478
Age-specific death rate
advantages  33, 36, 37, 85, 340, 369, 412
disadvantages  33, 36, 37, 81, 412
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
360°
thinking.
© Deloitte & Touche LLP and affiliated entities.
Discover the truth at www.deloitte.ca/careers 

DEMOGRAPHIC STATISTICS
490
Endnotes
age-specific death rates  46, 209, 210, 211, 247, 252, 
261, 262, 263, 266, 269, 270, 274, 276, 279, 
280, 281, 284, 291, 300
Arithmetic Percentage Growth Rate  102
average annual  90, 104, 105
average parity  371, 372, 374, 375, 376
B
basic estimating equation  89
Birth
outside marriage  359, 402
birth cohort  19, 118, 119, 224, 225, 226, 374
birth intervals  381
birth order  376, 377, 404
Birth Registration Form  49
blended sum  140, 141, 143
C
canvasser method  32, 33
case fatality rate  71
Cause-specifc
death rate  46, 71, 72, 75, 80, 81, 200, 201, 
202, 203, 204, 205, 206, 207, 208, 209, 
211, 214, 216, 217, 235, 238, 239, 240, 
241, 242, 246, 247, 250, 252, 253, 254, 
256, 257, 259, 260, 261, 262, 263, 264, 
265, 266, 267, 270, 271, 274, 276, 279, 
280, 281, 284, 285, 291, 292, 294, 295, 
296, 297, 298, 299, 300, 307, 318, 325, 
326, 329, 339, 340, 391, 394, 396, 397, 
398, 409, 410, 411, 412, 413, 487
death ratio  214, 215, 216, 235, 236, 237, 238, 
239, 240, 241, 246, 293, 294, 295
cause-specific death rate  71, 214, 216, 217, 274
Cause-specific death rate
advantages  33, 36, 37, 85, 340, 369, 412
age-sex  80, 165, 167, 168, 169, 174, 175, 176, 
195, 219, 254, 256, 260, 297, 298, 310, 
347, 360, 368, 448, 449, 450, 451, 452
disadvantages  33, 36, 37, 81, 412
cause-specific death ratio  214, 215, 216
Cause-specific death ratio
Advantage  36, 216, 217, 419, 429, 441
Cause-specific death ratio and rates
uses  12, 21, 35, 53, 222, 281, 287, 307
census  12, 14, 20, 25, 26, 27, 28, 29, 30, 31, 32, 
33, 34, 35, 36, 37, 39, 40, 42, 44, 45, 49, 50, 
51, 56, 57, 58, 59, 60, 61, 62, 63, 77, 87, 90, 
97, 99, 101, 102, 111, 113, 115, 117, 119, 120, 
122, 123, 124, 125, 126, 139, 163, 165, 168, 
172, 175, 177, 178, 186, 204, 206, 207, 256, 
260, 318, 326, 340, 361, 367, 368, 369, 370, 
371, 381, 382, 402, 436, 437, 456, 459, 467, 
468, 479, 486
Census
advantage  37, 309, 437, 476
data evaluation  22
definition of  31, 36, 86, 175, 197, 242, 269, 
309, 349, 390, 434, 462
disadvantage  309, 476
organisation  28, 234, 333, 434, 484
other features of  27
purposes of  26, 59
Census counts
problems  9, 11, 25, 32, 37, 45, 57, 81, 305, 
327, 459, 461
Census enumeration
canvasser method  32, 33
householder method  32, 33
census night  27, 34, 35, 37
Census-taking
systems of  35, 483
census test  32
Central rate
advantages  35, 44, 49, 54, 57, 68, 78, 80, 205, 
214, 261, 269, 340, 342, 347, 352, 369, 
411, 412, 419, 429, 439, 441, 481
disadvantages  36, 37, 44, 45, 49, 54, 55, 57, 78, 
80, 81, 205, 214, 217, 269, 340, 342, 343, 
347, 348, 352, 370, 411, 412, 419, 429, 
431, 439, 441, 481
central rates  72, 76, 77, 81, 305
Chandrasekaran-Deming Method  56
Childbearing
average age of  195, 347, 360, 456
mean age of  155, 156, 360, 361, 362, 363, 376
modal age of  360, 366, 367
child mortality  222
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com

DEMOGRAPHIC STATISTICS
491
Endnotes
child population  149, 150, 154
Child-woman ratio
advantage  37, 309, 437, 476
disadvantage  309, 476
Civil registration system  46, 436
closed population  89
cohabitation  434
cohort  19, 118, 119, 167, 197, 224, 225, 226, 232, 
305, 306, 307, 308, 309, 310, 311, 313, 314, 
316, 317, 319, 328, 329, 337, 348, 349, 350, 
354, 355, 360, 374, 385, 386, 408, 421, 422, 
423, 426, 429, 452, 457, 488
cohort analysis  19, 119
Cohort analysis
generation analysis  119
longitudinal analysis  119
cohort fertility rate  374
Cohort measures  337
coital frequency  334
comparative mortality figure  269, 276, 299, 300, 
302
Comparative mortality index
Fisher’s Ideal-type  289, 290, 304
Laspeyre-type  280, 281, 283, 284, 289, 304
Marshall-Edgeworth-type  287, 289, 299, 304
Paasche-type  280, 281, 284, 285, 286, 287, 
289, 304
Complete  309, 316, 320, 322, 324, 325, 327, 331, 
332
Completed Cumulative Fertility  356
Completed Family Size  374
completed fertility  355, 356, 374
completed fertility rate  355, 374
Complete life table
limitation of  24, 52, 420
Complete Life Table  309, 322, 324, 327
Component Equation  467
concentration ratio  86, 177, 181, 182, 184, 185, 194
conception  197, 334, 337
consensual union  434
Controlled fertility  337
Counterstream  463
Cross-sectional analysis
period analysis  119
cross-sectional data  119
Crude  77, 78, 79, 80, 81, 200, 201, 203, 204, 205, 
261, 262, 263, 291, 292, 337, 338, 339, 340, 
341, 397, 402, 409, 411, 432, 437, 439, 471
crude birth rate  250, 318, 338, 339, 340, 341, 342, 
396, 398, 399, 402, 403, 409, 411, 439
Crude birth rate
advantage  36, 216, 217, 419, 429, 441
annual average  339
average  154, 201, 339, 360, 374, 456
definition  25, 71, 74, 117, 127, 197, 200, 205, 
333, 338, 341, 344, 348, 350, 351, 409, 
414, 416, 434, 437, 440, 452, 461, 478
disadvantage  261, 353, 420, 481
life table  118, 119, 305, 306, 307, 308, 309, 
310, 311, 314, 318, 319, 321, 322, 323, 
325, 326, 327, 328, 330, 331, 332, 354, 
413, 422, 423, 426, 427, 428, 433, 487, 
488
mean annual  291, 402
mid-period  204, 291, 340, 402
Crude death rate
advantages  33, 36, 37, 85, 340, 369, 412
annual mean  91, 92, 203
average  72, 73, 74, 76, 77, 85, 90, 96, 97, 98, 
104, 105, 106, 108, 118, 140, 149, 156, 
162, 195, 201, 203, 204, 205, 208, 261, 
287, 307, 313, 314, 316, 317, 329, 339, 
347, 349, 351, 353, 356, 359, 360, 371, 
372, 374, 375, 376, 379, 381, 402, 414, 
418, 421, 424, 426, 429, 432, 433, 456, 
486
definition  25, 71, 74, 117, 127, 197, 200, 205, 
333, 338, 341, 344, 348, 350, 351, 409, 
414, 416, 434, 437, 440, 452, 461, 478
disadvantages  36, 37, 44, 45, 49, 54, 55, 57, 78, 
80, 81, 205, 214, 217, 269, 340, 342, 343, 
347, 348, 352, 370, 411, 412, 419, 429, 
431, 439, 441, 481
life table  118, 119, 305, 306, 307, 308, 309, 
310, 311, 314, 318, 319, 321, 322, 323, 
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com

DEMOGRAPHIC STATISTICS
492
Endnotes
325, 326, 327, 328, 330, 331, 332, 354, 
413, 422, 423, 426, 427, 428, 433, 487, 
488
mean annual  291, 402
mid-period  204, 291, 340, 402
crude emigration rate  472, 482
crude immigration rate  471, 472, 482
Crude marriage rate
definition  25, 71, 74, 117, 127, 197, 200, 205, 
333, 338, 341, 344, 348, 350, 351, 409, 
414, 416, 434, 437, 440, 452, 461, 478
crude rate of natural increase  408, 409, 410
crude rate of reproductive change  409
Current analysis
period analysis  119
current fertility  367, 375, 418, 420, 421, 429
Curtate  316
D
data processing  31, 32, 34
Day one mortality  231, 232
death  18, 45, 46, 49, 52, 61, 63, 71, 72, 75, 76, 
79, 80, 81, 82, 117, 121, 140, 197, 198, 200, 
201, 202, 203, 204, 205, 206, 207, 208, 209, 
210, 211, 214, 215, 216, 217, 219, 220, 221, 
222, 225, 226, 229, 234, 235, 236, 237, 238, 
239, 240, 241, 242, 246, 247, 250, 252, 253, 
254, 256, 257, 259, 260, 261, 262, 263, 264, 
265, 266, 267, 269, 270, 271, 274, 276, 278, 
279, 280, 281, 284, 285, 291, 292, 293, 294, 
295, 296, 297, 298, 299, 300, 305, 306, 307, 
309, 310, 311, 316, 317, 318, 319, 325, 326, 
327, 329, 339, 340, 391, 394, 396, 397, 398, 
409, 410, 411, 412, 413, 424, 429, 436, 457, 
459, 461, 487
Death
foetal  115, 197, 198, 223, 234, 235, 236, 237, 
238, 239, 240, 241, 242, 243, 244, 293, 
294, 295, 337
Death rate
specific  9, 25, 34, 46, 51, 53, 54, 59, 71, 77, 79, 
80, 81, 82, 83, 84, 85, 99, 120, 121, 134, 
153, 172, 174, 195, 205, 206, 207, 208, 
209, 210, 211, 214, 215, 216, 217, 219, 
220, 247, 248, 252, 253, 258, 261, 262, 
263, 264, 266, 267, 269, 270, 271, 272, 
274, 275, 276, 278, 279, 280, 281, 282, 
284, 285, 286, 288, 291, 296, 300, 305, 
306, 309, 326, 327, 329, 335, 337, 342, 
343, 344, 346, 347, 348, 349, 350, 351, 
352, 355, 356, 358, 359, 360, 361, 362, 
363, 366, 367, 374, 376, 377, 378, 379, 
381, 385, 391, 393, 394, 395, 396, 397, 
398, 399, 401, 403, 404, 406, 407, 413, 
414, 416, 418, 419, 421, 422, 424, 427, 
430, 431, 434, 439, 442, 443, 446, 447, 
448, 449, 450, 451, 452, 453, 454, 455, 
458, 460, 467, 473, 481, 486, 487
Death rates
age-specific  46, 80, 83, 172, 174, 195, 208, 
209, 210, 211, 216, 217, 219, 247, 252, 
253, 261, 262, 263, 264, 266, 269, 270, 
271, 274, 276, 279, 280, 281, 284, 285, 
291, 296, 300, 306, 335, 342, 343, 344, 
346, 347, 348, 349, 350, 351, 352, 355, 
356, 359, 360, 361, 362, 363, 366, 367, 
374, 391, 394, 396, 397, 399, 401, 414, 
418, 421, 422, 427, 446, 447, 448, 449, 
452, 453, 454, 455, 458, 473
crude  46, 71, 72, 75, 77, 78, 79, 80, 81, 83, 
181, 200, 201, 202, 204, 205, 207, 209, 
214, 216, 247, 250, 252, 256, 257, 259, 
261, 262, 266, 270, 276, 291, 297, 298, 
318, 338, 339, 340, 341, 342, 343, 391, 
396, 398, 399, 402, 403, 408, 409, 410, 
411, 412, 437, 439, 440, 454, 471, 472, 
482, 487
Death Registration Form  49
deaths  16, 17, 18, 21, 45, 46, 47, 48, 49, 54, 59, 60, 
71, 72, 75, 76, 80, 82, 84, 87, 89, 90, 99, 107, 
115, 119, 170, 197, 198, 199, 200, 201, 203, 
204, 205, 206, 207, 209, 210, 211, 214, 215, 
216, 217, 218, 219, 220, 221, 222, 223, 224, 
225, 226, 229, 230, 231, 233, 234, 235, 236, 
237, 238, 239, 240, 241, 242, 243, 244, 245, 
246, 247, 248, 252, 254, 255, 256, 257, 259, 
260, 262, 263, 264, 266, 269, 270, 271, 272, 
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com

DEMOGRAPHIC STATISTICS
493
Endnotes
273, 274, 276, 277, 281, 282, 284, 286, 291, 
293, 294, 295, 296, 297, 298, 300, 301, 302, 
305, 306, 310, 311, 313, 318, 319, 327, 328, 
329, 337, 408, 409, 411, 412, 413, 420, 421, 
429, 433, 459, 460, 468, 482, 486, 487, 488
De facto method
Advantage  36, 216, 217, 419, 429, 441
Disadvantage  261, 353, 420, 481
De Facto Method  35
de jure  35, 36, 37, 45, 50, 60, 90, 488
De jure method
advantage  37, 309, 437, 476
disadvantage  309, 476
De Jure Method  36, 37
de jure population  50, 488
demo-geography  15
demographic booking equation  87
Demographic data
characteristics of  19, 54, 60, 63, 76, 84, 111, 
120, 165, 317, 434, 459, 473
sources of  23, 24, 25, 51, 52, 54, 61, 119, 464, 
479
uses of  23, 45, 51, 88, 110, 111, 119, 168, 199, 
215, 222, 271, 307, 336, 374, 384, 435, 
459
demographic events  17, 18, 19, 21, 24, 73, 487
Demographic Events  17
demographic methods  9, 21
Demographic of sample survey
advantage  37, 309, 437, 476
disadvantage  309, 476
Demographic process
group  18, 19, 20, 30, 34, 55, 66, 67, 68, 70, 73, 
74, 75, 77, 79, 80, 83, 86, 117, 118, 119, 
120, 121, 122, 123, 124, 125, 126, 127, 
129, 131, 132, 151, 152, 153, 155, 156, 
157, 160, 161, 164, 165, 166, 168, 169, 
172, 173, 174, 175, 176, 177, 181, 182, 
186, 192, 195, 197, 205, 206, 209, 210, 
215, 216, 247, 252, 253, 256, 258, 264, 
287, 305, 307, 308, 329, 332, 336, 337, 
343, 344, 345, 346, 347, 348, 350, 351, 
352, 353, 354, 355, 356, 358, 360, 361, 
362, 363, 364, 365, 366, 367, 368, 369, 
370, 371, 372, 373, 374, 375, 377, 378, 
379, 380, 381, 391, 392, 393, 394, 395, 
397, 398, 401, 403, 404, 405, 406, 407, 
413, 414, 415, 416, 417, 418, 419, 421, 
422, 423, 424, 425, 426, 427, 428, 430, 
432, 433, 434, 446, 447, 449, 450, 452, 
454, 456, 466, 487, 488
individual  17, 18, 20, 24, 26, 30, 32, 34, 37, 
46, 50, 51, 57, 59, 62, 63, 73, 117, 153, 
204, 305, 311, 314, 459, 461, 481, 487
demographic sample surveys  25, 52
demographic studies  15, 118
Demography
types of  15, 16, 31, 50, 52, 54, 71, 90, 99, 119, 
122, 124, 134, 167, 214, 217, 269, 309, 
461
Dependency ratio
child  21, 25, 36, 46, 49, 50, 66, 72, 76, 149, 
150, 151, 152, 154, 167, 186, 195, 211, 
219, 222, 230, 317, 333, 334, 335, 337, 
340, 342, 359, 361, 368, 369, 370, 371, 
381, 383, 384, 386, 387, 434, 459
old age  134, 151, 169, 186, 195, 314
total  16, 18, 25, 30, 37, 43, 44, 45, 50, 56, 
57, 66, 68, 69, 70, 73, 74, 75, 76, 77, 82, 
83, 84, 86, 87, 90, 111, 112, 113, 114, 130, 
134, 137, 140, 141, 142, 143, 149, 151, 
157, 160, 165, 169, 186, 195, 197, 200, 
201, 204, 205, 206, 209, 215, 220, 223, 
224, 235, 237, 247, 252, 261, 262, 263, 
264, 269, 271, 274, 287, 292, 300, 305, 
314, 333, 334, 338, 341, 347, 348, 349, 
350, 351, 352, 353, 354, 355, 357, 358, 
359, 362, 371, 372, 374, 383, 384, 388, 
389, 391, 392, 396, 400, 406, 407, 413, 
414, 418, 424, 426, 427, 428, 440, 452, 
453, 454, 466, 468, 474, 487, 488
dependent population  149
Digit preference
index  68, 78, 82, 84, 85, 86, 125, 127, 130, 
131, 132, 133, 134, 137, 140, 148, 149, 
150, 154, 155, 159, 160, 161, 162, 163, 
174, 175, 176, 177, 182, 184, 185, 187, 
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com

DEMOGRAPHIC STATISTICS
494
Endnotes
190, 192, 194, 195, 205, 269, 279, 280, 
281, 284, 285, 287, 317, 340, 348, 369, 
408, 411, 412, 419, 432, 452, 469, 477, 
487
disadvantage
disadvantage  261, 353, 420, 481
divorce  357, 434, 436, 438, 457, 458
Doubling Time  107
Dual record system
advantage  36, 216, 217, 419, 429, 441
disadvantage  261, 353, 420, 481
E
Emigrant  465
emigration  16, 310, 311, 464, 465, 466, 468, 469, 
471, 472, 474, 482, 486
Emigration Proportion  471
enumeration area  30, 33
Error
of content  34, 60, 122
of coverage  34, 55, 60, 61, 122
error of closure  88, 89
Error of closure
in age data  122, 125
of content  34, 60, 122
of coverage  122
Errors in age data
detection  62, 125
Errors in population data
detection  62, 125
sources of  436
types of  15, 16, 31, 50, 52, 54, 71, 90, 99, 119, 
122, 124, 134, 167, 214, 217, 269, 309, 
461
ever married  357, 358, 402, 436
expectation of life  86, 197, 215, 307, 309, 316, 
317, 318, 330, 332
Expectation of life
at birth  111, 115, 309, 317, 318, 418, 426, 428
complete  10, 13, 34, 40, 45, 53, 55, 137, 197, 
309, 316, 321, 325, 327, 328, 330, 332, 
334, 385, 421, 439, 479, 487, 488
curtate  316
Expectation of Life at Birth  317
experimental census  32
exponential growth equation  106
exponential growth rate  106, 109
F
family  10, 20, 24, 26, 59, 110, 111, 354, 356, 374, 
375, 381, 386, 431, 434
Family
extended  20, 306
nuclear  20
Family size
completed  31, 32, 34, 35, 117, 198, 242, 315, 
316, 322, 325, 328, 330, 336, 354, 355, 
356, 374, 375, 385, 422, 428
distribution of  16, 19, 20, 84, 85, 110, 111, 
140, 143, 149, 161, 162, 163, 164, 165, 
168, 177, 182, 186, 192, 194, 236, 247, 
252, 256, 261, 263, 269, 291, 297, 298, 
301, 302, 305, 307, 343, 347, 353, 367, 
368, 370, 371, 376, 386, 391, 392, 400, 
433, 435, 441, 456, 460, 487
Fecundability  391
fecundity  335, 337, 391
Feminity Proportion  112
fertility  12, 15, 21, 22, 52, 53, 54, 71, 81, 85, 86, 
111, 115, 120, 122, 154, 155, 163, 165, 167, 
168, 170, 197, 199, 222, 307, 333, 334, 335, 
336, 337, 338, 340, 341, 342, 343, 344, 346, 
347, 348, 349, 350, 351, 352, 354, 355, 356, 
357, 358, 359, 360, 361, 362, 363, 366, 367, 
368, 369, 370, 371, 372, 374, 375, 376, 377, 
378, 379, 381, 385, 391, 392, 393, 394, 395, 
396, 397, 398, 399, 400, 401, 402, 403, 404, 
405, 406, 407, 408, 411, 412, 413, 414, 416, 
418, 419, 420, 421, 422, 424, 425, 427, 429, 
430, 431, 432, 433, 434, 435, 437, 454, 455, 
456, 459, 460, 486, 488
Fertility rate
age-specific  153, 172, 209, 211, 214, 247, 258, 
263, 267, 272, 278, 282, 286, 288, 326, 
337, 344, 346, 347, 348, 351, 352, 356, 
358, 361, 363, 398, 403, 416, 419, 424, 
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com

DEMOGRAPHIC STATISTICS
495
Endnotes
427, 430, 448
cumulative  354
direct standardised  246, 251, 253, 254, 255, 
261, 391, 393, 395, 454
general  9, 12, 20, 24, 34, 47, 49, 77, 83, 85, 
92, 122, 123, 170, 197, 205, 211, 214, 215, 
217, 222, 232, 271, 310, 317, 322, 333, 
341, 342, 343, 357, 360, 367, 368, 370, 
376, 377, 391, 402, 403, 427, 439, 440, 
441, 442, 462, 463, 468, 479
general marital  357
indirect standardised  261, 265, 266, 269, 396, 
398, 454
total  16, 18, 25, 30, 37, 43, 44, 45, 50, 56, 
57, 66, 68, 69, 70, 73, 74, 75, 76, 77, 82, 
83, 84, 86, 87, 90, 111, 112, 113, 114, 130, 
134, 137, 140, 141, 142, 143, 149, 151, 
157, 160, 165, 169, 186, 195, 197, 200, 
201, 204, 205, 206, 209, 215, 220, 223, 
224, 235, 237, 247, 252, 261, 262, 263, 
264, 269, 271, 274, 287, 292, 300, 305, 
314, 333, 334, 338, 341, 347, 348, 349, 
350, 351, 352, 353, 354, 355, 357, 358, 
359, 362, 371, 372, 374, 383, 384, 388, 
389, 391, 392, 396, 400, 406, 407, 413, 
414, 418, 424, 426, 427, 428, 440, 452, 
453, 454, 466, 468, 474, 487, 488
total marital  358
Foetal death
classification  61, 79, 120, 309, 359, 436, 437
ratio  12, 20, 66, 67, 68, 69, 74, 77, 83, 84, 85, 
86, 114, 115, 116, 117, 124, 125, 126, 127, 
129, 130, 131, 132, 133, 134, 136, 149, 
150, 151, 153, 169, 172, 173, 174, 175, 
176, 177, 181, 182, 184, 185, 186, 187, 
190, 194, 195, 214, 215, 216, 219, 235, 
236, 237, 238, 239, 240, 241, 242, 243, 
244, 245, 246, 262, 269, 271, 276, 280, 
281, 285, 293, 294, 295, 302, 341, 342, 
368, 369, 370, 371, 381, 382, 385, 403, 
411, 412, 414, 418, 428, 431, 433, 440, 
449, 469, 470, 476, 482, 486
Foetal Death
Rate  86, 101, 102, 104, 200, 201, 203, 204, 
205, 215, 216, 217, 218, 220, 221, 223, 
224, 225, 230, 233, 239, 240, 241, 244, 
245, 246, 251, 253, 254, 255, 258, 261, 
265, 266, 267, 269, 272, 275, 282, 286, 
288, 312, 315, 337, 338, 339, 340, 341, 
342, 343, 357, 358, 376, 378, 381, 390, 
391, 393, 395, 396, 398, 400, 409, 411, 
413, 414, 416, 419, 420, 421, 422, 423, 
424, 427, 428, 429, 431, 437, 439, 440, 
441, 443, 444, 445, 446, 448, 451, 452, 
453, 454, 458, 474
foetal deaths  115, 197, 198, 223, 234, 235, 236, 
237, 238, 239, 240, 241, 242, 243, 244, 293, 
294, 295
follow-up survey  54
formal demography  15, 21, 22
fraction  65, 66, 68, 69, 74, 86, 316, 362
G
general
advantage  36, 216, 217, 419, 429, 441
definition  25, 71, 74, 117, 127, 197, 200, 205, 
333, 338, 341, 344, 348, 350, 351, 409, 
414, 416, 434, 437, 440, 452, 461, 478
disadvantage  261, 353, 420, 481
general fertility ratio  368
generation  46, 117, 118, 119, 167, 305, 308, 309, 
408, 413, 421, 422, 429, 488
Generation analysis
cohort analysis  19, 119
generation cohort  119
geometric growth equation  105, 106
Geometric rate of growth
average annual  90, 104, 105
Gestation
period of  17, 19, 20, 21, 26, 46, 57, 71, 72, 73, 
76, 81, 90, 92, 99, 119, 134, 155, 198, 205, 
222, 280, 305, 309, 310, 317, 334, 335, 
336, 337, 374, 408, 429, 466, 488
graduation  314, 327
Gravidity  336
Gross Migration  466
gross migration rate  473, 482
gross overenumeration  122
Gross reproduction rate
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com

DEMOGRAPHIC STATISTICS
496
Endnotes
concept of  306, 311, 419, 434, 436, 462
interpretation  75, 76, 84, 137, 141, 154, 162, 
163, 184, 185, 186, 252, 266, 284, 286, 
339, 346, 351, 384, 385, 393, 397, 413, 
416, 418, 421, 424, 439, 441, 442
Gross Reproduction rate
advantage  36, 216, 217, 419, 429, 441
disadvantage  261, 353, 420, 481
method of calculation  77
gross underenumeration  122
Growth rate
annualisation of  104
arithmetic  101, 102, 104, 109, 125, 130, 456
average annual geometric  105
exponential  106
geometric  95, 96, 105, 106, 109, 289, 486
negative  69, 99, 197, 409, 411
positive  10, 99, 346, 411
H
Household
head  20, 30, 33
householder method  32, 33
housing census  42
I
Immigrant  464
immigration  16, 63, 71, 99, 310, 311, 459, 464, 465, 
466, 467, 468, 469, 471, 472, 474, 482, 486
Immigration Proportion  471
Index
age-ratio-type  125, 130, 131, 132, 133, 134, 
187, 190
age-sex accuracy  174, 175, 177
Digit preference  123
Myer’s  141, 145, 146, 147
of ageing  149, 153, 154, 195
of concentration  86, 134, 143, 182, 184, 185, 
194
of dissimilarity  149, 162, 163, 185
of relative difference  149, 159, 160, 161, 192, 
194
Whipple’s  125, 134, 137, 138, 139, 140, 148, 
187, 190
Index of Ageing
limitation of  100, 154, 156, 224, 236, 238, 
284, 287, 344, 449, 452
Index of Preference  477
infant mortality  46, 76, 86, 222, 224, 225, 226, 
227, 292, 317
Infant mortality
decomposition  87, 229, 230
uses  12, 21, 35, 53, 222, 281, 287, 307
Infant mortality rate
adjusted  77, 82, 84, 217, 222, 225, 226, 227, 
246, 250, 261, 262, 284, 286, 295, 391, 
400, 407, 421
conventional  223, 224, 292, 413
infecundity  335
inflow-outflow relationship  87
informal union  434
In-migrant  478
in-migration  478, 479
internal migration  89, 461, 463, 464, 478, 479, 
480, 481
Internal migration
sources of  23, 24, 25, 51, 52, 54, 61, 119, 464, 
479
International migration
methods of analysis  467, 481
sources of  24, 61, 467, 479
L
legitimate births  359
legitimate fertility rate  403, 488
Life expectancy
complete  309, 316, 320, 322, 324, 325, 327, 
331, 332
curtate  316
Life table
abridged  327
cohort  19, 118, 119, 167, 197, 224, 225, 226, 
232, 305, 306, 307, 308, 309, 310, 311, 
313, 314, 316, 317, 319, 328, 329, 337, 
348, 349, 350, 354, 355, 360, 374, 385, 
386, 408, 421, 422, 423, 426, 429, 452, 
457, 488
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com

DEMOGRAPHIC STATISTICS
497
Endnotes
construction of  64, 199, 319, 326, 327, 458
assumptions  9, 307, 319, 437
cross sectional  309
current  10, 59, 87, 89, 95, 105, 118, 119, 154, 
280, 281, 284, 285, 287, 306, 308, 309, 
322, 354, 367, 375, 411, 413, 418, 420, 
421, 429, 431, 436, 480
longitudinal  119, 308
period  52, 72, 94, 119, 236, 337, 385
relationships  311
types  60, 77, 165, 169, 279, 308, 337
uses  12, 21, 35, 53, 222, 281, 287, 307
Life Table  305, 306, 307, 308, 309, 310, 318, 319, 
322, 324, 327, 328, 330, 422, 428
life table death rate  318
Life table functions
definition  31, 35, 36, 86, 127, 129, 175, 176, 
197, 242, 269, 276, 309, 312, 326, 349, 
390, 434, 461, 462, 469, 488
relationships  328
life-table population  313
lifetime fertility  367, 371, 375
live birth  197, 221, 230, 234, 241, 333, 334, 377, 
404
Longitudinal analysis
cohort analysis  19, 119
M
marital event  436
Marital status
broader sense  16, 21, 71, 436
narrower sense  16, 72, 74, 436
marriage  18, 19, 20, 46, 50, 119, 124, 199, 357, 
358, 359, 371, 374, 385, 402, 431, 434, 435, 
436, 437, 439, 440, 441, 442, 443, 444, 446, 
447, 448, 449, 450, 451, 452, 453, 454, 455, 
456, 457, 458, 460, 486, 488
marriage cohort  19, 119, 374, 457
marriage rate  437, 439, 440, 441, 442, 443, 444, 
446, 448, 449, 452, 453, 454, 455
Marriage rate
age  117, 165, 343, 360
Age-sex  170, 172, 174, 175, 177, 448, 449
crude  46, 71, 72, 75, 77, 78, 79, 80, 81, 83, 
181, 200, 201, 202, 204, 205, 207, 209, 
214, 216, 247, 250, 252, 256, 257, 259, 
261, 262, 266, 270, 276, 291, 297, 298, 
318, 338, 339, 340, 341, 342, 343, 391, 
396, 398, 399, 402, 403, 408, 409, 410, 
411, 412, 437, 439, 440, 454, 471, 472, 
482, 487
advantage  37, 309, 437, 476
general
advantage  37, 309, 437, 476
definition  25, 71, 74, 117, 127, 197, 200, 
205, 333, 338, 341, 344, 348, 350, 351, 
409, 414, 416, 434, 437, 440, 452, 461, 
478
Order-specific  443
sex  111, 112, 114, 115, 116, 117, 124, 153, 
166, 167, 170, 172, 174, 175, 177, 206, 
299, 400, 438, 443, 445, 448, 449, 451, 
486
total  56, 94, 112, 121, 128, 136, 139, 143, 145, 
146, 151, 152, 156, 158, 161, 164, 165, 
166, 167, 177, 178, 179, 180, 181, 182, 
183, 184, 185, 187, 192, 193, 194, 195, 
196, 212, 224, 225, 227, 249, 251, 255, 
257, 259, 264, 265, 268, 272, 273, 274, 
275, 277, 279, 282, 283, 286, 289, 294, 
300, 301, 302, 304, 337, 349, 352, 358, 
362, 363, 365, 372, 373, 378, 380, 382, 
383, 388, 392, 393, 395, 397, 398, 399, 
401, 402, 403, 405, 406, 416, 417, 419, 
424, 427, 428, 430, 433, 442, 443, 448, 
452, 453, 457, 458
total first  453
Marriage rates
crude  46, 71, 72, 75, 77, 78, 79, 80, 81, 83, 
181, 200, 201, 202, 204, 205, 207, 209, 
214, 216, 247, 250, 252, 256, 257, 259, 
261, 262, 266, 270, 276, 291, 297, 298, 
318, 338, 339, 340, 341, 342, 343, 391, 
396, 398, 399, 402, 403, 408, 409, 410, 
411, 412, 437, 439, 440, 454, 471, 472, 
482, 487
masculinity proportion  20, 112, 115, 116, 117, 186
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com

DEMOGRAPHIC STATISTICS
498
Endnotes
masculinity ratio  114, 115, 116, 186
Maternal Death  220
Maternal mortality rate
limitations  60, 80, 140, 148, 221, 327
Maternal Mortality Rate  220, 221
Mean age of population
limitation of  100, 154, 156, 224, 236, 238, 
284, 287, 344, 449, 452
mean length of life  317
mechanical change  17, 87
mechanical change of population  17, 87
mechanical growth  99
Median Age of Population  157
Menarche  336
age of  14, 46, 54, 111, 117, 118, 122, 154, 
155, 156, 157, 195, 219, 223, 231, 276, 
314, 317, 326, 336, 342, 344, 347, 357, 
360, 361, 362, 363, 364, 365, 366, 367, 
372, 373, 375, 376, 377, 396, 403, 404, 
421, 456
Menopause  336
Menstruation  335
migrant  459, 461, 462, 463, 465, 466, 474, 478
Migrant Component  474
Migration
characteristics of  19, 24, 69, 459, 460
effectiveness ratio  470
rate  86, 101, 102, 104, 200, 201, 203, 204, 
205, 215, 216, 217, 218, 220, 221, 223, 
224, 225, 230, 233, 239, 240, 241, 244, 
245, 246, 251, 253, 254, 255, 258, 261, 
265, 266, 267, 269, 272, 275, 282, 286, 
288, 312, 315, 337, 338, 339, 340, 341, 
342, 343, 357, 358, 376, 378, 381, 390, 
391, 393, 395, 396, 398, 400, 409, 411, 
413, 414, 416, 419, 420, 421, 422, 423, 
424, 427, 428, 429, 431, 437, 439, 440, 
441, 443, 444, 445, 446, 448, 451, 452, 
453, 454, 458, 474
types of  15, 16, 31, 50, 52, 54, 71, 90, 99, 119, 
122, 124, 134, 167, 214, 217, 269, 309, 
461
uses  12, 21, 35, 53, 222, 281, 287, 307
Migration Index  468
Migration rate
crude  77, 78, 79, 80, 81, 200, 201, 203, 204, 
205, 261, 262, 263, 291, 292, 337, 338, 
339, 340, 341, 397, 402, 409, 411, 432, 
437, 439, 471
specific  79, 80, 82, 205, 206, 207, 211, 212, 
214, 251, 255, 265, 267, 292, 346, 347, 
376, 378, 380, 399, 443, 445, 446, 448, 
449, 451, 452, 473
Migration Ratios  468
Migration studies in Africa
characteristics  18, 19, 24, 26, 27, 54, 58, 59, 
60, 63, 65, 76, 82, 84, 110, 111, 120, 159, 
162, 165, 205, 207, 307, 310, 317, 434, 
459, 473
Migration turnover  479
miscarriage  198
misstatement of age  122
Mobility  461
Mortality
under five  222
Mortality index
Laspeyres  281, 290, 487
Paasche  280, 281, 284, 285, 286, 287, 289, 
290, 304, 487
Mortality rate
Neonatal  230, 231, 232, 233, 242, 243, 244, 
245, 293
Post-Neonatal  233, 293
Mortality rates
Infant  46, 52, 76, 86, 211, 222, 223, 224, 225, 
226, 227, 229, 233, 234, 292, 317, 487
Mortality ratio
proportional  169, 219
standardised  81, 246, 269, 279, 391, 454
mortality table  14, 305, 306
Mover  462
short-distance  462
Multiple Decrement Table  310
Multi-round survey
disadvantage  309, 476
Myers’ index  125, 190
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com

DEMOGRAPHIC STATISTICS
499
Endnotes
N
natality  333, 459
natural change  17, 87
natural fertility  337
natural growth  99
net census error  123
net census overcount  123
net census undercount  123
Net migration  431, 465, 469, 479
net migration rate  472, 473, 482
net migration ratio  469, 482
net misreporting  123
Net reproduction rate
method of calculation  77
Net Reproduction rate
advantage  36, 216, 217, 419, 429, 441
concept of  306, 311, 419, 434, 436, 462
disadvantage  309, 476
interpretation of  84, 137, 141, 185, 384, 413, 
421
Net Stream  463
net underenumeration  122, 123, 124
never married  436, 442, 444, 453
nubile  441, 442, 444
O
observed rates  72, 77, 305
open population  76
Organisation  28, 234, 333, 434, 484
Out-migrant  478
out-migration  478, 479
overall growth  99
P
Parity  371, 374, 381, 383, 385, 388, 403
Parity progression ratio
period  17, 19, 20, 21, 26, 27, 30, 34, 45, 46, 
52, 53, 54, 55, 57, 61, 71, 72, 73, 74, 75, 
76, 81, 87, 90, 92, 95, 96, 97, 99, 100, 101, 
102, 103, 104, 108, 109, 118, 119, 134, 
155, 163, 198, 200, 201, 202, 203, 204, 
205, 219, 220, 222, 236, 242, 280, 281, 
291, 305, 309, 310, 317, 319, 326, 334, 
335, 336, 337, 339, 340, 348, 349, 352, 
353, 355, 358, 370, 374, 375, 385, 402, 
408, 413, 414, 418, 420, 421, 429, 452, 
463, 466, 467, 468, 478, 482, 486, 488
Parity Progression Ratio  381, 383, 388, 403
parturition  242, 334
Passive System of Registration  48
percentage  65, 70, 86, 101, 102, 104, 109, 112, 
113, 140, 141, 143, 149, 160, 162, 163, 182, 
186, 215
percentage change  101, 102
perinatal mortality  229, 242, 244, 245, 246, 295
Perinatal mortality
rate  12, 21, 36, 46, 47, 54, 57, 60, 71, 72, 74, 
75, 77, 78, 79, 80, 81, 82, 83, 84, 85, 86, 
97, 98, 99, 101, 102, 104, 105, 106, 107, 
109, 167, 200, 201, 202, 203, 204, 205, 
206, 207, 208, 209, 211, 214, 215, 216, 
217, 218, 220, 221, 222, 224, 225, 226, 
227, 230, 231, 232, 233, 234, 235, 238, 
239, 240, 241, 242, 244, 245, 246, 247, 
250, 252, 253, 254, 256, 257, 259, 260, 
261, 262, 263, 264, 265, 266, 267, 270, 
271, 274, 276, 279, 280, 281, 284, 285, 
291, 292, 293, 294, 295, 296, 297, 298, 
299, 300, 307, 310, 311, 315, 318, 322, 
325, 326, 329, 334, 337, 338, 339, 340, 
341, 342, 343, 344, 346, 347, 348, 349, 
350, 351, 352, 354, 355, 356, 357, 358, 
359, 366, 367, 370, 374, 376, 377, 378, 
379, 381, 390, 391, 392, 393, 394, 395, 
396, 397, 398, 399, 400, 402, 403, 404, 
405, 406, 407, 408, 409, 410, 411, 413, 
414, 416, 417, 418, 419, 421, 422, 423, 
424, 425, 426, 427, 428, 429, 430, 431, 
432, 433, 434, 437, 439, 440, 441, 442, 
443, 444, 445, 446, 447, 448, 449, 451, 
452, 453, 454, 455, 457, 458, 471, 472, 
473, 474, 475, 482, 487, 488
ratio  12, 20, 66, 67, 68, 69, 74, 77, 83, 84, 85, 
86, 114, 115, 116, 117, 124, 125, 126, 127, 
129, 130, 131, 132, 133, 134, 136, 149, 
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com

DEMOGRAPHIC STATISTICS
500
Endnotes
150, 151, 153, 169, 172, 173, 174, 175, 
176, 177, 181, 182, 184, 185, 186, 187, 
190, 194, 195, 214, 215, 216, 219, 235, 
236, 237, 238, 239, 240, 241, 242, 243, 
244, 245, 246, 262, 269, 271, 276, 280, 
281, 285, 293, 294, 295, 302, 341, 342, 
368, 369, 370, 371, 381, 382, 385, 403, 
411, 412, 414, 418, 428, 431, 433, 440, 
449, 469, 470, 476, 482, 486
Period  52, 72, 94, 119, 236, 337, 385
Period analysis
current analysis  119
Period Analysis  119
period data  55
Period measures  337
Person Years  313, 314
person-years lived  73, 313, 329, 487
pilot census  29, 31, 32
pilot post enumeration survey  32
pivotal column  322
population  9, 12, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19, 20, 21, 22, 
23, 24, 25, 26, 27, 28, 30, 31, 34, 35, 36, 37, 
38, 39, 40, 42, 44, 45, 46, 47, 48, 50, 51, 52, 
57, 59, 60, 62, 64, 65, 66, 67, 69, 70, 71, 72, 
74, 75, 76, 77, 78, 79, 80, 81, 82, 83, 84, 85, 
86, 87, 88, 89, 90, 91, 92, 93, 94, 95, 96, 97, 
98, 99, 100, 101, 102, 103, 104, 105, 106, 107, 
108, 109, 110, 111, 112, 113, 114, 115, 118, 
119, 120, 122, 123, 125, 126, 127, 129, 130, 
131, 132, 133, 134, 137, 138, 140, 141, 142, 
143, 147, 148, 149, 150, 151, 153, 154, 155, 
156, 157, 159, 160, 162, 163, 165, 167, 168, 
169, 170, 171, 172, 174, 175, 177, 178, 179, 
180, 181, 182, 184, 185, 186, 187, 190, 192, 
193, 194, 195, 197, 199, 200, 201, 202, 203, 
204, 205, 206, 207, 209, 210, 211, 212, 214, 
215, 216, 217, 222, 225, 238, 241, 246, 247, 
248, 250, 252, 253, 254, 255, 256, 257, 258, 
259, 260, 261, 262, 263, 264, 266, 269, 270, 
271, 274, 276, 278, 279, 280, 281, 284, 285, 
286, 287, 291, 292, 294, 295, 296, 297, 298, 
301, 302, 305, 306, 307, 309, 310, 311, 313, 
317, 318, 319, 325, 326, 327, 332, 333, 334, 
335, 336, 337, 338, 339, 340, 341, 342, 343, 
344, 347, 348, 350, 352, 353, 354, 357, 358, 
359, 362, 367, 368, 370, 376, 377, 379, 381, 
386, 391, 392, 393, 394, 396, 397, 398, 402, 
403, 404, 405, 406, 408, 409, 411, 412, 413, 
414, 415, 416, 417, 419, 421, 422, 423, 424, 
427, 428, 429, 430, 431, 432, 433, 434, 435, 
436, 437, 438, 439, 440, 441, 442, 444, 446, 
449, 452, 453, 454, 455, 456, 457, 459, 460, 
461, 466, 467, 468, 470, 472, 473, 474, 475, 
476, 477, 479, 480, 481, 482, 486, 487, 488
Population
at risk  75, 76, 97, 217, 238, 241, 340, 441
change of  16, 17, 19, 71, 87, 99, 102
chronological mean  92
De facto  35, 36, 37, 45, 50, 90, 371, 488
distribution of  16, 19, 20, 84, 85, 110, 111, 
140, 143, 149, 161, 162, 163, 164, 165, 
168, 177, 182, 186, 192, 194, 236, 247, 
252, 256, 261, 263, 269, 291, 297, 298, 
301, 302, 305, 307, 343, 347, 353, 367, 
368, 370, 371, 376, 386, 391, 392, 400, 
433, 435, 441, 456, 460, 487
mean annual  90, 104, 201, 202
mid-year  72, 77, 79, 91, 97, 98, 108, 109, 179, 
200, 201, 202, 205, 206, 209, 210, 215, 
216, 247, 291, 297, 313, 318, 338, 339, 
340, 341, 342, 344, 350, 357, 359, 376, 
379, 391, 392, 402, 403, 404, 409, 411, 
414, 423, 432, 433, 437, 438, 439, 440, 
441, 444, 449, 452, 454, 471, 472, 474, 
482
rate of growth  98, 104, 311, 411, 429
simple mean  90
size of  16, 19, 45, 52, 66, 68, 70, 71, 73, 74, 
77, 79, 87, 90, 98, 100, 101, 102, 105, 119, 
125, 148, 157, 165, 169, 181, 204, 217, 
220, 339, 351, 356, 374, 431, 459, 474
structure of  16, 82, 84, 110, 162, 163, 165, 
186, 252, 336, 340, 459, 461, 488
weighted mean  80, 93, 96, 247, 361
Population Analysis  9, 483
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com

DEMOGRAPHIC STATISTICS
501
Endnotes
population at risk  75, 76, 97, 217, 238, 241, 340
Population change
decomposition of  87, 229, 230
Population composition
by age  14, 79, 110, 125, 150, 160, 165, 173, 
174, 186, 192, 195, 211, 219, 247, 252, 
256, 262, 263, 269, 276, 297, 298, 300, 
301, 305, 306, 307, 310, 335, 342, 344, 
370, 371, 372, 373, 377, 392, 396, 401, 
403, 404, 432, 453, 454, 456, 458
by sex  111
uses of  23, 45, 51, 88, 110, 111, 119, 168, 199, 
215, 222, 271, 307, 336, 374, 384, 435, 
459
population density  177, 178, 179, 180, 181
population distribution  30, 82, 110, 119, 177, 181, 
194, 262, 266, 391
population dynamics  20, 21, 22, 64
Population growth
absolute  65, 86, 99, 100, 101, 111, 119, 141, 
160, 162, 163, 165, 169, 476, 487
exponential  106
geometric  95, 96, 105, 106, 109, 289, 486
Population Growth  55, 99, 100, 101, 105, 106
Population growth rate
arithmetic  101, 102, 104, 109, 125, 130, 456
Population pyramid
forms  31, 170
progressive  167, 170, 171
retrogressive  167, 170, 171
uses  23, 45, 51, 88, 110, 111, 119, 168, 199, 
215, 222, 271, 307, 336, 374, 384, 435, 
459
Population Pyramid  168, 169, 170, 171
Population register
approach  12, 47, 48, 52, 53, 54, 57, 60, 91, 
108, 390, 425
purpose  9, 14, 59, 65, 74, 86, 118, 149, 166, 
169, 307, 336, 408, 437, 442
Population replacement
reproductivity  12, 21, 111, 165, 305, 307, 408, 
413, 431
population static  20
Population Statistics  52
population structure  79, 110, 165, 167, 169, 170, 
171, 261
Population structure
types of  15, 16, 31, 50, 52, 54, 71, 90, 99, 119, 
122, 124, 134, 167, 214, 217, 269, 309, 
461
Population Studies  9, 22, 483
Post-enumeration Survey  34, 63
poverty map  44
Pregnancy/Birth History  52
Pregnancy Rate  390
probabilities  71, 72, 76, 77, 86, 219, 230, 305, 314
Probabilities of dying
older ages  81, 140, 155, 314, 337
productive population  149
progeny  117, 118, 487
proportion  20, 30, 47, 65, 68, 69, 70, 76, 81, 112, 
115, 116, 117, 140, 160, 167, 169, 171, 182, 
186, 253, 287, 340, 342, 343, 358, 359, 371, 
381, 383, 384, 391, 394, 413, 418, 419, 427, 
431, 436, 437, 452, 453, 459, 469, 482, 487
Proportional Mortality Ratio  219
Puberty  335
pyramid  20, 168, 169, 170, 171, 172, 186, 195
R
radix  72, 74, 102, 105, 106, 119, 200, 306, 311, 
319, 322, 422, 438, 457, 487
rate  12, 21, 36, 46, 47, 54, 57, 60, 71, 72, 74, 75, 
77, 78, 79, 80, 81, 82, 83, 84, 85, 86, 97, 98, 
99, 101, 102, 104, 105, 106, 107, 109, 167, 
200, 201, 202, 203, 204, 205, 206, 207, 208, 
209, 211, 214, 215, 216, 217, 218, 220, 221, 
222, 224, 225, 226, 227, 230, 231, 232, 233, 
234, 235, 238, 239, 240, 241, 242, 244, 245, 
246, 247, 250, 252, 253, 254, 256, 257, 259, 
260, 261, 262, 263, 264, 265, 266, 267, 270, 
271, 274, 276, 279, 280, 281, 284, 285, 291, 
292, 293, 294, 295, 296, 297, 298, 299, 300, 
307, 310, 311, 315, 318, 322, 325, 326, 329, 
334, 337, 338, 339, 340, 341, 342, 343, 344, 
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com

DEMOGRAPHIC STATISTICS
502
Endnotes
346, 347, 348, 349, 350, 351, 352, 354, 355, 
356, 357, 358, 359, 366, 367, 370, 374, 376, 
377, 378, 379, 381, 390, 391, 392, 393, 394, 
395, 396, 397, 398, 399, 400, 402, 403, 404, 
405, 406, 407, 408, 409, 410, 411, 413, 414, 
416, 417, 418, 419, 421, 422, 423, 424, 425, 
426, 427, 428, 429, 430, 431, 432, 433, 434, 
437, 439, 440, 441, 442, 443, 444, 445, 446, 
447, 448, 449, 451, 452, 453, 454, 455, 457, 
458, 471, 472, 473, 474, 475, 482, 487, 488
Rate
broader sense  16, 21, 71, 436
central mortality  325
narrower sense  16, 72, 74, 436
rate of increase  101, 413
Rate of migration  474
rates  21, 36, 45, 46, 65, 71, 72, 74, 76, 77, 78, 79, 
80, 81, 82, 83, 84, 85, 86, 90, 97, 104, 200, 
201, 205, 206, 207, 209, 210, 211, 214, 216, 
217, 219, 222, 242, 246, 247, 248, 252, 261, 
262, 263, 266, 269, 270, 274, 276, 278, 279, 
280, 281, 284, 285, 291, 292, 295, 300, 305, 
306, 307, 310, 311, 316, 318, 326, 327, 335, 
340, 341, 343, 344, 346, 347, 348, 349, 350, 
351, 352, 353, 354, 355, 356, 358, 360, 361, 
362, 374, 376, 396, 398, 401, 403, 408, 411, 
413, 414, 417, 418, 421, 424, 429, 431, 434, 
436, 437, 439, 442, 443, 446, 447, 449, 450, 
452, 453, 454, 455, 457, 458, 459, 473, 481
Rates
broader sense  16, 21, 71, 436
central  40, 77, 80, 81, 179, 180, 182, 184, 185, 
193, 194, 212, 257, 291
crude  46, 71, 72, 75, 77, 78, 79, 80, 81, 83, 
181, 200, 201, 202, 204, 205, 207, 209, 
214, 216, 247, 250, 252, 256, 257, 259, 
261, 262, 266, 270, 276, 291, 297, 298, 
318, 338, 339, 340, 341, 342, 343, 391, 
396, 398, 399, 402, 403, 408, 409, 410, 
411, 412, 437, 439, 440, 454, 471, 472, 
482, 487
narrower sense  16, 72, 74, 436
specific  9, 25, 34, 46, 51, 53, 54, 59, 71, 77, 79, 
80, 81, 82, 83, 84, 85, 99, 120, 121, 134, 
153, 172, 174, 195, 205, 206, 207, 208, 
209, 210, 211, 214, 215, 216, 217, 219, 
220, 247, 248, 252, 253, 258, 261, 262, 
263, 264, 266, 267, 269, 270, 271, 272, 
274, 275, 276, 278, 279, 280, 281, 282, 
284, 285, 286, 288, 291, 296, 300, 305, 
306, 309, 326, 327, 329, 335, 337, 342, 
343, 344, 346, 347, 348, 349, 350, 351, 
352, 355, 356, 358, 359, 360, 361, 362, 
363, 366, 367, 374, 376, 377, 378, 379, 
381, 385, 391, 393, 394, 395, 396, 397, 
398, 399, 401, 403, 404, 406, 407, 413, 
414, 416, 418, 419, 421, 422, 424, 427, 
430, 431, 434, 439, 442, 443, 446, 447, 
448, 449, 450, 451, 452, 453, 454, 455, 
458, 460, 467, 473, 481, 486, 487
types of  15, 16, 31, 50, 52, 54, 71, 90, 99, 119, 
122, 124, 134, 167, 214, 217, 269, 309, 
461
ratio  12, 20, 66, 67, 68, 69, 74, 77, 83, 84, 85, 86, 
114, 115, 116, 117, 124, 125, 126, 127, 129, 
130, 131, 132, 133, 134, 136, 149, 150, 151, 
153, 169, 172, 173, 174, 175, 176, 177, 181, 
182, 184, 185, 186, 187, 190, 194, 195, 214, 
215, 216, 219, 235, 236, 237, 238, 239, 240, 
241, 242, 243, 244, 245, 246, 262, 269, 271, 
276, 280, 281, 285, 293, 294, 295, 302, 341, 
342, 368, 369, 370, 371, 381, 382, 385, 403, 
411, 412, 414, 418, 428, 431, 433, 440, 449, 
469, 470, 476, 482, 486
Ratio
advantage  36, 216, 217, 419, 429, 441
Reference Period Approach  52
relative growth  101, 109
Reproduction
conventional  25, 222, 224, 226, 227, 408, 413, 
422
REPRODUCTION-SURVIVAL RATIO  431
reproductivity  12, 21, 111, 165, 305, 307, 408, 
413, 431
Reproductivity
natural increase  408, 432
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com

DEMOGRAPHIC STATISTICS
503
Endnotes
crude rate  432
simple measures  408
natural increase  89, 408, 409, 410, 411, 432, 
459, 467, 468
vital index  408, 411, 412
advantage  36, 216, 217, 419, 429, 441
disadvantage  261, 353, 420, 481
response bias  123
response variability  123
Retrogressive pyramid
typical  153, 167, 171, 172, 211, 319, 328, 342
retrospective survey  52
Return Migrant  463
reverse stream  463
S
sexual union  334
single  20, 24, 30, 52, 54, 55, 61, 77, 82, 85, 98, 
118, 120, 124, 125, 130, 143, 148, 155, 157, 
169, 187, 190, 201, 209, 219, 305, 309, 310, 
311, 327, 337, 341, 343, 344, 347, 348, 349, 
352, 359, 360, 414, 422, 436, 440, 446, 448, 
449, 452, 453, 461, 487, 488
Single Decrement Table  310
single round retrospective surveys  52
Single round survey
advantage  37, 309, 437, 476
disadvantage  261, 353, 420, 481
Single Round Survey  54
single round surveys  52
size of a population  16, 71, 90, 459
size of population  45, 102
social demography  22
Specific death rate
definition  25, 71, 74, 117, 127, 197, 200, 205, 
333, 338, 341, 344, 348, 350, 351, 409, 
414, 416, 434, 437, 440, 452, 461, 478
Specific rate
limitation  24, 52, 156, 341, 420, 440
Stable Population  311
Standardisation  81, 82, 83, 84, 85
direct  29, 50, 81, 82, 83, 84, 85, 220, 246, 247, 
248, 250, 252, 253, 254, 259, 260, 261, 
269, 295, 296, 297, 298, 337, 338, 342, 
389, 391, 392, 394, 405, 406, 411, 454, 
480, 481, 486
indirect  54, 82, 83, 85, 261, 262, 263, 265, 
266, 267, 269, 270, 300, 391, 396, 397, 
398, 399, 400, 406, 407, 454, 455, 481, 
486
method of  31, 77, 82, 83, 84, 269, 296, 330, 
361
STANDARDISED DEATH INDICES  279
standardised death rate  246, 247, 250, 253, 254, 
259, 260, 262, 265, 266, 267, 270, 276, 296, 
297, 298, 299, 300, 394, 396, 398
Standardised death rate
direct  29, 50, 81, 82, 83, 84, 85, 220, 246, 247, 
248, 250, 252, 253, 254, 259, 260, 261, 
269, 295, 296, 297, 298, 337, 338, 342, 
389, 391, 392, 394, 405, 406, 411, 454, 
480, 481, 486
advantages  35, 44, 49, 54, 57, 68, 78, 80, 
205, 214, 261, 269, 340, 342, 347, 352, 
369, 411, 412, 419, 429, 439, 441, 481
interpretation  75, 76, 84, 137, 141, 154, 
162, 163, 184, 185, 186, 252, 266, 284, 
286, 339, 346, 351, 384, 385, 393, 397, 
413, 416, 418, 421, 424, 439, 441, 442
two variables  254
indirect
advantage  36, 216, 217, 419, 429, 441
disadvantage  261, 353, 420, 481
interpretation  75, 76, 84, 137, 141, 154, 
162, 163, 184, 185, 186, 252, 266, 284, 
286, 339, 346, 351, 384, 385, 393, 397, 
413, 416, 418, 421, 424, 439, 441, 442
Standardised fertility rate
indirect
interpretation  75, 76, 84, 137, 141, 154, 
162, 163, 184, 185, 186, 252, 266, 284, 
286, 339, 346, 351, 384, 385, 393, 397, 
413, 416, 418, 421, 424, 439, 441, 442
standardised mortality ratio  269, 271
Standardised rate
interpretation of  84, 137, 141, 185, 384, 413, 
421
standardised rates  77, 84, 305
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com

DEMOGRAPHIC STATISTICS
504
Endnotes
Standard population
selection of  45, 169
Stationary Population  310
Sterility
involuntary  335, 464
voluntary  197, 334, 335, 464
Stillbirth  198
streams  163, 476
Streams
efficiency of  476
relative efficiency of  476
substantive demography  22
supervisory area  30
survival rate  315, 422, 425
survivors  19, 118, 311, 315, 355, 422, 423, 424, 
425, 427, 428, 430, 433
Survivorship
probability of  69, 71, 75, 76, 85, 86, 219, 224, 
307, 312, 315, 316, 329, 330, 331, 384
synthetic cohort  118, 309, 360
System of census-taking
combined method  37
De facto method  35
De jure method  36, 37
T
Technical Demography  484
tendentious bias  124, 148
tendentious error  123, 124
terminal digit  134, 140, 141, 145, 146
Total fertility rate
advantages  35, 44, 49, 54, 57, 68, 78, 80, 205, 
214, 261, 269, 340, 342, 347, 352, 369, 
411, 412, 419, 429, 439, 441, 481
disadvantage  261, 353, 420, 481
for equal interval  350, 414
for single ages  130, 143, 187, 190, 343, 344, 
348, 359, 448
Total First Marriage Rate  453
TOTAL MARRIAGE RATE  452
total population  16, 37, 45, 66, 77, 86, 87, 90, 112, 
113, 114, 130, 134, 137, 140, 141, 143, 149, 
157, 160, 165, 169, 186, 200, 204, 205, 271, 
274, 292, 347, 354, 391, 392, 474, 487
trial census  32
U
Under Five Mortality  222
unmarried  19, 79, 343, 358, 436, 441, 442, 449, 452
V
Vital Events  17, 294, 402
vital registration  20, 25, 47, 50, 51, 56, 58, 59, 124, 
318, 361, 362, 367, 369, 461
Vital Registration
Uses of  12, 307
Vital registration data
methods of collecting  47
Vital registration system
advantage  36, 216, 217, 419, 429, 441
disadvantage  261, 353, 420, 481
nature of  47, 63, 65, 140
Vital registration system, see civil registration
system  18, 47, 48, 49, 50, 55, 56, 57, 58, 59, 
88, 484
vital statistics  17, 18, 22, 50, 51, 60, 61, 62, 64, 
65, 71, 81, 120, 122, 459, 486
W
Whipple’s index  125, 137, 187, 190
widow  435, 458
widower  435
widowhood  434, 438, 458
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com

