THE BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1984) 7, 547-581
Printed in the United States of America
The operational analysis of
psychological terms
B. F. Skinner
Department of Psychology and Social Relations, Harvard University,
Cambridge, Mass. 02138
Abstract: The major contributions of operationism have been negative, largely because operationists failed to distinguish logical
theories of reference from empirical accounts of language. Behaviorism never finished an adequate formulation of verbal reports and
therefore could not convincingly embrace subjective terms. But verbal responses to private stimuli can arise as social products
through the contingencies of reinforcement arranged by verbal communities.
In analyzing traditional psychological terms, we need to know their stimulus conditions ("finding the referent"), and why each
response is controlled by that condition. Consistent reinforcement of verbal responses in the presence of stimuli presupposes stimuli
acting upon both the speaker and the reinforcing community, but subjective terms, which apparently are responses to private
stimuli, lack this characteristic. Private stimuli are physical, but we cannot account for these verbal responses by pointing to
controlling stimuli, and we have not shown how verbal communities can establish and maintain the necessary consistency of
reinforcement contingencies.
Verbal responses to private stimuli may be maintained through appropriate reinforcement based on public accompaniments, or
through reinforcements accorded responses made to public stimuli, with private cases then occurring by generalization. These
contingencies help us understand why private terms have never formed a stable and uniform vocabulary: It is impossible to establish
rigorous vocabularies of private stimuli for public use, because differential reinforcement cannot be made contingent upon the
property of privacy. The language of private events is anchored in the public practices of the verbal community, which make
individuals aware only by differentially reinforcing their verbal responses with respect to their own bodies. The treatment of verbal
behavior in terms of such functional relations between verbal responses and stimuli provides a radical behaviorist alternative to the
operationism of methodological behaviorists.
Keywords: awareness; behavior, verbal; behaviorism, methodological; behaviorism, radical; operationism; philosophy of psychology;
private events; reference; semantics; subjectivity-objectivity; verbal community
Operationism may be defined as the practice of talking
about (1) one's observations, (2) the manipulative and
calculational procedures involved in making them, (3) the
logical and mathematical steps which intervene between
earlier and later statements, and (4) nothing else. So far,
the major contribution has come from the fourth provi-
sion and, like it, is negative. We have learned how to
avoid troublesome references by showing that they are
artifacts which may be variously traced to history, philos-
ophy, linguistics, and so on. No very important positive
advances have been made in connection with the first
three provisions because operationism has no good defi-
nition of a definition, operational or otherwise. It has not
developed a satisfactory formulation of the verbal behav-
ior of the scientist.
Operationists, like most contemporary writers in the
field of linguistic and semantic analysis, are on the fence
between logical "correspondence" theories of reference
and empirical formulations of language in use. They have
not improved upon the mixture of logical and popular
terms usually encountered in casual or even supposedly
technical discussions of scientific method or the theory of
knowledge (e.g. Bertrand Russell's An Inquiry into
Meaning and Truth, 1940). Definition is a key term but is
not rigorously defined. Bridgman's (1928; see also 1945)
original contention that the "concept is synonymous with
the corresponding set of operations" cannot be taken
literally, and no similarly explicit but satisfactory state-
ment of the relation is available. Instead, a few round-
about expressions recur with rather tiresome regularity
whenever this relation is mentioned: We are told that a
concept is to be defined"in terms of certain operations,
that propositions are to be "based upon" operations, that
a term denotes something only when there are "concrete
criteria for its applicability," that operationism consists
in "referring any concept for its definition to . . . con-
crete operations," and so on. We may accept expressions
of this sort as outlining a program, but they do not provide
a general scheme of definition, much less an explicit
statement of the relation between concept and operation.
The weakness of current theories of language may be
traced to the fact that an objective conception of human
behavior is still incomplete. The doctrine that words are
used to express or convey meanings merely substitutes
"meaning" for "idea" (in the hope that meanings can then
somehow be got outside the skin) and is incompatible
with modern psychological conceptions of the organism.
Attempts to derive a symbolic function from the principle
of conditioning (or association) have been characterized
by a very superficial analysis. It is simply not true that an
organism reacts to a sign "as it would to the object which
the sign supplants" (Stevens 1939). Only in a very limited
© 7984 Cambridge University Press
O14O-525X/84IO4O547-35I$O6.OO
547

Skinner: Psychological terms
area (mainly that of autonomic responses) is it possible to
regard a sign as a simple substitute stimulus in the
Pavlovian sense. Modern logic, as a formalization of
"real" languages, retains and extends this dualistic theory
of meaning and can scarcely be appealed to by the
psychologist who recognizes his own responsibility in
giving an account of verbal behavior.
The operational attitude, in spite of its shortcomings, is
a good thing in any science, but especially in psychology
because of the presence there of a vast vocabulary of
ancient and nonscientific origin. It is not surprising that
the broad empirical movement in the philosophy of
science, which Stevens has shown to be the background
of operationism, should have had a vigorous and early
representation in the field of psychology - namely, be-
haviorism. In spite of the differences which Stevens
claimed to find, behaviorism has been (at least to most
behaviorists) nothing more than a thoroughgoing opera-
tional analysis of traditional mentalistic concepts. We
may disagree with some of the answers (such as Watson's
disposition of images), but the questions asked by behav-
iorism were strictly operational in spirit. I also cannot
agree with Stevens that American behaviorism was
"primitive." The early papers on the problem of con-
sciousness by Watson, Weiss, Tolman, Hunter, Lashley,
and many others, were not only highly sophisticated
examples of operational inquiry, they showed a willing-
ness to deal with a wider range of phenomena than do
current streamlined treatments, particularly those of-
fered by logicians (e.g. Carnap 1934) interested in a
unified scientific vocabulary. But behaviorism, too,
stopped short of a decisive positive contribution - and for
the same reason: It never finished an acceptable formula-
tion of the "verbal report." The conception of behavior
which it developed could not convincingly embrace the
"use of subjective terms."
A considerable advantage is gained from dealing with
terms, concepts, constructs, and so on, quite frankly in
the form in which they are observed - namely, as verbal
responses. There is then no danger of including in the
concept the aspect or part of nature which it singles out.
One may often avoid that mistake by substituting term for
concept or construct. Meanings, contents, and references
are to be found among the determiners, not among the
properties, of response. The question, What is length?
would appear to be satisfactorily answered by listing the
circumstances under which the response "length" is
emitted (or, better, by giving some general description of
such circumstances). If two quite separate sets of circum-
stances are revealed, then there are two responses having
the form "length," since a verbal response class is not
defined by phonetic form alone but by its functional
relations. This is true even though the two sets are found
to be intimately connected. The two responses are not
controlled by the same stimuli, no matter how clearly it is
shown that the different stimuli arise from the same
"thing."
What we want to know in the case of many traditional
psychological terms is, first, the specific stimulating con-
ditions under which they are emitted (this corresponds to
"finding the referents") and, second (and this is a much
more important systematic question), why each response
is controlled by its corresponding condition. The latter is
not entirely a genetic question. The individual acquires
language from society, but the reinforcing action of the
verbal community continues to play an important role in
maintaining the specific relations between responses and
stimuli which are essential to the proper functioning of
verbal behavior. How language is acquired is, therefore,
only part of a much broader problem.
We may generalize the conditions responsible for the
standard "semantic" relation between a verbal response
and a particular stimulus without going into reinforce-
ment theory in detail. There are three important terms: a
stimulus, a response, and a reinforcement supplied by
the verbal community. (All of these need more careful
definition than are implied by current usage, but the
following argument may be made without digressing for
that purpose.) The significant interrelations between
these terms may be expressed by saying that the commu-
nity reinforces the response only when it is emitted in the
presence of the stimulus. The reinforcement of the re-
sponse "red," for example, is contingent upon the pres-
ence of a red object. (The contingency need not be
invariable.) A red object then becomes a discriminative
stimulus, an "occasion" for the successful emission of the
response "red."
This scheme presupposes that the stimulus act upon
both the speaker and the reinforcing community; other-
wise the proper contingency cannot be maintained by the
community. But this provision is lacking in the case of
many "subjective" terms, which appear to be responses
to private stimuli. The problem of subjective terms does
not coincide exactly with that of private stimuli, but there
is a close connection. We must know the characteristics of
verbal responses to private stimuli in order to approach
the operational analysis of the subjective term.
The response "My tooth aches" is partly under the
control of a state of affairs to which the speaker alone is
able to react, since no one else can establish the required
connection with the tooth in question. There is nothing
mysterious or metaphysical about this; the simple fact is
that each speaker possesses a small but important private
world of stimuli. So far as we know, responses to that
world are like responses to external events. Nevertheless
the privacy gives rise to two problems. The first difficulty
is that we cannot, as in the case of public stimuli, account
for the verbal response by pointing to a controlling
stimulus. Our practice is to infer the private event, but
this is opposed to the direction of inquiry in a science of
behavior in which we are to predict a response through,
among other things, an independent knowledge of the
stimulus. It is often supposed that a solution is to be found
in improved physiological techniques. Whenever it be-
comes possible to say what conditions within the orga-
nism control the response "I am depressed," for example,
and to produce these conditions at will, a degree of
control and prediction characteristic of responses to ex-
ternal stimuli will be made possible. Meanwhile, we must
be content with reasonable evidence for the belief that
responses to public and private stimuli are equally lawful
and alike in kind.
But the problem of privacy cannot be wholly solved by
instrumental invasion. No matter how clearly these inter-
nal events may be exposed in the laboratory, the fact
remains that in the normal verbal episode they are quite
private. We have not solved the second problem of how
the community achieves the necessary contingency of
548
THE BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1984) 7:4

reinforcement. How is the response "toothache" appro-
priately reinforced if the reinforcing agent has no contact
with the tooth? There is, of course, no question of
whether responses to private stimuli are possible. They
occur commonly enough and must be accounted for. But
why do they occur, what is their relation to controlling
stimuli, and what, if any, are their distinguishing charac-
teristics?
There are at least four ways in which a verbal communi-
ty with no access to a private stimulus may generate
verbal behavior in response to it:
1. It is not strictly true that the stimuli which control
the response must be available to the community. Any
reasonably regular accompaniment will suffice. Consid-
er, for example, a blind man who learns the names of a
trayful of objects from a teacher who identifies the objects
by sight. The reinforcements are supplied or withheld
according to the contingency between the blind man's
responses and the teacher's visual stimuli, but the re-
sponses are controlled wholly by tactual stimuli. A satis-
factory verbal system results from the fact that the visual
and tactual stimuli remain closely connected.
Similarly, in the case of private stimuli, one may teach a
child to say "That hurts" in agreement with the usage of
the community by making the reinforcement contingent
upon public accompaniments of painful stimuli (a smart
blow, tissue damage, and so on). The connection between
public and private stimuli need not be invariable; a
response may be conditioned with intermittent reinforce-
ment and even in spite of an occasional conflicting con-
tingency. The possibility of such behavior is limited by
the degree of association of public and private stimuli
which will supply a net reinforcement sufficient to estab-
lish and maintain a response.
2. A commoner basis for the verbal reinforcement of a
response to a private stimulus is provided by collateral
responses to the same stimulus. Although a dentist may
occasionally be able to identify the stimulus for a tooth-
ache from certain public accompaniments as in (1), the
response "toothache" is generally transmitted on the
basis of responses which are elicited by the same stimulus
but which do not need to be set up by an environmental
contingency. The community infers the private stimulus,
not from accompanying public stimuli, but from collat-
eral, generally unconditioned, and at least nonverbal
responses (hand to jaw, facial expressions, groans, and so
on). The inference is not always correct, and the accuracy
of the reference is again limited by the degree of associ-
ation.
3. Some very important responses to private stimuli are
descriptive of the speaker's own behavior. When this is
overt, the community bases its instructional reinforce-
ment upon the conspicuous manifestations, but the
speaker presumably acquires the response in connection
with a wealth of additional proprioceptive stimuli. The
latter may assume practically complete control, as in
describing one's own behavior in the dark. This is very
close to the example of the blind man; the speaker and the
community react to different, though closely associated,
stimuli.
Suppose, now, that a given response recedes to the
level of covert or merely incipient behavior. How shall we
explain the vocabulary which deals with this private
world? (The instrumental detection of covert behavior is
Skinner:Psychological terms
again not an answer, for we are interested in how re-
sponses to private stimuli are normally, and noninstru-
mentally, set up.) There are two important possibilities.
The surviving covert response may be regarded as an
accompaniment of the overt one (perhaps part of it), in
which case the response to the private stimulus is im-
parted on the basis of the public stimulus supplied by the
overt responses, as in (1). On the other hand, the covert
response may be similar to, though probably less intense
than, the overt one and hence supply the same stimulus,
albeit in a weakened form. We have, then, a third
possibility: A response may be emitted in the presence of
a private stimulus, which has no public accompaniments,
provided it is occasionally reinforced in the presence of
the same stimulus occurring with public manifestations.
Terms falling within this class are apparently descrip-
tive only of behavior, rather than of other internal states
or events, since the possibility that the same stimulus
may be both public and private (or, better, may have or
lack public accompaniments) seems to arise from the
unique fact that behavior may be both covert and overt.
4. The principle of transfer or stimulus generalization
supplies a fourth explanation of how a response to private
stimuli may be maintained by public reinforcement. A
response which is acquired and maintained in connection
with public stimuli may be emitted, through generaliza-
tion, in response to private events. The transfer is based
not on identical stimuli, as in (3), but on coinciding
properties. Thus, we describe internal states as "agi-
tated," "depressed," "ebullient," and so on, in a long list.
Responses in this class are all metaphors (including spe-
cial figures like metonymy). The term metaphor is not
used pejoratively but merely to indicate that the differen-
tial reinforcement cannot be accorded actual responses to
the private case. As the etymology suggests, the response
is "carried over" from the public instance.
In summary, a verbal response to a private stimulus
may be maintained in strength through appropriate rein-
forcement based upon public accompaniments or conse-
quences, as in (1) and (2), or through appropriate rein-
forcement accorded the response when it is made to
public stimuli, the private case occurring by generaliza-
tion when the stimuli are only partly similar. If these are
the only possibilities (and the list is here offered as
exhaustive), then we may understand why terms refer-
ring to private events have never formed a stable and
acceptable vocabulary of reasonably uniform usage. This
historical fact is puzzling to adherents of the "correspon-
dence school" of meaning. Why is it not possible to assign
names to the diverse elements of private experience and
then to proceed with consistent and effective discourse?
The answer lies in the process by which "terms are
assigned to private events," a process we have just ana-
lyzed in a rough way in terms of the reinforcement of
verbal responses.
None of the conditions which we have examined per-
mits the sharpening of reference which is achieved, in the
case of public stimuli, by a precise contingency of rein-
forcement. In (1) and (2) the association of public and
private events may be faulty; the stimuli embraced by (3)
are of limited scope; and the metaphorical nature of those
in (4) implies a lack of precision. It is, therefore, impossi-
ble to establish a rigorous scientific vocabulary for public
use, nor can the speaker clearly "know himself" in the
THE BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1984) 7:4
549

Skinner:Psychological terms
sense in which knowing is identified with behaving dis-
criminatively. In the absence of the "crisis" provided by
differential reinforcement (much of which is necessarily
verbal), private stimuli cannot be analyzed. (This has
little or nothing to do with the availability or capacity of
receptors.)
The contingencies we have reviewed also fail to pro-
vide an adequate check against fictional distortion of the
relation of reference (e.g. as in rationalizing). Statements
about private events may be under control of the depriva-
tions associated with reinforcing consequences rather
than antecedent stimuli. The community is skeptical of
statements of this sort, and any attempt to talk about one's
private world (as in psychological system making) is
fraught with self-deception.
Much of the ambiguity of psychological terms arises
from the possibility of alternative or multiple modes of
reinforcement. Consider, for example, the response "I
am hungry." The community may reinforce this on the
basis of the history of ingestion, as in (1), or on the basis of
collateral behavior associated with hunger, as in (2), or as
a description of behavior with respect to food, or of
stimuli previously correlated with food, as in (3). In
addition the speaker has (in some instances) the powerful
stimulation of hunger pangs, which is private since the
community has no suitable connection with the speaker's
stomach. "I am hungry" may therefore be variously
translated as "I have not eaten for a long time" (1), or
"That food makes my mouth water" (2), or "I am raven-
ous" (3) (compare the expression "I was hungrier than I
thought" which describes the ingestion of an unexpected-
ly large amount of food), or "I have hunger pangs. " While
all of these may be regarded as synonymous with "I am
hungry,' they are not synonymous with each other. It is
easy for conflicting psychological systematists to cite
supporting instances or to train speakers to emit the
response "I am hungry" in conformity with a system.
Using a stomach balloon, one might condition the verbal
response exclusively to stimulation from stomach con-
tractions. This would be an example of either (1) or (2)
above. Or speakers might be trained to make nice obser-
vations of the strength of their ingestive behavior, which
might recede to the covert level as in (3). The response "I
am hungry" would then describe a tendency to eat, with
little or no reference to stomach contractions. Everyday
usage reflects a mixed reinforcement. A similar analysis
could be made of all terms descriptive of motivation,
emotion, and action in general, including (of special
interest here) the acts of seeing, hearing, and other kinds
of sensing.
When public manifestations survive, the extent to
which the private stimulus takes over is never certain. In
the case of a toothache, the private event is no doubt
dominant, but this is due to its relative intensity, not to
any condition of differential reinforcement. In a descrip-
tion of one's own behavior, the private component may be
much less important. A very strict external contingency
may emphasize the public component, especially if the
association with private events is faulty. In a rigorous
scientific vocabulary private effects are practically elimi-
nated. The converse does not hold. There is apparently
no way of basing a response entirely upon the private part
of a complex of stimuli. Differential reinforcement cannot
be made contingent upon the property of privacy. This
fact is of extraordinary importance in evaluating tradi-
tional psychological terms.
The response "red" is imparted and maintained (either
casually or professionally) by reinforcement which is
contingent upon a certain property of stimuli. Both
speaker and community (or psychologist) have access to
the stimulus, and the contingency can be made quite
precise. There is nothing about the resulting response
which should puzzle anyone. The greater part of psycho-
physics rests upon this solid footing. The older psycholog-
ical view, however, was that the speaker was reporting,
not a property of the stimulus, but a certain kind of
private event, the sensation of red. This was regarded as a
later stage in a series beginning with the red stimulus.
The experimenter was supposed to manipulate the pri-
vate event by manipulating the stimulus. This seems like
a gratuitous distinction, but in the case of some subjects a
similar later stage could apparently be generated in other
ways (by arousing an "image"), and hence the autonomy
of a private event capable of evoking the response "red"
in the absence of a controllable red stimulus seemed to be
proved. An adequate proof, of course, requires the elim-
ination of other possibilities (e.g. that the response is
generated by the procedures which are intended to
generate the image).
Verbal behavior which is "descriptive of images" must
be accounted for in any adequate science of behavior. The
difficulties are the same for both behaviorist and subjec-
tivist. If the private events are free, a scientific descrip-
tion is impossible in either case. If laws can be dis-
covered, then a lawful description of the verbal behavior
can be achieved, with or without references to images. So
much for "finding the referents"; the remaining problem
of how such responses are maintained in relation to their
referents is also soluble. The description of an image
appears to be an example of a response to a private
stimulus of class (1) above. That is to say, relevant terms
are established when the private event accompanies a
controllable external stimulus, but responses occur at
other times, perhaps in relation to the same private
event. The deficiencies of such a vocabulary have been
pointed out.
We can account for the response "red" (at least as well
as for the "experience" of red) by appeal to past conditions
of reinforcement. But what about expanded expressions
like "I see red " or "I am conscious of red"? Here "red"
may be a response to either a public or a private stimulus
without prejudice to the rest of the expression, but "see"
and "conscious" seem to refer to events which are by
nature or by definition private. This violates the principle
that reinforcement cannot be made contingent upon the
privacy of a stimulus. A reference cannot be narrowed
down to a specifically private event by any known method
of differential reinforcement.
The original behavioristic hypothesis was, of course,
that terms of this sort were descriptions of one's own
(generally covert) behavior. The hypothesis explains the
establishment and maintenance of the terms by supplying
natural public counterparts in similar overt behavior. The
terms are in general of class (3). One consequence of the
hypothesis is that each term may be given a behavioral
definition. We must, however, modify the argument
slightly. To say "I see red" is to react, not to red (this is a
trivial meaning of "see"), but to one's reaction to red.
550
THE BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1984) 7:4

"See" is a term acquired with respect to one's own
behavior in the case of overt responses available to the
community, but according to the present analysis it may
be evoked at other times by any private accompaniment
of overt seeing. Here is a point at which a nonbehavioral
private seeing may be slipped in. Although the com-
monest private accompaniment would appear to be the
stimulation which survives in a similar covert act, as in (3),
it might be some sort of state or condition which gains
control of the response as in (1) or (2).
The superiority of the behavioral hypothesis is not
merely methodological. That aspect of seeing which can
be defined behaviorally is basic to the term as established
by the verbal community and hence most effective in
public discourse. A comparison of cases (1) and (3) will
also show that terms which recede to the private level as
overt behavior becomes covert have an optimal accuracy
of reference, as responses to private stimuli go.
The additional hypothesis follows quite naturally that
being conscious, as a form of reacting to one's own
behavior, is a social product. Verbal behavior can be
distinguished, and conveniently defined, by the fact that
the contingencies of reinforcement are provided by other
organisms rather than by a mechanical action upon the
environment. The hypothesis is equivalent to saying that
it is only because the behavior of the individual is impor-
tant to society that society in turn makes it important to
the individual. One becomes aware of what one is doing
only after society has reinforced verbal responses with
respect to one's behavior as the source of discriminative
stimuli. The behavior to be described (the behavior of
which one is to be aware) may later recede to the covert
level, and (to add a crowning difficulty) so may the verbal
response. It is an ironic twist, considering the history of
the behavioristic revolution, that as we develop a more
effective vocabulary for the analysis of behavior we also
enlarge the possibilities of awareness, so defined. The
psychology of the other one is, after all, a direct approach
to "knowing thyself."
The main purpose of this discussion has been to define
a definition by considering an example. To be consistent,
psychologists must deal with their own verbal practices
by developing an empirical science of verbal behavior.
They cannot, unfortunately, join logicians in defining a
definition, for example, as a "rule for the use of a term"
(Feigl 1945); they must turn instead to the contingencies
of reinforcement which account for the functional relation
between a term, as a verbal response, and a given
stimulus. This is the "operational basis" for their use of
terms; and it is not logic but science.
Philosophers will call this circular. They will argue that
we must adopt the rules of logic in order to make and
interpret the experiments required in an empirical sci-
ence of verbal behavior. But talking about talking is no
more circular than thinking about thinking or knowing
about knowing. Whether or not we are lifting ourselves
by our own bootstraps, the simple fact is that we can make
progress in a scientific analysis of verbal behavior.
E antually we shall be able to include, and perhaps to
understand, our own verbal behavior as scientists. If it
turns out that our final view of verbal behavior invalidates
our scientific structure from the point of view of logic and
truth value, then so much the worse for logic, which will
also have been embraced by our analysis.
Skinner: Psychological terms
Some afterthoughts on methodological and
radical behaviorism
In the summer of 1930, two years after the publication of
Bridgman's The Logic of Modern Physics, I wrote a paper
called "The Concept of the Reflex in the Description of
Behavior" (Skinner 1931), later offered as the first half of a
doctoral thesis. Although the general method, particu-
larly the historical approach, was derived from Mach's
The Science of Mechanics (1893), my debt to Bridgman
was acknowledged in the second paragraph. This was, I
think, the first psychological publication to contain a
reference to The Logic of Modern Physics (1928), and it
was the first explicitly operational analysis of a psychologi-
cal concept.
Shortly after the paper was finished, I found myself
contemplating a doctoral examination before a committee
of whose sympathies I was none too sure. Not wishing to
wait until an unconditional surrender might be neces-
sary, I put out a peace feeler. Unmindful or ignorant of
the ethics of the academy, I suggested to a member of the
Harvard department that if I could be excused from
anything but the most perfunctory examination, the time
which I would otherwise spend in preparation would be
devoted to an operational analysis of half a dozen key
terms from subjective psychology. The suggestion was
received with such breathless amazement that my peace
feeler went no further.
The point I want to make is that at that time - 1930 - I
could regard an operational analysis of subjective terms as
a mere exercise in scientific method. It was just a bit of
hackwork, badly needed by traditional psychology, which
I was willing to engage in as a public service or in return
for the remission of sins. It never occurred to me that the
analysis could take any but a single course or have any
relation to my own prejudices. The result seemed as
predetermined as that of a mathematical calculation.
I am of this opinion still. I believe that the data of a
science of psychology can be defined or denoted unequiv-
ocally, and that some one set of concepts can be shown to
be the most expedient according to the usual standards in
scientific practice. Nevertheless, these things have not
been done in the field which was dominated by subjective
psychology, and the question is, Why not?
Psychology, alone among the biological and social sci-
ences, passed through a revolution comparable in many
respects with that which was taking place at the same time
in physics. This was, of course, behaviorism. The first
step, like that in physics, was a reexamination of the
observational bases of certain important concepts. But by
the time Bridgman's book was published, most of the
early behaviorists, as well as those of us just coming along
who claimed some systematic continuity, had begun to
see that psychology actually did not require the redefini-
tion of subjective concepts. The reinterpretation of an
established set of explanatory fictions was not the way to
secure the tools then needed for a scientific description of
behavior. Historical prestige was beside the point. There
was no more reason to make a permanent place for terms
like "consciousness," "will," or "feeling" than for "phlo-
giston" or "vis anima." On the contrary, redefined con-
cepts proved to be awkward and inappropriate, and
Watsonianism was, in fact, practically wrecked in the
attempt to make them work.
THE BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1984) 7:4
551

SkinnenPsychological terms
Thus it came about that while the behaviorists might
have applied Bridgman's principle to representative
terms from a mentalistic psychology (and were most
competent to do so), they had lost all interest in the
matter. They might as well have spent their time in
showing what an 18th-century chemist was talking about
when he said that the Metallic Substances consisted of a
vitrifiable earth united with phlogiston. There was no
doubt that such a statement could be analyzed opera-
tionally or translated into modern terms, or that subjec-
tive terms could be operationally defined, but such mat-
ters were of historical interest only. What was wanted was
a fresh set of concepts derived from a direct analysis of the
newly emphasized data, and this was enough to absorb all
the available energies of the behaviorists. Besides, the
motivation of the enfant terrible had worn itself out.
I think the Harvard department would have been
happier if my offer had been taken up. What happened
instead was the operationism of Boring and Stevens. This
has been described as an attempt to climb onto the
behavioristic bandwagon unobserved. I cannot agree. It
is an attempt to acknowledge some of the more powerful
claims of behaviorism (which could no longer be denied)
but at the same time to preserve the old explanatory
fictions. It is agreed that the data of psychology must be
behavioral rather than mental if psychology is to be a
member of the Unified Sciences, but the position taken is
merely that of "methodological" behaviorism. According
to this doctrine the world is divided into public and
private events; and psychology, in order to meet the
requirements of a science, must confine itself to the
former. This was never good behaviorism, but it was an
easy position to expound and defend and was often
resorted to by the behaviorists themselves. It is least
objectionable to the subjectivist because it permits him to
retain "experience" for purposes of "nonphysicalistic"
self-knowledge.
The position is not genuinely operational because it
shows an unwillingness to abandon fictions. It is like
saying that although the physicist must admittedly con-
fine himself to Einsteinian time, it is still true that
Newtonian absolute time flows "equably without relation
to anything external." It is a sort of E pur si muove in
reverse. What is lacking is the bold and exciting behav-
ioristic hypothesis that what one observes and talks about
is always the "real" or "physical" world (or at least the
"one" world) and that "experience" is a derived construct
to be understood only through an analysis of verbal (not,
of course, merely vocal) processes.
It may be worthwhile to consider four of the principle
difficulties 
which arise from 
the 
public-private
distinction.
1. The relation between the two sets of terms which are
required has proved to be confusing. The pair most
frequently discussed is "discrimination" (public) and
"sensation" (private). Is one the same as the other, or
reducible to the other, and so on? A satisfactory resolu-
tion would seem to be that the terms belong to conceptual
systems which are not necessarily related in a point-to-
point correspondence. There is no question of equating
them or their referents, or reducing one to the other, but
only a question of translation - and a single term in one
set may require a paragraph in the other.
2. The public-private distinction emphasizes the arid
philosophy of "truth by agreement." The public, in fact,
turns out to be simply that which can be agreed upon
because it is common to two or more agreers. This is not
an essential part of operationism; on the contrary, opera-
tionism permits us to dispense with this most unsatisfy-
ing solution of the problem of truth. Disagreements can
often be cleared up by asking for definitions, and opera-
tional definitions are especially helpful, but opera-
tionism is not primarily concerned with communication
or disputation. It is one of the most hopeful of principles
precisely because it is not. The solitary inhabitant of a
desert isle could arrive at operational definitions (pro-
vided he had previously been equipped with an ade-
quate verbal repertoire). The ultimate criterion for the
goodness of a concept is not whether two people are
brought into agreement but whether the scientist who
uses the concept can operate successfully upon his mate-
rial - all by himself if need be. What matters to Robin-
son Crusoe is not whether he is agreeing with himself
but whether he is getting anywhere with his control over
nature.
One can see why the subjective psychologist makes so
much of agreement. It was once a favorite sport to quiz
him about intersubjective correspondences. "How do
you know that O's sensation of green is the same as E's?"
And so on. But agreement alone means very little. Vari-
ous epochs in the history of philosophy and psychology
have seen wholehearted agreement on the definition of
psychological terms. This makes for contentment but not
for progress. The agreement is likely to be shattered
when someone discovers that a set of terms will not really
work, perhaps in some hitherto neglected field, but this
does not make agreement the key to workability. On the
contrary, it is the other way round.
3. The distinction between public and private is by no
means the same as that between physical and mental.
That is why methodological behaviorism (which adopts
the first) is very different from radical behaviorism (which
lops off the latter term in the second). The result is that
whereas the radical behaviorist may in some cases consid-
er private events (inferentially, perhaps, but nonetheless
meaningfully), the methodological operationist has ma-
neuvered himself into a position where he cannot. "Sci-
ence does not consider private data," says Boring (1945). I
contend, however, that my toothache is just as physical as
my typewriter, though not public, and I see no reason
why an objective and operational science cannot consider
the processes through which a vocabulary descriptive of a
toothache is acquired and maintained. The irony of it is
that, whereas Boring must confine himself to an account
of my external behavior, I am still interested in what
might be called Boring-from-within.
4. The public-private distinction apparently leads to a
logical, as distinct from a psychological, analysis of the
verbal behavior of the scientist, although I see no reason
why it should. Perhaps it is because the subjectivist is still
not interested in terms but in what the terms used to
stand for. The only problem a science of behavior must
solve in connection with subjectivism is in the verbal
field. How can we account for the behavior of talking
about mental events? The solution must be psychological,
rather than logical, and I have tried to suggest one
approach in my present paper.
The confusion which seems to have arisen from opera-
552
THE BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1984) 7:4

Commentary/ Skinner: Psychological terms
tionism - a principle which is supposed to eliminate
confusion - is discouraging. But upon second thought it
appears that the possibility of a genuine operationism in
psychology has not yet been fully explored. With a little
effort I can recapture my enthusiasm of some years ago/
(This is, of course, a private event.)
NOTE
This article is slightly revised from the original, which ap-
peared in Psychological Review 52: 270-277; 291-294, 1945.
Open Peer Commentary
Commentaries submitted by the qualified professional readership of
this journal will be considered for publication in a later issue as
Continuing Commentary on this article, lntegrative overviews and
syntheses are especially encouraged.
Stimulus-response meaning theory
Jonathan Bennett
Department of Philosophy, Syracuse University, Syracuse, N.Y. 13210
Skinner's account of how subjective psychological terminology
gets its meaning relies on his views about meaning in general.
Though not extensively laid out in "Terms," their general
outline emerges clearly enough to show how radically mistaken
they are. So there must be a lot wrong also with Skinner's
account of the meanings of psychological terms, but I shall not
follow out those consequences; my topic is the underlying
stimulus-response approach to meaning in general.
To evaluate Skinner's views about meaning we must first
cleanse them of their most unrealistic assumption, namely that
the basic linguistic performance is the uttering of a single word.
When Skinner speaks of "the circumstances under which the
response 'length' is emitted" he is not discussable. Apart from
certain highly specialized circumstances, such as helping with a
crossword puzzle or displaying reading skills, there are no
circumstances under which that one word is uttered in isolation.
And when he implicitly contrasts "I see red" with "red," calling
the former an "expanded expression," he puts the cart before
the horse. Although we grasp sentences only through under-
standing their constituent words, the notion of meaning attaches
primarily to whole sentences and only derivatively to smaller
units such as words. Our primary concept of meaning is that of
something's meaning that P, and the notion of word meaning
must be understood through the idea of the effect on a sen-
tence's meaning of replacing this word in it by that. Try to
imagine a tribe that has a word for trees, a word for sand, a word
for fire, and so on, but that does not use these words in sentences
to say anything about trees, sand, or fire. The supposition makes
no sense: If the noises in question are not used to say anything,
to express whole "that-P" messages, there is nothing to make it
the case that the noises are words at all.
However, when Skinner and other stimulus-response mean-
ing theorists focus on the single word, perhaps they are really
thinking not of the word "red," say, but rather of the one-word
sentence "Red!," meaning something like "That thing (in front
of me) is red." Let us suppose this, and forget that it still makes
no sense of "the response 'length.'"
The activity of labeling whatever public or private item one is
presented with is a rare event. Even if we allow for it to be done
in normal sentences with several words each - for example,
"This is a chair" or "That is a Ming vase" - it does not happen
often, and there is no reason to take it as paradigmatic of
linguistic behavior, or as central or basic in it.
Let us set that fact aside also, and attend to the tiny fragment
of linguistic behavior that does fit this pattern. Still there is
trouble for Skinner's theory of meaning. I am confronted by
something red; it is a stimulus, to which I respond by saying
"(That is) red." In calling these items a "stimulus" and a
"response" respectively, Skinner is implying that the former
causes the latter: Like most stimulus-response meaning theo-
rists, he is apparently attracted by the idea that the meanings of
our utterances are determined by the very same items that
cause them. In his own words, the "referents" of what we say
"control" our saying it, and he ties control to prediction, speak-
ing of a "science of behavior in which we are to predict response
through, among other things, an independent knowledge of the
stimulus."
The phrase "among other things" is needed in that sentence.
Without it, Skinner would be implying that linguistic behavior
is vastly more predictable than it really is, in the manner of the
stimulus-response meaning theorist who once wrote: "If you
want a person to utter the word chair, one of the best ways is to
let him see an unusual chair" (Miller 1951, p. 166). That is
plainly false, of course, and no one would write it who was not in
thrall to a bad theory. In a large range of situations we can
predict something about the world from a fact about what is said
- for example, someone's saying "This is a chair" is evidence
that he is probably in the presence of a chair - but predictions
running the other way are nearly always quite hopeless (this
point is made by Ziff 1970, p. 73; see also Ziff 1960, sees. 46 and
54). But Skinner says "among other things." We are to suppose
that the causally sufficient conditions for a person's uttering
"(That is) red" consist in (i) a red stimulus in conjunction with (ii)
a set of circumstances C which always mediates between a
stimulus and an utterance whose meaning is somehow given by
the stimulus. If the theory is not that there is a single value of C
such that someone who undergoes a red stimulus in C circum-
stances says something like "That is red, " someone who sees a
chair in C circumstances says "That is a chair," and so on, then
there is no theory. The aim is to say something systematic about
how the meanings of utterances relate to their causes, and that
requires a general rule enabling us to read off the meaning of an
utterance from the facts about the causal chain that produced it.
We shan't get that merely by learning that in each case the
causal chain includes, together with a lot of other stuff, some-
thing constitutive of the meaning of the utterance. We need a
systematic way of filtering out the "other stuff' in order to isolate
the element that gives the meaning; and so, as I said, we need a
single value of C that tells us in each case which part of the causal
chain gives the meaning and which part belongs to the all-
purpose "other stuff." (For a fuller defense of this, see sec. 6 of
Bennett 1975.)
That is the project of Skinner's kind of stimulus-response
meaning theory. (There is another kind - no better but different
- according to which meaning is determined not by the stimuli
to which an utterance is a response but rather by the responses
to the utterance considered as stimulus. For more on this, and
on relations between the two, see sees. 7 - 9 of Bennett 1975.)
As a project, it has no hope of success: There is no reason to think
there is anything remotely resembling a general truth of the
form "Whenever anyone encounters an F item in C circum-
stances he utters something meaning that the item is F." Let C
be somewhat vague and tattered around the edges; let it also be
less than perfectly unitary, consisting perhaps of about 17
disjuncts; lower your sights by looking only for a rule that applies
about 20% of the time; help yourself to two or three further
indulgences as well. Still the project will have no chance of
success. It assumes a world-to-meaning relationship that simply
doesn't exist.
This is not to deny that when a person says something
THE BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1984) 7:4
553

Commentary /Skinner: Psychological terms
meaning "That is an F," the odds are that he is confronted by an
F, that he has been in perceptual contact with it, and that this
contact is part of the causal history of his making that utterance.
That much is true, and is presumably the launching pad from
which Skinner and the other stimulus-response meaning theo-
rists have embarked on their theory. But it is a truth that brings
no comfort to stimulus-response meaning theory, as can be
seen by seeing why it is true. The explanation is as follows.
When a person utters something that means that a certain
thing x is F, he is likely to have some one of a certain cluster of
intentions (intending to get someone else to think that Fx, or
intending to fix in his own memory his belief that Fx, or the like);
if he has such an intention, he probably believes that Fx; and if
he believes that Fx then the odds are that x is F-like and that the
person has been caused to believe it is F by a perceptual
transaction with it. And so someone who says "That is red" has
probably been acted upon perceptually by something red.
This involves several probabilities each falling short of cer-
tainty; multiply them all together and the upshot is a long way
below certainty. Still, it provides an inference from "He has just
uttered 'That is a chair' " to "He has recently encountered a
chair" which has some cogency: If I had to bet on whether
someone had recently seen a chair, I would be interested to
learn that he had recently said "That is a chair." But for obvious
reasons it provides a vastly less secure basis for inferring the
utterance from the perception. Granted that when the utter-
ance occurred it was partly as a result of the perception, there is
no systematic and manageable way in which it could have been
predicted with as much as 1% probability, except in special
cases where the perception is accompanied by a threat or a
bribe. Furthermore, there is good reason to think that it is not a
strictly causal flow from the perception through the belief to the
utterance, and that the causal explanation of the utterance will
run along physiological channels and not psychological ones.
For a lot of argument to this effect, see Fodor (1980). The best
argument, in a nutshell, is as follows. It seems reasonable to
think that (i) any item of linguistic behavior admits of a correct
causal explanation in physiological terms, and that (ii) there is no
systematic mapping between facts about mental content and
associated facts about physiological states, and that (iii) there is a
systematic mapping between any two correct causal explana-
tions of the same phenomenon. Thus, my suggested route from
the perceptual encounter through to the utterance, as well as
failing to support a prediction, also fails to be strictly causal.
How then can I offer it as a replacement for, or improvement on,
what Skinner is trying to get?
Well, useless as this relation between world and meaning is
for Skinner's purposes, it is the nearest thing to his theory that is
anywhere near true. What is most striking about it is that it
depends essentially upon two of the concepts - intention and
belief- that belong to that "subjective psychology" that Skinner
thinks he can safely disregard as being of merely antiquarian
interest, like phlogiston and vis anima. Now, quite a lot of
philosophers of psychology these days are also inclined to drop
the concepts of intention and belief or to look forward to the day
when we shall be able to do so (see Churchland 1981), and for all
I know they are right. I am not contending that a good scientific
account of behavior must involve those concepts, but only that
they are required for any semblance of a systematic link be-
tween meaning and circumstance of utterance. Like some oth-
ers, I think that the very notion of meaning depends essentially
on intention and belief, and cannot stand if they fall (see
Armstrong 1971; Bennett 1976; Grice 1957; Schiffer 1972), but I
do not insist on that either. All I need is the much securer thesis
that any systematic bridge between meanings and circumstances
of utterance must involve intention and belief.
Incidentally, once that fact has been faced we can liberate
ourselves from the restriction to utterances such as "That is a
chair" and "This is red" and "I feel a pain." Skinner's attempt to
explain the meanings of psychological terms depends essentially
on his taking that kind of utterance as paradigmatic, but it
obviously isn't, and now we can break free from it. Instead of the
restricted thesis "When someone utters something meaning
that some present thing x is F, it is fairly likely that the thing is F-
like and the speaker has recently had perceptual contact with
it," we have the much more widely applicable thesis "When
someone utters something meaning that P, it is fairly likely that
there is evidence that P and the speaker has recently had
perceptual contact with some of it." In this statement, of course,
we must understand "evidence" as "what would count as evi-
dence for the person whose utterance is in question," and so the
notion of evidence we arc using here further involves the
concept of belief: what counts for a person as evidence that P is,
roughly, what inclines him to believe that P. But that is not a
further trouble for Skinner's program, because even within the
tiny area to which the program is confined it doesn't work -
doesn't achieve the beginnings of an approximation to the truth
- except with help from the concepts of intention and belief.
Waiting for the world to make me talk and
tell me what I meant
Richard P. Brinkera and Julian Jaynesb
"Educational Testing Service, Princeton, N.J. 08541 and" Department of
Psychology, Princeton University, Princeton, N.J. 08544
Like so much of Professor Skinner's work, "Terms" separates
him from the main thrust of operationism and from the main
body of behaviorism. Yet history rarely sees subtle differences.
For example, Piaget and Inhelder (1969) miss such distinctions
when they brand Skinner a "copy theorist" indistinguishable
from other behavioral associationists such as Pavlov or Hull.
Why have such criticisms, or those of Chomsky (1959), been so
lasting when in fact Skinner's use of terms such as operant,
discriminative stimulus, and reinforcement could be used to
refer to and "explain" many phenomena treated by cognitive
psychologists (Catania 1979)? Perhaps the reason that Skinner
has been a focal target of criticism from cognitively oriented
psychologists is that the differentiation of himself from other
behaviorists and other operationists has never culminated in the
promised program of research in human behavior that would
demonstrate the differences between the old and the new
operationism. That is the main point of this commentary, in
which we are trying to stay within Skinner's purview, refraining
from discussion of that purview itself.
What are the distinctions whereby Skinner differentiates
himself from previous operationists? He offers a "definition of
definition" rather than mere correspondences between con-
cepts and the operations by which they are defined or between
terms and the criteria for their application. The definition of
definition is a statement of the social community's contingency
of reinforcement for a term. Thus, psychologists must develop
an empirical science of verbal behavior. They cannot. . . join logi-
cians in defining a definition, for example as a "rule for the use of a
term " (Feigl 1945); they must turn instead to contingencies of rein-
forcement which account for the functional relation between a term,
as a verbal response, and a given stimulus. This is the "operational
basis" for their use of terms.
Since it has previously been concluded that there is no basis for
differential reinforcement of private events - no "inner" rein-
forcing - public verbal responses are the only admissible data
for operationism. The promise of this 1945 paper, then, is that
an analysis of reinforcement contingencies from the verbal
community for verbal behavior will lead to truly operational
definitions of terms and therefore to a complete behaviorism.
Twenty-four years later, Skinner seems to have rescinded this
promise of operationism. In 1969, he insisted that an observer of
contingencies, even the simple contingencies in an operant
554
THE BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1984) 7:4

Commentary/Skinner: Psychological terms
conditioning chamber, will not be able to describe the contin-
gencies.
Over a substantial period of time he has seen various stimuli, re-
sponses, and reinforcers appear and disappear. The fact remains that
direct observation, no matter how prolonged, tells him very little
about what is going on . . . If he could not see what was happening in
a relatively simple experimental space, how can we expect him to
understand the behavior he sees in the world around him? . . . It is
only when we have analyzed behavior under known contingencies of
reinforcement that we can begin to see what is happening in daily life.
(Skinner 1969a, p. 9-10, italics in original).
Thus, operationism really requires the demonstration of be-
havioral control. But how and over what? Is the verbal behavior
that is to be "operationalized" the specific words spoken, the
inflection, the intensity pattern, the temporal pattern, other
features of how words are spoken, or the entire class of syn-
onymous ways that the same thing could be said, or all of these,
or something still more? And how, for example, would we
operationalize the term had in the sentence from a grammar
lesson "Mary, where Jane had had, had had had; had had had
the teacher's approval." Such examples exert enough control (in
Skinner's terms) upon most of us out here in the language
community that we express our acceptance of the grammatical
nature of the statement and acknowledge the independence of
the grammatical rule from the specific stimulus words.
Although Skinner did not seem to follow through on the
distinction between his use of operational definition and his
behaviorist predecessors' use of that term, others have explored
with other vocabularies what Skinner knows as the verbal
community's contingencies for verbal and vocal behavior
(Bruner 1975; Wells 1981). However, this endeavor has culmi-
nated in a framework that includes consideration of the active
"intentions" of both the language community and the speaker.
Words and word combinations have different meanings in the
language community depending upon the conditions under
which they are emitted. The stimuli are not the sounds uttered
or even such utterances in the environmental context. Aspects
of both must be intentionally selected by an active language
community attempting to reconstruct messages from the en-
vironmental context and the sounds uttered (Brinker 1982). This
active process occurs even when infants emit sounds that could
not possibly be words: Adults behave as if these sounds meant
something (Bruner 1975).
Even when research on the semantic and pragmatic develop-
ment of language contains the data that could be relevant to
"Terms" (see Segal 1975), a successful analysis of this language
data from an operational point of view seems unlikely, given
Skinner's 1969 rejection of the possibility of making sense of
such observations. Moreover, although organisms freely emit
behavior (Skinner 1938), the structure of behavioral repertoires
and the probabilities as to which of several behaviors would be
emitted - surely prolegomena for such an analysis - were never
seriously studied within the operant framework. Nor was the
impact of a history of learning upon an organism's performance
in a new contingency ever seriously examined.
The Skinnerian picture seems to be of a passive individual
who brings nothing to contingencies of reinforcement. He waits
for referents to talk about. When a referent comes along he uses
terms that are or have been positively reinforced. Thus, he
learns the appropriate verbal behavior to talk about public and
ultimately private things. It is this passive view of human nature
in Skinner's later writings that was not necessary on the basis of
his early theoretical distinctions (1935a; 1938), but was neces-
sary to be consistent with Skinner's operationism. Moreover,
this passive view reduces the possibility of a serious and com-
plete contingency analysis of verbal behavior.
Skinner's sense of operational definition in "Terms" then,
promises a program of research in which natural contingencies
of reinforcement by the verbal community for verbal behavior
provide the concept of definition. Yet it has fallen to others to
study such contingencies from a standpoint quite removed from
either traditional or radical behaviorism (Bates 1976; Bruner
1975; Greenfield & Smith 1976). Skinner (1969a) seems to have
moved away from his 1945 position and abandoned the pos-
sibility of understanding any behavior, verbal or otherwise,
based on an analysis of natural contingencies. The later position
is that understanding is equivalent to experimental control. It is
this position, rather than the 1945 one, that is very poorly suited
to an analysis of verbal behavior. It is the requirement for
experimental control of verbal behavior that has produced the
anti-Skinnerian position reviewed by Herrnstein (1977). Skin-
ner (1977) himself feels that such criticism does not apply to his
own verbal behavior.
What all this shows perhaps is the power of derivative fashions
over the best of 20th-century psychology. The fashion here is
operationism which, after the disillusionments of World War I
and the ensuing fever for pure objectivity, had grown out of the
logical positivism of the Vienna Circle into a promise of a "Unity
of Science" for all who would accept its simple rules of initiation.
And psychology, weakened with the ineptness of its earlier
misguided attempts at a science of consciousness (Fechner,
Wundt, Titchener, et al.), wearily climbed on the bandwagon
and tried to behave like physics.
But operationism was soon cast off by physicists themselves.
It contained logical contradictions (e.g. a "thing" measured or
observed in two ways is really two things) and regressions (e.g.
how do we operationally define the operationally defining mea-
suring instruments?), and was an insensitive bull in the china
shop of psychology with nowhere to go (e.g. how do we opera-
tionally define dreams?). As Skinner himself points out in
"Terms," Bridgman's (1928) formulation "cannot be taken liter-
ally." We note also that in his last sentences some of Professor
Skinner's earlier enthusiasm for operationism seems to have
become attenuated. For the sake of his own important theoriz-
ing, we wish he had never had any enthusiasm for it at all.
Skinner on the verbal behavior of
verbal behaviorists
Arthur C. Danto
Department of Philosophy, Columbia University, New York, N.Y. 10027
Skinner's scenario for fixing the reference of psychological
terms has the structure of a Greek tragedy, in which the verbal
community acts as chorus, instructing the tragic subject in how
to name his agonies. The ancients left unexplained the manner
in which choruses came by their knowledge, and it is no less a
puzzle how the verbal community in Skinner's semantical story
comes by its cognitions, all the more so if the story is true. For
the question then is how anyone ascends from such basic ver-
bal reports as "toothache" in the presence of toothache, or
"red" in the presence of red, as emitted by the well-condi-
tioned subject, to the rich, dense metalanguage of the story
itself. The unwritten program of the paper is to show how so
exiguous an input gets processed to yield an output as rich as
the paper that presupposes the program, if its author began the
way its subject does. It is Skinner's belief that we shall, by
procedures scarcely more complex than those through which
the meaning of "toothache" gets transmitted to otherwise in-
choate agonizers, arrive at an understanding of the verbal be-
havior of scientists. Self-understanding must after all be an aim
of psychology, psychologists being human; and if "knowing
oneself' is limited even in the case of simple names of simple
pains, how likely is it that reflexive knowledge - knowledge de
se - can be attained of science at the level of science? The
question is whether Verbal Behavior would have been possible
if verbal behavior at large is analyzable as it is said to be here.
This I shall show reason to doubt. But I must first applaud
THE BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1984) 7:4
555

Commentary/ Skinner: Psychological terms
Skinner's recognition that science itself cannot be left outside
science, and that what he fears may look like circularity -
characterizing a practice in the language of the practice charac-
terized - is not an obstacle to but a condition for the validity of
any analysis that pretends to adequacy. Quis custodiet ipsos
custodes - Who shall guard the guardians? - a problem for the
implementation of Skinner's Utopia, has its methodological
counterpart here.
The genius of tragedy is inseparable from the genius of com-
edy, Socrates observed after a legendary night of drinking, and
it is comic that the conditions for instructing in the reference of
psychological predicates immediately gives rise to the Problem
of Other Minds, as well as the lesser possibility of malingering
pretense on the subject's part. For the collateral accompanying
stimuli - "hand to the jaw, facial expressions, groans, and the
like' - can be present in the absense of the pain. Logical
behaviorism, which seeks to define psychological terms
through what for Skinner are merely collateral accompani-
ments, is a radical effort to abort skepticism by making it lin-
guistically inexpressible. But Skinner's native radicalism is
tempered by a certain realism: it is "a simple fact" that private
stimuli occur and that a (humanly) important class of psycho-
logical terms take them as their primary referenda. Besides,
logical behaviorism is dogged by the circumstance that at best
disjunctive definientiae leave psychological terms ultimately
ambiguous, neat translations being hard to come by. If this is
so for toothaches, think how much more true it is as we rise to
such civilized feelings as gratitude to M. Swann for his gift to
the family of a case of Asti, which the narrator's aunts, in Du
coti de chez Swann, report with such obliquity that even those
who know them best, let alone the intended beneficiary of
their thanks, are left unclear as to what is said and what is felt.
Teelings like gratitude, pride, jealousy, and love typically oc-
cur within networks of other feelings as well as beliefs and
other propositional attitudes, and it may often take the omnis-
cient powers of a chorus to know what is really going on in alien
breasts, as readers of Proust know. And matters are compli-
cated by the intentional structure of many important feelings,
which enables them to occur in the absence of stimuli corre-
spondent with their contents - as when someone is grateful to
his god (when there is none) for his many blessings (when there
aren't any). Toothache is minimally intentional, but even
"toothache" requires the user to know something about teeth
and appreciate that pains have location. Yet even here, in this
minimal case, collateral reference is sufficiently dilating as to
foreclose, on Skinner's view, precision of reference.
Now my problem is less with whether his account of the
reference of psychological terms is adequate than with whether
his analysis of the emission of "Red!" in the presence of red
gives an adequate model of the verbal behavior of scientists,
though the two problems are deeply connected. The implicit
semiotics is this: A verbal report is reinforced only when it is
emitted in the presence of the stimulus that the emitted term
denotes when the emission is correct. The burden of the paper
concerns those cases in which the stimulus, though real, is
inaccessible to the agents of reinforcement, in contrast to the
standard case where it is accessible to emitter and reinforcer
equally. But the terms I regard as central to science are not of
this latter sort, but denote things and events inaccessible to
anyone, and only loosely connected via definitional ties to
"stimuli" themselves intepretable only against a background of
typically complex theory. Now there are very familiar pro-
grams of analysis that maintain programmatically that all such
theoretical terms may be defined without remainder in the
idiom of terms that refer merely to what Skinner will call stim-
uli. Since Skinner has been realist enough to resist logical
behaviorism, it is difficult to see how he can consistently yield,
strongly tempted as his paper implies he is, to logical em-
piricism. But once one admits into the language of science
terms as loosely tied to stimuli as theoretical terms are, the
schedules of reinforcement will be no more stable here than
they are with psychological terms. But if this means, in the
latter case, that "it is . . . impossible to establish a rigorous
scientific vocabulary for public use, ' well, it should be so in the
former case as well, which means it is impossible, unless one
yields to one form or another of radicalism, to establish a
rigorous scientific vocabulary at all!
If, in the case of private stimuli, the lack of precision in
referring terms makes it impossible for the speaker to know
himself, in the case of null stimuli it must equally follow from
the correspondent lack of precision for theoretical terms, that
we cannot know the real world the terms refer to either. A
theory of the semantics of scientific terms that makes it impos-
sible for science to attain its cognitive aims had better be care-
fully considered, and this certainly must hold for a theory of
verbal behavior that makes it impossible to understand the
language of science. The symmetries suggest, however, that if
we are to make knowledge possible by relaxing the demand for
sharpness of reference in the one case, we have no logical basis
for not relaxing it in the other direction as well, enabling self-
knowledge to arise together with the possibility of knowledge
of the world. But as these demands are symmetrically
loosened, the picture of verbal behavior limned in "Terms"
seems decreasingly adequate to the language of science. In
compensation, I would propose that the relevance of immedi-
ate inner experience to self-understanding is probably as cir-
cumscribed as the relevance of immediate outer experience to
understanding the deep realities of the world. Our representa-
tions of either must be considerably more complex than mere
constellations of verbal reports. The creative individual, in sci-
ence as in sensibility, will often have to teach the verbal com-
munity a thing or two.
Wishful thinking
Daniel C. Dennett
Department of Philosophy, Tufts University, Medford, Mass. 02155
Even bearing in mind that "Terms" is a "theoretical" paper, not
a report of experimental work, I am struck by how totally
ideology driven the claims in it are. There is no glimmer of brute
empirical fact cited to motivate or support the claims expressed.
In particular, no puzzling or recalcitrant or otherwise inexplica-
ble facts about human behavior are shown to succumb nicely to
the theory proposed (always a persuasive theme in selling a way
of doing science). Instead what we have here is the extrapolation
of a creed: working out the details of what the devout behaviorist
has to say, figuring out the kosher categories into which all facts
must be cast, no matter how the facts come out. Skinner's role in
"Terms" is thus analogous to the theologian's role in codifying,
extending, and proselytizing for a system of dogmas.
Skinner, foe of ideology that he is, may take this observation
as a particularly shrill criticism, but that is not how I intend it.
Every scientific "school" I know anything about has its the-
ologians, and they perform a singularly useful - perhaps even
indispensable - service. They clarify the "position," showing
what one is committed to if one does science in that way, and this
not only sharpens the edges of the theories so that they can
better be put to empirical test for confirmation and disconfirma-
tion, it also generates new questions and problems for the
theorists and experimentalists to explore.
There is good scientific theology and bad scientific theology,
however; one of the benchmarks of excellence is forthrightness
and explicitness of claims - leading with one's chin and giving
the skeptics and critics an unmistakable target to challenge.
Skinner, however, feints and weaves. We get bold declarations
("The significant interrelations between these terms may be
expressed by saying that the community reinforces the response
only when it is emitted in the presence of the stimulus"), but
then discover that they don't mean what they seem at first to
556
THE BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1984) 7:4

Commentary I SVmner: Psychological terms
mean, since the host of obvious counterinstances one could cite
does not count against the claim, for one reason or another.
It is an interesting exercise to go through the sentences of
"Terms" one at a time and ask oneself: What would it be,
exactly, to disagree with this claim? One of Skinner's favorite
auxiliaries is "may," which occurs with great frequency in
"Terms." Here are just a few examples: "the surviving covert
response may be regarded as," "a response may be emitted in
the presence of," "we may understand why terms referring to
private events have never formed a stable and acceptable
vocabulary of reasonably uniform usage." "Statements about
private events may be under control of the deprivations associ-
ated with reinforcing consequences rather than antecedent
stimuli." " 'I am hungry' may therefore be variously translated."
A further review of the text shows variations on the theme:
"Might" and "could" and "possible" are high-frequency items.
What is frustrating about these terms is that they have several
quite distinct dictionary meanings, and it is often not clear from
context which way the reader is intended to go. Sometimes it
seems to be the "may" of doctrinal permission ("The communi-
cant may take the wafer on the tongue or in the hand"), and since
it's a free country, who could argue with that? Sometimes it
seems to be the "may" of mere logical possibility ("It may rain
tomorrow, and then again it may not"), and who in his right
mind would quarrel with that? Sometimes there is a hint that
much more is being asserted: that what may be regarded as such
and such may correctly be regarded as such and such; that when
a response may be under the control of x or y or z, it cannot have
any other explanation, it must be under the control of exactly
one of x, y, and z, and so on. But these stronger claims are not
forthrightly made. So who knows what doctrine is being as-
serted? There is a way of reading almost every sentence of
"Terms" so that the staunchest, most radical "mentalist" could
agree with it. But we know that that would be a misreading; we
are meant to understand that this is a behaviorist manifesto, but
exactly which manifesto it is has been left to the intuition of the
reader.
There is a reason, I think, for the high frequency of what
Skinner would probably call the "may" response in "Terms."
What Skinner was proposing at the time was a certain brand of
wishful thinking that might have worked - but didn't. Every
science must simplify, and even oversimplify, its phenomena in
search of tractable ways of manipulating, and conceiving of, the
"basic" forces, processes, principles. As investigators in ar-
tificial intelligence would say, you have to find a "toy problem"
you can master first, and no one can give rules or "criteria" for a
"good" simplification. "Terms" is a paper about behaviorism's
proposed simplifications, and while in the cold light of retro-
spect we can see that they were not good choices, they were
probably well worth a try. "Maybe," Skinner is saying, "we can
get away with this crude version of 'translation,' this tractably
simple substitute for 'meaning,' this theoretically easy way with
reference and consciousness." It is not that Skinner and other
behaviorists were oblivious to the ravishing complexities of
human behavior, but that they hoped - not unreasonably - to
bootstrap their way to some manageably doable science of
human behavior with the aid of a little wishful (or even willful)
thinking. There is probably no alternative to that basic strategy;
today's cognitive scientists just as willfully propose their own
oversimplifications. One of these years those defenders of mys-
terious complexity who hang around waiting to say "I told you
so" will be silenced by success.
Private reference
K. R. Garrett
Department of Philosophy, Brandeis University, Waltham, Mass. 02254
This commentary elaborates the theory of reference implicit in
B. F. Skinner's canonical paper, "The Operational Analysis of
Psychological Terms" in an effort to further distinguish Skin-
ner's radical behaviorism from the logical or philosophical be-
haviorism of Ludwig Wittgenstein's Philosophical Investiga-
tions (1953). Wittgenstein rejects the notion that we refer to
private stimulation (i.e. "sensations') or at least rejects the
notion that we do so in the very same way we refer to people or
parades. I argue that, in a Skinnerian analysis, there is no
essential difference between the way we "refer" to public things
and events and private stimulation.
Our elaboration of Skinner's analysis of reference may begin
with Skinner's Verbal Behavior (1957), in which he discusses
the reference of tacts. Tacts are, roughly, verbal operants
evoked by some particular object or event. Generally, their
referent is the object or event evoking them; for example, the
referent of "That animal is a lion" might be a lion or (in the event
of an error) some large dog whose presence prompted the
remark. Sometimes, however, a tact may be evoked by an object
or event that is not the referent itself, but only causally linked
with the referent in some way; for example, "That bear stole our
food again" in response to a bear track found near an empty
picnic table. Nonetheless, in these cases too, the referring
response and the referent may be said to be causally linked; that
is, the bear referred to may be said to have caused the prompt-
ing stimulus, the bear track. Generalizing, we may say that
referents or objects or events causally linked with referents are
responsible for the referring response.
Although Skinner does not consider reference in contexts
other than tacts, it is possible to do so. What Skinner calls
echoics is an example. Roughly, an echoic is a verbal operant
evoked by another verbal operant of the same form. Suppose a
wife says to her husband over the phone, "A skunk got in the
basement" and the husband turns to his secretary and repeats,
"A skunk got in the basement." The wife's response is a tact, the
husband's an echoic; yet husband and wife refer to the same
thing, namely, to the skunk. This same analysis also applies to
what Skinner classifies as intraverbals or verbal operants
evoked by other verbal responses having a different form. Thus,
suppose instead of merely repeating the wife's report, "A skunk
got in the basement," the husband had said, "There is a polecat
in my cellar." In that case, his remark would have been an
intraverbal. Nonetheless, it still would have referred to the
same skunk. Generalizing we may say that the referents of
intraverbals and echoics are the same as the referents of the tacts
to which they may be traced. Since the referent or some object
or event causally linked with the referent is responsible for the
tact and the tact in turn is responsible for the echoic or the
intraverbal, the referent or some object or event causally linked
with it is ultimately responsible for the echoic or intraverbal,
too.
When we turn from public objects or events to private
stimulation, the same essential causal or functional relations
exist between referent and referring response. When I say,
"The pain is in my.neck," I am emitting a tact evoked by the
private stimulation in my neck and this is precisely what I am
referring to as well. Another person cannot be said to emit a tact
directly under the control of that very same stimulation for the
simple reason that the stimulation is only in my body and not in
the other person's body as well. For this reason, the stimulation
evoking the tact and the referent of the tact are distinct. Another
may, nonetheless, emit a tact ("Richard is in pain") under the
control of an object or event causally linked with the painful
stimulation occurring in my body; he may, for example, see me
holding my neck and moaning and take that as "evidence" that
painful stimulation is occurring in my neck. In both cases
(whether I or another describes my pain), the referent (the
painful stimulation) is what is ultimately responsible for the
verbal response. Had the other person's tact ("Richard is in
pain") been emitted at the sight of blood, then we could still say
that the evoking stimulus is a condition (damaged tissue)
causally linked with the referent (the painful stimulation). Thus,
THE BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1984) 7:4
557

Commentary/ Skinner: Psychological terms
the essential causal or functional relationships are no different
from cases in which the referent is a public object or event. Nor
is there any cause to exaggerate the importance of the fact that
only I can directly tact the painful stimulation. There are parallel
situations that can arise even when we are dealing with public
objects or events. If, for example, I am the only one who
witnesses a certain event, say the eruption of a volcano, then I
alone am in a position to emit the relevant tacts (e.g. "The dust
of the volcano went miles into the air") in a "direct" way.
Indeed, each of us is in a position to emit very few tacts of this
"direct" sort with respect to most of the things to which we
nonetheless refer.
A great many of our statements referring to the private
stimulation of others are emitted as intraverbals. That is, for the
most part we rely upon the tacts of the person in whose body the
stimulation occurs. (Obviously, this is not the case when we are
establishing such tacts in the young. In those cases, we rely
upon the measures noted by Skinner in "Terms.") In any case,
when intraverbals are emitted, the painful stimulation is re-
sponsible for both the tact of the person in pain and ultimately,
therefore, for the intraverbal as well. And in these cases,
moreover, that very same private stimulation is what both tact
and intraverbal refer to. Thus, if someone says, "The discomfort
is in Richard's neck" upon hearing my report, "The pain is in my
neck," both responses refer to and are the result of the painful
stimulation in my body. Similar consideration would apply
when a parent echoes his child's pain report, "The pain is in
Margaret's tummy." Here, too, the parent's echoic and the
child's tact refer to and are the result of the very same painful
stimulation occurring in the child's body.
In conclusion, then, it has been argued that there is no
essential difference between public and private reference in a
Skinnerian analysis. In both cases, the very same sort of func-
tional relations may be seen to obtain between referent and
referring response. This is, I believe, a very great advance over
Wittgenstein's notion that there is some essential difference
between the two cases - a suggestion that only mystifies us,
since it is never spelled out in a clear or detailed way.
Sensation and classification
George Graham
Department of Philosophy, University of Alabama in Birmingham,
Birmingham, Ala. 35294
The aspect of Skinner's canonical target article on psychological
terms on which I want to focus attention is that of the role of
stimuli and responses in the classification of sensations. On
Skinner's view, when subjects report certain private stimuli,
sensation classification takes place. Something is called a pain
rather than an ache, and a sharp pain rather than a dull one.
These classifications involve as prime movers both the previous
stimuli for the sensations and the consequent responses; that is,
the surrounding community operantly conditions subjects to
classify sensations in terms of the stimuli that produce them and
the responses that they produce. Stimuli and responses may
vary, and there may also be publicly unobservable stimuli and
responses. Thus, classifications are pegged by conditioning to a
tangled skein of stimuli and responses.
If we consider Skinner's view of sensation classification in the
light of the currently regnant philosophy of mind - func-
tionalism or the causal theory of mind (e.g. Churchland &
Churchland 1981; Lycan 1981) - we see immediately that
Skinner's account bears a striking resemblance to the func-
tionalist or causal account. On the functionalist or causal ac-
count, sensations are classified in terms of their causal roles. If
there is a difference between one kind of sensation and another,
there is a difference in their causes and effects.
Resemblance between Skinner's and the functionalist ac-
count is no accident. Skinner is a kind of functionalist, for he has
always found it necessary to interpret behavior as standing in
functional relations with environmental and physiological
events. But his psychology tends to concentrate on three sorts of
behavioral relata or effects: (1) movement of a joint or limb in
service of the creature as a whole such as kisses and key pecks;
(2) locomotor acts such as walking and jumping; and (3) speech
acts (Skinner 1957) such as tacting (roughly, stating) and inand-
ing (roughly, commanding and requesting). What "Terms"
contains is atypical: a glimpse of Skinner's view of sensory
experience below the level of joint or limb movements, loco-
motor acts, and speech. Here, I think, is where confusion in
interpreting Skinner arises. Malcolm (1964), in a widely read
discussion, called attention to Skinner's view of sensation classi-
fication. But he argued that the view implied that introspection
does not occur, that reports of sensations by subjects of the
sensations are based on observations of their movements and
locomotor acts.
Contrary to Malcolm's interpretation, Skinner argues that
classification by subjects is immediate, in the direct report of
sensations under the aspect of the stimuli that produce them and
the responses they produce. Subjects do not observe move-
ments and then classify. They immediately respond to their
sensations - both "feel" and report them - as typed according to
their causes and effects. A person knows what it is like to have a
sharp pain as a result of having conditioned responses of the
sharp pain sort - where sharp pain sort is defined in terms of
stimuli and responses associated with sharp pains.
"Terms" and sections of Verbal Behavior (pp. 130ff.) ex-
plain, on my reading, how such conditioned responses are
possible. The key idea is that reinforcement by outside observ-
ers fixes or pegs certain overt responses (introspective reports,
e.g.) and covert responses (introspections) to sensations by
virtue of their associated stimuli and responses. Subjects learn
to "feel" or perceive what is distinctively sharp about sharp
pains. This is what their typical stimuli and responses consist
of. For example, a sharp pain is a pain felt to be the sort one
usually gets from knives and tacks. A burning pain is a pain
perceived to be like those produced by contact with fire or hot
surfaces. An adjective such as "blinding" reported of a sensa-
tion suggests that the character of the sensation has something
about it that makes a subject close his eyes or shuts off his
vision. Each of these ways of characterizing sensations involves
reference to the typical stimuli-responses of the sensation. For
Skinner, subjects are taught to make such discriminations or
classifications by the surrounding verbal community, which
makes reinforcement for introspective reports (and by gener-
alization for introspections) contingent upon whether the sub-
ject of the sensation classifies sensations by reference to their
typical stimuli-responses.
My reading welcomes Skinner as a contributor to current
debate on sensations. There are several ways to make this point.
It seems promising, for example, to consider how Skinner would
respond to the inverted qualia objection to functionalism (e.g.
Block 1978). The heart of the objection is that it is possible for
sensations to remain the same (in kind) on introspection when
their roles change. But Skinner should retort that this is not
possible. The operant conditioning of introspections to sensa-
tions as-classified-by-stimuli-responses means that if stimuli-
responses or roles change, introspections would change also.
What sort of sensation a person has - or what it is like to have a
certain sensation - cannot be detached from the stimuli and
responses associated with the sensation.
Another point worth mentioning is that Skinner's account of
sensation classification makes for symmetry between classifica-
tions by subjects and outside observers. Both subjects in intro-
558
THE BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1984) 7:4

Commentary/ Skinner: Psychological terms
spection and observers through inference from associated stim-
uli and responses classify sensations the same way for Skinner: in
terms of their associated stimuli and responses. Introspective
classifications are pegged to stimuli and responses by the mech-
anism of operant conditioning. A recurrent problem for func-
tionalism is to explain the introspective classification of sensa-
tions without appeal to exclusively introspectible qualities or so-
called intrinsic properties. The importation of the mechanism of
operant conditioning from Skinnerian psychology might be the
solution to this problem.
In summary, reflection on Terms should serve to locate
Skinner in the center of current debate on the classification of
sensations. When he discusses certain private stimuli, he is
discussing sensations. And his view, like that of the currently
regnant philosophy of mind, is that types of sensations are
defined by their causal roles. The distinctive contribution of
Skinner to the debate in question is the postulation of operant
conditioning as the mechanism whereby subjects classify sensa-
tions in terms of their causal roles.
Operationism, smuggled connotations,
and the nothing-else clause
Peter Harzem
Department of Psychology, Auburn University, Auburn, Ala. 36849
Scientific language contains two types of words: those that are
also used in the ordinary language of the scientist, and those that
have been specially developed for specific use in the science.
The latter, that is the technical terms, are generally more
precise than ordinary words in the sense that there is little
ambiguity about the phenomena to which they refer. This is
simply because an a priori agreement exists in the scientific
community as to exactly how a given technical term shall be
used. Some technical terms are coined for the purpose: for
example, neutron, haemoglobin, trigonometry, and bacillus. In
some sciences, notably psychology, however, a different prac-
tice is common. Selected words of ordinary language are used as
t/they were technical terms. This has resulted, as we shall see,
in considerable confusion. It is important, therefore, to note
that the sort of terms discussed in "Terms," that is verbal
responses to "private" stimuli, are not, as Skinner's title im-
plies, psychological ones. They are words of ordinary language.
The characteristics of words in ordinary language are quite
different from those of technical terms. Ordinary words do not
have predetermined meanings because they do not come into
use as a result of prior deliberation. Moreover, as any good
dictionary will show, there is no word that has only a single
meaning. Ordinary language functions perfectly well, however,
for two main reasons. First, the context in which a word is used
makes clear its meaning on that occasion. The word "reinforce-
ment," for example, has very different (but not unconnected)
meanings when it is used in discussions of military strategy,
architecture, and psychology. Second, the sort of accuracy
generally necessary in science is not demanded in ordinary
discourse. The statement "Jane smiled," for example, does not
invite questions as to the extent and direction of Jane's facial
movements, or about the precise criteria by which the smile was
distinguished from a grimace or a laugh.
When a word is considered apart from context there is
nothing to indicate what meaning should be given to it. For
example, despite the fact that a false belief to the contrary is
common, the question, What is "mind"? is not answerable
because it does not make clear which of a multitude of usages is
in question; for example, "my mind is on other things," "mind
that child," "have you lost your mind," "he has a good mind,"
and "my mind is made up." None of these statements calls for
the speaker to subscribe to any "theory" of mind, dualist or
otherwise, and the word "mind" presents no difficulties when,
in Wittgenstein's terms, it is used in its "original home," namely
"everyday usage" (1953, sec. 116). Confusion occurs only when
the definition is sought for a word such as "mind."
Operationism has been the most influential attempt in psy-
chology to deal with this difficulty. In essence it seeks to
institute a single (operational) definition for a term that has
numerous uses. These uses must be eliminated if a single
definition is to stand. For this reason the nothing-else clause in
Skinner's definition of operationism is crucially important. As
Skinner notes, however, operationism has failed - though not
because the nothing-else clause is negative, but because it has
not been observed.
In the first place, it has proved impossible to eliminate the
ordinary-language connotations of a word. For example, opera-
tionally defining "stress" as immobilizing a rat for 48 hours has
not prevented the same psychologist from making assertions
about job stress, marital stress, and the like. Indeed, operational
definitions have been used to smuggle into scientific statements
claims that are unwarranted by data. The confusion is made
worse by the impossibility of legislating a single operational
definition for a term. Different individuals have used different
operational definitions for the same term, and the same indi-
vidual has used different operational definitions from time to
time. Thus, the very purpose of operationism in psychology has
been thwarted.
Skinner offers an entirely different approach to the problem
that operationism failed to resolve. I shall term this the "special
theory" of verbal behavior, as it is a specific application to the
issue at hand of his "general theory" of verbal behavior. This
theory is a monumental contribution to our understanding of
language. It is also a curiosity of the intellectual history of this
century because, for various reasons - none of them sound - it
has been neglected in favor of linguistic theories of no lasting
value. Nevertheless the special theory does not effectively deal
with the problems of scientific discourse. This is because these
problems are conceptual whereas the theory is empirical. In fact
Skinner noted this distinction, some years after the first publica-
tion of "Terms," as follows: "Behaviorism is not the science of
human behavior; it is the philosophy of that science" (1974, p.
3). By the same token, the special theory of verbal behavior is a
scientific theory, whereas issues concerning the language of
science are problems of philosophy of science. Only the theory
of verbal behavior depends upon empirical evidence whereas
the philosophy of science entails conceptual analysis (cf.
Harzem & Miles 1978).
Consider, for example, a child (or for that matter, an adult)
saying "Mama!" when in pain. Merely to assert that here
"Mama" is associated with pain stimuli does not render it any
the less correct that "Mama" refers to the individual's mother.
Moreover, "Mama" may also be uttered under a variety of other
stimulus conditions; when one is unhappy, wistful, overjoyed,
and so on. And this, of course, again entails the problem of
ambiguity that operationism failed to remedy. For a different
example, consider the words used by Skinner in his definition of
operationism: "observation," "procedure," "step," "inter-
vene," and so on. Knowing the stimulus conditions prevailing at
the time he wrote them will help us to comprehend neither the
words nor the definition. What is needed is a conceptual analy-
sis. The techniques of conceptual analysis, mostly developed by
Wittgenstein (1953), Ryle (1949), Austin (1946), and other "lin-
guistic" philosophers, in the years following the first publication
of "Terms," constitute a major support for behaviorism as the
philosophy of the science of behavior (see Harzem & Miles 1978
for a detailed discussion). These techniques provide significant
new insights concerning, for example, "mentalistic" terms. It is
high time that they were recognized and used in contemporary
behaviorism. For without them many of the puzzles of the
language of a science of behavior will remain unsolved.
THE BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1984) 7:4
559

Commentary /Skinner: Psychological terms
What, then, is Skinner's operationism?
Philip N. Hineline
Department of Psychology, Temple University, Philadelphia, Pa. 19122
Although much of Professor Skinner's essay, "Terms," is a
critique of ways in which operationist notions are commonly
applied and understood, he clearly identifies his own work with
an operationist position. What sort of operationism, then, is his?
"Terms" offers no direct statement of this except through
example; it provides only clues as to the role of operationist
principles in behavioral analysis considered as a whole theory.
Since those clues provide an indistinct and perhaps misleading
impression of Skinner's operationism, they bear examination in
relation to some of his other work.
A salient clue appears toward the end of the first section of
"Terms," when Skinner asserts that contingencies of reinforce-
ment provide the proper operational basis for analyzing psychol-
ogists' use of terms. One might infer from this, as critics have
inferred from other of his writings, that for Skinner contingen-
cies of reinforcement are the only admissible operations in a
scientific accounting of behavior. Indeed, he places these
among the most fundamental of interpretive principles. Howev-
er, Skinner's approach to behavioral science also includes, at the
very least, elicitation as the defining relation of reflexive behav-
ior. After all, Skinner was the first to distinguish clearly control
of behavior by elicitation from control by consequences (1935b;
1937), and two of his early papers (1931; 1935a) provide some of
the most astute analyses of elicitation that are to be found
anywhere. But these do not exhaust the range of behavioral
processes that Skinner entertains. In "Selection by Conse-
quences" (1981 and this issue, q. v.), he asserts the validity of
selective consequences other than the reinforcement principle.
And in a recent exchange with Herrnstein (Skinner 1977a), it
became clear that Skinner is willing to entertain additional
formulations for dealing with "phylogenic behavior," which
seems to be maintained neither through elicitation nor through
reinforcement.
A key feature of Skinner's operationism, while implicit in his
many positive contributions, is explicitly identified mainly by
exclusion. Part of the exclusion is specified in "Terms" when he
questions the usefulness of operationalizing mentalistie terms.
He uses similar arguments to put aside less mentalistie terms
that are also derived from vernacular explanations of behavior.
In such cases, as illustrated here for "being conscious" and for
"matters of reference or definition," Skinner accounts for do-
mains of phenomena in which vernacular or mentalistie terms
are commonly invoked, but he does not use such labels to shape
his enterprise. Examining his rationale still further, one finds
him in a later paper, "Are Theories of Learning Necessary?"
(Skinner 1950), putting aside not only mentalistie and ver-
nacular terms as useful foci for operational definition, but also
rejecting certain technical terms - those that appeal to "events
taking place somewhere else, at some other level of observation,
described in different terms, and measured, if at all, in different
dimensions" (Skinner 1950, p. 193). Thus his enterprise is not a
pursuit of engrams, or of the nature of an association, as could be
said of other behaviorists. Nor is it an attempt to give scientific
legitimacy to psychological terms from ordinary language, as
could be said of much of the current fashion in psychology.
Rather, Skinner's behavior analysis is a conceptual fabric in
which operations are themselves the very warp and weft. Fur-
ther, it is a bona fide theory, monisticaily construed, of "the
'real' or 'physical' world (or at least the 'one' world)." Skinner's
specification of operations, then, is an attempted characteriza-
tion of features of the world as they affect behavior. The theory is
an attempt to describe efficiently the effective environment in
interactions between behavior and environment.
With hindsight, it seems unfortunate to have asserted this
position was "nontheoretical," for this appears often to have led
to its being misunderstood. Skinner's assertions that the causes
of behavior are in the environment are read by his critics as
logical howlers, or even as claims to metaphysical truth. If one
clearly identifies such assertions as stating an assumption of a
theory - the key axiom in a "bold and exciting behavioristic
hypothesis, ' philosophically trained readers are obliged to en-
tertain the assumption while reading on, whether or not the
statement violates commonly held assumptions.
An additional issue is the place of logic within Skinner's
system. An explicit message of the essay is that logic is neither
the starting point in his approach nor the ultimate source of its
validity. In elaborating the rubric of discriminandum, response,
and consequence, Skinner provides an interpretive account of
the scientist's working - and of what it means to be discriminat-
ing and aware, as indeed a scientist may be. "It is not logic, but
science," in that these relationships efficiently characterize the
phenomena whereby scientific activity is effective, and thus
valid. The reader might conclude that for Skinner, "logic is out,"
for "Terms" gives no hint of the fact that the circumstances in
which we ordinarily speak of logic do have a place within his
system. The interpretation that handles them resembles the one
he presents here, but the discriminanda are not mainly one's
own behavior, as in the case of awareness, but rather are special
products of behavior - rules and algorithms. Most of this
elaboration came later than "Terms" and is worked out in "An
Operant Analysis of Problem Solving." (Skinner 1969b and this
issue q. v.). Thus, logic is still in, but not in a keystone position.
One finds it instead as a category under rule-governed behavior,
in an exposition that clarifies a basic fact that is obscured in
everyday usage: Only part of the behavior described as logical is
functionally attributable to formal logic. So, contrary to a likely
inference from "Terms," rules of formal logic do play a role in
Skinner's system. Still, deemphasis of that role is appropriate to
Skinner's present article, for within behavior analysis the role of
what we commonly call logic is not a definitive one that justifies
either theory or scientific practice.
Skinner on sensations
Max Hocutt
Department of Philosophy, University of Alabama, University, Ala. 35486
What does the word toothache mean? In the view of a mentalist,
it means a personal experience, a private sensation; in the view
of an operationist, it means the public moaning and grasping of
the jaw containing an abscessed tooth. As his 1945 paper,
"Terms," indicates, Professor Skinner is an operationist. For
him, the word toothache means not the private stimulus that
elicits its use but the public stimuli that control reinforcement of
its use. Furthermore, Skinner resists the moderate suggestion
that toothache means both private sensation and public accom-
paniments. He prefers the more provocative thesis that its
meaning is exhausted by talking about the latter. No fence
sitting for him. Radical behaviorism or none at all. Toothache is
to be defined solely in terms of its dental causes and behavioral
manifestations.
What, exactly, is Skinner saying here? Definitions properly so
called are equations, assertions of identity. They have the form
"a = b," and they mean "a is the same thing as b." By saying that
toothache is to be defined in terms not of private sensations but
of public accompaniments, does Skinner mean either to deny
that there is such an experience as toothache or to assert that it
consists in moaning and grasping of the jaw of an abscessed
tooth? Such is the usual interpretation of his views, but I do not
think it will fit "Terms." As I read him, Skinner is saying here
that toothache denotes neither a private sensation nor its public
accompaniments but an unknown bodily condition normally
caused by an abscessed tooth and normally manifesting itself in
moaning and grasping of the jaw. To say that we can only define
this condition by talking about its public causes and symptoms is
560
THE BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1984) 7:4

Commentary/ Skinner: Psychological terms
to say not that it is identical with these but that we know how to
identify it only by referring to these.
If Skinner is often taken as denying the very view that I have
here attributed to him, part of the reason may be that he does
deny a superficially similar view. This view, which he attributes
to such "methodological behaviorists" as E. G. Boring, is the
doctrine that toothache is that unobservable experience nor-
mally caused by an abscessed tooth and normally manifested in
moaning and grasping of the jaw. Skinner certainly rejects this
doctrine, which sounds very much like the one I have attributed
to him. However, there is a considerable difference between
the two. On Boring's view, nobody can know what another's
toothache feels like, or tell someone else what his own toothache
feels like. To know what a toothache feels like, one must have it;
and no one can have anyone else's toothache. By contrast,
Skinner says that one can know what someone else's toothache is
like in two ways. First, one can know that it is the sort of
experience that people have under certain conditions; for it is
defined by reference to those conditions. Thus, one can know
that a piercing toothache is like the ache one feels when one's
skin is pierced by a knife; for that is its definition. Second, one
can learn what another person's toothache is like by discovering
its physiological properties; thus, we might one day discover
that someone's having a toothache consists in his brain being in a
certain state.
The distinction just stated will be clearer if I explain it by
means of an analogy. In front of a room two people are in clear
view. X says, "Behind the screen between those two people is a
person whom you do not see but whose voice you hear. We do
not know what he looks like, but we could find out if we could get
behind the screen." By contrast, Y says, "Behind the screen
between those two people is an invisible and intangible person.
We do not know what he looks like, and we never shall; but we
know he is there because we can hear him." X is Skinner; Y is
Boring (at least as Skinner sees him). What X and Y say will
sound identical to those who detect no important difference
between an unseeable person and one that is merely unseen.
Similarly, those who uncritically and incoherently assume (as
Boring apparently did) that an unobservable experience could
be identical with an observable state of the body will see no
important difference between the doctrine I have attributed to
Skinner and the doctrine he attributes to Boring and repudiates
as untenable. However, they are worlds apart. Boring has
postulated an unknowable; Skinner has not.
It is true that, at the present moment, both Boring's and
Skinner's toothache are unknown in the sense that we lack
knowledge of their intrinsic properties. We know toothache
only as that organic condition, whatever it may be, typically
caused by an abscessed tooth and typically causing moaning and
grasping of the jaw. We do not know whether toothache is a
brain state or a muscular condition or both. For this reason,
Skinner often says that there is little profit in talking about this
undetermined state. Doing so is rather like trying to say what
the person behind the screen looks like ("He is tall and has
brown hair") before we have seen him. It would be better,
thinks Skinner, to wait until we can have a look - especially
since the thing making the sounds might be not a person but a
record player or two persons talking alternately. Similarly, it
would be better, thinks Skinner, to wait until we have indepen-
dent information about the intrinsic properties of such states as
toothache - especially since, so far as we know, there may be not
one but many different physiological conditions answering to
the one word toothache. Skinner's cautions against postulating
unobserved states may be unjustified, but they do not amount to
denials that such states exist.
In summary, I read Skinner as arguing in "Terms" not that
toothache just is its overt accompaniments, but that it is the
physiological state or states that these usually accompany. His
claim that we can only define toothache in terms of abscess and
moaning and grasping of the jaw, I take to mean not that
toothache just is abscess plus moaning and grasping of the jaw
but that, lacking ability to specify the physiological properties of
toothache, we are able to identify it only by talking about its
usual causes and symptoms. Doing so may not provide us with
the best kind of identification, but for the moment it provides us
with all the definition we have.
Social traits, self-observations, and other
hypothetical constructs
Douglas T. Kenrick and Richard C. Keefe
Department of Psychology, Arizona State University, Tempe, Ariz. 85287
In returning to read Skinner's original writings, one is struck
with the contrast between the much maligned and simplistic
"Skinnerian" position and Skinner's own work. Whatever one's
theoretical stance, it is hard to read more than a few pages of
Skinner and not find a compelling logical argument. Likewise,
one is reminded in "Terms" of the characteristic that marks so
much of Skinner's work, and that is most responsible for his
position within and outside the discipline of psychology: Skin-
ner has never been content to apply his functional approach
exclusively to limited problems of the laboratory, but has,
throughout his career, grappled with crucial philosophical is-
sues. It is this great breadth that is, more than anything else, the
basis of Skinner's important contribution to contemporary
thought.
In "Terms," Skinner introduces issues that continue to be of
great interest to those studying personality and social psychol-
ogy. For instance, the abundant research on "self-perception"
owes much of its impetus to Bern's (1967) radical behaviorist
analysis of "cognitive dissonance" research. In fact, 35 years
after Skinners paper appeared in the Psychological Review, one
of us published a paper there dealing with the issue of self-
observation of one's own "traits" (Kenrick & Stringfield 1980),
and the lines of reasoning there can be traced directly through
Daryl Bern (Bern 1967; Bern & Allen 1974) to Skinner.
From the vantage point of the recent research on trait mea-
surement, we wish to make two points regarding Skinner's
analysis. One is that Skinner may yet be making too much of the
distinction between public events and private events as they
occur in natural (nonlaboratory) settings. The other is that
people can be taught to make the important and useful discrimi-
nation between those covert events with public concomitants
and those without such accompaniments, and this distinction is
a useful one for psychology.
With regard to the first point, public language may not be as
closely discriminating as Skinner implies, but may instead
approach the imprecision of describing private events. Nev-
ertheless, both may still have a rough utility. In learning to
apply terms to publicly available events, one is not usually
dealing with phenomena as stable and reliable as a "red" ball.
Many of the interesting (and survival relevant) discriminations
have to do with applying social labels (e.g. "aggressive,"
"friendly," "seductive") to overt behavior. Unfortunately, such
behavior is often subtle and transient. Consider, for instance,
the case of aggressive behavior, which occurs infrequently,
briefly, and which is, except in rare instances, modified and
attenuated by situational constraints. In addition, a given in-
stance of overt behavior may not look the same to (or even be
processed by) observers at different vantage points. Behavior
that looks like a friendly pat on the back to one observer may
appear to be an aggressive and competititive act to another, and
may not even be processed by a third observer. Thus, the
"sharpening of reference that is achieved, in the case of public
stimuli, by a precise contingency of reinforcement" may not be
possible in many important cases of overt social behavior. Even
so, recent research has demonstrated that our reports about the
THE BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1984) 7:4
561

Commentary/Skinner: Psychological terms
"traits" of those we know well, for all the ambiguity and com-
plexity of their basis, are well corroborated by other familiar
observers. These findings have gone contrary to the expecta-
tions of many social psychologists who, focusing on all the
potential sources of unreliability in trait ascription, came to
believe that traits existed mainly in the "eye of the beholder"
(see Kenrick & Dantchik 1983). With all their problems, social-
trait terms do nevertheless have utility, and the same case may
be extended to reports of private events. If we were to disregard
descriptions of private events solely because they are often
inexact or ambiguous to the outsider observer, we would by the
same reasoning have to discard descriptions of overt social
behavior. Rather than do this, however, we would argue that
the evidence from the social realm should encourage us to give
more credibility to actors' reports about their internal states.
Not only are such states frequently salient and easily discrimina-
ble, but they may be no more subject to bias than reports about
overt behavior, and like such reports, they may nevertheless
have an important utility.
A related point regards Skinner's contention that "differential
reinforcement cannot be made contingent upon the property of
privacy." This statement can be interpreted in two ways. If we
take it to mean that the community cannot differentially rein-
force two covert events, it is true, but rather obvious. If,
however, we interpret it in its literal sense, to imply that the
community cannot provide feedback that will allow for a dis-
crimination between those internal events that have public
concomitants and those that do not, it is false. For instance, if I
say "I feel anxious," an observer may respond, "Yes, you're
shaking like a leaf' or "That's funny, you look calm. ' The self-
observer's ability to make such a distinction is, in fact, of
practical utility to the personality researcher. Subjects in the
Kenrick and Stringfield (1980) study were able to provide such
information successfully, and this proved useful in enhancing
the strength of the correlations between self-reported trait
standing and criterion ratings (made by others). Neither parents
nor friends could accurately gauge the emotionality experienced
by people who describe their emotion as private, while parents
and friends could reliably assess the emotionality of those who
described their emotionality as public. This finding was recently
corroborated in a more intensive investigation by Cheek (1982).
A final point we wish to make is that while there is some utility
in dealing with constructs "in the form in which they are
observed," this analysis of overt verbal responses can take us
just so far. Skinner is to be lauded for showing the limitations of
the earlier operationism, but he does not go far enough in
making the case for inference-based approaches to science.
After all, the elements of the periodic table were placed by
Dalton's inference, and Mendel established the existence of
"genes" by inference. In the behavioral realm, there is some
utility in performing a functional analysis of the verbalizations of
schizophrenics, in the interest of modifying their utterances to
bring them into an acceptable range for social discourse. [See
also Schwartz: "Is there a Schizophrenic Language?" BBS 5(4)
1982.] However, no amount of such proximate functional analy-
sis would by itself have led one to suspect a genetic involvement
in the disorder, a discovery that could ultimately prove useful in
understanding and treating the disorder. Similarly, a functional
analysis might be useful in understanding the circumstances
surrounding the complaints of a conversion hysteric, but an
operant approach to modifying the verbal behavior of such an
individual might be misplaced indeed, given the research indi-
cating that the majority of individuals so diagnosed actually had
serious physical symptoms (Slater & Glithero 1965; Whitlock
1967).
In summary: (1) Skinner's functional analysis of psychological
terms continues to have diverse ramifications throughout the
field. (2) He may have overstated the differential accuracy with
which words describing public and private events are used in
normal language. (3) The usefulness of a functional approach
does not negate the use of approaches relying upon hypothetical
constructs (provided that these are ultimately verifiable).
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
We wish to thank Peter R. Killeen for his very helpful editorial
suggestions.
The flight from human behavior
C. Fergus Lowe
Department of Psychology, University College of North Wales, Bangor,
Gwynedd LL57 2DG, Wales
"Terms" is undoubtedly one of the most important papers that
Skinner has written. It is also one of the most neglected.
Thereon hangs a tale of misrepresentation, misunderstanding,
or simply confusion on the part of behaviorists and non-
behaviorists alike; a tale, moreover, that reveals a strange
reluctance by behaviorists to grapple with the central problems
of human psychology.
In his book The Behavior of Organisms (1938) Skinner wrote
that the importance of his science of behavior, then based upon
research with animals, lay in the possibility of its eventual
extension to human affairs. He speculated that the only dif-
ferences existing between the behavior of rat and man - apart
from differences of complexity - might be in the area of verbal
behavior (p. 442). His paper on operationism pursues the
direction he had earlier signalled and is an attempt to extend his
account of animal behavior to humans, and in particular to
verbal behavior. Implicit throughout "Terms" is the recognition
of something special about human behavior - the salient charac-
teristic being that not only can humans like rats "see objects,"
but also that they can "see that they are seeing them." That is,
humans become aware or conscious of their own behavior, and
in a way that is true of no other animal species. The great
achievement of "Terms" is that it shows that "consciousness,"
which has long been ignored or denied in both behavionst and
nonbehaviorist sectors of psychology, is, after all, amenable to
scientific analysis. Far from being forever locked away in the
purely private domain of an individual's "mind," it has its origin
(and therefore its decipherment) in the most public of arenas -
the "verbal community." We learn from our parents and others
how to use words to describe the environment and our own
overt behavior, and we also learn to describe stimuli and
behavior that are not directly observable by the verbal commu-
nity, such as our "having a toothache" and our "seeing red."
Over time, much of this verbal commentary on our own behav-
ior itself becomes covert and elliptical in form, but it remains
behavior nonetheless, and as such is subject to a behavioral
analysis.
This analysis, dealing as it does with the role of covert stimuli
and covert behavior, contrasts with the approach of meth-
odological behaviorism which maintains that, since there can be
no public agreement about unobservable events, they cannot be
included in a scientific account. Skinner, never one to balk at a
lack of public agreement, cogently argues that this is an out-
moded view of science and that there should be no aspect of
human activity left out of account on the grounds that it is not
publicly observable or that it has to be inferred from other
events. It is this concern with the role of "private events" in
human behavior that distinguishes his approach and is, indeed,
at the heart of his radical behaviorism (Skinner 1974, p. 212).
Thus it is surely a strange irony of contemporary psychology
that an approach which, as far back as 1945, established its
identity on the basis of its recognition of the "inner life" of
humans should so often be charged with the error of ruling it out
of court. It is widely asserted, for example, that Skinner's is a
"black box" account of human behavior, that it does not deal
562
THE BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1984) 7:4

Commentary /Skinner: Psychological terms
with consciousness and cognitive processes, that it eschews the
analysis and modification of private events, and that it shuns
inferential accounts of behavior because they are unpar-
simonious (see Chomsky 1975; Harr6 & Secord 1972; Kendall &
Hollon 1979; Koestler 1967; Ledgwidge 1978; Locke 1979;
Mahoney 1977; Wilson 1978). Recently, for example, a new
movement within clinical psychology, known as cognitive be-
havior therapy has found it necessary to adopt the conceptual
apparatus of cognitivism apparently out of a mistaken belief that
the behavioral approach cannot deal with the modification of
people's covert behavior (see Lowe & Higson 1981; Zettle &
Hayes 1982). It may be partly the responsibility of behaviorists
themselves that such misconceptions about radical behaviorism
are so widespread. For, unhappily, despite the clear theoretical
lead given by Skinner in this paper, radical behaviorists have
been reluctant to investigate the role of language in human
learning. Although Skinner's account of the development of
human "consciousness" is similar in many respects to that of
Vygotsky (1962) and Luria (1961), it has not had anything like a
comparable impact on psychological research. Whereas
Vygotsky s ideas inspired valuable research on the way in which
self-descriptive verbal behavior develops and interacts with
other behavior (cf. Luria 1961; Sokolov 1972), there has been
little empirical investigation of the ideas that Skinner outlines in
"Terms" and goes on to elaborate in subsequent publications
(e.g. Skinner 1953; 1957; 1963; 1974). Instead, radical behav-
iorist research has been concerned almost exclusively with
animal behavior or with human behavior treated as if it did not
differ significantly, in terms of controlling variables, from the
key peck of the pigeon or the lever press of the rat.
One can only speculate about the factors responsible for
behaviorists' neglect of the complexities of human behavior.
From the start what was attractive for many about the Skin-
nerian system was the new methodology and techniques that it
introduced for the prediction and control of animal behavior,
together with the basic conceptual apparatus within which the
effects of the environment on behavior could be expressed. On
the other hand, "Terms," together with Skinner's other writings
on the philosophy of science and on the development of human,
as opposed to animal, consciousness, was perhaps not known,
and certainly was not widely appreciated. Instead, earlier no-
tions, dating from Watson, of what behaviorism was about and
the prevailing Zeitgeist of positivism overshadowed behav-
iorism's principal theoretical innovation. Thus, for many aspir-
ing behavior analysts, it became almost a matter of ideological
purity to deny the existence or efficacy of any event that could
not be publicly and directly observed and measured. Watson's
(1913) ban on introspection, although no longer justified by
Skinnerian theory, continued to hold sway and had particularly
bad effects. If, as Skinner argues, what is unique about humans
is their capacity to reflect upon their own behavior, then not
allowing subjects to report such behavior served only to distance
it from behavioral analysis.
So it is that almost 40 years have elapsed since "Terms" was
written and yet its challenge to contemporary psychology re-
mains. For example, Skinner's hypotheses that "being con-
scious, as a form of reacting to one's own behavior, is a social
product" and that "one becomes aware of what one is doing only
after society has reinforced verbal responses with respect to
one's behavior as the source of discriminative stimuli" have not
yet been systematically investigated. Moreover, little is known
about the ways in which the rest of human behavior is affected
when this form of consciousness develops. Could it be the case,
as recent evidence suggests, (i) that the effects of reinforcement
are altered qualitatively when subjects acquire the skill of
generating verbal descriptions (of whatever accuracy) of their
own behavior and its consequences, and (ii) that human perfor-
mance that is free of this "interfering" consciousness is indis-
tinguishable from that of animals? (see Lowe 1979; 1983; Lowe,
Beasty & Bentall 1983). How much of our behavior is conscious
in the sense that Skinner posits, and, finally, is it possible within
the context of an overall behavioral analysis to alter "con-
sciousness, " thereby enabling humans to control more effective-
ly their own behavior and their conditions of existence? Radical
behaviorism offers a coherent conceptual system and meth-
odology which, as this paper of Skinner's demonstrates, can be
applied to human as well as to animal behavior. It would seem,
then, a particularly suitable approach to adopt in the investiga-
tion of such questions, and it is issues such as these that should
surely be central to any human psychology.
Radical behaviorism and mental events:
Four methodological queries
Paul E. Meehl
Department of Psychiatry, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, Minn.
55455
This somewhat neglected paper, "Terms," is one of the most
important theoretical articles that Skinner ever wrote, and his
arguments are as worthy of attention today as they were in 1945.
The paper is Skinner at his consistent best (or worst, for non-
behaviorists) and this friendly critic puts four questions to the
author:
1. In his initial definition, legitimate (cognitive) operations
are "the logical and mathematical steps that intervene between
earlier and later statements, and . . . nothing else." Are these
confined to deductive (algorithmic) steps? And even if the
mathematics is like that, is its embedding interpretive text
reductive, all such "intervening" (theoretical) terms being ex-
plicitly defined by means of stimulus, response, and S-R dis-
positions? If a looser, conjectural relation - as in normal scien-
tific theorizing about postulated entities - is allowed, just what
does this kind of behaviorism forbid?
2. Skinner's brilliant analysis of why verbal operants reporting
inner events are imprecise shows why the introspectionist
program degenerated. If the discriminations and shapings had
been precise, so that a high degree of reproducibility existed in
the domain of self-report about inner events, what then would
have been the thrust of the behaviorist thesis? If most verbal
accounts by naive subjects concerning inner events had the high
predictability and order of, say, a naive sophomore's lab report
on his negative afterimage, would behaviorism have been a
significant methodological proposal? Now of course it was the
way it was; but the contemporary cognitive psychologist,
whether experimental or clinical, will argue that certain sub-
divisions of that subject matter do have the scientific re-
producibility of the negative afterimage, and that, given Skin-
ner's analysis, there is no good methodological reason to exclude
them. That puts us on a slippery slope, because reproducibility,
consistency, clarity, and the like are matters of degree. More
complicated properties of the visual field less replicable than,
say, shadow caster experiments, or "fuzzy" clinical events, like
the Isakower phenomenon (Hinsie & Campbell 1970, p. 334) in
psychoanalytic therapy (uncanny sensations of equilibrium and
space, unclear objects rotating or rhythmically approaching and
receding, crescendo-decrescendo sensations localized in
mouth, skin, and hands), might have enough consistency, as
rough but complex patterns, to be admissible. It is not clear
what Skinner can say as a matter of principle rather than a matter
of varying degrees of reliability against such "subjective"
reports. But does he want to? Intimately associated with that
problem is the question of how much inner structure is to be
attributed to such an entity as a visual image when it appears to
play the same role that an external stimulus does with respect to
the verbal operant describing it. Consider the eidetiker who
cannot tell u: how many teeth the crocodile had in the picture
we showed him earlier but who can, on request, "call up the
THE BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1984) 7:4
563

Commentaryi'Skinner: Psychological terms
image" and then proceed to count the teeth off his crocodile
image and get it right. [See also Haber: "The Impending
Demise of the Icon" BBS 6(1) 1983.] I can imagine Skinner
saying here, "Well, but we do not have to say that there is an
image which . . . ." a locution recurring frequently in his writ-
ings. That brings me back to my first question about operations,
because the fact that we do not have to speak a certain way about
an inner event, that the behavioral data do not coerce us to say
that, is of course not equivalent to saying that it is unreasonable
to say it, or that it wouldn't be good scientific strategy to allow
ourselves to say such things. Inductive (ampliative) inference
about the empirical world is just not the same as strict deduc-
tion, and it is not a fatal objection to a theoretical concept's
introduction to point out that no observational datum compels
you to infer it.
3. Can state variables like emotions and drives (postulation of
which was beautifully justified in Skinner's 1938 book despite
his subsequent distaste for them) play the role of private stimuli?
As I understand his position they cannot, but the model as
presented in "Terms" is that of discriminative stimulus, and the
examples used (like toothache) make it easy to think of them as
stimuli. Does that mean that we do not believe that people,
having acquired language, should be able to report on inner
states if these lack the usual "stimulus" properties, such as a
structure, reference to a sensory modality, or being "events"
rather than "states"?
4. Why does Skinner want to reduce the logical and epis-
temological concepts of truth and validity to behaviorese? It is
not necessary for the coherency of his position, and it gets him
into trouble with the logicians. We do not reduce the concepts of
geometry, analysis, or number theory to the behavior of mathe-
maticians, and in fact we could not operate in these disciplines if
we did because our knowledge of mathematical behavior is too
primitive, as I'm sure Skinner would agree. Why, then, is it
necessary to behaviorize logic? Deducibility as norm - dis-
tinguished from inference as (psychological) fact, as an empirical
transition in discourse - is part of mathematics, and of logic.
Suppose no mathematician succeeds in proving Goldbach's
Conjecture (every even number is a sum of two primes) before
the sun burns out. Nobody will have been reinforced for emit-
ting such a valid chain of mathematical operants. Does Skinner
want to say that in that case the Goldbach Conjecture would be
neither true nor false? Logic and mathematics being more
advanced and rigorous than the science of behavior, isn't it an
undoable (and needless) task to reduce the former to the latter?
Similarly, if a rat that is suddenly shifted from continuous
reinforcement to a fixed ratio schedule requiring 192 responses
per food pellet starves, the truth of the matter is that the pellets
are objectively available, whatever the rat knows or does. The
objective truth of the proposition "food available" does not
depend on the rat's behaving and being reinforced. Why should
it depend on the psychologist's asserting it? As Skinner's radical
behaviorism differs from "methodological behaviorism" partly
in its consistently physicalist ontology, his insistence on psy-
chologizing all concepts of logic and epistemology is puzzling
and, I suggest, not defensible.
On Skinner's radical operationism
J. Moore
Department of Psychology, University of Wisconsin - Milwaukee,
Milwaukee, Wise. 53201
Professor Skinner's contribution to the 1945 Symposium on
Operationism is a landmark paper in the development of behav-
ioristic epistemology and philosophy of science. During the
decade immediately preceding the Second World War, logical
positivism and operationism as interpreted by Stevens (1939),
Boring (1936), and Bergmann and Spence (1941) had established
in psychology an intellectual position that Skinner terms "meth-
odological behaviorism." According to methodological behav-
iorists, science should be restricted to publicly observable,
intersubjectively verifiable phenomena. As Skinner acknowl-
edges, this restriction was not without some virtue, but the
problem was that methodological behaviorists nearly always
conceded the existence and importance of mental events as
distinct from physical or behavioral events at the same time that
they ruled mental events out of scientific consideration. This
practice was perhaps most conspicuous in the "science of sci-
ence," when scientists analyzed their own scientific behavior.
Scientists simply took it for granted that mental events taking
place in "immediate experience" constituted the essential basis
for science; the issue was how to deal respectably with the
events from the mental dimension. In brief, operationism came
to imply the symbolic representation of the scientist's mental
events by means of a set of measurements, so that agreement
could be reached about the concepts involved. Accordingly,
operationism became the cornerstone of the new scientific
epistemology.
As certain passages in "Terms" indicate, Skinner had clearly
had enough of this interpretation and the mentalism upon which
it was predicated. The symposium offered a formal opportunity
to challenge the conventional practices, and challenge them he
did. The article itself mixes Skinner's critical assessment of
conventional practices with his revolutionary, constructive pro-
posals derived from the behavioristic perspective. Running
throughout his critique is the attack upon the mentalistic, if not
dualistic, bifurcation of nature into physical and nonphysical
(i.e. "mental") ontological realms. Thus, perhaps the most
central of his criticisms is that the conventional interpretation of
operationism implicitly assumes that the scientists' language is a
logical activity, taking place in some other dimension, which is
related in some causal way to a nonphysical copy - imperfect,
transformed, or otherwise - of reality called immediate experi-
ence. Why was it supposed that there were two dimensions? As
Skinner asked later, Who sees the copy in the other dimension?
Moreover, if meaning in language is essentially a referential or
symbolic activity that links entities, concepts, or categories from
immediate experience with reality, what is the origin of the
entities, concepts, and categories in the first place? Where do
they come from? Do they come from the pineal gland, Broca's
area, or an Apperceptive Mass? Are they learned? If so, what
processes are involved in their acquisition? What terms apply to
the analysis of this activity, those from the presumed mental
dimension or those from the physical dimension?
A second criticism, following from the first, concerns the
general conception of human beings with regard to matters of
epistemology. Given that behavioral matters are physical mat-
ters, and physical matters are observable, does it follow that
something unobserved is something unobservable, that unob-
servable implies nonphysical, and nonphysical further implies
mental, which in turn means that the whole business has to be
dealt with in a different way by science, if science can deal with it
at all? Skinner's argument, in "Terms" and subsequently, is that
although private events aren't "observed" by more than one
person, they need not be construed as nonphysical, that is, as
mental, such that they need be dealt with in a special way. Thus,
they are indeed amenable to scientific analysis. Moreover,
private events have no special causal status; in particular, they
do not produce knowledge. Rather, they are behavioral matters.
From this perspective, truth follows from a consideration of
pragmatic utility in behavior, rather than from a consideration of
public status vis-a-vis private status.
A third criticism is that by failing to speak plausibly of private
events and embracing instead every variety of explanatory
fiction, one is in fact operating counterproductively. One is
insulating private events from analysis by assuming that they are
actually ineffable and therefore not amenable to scientific analy-
sis. Thus, most methodological operationists assume an ironic
564
THE BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1984) 7:4

Commentary /Skinner: Psychological terms
posture: They implicitly acknowledge private events as causal, if
only for themselves, but then they state their laws only in terms
of publicly observable variables. In effect, methodological oper-
ationists regard introspective reports of their own immediate
experience as incorrigible, but at the same time mistrust intro-
spective reports of their subjects' immediate experience, a
curious inconsistency at best.
The major portion of "Terms" is in fact constructive and
concerns how private events can be approached from the fresh
perspective provided by a behavioral viewpoint. Of course such
private phenomena as descriptions of toothaches, images, and
thinking must be accommodated in any adequate science of
behavior, but that assertion doesn't mean that some measure-
ment must be taken to symbolize what the scientist is talking
about. Rather, private events have to do with the discriminative
control by private stimuli over subsequent operant behavior,
generally verbal behavior. As is stated in another section of the
original symposium, Skinner was indeed filled with his unwrit-
ten book - Skinner's contribution was extracted from the work
that was to become Verbal Behavior (1957). Private events may
therefore be approached from that direction. How do private
stimuli gain control given the problem of privacy? Skinner notes
that they are present when the verbal community differentially
reinforces responses on the basis of public stimuli (ways 1 and 2,
and, through generalization, way 4), or that they supply a
weaker form of the same stimulation as does the public response
(way 3). Thus, Skinner was perfectly willing to talk about the
relation between covert phenomena and verbal behavior, but
he was unwilling to grant the mentalistic premises (a) that
anyone's language, including the scientist's, was essentially
descriptive of private, mental entities or logical relations among
them, or (b) that the causal analysis of behavior essentially
involved specifying the nature of any affective or effective,
prebehavioral neurophysiological activity that occurred when
organisms came into contact with their environment. The sub-
jective verbal report and the process by which covert behavior
exercises discriminative control over subsequent operant be-
havior must be dealt with, but these two processes are the ones
that need to be assessed in connection with the relation between
private phenomena and language. In particular, the whole
business of language as logical symbols describing the contents
of immediate experience was simply the wrong way to go.
Boring should have been frightened; Skinner was rejecting his
entire world view.
Now, both Skinner and a methodological behaviorist might
agree that one can't scientifically analyze a "mental event," but
the bases for their positions are entirely different. Skinner
would say that "mental events" are explanatory fictions - neu-
ral, psychic, or conceptual creations empowered with precisely
the characteristics necessary to explain what needs to be ex-
plained. Skinner calls instead for some assessment of what the
person is talking about when talking about images and the like,
not so that some measurement can be taken, but so that the
controlling contingencies can be examined, if only by the single
person involved. In contrast, the methodological behaviorist
declines to comment on mental events, but for another reason:
They aren't intersubjectively verifiable. One can have a science
only about things that can be agreed upon, for example, by
being measured. One must specify what measured behavior
serves as the index for and gives evidence of the operation of the
underlying mental event. It follows that all sorts of nonsense can
be pursued under such a program, and Skinner felt obliged to
repudiate the position. Thus, to call Skinner "a practising
operationist," as does Boring, requires considerable clarifica-
tion as to what kind of operationism Skinner was practising.
Skinner's repeated emphasis on the observability of behavioral
processes should certainly not be taken to mean that he en-
dorsed the practice of reifying the "mental" in terms of the
"physical" through taking measurements, which is the all-too-
frequent but erroneous interpretation of Skinner's opera-
tionism. In fact, it is to just that interpretation that Skinner has
spent much of his professional life objecting.
"Terms" is now over 35 years old, and its message is as timely
today as then. In a way, its continued timeliness is tragic,
because it means that despite the availability of this remarkable
article for those 35 years, we have failed to act upon its message
as we should and move forward. Perhaps the most appropriate
step to take at this point is finally to implement the operational
program as Skinner envisioned it, on the basis of a functional
analysis of verbal behavior. To do so requires in part the
recognition that the explanatory verbal behavior of scientists be
dealt with at a single level of observation, rather than as an
indicant of things going on somewhere else, in some other
dimension, to be described, if at all, in different terms. Whether
scientists will see the mentalism inherent in their ways, given
that they have not done so for the preceding 35 years, is
questionable.
Logic, reference, and mentalism
Ullin T. Place
Department of Philosophy, University of Leeds, Leeds LS2 9JT, England
While there is much in this paper that seems to me entirely
right, I shall confine my discussion to three points where in my
view Skinner has got it wrong.
Logic. Skinner draws a distinction between "logical theories of
reference" on the one hand and an account of reference based on
a "scientific analysis of verbal behavior" on the other, and
envisages that the latter will ultimately supersede the former.
Although it is difficult to be certain what Skinner is actually
saying in these passages, he seems to think that the only
arguments recognised as valid by logicians are those that con-
form to the explicitly stated rules of an existing logical calculus.
In fact logicians are well aware that human beings who have
never heard of logic or still less of a logical calculus have been
giving valid agruments in support of their conclusions and
detecting fallacies in the arguments of others long before the
first treatise on logic was ever written.
Reasoning in accordance with the principles of logic, like all
verbal skills, is, as Skinner himself (1969a, chap. 6) puts it,
"contingency shaped" rather than "rule governed" behaviour.
The principles of logic formulated by the logician are an abstrac-
tion from the intuitive contingency-shaped inferential practice
of thinkers, not a set of verbally formulated rules which the
thinker is obliged to follow if he is to reason correctly. [See also
Cohen: "Can Human Irrationality Be Experimentally Demon-
strated" BBS 4(3) 1981.]
The logician's concern is to give formal expression to the
principles whereby we relate the truth value of one statement to
the truth value of another. It is therefore a reasonable criticism
of the accounts of language and its meaning given by logicians
that they concentrate on those aspects of an indicative sentence
and its utterance that determine its truth value and ignore
imperatives and interrogatives (Skinner's "mands") where the
concept of "truth value" has no obvious application. However,
to talk, as Skinner does, as if questions of truth value are
irrelevant from the standpoint of an empirical science of verbal
behaviour is equally unbalanced.
As I have suggested elsewhere (Place 1981b) Skinner's cav-
alier attitude towards truth in his account of verbal behaviour
(Skinner 1957) stems from his preoccupation with verbal be-
haviour from the standpoint of the speaker whose interest, qua
speaker, lies in the effectiveness of verbal behaviour as a device
for manipulating the behaviour of the listener. He ignores the
standpoint of the listener from whom the truth value and hence
the reliability of what is communicated by others is of vital
concern.
THE BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1984) 7:4
565

Commentary/Skinner: Psychological terms
Reference. The effect of Skinner's preoccupation with verbal
behaviour viewed from the standpoint of the speaker to the
exclusion of that of the listener is also apparent in the account of
reference which he offers as an empirical scientific alternative to
"logical theories of reference." This leads him to concentrate on
the case in which the speaker names an object when confronted
by an instance of objects of that kind as his paradigm case of the
referring function of verbal behaviour, whereas the problem of
reference, when viewed from the standpoint of the listener, is
the problem of how verbal behaviour emitted by the speaker can
prepare a listener to encounter a situation that is not only not
impinging on his sense organs at the time, but never has done in
that precise form in the past. Reference is not, as Skinner
supposes, a matter of the stimulus control exercised by nonver-
bal stimuli over the verbal behaviour of the speaker. It is a
matter of the stimulus control exercised by verbal behaviour
emitted by the speaker over the verbal and nonverbal behaviour
of the listener.
Mentalism. As Skinner conceives it, the problem about our
ordinary psychological vocabulary is that the controlling stimuli
to which, on his account, these words refer are accessible only to
the individual to whom the words in question apply. For him
"being in pain" is the paradigm case of a psychological ex-
pression. What he fails to appreciate is that "being in pain" is
one of a very small number of expressions in our very extensive
psychological vocabulary whose primary use is indeed in the
context of first-person sentences that report the occurrence of a
private event of which the listener would not otherwise be
aware. As Ryle (1949) points out, the majority of the psychologi-
cal terms we use in everyday life occur primarily in the context
of the third-person sentences that we use to describe, explain,
and predict the public behaviour of other people, especially
verbs like "knowing," "believing," "thinking," "wanting," and
"intending," which comprise what behaviourists like Skinner
dismiss as "mentalistic" explanations. To say of someone that he
knows, believes, or thinks that so and so is the case, that he
wants or intends to do something is not to assert the occurrence
of a private event or indeed the existence of a private mental
state, it is simply to say something about what the individual in
question could or would publicly say and do if certain broadly
specifiable contingencies were to arise. More recent work (Place
1981a) on the intensionality of the grammatical objects of these
psychological verbs suggests that what we are dealing with here
is a device whereby the individual's behavioural dispositions are
specified in terms of how he would describe the situation and his
objectives with respect to it. This in turn suggests that the use of
mentalistic terms in the explanation of behaviour involves the
assumption that the behaviour in question is governed by a
verbal formula or "rule" that "specifies" the contingencies
involved (Skinner 1969a, pp. 146-52) and hence that the use of
such explanations for scientific purposes is not, as Skinner
believes, objectionable in every case, but only insofar as this
assumption of a consistent rational and causal connection be-
tween what is said and what is otherwise done fails to hold.
Mental, yes. Private, no.
Howard Rachlin
Psychology Department, State University of New York, Stony Brook, N.Y.
11794
Skinner's most valuable contribution to psychology (so far) is the
concept of the operant. This concept, pursued consistently,
provides a psychology of the whole organism independent of
physiology, neurology, endocrinology, and the like. There is no
room in such a psychology for consideration of private, internal
events.
An operant is a class of behavior defined by its consequences
rather than by its antecedents. Thus, a rat's bar press as an
operant may be defined in terms of the closure of a microswitch
but not in terms of the neural events inside the rat that precede
and, in a physiological sense, cause and control the bar press.
Such internal physiological events undoubtedly occur, but they
are irrelevant to operant conditioning; the history of reinforce-
ment of the bar press is both necessary and sufficient to explain
(i.e. predict and control) bar presses.
The other behavioral class in Skinner's science of behavior is
the class of respondents. A respondent is indeed defined accord-
ing to its antecedents. But these antecedents must be external.
Otherwise, one could consider a rat's bar press, controlled as it
must be by internal physiological events, to be a respondent. If
no external stimuli are found that reliably elicit a response such
as a rat's bar press, Skinner does not ask you to look for stimuli
inside the rat. It is always possible to discover or invent such
stimuli. That is the path that Watson and Hull took (and on
which they lost their way). To look inside the rat for the cause of
a bar press is to assume that the bar press is a respondent (and to
abandon the search for the cause of the bar press in the con-
tingencies of its reinforcement). Skinner, instead, considers a
response with no apparent eliciting stimulus to be an operant
which may be more or less manipulable by contingencies of
reinforcement.
It is inconsistent with this notion of the operant to say, as
Skinner does in "Terms," that a toothache is a private event. In a
(truly) Skinnerian science of psychology, a toothache must be a
respondent or an operant (or some combination of the two). If
the stimulus is considered to be the diseased tooth and the
diseased tooth is supposed to be part of the person who has the
toothache, then the toothache is an operant and consists of the
class of overt behavior to which the label "toothache" is given.
Alternatively, for the sake of analysis, one may want to consider
the diseased tooth apart from the person with the toothache. In
that case the toothache may be a respondent consisting of
whatever behavior is elicited by that tooth (as determined by
laws of the reflex). The operant toothache may well consist of a
different, even nonoverlapping, class of behavior from the
respondent toothache. In either case, however, the toothache is
overt, public behavior.
In the case of thoughts, feelings, and other mental events,
there is usually no apparent objective cause like a tooth that may
be alternately considered inside or outside the organism. There
is (usually) no apparent external antecedent stimulus that can be
said (by the laws of the reflex) to elicit these mental events. Such
events are thus operants - overt actions controlled by their
consequences. Nothing in "Terms," nothing Skinner has writ-
ten, and nothing in nature contradicts this idea. The main
difference between a rat's hope and a rat's bar press is not that
one is private and internal (even partially) and the other is public
and external. Both are wholly external and (at least potentially)
public, but one takes longer to occur than the other.
In "Terms" Skinner suggests that mental terms are used in
ordinary speech to refer to private events and that, because it is
so difficult for the verbal community to control such events, any
analysis of mental terms as operants and respondents would be
strained at best and ultimately futile. But Skinner gives unnec-
essary ground to his critics by this suggestion. As he indicates, in
teaching people to use the mentalistic vocabulary, it must be
overt behavior that society observes and then rewards or
punishes. It would seem to follow that a person who uses that
vocabulary to refer to private events must be using it incor-
rectly. Thus, a boy who says he is hungry just after he has eaten a
big meal is either ignored or punished. Hunger pangs are not
relevant here. In general, the use of mental or emotional terms
without (eventual) support by overt behavior ("I love you,"
being perhaps the most egregious example of such use) is
frowned upon. When we use those terms we are in much the
566
THE BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1984) 7:4

Commentary/ Skinner: Psychological terms
same position us the boy who cried wolf. People will respond
only so many times without confirmation. And it is not to
private, but to public events that they look for confirmation.
It would seem to be an important task for psychology to
determine what the (overt behavioral) criteria are for the use of
mental terms, how they change with circumstances, how they
interact with one another. Before doing this job, it may be
necessary to widen the conception of the operant, as originally
advanced by Skinner, from a single discrete event (such as a
lever press) to a complex pattern of events that may occur over
days or weeks and (consequently) to alter the notion of reinforce-
ment from contiguity between a pair of discrete events (re-
sponse and reward) to more complex correlations that have
meaning only over an extended period (see Commons, Herrn-
stein & Rachlin 1982). When the important variables of such
molar behaviorism are discovered, the mentalistic vocabulary
will, I believe, come nicely to hand.
To the extent that mental terms refer to the overt behavioral
context of immediate behavior it is possible to use them in a
behavioral science. To the extent that mental terms refer to the
covert or internal context of immediate behavior they have no
place in behavioral science, because such use of mental terms
converts observable operants into hypothetical respondents.
B. F. Skinner's operationism
Jon 0. Ringen
Philosophy Department, Indiana University at South Bend, South Bend,
Ind. 46634
"Terms" represents a brilliant and powerful innovation in the
development of behaviorism. The paper presents Skinner's
conception of operationism and outlines a framework and set of
problems for a radical behaviorist analysis of verbal behavior.
Skinner (1957) develops the program further.
Skinner's operationism is quite different from the opera-
tionism of the logical positivists (Hempel 1965b; 1965c). Skinner
rejects the aim of providing complete, explicit (behavioristic)
definitions of (psychological) terms from ordinary language. He
also rejects any form of operationism that requires a statement of
logically necessary or sufficient conditions for the correct ap-
plication of technical scientific terms. Like the positivists, Skin-
ner does acknowledge the influence of Mach (1919) and
Bridgman (1928), and he clearly draws the term operational
definition from the latter. Unlike the positivists, Skinner limits
himself to endorsing Mach's historical method and the pro-
cedure Bridgman ascribes to himself, namely, observing what
people (e.g. scientists) do with the terms they use. As construed
by Skinner, Bridgman's procedure makes the task of the logician
and philosopher of science a task for psychology. The type of
"psychological" investigation Skinner proposes is an experi-
mental analysis of the contingencies of reinforcement under
which those verbal responses ordinarily classified as verbal
reports are acquired and maintained. Skinner's operationism is,
thus, one part of the radical behaviorist program for the experi-
mental analysis of verbal behavior.
Skinner explicitly requires that his operationism solve the
problem of explaining how verbal responses are brought under
the control of private stimuli (i.e. stimuli that only the responder
can discriminate and respond to). This requirement marks a
distinction between radical behaviorism and methodological
behaviorism, since methodological behaviorism presupposes
that private stimulation lies outside the realm of scientific
investigation.
The program Skinner proposes escapes the standard objec-
tions to methodological behaviorism and the operationism of the
logical positivists (contra Boden 1972; Koch 1964; Scriven 1956).
In addition, the program provides principled reasons for behav-
iorists' long-standing suspicion of scientific use of commonsense
psychological terms and for the behaviorist conclusion that
introspection is an inappropriate method of investigation in
science.
Serious attempts to evaluate Skinner's program must begin
with a clear appreciation of how radical a program it is. Like his
contemporary Quine (1960), Skinner rejects the use of the
"intentional idiom" in scientific descriptions and explanations of
verbal behavior. For example, verbal behavior ordinarily classi-
fied as first-person reports of concurrent psychological states
(e.g. "My tooth aches," "I am depressed.") are not to be treated
as reports or statements at all, much less as reports or statements
that are accurate, reliable, true, or correct. (For discussion of
the difference this makes see Ringen 1977; 1981.) Explanations
of these verbal responses are to be given in terms of the
contingencies of reinforcement by which they are shaped and
maintained. Explanatory reference to meanings, intentions, or
psychological states of the speaker is prohibited.
Recent work in the history and philosophy of science (e.g.
Kuhn 1962) has emphasized that the more radically the commit-
ments embodied in a given research program diverge from
those of whoever attempts to assess it, the greater the difficulties
objective assessment presents. For all of us whose customary
ways of speaking and thinking embody western cultural tradi-
tions, considerable difficulty attends objective assessment of
Skinner's program. The intentional idiom, which Quine and
Skinner proscribe, constitutes an absolutely fundamental fea-
ture of our customary ways of describing and explaining all
human action, and especially action that involves language. It is
hard to imagine anything more radical or revolutionary than the
attempt to describe and explain human verbal behavior without
the concepts the intentional idiom embodies. Indeed, without
this idiom it is difficult to find anything coherent to say about
verbal behavior. [See also Dennett: "Intentional Systems in
Cognitive Ethology" BBS 6(3) 1983.]
When faced with such difficulties, it is only prudent to ask
whether there is any reason to pursue Skinner's program or
even to make the considerable effort required to understand
what the program involves. It is instructive to reflect on the
reasons Skinner suggests. Quite clearly his reasons do not
include a commitment to the operationism logical positivists
recommend. Rather, Skinner's own statements (e.g. 1931; 1959)
suggest that his rejection of the intentional idiom derives from
two sources: an interpretation of the history of science according
to which scientific progress occurs only after anthropomorphic
conceptions have been rejected, and suspicion that reference to
psychological states will be problematic in putative explanations
of behavior because these states are not identified independent-
ly of the behavior or functional relations they are to explain.
Evidence of successful development of the program aside,
Skinner's commitment to operationism is linked to its promise
in eliminating anthropomorphism and explanatory vacuity from
a scientific study of behavior.
Chomsky (1959) and others provide considerable reason for
Skinner to be concerned about explanatory vacuity in existing
radical behaviorist accounts of verbal behavior. (Majpr crit-
icisms are directed at explanatory references to unobserved
covert behavior - "Terms" - as providing stimuli for verbal
responses - see point 3 in "Terms" - and to unspecified
dimensions of generalization in accounts of responses occurring
under public stimulus conditions which differ from those under
which the response has previously been conditioned - see point
4.) Hence, there is reason to conclude that Skinner's opera-
tionism has not, in fact, served one of the functions it was
designed to serve. In addition, strong arguments have been
given (e.g. Hempel 1965a; Taylor 1964; Woodfield 1976; Wright
1976) that explanatory use of concepts embodied in the inten-
tional idiom need not be vacuous in any sense that concerns
THE BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1984) 7:4 
567

Commentary I Skinner: Psychological terms
Skinner. Thus, we are free to wonder whether anthropomor-
phism really is misplaced in a scientific study of human (verbal)
behavior. Whether it is misplaced or not can be determined
only by comparing the results of serious attempts to provide a
scientific analysis of behavior without the use of concepts em-
bodied in the intentional idiom with the results of attempts in
which those concepts occur essentially. The radical behaviorism
of Skinner and the contemporary cognitivism inspired by
Chomsky provide an opportunity for such a comparison. Both
programs have been defended and elaborated in work subse-
quent to Chomsky's (1959) well-known critique of Skinner
(1957). Quine (1970), MacCorquodale (1970), Fodor, Bever,
and Garrett (1974), and Winokur (1976) provide a place to begin
comparing the results of pursuing the programs. Lacey (1974)
provides some useful guidance.
There is more than one way to access an
image
Lynn C. Robertson
Veterans Administration Medical Center, Martinez, Calif. 94553
For Professor Skinner, science depends on operationalism. He
argues that private stimuli cannot be operationally defined; only
the verbal response to a private stimulus can be so defined. One
could dismiss this argument as outdated, since mainstream
psychology abandoned its obsession with operationalism in the
1940s and has since migrated toward the philosophy of critical
realism. However, to disregard "Terms" on this basis would be
to miss some of the compelling differences between modern
behaviorism and cognitive psychology that are relevant today.
The most important issue that Skinner addresses is the ques-
tion of how and why people respond to private stimuli. This is
indeed one of the current concerns of experimental psychology.
There is a search for the nature of internal representations
(private stimuli) and cognitive processes (private events). Skin-
ner predates, and is in agreement with, some contemporary
arguments that it is impossible to know the nature of an internal
representation (Anderson 1978; Palmer 1978). However, cur-
rent controversy is based on mathematical analyses and pertains
only to internal representations in isolation and not to the
processes (one could call them behaviors) that operate upon
them.
Skinner believes that "internal representations" and "mental
processes" are fictions, yet private stimuli and private events are
not. He agrees that there are "images" but disagrees that they
can be studied. His basic premise is that we can only study a
verbal response like "red" in the context of a history of verbal
responses to some public red. We cannot study the private
stimulus to which it may refer. In other words, we cannot find
the reference to "red" in the internal event (except physiologi-
cally, which is not relevant to the issue), so we must find it in the
contingencies of reinforcement that correlate with, or, as Skin-
ner would say, control the verbal response.
This line of thought can be extended to any response that is
symbolic of the private stimulus red. If subjects were asked to
press a key whenever they imagined the word red, the evalua-
tion of the response would not lie in inferences of processing
strategies and comparative analyses of internal representations.
It would, rather, be possible to examine only the contingencies
of reinforcement that lead to the key response. In this case the
key response and the verbal report "red" presumably refer to
the same stimulus - the color red. If we compared the verbal
report "red" to the manual key response in the same experi-
ment, I suspect we would find that the conditions under which
the key response and the verbal response were emitted would
be the same. For one moment, let's accept Skinner's opera-
tionalism and analyze the history of reinforcement contingen-
cies for saying "red" and of reinforcement contingencies for
pressing keys. It is probable that the two histories would be very
different (except by the greatest coincidence), yet it is clear that
the responses have the same referent. It is not the functional
analysis of key pressing and verbally saying "red" that will reveal
how the same referent can result in two diverse responses
(responses that have different reinforcementhistories). Rather,
the question is how reorganization (an internal process) occurs
to form a new relationship between a referent and a response.
Knowing how verbal reports to private stimuli are shaped does
not answer this question.
A second, somewhat related, problem is that parametric
variations in the response seem to be of little importance in
"Terms." The verbal response "red" may be said with greater
intensity and more rapidly when a traffic signal turns red than
when one is asked the color of a dress. Contingencies of rein-
forcement could presumably explain a part of the differences in
intensity, since the effect of ignoring a red light may be much
greater than that of ignoring the color of clothing. Reinforce-
ment contingencies, however, are not sufficient to explain all
the factors contributing to parametric variations in response
patterns.
When Shepard and Metzler (1971) presented two figures in
different orientations and found that reaction time increased
linearly with the degree of difference, the contingencies of
reinforcement that contribute to faster and slower responses are
not obviously relevant. Shepard interpreted these data in terms
of images and internal referents, and his subjects verbally
reported the experience of "seeing" a rotating image. It is true
that Shepard may be wrong about the nature of the private
event, just as a behaviorist could be wrong about the contingen-
cies of reinforcement that contribute to the response. Yet, as I
understand Skinner's view, we would have to regard the dif-
ferences in reaction time in Shepard and Metzler's study as
responses that must be analyzed in themselves. It appears that
Skinner would deemphasize the reaction-time data and analyze
the contingencies of reinforcement that "control" reporting the
experience of having an image, including the reference to
images by Shepard and Metzler and the rest of the scientific
community.
This approach leads Skinner to argue that the verbal reports of
scientists should be analyzed in the same way as their subjects'
verbal responses. It is an interesting question how words func-
tion in the thinking and behavior of scientists. Skinner's orienta-
tion, however, leads to an infinite regress.
Suppose we decide to define operationally the concept "red"
according to Skinner's recipe of operationalism. We seek the
contingencies of reinforcement that have shaped the verbal
report "red," and we look at the contingencies in the present use
of the word "red." As noted above, a person may yell "red"
when the driver of a car is about to run a traffic signal, and say
"red" more softly when commenting on the color of a dress.
Privately, the two verbal reports of "red" refer to two very
different meanings. So we must operationalize two instances of
"red," the intense verbal report of red and the less intense
verbal report of red. Now we have a new task - to define
intensity operationally. According to Skinner, "intensity" con-
sists of the conditions under which the word "intensity" is used.
Thus, the use of the phrase "intense red" now is the verbal
report of the person who defines intensity. We have louder
"red" and softer "red" referring to the contingencies of rein-
forcement surrounding the response "intense" combined with
the contingencies of reinforcement surrounding the response
"red." We now need a verbal report of the person who is
reporting the difference between these two responses. This
verbal report, in turn, needs analysis in the form of another
verbal report. Something is surely amiss.
568
THE BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1984) 7:4

B. F. Skinner's theorizing
Douglas Stalker and Paul Ziff
Department of Philosophy, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill,
Chapel Hill, N.C. 27514
In 1938 (the year of The Behavior of Organisms) B. F. Skinner
began developing a technology of behavior. He has worked at it
over the years. His achievement has been awesome, inspiring:
It has yet to be rivaled.
But even the best of technologists, and the best of engineers,
can succumb to a lust for philosophic theorizing, and Skinner
has been no exception.
By 1945 ("Terms") Skinner had other things in mind beside
technology. Though he would talk (albeit in passing) about this
technology and our need for it, Skinner had become more and
more concerned with theorizing. He proceeded from describing
operant behavior and how to shape it all the way to theorizing
about every feature of human life willy nilly, behavioral or not.
By 1974 (About Behaviorism) Skinner was openly pursuing an
elusive Weltanschauung: Philosophy had replaced technology.
With fast talk from a strategic armchair, Skinner extended his
theory of behavior by definition and redefinition, rather than by
experiment.
Consider, for example, what has happened to Skinner's con-
ception of behavior over the years. In 1938 it was clear and in
line with his practical aim: immediate, overt, and observable
behavior was the relevant datum to describe and control. There
was no need to explain or deny the existence of other forms of
behavior, let alone mental states, events, or processes. But by
1974 that conception had been expanded beyond all belief: Any
sort of matter became behavioral in all sorts of ways; so knowing
that something is so became a form of behavior, and so did
thinking a thought. How could these count as immediate, overt,
and observable? A new label was created: "covert behavior."
Covert behavior is minuscule and after the fact; in truth, is it
behavior at all? And scurrying along with covert behavior, in
About Behaviorism, came current behavior, probable behavior,
perceptual behavior, past behavior, future behavior, and, cer-
tainly, whatever behavior was needed to fill the bill of a tech-
nological bird fishing for philosophic frissons in Plato's wordy
meander.
When reading Skinner, one must ask oneself, Is this the
technologist or a philosopher speaking? Early on he is almost
exclusively the first; by 1974 he is the second. The first is more
intriguing than the second, and so are his position and its value.
It is a technology, and its value is that of a technology - a way of
changing the ways in which humans (and nonhumans) behave;
to have these means available, Skinner needed only modest
means - his unvarnished definition of behavior and his notions
of operant and respondent conditioning. If these means were to
need supplementation, the reasons would be technological: The
results, being unsatisfactory, could only be aberrant. In
"Terms" Skinner, perhaps in passing, says the only criterion for
the utility of a notion is whether it helps one get anywhere in
controlling things. That is the great technological Skinner
speaking, and espousing the criterion of a technology. What
replaces it, or supplants it, when the philosopher king speaks?
Large gestures about science and what is prescientific; there are
motions made to scientific revolutions in physics, break-
throughs here and there, and how all the dross - the phlogiston
and ether and 6lan vital - has gone by the boards. Somewhere in
all this there is supposed to be a lesson for psychology, but the
lesson is lost at the level of slogans we can all agree to: Do we all
agree to accept no explanatory fictions? How do we now tell a
fiction from a fact, a decoy from a duck? When Skinner was a
behavioral engineer, he knew what his criterion was: utility. In
his philosophic period, which seems to have afflicted him even
as early as 1945, Skinner lacked a criterion for discriminating
Commentary/'Skinner: 
Psychological terms
between psychological phlogiston and the daydreams of cog-
nitive psychologists. He gestures and promises and displays
high ideals, which serves merely to turn behaviorism into a
posture - defiant and quixotic.
Some will wonder at Skinner's "operational" definitions. We
wonder at the attempt. Why did he feel the need?
Even a genius can be seduced by philosophy.
A behavioral theory of mind?
H. S. Terrace
Department of Psychology, Columbia University, New York, N.Y. 10027
How timely it is to reread "The Operational Analysis of Psycho-
logical Terms, ' a remarkable gem of Skinner's prodigious out-
put of seminal publications. Especially during this age of
cognitive psychology, many readers may be surprised to dis-
cover Skinner's idiosyncratic but carefully reasoned analysis of
"private events. ' They may be equally surprised by the unusual
metaphysical and epistemological positions that Skinner as-
sumed in his first detailed treatment of mentalism.
The uninviting and misleading title of this important article
has undoubtedly contributed to its neglect. Instead of revealing
Skinner's distaste for operationism, it suggests yet another arid
exercise in deriving operational definitions of psychological
phenomena. It also seems likely that the more alluring titles of
some of Skinner's other well known articles, such as "Are
Theories of Learning Necessary?" and "Why I Am Not a Cog-
nitive Psychologist," have led many psychologists to conclude
that Skinner is antitheoretical and that he denies the existence of
mental events.
The truth of the matter is that Skinner has a theory of
behavior, that he acknowledges the existence of an inner mental
life, but that he also argues forcefully against the Cartesian
dualism implied by traditional (operational) definitions of cog-
nitive phenomena (see Terrace 1970). In short, Skinner's 1945
classic is an appeal to psychologists to regard thoughts, beliefs,
perceptions, memories, feelings, and soon, as bonafide subject
matter for psychology, a subject matter that, from Skinner's
point of view, obeys the same laws as those that govern overt
behavior.
It is important to recognize that Skinner's penetrating analy-
sis of private events occurred well in advance of the rise of
modern cognitive psychology. It is widely recognized that the
metaphor of the computer revolutionized the study of cognition
by showing how complex processes can be conceptualized as
material phenomena that obey mechanical laws and how cog-
nitive phenomena can be studied meaningfully without reduc-
ing them to the electrical activity of the computer's hardware.
Solely on the basis of his careful analysis of behavior, Skinner
provided his own monistic alternative to the dualistic mentalism
inherent in traditional definitions of cognitive events. He also
argued convincingly that psychologists need not concern them-
selves about the locus of private events in the nervous system
(Skinner 1950). Thus, long before the paradigms of modern
cognitive psychology began to take root, Skinner insisted on a
materialistic and nonreductionistic approach to its subject
matter.
Skinner parts company with most other psychologists con-
cerned with private events by his unwillingness to regard them
as introspective givens. Statements such as "I feel or think X"
prompt Skinner to ask what variables are responsible for the
occurrence of a particular feeling or thought. That question is
seldom asked because, by their very nature, private events
seem to be insulated from external influences. Skinner nev-
ertheless maintains that the experience of a private event
presupposes public intervention, at some earlier time, by other
THE BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1984) 7:4
569

CommentaryI'Skinner: Psychological terms
members of the "verbal community." According to Skinner, we
"know ourselves" only because others direct our attention to
what we think, feel, or do. Children, for example, learn when it
is appropriate to say "I think," or "My stomach aches," or "I had
a bad dream" only after listening to innumerable comments or
queries such as, "You look deep in thought. Are you thinking
about X?" or "Are you upset because you have a stomach ache?"
or "What were you dreaming about when you woke up crying?"
Skinner's view of the ontogeny of private events is consistent
with a wide range of psychological theorizing. Skinner himself
reminds us of Freud's belief that it is our natural condition to be
unconscious of our actions, thoughts, feelings, and so on, and
that mental activity does not presuppose consciousness (see
Skinner 1969a, p. 225). Piaget commented extensively about
the kinds of training that his daughter needed to understand
when she was thinking and that her head was the locus of her
thoughts (e.g. Piaget 1929, p. 44). At least one social psychol-
ogist (Bern 1967) has noted the similarity between the logic of
Skinner's analysis of how we come to know about private events
and the logic of attribution theory, a theory that claims that
particular kinds of social interactions determine how we de-
scribe our thoughts and feelings. It is also of interest to note that
Jaynes's review of early history led him to conclude that con-
sciousness is a relatively recent development, a development
that Jaynes claims occurred after the invention of writing (Jaynes
1976). Jaynes hypothesized that, prior to the appearance of
mans sense of consciousness, his language made reference only
to objects and events of the external environment and that man
had no vocabulary with which to refer to his mental life - or, for
that matter, to himself. When, on occasion, he heard "inner
voices," they were interpreted as the voices of gods or as
hallucinations. Only as a result of violent upheavals did early
societies develop the cultural practice of teaching their mem-
bers to identify their inner thoughts and feelings and to attribute
those thoughts and feelings to themselves.
Skinner's counterintuitive hypothesis about private events
(that they owe their existence to the public efforts of others who
teach us how to respond verbally to internal stimuli) was an
effective reply to Boring, Stevens, and other like-minded opera-
tionists who argued that the study of private (and, therefore,
scientifically inaccessible) events should be limited to their
public manifestations. Skinner not only revealed the dualistic
flaw of such operational definitions but also defined a radically
new view of private events.
For a variety of reasons that view has not received the
attention it deserves. One problem stems from some unex-
plored ramifications of Skinner's analysis of private events.
Another is Skinner's reluctance to consider private events other
than those he so insightfully defined. Ironically, Skinner does
not appear to have recognized that the struggle against men-
talism or, more specifically, dualism, has been won. Thanks, in
large part, to his own efforts, modern studies of human and
animal cognition need not concern themselves with the ghost in
the machine.
Before reviewing the import of recent developments in cogni-
tion, let us consider the following implications of Skinner's
hypothesis about private events: (1) Private events are con-
scious, (2) consciousness presupposes language, and (3) only
human beings experience consciousness.
Since so much of Skinner's view of consciousness hinges on
the verbal labels we have been taught to apply to internal
stimuli, it is important to ask whether a verbal label is a
necessary or sufficient condition for consciousness. That we are
conscious of unlabeled images suggests that verbal labeling is
neither necessary nor sufficient (see Skinner's examples of
"operant seeing," 1953, pp. 270ff.). Even if one wanted to argue
that verbal labels were a necessary or a sufficient condition for
consciousness, we would still need to know why we label certain
internal stimuli and not others. Skinner's suggestion (1969a, pp.
157ff.) that consciousness functions to help us cope with difficult
situations, (i.e. situations in which the cause of the problem is
behavior of which we are unaware) is a promising start. I doubt,
however, that Skinner would argue that such situations are the
only cause of consciousness.
A moment's thought should reveal why the basic objection to
Skinner's explanation of consciousness is one of those he raised
against mentalistic explanations in general. Skinner notes that to
say that John did X because he thought Z is to beg the question,
Why did John think Z? To answer that question by asserting that
John thought Z because he applies verbal response Z to internal
stimulus z' is to beg the question, Why the occurrence of verbal
response Z?
Skinner's insistence that all mental activity be characterized
as private (conscious) events, under the control of particular
internal stimuli, would seem to deny the existence of uncon-
scious private events. So extreme a position is understandable in
a Zeitgeist in which reference to mental processes of any sort
implied a dualistic view of psychology's subject matter (in
"Terms" Skinner writes that "the distinction between public
and private is by no means the same as that between physical
and mental)." However, Skinner's more recent publications
(1974; 1977b) suggest that he has yet to acknowledge that the
study of cognitive phenomena does not presuppose dualism.
Skinner also doesn't appear to recognize that much of human
and animal behavior can no longer be explained by reference to
the three-term contingency (a discriminative stimulus, a re-
sponse, and a reinforcer) that he applied so imaginatively to a
large variety of examples of human and animal behavior. A basic
problem arises when organisms respond appropriately in the
absence of any relevant environmental stimulus (see Hunter
1913; Terrace 1983a). This state of affairs has motivated the
study of representations of environmental stimuli, in both
human and animal subjects (e.g. Bousfield & Bousfield 1966;
Bower 1972; Mandler 1967; Olton & Samuelson 1976; Roitblat
1980; Shepard 1975; Shimp 1976; Terrace 1983b). The study of
representations in animals is of especial interest because of their
nonverbal nature (Terrace 1982). [See also Roitblat: "The Mean-
ing of Representation in Animal Memory" BBS 5(3) 1982.]
What separates Skinner from the modern study of cognitive
processes is his reluctance to acknowledge that the study of
representations does not imply a regression to mentalism.
Indeed, the study of representations can be regarded profitably
as an extension of the study of stimulus control (Terrace 1983a).
Asking about the nature of a representation is simply to pose the
questions, What features of an environmental stimulus are
coded by the organism and how does the organism represent
those features to itself when it must respond in the absence of
the environmental stimulus?
An instructive example of the need to include representations
of environmental stimuli in the experimental analysis of behav-
ior can be seen in a pigeon's performance on a matching-to-
sample task (Skinner 1950). In the original version of this
paradigm, the pigeon was shown a sample stimulus (either red
or green). A few seconds later, two choice stimuli (red and
green) were added, one on each side of the sample. The subject
was rewarded if and only if it selected a choice stimulus that
matched the color of the sample stimulus.
Subsequent research showed that Skinner's description of the
pigeon's behavior as "matching" was a misnomer. When con-
fronted with novel samples (in conjunction with appropriate
novel choices), performance fell to chance (Cumming & Ber-
ryman 1965). What the pigeons seemed to have learned was to
respond to the left choice when confronted with stimulus config-
uration 1 and to the right choice when confronted with stimulus
configuration 2, and so on.
A variety of recent studies has shown that it is possible to
obtain generalization of matching-to-sample (Premack 1976;
Zentall 1983). Accordingly, it is necessary to ask how one might
characterize the stimulus that results in matching. It cannot be
the physical identity that exists between the sample and the
570
THE BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1984) 7:4

Commentary/ Skinner: Psychological terms
choice stimuli. The experimental literature indicates that phys-
ical similarity per se fails as often as it succeeds in producing
generalization of matching. The only alternative is to postulate
some internal response, generated by the organism, which
yields an internal "same" stimulus. That stimulus, in turn, leads
to the correct choice. In short, successful generalization of
matching must mean that the subject makes a judgment of
"sameness" before responding to the correct choice. Specifical-
ly, the subject must transform the environmental stimuli pro-
vided by the experimenter into an intermediate cue that indi-
cates which choice it should select. [See also Premack: "The
Codes of Man and Beasts" BBS 6(1) 1983.]
The importance of taking into account the subjects contribu-
tion to the stimulus complex that results in accurate matching-
to-sample performance is especially apparent when a delay is
interposed between the presentation of the sample and the
presentation of the choices (Grant 1983; Roberts & Kraemer
1982; Roitblat 1980). Accurate responding under those circum-
stances suggests that the subject has access to a representation of
the sample when the choice stimuli are made available.
Skinner should be heartened by these and other demonstra-
tions of the feasibility of studying complex processes in humans
and animals from a monistic and a materialistic point of view.
Rather than regard such developments as contrary to the tenets
of radical behaviorism, Skinner should welcome them as signifi-
cant extensions of the approach to cognitive events that he.
introduced in "Terms."
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The preparation of this commentary was supported in part by an NSF
grant (BNS-82-02423).
On the operational definition of a toothache
Colin Wright
Department of Philosophy, University of Exeter, Exeter EX4 4QH, England
Psychology was in its most formative stage in the 1930s, when
the philosophy of science was in its heyday. Many of its elements
are to be found in Professor Skinner's paper "Terms": the
fictionalism of Mach, the physicalism and the problems of the
public and the private of the Vienna Circle, and the opera-
tionism of Einstein and Bridgman. The psychologists wanted to
know how a science of man was possible, and they turned to the
philosophers as the only authorities they knew for guidance; for
the acknowledged scientists, qua scientists, of course did not
understand the principles of their own subject, no matter how
skillfully they might use them. But the philosophers of science
did not understand them either, and they led the psychologists
up the garden path.
In "Terms" Skinner tells us that experience is "a derived
construct to be understood only through an analysis of ver-
bal . . . processes." But one always supposed that verbal pro-
cesses reported experience, whether "inner" or "outer," or at
least reported the content of experience, what was experienced;
and if so, experience can hardly be a construct out of verbal
behavior. Words themselves, we are told, are not signs or
symbols used to express or convey meanings. Words are re-
sponses to stimuli resulting from reinforcement by the verbal
community. In other words, all words are meaningless physical
effects caused by specific kinds of physical stimuli - including
this paper by Skinner, what I am writing now, and the various
verbal effects, caused in you, the reader. If this is so, there is no
meaning, no understanding, no judgment - and no science. Or
shall we suppose that we are in some God-given privileged
position in our investigations, possessing in ourselves faculties
that we deny in those we study, like the spiritually enlightened
in Plato's allegory of the cave? Well, apparently we are, right up
to the end: Then, however, "we shall be able to include, and
perhaps to understand, our own verbal behavior as scientists."
To do this, of course, we would have to treat our own verbal
behavior as meaningful in order to prove that it wasn't. In fact,
there would be nothing to explain. There is nothing to explain
insofar as people think rationally, and since science is supposed
to be, par excellence, a rational activity, there shouldn't be
much to explain in it; and if it wasn't very largely rational there
wouldn't be much point in listening to its explanations as to why
it wasn't! Psychology must, on pain of otherwise cutting off its
own head, presuppose that human discourse is very iargely
rational - that it isn't caused by stimuli. [See also Cohen: "Can
Human Irrationality Be Experimentally Demonstrated" BBS
4(3) 1981 and Kyburg: "Rational Belief" BBS 6(2) 1983.]
One had supposed that the methodological and radical behav-
iorists agreed that science was, by definition, concerned with
the publicly observable and publicly testable world, and that the
real difference between them was that the former accepted and
the latter denied that there was a private mental world - a
difference that would appear to be of no material consequence.
Skinner, however, denies this. It meant for a start that the
methodological behaviorists were soft on those old explanatory
fictions, consciousness, feeling, and the will, and looked for
behavioral manifestations that could be given operational defini-
tions. Of course, our intuitive concepts will not do for scientific -
or indeed for philosophical - purposes. Our intuitive concepts
of truth and knowledge, as Carnap (1962) pointed out, need
explication. But that does not mean that they should be aban-
doned. Some scientific concepts have not proved very fruitful:
The medieval concept of impetus (which, until it was finally
dissipated like the heat in a poker, was supposed to keep a
projectile in motion) was abandoned in favour of the concept of
momentum; and the concept of phlogiston, one of Skinner's
examples, was abandoned in favour of that of oxygen. But the
concepts of electricity, heat, velocity, and so on, have simply
been modified. And it was empirical science that was the judge
in each case.
But Skinner is still right in rejecting the program of meth-
odological behaviorism. Suppose for the moment that con-
sciousness, feelings, and the will are real. Surely the manifesta-
tions in behavior of these intentional states can only be
intelligibly described in terms of the intentional states them-
selves. If so, the program is self-defeating. The solution might
be to abandon the notion that psychology cannot be a science
unless it restricts its subject matter to what is publicly observ-
able, and so to abandon behaviorism with it. Skinner, of course,
does not abandon behaviorism; indeed he reaffirms his credo.
But, incredibly, he drops the requirement of publicity. Or does
he? He, too, he says, has a toothache, and a toothache is a
private event. But it is private only in the sense that the only
system that is directly "wired up" to the tooth in question is the
physical system called "Skinner": the toothache is a purely
physical event, just like the radioactive event that is manifested
in the click in the Geiger counter. Skinner, it seems, does not
suffer from toothache like ordinary mortals; he just displays the
kinds of behavior one usually associates with a toothache - play
acting, some would call it. [See also Searle: "Minds, Brains and
Programs" BBS 3(3) 1980.]
What is wrong with operationism is not that no explicit
statement of the relation between concept and operation has
been provided. It is that the very character of the relation has
been misconceived. One's actions are not defined by one's
bodily movements but the reverse - in order to know what sort
of operation a person is performing one must know what he is
trying to achieve - one must know what velocity is before one
can set out to measure it. Newton was well aware that there was
no operation by which he could measure velocity as he under-
stood it, that is, motion relative to God's Sensorium (I ignore his
bucket experiment), and he used the "fixed" stars as a surrogate
framework instead. The concept determines the operation, the
operation does not define the concept. There may, of course, be
THE BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1984) 7:4
571

Response /Skinner: Psychological terms
something wrong with the concept, something that a considera-
tion of the operation determined by it may reveal. Philosophical
analysis is required to reveal such deficiencies and decide where
the fault lies. Unfortunately the scientist rarely has the philo-
sophical training for the job - or the philosopher the necessary
conceptual background.
Radical behaviorism and theoretical entities
G. E. Zuriff
Department of Psychology, Wheaton College, Norton, Mass. 02766
After nearly four decades, "Terms" retains its significance and
its brilliance. But along with its liberating impact on behaviorist
thought, it is also the source of certain ambiguities and confu-
sions persisting to the present. I address two of these.
1. Ironically, commentators on the history of behaviorism
commonly ignore the historical context of this article. "Terms"
was presented as part of a symposium on operationism in
psychology. Skinner was concerned with distinguishing his
approach from the operationism of his Harvard colleagues S. S.
Stevens and E. G. Boring. The latter was not a behaviorist, and
the former only marginally so. Certainly neither was part of the
behaviorist mainstream devoted to the study of conditioning
and learning and to the development of a science of behavior.
Yet over the next 40 years, the distinction between the position
of Skinner on the one hand and the operationism of Boring and
Stevens on the other hand came to be regarded as a major
distinction between Skinner's "radical" behaviorism and all
other forms of behaviorism. It is commonly thought that only
radical behaviorism admits private events into the science of
behavior, while all forms of methodological behaviorism are
restricted to publicly observable entities and events. While this
distinction may differentiate Skinner from Boring and Stevens,
it does not distinguish him from nearly any other major behav-
iorist. Watson, Weiss, Tolman, Guthrie, Hull, and Spence all
included private events, such as "implicit," "covert," and "in-
cipient" responses, in their behavioral systems. Furthermore,
they suggested that these unobserved events can serve as
stimuli for verbal responses, including reports of emotions,
pains, and images. What distinguishes Skinner from these other
behaviorists is not his legitimization of private events but the
fact that he provides the most coherent account of how these
events come to function as stimuli for verbal behavior. Thus,
contrary to common opinion, the admission of private events
into a behavioral science does not distinguish radical behav-
iorism from other forms. In sophisticated methodological be-
haviorism, scientific data are derived by observation, and pri-
vate events are postulated as hypothetical constructs. This
hypothetical nature of private events leads to my second point.
2. In "Terms" Skinner states: "Our practice is to infer the
private event." Similarly, he speaks of considering private
events "inferentially." This implies that private stimuli, as
inferred events, are theoretical entities as opposed to observ-
ables. On the other hand, Skinner (1969a, p. 242; 1974, p. 17) at
times writes as if private events are observed rather than
inferred because they are observed by the person in whose body
they occur and whose verbal behavior they control. Contempo-
rary researchers in behavior therapy have extrapolated this
position to an extreme in some cases. Ignoring Skinner's cau-
tionary attitude toward the reliability of reports of private
events, they treat the patient's first-person reports about covert
events as genuine data reports observed by a "public of one."
I believe that private events must be considered inferred
entities (i.e. theoretical) for two reasons. First, if psychology is
to be the "psychology of the other one" in Meyer's (1921)
felicitous phrase, then even if a subject may be said to be
observing a private event, the experimenter, representing the
science, must be said to infer the private event. Second, Skin-
ner's statement that private events are discriminative stimuli for
certain verbal responses is, at present, no more than a plausible
hypothesis. No evidence is currently available to show that
verbal responses enter into causal relationships with private
events as required by the hypothesis, or that these private
events are stimuli in the sense of conforming to the same laws as
their overt counterparts. Therefore, the existence of private
stimuli controlling verbal behavior is an inference. Even the
subject's verbal reports provide no observational evidence for
the hypothesis since they are in the form "I have a toothache"
rather than "Private stimulus X is controlling my verbal behav-
ior." It must be concluded that the scientific status of private
stimuli is that of a hypothetical construct.
Author's Response
Coming to terms with private events
B. F. Skinner
Department of Psychology and Social Relations, Harvard University,
Cambridge, Mass. 02138
When I was asked to participate in the symposium for
which "terms " was written, I was at work on a manuscript
that would be published 12 years later under the title
Verbal Behavior (Skinner 1957). It was an interpretation
of the field of language which avoided "ideas," "mean-
ings," "information," and all the other things said to be
expressed by a speaker or communicated to a listener.
Although I had lost interest in the operationism of the
thirties, I still called myself an operationist and thought
that certain parts of the manuscript were suitable for the
symposium. They concerned the place of private events
in the analysis of verbal behavior, in particular the privacy
of "sensations" and "feelings," which were still important
to psychologists of the time, particularly E. G. Boring,
who had organized the symposium.
In traditional terms the question I addressed was this:
How is it possible to learn to refer to or describe (and I
would say hence know) things or events within our own
bodies to which our teachers do not have access? How can
they tell us that we are right or wrong when we describe
them?
I used as an example a special type of verbal response
called (in my manuscript) the tact. It will be important in
what follows to define this term here as clearly as possi-
ble. It refers to the probability of occurrence of a verbal
response (say, chair) as it is affected by a stimulus (say, a
chair or chairlike object). At any given moment a native
speaker of English possesses the response chair in some
strength (where "in strength" means "with a given proba-
bility of emission"). During a quiet walk in the woods it is
weak. In a furniture store, it is strong, even though not
being actually emitted.
The response chair in its relation to a chair as a
controlling stimulus is a tact (and the chair is then said to
be tacted); it is not a "reference to a chair," or a "state-
ment about chairs," nor does it "express the idea of a
chair," or "denote a chair," or "name a chair." It is simply
572
THE BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1984) 7:4

a probability of emission of chair as a function of a
particular kind of stimulus. Tacts sometimes occur alone,
but they are usually parts of larger samples of verbal
behavior. They can be, but need not be, explicitly taught,
as when a child is taught to name objects.
(The response chair is not always a tact. If it occurs
because it has often been followed by the appearance of a
chair as a reinforcing consequence, it is a mand, a "re-
quest for a chair." If, because it often occurs in ex-
pressions like table and chair or sitting in a chair, it is
strengthened when table and or sitting in a is read or
heard, it is an intraverbal response. If it is strong because
someone else has just said chair, it is an echoic response.
If the speaker is simply reading the word, it is a textual
response. These kinds of verbal responses are not impor-
tant for the present Response.)
Speakers acquire and emit tacts under many different
states of deprivation and aversive stimulation and when
many different kinds of reinforcing consequences follow.
Such reinforcements are mediated by other people.
There are no important nonsocial consequences of saying
chair, at least until the speaker himself becomes a lis-
tener. The question I raised in "Terms" was this: How can
we tact private stimuli inaccessible to the verbal commu-
nity which arranges the necessary contingencies of rein-
forcement? For chair, substitute pain, and one reaches
the problem of "the operational definition of a psychologi-
cal term."
"Terms" argues that there are only four ways in which
we can learn to tact private stimuli: (1) The verbal com-
munity can base its reinforcements on associated public
stimuli. (2) It can use public responses made to the same
stimuli. (3) Some private stimuli are generated by covert
behavior to which responses can be learned when the
same behavior is overt. (4) The tact can be metaphorical
and acquired when made to similar public stimuli. Now,
nearly 40 years later, I do not see any other possibilities.
Before taking up specific commentaries I list some
common misunderstandings:
1. I was not trying to bring sensations back into behav-
iorism. By toothache, I mean only the stimulation arising
from a damaged tooth. We must wait for physiology to
supply further details.
2. Although private stimuli are often salient, the public
accompaniments used by the verbal community often
continue to contribute to the strength of a tact. I may say,
"I am hungry" mainly because I see myself eating vo-
raciously, a public stimulus.
3. A tact, once established or in the process of being
established, usually figures in larger samples of verbal
behavior to which terms like reference, denotation, and
description are often applied, but the term is not itself
correctly thus used.
4. A tact may have the form of a sentence if it is acquired
as such. The whole expression "I'm hungry as a bear" may
be a single response and useful as such upon a given
occasion. On a different occasion it may be composed as a
sentence of which the tact hungry is only a part.
5. Verbal contingencies bring responses under the
control of single properties of stimuli. Only by looking at a
number of instances can we identify the property that is
functioning in a tact. Chair is, in this sense, an abstract
response, but the issue is clearer when the defining
property is more often found with other properties, as in
Response/Skinner: Psychological terms
the tact red, to the probability of which the size and shape
of red objects contribute very little.
I do not think that Bennett is right in saying that by
calling one thing a stimulus and another a response I am
"implying that the former causes the latter" or that "like
most stimulus-response meaning theorists, [I am] appar-
ently attracted by the idea that the meanings of our
utterances are determined by the very same items that
cause them." That is precisely what I am not saying. I am
saying that the presence of an object (call it a stimulus)
increases the probability that a response will be emitted.
This can be fairly easily demonstrated and can indeed be
used in predicting a speaker's behavior. Of course, "other
things" enter into the actual speaking of a word, and I
have dealt with them in detail in Verbal Behavior. I
cannot agree with Bennett that the statement "If you
want a person to utter the word 'chair,' one of the best
ways is to let him see an unusual chair" (Miller 1951, p.
166) is "plainly false." Let someone scaling Mt. Everest
arrive at the summit and find a chair, and the word
"chair" will be pronounced with alacrity. (Incidentally,
the reader should not infer that George Miller, from
whose book the sentence is taken, is in thrall to a stim-
ulus-response theory of meaning; he is one of its sharpest
critics.)
It would be unfair of me to refer to my book, published
12 years after "Terms," if Bennett were devoting his
commentary to my paper. But a critic of my theory of
meaning must look at my book, where I appeal to much
more than a stimulus in accounting for a verbal response.
I do not suggest "that the causally sufficient conditions for
a person's uttering '(That is) red' consist in (i) a red
stimulus in conjunction with (ii) a set of circumstances C
which always mediates between a stimulus and an utter-
ance whose meaning is somehow given by the stimulus."
What must be taken into account "among other things" is
(1) a setting which includes a listener and (2) a long history
in which speaking in similar settings has been followed by
the reactions of similar listeners. The listeners have
supplied the reinforcers which built the functional con-
trol exercised by the stimulus.
Typical of modern philosophers, Bennett replaces a
history of reinforcing consequences with a currently felt
or at least active "intention." His expression "intending
to get someone else to think that Fx, or intending to fix in
his own memory his belief that Fx, or the like" is an effort
to find a current entity to replace the speaker's relation to
the listener and the kinds of effects he has had on
listeners, especially the effects described in detail in
Verbal Behavior.
(Far from disregarding intention and belief as "of
merely antiquarian interest" I am at the moment involved
with a colleague, Dr. Pere Julia, a linguist, in reviewing
the use of those words in current philosophy. Bennett's
best effort to supply an alternative theory depends, he
says, essentially upon intention and belief. From my
point of view, it depends upon the personal histories
which lead to verbal behavior, histories for which inten-
tion and belief stand as current surrogates.
In "Terms" I compare those who teach the meanings of
words referring to private events which they themselves
cannot see to a blind man teaching someone the names of
colors. Obviously the blind man must have collateral
THE BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1984) 7:4
573

Response/Skinner: Psychological terms
information before he can do so successfully. A solution
by Bennett of the problem of the blind man with the
concepts of belief and intention would be a useful contri-
bution to this discussion.
An experiment might be helpful. Let us undertake to
explain to a bright 10-year-old boy what intentions and
beliefs are. When we have finished, the boy must be able
to tell us when he has an intention and when he holds a
belief. What things shall we point to as we tell him what
those words mean? What things must he know about
himself to report correctly that he has an intention or
holds a belief? I think we shall find that we have taught
him to mention actions and to mention or imply their
consequences. These are parts of the contingencies of
reinforcement of which his behavior is a function. As
states of mind, intentions and beliefs are current surro-
gates of the contingencies. As a behaviorist, I dispense
with the surrogates but take the contingencies quite
seriously.
Brinker & Jaynes seem to misunderstand my saying
that a casual observer can tell very little about what is
going on in an operant experiment in spite of its supposed
oversimplification. The experimenter sees what is going
on in the experimental space much more clearly than the
casual observer because he has additional information
about the history of the organism - its deprivational state,
its history of reinforcement, possibly something about its
genetics, and so on. To understand behavior, one must
know the history of the organism as well as the present
"structure" of the behavior. I do not see how admitting
that necessity "rescind[s] [the] promise of operationism."
It simply recognizes the need for a closer study of control-
ling variables.
I think the same thing can be said about casual encoun-
ters between people. If the listener "makes sense of what
the speaker is saying," both must be members of the same
language community (i.e. have had much the same verbal
history) and sense will be made more effectively if this
particular speaker and listener have shared other verbal
experiences. (It often takes a certain amount of time to be
clear about what a stranger is saying.)
I agree in general with Brinker & Jaynes's dismissal of
operationism as that term is most often used, but behav-
iorism, when applied to the definition of psychological
terms, the subject of the symposium to which "Terms"
was contributed, is very close to the spirit of opera-
tionism, and I submitted the paper on that understand-
ing. I, too, regret that more work has not been done in
line with my analysis in Verbal Behavior, particularly in
the behavior of young children. The field is only slowly
recovering from the developmentalism of Piaget and
others, in which the appearance of verbal behavior is
followed with little or no attention paid to the contingen-
cies of reinforcement responsible for it.
I agree with Danto that an analysis of my toothache will
not get us very far toward explaining a Greek tragedy or
the works of Marcel Proust. Physics is a much more
advanced science, but it has not got very far toward
explaining the present condition of the universe. Biology
and biochemistry are advanced sciences, but they have
not got very far toward explaining that rite of spring in
which molecules work their way up through the branches
of trees and take their appointed places in leaves and
flowers and fruit. Nor has philosophy or religion offered
alternative accounts of any of this that satisfy the critical
thinker. Let us be content with beginnings.
Danto summarizes the point of my paper quite accu-
rately, and I agree that the "terms. . .central to science
are not of this . . . sort." I would also be interested in a
further analysis of those terms which are "as loosely tied
to stimuli as theoretical terms are." I have had something
more to say about that in "Problem-Solving." I do not
believe that we must in any sense relax a demand for
sharpness of reference.
If I have neglected brute facts, as Dennett claims, it is
only because I have no reason to rehearse them. The role
of the discriminative stimulus in controlling the proba-
bility of emission of a response was already well estab-
lished when I wrote "Terms" and has since been abun-
dantly confirmed. The point of my paper concerned a
procedure through which a private stimulus could play
the usual role in spite of its inaccessibility to the verbal
community which maintains the necessary contingen-
cies. There were no "puzzling or recalcitrant or otherwise
inexplicable facts" to be accounted for. The facts were
well known to everyone.
My paper was not theoretical. It was an interpretation.
Through what fairly obvious ways could the verbal com-
munity circumvent privacy? I cannot see any theory in
my exposition of four ways in which it could be done or
the conclusion that none of these ways leads to a very
precise control by private stimuli.
Dennett, along with other commentators, accuses me
of dogmatism. I am "extrapolat[ing] a creed: working out
the details of what the devout behaviorist has to say,
figuring out the kosher categories into which all facts must
be cast, no matter how the facts come out." And yet he
complains at length of my use of "may" and "might,"
terms which, in all the "dictionary meanings" he cites,
suggest far from a dogmatic stance. In order to have it
both ways, Dennett says that I am feinting and weaving
and that when I say "may" I really mean "must." (The
only "bold declaration" that he offers as a sample of my
dogmatism occurs in a paragraph in which I say that "we
may generalize the conditions responsible for the stan-
dard semantic' relation between a verbal response and a
particular stimulus without going into reinforcement the-
ory in detail." The paragraph is little more than a defini-
tion of "contingency of reinforcement" - a key term
borrowed from the experimental analysis of behavior.
Dennett gives no example of the "host of obvious coun-
terinstances" that he could cite, but if he means instances
in which the community reinforces a response under
other circumstances, they are instances I was excluding
from the present discussion.)
"Terms" makes a fairly simple point about a kind of
verbal behavior - behavior that Dennett would perhaps
say "refers to" events inaccessible to those who teach us
to speak. I believe the technical terms it uses are con-
sistent with each other and with other terms in the work
in progress to which I repeatedly referred. The point was
relevant to the symposium because it shows how difficult
it is to validate a system of mentalistic psychology which
calls for introspection by trained observers. The the-
ological violence of Dennett's commentary suggests that
574
THE BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1984) 7:4

Response/Skinner: Psychological terms
it must raise particularly troublesome difficulties for his
own discipline.
Garrett's paper is a useful interpretation of the relation
called reference, particularly with respect to Wittgen-
stein's insistence that we do not refer to private events. As
Garrett points out, such references are no more "direct"
than references to other kinds of events. Private events
are exclusive, but so are other events with which we alone
are in contact. Privacy raises a problem only for those who
teach us how to refer. Garrett's analysis of the reference
function of intraverbal and echoic behavior is also useful.
I have only one criticism to make of his analysis of the tact.
Saying "bear" in response to a bear track found near an
empty picnic table is a metonymical tact. Saying "A bear
has been here" is much more. In a normal occurrence
"That animal is a lion" is also more than a tact. The
expression contains two tacts: animal and lion. It also
contains additional material serving a function that I call
in my book "autoclitic." It includes what linguists call
syntax or grammar. If we are to stick closely to demon-
strated behavioral processes, only the increased proba-
bility of saying lion in the presence of a lion is the relation
called a tact. The sentence as a whole is controlled by
other features of the situation, especially the presence of a
listener who is likely to reinforce behavior that proves
useful to him in the setting to which the speaker is
responding. Short sentences are sometimes learned as
units under the control of stimuli in connection with
which they can be called tacts, but sentences are usually
to some extent composed. Primordial verbal material
(tacts, intraverbals, echoics, etc.) are put together with
the help of autoclitic devices so that the listener reacts in a
more effective way.
I am not familiar enough with "functionalism or the
causal theory of mind" to do justice to Graham's com-
mentary, but if for "sensation classification" we may read
"stimulus classification" then so far as I can see the
comparison is correct. I am not sure, however, that
Graham would accept that substitution of terms. One
may speak of the cause of a stimulus by distinguishing
between the object (for example, a red light) and its
stimulating effect (the arousal of nerve impulses in the
retina), but I think it is the latter that Graham would want
to call the cause of a sensation.
There are different kinds of "painful" stimuli. We
classify them with terms like sharp and dull which we take
from the objects which cause the pain. As a behaviorist I
can say that a sharp object causes the kind of stimulation
that evokes the response sharp pain, but Graham, I
suppose, would want to say that it is the sensation which,
in turn, is reported as a sharp pain.
I allowed for that possibility in a passage in "Terms"
that I am surprised has gone unnoticed by those who are
critical of behaviorism. The passage reads as follows:
"See" is a term acquired with respect to one's own
behavior in the case of overt responses available to the
community, but according to the present analysis it
may be evoked at other times by any private accom-
paniment of overt seeing. Here is a point at which a
nonbehavioral private seeing may be slipped in.
The point is relevant to Malcolm's (1964) contention
that I must deny that introspection is possible. I agree
with Graham in saying that Malcolm is wrong, and so are
all those who take the operation to be identical with the
thing it is said to define. So far as I am concerned,
whatever happens when we inspect a public stimulus is in
every respect similar to what happens when we intro-
spect a private one. "Terms" is concerned only with the
problems which arise in learning to do so. What people
eventually " 'feel' [as] distinctively sharp about sharp
pains " may contain no vestige of the stimuli which were
needed when they were taught to call them sharp.
There is nothing in Harzem's commentary to which I
can seriously object. It summarizes a philosophy of
human behavior which, as Harzem points out, was shared
by Wittgenstein, Ryle, and Austin. (It is often forgotten
that Wittgenstein called for animal research to answer
some of the questions he raised.) I wish, however, that
Harzem had spent more time on the problem of privacy,
which is not quite identical with that of mentalism. It is
worth emphasizing that an analysis of verbal behavior and
of "how words become attached to their meanings" raises
what seems to me an insuperable obstacle in the path of
any kind of rigorous science of mental life.
Hineline's commentary is a better reply than my own
to some of the points made in the other commentaries.
His references to my analysis and use of logic are particu-
larly helpful. I am always surprised, however, when it is
said that I have only very recently acknowledged the role
of natural selection in the shaping and maintaining of
behavior, although the fact that I am willing to yield some
of the place of operant conditioning to its rival is worth
repeating (see "Consequences" and "Phylogeny"). I am
also glad that Hineline clarifies my objection to theory. I
do not object to mentalistic theories of behavior so much
because of the mentalism as because of the irrelevance,
an irrelevance which also applies at the present time to
neurological theories. In the paper on theory to which
Hineline refers (Skinner 1950; here, part of "Methods"), I
questioned the use of theories that appeal to "events
taking place somewhere else, at some other level of
observation, described in different terms, and measured,
if at all, in different dimensions," but I called for a theory
of behavior of a different kind.
Hocutt raises the question of meaning. The colloquial
statement that a person "uses a word to express a mean-
ing" appears to be an explanation of the occurrence of the
word, but what and where is the meaning? To the
mentalist, as Hocutt says, toothache means a personal
experience. To a methodological behaviorist it means the
setting which is said to give rise to such an experience. To
the crude operationist it means the operation from which
the experience is inferred. I do not accept any of those
views. As a radical behaviorist I would say that if the term
"meaning" has any meaning at all, it is the setting which
gives rise to the response of the speaker or the subse-
quent action of the listener with respect to that setting.
I am glad to accept Hocutt's paraphrase that "toothache
denotes neither a private sensation nor its public accom-
paniments but an unknown bodily condition normally
caused by an abscessed tooth and normally manifesting
THE BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1984) 7:4
575

Response/Skinner: Psychological terms
itself in moaning and grasping of the jaw." But that is not
what he says when he writes "for [Skinner], the word
toothache means not the private stimulus that elicits its
use but the public stimuli that control reinforcement of its
use." The trouble arises from the words "denote" and
"mean." When a person says, "My tooth aches," stimula-
tion from the tooth is in control, but it does not "elicit" the
response as in a reflex. It makes a contribution to its
strength. "Public accompaniments," such as a cry of pain
or a hand to the jaw, play no part at the time. They were
important to the verbal community in setting up the
response at some earlier date, but this instance of the
response is now under the control of private stimulation.
With the rest of Hocutt's commentary I generally agree.
I am glad that Kenrick & Keefe bring up the relevance
of "Terms" to self-perception and Bern's (1967) analysis of
cognitive dissonance, and I agree that there are problems
of reference with respect to public stimuli as well as
private. That, indeed, was the principal contention of
physical operationism. What are time, length, force, and
so on? I should want to see the same kinds of answers
given with respect to psychological traits. Should we try
to discover exactly what a trait is, or should we look at the
facts from which the trait is, as Kenrick & Keefe put it,
inferred. The operational answer to Newton's time and
space was not to solve the problem by improving the
process of inference but to question whether the things
Newton thought he was talking about existed. Is there
any point in trying to "sharpen the reference" of the word
"aggression"? It seems to me much more useful to exam-
ine the many instances to which the term has been
applied and see whether any single term will prove useful
with respect to all of them. It is true that terms from the
vernacular can often be redefined scientifically, but they
are usually found to acquire different definitions under
different circumstances.
It seems to me that Kenrick & Keefe have misun-
derstood my contention that "differential reinforcement
cannot be made contingent upon the property of pri-
vacy." I did not mean that a person cannot distinguish
between the public and private attributes which underlie
the use of a term. I can understand why self-description of
the wholly private aspects of an emotion is probably less
useful than self-descriptions of their public accompani-
ments. I was referring to the problem of psychological
entities which were by definition exclusively private. The
essence of consciousness was once said to be its privacy.
But I do not think that is a useful definiens if it means
there are no public accompaniments.
Lowe has, predictably, summarized my position cor-
rectly, and I am happy to join him in calling for the next
step: research on self-knowledge and self-management
and their possible effects on human behavior in general. I
would formulate his questions in a rather different way,
however. I doubt whether "the effects of reinforcement
are altered qualitatively when subjects acquire the skill of
generating verbal descriptions" of their own behavior and
its consequences. When they do so, they generate other
controlling variables which play a part in controlling
subsequent behavior. That is why it is fio hard to do
research on operant behavior in human subjects who
have learned to analyze the contingencies to which they
are exposed. Their analyses (whether or not they are
correct) enter into the control of their behavior as self-
generated rules (see "Problem Solving"). Research on
human behavior which compares favorably with animal
research is most successful in small children and retarded
persons or when the contingencies are concealed. My
answer to Lowe's second question (Is "human perfor-
mance that is free of this 'interfering' conscious-
ness . . . indistinguishable from that of animals") is yes,
although the data Lowe (1983) cites may prove me wrong.
Meehl poses four hard questions. My tentative replies:
1. The first question concerns my opening definition of
operationism, which was not very relevant to the rest of
the paper. How we formulate rules as descriptions of the
contingencies of reinforcement encountered in nature
and society, and how logicians manipulate those rules and
derive from them other rules descriptive of contingencies
not yet experienced by anyone (and, possibly, never to be
experienced by anyone) form too big a field to be charac-
terized accurately with terms as general as deduction,
induction, reduction, and so on. I pass.
2. If an accurate introspective vocabulary were avail-
able, I should be an ardent introspectionist (as I am,
personally, with a far from accurate one). But I regard
introspection, like all other forms of "spection," as
behavior.
3. I think clinicians sometimes get useful information,
from which they can infer something of their clients'
histories, from answers to the question "How do you feel
about that?" But I am not sure what private stimuli are
involved or how many of the stimuli are public. In
general, I have said that we cannot introspect cognitive
processes because we do not have nerves going to the
right places. Such nerves would be useful, but verbal
behavior and hence introspection arose too late in the
history of the species to have made the evolution of such
nerves possible.
4. I should not want logicians to use behaviorese, but if
I am to analyze the behavior of logicians, I must use my
terms, not theirs. Theirs appear among the subject mat-
ter. I am willing to use "true" and "false" in logic and
mathematics, where they can be defined reasonably well.
If the sun burns out before Goldbach's Conjecture has
been proved, no one will have been able to say that the
conjecture is true or false. In what sense could its truth or
falsity exist prior to a proof? If Goldbach had conjectured
that where there is smoke there is fire, a very different
account of the "truth or falsity" of the behavior would be
needed, and those terms would have a very different
meaning.
Moore's commentary is useful because it summarizes
the argument of my paper in fresh terms and brings it into
line with some of the other things that were being said
about the operational definition of psychological terms at
the time. It also calls attention to an important related
problem. Privacy has caused trouble to psychologists and
philosophers struggling to exchange views about their
mental life. It has also caused trouble, unnecessarily it
would seem, to the physical scientist who insists that
science is personal knowledge. Polanyi (1960) argued
that, and I spent many hours, to no avail, discussing the
576
THE BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1984) 7:4

point with P. W. Bridgman, whose operationism failed
him when it came to his own behavior. The scientist first
interacts with the world, like everyone else, in contingen-
cy-shaped behavior. He becomes a scientist when he
begins to describe the contingencies and to design experi-
ments which make them clearer. The ultimate product,
the "laws" of science, governs scientific behavior as a
corpus of rules to be followed. The behavior of the
scientist in following them is reinforced by the same
consequences as the original contingency-shaped behav-
ior, but the controlling stimuli are different (see "Prob-
lem Solving"). I take it that Moore is saying that they are
free of private stimuli and that those science philosophers
who insist that science is personal knowledge only create
problems for themselves by returning to contingency-
shaped behavior.
I have not said, as Place claims, that reasoning in
accordance with the rules of logic is " 'contingency
shaped' rather than 'rule governed' behaviour" (italics
added). All behavior is, I believe, contingency shaped.
We take advice and follow rules because of reinforcing
consequences which have followed when we have done so
in the past. But the behavior referred to by the advice or
the rules has other consequences. Thus, if a friend advises
me to take one route rather than another on a journey I do
so because of what has happened in the past when I have
taken advice from him or others like him. In addition, I
enjoy a shorter, smoother, or pleasanter journey - the
consequences specified in the advice. I obey the laws of
government not because I have disobeyed them and been
punished but because I was taught to obey them. In
addition, I avoid the contingent punishments specified in
the laws. One behaves logically by following rules which
describe contingencies; at other times one might behave
in the same way after having been exposed to the con-
tingencies. The business of the logician is deriving new
roles from old and arriving at descriptions of contingen-
cies to which no one has necessarily yet been exposed.
I don't believe my attitude toward "truth " is cavalier. I
accept the tautological truth of logic, but I do not think
that science, including behavioral science, can be true or
false in the same sense - or in any useful sense. Some
verbal responses are controlled by sharply defined stim-
uli which have acquired their power from the part they
play in very consistent contingencies. They are as close as
one can come to being true. Beyond that I do not think we
can go.
Place's concern for the listener seems to me irrelevant.
My book Verbal Behavior was different from most lin-
guistic material of the time in emphasizing the behavior of
the speaker. I did not think that the behavior of the
listener called for any special treatment beyond the role
played in reinforcing the behavior of speakers. The be-
havioral processes involved when a person responds to
"It is raining" do not differ significantly from those in-
volved in responding to a few drops of rain on the skin or a
particular noise on the roof. All three "mean' rain. The
"meaning" of a verbal response for the speaker is not the
same as its "meaning" for the listener. That is what is
wrong with "communication" as making something com-
mon to both parties.
Place speaks of "being in pain" when I speak of the
Response/Skinner: Psychological terms
stimuli generated by a carious tooth. I chose some such
response as "My tooth aches" as a simple example, not as
a "paradigm case of a psychological expression." I do not
agree that "it is one of a very small number of expressions
in our very extensive psychological vocabulary." I agree
with Ryle that we are usually talking about behavior when
we speak of knowing, believing, thinking, wanting, and
intending (I would not be much of a behaviorist if I did
not!), but that is not what the psychologists of 1945 were
saying. The editor of the symposium (E. G. Boring), a
student of Titchener and, through Titchener, Wundt,
believed in a world of mental life in which mental events
obeyed mental laws observed by "trained observers."
These were the things of which I was offering an opera-
tional definition.
I found Rachlin's paper puzzling. He evidently uses
the term "toothache" for all the behavior elicited or
evoked by a carious tooth, where I was using it to mean
only the stimulation arising from such a tooth. He also
speaks of thoughts, feelings, and other mental events and
argues that they must be operants because they have "no
apparent external antecedent stimulus." But one point of
"Terms" was that a substantial amount of behavior that
would be called operant was indeed under the control of
private stimuli; that was the problem I was discussing. I
can't imagine what Rachlin means by a rat's hope or how
he knows that it takes longer than a bar press.
I do not see why it follows from the fact that "in
teaching people to use the mentalistic vocabulary, it must
be overt behavior that society observes and then rewards
or punishes" that "a person who uses that vocabulary to
refer to private events must be using it incorrectly." To
the extent that the private event correlates with the
public evidence, terms will be used correctly. Rachlin
later makes that point by saying that "to the extent that
mental terms refer to the overt behavioral context of
immediate behavior it is possible to use them in a behav-
ioral science. ' But since we do not know the extent to
which they do so, any such use is questionable.
It would be ungrateful of me to complain of Ringen's
excellent summary of my position, and the only remark I
have to make is not a complaint. Ringen extends the
argument of my paper to cover the behavioristic conten-
tion that anthropomorphism, in particular "the cog-
nitivism inspired by Chomsky," is "misplaced in the
scientific study of human (verbal) behavior." I would have
been willing to make the extension at the time I wrote
"Terms" (and indeed was making it in the manuscript
from which the paper was essentially taken), but I would
put it rather differently today. The explanatory terms
which have been used for more than 2,000 years to
explain human behavior are troublesome not because
they raise questions about dimensions but because they
assign the initiation of behavior to the person rather than
to that persons genetic and personal history. The prob-
lem is centrism rather than anthropomorphism. The
terms I hoped to dispense with in my analysis of verbal
behavior (terms like meaning, idea, information, and
knowledge) represent supposed possessions of the speak-
er. So far as I am concerned they are inconvenient
surrogates of the speaker's history. Their dimensions
THE BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1984) 7:4
577

Response/Skinner: Psychological terms
(physical, mental, conceptual?) are not really at issue.
What causes trouble is the usurpation of the initiating role
of the environment.
Robertson raises the question of sensations and images
as representations of stimuli. Do we see red as a property
of an object, as a retinal response to a given frequency of
radiation, as nerve impulses in the optic tract, or as
activity in the occipital cortex? As a behaviorist, I must
reply that what is happening in retina, optic tract, and
occipital cortex are part of seeing red. As a behaviorist, I
leave that to the physiologist, who has more appropriate
instruments and methods. As a behaviorist, I am con-
cerned only with the way in which a discriminative
response (whether it be key press, saying "red," or
stepping on the brake of a car) is brought under the
control of red objects.
Also as a behaviorist, I am concerned with how a person
learns to say "I see red" in both the presence and absence
of red objects. It is the word "see" that causes trouble.
We teach a child to answer questions like, "Do you see
that animal?" or, "Can you see the clock?," but we do so
successfully only if we have evidence that the child's
responses are correct. The evidence we use usually con-
sists of subsequent behavior, as in answering the ques-
tion, "What is it?" or, "What time is it?" Certain private
events are part of that behavior, and the private events
take over control when the child is eventually told to
"think of an elephant" or "imagine a clock." We have no
evidence that copies of elephants or clocks exist inside the
child at any time. Whatever is happening when we see an
elephant or a clock does not require a representation.
Stalker & Ziff have assumed that beyond science and
technology there lies only philosophy. I have found
something else: interpretation. I would define it as the
use of scientific terms and principles in talking about facts
about which too little is known to make prediction and
control possible. The theory of evolution is an example. It
is not philosophy; it is an interpretation of a vast number
of facts about species using terms and principles taken
from .. science of biology based upon much more accessi-
ble material and upon experimental analyses and their
technological applications. The basic principle, re-
production with variation, can be studied under con-
trolled conditions, but its role in the evolution of existing
species is a mere interpretation.
Plate tectonics is another example. It is not philosophy
but an interpretation of the present state of the crust of
the earth, using physical principles governing the behav-
ior of material under high temperatures and pressures
established under the conditions of the laboratory, where
prediction and control are possible. 
\
Laboratory analyses of the behavior of organisms have
yielded a good deal of successful prediction and control,
and to extend the terms and principles found effective
under such circumstances to the interpretation of behav-
ior where laboratory conditions are impossible is feasible
and useful. I do not think that is properly called philoso-
phy. The human behavior we observe from day to day is
unfortunately too complex, occurs too sporadically, and is
a function of variables too far out of reach to permit a
rigorous analysis. It is nevertheless useful to talk about it
in the light of instances in which prediction and control
have proved to be possible. It is true that I was in contact
with philosophers in the thirties and forties and I believe
to my benefit. In particular, I discussed the point of
"Terms" with Herbert Feigl, a distinguished member of
the Vienna Circle. But I was not "pursuing an elusive
Weltanschauung." I have not "succumb[ed] to a lust for
philosophic theorizing."
My book Verbal Behavior was an interpretation of the
field. Early on I had removed a few sections that could be
said to present facts (about word associations, alliteration,
guessing, and so on) just in order to make the nature of the
book clearer. The book differed from what might have
been called the philosophy of language that was then
current in linguistics, semantics, and books like The
Meaning of Meaning (Ogden & Richards 1938). In turn-
ing to the history of the speaker rather than to the
presumed current endowments of speech, I could avoid
saying that a speaker uses words to refer to things, to
express ideas, or to communicate meanings. I questioned
the existence of these things in their traditional sense. I
could, however, have defined them behaviorally, al-
though the resulting expressions would not have been
convenient.
Stalker & Ziff had some difficulty in finding the new
kinds of behavior I am said to have used to "fill the bill of a
technological bird fishing for philosophic frissons in Pla-
to's wordy meander." The essential dependent variable
in the behavioral analysis is the probability of behavior,
rather than the behavior itself, and why should I not refer
to past, current, and future behavior? I agree that percep-
tual behavior is difficult, but philosophers have found it
so, too. The term is not to be dismissed as a slogan. The
expression "covert behavior" was current long before my
time, and its referent is familiar to anyone who has talked
silently to himself.
Although while I do not, as Terrace points out, deny
"the existence of mental events," I do not believe they
exist. There is an inner behavioral life including private
stimuli and private responding. Traditional expressions
referring to mental events I regard as surrogates of
histories of reinforcement. Thus, for me, the bona fide
subject matters are
not thoughts, but what is happening as one thinks and the
history of reinforcement responsible for it;
not beliefs, but behavior with respect to controlling stimuli
and the histories responsible for that control;
not perceptions, but the current control exercised by stimuli
as the result of earlier contingencies of reinforcement;
and so on.
It is true that "modern studies of human and animal
cognition need not concern themselves with the ghost in
the machine," but it is equally important that they dis-
pense with the internal origination of behavior.
Terrace begins a review of "recent developments in
cognition" with three supposed implications of my hy-
pothesis about private events. I should want to state them
in a very different form:
1. "Private events are conscious." The percentage of
which we are conscious must be very small. We seldom
say we are conscious of interoceptive or proprioceptive
stimulation or of much of the exteroceptive stimulation
578
THE BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1984) 7:4

Response/ Skinner: Psychological terms
which can be shown to have an effect on our behavior.
"Terms" dealt with responses which are brought under
the control of private events by a verbal community.
2. "Consciousness presupposes language." Self-knowl-
edge requires verbal contingencies.
3. "Only human beings experience consciousness."
The verbal communities which generate such responses
have until very recently generated them for human
beings only.
With these translations, I do not see the import of the
paragraphs which follow in Terrace's commentary. A few
remarks: I would certainly not say that "all [the behavior
contributing to] mental activity [should] be characterized
as private (conscious) events, under the control of particu-
lar internal stimuli." We "think" about public stimuli and
talk about private ones.
I agree that "the study of cognitive phenomena does
not presuppose dualism," but I insist it presupposes inner
determination, which is the heart of the matter when one
says that one acts because one feels like acting or takes a
particular course because one thinks it will succeed.
This is not the place to argue with Terrace about
"representations" (but see "Behaviorism-50"). It is the
essence of behaviorism to argue that one does not take in
the world or make copies of it in any form and that
behavior which appears to require an internal representa-
tion must be explained in other ways. A complete account
of an alternative explanation in neurological terms is, so
far as I know, still out of reach, but that is also out of my
reach as a behaviorist.
Wright goes far beyond the scope of "Terms" to a
criticism of what is essentially the argument of the book
(Verbal Behavior) from which it was in a sense taken. It is
true that I was attempting to account for verbal behavior
without formulating it as a "report of experience," as "the
expression or communication of meaning," or as neces-
sarily involving "understanding" or "judgment," as those
terms were traditionally defined. The account worked in
a very different way, and if successful it should have
included the behavior of scientists if not some essence of
"science" as knowledge. I could answer Wright only by
reviewing the whole book, and that would be irrelevant
here. I may point out, however, that he is wrong in
characterizing my position as that "all words are mean-
ingless physical effects caused by specific kinds of phys-
ical stimuli." The selective action of operant conditioning
establishes a controlling relation among three things -
stimuli (the setting), behavior (in this case, verbal), and
the reinforcing consequences (in this case, arranged by a
verbal community).
The argument that "psychology must, on pain of other-
wise cutting off its own head, presuppose that human
discourse is very largely rational - that it isn't caused by
stimuli" - raises a different point. Apart from the last
phrase, with which of course I agree, I make a very
different point about rationality. Prior to the advent of
verbal behavior (which required the evolution of physio-
logical changes bringing the vocal musculature under
operant control), all behavior must have been shaped and
maintained by natural selection or operant conditioning.
It is true that some linguists and cognitive psychologists
have asserted that contingencies of reinforcement con-
tain rules, where I would say rather that rules are descrip-
tions of such contingencies, but something else happened
when descriptions became possible and rules could be
formulated. A different kind of behavior then emerged
which needed to be distinguished (see "Problem Solv-
ing"). Once people could talk about their behavior and
the circumstances under which it occurred, they could
begin to give each other reasons for acting in given ways.
An early form must have been the command, describing
an action and at least implying a consequence of failure to
act. Advice and warnings presumably followed in turn.
They described behavior and at least implied conse-
quences. The laws of religion and government more
explicitly specified behavior and consequences. Behavior
that is called taking advice, heeding a warning, or obeying
a law, or behavior that follows rules composed upon
occasion by an immediate analysis of contingencies can be
called rational. The behaver can be said to have "knowl-
edge of the consequences." Nevertheless I doubt that it is
true that human behavior is "very largely rational" in that
sense. Would that it were!
The point of my paper could have been made in
traditional terms. How do we learn the meanings of
words? And how do we do so when the things the words
mean are not accessible to those who teach us? Why did I
not make the point that way? Because I was composing a
different account of verbal behavior in which meanings in
some Platonic sense did not exist in words but were to be
sought among the variables of which verbal behavior was
a function (colloquially, the situations in which words are
used). For the purpose of "Terms," I chose a very simple
functional relation, the discriminative control exercised
by a private stimulus.
ZurifFs first point is very important. Methodological
behaviorists also talked about private events that serve as
stimuli and also about private (covert) behavior. The part
of methodological behaviorism I rejected was the argu-
ment that science must confine itself to events accessible
to at least two observers (the position of logical positivism)
and that behaviorism was therefore destined to ignore
private events. (Hence the still current popular view that
behaviorists confine themselves only to the behavior they
can see.) It was Stevens and Boring, not Watson, Weiss,
Tolman, Guthrie, or Hull who then continued to believe
in the existence of mental life.
But Zuriff misreads my view of the role of the private
stimulus. It is true that the practice of the verbal commu-
nity is to infer the private event in arranging instructional
contingencies, but the person who thereby learns to
describe the event is responding to it directly, not by
inference. It is no doubt wrong of behavior therapists to
assume that self-descriptive statements are correct (as it is
wrong of Freudian or other kinds of therapists to do the
same thing), but within the limits of accuracy of such
reports, something can be learned about a person's histo-
ry by asking how he feels.
The listener who responds to "I am depressed," by
acting henceforth as he usually reacts to a depressed
person is using inference only to the extent that a person
who hears someone say "It is raining" then takes an
umbrella. If doing either of these things is using a hypo-
thetical construct, so be it.
THE BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1984) 7:4
579

References/Skinner: Psychological terms
References
Anderson, J. R. (1978) Arguments concerning representations for mental
imagery. Psychological Review 85:249-77. 
[LCR]
Armstrong, D. M. (1971) Meaning and communication Philosophical Review
80:427-47. 
[JB]
Austin, J. L. (1961) Philosophical papers. Clarendon Press. 
[PH]
Bates, E. (1976) Language and context: The acquisition of pragmatics.
Academic Press. 
[RPB]
Bern, D. J. (1967) Self-perception: An alternative interpretation of cognitive
dissonance phenomena. Psychological Review 74:183-200. 
[DTK, rBFS,
HST]
Bern, D. J. & Allen, A. (1974) On predicting some of the people some of the
time: The search for cross-situational consistencies in behavior.
Psychological Review 81:506-20. 
[DTK]
Bennett, J. (1975) Stimulus, response, meaning. American Philosophical
Quarterly 9:55-88. 
[JB]
(1976) Linguistic behaviour. Cambridge University Press. 
[JB]
Bergmann, G. & Spence, K. W. (1941) Operationism and theory in
psychology. Psychological Review 48:1-14. 
[JM]
Block, N. (1978) Troubles with functionalism. In: Perception and cognition:
Issues in the foundations of psychology. Minnesota studies in the
philosophy of science, vol. 9, ed. C. W. Savage. University of Minnesota
Press. 
[CG]
Boden, M. (1972) Purposive explanation in psychology. Harvard University
Press. 
[JDR]
Boring, E. G. (1936) Temporal perception and operationism. American
Journal of Psychology 48:519-22. 
[JM]
(1945) The use of operational definitions in science. Psychological Review
52:243-45. 
[taBFS]
Bousfield, A. K. & Bousfield, W. A. (1966) Measurement of clustering and of
sequential constancies in repeated free recall. Psychological Reports
19:935-42. 
[HST]
Bower, G. H. (1972) A selective review of organizational factors in memory.
In: Organization of memory, ed. E. Tulving & W. Donaldson. Academic
Press. 
[HST]
Bridgman, P. W. (1928) The logic of modern physics. Macmillan. 
[RPB,
JDR, taBFS]
(1945) Some general principles of operational analysis. Psychological Review
52:246-49. 
[taBFS]
Brinker, R. P. (1982) Contextual contours in the development of language. In:
Children thinking through language, ed. M. Beveridge. Edward
Arnold. 
[RPB]
Bruner, J. S. (1975) The ontogenesis of speech acts. Journal of Child Language
2.1-19. 
[RPB]
Carnap, R. (1934) The unity of science. K. Paul, Trench, Trubner &
Co. 
[taBFS]
Catania, A. C. (1979) Learning. Prentice-Hall. 
[RBP]
Cheek, J. M. (1982) Aggregation, moderator variables, and the validity of
personality tests: A peer-rating study. Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology 43:1254-69. 
[DTK]
Chomsky, N. (1959) A review of B. F. Skinner's Verbal Rehavior. Language
35:26-58. 
[RPB, JDR]
(1975) Reflections on language. William Collins. 
[CFL]
Churchland, P. (1981) Eliminative materialism and propositional attitudes.
Journal of Philosophy 78:67-90. 
[JB]
Churchland, P. M. & Churchland, P. S. (1981) Functionalism, qualia, and
intentionality. Philosophical Topics 12:121-45. 
[GG]
Commons, M. L., Hermstein, R. J. & Rachlin, H. eds. (1982) Quantitative
analyses of behavior, vol. 2, Matching and maximizing accounts.
Ballinger, 
[HR]
Cumming, W. W. & Berryman, R. R. (1965) Stimulus generalization. In:
Stimulus generalization, ed. D. I. Mostofsky. Stanford University
Press. 
[HST]
Feigl, H. (1945) Operationism and scientific method. Psychological Review
52:250-59. 
[RPB, taBFS]
Fodor, J. A. (1980) Methodological solipsism considered as a research strategy
in cognitive psychology. Behavioral and Brain Sciences 3:63-72. 
[JB]
Fodor, J. A. Bever, T. G. & Garrett, M. F. (1974) The psychology of
language. McGraw-Hill. 
[JDR]
Grant, D. S. (1983) Rehearsal in pigion short-term memory. In: Animal
cognition, ed. H. L. Roitblat, T. G. Bever & H. S. Terrace. Lawrence
Erlbaum Associates. 
[HST]
Greenfield, P. M. & Smith, J. H. (1976) The structure of communication in
early language development. Academic Press. 
[RPB]
Grice, H. P. (1957) Meaning. Philosophical Review 66:377-88. 
[JB]
Harre, R. & Secord, P. F. (1972) The explanation of social behaviour.
Blackwell. 
[CFL]
Harzem, P. & Miles, T. R. (1978) Conceptual issues in operant psychology.
Wiley. 
[PH]
Hempel, C. G. (1965a) The concept of rationality and the logic of explanations
by reasons. In; Aspects of scientific explanations. Free Press. 
[JDR]
(1965b) Empiricist criteria of cognitive significance: Problems and changes.
In: Aspects of scientific explanation. Free Press. 
[JDR]
(1965c) A logical appraisal of operationism. In: Aspects of scientific
explanation. Free Press. 
[JDR]
Herrnstein, R. J. (1977) The evolution of behaviorism. American Psychologist
32:593-603. 
[RPB]
Hinsie, L. E. & Campbell, R. J., eds. (1970) Psychiatric Dictionary. 4th ed.
Oxford University Press. 
[PEM]
Hunter, W. S. (1913) The delayed reaction in animals. Behavior Monographs
2:6. 
[HST]
Jaynes, J. (1976) The origin of consciousness in the breakdown of the
bicameral mind. Houghton Mifflin. 
[HST]
Kendall, P. C. & Hollon, S. D. (1979) Cognitive-behavioral 
interventions:
Theory, research and procedures. Academic Press. 
(CFL]
Kenrick, D. T. & Dantchik, A. (1983) Interactions, idiographics, and the
social psychological invasion of personality. Journal of Personality 51:286-
307. 
[DTK]
Kenrick, D. T. & Stringfleld, D. O. (1980) Personality traits and the eye of
the beholder: Crossing some traditional philosophical boundaries in the
search for consistency in all of the people. Psychological Review 87:88-
104. 
[DTK]
Koch, S. (1964) Psychology and emerging conceptions of knowledge as
unitary. In: Behaviorism and phenomenology, ed. T. W. Wann.
University of Chicago Press. 
[JDR]
Koestler, A. (1967) The ghost in the machine. Hutchinson. 
[CFL]
Kuhn, T. (1962) The structure of scientific revolutions. University of Chicago
Press. 
[JDR]
Lacey, H. (1974) The scientific study of linguistic behavior: A perspective on
the Skinner-Chomsky controversy. Journal for the Theory of Social
Behaviour 4:17-51. 
[JDR]
Ledgwidge, B. (1978) Cognitive-behavior modification: A step in the wrong
direction? Psychological Bulletin 85:353-75. 
[CFL]
Locke, E. A. (1979) Behavior modification is not cognitive and other myths: A
reply to Ledgwidge. Cognitive Therapy and Research 3:119-25. 
[CFL]
Lowe, C. F. (1979) Determinants of human operant behaviour. In: Advances
in analysis of behaviour, vol. 1, Reinforcement and the organisation of
behaviour, ed. M. D. Zeiler & P. Harzem. Wiley. 
[CFL]
(1983) Radical behaviorism and human psychology. In: Animal models of
human behavior, ed. G. C. L. Davey. Wiley. 
[CFL, rBFS]
Lowe, C. F., Beasty, A. & Bentall, R. P. (1983) The role of verbal behavior
in human learning: Infant performance on fixed-interval schedules.
Journal of the Experimental Analysis of Behavior 39:157-64. 
[CFL]
Lowe, C. F. & Higson, P. J. (1981) Self-instructional training and cognitive
behaviour modification: A behavioural analysis. In: Applications of
conditioning theory, ed. G. C. L. Davey. Methuen. 
[CFL]
Luria, A. (1961) The role of speech in the regulation of normal and abnormal
behavior. Liveright. 
[CFL]
Lycan, W. (1981) Form, function, and feel. Journal of Philosophy 78:24-
49. 
[GG]
MacCorquodale, K. (1970) On Chomsky's review of Skinner's Verbal
Behavior. Journal of the Experimental Analysis of Behavior 13:83-
99. 
[JDR]
Mach, E. (1893) The science of mechanics. Open Court Publishing
Company. 
[taBFS]
(1919) The science of mechanics. Translated by T. J. McCormack. 4th ed.
Open Court Publishing Company. 
[JDR]
Mahoney, M. J. (1977) Reflections on the cognitive-learning trend in
psychotherapy. American Psychologist 32:5-13. 
[CFL]
Malcolm, N. (1964) Behaviorism as a philosophy of psychology. In:
Behaviorism and phenomenology: Contrasting bases for modern
psychology, ed. T. W. Wann. University of Chicago Press. 
[GG, rBFS]
Mandler, G. (1967) Organization and memory. In: The psychology of learning
and motivation, ed. K. W. Spence & J. T. Spence. Academic
Press. 
[HST]
Meyer, M. (1921) The psychology of the other-one. Missouri Book
Co. 
[GEZ]
Miller, G. A. (1951) Language and communication. McGraw-Hill. 
[JB,
rBFS]
Ogden, C. K. & Richards, I. A. (1938) The meaning of meaning. Harcourt,
Brace. 
[rBFS]
Olton, D. S. & Samuelson, R. J. (1976) Remembrance of places past: Spatial
5 8 0 
THE BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1984) 7:4

References/ Skinner: Psychological terms
memory in rats. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Animal Behavior
Processes 2:97-116. 
[HST]
Palmer, S. E. (1978) Fundamental aspects of cognitive representation. In:
Cognition and categorization, ed. E. Rosch & B. Lloyd. Lawrence
Erlbaum Associates. 
[LCR]
Piaget, J. (1929) The child's conception of the world. Harcourt, Brace. 
[HST]
Piaget, J. & Inhelder, B. (1969) The gaps in empiricism. In: Beyond
reductionism, ed. A. Koestler & J. R. Smythies. Hutchinson. 
[RPB]
Place, U. T. (1981a) Skinner's Verbal behavior I - Why we need it.
Behaviorism 9:1-24. 
[UTP]
(1981b) Skinner's Verbal Behavior II - What is wrong with it. Behaviorism
9:131-52. 
[UTP]
Polanyi, M. (1960) Personal knowledge. University of Chicago Press. 
[rBFS]
Premack, D. (1976) Intelligence in ape and man. Lawrence Erlbaum
Associates. 
[HST]
Quine, W. (1960) Word and object. MIT Press. 
[JDR]
(1970) Methodological reflections on current linguistic theory. Synthese
27:325-29. 
[JDR]
Ringen, J. (1977) On evaluating data concerning linguistic intuition. In:
Current themes in linguistics, ed. F. Eckman. Wiley. 
[JDR]
(1980) Quine on introspection in linguistics. In: A festschrift for a native
speaker, ed. F. Coulmas. Mouton. 
[JDR]
Roberts, W. A. & Kraemer, P. J. (1982) Some observations of the effects of
intertrial interval and delay on delayed matching to sample in pigeons.
Journal of Experimental Psychology: Animal Behavior Processes 8:342-
53. 
[HST]
Roitblat, H. L. (1980) Codes and coding processes in pigeon short-term
memory. Animal Learning and Behavior 8:341-51. 
[HST]
Russell, B. (1940) An inquiry into meaning and truth. C. Allen &
Unwin. 
[taBFS]
Ryle, G. (1949) The concept of mind. Hutchinson. 
[PH, UTP]
Schiffer, S. R. (1972) Meaning. Oxford University Press. 
[JB]
Scriven, M. (1956) A study of radical behaviorism. In: The foundations of
science and the concepts of psychology and psychoanalysis, ed. H. Feigl
& M. Scriven. Minnesota Studies in the Philosophy of Science, vol. 1.
University of Minnesota Press. 
[JDR]
Segal, E. F. (1975) Psycholinguistics discovers the operant: A review of Roger
Brown's A first language: The early states. Journal of the Experimental
Analysis of Behavior 23:149-58. 
[RPB]
Shepard, R. N. (1975) Form, formation and transformation of internal
representations. In: Information processing and cognition, ed. R. L.
Solso. Lawrence Erlbaum Associates. 
(HST]
Shepard, R. N. & Metzler, J. (1971) Mental rotation of three-dimensional
objects. Science 171:701-3. 
[LCR]
Shimp, C. P. (1976) Short-term memory in the pigeon: Relative recency.
Journal of the Experimental Analysis of Behavior 25:55-61. 
[HST]
Skinner, B. F. (1931) The concept of the reflex in the description of behavior.
Journal of General Psychology 5:427-58. 
[PNH, JDR, taBFS]
(1935a) The generic nature of the concepts of stimulus and response.
Journal of General Psychology 12:40-65. 
[RPB, PNH]
(1935b) Two types of conditioned reflex and a pseudo-type. Journal of
General Psychology 12:66-77. 
[PNH]
(1937) Two types of conditioned reflex: A reply to Konorski and Miller.
Journal of General Psychology 16:272-79. 
[PNH]
(1938) The behavior of organisms. Appleton-Century-Crofts. 
:APB, CFL,
PEM, DS]
(1950) Are theories of learning necessary? Psychological Review 57:193-
216. 
[PNH, rBFS, HST]
(1953) Science and human behavior. Macmillan. 
[CFL, HST]
(1957) Verbal behavior. Appleton-Century-Crofts. 
[KRG, GG, CFL, JM,
UTP, JDR]
(1959) John Broadus Watson, behaviorist. Science 129:197-98. 
[JDR]
(1963) Behaviorism at fifty. Science 134:566-602. 
[CFL]
(1969a) Contingencies of reinforcement: A theoretical analysis. Appleton-
Century-Crofts. 
[RPB, UTP, HST, GEZ]
(1969b) An operant analysis of problem solving. In: Contingencies of
reinforcement: A theoretical analysis. Appleton-Century-Crofts. 
[PNH]
(1974) About behaviorism. Alfred A. Knopf. 
[PH, CFL, DS, HST, GEZ]
(1977a) Herrnstein and the evolution of behaviorism. American Psychologist
32:1006-12. 
[RPB, PNH]
(1977b) Why I am not a cognitive psychologist. Behaviorism 5:1-10 
[HST]
(1981) Selection by consequences. Science 213:501-4. 
[PNH]
Slater, E. & Glithero, E. (1965) A follow up of patients diagnosed as suffering
from hysteria. Journal of Psychosomatic Research 9:9-13. 
[DTK]
Sokolov, A. N. (1972) Inner speech and thought. Plenum. 
[CFL]
Stevens, S. S. (1939) Psychology and the science of science. Psychological
Bulletin 36:221-63. 
[JM, taBFS]
Taylor, C. (1964) The explanation of behaviour. Humanities Press. 
[JDR]
Terrace, H. S. (1970) Towards a doctrine of radical behaviorism.
Contemporary Psychology 15:531-35. 
[HST]
(1982) Can animals think? New Society 4:339-42. 
[HST]
(1983a) Animal cognition. In Animal Cognition, ed. H. L. Roitblat, T. G.
Bever & H. S. Terrace. Lawrence Erlbaum Associates. 
[HST]
(1983b) Simultaneous chaining: The problem it poses for traditional chaining
theory. In: Quantitative studies in operant behavior: Acquisition, ed. M.
L. Commons, A. R. Wagner & R. J. Herrnstein. Ballinger. 
[HST]
Vygotsky, L. (1962) Thought and language. Wiley. 
[CFL]
Watson, J. B. (1913) Psychology as the behaviorist views it. Psychological
Review 20:158-77. 
[CFL]
Wells, G. (1981) Learning through interaction: Study of language
development. Cambridge University Press. 
[RPB]
Whitlock, F. A. (1967) The aetiology of hysteria. Acta Psychiatrica
Scandinavica 43:144-62. 
[DTK]
Wilson, T. (1978) Cognitive behavior therapy: Paradigm shift or passing
phase? In: Cognitive behavior therapy: Research and application, ed. J.
Foreyt & D. Rathjen. Plenum. 
[CFL]
Winokur, S. (1976) A primer of verbal behavior: An operant view. Prentice-
Hall. 
[JDR]
Wittgenstein, L. (1953) Philosophical investigations. Macmillan. 
[KRG, PH]
Woodfield, A. (1976) Teleology. Cambridge University Press. 
[JDR]
Wright, L. (1976) Teleological explanations. University of California
Press. 
[JDR]
Zentall, T. (1983) Cognitive factors in conditional learning by pigeons. In:
Animal cognition, ed. H. L. Roitblat, T. G. Bever & H. S. Terrace.
Lawrence Erlbaum Associates. 
[HST]
Zettle, R. D. & Hayes, S. C. (1982) Rule-governed behavior: A potential
theoretical framework for cognitive behavior therapy. In: Advances in
cognitive-behavioral research and therapy, vol. 1, ed. P. C. Kendall.
Academic Press. 
[CFL]
Ziff, P. (1960) Semantic analysis. Cornell University Press. 
[JB]
(1970) A response to stimulus meaning. Philosophical Review 79:63-
74. 
[JB]
THE BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1984) 7:4
581

Journal of the
Experimental Analysis
i
of Behavior /
A SAMPLING OF RECENT ARTICLES
B. F. Skinner. The evolution of behavior.
E. Sue Savage-Rumbaugh. Verbal behavior at a procedural
level in the chimpanzee.
Travis Thompson. The examining magistrate for nature. A
retrospective review of Claude Bernard's An Introduc-
tion to the Study of Experimental Medicine.
William Timberiake. Behavior regulation and learned
performance: 
Some 
misapprehensions and
disagreements.
Alliston K. Reid & J. E. R. Sladdon. Schedule-induced
drinking: Elicitation, anticipation, or behavioral interac-
tion?
Ronald M. Lazar, Deborah Davis-Lang, & Lisette Sanchez.
The formation of visual stimulus equivalences in
children.
A. P. Cos tell. Are theories of perception necessary?. A
review of Gibson's The Ecological Approach to Visual
Perception.
Eric F. Ward. Teaching sign language to a chimpanzee:
Some historical references.
Tom L. Schmid & Don F. Hake. Fast acquisition of
cooperation and trust: A two-stage view of trusting
behavior.
Alan Baron, Stephen R. Menich, & Michael Perone. Reac-
tion times of younger and older men and temporal con-
tingencies of reinforcement.
Kazuo Fujita. Formation of the sameness-difference con-
cept of Japanese monkeys from a small number of color
stimuli.
D. E. McMillan & G. R. Wenger. Effects of barbiturates
and other sedative hypnotics in pigeons trained to
discriminate phencyclidine from saline.
Edmund Fantino & David A. Case. Human observing:
Maintained by stimuli correlated with reinforcement but
not extinction.
William Blum. Matching, statistics, and common sense.
C. F. Lowe, A. Beasty, & R. P. Benlall. The role of verbal
behavior in human learning: Infant performance on
fixed-interval schedules.
C. P. Shimp. The local organization of behavior: Dissocia-
tion between a pigeon's behavior and self-reports of that
behavior.
Donald M. Thompson, Joseph M. Moerschbaecher, &
Peter J. Winsauer. Drug effects on repeated acquisition:
Comparison of cumulative and noncumulative dosing.
Nancy K. Innis, Virginia L. Simmelhag-Grant, & J. E. R.
Staddon. Behavior induced by periodic food delivery:
The effects of interfood interval.
Ben A. Williams. On the failure and facilitation of condi-
tional discrimination.
Jay Moore. On the tactful specification of meaning: A
review of Harre' and Lamb's The Encyclopedic Dic-
tionary of Psychology.
A. Charles Catania, Byron A. Matthews, & Eliot Shimoff.
Instructed versus shaped human verbal behavior: In-
teractions with nonverbal responding.
James A. Dinsmoor, Kay L. Mueller, Louise T. Martin, &
Craig A. Bo we. The acquisition of observing.
Stephen P. Kramer. Memory for recent behavior in the
pigeon.
Nureya Abarca & Edmund Fantino. Choice and foraging.
Robert Slromer & J. Grayson Osborne. Control of
adolescents' arbitrary matching-to-sample by positive
and negative stimulus relations.
Murray Sidman, Rick Rauzin, Ronald Lazar, Sharon
Cunningham, William Tailby, & Philip Carrigan. A
search for symmetry in the conditional discrimination of
rhesus monkeys, baboons, and children.
John A. Nevin, Peter Jenkins, Stephen Whittaker, & Peter
Yarensky. Reinforcement 
contingencies 
and 
signal
detection.
Jack Michael. Distinguishing between discriminative and
motivational functions of stimuli.
Andrew S. Bondy. Effects of prompting and reinforcement
of one response pattern upon imitation of a different
modeled pattern.
Philip N. Hineline. Aversive control: A separate domain?
Allen J. Neuringer. Melioration and self-experimentation.
Steven R. Hursh. Behavioral economics.
ENTER YOUR SUBSCRIPTION NOW FOR 1985.
Rates
$ 8.00 Full time students
16.00 Individuals (personal use only)
30.00 Institutions
(Subscribers outside the U.S. should add $4.00
for postage. Credit card orders are accepted.)
Mail orders and checks (payable to JEAB) to:
Kay Dinsmoor, JEAB
Department of Psychology
Indiana University
Bloomington, Indiana 47405
U.S.A.

