Examining the Work and Its Later Impact
569
Examining the Work and Its Later Impact
Daniel Dennett is inspired by —
TURING’S
“STRANGE INVERSION OF REASONING”
Some of the greatest, most revolutionary advances in science have been given their initial expression
in attractively modest terms, with no fanfare. Charles Darwin managed to compress his entire theory
into a single summary paragraph that a layperson can readily follow, in all its details:
If during the long course of ages and under varying conditions of life, organic beings vary
at all in the several parts of their organization, and I think this cannot be disputed; if there
be, owing to the high geometric powers of increase of each species, at some age, season, or
year, a severe struggle for life, and this certainly cannot be disputed; then, considering the
inﬁnite complexity of the relations of all organic beings to each other and to their conditions
of existence, causing an inﬁnite diversity in structure, constitution, and habits, to be advanta-
geous to them, I think it would be a most extraordinary fact if no variation ever had occurred
useful to each being’s own welfare, in the same way as so many variations have occurred
useful to man. But if variations useful to any organic being do occur, assuredly individu-
als thus characterized will have the best chance of being preserved in the struggle for life;
and from the strong principle of inheritance they will tend to produce offspring similarly
characterized. This principle of preservation, I have called, for the sake of brevity, Natural
Selection. (Origin of Species, end of chapter 4)
Francis Crick and James Watson closed their epoch-making paper on the structure of DNA with
the deliciously difﬁdent sentence:
It has not escaped our notice that the speciﬁc pairings we have postulated immediately sug-
gests a possible copying mechanism for the replicating unit of life. (Watson and Crick (1953),
p.738)
And Alan Turing created a new world of science and technology, setting the stage for solving
one of the most bafﬂing puzzles remaining to science, the mind-body problem, with an even shorter
declarative sentence in the middle of his 1936 paper on computable numbers:
It is possible to invent a single machine which can be used to compute any computable
sequence. (Turing (1936), p.241)
Turing didn’t just intuit that this remarkable feat was possible; he showed exactly how to make such
a machine. With that demonstration the computer age was born. It is important to remember that
there were entities called computers before Turing came up with his idea – but they were people,
clerical workers with enough mathematical skill, patience, and pride in their work to generate reli-
able results of hours and hours of computation, day in and day out. Many of them were women.

570
Part III
Thousands of them were employed in engineering and commerce, and in the armed forces and
elsewhere, calculating tables for use in navigation, gunnery and other such technical endeavours.
A good way of understanding Turing’s revolutionary idea about computation is to put it in juxtapo-
sition with Darwin’s about evolution. The pre-Darwinian world was held together not by science but
by tradition: all things in the universe, from the most exalted (‘man’) to the most humble (the ant,
the pebble, and the raindrop), were the creations of a still more exalted thing, God, an omnipotent
and omniscient intelligent creator – who bore a striking resemblance to the second-most exalted
thing. Call this the trickle-down theory of creation. Darwin replaced it with the bubble-up theory of
creation. One of Darwin’s nineteenth century critics put it vividly:
In the theory with which we have to deal, Absolute Ignorance is the artiﬁcer; so that we may
enunciate as the fundamental principle of the whole system, that, IN ORDER TO MAKE A
PERFECT AND BEAUTIFUL MACHINE, IT IS NOT REQUISITE TO KNOW HOW TO
MAKE IT. This proposition will be found, on careful examination, to express, in condensed
form, the essential purport of the Theory, and to express in a few words all Mr. Darwin’s
meaning; who, by a strange inversion of reasoning, seems to think Absolute Ignorance fully
qualiﬁed to take the place of Absolute Wisdom in all the achievements of creative skill.
(MacKenzie, 1868)
It was, indeed, a strange inversion of reasoning. To this day many people cannot get their heads
around the unsettling idea that a purposeless, mindless process can crank away through the eons,
generating ever more subtle, efﬁcient and complex organisms without having the slightest whiff of
understanding of what it is doing.
Turing’s idea was a similar – in fact remarkably similar – strange inversion of reasoning. The
Pre-Turing world was one in which computers were people, who had to understand mathemat-
ics in order to do their jobs. Turing realised that this was just not necessary: you could take the
tasks they performed and squeeze out the last tiny smidgens of understanding, leaving nothing but
brute, mechanical actions. IN ORDER TO BE A PERFECT AND BEAUTIFUL COMPUTING
MACHINE IT IS NOT REQUISITE TO KNOW WHAT ARITHMETIC IS.

Examining the Work and Its Later Impact
571
What Darwin and Turing had both discovered, in their different ways, was the existence of com-
petence without comprehension (Dennett, 2009, from which material in the preceding paragraphs
has been drawn, with revisions). This inverted the deeply plausible assumption that comprehension
is in fact the source of all advanced competence. Why, after all, do we insist on sending our chil-
dren to school, and why do we frown on the old-fashioned methods of rote learning? We expect
our children’s growing competence to ﬂow from their growing comprehension; the motto of modern
education might be: ‘comprehend in order to be competent’ And for us members of H. sapiens, this
is almost always the right way to look at, and strive for, competence. I suspect that this much-loved
principle of education is one of the primary motivators of skepticism about both evolution and its
cousin in Turing’s world, Artiﬁcial Intelligence. The very idea that mindless mechanicity can gen-
erate human-level – or divine level! – competence strikes many as philistine, repugnant, an insult to
our minds and the mind of God.
Consider how Turing went about his proof. He took human computers as his model. There they
sat at their desks, doing one simple and highly reliable step after another, checking their work, writ-
ing down the intermediate results instead of relying on their memories, consulting their recipes as
often as they needed, turning what at ﬁrst might appear a daunting task into a routine they could
almost do in their sleep. Turing systematically broke down the simple steps into even simpler steps,
removing all vestiges of discernment or comprehension. Did a human computer have difﬁculty
telling the number 99999999999 from the number 9999999999? Then, break down the perceptual
problem of recognizing the number into simpler problems, distributing easier, stupider acts of dis-
crimination over multiple steps. He thus prepared an inventory of basic building blocks from which
to construct the universal algorithm that could execute any other algorithm. He showed how that
algorithm would enable a (human) computer to compute any function, and noted that:
The behaviour of the computer at any moment is determined by the symbols which he is
observing and his “state of mind” at that moment. We may suppose that there is a bound B
to the number of symbols or squares which the computer can observe at one moment. If he
wishes to observe more, he must use successive observations.
.... The operation actually
performed is determined
....
by the state of mind of the computer and the observed
symbols. In particular, they determine the state of mind of the computer after the operation
is carried out.
He then noted, calmly:
We may now construct a machine to do the work of this computer. (p.251)
Right there we see the reduction of all possible computation to a mindless process. We can
start with the simple building blocks Turing had isolated, and construct layer upon layer of more
sophisticated computation, restoring, gradually, the intelligence Turing had so deftly laundered out
of the practices of human computers.
But what about the genius of Turing, and of later, lesser programmers, whose own intelligent
comprehension was manifestly the source of the designs that can knit Turing’s mindless building
blocks into useful competences? Doesn’t this dependence just re-introduce the trickle-down per-
spective on intelligence, with Turing in the God role? No less a thinker than Roger Penrose has
expressed skepticism about the possibility that Artiﬁcial Intelligence could be the fruit of nothing
but mindless algorithmic processes.
I am a strong believer in the power of natural selection. But I do not see how natural selection,
in itself, can evolve algorithms which could have the kind of conscious judgements of the
validity of other algorithms that we seem to have. (1989, p.414)

572
Part III
He goes on that admit:
To my way of thinking there is still something mysterious about evolution, with its appar-
ent‘groping’ towards some future purpose. Things at least seem to organize themselves
somewhat better than they‘ought’ to, just on the basis of blind-chance evolution and natural
selection. (1989, p.416)
Indeed, a single cascade of natural selection events, occurring over even billions of years, would
seem unlikely to be able to create a string of zeroes and ones that, once read by a digital computer,
would be an ‘algorithm’ for ‘conscious judgments.’ But as Turing fully realised, there was nothing
to prevent the process of evolution from copying itself on many scales, of mounting discernment
and judgment. The recursive step that got the ball rolling – designing a computer that could mimic
any other computer–could itself be reiterated, permitting speciﬁc computers to enhance their own
powers by redesigning themselves, leaving their original designer far behind. Already in ‘Comput-
ing Machinery and Intelligence,’ his classic paper in Mind, 1950, he recognised that there was no
contradiction in the concept of a (non-human) computer that could learn.
The idea of a learning machine may appear paradoxical to some readers. How can the rules
of operation of the machine change? They should describe completely how the machine will
react whatever its history might be, whatever changes it might undergo. The rules are thus
quite time-invariant. This is quite true. The explanation of the paradox is that the rules which
get changed in the learning process are of a rather less pretentious kind, claiming only an
ephemeral validity. The reader may draw a parallel with the Constitution of the United States.
(See Suber (2001), unpublished, for a valuable discussion of this passage and the so-called
paradox of self-amendment.)
He saw clearly that all the versatility and self-modiﬁability of human though – learning and
re-evaluation and, language and problem-solving, for instance – could in principle be constructed
out of these building blocks. Call this the bubble-up theory of mind, and contrast it with the various
trickle-down theories of mind, by thinkers from Ren´e Descartes to John Searle (and including,
notoriously, Kurt G¨odel, whose proof was the inspiration for Turin’s work) that start with human
consciousness at its most reﬂective, and then are unable to unite such magical powers with the mere
mechanisms of human bodies and brains.
Turing, like Darwin, broke down the mystery of intelligence (or Intelligent Design) into what
we might call atomic steps of dumb happenstance, which, when accumulated by the millions, added
up to a sort of pseudo-intelligence. The Central Processing Unit of a computer doesn’t really know
what arithmetic is, or understand what addition is, but it ‘understands’ the ‘command’ to add two
numbers and put their sum in a register – in the minimal sense that it reliably adds when thus called
upon to add and puts the sum in the right place. Let’s say it sorta understands addition. A few levels
higher, the operating system doesn’t really understand that it is checking for errors of transmission
and ﬁxing them but it sorta understands this, and reliably does this work when called upon. A few
further levels higher, when the building blocks are stacked up by the billions and trillions, the chess-
playing program does’t really understand that its queen is in jeopardy, but it sorta understands this,
and IB’s Watson on Jeopardy sorta understands the questions it answers.
Why indulge in this ‘sorta’ talk? Because when we analyze – or synthesise – this stack of ever
more competent levels, we need to keep track of two facts about each level: what it is and what
it does. What it is can be described in terms of the structural organization of the parts from which
it is mad – so long as we can assume that the parts function as they are supposed to function.
What it does is some (cognitive) function that it (sorta) performs – well enough so that at the next
level up, we can make the assumption that we have in our inventory a smarter building block that
performs just that function – sorta, good enough to use. This is the key to breaking the back of the
mind-bogglingly complex question of how a mind could ever be composed of material mechanisms.

Examining the Work and Its Later Impact
573
What we might call the sorta operator is, in cognitive science, the parallel of Darwin’s gradualism
in evolutionary processes. Before there were bacteria there were sorta bacteria, before there were
mammals there were sorta mammals and before there were dogs there were sorta dogs, and so
forth. We need Darwin’s gradualism to explain the huge difference between an ape and an apple,
and we need Turin’s gradualism to explain the huge difference between a humanoid robot and hand
calculator. The ape and the apple are made of the same basic ingredients, differently structured and
exploited in a many-level cascade of different functional competences. There is no principled divid-
ing line between a sorta ape and an ape. The humanoid robot and the hand calculator are both made
of the same basic, unthinking, unfeeling Turing-bricks, but as we compose them into larger, more
competent structures, which then become the elements of still more competent structures at higher
levels, we eventually arrive at parts so (sorta) intelligent that they can be assembled into compe-
tences that deserve to be called comprehending. We use the intentional stance (Dennett, 1971,1987)
to keep track of the beliefs and desires (or ‘beliefs’ and ‘desires’ or sorta beliefs and sorta desires)
of the (sorta-)rational agents at every level from the simplest bacterium through all the discriminat-
ing, signaling, comparing, remembering circuits that compose the brains of animals from starﬁsh to
astronomers. There is no principled line above which true comprehension is to be found – even in
our own case. The small child sorta understands her own sentence ‘Daddy is a doctor’, and I sorta
understand ‘E = mc2’. Some philosophers resist this anti-essentialism: either you believe that snow
is white or you don’t; either you are conscious or you aren’t; nothing counts as an approximation of
any mental phenomenon – it’s all or nothing. And to such thinkers, the powers of minds are insolu-
ble mysteries because they are ‘perfect,’ and perfectly unlike anything to be found in mere material
mechanisms.
We still haven’t arrived at ‘real’ understanding in robots, but we are getting closer. That, at least,
is the conviction of those of us inspired by Turing’s insight. The trickle-down theorists are sure in
their bones that no amount of further building will ever get us to the real thing. They think that a
Cartesian res cogitans, a thinking thing, cannot be constructed out of Turing’s building blocks. And
creationists are similarly sure in their bones that no amount of Darwinian shufﬂing and copying
and selecting could ever arrive at (real) living things. They are wrong, but one can appreciate the
discomfort that motivates their conviction.
Turing’s strange inversion of reason, like Darwin’s, goes against the grain of millennia of earlier
thought. If the history of resistance to Darwinian thinking is a good measure, we can expect that
long into the future, long after every triumph of human thought has been matched or surpassed by
‘mere machines’, there will still be thinkers who insist that the human mind works in mysterious
ways that no science can comprehend.
References
Darwin, C., 1859. On the Origin of Species, John Murray, London.
Dennett, D.C., 1971. Intentional systems. J. Phil., 68, 87–106.
Dennett, D.C., 1987. The Intentional Stance, MIT Press, Cambridge, MA.
Dennett, D.C., 2009. Darwin’s Strange inversion of reasoning. PNAS, 106, 10061–10065.
MacKenzie, R.B., 1868. The Darwinian Theory of the Transmutation of Species Examined, Nisbet & Co,
London.
Penrose, R., 1989. The Emperor’s New Mind, Oxford University Press, Oxford.
Suber, P., (unpublished). Saving Machines From Themselves: The Ethics of Deep Self-Modiﬁcation, preprint,
30 November 2001. http://www.earlham.edu/∼peters/writing/selfmod.htm
Turing, A., 1936. On computable numbers, with an application to the Entscheidungsproblem. Proc. Lond.
Math. Soc. 42, 23–265, and erratum (1937) 43, 544–546.
Turing, A., 1950. Computing machinery and intelligence. Mind, LIX, 2236, 433–460.
Watson, J.D. and Crick, F.H.C., 1953. A structure for deoxyribose nucleic acid. Nature 171, 737–738.

Alan Turing
HIS WORK AND IMPACT
Edited by
S. BARRY COOPER
University of Leeds, UK
and
JAN VAN LEEUWEN
Utrecht University, The Netherlands
AMSTERDAM • BOSTON • HEIDELBERG • LONDON
NEW YORK • OXFORD • PARIS • SAN DIEGO
SAN FRANCISCO • SINGAPORE • SYDNEY • TOKYO

Elsevier
225 Wyman Street, Waltham, MA 02451, USA
The Boulevard, Langford Lane, Kidlington, Oxford OX5 1GB, UK
Radarweg 29, PO Box 211, 1000 AE Amsterdam, The Netherlands
Copyright c⃝2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved
No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system or transmitted in any form or by
any means electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording or otherwise without the prior written permission
of the publisher Permissions may be sought directly from Elsevier’s Science & Technology Rights
Department in Oxford, UK: phone (+44) (0) 1865 843830; fax (+44) (0) 1865 853333; email:
permissions@elsevier.com. Alternatively you can submit your request online by visiting the Elsevier web site
at http://elsevier.com/locate/permissions, and selecting Obtaining permission to use Elsevier material
Notice
No responsibility is assumed by the publisher for any injury and/or damage to persons or property as a matter
of products liability, negligence or otherwise, or from any use or operation of any methods, products,
instructions or ideas contained in the material herein. Because of rapid advances in the medical sciences, in
particular, independent veriﬁcation of diagnoses and drug dosages should be made
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
A catalog record for this book is available from the Library of Congress
British Library Cataloguing in Publication Data
A catalogue record for this book is available from the British Library
For information on all Elsevier publications
visit our web site at elsevierdirect.com
Printed and bound in USA
12 13 14 15
10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1
ISBN: 978-0-12-386980-7
c⃝Matthew Oldﬁeld Photography, Turing Statue at Bletchley Park, National Codes Centre. Created by
Stephen Kettle and commissioned by the Sidney E Frank Foundation.

