Daniel Dennett
Daniel Dennett (born 1942 in Boston, Massachusetts) is a prominent
U.S. philosopher whose research centers on philosophy of mind, philos-
ophy of science, and philosophy of biology, particularly as those fields
relate to evolutionary biology and cognitive science. He is currently the
codirector of the Center for Cognitive Studies and the Austin B.
Fletcher Professor of Philosophy at Tufts University. Dennett is also a
noted atheist and advocate of the Brights movement. His first book,
Content and Consciousness, appeared in 1969, followed by Brainstorms
(1978); Elbow Room (1984); The Intentional Stance (1987); Consciousness
Explained (1991); Darwin’s Dangerous Idea (1995); Kinds of Minds
(1996); Brainchildren, A Collection of Essays 1984–1996 (1998); Sweet
Dreams, Philosophical Obstacles to a Science of Consciousness (2005); and
Breaking the Spell (2006).
Luıs Rodrigues—In your book Breaking the Spell you consider reli-
gion as a ‘‘natural phenomenon.’’ Philosophically speaking, can
there be types of phenomena other than ‘‘natural’’ ones? Estab-
lishing the dichotomy between natural/supernatural, aren’t you
conceiving the possibility of a supernatural realm existence?
Daniel Dennett—The only way to provide grounds for believing in
supernatural phenomena would be by trying to explain the phenomena
as natural phenomena and failing utterly. Of course, there would be the
very real prospect that some unimagined naturalistic explanation had
been overlooked, but by the time we’ve resorted to positing radical new
laws of physics which we don’t understand, we’re conceding that the
phenomenon is supernatural (by our existing standards of what
is natural). It is not hard to describe imaginary trains of events that

would convince most naturalists that there were some supernatural
events (miracles).
LR—But does atheism necessarily entail an adherence to phys-
icalism (a philosophical view defending that everything can
be reduced to a physical/natural explanation)? If not, how
can other philosophical views be compatible with an atheist
worldview?
DD—Certainly atheism is compatible with nonphysicalist views. For
instance, David Chalmers is a well-known dualist, and I am quite sure
he is an atheist, though I’ve never asked him.
LR—When the Vatican, through the Pontifical Academy of
Sciences, says it ‘‘promotes the progress of the mathematical,
physical, and natural sciences and the study of epistemological
problems related thereto,’’ how do you see this attempt by
religious institutions to ‘‘promote science’’? Is it real? Is it
productive? Is it necessary?
DD—I think the Vatican has genuinely promoted science in a number
of regards. So have tobacco companies, for instance. But when support-
ers of science have an agenda that rules out the widespread publication
of certain answers to the questions being raised, you have to be skepti-
cal. Pope John Paul II said evolution is a fact, not just a theory—but
then he spoiled the effect by explicitly exempting the mind (soul) of
Homo sapiens. That is like saying that levitators are exempt from the
law of gravity.
LR—Do you think Intelligent Design (a ‘‘made in the USA’’
theory), has the conditions to be exported worldwide and
become a part of Catholic doctrine?
DD—I certainly hope not, since it is transparently dishonest, intellectu-
ally. I used to think that ID was only an American problem, but recently
they have been exporting it rather effectively. The silver lining on this
cloud is perhaps that Europe will be less scornful of American credulity
when they encounter it among their own citizens.
76
Open Questions

LR—With the tremendous success of self-help books, the spread-
ing of sects, cults, and a myriad of superstitions related with
ancient and recent ideas (astrology, quantum healing, etc.), super-
naturalism is on the rise. How can dialogue be established with
the growing number of people who wish to enter Plato’s cave only
to be entertained by the shadows of hope and delusion?
DD—I don’t think these people want dialogue. That is, they aren’t, as a
rule, prepared to do some hard work to find common terms and under-
standing. Most supernaturalism is quite obviously just an excuse for not
thinking carefully about one phenomenon or another. So trying for
dialogue is often systematically fruitless.
LR—You have a book called Darwin’s Dangerous Idea. After
Darwin’s dangerous idea (namely, natural selection), what other
ideas and novelties coming out of biology (and also, philosophy)
do you think can reinforce atheist arguments? And what ideas can
jeopardize them?
DD—The tremendous success of naturalism, in all the sciences, not just
biology, makes it an unrivaled foundation for all knowledge claims.
Think of how our knowledge of astronomy and cosmology undermines
traditional religious ideas. Would God have made billions and billions of
galaxies with billions of stars and planets, just for the sake of a few tens of
thousands of years of human experience? Our species is unlikely to be eter-
nal, and even if we last for 10 million years more, this will be an insignifi-
cant eye blink of time on one tiny planet in one minor galaxy.
LR—Nevertheless, most human beings aren’t willing to accept
that there isn’t a higher purpose in life, or a higher being,
bigger than themselves. Where can you find the root and justi-
fications to this unshakable need for ‘‘beyondness’’? Will it
forever be a human trait?
DD—‘‘Bigger than themselves’’ is nicely ambiguous; I find higher pur-
poses bigger than my self, but not bigger than the collective purposes of
the best of humanity. We are not wrong to desire the existence of some-
thing more important than our own minor individual existences. The
idea that this must be something supernatural is simply a mistake.
Daniel Dennett
77

LR—What do you think prevents people all over the world from
questioning their own religious beliefs, even in the face of the
diversity of religions, spiritual cults, and philosophies that
permeate each culture?
DD—I think a combination of a sense of loyalty, often buttressed by a
concern for elders whose lives we don’t want to blight with our
‘‘betrayal,’’ plus a modesty about one’s own powers of inquiry, are
enough to make many, if not most, people deeply conservative about
what they will profess in public about religion. Their private thoughts
are another matter.
LR—Do you think it is preferable to have a society in which
social peace is provided by religious bonhomie and unanimity,
or a society where conflict is always rising due to the diversity
of religious and irreligious points of view?
DD—This is a good question, to which I don’t have a confident answer.
Might it be better to cloud our vision and live in a comforting stew of
hypocrisy and obfuscation, if that way we can avoid emotionally drain-
ing conflicts? Maybe it would be! It depends, I guess, on how large a
price we pay for our insincere lip service. That is hard to measure.
LR—When some people talk about the deity today, they no lon-
ger talk about a deity physically intervening in the world—like
the ancient gods of old who intervened in the growing of crops,
in child-bearing, in health issues, in battles, etc. The ‘‘topology’’
of the divine seems to reside, today, in the inner self (one of
the arguments used is that ‘‘Hell is not a place, but a state of
mind in which we live when we refuse God or practice evil
deeds’’). Is this ‘‘retreat’’ of God (and gods), from the objective
natural world to the subjective inner world of the self, a more
challenging aspect for atheism to deal with? I mean, with no
way of confirming or refuting the physical presence and exis-
tence of God (since he ‘‘lives’’ inside us), isn’t the debate
between the theist and the atheist jeopardized by subjectivity?
How does one overcome this difficulty?
DD—Maybe, as the concept of God is further eroded in this way, the
whole issue of the existence or nonexistence of God will have all the
78
Open Questions

interest and importance drained from it. I certainly spend very little
time in Breaking the Spell even considering the evidence and argument
one way or the other.
LR—How do you think the ‘‘New Atheism’’ movement will
evolve, namely in Europe?
DD—I have no idea. It is already possible to be elected to high office in
Europe without declaring one’s ‘‘faith in God.’’ There may be no need
for a New Atheist movement in Europe. I’d certainly prefer not to have
to talk about atheism for the rest of my days! (Like talking about ESP
or tarot cards.)
LR—Can you recommend a small bibliography for the religious
neophyte who’s interested in knowing more about this ‘‘strange
idea of atheism’’?
DD—Certainly start by reading the other ‘‘horsemen of the Apocalypse’’—
Richard Dawkins, The God Delusion, Christopher Hitchens, God Is Not
Great, and Sam Harris, The End of Faith and Letter to a Christian Nation.
LR—Most people try to be believers due to their fear of death
and the wish to live forever. How do you deal with the expecta-
tion of death and the possibility of living forever?
DD—Forever is a long time! I wouldn’t want to live forever, and the
fact that an eternity with no me in it will start in a few decades (or
sooner) is no more troubling to me than the fact that an eternity with
no me in it preceded my birth in 1942.
Daniel Dennett
79

OPEN QUESTIONS
Diverse Thinkers Discuss
God, Religion, and Faith
Luıs F. Rodrigues

Copyright 2010 by Luıs F. Rodrigues
All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced,
stored in a retrieval system, or transmitted, in any form or by any
means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording, or otherwise,
except for the inclusion of brief quotations in a review, without prior
permission in writing from the publisher.
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Rodrigues, Luıs F.
Open questions : diverse thinkers discuss God, religion, and faith / Luıs F. Rodrigues.
p. cm.
Includes bibliographical references and index.
ISBN 978-0-313-38644-2 (hard copy : alk. paper)—ISBN 978-0-313-38645-9 (ebook)
1. Religion. 2. Intellectuals—Interviews. I. Title.
BL48.R4728 2010
200—dc22
2010011195
ISBN: 978-0-313-38644-2
EISBN: 978-0-313-38645-9
14
13
12
11
10
1
2
3
4
5
This book is also available on the World Wide Web as an eBook.
Visit www.abc-clio.com for details.
Praeger
An Imprint of ABC-CLIO, LLC
ABC-CLIO, LLC
130 Cremona Drive, P.O. Box 1911
Santa Barbara, California 93116-1911
This book is printed on acid-free paper
Manufactured in the United States of America

