DARWIN'S DANGEROUS IDEA
Like "universal acid," evolutionary theory eats through
every other explanationfor life) mind and culture
BY DANIEL C. DENNETT
W
HEN I WAS A SCHOOLBOY, MY FRIENDS
and I used to amuse ourselves with
fantasies about an imaginary chem-
ical we called universal acid. I have
no idea whether we invented it or inherited it, along with
Spanish fly and saltpeter, as part ofunderground youth cul-
ture. Universal acid is a liquid so corrosive that it will eat
through anything. The problem with universal acid, of
course, is what to keep it in. It dissolves glass bottles and
stainless-steel canisters as readily as it does paper bags. What
would happen ifsomehow you came upon a dollop ofuni-
versal acid? Would the entire planet eventually be de-
stroyed? If not, what would be left? After everything had
been transformed by its encounter with universal acid,
what would the world look like?
Our speculations were a diverting joke; none of us ex-
pected to come in contact with such corrosive material.
Yet in only a few years I would encounter something bear-
ing as close a likeness to universal acid as anyone could
wish. It was not a chemical but an idea-one that eats
through virtually every traditional concept, leaving in its
wake a revolutionized world view, with most of the old
landmarks still recognizable but transformed in fundamen-
tal ways. It was the idea that Charles Darwin, in 1859, un-
leashed on an unsuspecting world.
I was not the first to realize that I was dealing with dan-
gerous stuff. From the moment ofpublication of The Ori-
gin ofSpecies, Darwin's fundamental idea has inspired intense
reactions, ranging from ferocious condemnation to ecstatic
allegiance, sometimes tantamount to religious zeal. Dar-
win's theory has been abused and misrepresented by friend
and foe alike. It has been misappropriated to lend scientific
respectability to appalling political and social doctrines. It
has been pilloried in caricature by opponents, some of
whom would have it compete in the schools with"creation
science," a pathetic hodgepodge ofpious pseudoscience.
Almost no one is indifferent to Darwin, and no one
should be. The Darwinian theory is a scientific theory, and
a great one, but that is not all it is. The creationists who
oppose it so bitterly are right about one thing: Darwin's
dangerous idea cuts much deeper into the fabric of our
most fundamental beliefs than many of its sophisticated
apologists have yet admitted, even to themselves. Even to-
day, more than a century after Darwin's death, many peo-
ple still have not come to terms with its mind-boggling im-
plications. Perhaps, they think, one can distinguish the
34
THE SCIENCES· MaylJllne 1995
parts ofDarwin's idea that really are established beyond any
reasonable doubt from the other, more speculative parts.
Perhaps the rock-solid scientific facts would then turn out
to have no stunning implications for religion, or human
nature, or the meaning of life, whereas the parts of Dar-
win's ideas that get people so upset could be quarantined
as controversial extensions, or mere interpretations, of the
scientifically irresistible parts. That would be reassuring.
But alas, that isjust about backward. There are vigorous
controversies swirling around in contemporary evolution-
ary theory, but people who feel threatened by Darwinism
should not take heart from that fact. Most-if not quite
all-of the controversies concern issues that are "just sci-
ence"; no matter which side wins, the outcome will not
undo the basic Darwinian idea. That idea, which is as se-
cure as any in science, really does have far-reaching impli-
cations for visions of what the meaning of life is or could
be. Among other things, Darwin changed forever what it
means to ask, and answer, the question, Why?
The Great Chain of Being
To APPRECIATE HOW DEEPLY DARWIN'S UNIVERSAL ACID
has etched its way into the intellectual landscape, it may
help to see how the world looked before Darwin inverted
it. A passage written by the English philosopher John
Locke in his Essay Concerning Human Understanding, pub-
lished in 1690, perfectly illustrates the conceptual blockade
that was in place before the Darwinian revolution:
Let us suppose any parcel of Matter eternal, great or small, we
shall find it, in it self, able to produce nothing.... Matter then,
by its own Strength, cannot produce in it selfso much as Motion:
the motion it has, must also be from Eternity, or else be produced,
and added to Matter by some other Being more powerful than
Matter. ... But let us suppose Motion eternal too; yet Matter,
incogitative Matter and Motion, whatever changes it might pro-
duce of Figure and Bulk, could neverproduce Thought. . . .
So that if we will suppose nothing first, or eternal; Mattercan
never begin to be: If we suppose bare Matter, without Motion,
eternal; Motion can never begin to be: If we suppose only Mat-
ter and Motion first, or eternal; 1110ught can never begin to be.
The argument may seem strange and stilted to modern
readers, but Locke himself thought he was just reminding
people of something obvious: mind must come first, or at
least it must be tied for first. And so it seemed to many bril-
liant and skeptical thinkers before Darwin. Behind their
thinking lay a top-to-bottom view ofthings often described

asa ladder, a tower or, in the memorable phrase ofthe Amer-
ican intellectual historian Arthur 0. Lovejoy, a "great chain
of being." Locke's argument invoked a particularly abstract
version ofthe hierarchy, which I call the cosmic pyramid:
God
Mind
Design
Or d e r
C h a
0 s
Nothing
Everything finds its place somewhere in the pyramid-
even blank nothingness, the ultimate foundation. Not all
matter is ordered; some is in chaos; only some ordered mat-
ter is also designed; only some designed things have minds;
and, of course, only one mind is God.
What is the difference between order and design? As a
first stab, I would say that order is mere regularity, mere
pattern; design reflects Aristotle's telos, an exploitation of
order for a purpose, as in a cleverly designed artifact. The
solar system exhibits stupendous order, but (apparently) it
has no purpose-it is notfor anything. An eye, in contrast,
is for seeing. Before Darwin, the distinction was not always
clearly marked, but Darwin suggested a division. Give me
order and time, he said, and I will give you design-with-
out the aid of mind.
Mike & Doug Starn, Sphere ofInfiuence, 1990-92
May/JUlie 1995· THE SCIENCES
35

Fanny Brennan, Mountain Lift, 1990
Kinds, Essences and Change
DARWIN DID
NOT SET OUT TO FIND AN ANTIDOTE TO
Locke's conceptual paralysis or to pin down a grand cos-
mological alternative. His aim was slightly more modest:
he wanted to explain the origin of species. The naturalists
of his day had amassed mountains of facts about living
things and had succeeded in systematizing those facts along
several dimensions. Two great sources ofwonder emerged
from that work. First were all the discoveries about the
impressive
adaptations
of organisms.
Second
was the recognition of
the prolific diversity of
living
things:
it
had
begun to dawn on peo-
ple that literally millions
of kinds of plants and
animals
inhabit
the
earth. Why were there
so many?
Even
more
striking
were the patterns dis-
cernible within that di-
versity, particularly the
huge gaps between many organisms. There were birds and
mammals that swam like fish, but none with gills; there
were dogs ofmany sizes and shapes, but no dogcats or dog-
cows or feathered dogs. The patterns cried out for classifi-
cation. Aristotle taught that all things-not just living
things-have two kinds of properties: essential properties,
without which they fail to be the particular kind of thing
they are, and accidental properties, which are free to vary
within the kind. And along with each kind of thing came
an essence. Essences for Aristotle were definitive: timeless,
unchanging, all or nothing. A thing could not be rather sil-
ver or quasi-gold or a semi-mammal. Species of organisms
were deemed to be as timeless and unchangeable as the
perfect triangles and circles of Euclidean geometry.
On the outskirts of that deliciously crisp and systematic
hierarchy lurked a plethora ofawkward and puzzling facts.
There were all manner of hard-to-classify intermediate
creatures, which seemed to have parts of more than one
essence. There were
curious higher-order patterns of
shared and unshared features: Why should it be backbones
and not feathers that birds and fish share, and why should
creature with eyes or carnivore not be as important a classifier
as is warm-blooded? Which principle of classification should
count? In Plato's famous image, which system "carved na-
ture at the joints"?
What Darwin provided was the first background theory
for showing why one classification scheme would get the
joints right. The solution, he argued, was to take a histor-
ical approach. Species are not eternal and immutable; they
have evolved over time and can give birth to new species
in turn. The idea was not new; many versions of it had
been seriously discussed since the time of the ancient
Greeks. But there was a powerful Aristotelian bias against
it: essences, after all, were unchanging; a thing could not
change its essence, and new essences could not be born
(except, of course, by God's command in episodes ofSpe-
cial Creation). Reptiles could no more turn into birds than
copper could turn into gold.
To imagine how the idea of evolution must have struck
Darwin's contemporaries, consider how you would react
ifsomeone announced that, long, long ago, the number 7
had been an even number and that it had gradually ac-
quired its oddness by exchanging some properties with the
ancestors of the number 10 (which was once a prime
number). Utter nonsense, of course. Inconceivable. Yet
that was just the kind of conceptual leap Dar-
win demanded of his peers. In The Originif
Species he set out both to prove that modern
species were revised descendants of earlier
species-species had evolved-and to show
howthat "descent with modification" had tak-
en place. The book presented an overwhelm-
ingly persuasive case for the first thesis and a
tantalizing case in favor of the second. Sud-
denly the burden ofproofshifted to the skep-
tics: Could they show that Darwin's argu-
ments were mistaken? Could they show how
natural selection would be incapable ofgiving
rise to the effects he described? Given all the
signs ofhistorical process that Darwin had un-
covered-all the brush marks ofthe artist, you might say-
could anyone imagine how any process other than natural
selection could have led to all those effects?
Algorithmic Processes
DARWIN SUCCEEDED NOT ONLY BECAUSE HE DOCUMENTED
his ideas exhaustively but also because he grounded them
in a powerful theoretical framework. In modern terms, he
had discovered the power of an algorithm.
An algorithm isa formal process that can be counted on-
logically-to yield a certain kind of result whenever it is
"run" or instantiated. The idea that an algorithm is a fool-
proof and somehow "mechanical" procedure has been
around for centuries, but it was the pioneering work ofAlan
M. Turing, Kurt Godel and Alonzo Church in the 1930s
that more or less fixed the current understanding of the
term. Three key features ofalgorithms are important here:
1. Substrate neutrality: The power of the procedure is
a result of its logical structure, not the materials that hap-
pen to be used in carrying it out. Long division works
equally well with pencil or pen, paper or parchment, neon
lights or skywriting, using any symbol system you like.
2. Underlying mindlessness: Although the overall de-
sign of the procedure may be brilliant, or may yield bril-
liant results, each constituent step is utterly simple. The
recipe requires no wise decisions or delicate judgments on
the part of the recipe reader.
3. Guaranteed results: Whatever it is an algorithm does,
it always does it, provided the algorithm is executed with-
out misstep. An algorithm is a foolproof recipe.
Algorithms need not have anything to do with numbers.
Consider the process of annealing a piece of steel. What
could be more physical, less "computational," than that?
The blacksmith repeatedly heats the steel and then lets it
36
THE SCIENCES· MaylJlme 1995

cool, and somehow in the process it becomes much
stronger. How? Does the heat create special toughness
atoms that coat the surface? Or does it suck out of the
atmosphere subatomic glue
that binds all the iron atoms
together? No, nothing like that takes place.
The right level of explanation is the algorithmic level:
As the metal cools from its molten state, it begins to form
a solid in many spots at the same time, creating crystals that
grow together until the entire mass is solid. The first time
that takes place, the arrangement of the individual crystal
structures is less than optimal; they are weakly held to-
gether, with lots of internal stresses and strains. Heating
the steel again-but not all the way to melting-partly
breaks down those structures, so that, when next they
cool, the broken-up bits adhere to the still-solid bits in a
different arrangement. It can be mathematically proved
that the rearrangements tend to form a progressively
stronger total structure, provided the heating and cooling
are done just right.
To understand annealing in depth you have to learn the
physics of all the forces operating at the atomic level. But
the basic idea ofhow and why the process works can be lift-
ed clear of those details and put in substrate-neutral termi-
nology. For example, metallurgical annealing has inspired a
general problem-solving technique in computer science
known as simulated annealing, a way of getting a comput-
er program to build, disassemble and rebuild a data struc-
ture (such as another program) over and over, blindly grop-
ing toward a better-sometimes even an optimal-version.
Similarly, Darwin's ideas about the powers of natural se-
lection can be lifted out of their home base in biology. Dar-
win himselfhad few inklings about the microscopic process-
es ofgenetic inheritance (and those turned out to be wrong).
Because of substrate neutrality, however, his basic insights
have floated like a cork on the waves ofsubsequent research
and controversy, from Mendel to molecular biology.
Universal Acid, Redux
HERE, THEN, IS DARWIN'S DANGEROUS IDEA: THE ALGO-
rithmic level is the level that best accounts for the speed
of the
ante-
lope, the wing
of the
eagle,
the
shape
of
the orchid, the
diversity
of
species and all
the other oc-
casions
for
wonder in the
world of na-
ture.
Incredi-
ble as it may
seem, the en-
tire biosphere
Fanny Brennan, Big Horn, 1992
is
the
out-
come ofnoth-
ing but a cascade of algorithmic processes feeding on
chance. Who designed the cascade? Nobody. It is itself the
outcome ofa blind algorithmic process. As Darwin himself
put it, in a letter
to the British ge-
ologist
Charles
Lyell shortly af-
ter the publica-
tion of Origin:
I would give abso-
lutely nothing for
the theory ofNat-
ural Selection, if it
requires
miracu-
lous' additions at
Fanny Brennan, Lily'sEgg, 1990
anyone stageof descent.... If I were convinced that I required
such additions to the theory of natural selection, I would reject
it asrubbish.
The idea of evolution by algorithm is still controversial.
Today evolutionary biologists are engaged in a tug-of-war
between those who are relentlessly pushing toward an al-
gorithmic treatment and those who, for various submerged
reasons, are resisting the trend. It is rather as if there were
metallurgists around who were disappointed by the algo-
rithmic explanation of annealing. "You mean that's all
there is to it? No microscopic superglue especially created
by the heating and cooling process?" Nobody denies that
evolution, like annealing, works; what is at issue is Darwin's
radical vision of how and why it works. The forces of re-
sistance can dimly see that their skirmish is part of a wider
campaign. If the game is lost in evolutionary biology,
where will it end?
Like universal acid, Darwin's idea quickly began to eat
its way out ofits original container. If the redesign of or-
ganisms could be a mindless, algorithmic process of evo-
lution, why could that process itself not be the product of
evolution, and so forth, all the way down the cosmic
pyramid? And ifmindless evolution could account for the
breathtakingly clever artifacts of the
biosphere, how
could the products of our own minds be exempt from an
evolutionary explanation? Darwin's idea thus also threat-
ened to spread all the way up, dissolving the illusion of
human authorship, our own divine spark ofcreativity and
understanding.
In response, anxious thinkers have waged a number of
failed campaigns to contain Darwin's idea within some
acceptably safe, partial revolution. Cede some or all of
modern biology to Darwin, perhaps, but hold the line
there. Keep Darwinian thinking out of cosmology, out of
psychology, out of human culture, out of ethics, politics
and religion! (Among those who favor holding the line
within biology itself, Stephen Jay Gould has offered sev-
eral post-Darwinian counterrevolutions.) The forces of
containment have won many battles and, to their credit,
have exposed and discredited many flawed applications of
Darwin's idea. But new, improved waves of Darwinian
thinking keep coming.
Order and Design
LIKE ANY GOOD REVOLUTIONARY, DARWIN DID NOT SIMPLY
topple the old system; he adapted as much of it as possible
to his own purposes. Under his influence the cosmic pyra-
mid took on a new meaning, hinging on a radically altered
lv/ay!]ulle 1995· THE SCIENCES
37

Fanny Brennan, Tagged Tree, 1982
concept ofdesign. Many philosophers had regarded the ex-
istence ofdesign asproofofthe existence ofGod. The late-
eighteenth-century theologian William Paley compared
the intricacy of the universe to that of a watch found on a
heath in the wilderness. Where there is a watch, can there
fail to be a watchmaker?
As Paley pointed out, a watch exhibits a tremendous
amount of work done.
Watches and
other de-
signed objects do not just
happen;
they
are
the
product of what modern
industry
calls
R&D-
research
and
develop-
ment-and R&D is cost-
ly,
in
both
time
and
energy.
Before
Darwin
the only model ofa proc-
ess whereby R&D could
get done was one that in-
voked an intelligent arti-
ficer. What Darwin saw
was that in principle the
same work could be done
by a different kind ofproc-
ess that distributed the
work over huge amounts of time, thriftily conserving the
design work that had been accomplished at each stage so
that it did not have to be done over again.
Another way oflooking at the difference-and the tight
relation-between design and order was popularized by
the Austrian physicist Erwin Schrodinger. In physics, or-
der or organization can be measured as differences in heat
between regions of space-time; entropy is simply disorder,
the opposite oforder. According to the second law ofther-
modynamics, the entropy of any isolated system increases
with time. In other words, things run down; the universe
is unwinding out of a more ordered state into the ulti-
mately disordered' state called its heat death.
What, then, are living things? They are things that resist
crumbling into dust, at least for a while, by not being iso-
lated-by taking in from their environment the where-
withal to keep life and limb together. The psychologist
Richard 1. Gregory ofthe University ofBristol in England
sums up the idea crisply:
Time's arrow given by Entropy-the lossoforganization, or loss
of temperature differences-is statistical and is subject to local
small-scale reversals. Most striking: life is a systematic reversal of
Entropy, and intelligence creates structures and energy differ-
ences against the supposed gradual "death" through Entropy of
the physical Universe.
A designed thing, then, is either a living thing or a part of
a living thing, or the artifact ofa living thing, organized in
the service of the battle against disorder.
It is not impossible to oppose the trend of the second
law, but it is costly, as Gregory dramatized with an unfor-
gettable example. Suppose you decided to reverse entropy
by unscrambling an egg. How much would it cost to make
a device that takes scrambled eggs as input and delivers un-
scrambled eggs as output? Even with an unlimited budget
the most brilliant engineers could not do it. But there is a
ready solution: a live hen. Feed it scrambled eggs, and it
will be able to make eggs for you-for a while-thanks to
the design built into it.
The more design a thing exhibits, the more R&D work
must have been done to make it. In Darwin's conception,
the vertical dimension ofthe cosmic pyramid becomes the
measure of how
much
design
has
gone
into
items
at
a given
level.
Minds still end up near
the top, but only because
they are among the most
advanced effects (to date)
of the creative process-
not, as in the old version,
its cause or source. And
the products of human
minds,
namely,
human
artifacts,
must
count as
more designed still. That
might seem counterintu-
itive at first; surely a paper
clip is a trivial product of
design
compared
with
any living thing, however
rudimentary. But imagine yourself walking along an ap-
parently deserted beach on an alien planet. Which discov-
ery would excite you more: a clam, or a dam rake?
Cranes and Skyhooks
Now IMAGINE ALL THE "LIFTING" THAT MUST HAVE BEEN
needed to create the magnificent organisms and (other)
artifacts in the upper reaches of the cosmic pyramid. Vast
distances must have been traversed since the dawn of life
and the earliest, simplest self-replicating entities. Darwin
has offered an account of the crudest, most rudimentary,
stupidest imaginable lifting process: natural selection. By
taking the smallest possible steps, the process can gradual-
ly, over eons, traverse those huge distances.
Could it really have happened that way? Can Darwin's
mindlessly mechanical algorithms really get all the way to
here (the world ofwonders we all inhabit) from there (the
world of chaos or utter undesignedness) in only a few bil-
lion years? Or did the process need a leg up now and then,
if only at the very beginning, from some sort of "mind
first" force or power or process? In short, does evolution
need a skyhook?
skyhook. orig. Aeronaut. An imaginary contrivance for attach-
ment to the sky; an imaginary means of suspension in the sky.
-Oxford English Dictionary
The first use of the term noted by the OED dates from
1915, when an airplane pilot, commanded to remain aloft
for an hour beyond the planned landing, replied, "Sub-
nutted: that this machine is not fitted with skyhooks."
Skyhooks would be wonderful things to have: miracu-
lous lifters, unsupported and insupportable, great for haul-
ing unwieldy objects out of difficult circumstances and
speeding up all sorts of construction projects. Sad to say,
though, there are no skyhooks.
38
THE SCIENCES·
MaylJulle /995

Fanny Brennan, Fugue, 1991
But there are cranes. Anyone who is, like me, a lifelong
spectator at construction sites surely has noticed with some
satisfaction that it sometimes takes a small crane to set up a
big crane. And it must have occurred to many other on-
lookers that, in principle, the big crane could be used to
build a still more spectacular crane. In principle (if not in
real-world construction projects), there is no limit to the cas-
cade of cranes that could be organized to accomplish some
mighty end. In the Darwinian context cranes are natural
evolutionary subprocesses or features that speed up the ba-
sic, slow pace ofnatural selection. Cranes are expensive; they
have to be designed and built from everyday parts already on
hand; and they need to be erected on a firm base ofexisting
ground. Once built, however, they are excellent lifters; they
do their job in an honest, non-question-begging fashion;
and they have the decided advantage ofbeing real.
For more than a century skeptics have been trying to
find a proof that Darwin's idea just cannot work, at least
not all the way. Time and again they have come up with
truly fascinating challenges: leaps and gaps and other mar-
vels that do seem, at first, to need skyhooks. But then along
have come the cranes-discovered, in many cases, by the
very skeptics who were hoping to find a skyhook.
Sex
ONE EXTREMELY POWEIUUL CRANE, MOST EVOLUTIONARY
theorists agree, is sex. Species that reproduce sexually can
move through the universe ofpossible, nonlethal designs-
which might be called design space-much more rapidly
than organisms that reproduce asexually. That cannot be
the raison d'etre of sex, however. Evolution cannot see far
down the road; anything it builds must have an immediate
payoff to counterbalance the cost. Some other, short-term
benefit must have maintained the positive selection pres-
sure required to make sexual reproduction an offer few
species could refuse.
Another crane, one that was created to be a crane, is ge-
netic engineering. Genetic engineers-people who en-
gage in recombinant-DNA tinkering-can now take huge
leaps through design space, creating organisms that would
never have evolved by "ordinary" means. That is no mir-
acle-provided
the
genetic
engi-
neers themselves (and the artifacts
they use in their trade) are wholly the
products ofearlier, slower evolution-
ary processes.
In The Descent cif Man Darwin
made it clear that the cranes of evo-
lution reach all the way up to the
throne of mind. That idea was too
revolutionary for many people-and
it remains so, even among some of
evolution's best friends. Alfred Russel
Wallace,
whom Darwin acknowl-
edged as codiscoverer ofthe principle
of evolution, never quite got the
point. When, later in life, Wallace
converted to
spiritualism and
ex-
empted human consciousness alto-
gether from the iron rule of evolu-
tion, Darwin wrote to him: "I hope you have not mur-
dered too completely your own and my child."
More recently the physicist Paul Davies ofthe Universi-
ty of Adelaide in Australia proclaimed in his book The
Mind cifGod that the reflective power ofhuman minds can
be "no trivial detail, no minor by-product ofmindless pur-
poseless forces." That familiar denial betrays an ill-exam-
ined prejudice. Why, one might ask Davies, would its be-
ing a by-product of mindless, purposeless forces make it
trivial? Why couldn't the most important thing of all be
something that arose from unimportant things? Darwin's
inversion suggests that varieties of excellence, worth and
purpose can emerge, bubbling up out of "mindless, pur-
poseless forces."
People ache to believe that human beings are vastly dif-
ferent from all other species-and they are right. We are dif-
ferent. We are the only species that has access to an extra
mode for preserving and communicating design: culture.
(Other species have some capacity to transmit information
"behaviorally" as well as genetically, but they have not de-
veloped culture to the takeoff point that our species has.)
People have language, the primary medium of culture, and
language has opened up new regions of design space that
only we are privy to. In a few short millennia-a mere in-
stant in biological time-we have already launched our new
exploration vehicles to transform not only the planet but
the very process of design development that created us.
Crane-Making Cranes
HUMAN CULTURE IS NOTJUST A CRANE MADE UP OF CRANES;
it is a crane-making crane, so powerful that its effects can
swamp many (but not all) of the earlier genetic pressures
and processes that created it and still coexist with it.
What kind ofevolutionary revolution took place to set us
apart so decisively from all other products ofthe genetic rev-
olution? The explanation, I think, parallels the wonderful
story told by the biologist Lynn Margulis of the University
of Massachusetts at Amherst, about the revolution that
paved the way for all complex life. Once upon a time, Mar-
gulis says, the only organisms on earth were cells without
nuclei, the prokaryotes. They were simple, solitary forms of
life, destined for nothing fancier than
drifting around in an energy-rich soup
and reproducing themselves.
Then,
one day, some prokaryotes were in-
vaded by parasites. But the invaders
turned out to
be
beneficial;
they
joined forces with their hosts, creating
a revolutionary new kind of entity,
a eukaryotic cell. That partnership
opened up the vast space of possibili-
ties known as multicellular life.
A few billion years passed. Then
one fine day another invasion began.
A single species of multicellular or-
ganism, a kind ofprimate, had devel-
oped a variety of structures and ca-
pacities that happened to make the
organism particularly well suited for
the invaders. In fact, the primate hosts
MaylJlllle 1995· THE SCIENCES
39

Fanny Brennan, Forest, 1987
had created the invaders as well, in much the way spiders
create webs and birds create nests. In a twinkling-in less
than 100,000 years-the invaders transformed the apes
who were their unwitting hosts into something altogether
new: wittinghosts, who, thanks to their huge stock ofnew-
fangled invaders, could imagine the heretofore unimagin-
able, leaping through design space as nothing had ever
done before. Following the evolutionary biologist Richard
Dawkins of the University of Oxford, I call the invaders
memes. The radically new kind of entity created when a
particular kind ofanimal is properly furnished (or infested)
with memes is what is commonly called a person.
Roughly speaking, memes are ideas-specifically, the
kind of complex ideas that form themselves into distinct
memorable units, such as: arch; wheel; wearing clothes; vendet-
ta; ri,rtht triangle; alphabet; calendar; the Odyssey; calculus;
chess; perspective drawing; evolution by natural selection; impres-
sionism; "Creensleeves"; deconstructionism. In Dawkins's con-
ception, memes represent units of cultural transmission
analogous to the genes ofbiological evolution. Like genes,
memes are replicators, subject to much the same principles
of evolution as genes are. Their fate is determined by
whether copies and copies of
copies of them persist and
multiply, and that depends on
the selective forces that act
directly on the various phys-
ical
vehicles
that
embody
them.
Some thinkers have
proposed that there could be
a science of meme evolu-
tion-memetics-strongly
parallel to genetics. Others
consider the proposal absurd.
Emotional Aversions
SOME PEOPLE HATE THE VERY
idea
of explaining
human
culture
in
evolutionary
terms. I think they are making a big mistake. They want to
believe that the human way oflife is radically different from
that of all other living things-and so it is. But they also
want to understand that difference as the result of a mira-
cle, a gift from God, a skyhook, not a crane. Why? Why
should people flinch from carrying Darwin's idea through
to its logical conclusion?
The answer, I think, is fear. They are afraid that the idea
will not just explain but will explain away the minds and
purposes and meanings that everyone holds dear; that the
universal acid will pass through their most cherished mon-
uments,
dissolving them into an
unrecognizable and
unlovable puddle of scientistic destruction.
I can sympathize with such concerns. But the damage,
if damage it is, is already done. Even if Darwin's idea came
to be rejected by science-utterly discredited and replaced
by some vastly more powerful (and currently unimagin-
able) vision-it would still have irremediably demolished
everything that came before it. Simply by making design
without mind conceivable, Darwin rendered Locke's argu-
ment, and the thinking behind it, as obsolete as the quill
pen with which it was written. There can be no returning
to pre-Darwinian innocence.
We used to sing a lot when I was a child, at school and
Sunday school, around the campfire at summer camp, or
gathered around the piano at home. One of my favorite
songs, simple but surprisingly beautiful, was "Tell Me Why":
Tell me why the stars do shine,
Tell me why the ivy twines,
Tell me why the sky's so blue.
Then I will tell youjust why I love you.
Because God made the stars to shine,
Because God made the ivy twine,
Because God made the sky so blue.
Because God made you, that's why I love you.
That straightforward, sentimental declaration still brings a
lump to my throat-so sweet, so innocent, so reassuring is
its vision oflife. But it is a vision most ofus have outgrown,
however fondly we may recall it. The kindly God who lov-
ingly fashioned everyone ofus (allcreatures great and small)
and sprinkled the sky with shining stars for our delight-
that God is, like Santa Claus,
a myth ofchildhood, not any-
thing a sane, undeluded adult
could literally believe in.
I, too, cherish many of the
ideas and ideals that Darwin
seems
to
challenge,
and
I
want to protect them. I want
to protect the campfire song,
and what is beautiful and true
in it, for my little grandson
and his friends, and for their
children. Many other, more
magnificent ideas may also
need protection. But the only
good way to do that-the
only way that has a chance in
the long run-is to cut through the smoke screens and look
at the idea as unflinchingly, as dispassionately, as possible.
There is no future in a sacred myth. Why not? Because
of our curiosity. Because, as the song reminds us, we want
to know why. We may have outgrown the song's answer,
but we will never outgrow the question. Whatever we hold
precious, we cannot protect it from our curiosity, because
being who we are, one of the things we deem precious is
the truth. Our love of truth is surely a central element in
the meaning we find in our lives. In any case, the idea that
we might preserV<' meaning by kidding ourselves is a more
pessimistic, more nihilistic idea than I for one can stomach.
If that were the best that could be done, I would conclude
that nothing mattered after all.•
DANIEL C.
DENNETT is the author of BRAINSTORMS, THE
MIND'S I andCONSCIOUSNESS EXPLAINED. Heisthe distinguished
arts andscience professor anddirector ofthe Centerfor Cognitive Stud-
ies at Tuits University in Medjord, Massachusetts. This article is
adaptedfrom hisforthcoming book, DARWIN'S DANGEROUS IDEA:
EVOLUTION AND THE MEANINGS OF LIFE, tobe published inMay
by Simon & Schuster. Copyright © 1995 by Daniel C. Dennett.
40
THE SCIENCES· Mayl]flllc 1995

