 
 
University of Illinois Press is collaborating with JSTOR to digitize, preserve and extend access to The American Journal of 
Psychology.
http://www.jstor.org
Review 
Author(s): Daniel C. Dennett 
Review by: Daniel C. Dennett 
Source: 
 
 
The American Journal of Psychology, Vol. 106, No. 1 (Spring, 1993), pp. 121-126
Published by: 
 
University of Illinois Press
Stable URL: 
 
http://www.jstor.org/stable/1422869
Accessed: 02-11-2015 09:44 UTC
Your use of the JSTOR archive indicates your acceptance of the Terms & Conditions of Use, available at http://www.jstor.org/page/
 
info/about/policies/terms.jsp
JSTOR is a not-for-profit service that helps scholars, researchers, and students discover, use, and build upon a wide range of content 
in a trusted digital archive. We use information technology and tools to increase productivity and facilitate new forms of scholarship. 
For more information about JSTOR, please contact support@jstor.org.
This content downloaded from 139.184.14.159 on Mon, 02 Nov 2015 09:44:32 UTC
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

Book Reviews 
DOMINIC 
W. MASSARO, 
EDITOR 
University 
of California, 
Santa Cruz 
The Embodied 
Mind: Cognitive 
Science and Human 
Experience 
By Francisco J. Varela, Evan Thompson, and Eleanor Rosch. Cambridge, 
MA: MIT Press, 1991. 328 pp. Cloth, $25.00. 
Cognitive science, as an interdisciplinary school of thought, may have re- 
cently moved beyond the bandwagon stage onto the throne of orthodoxy, 
but it does not make a favorable first impression on many people. Familiar 
reactions on first encounters range from revulsion to condescending dis- 
missal-very 
few faces in the crowd light up with the sense of "Aha! So 
that's how the mind works! Of course!" Cognitive science leaves something out, 
it seems; moreover, what it apparently leaves out is important, even precious. 
Boiled down to its essence, cognitive science proclaims that in one way or 
another our minds are computers, and this seems so mechanistic, reduc- 
tionistic, intellectualistic, dry, philistine, unbiological. It leaves out emotion, 
or what philosophers call qualia, or value, or mattering, or... 
the soul. It 
does not explain what minds are so much as attempt to explain minds away. 
This deeply felt dissatisfaction with cognitive science has many grounds- 
some good, some preposterous-improperly 
jumbled together in a knot of 
anxiety. When you get right down to it, many people just do not like the 
idea of their minds as computers, and hence are strongly inclined to endorse 
any champion who will stand fast against this deplorable juggernaut. So 
critics of cognitive science, especially if they take themselves to be radical 
or revolutionary critics, must be uncommonly surefooted if they are to avoid 
being swept up in the more hysterical campaigns. And defenders of cognitive 
science must be uncommonly discriminating, and not just brand every critic 
a crypto-dualist, a vitalist, a Mysterian, for although the most vocal critics 
to date have often richly deserved these epithets, there are other, more 
thoughtful critics who do not. Moreover-truth 
to tell-even 
a crypto- 
dualist can stumble onto an important insight on occasion. 
Francisco Varela, an immunologist-turned-neuroscientist, 
Evan Thomp- 
son, a philosopher, and Eleanor Rosch, a psychologist, are radical critics of 
cognitive science, calling for what they consider to be more of a revolution 
than a set of reforms, and they have pooled their skills to execute what is 
surely the best informed, best balanced radical critique to date. Just how 
radical? Their heroes are the Buddha and the French phenomenologist 
Maurice Merleau-Ponty. They argue that Buddhist meditative traditions offer 
not just a wealth of important phenomena of human consciousness, but 
otherwise unobtainable insights into the relations of embodiment that permit 
AMERICAN JOURNAL OF PSYCHOLOGY 
Spring 1993, Vol. 106, No. 1, pp. 121-154 
This content downloaded from 139.184.14.159 on Mon, 02 Nov 2015 09:44:32 UTC
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

us to understand how the inner and the outer, the first-person point of view 
and the objective point of view of science, can coexist. 
Cognitive scientists standardly assume a division between independently 
existing ("pregiven"), "external" objects, properties, and events on the one 
hand and their "internal" representations in symbolic media in the mind/ 
brain on the other. Varela et al. propose to replace this with an "enactive" 
account. The fundamental differences are encapsulated in answers to three 
questions: 
Question 1: What is cognition? 
Cognitivist answer: Information processing as symbolic computation-rule- 
based manipulation of symbols. 
Enactivist answer: Enaction-a 
history of structural coupling that brings 
forth a world. 
Question 2: How does it work? 
Cognitivist answer: Through any device that can support and manipulate 
discrete functional elements-the 
symbols. The system interacts only with 
the form of the symbols (their physical attributes), not their meaning. 
Enactivist answer: Through a network consisting of multiple levels of in- 
terconnected, sensorimotor subnetworks. 
Question 3: How do I know when a cognitive system is functioning ade- 
quately? 
Cognitivist answer: When the symbols appropriately represent some aspect 
of the real world, and the information processing leads to a successful 
solution to the problem given to the system. 
Enactivist answer: When it becomes part of an ongoing existing world (as 
the young of every species do) or shapes a new one (as happens in evo- 
lutionary history). (pp. 42-43, 206-207) 
Well, what do the enactivist answers mean? Is this really revolutionary or 
is it just a modest revision of emphases in response to an assemblage of 
familiar criticisms? Or is it perhaps the assemblage that is revolutionary? 
Have the various piecemeal critics failed to see how radical the effect of 
their mass action might be? The authors try to make us believe this more 
exciting verdict, but they are so scrupulous and sympathetic in their gleaning 
from others that they provide all the ammunition one would need to rebut 
their revolutionary call. Reform, as we know, is the enemy of revolution, 
and as an ardent reformer, I must say that they have not convinced me. I 
think I can proceed with business-as-usual cognitive science, but I am gen- 
uinely grateful to them for a variety of important nudges away from ad- 
mittedly deplorable, but optional, features of standard cog-sci dogma. 
The authors locate their own project with the help of a polar coordinate 
map of cognitive science, a descendant of my "view from the East Pole" 
(Dennett, 1986), showing the location in logical space of the principal con- 
tributors, as they interpret them (Figure 1). 
Their project is to consolidate the outer ring of enactive theory, and one 
122 
BOOK REVIEWS 
This content downloaded from 139.184.14.159 on Mon, 02 Nov 2015 09:44:32 UTC
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

BOOK REVIEWS 
123 
Artificial Intelligence 
Holland Brook 
s 
?^ 
* 
* 
Winograd 
Neuroscience 
* Flores 
Grossberg 
" 
? Smolensky 
\ 
/ 
* 
\. 
Lako ff\ 
Linguistics 
Arbib 
es 
* 
/ .Barlo 
Hion 
* 
Ballard 
/ Freeman 
\ 
\ 
\ * 
U 
*Gbbs\ 
a 
Neisser 
) Hubel 
\ 
* Piager 
McClel land 
Choms 
e john 
^ 
Barlow 
.Fodor 
\Globus\ 
.Neisser 
G 
\ Pylyshyn 
, Hofstadter 
Cognitivism * DOwwen 
\ piage y 
McClelland 
0 Maturana 
Brunefr 
loodman 
\" 
' ~ Emergence 
Oreytus * 
Philosophy 
Cognitive 
Rorty * 
Psychology 
Enactive 
Figure 1. A conceptual chart of the cognitive sciences today in the form of 
a polar map, with the contributing disciplines in the angular dimensions and 
different approaches in the radial axis. 
Note. Reprinted from The Embodied Mind: Cognitive Science and Human Ex- 
perience (Figure 1.1, caption, p. 7) by F. Varela, E. Thompson, and E. Rosch, 
1991, Cambridge, MA, MIT Press. 
can see at a glance that this is going to involve being somehow farther out 
than the "emergentists" of the middle ring: such critics of various aspects 
of cognitive science as Ulric Neisser (the Apostate- 
1976, not the Foun- 
der- 
1967), the connectionists, and Douglas Hofstadter and myself. (See 
p. 99 for the emergentists' canonical answers to the three-question catechism 
above.) 
Another glance at the map shows that uniting the outer sanctum of en- 
activists is going to require the amalgamation of ideas drawn from extraor- 
dinarily diverse sources: the psychologists Jean Piaget and Jerome Bruner, 
the neuroscientists Walter Freeman and Stephen Grossberg, the linguist 
George Lakoff, the philosophers Richard Rorty and Hubert Dreyfus, and 
such hard-to-classify thinkers as John Holland (genetic algorithms), Rodney 
This content downloaded from 139.184.14.159 on Mon, 02 Nov 2015 09:44:32 UTC
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

Brooks (artificial insects), and Umberto Maturana (autopoesis). Finding com- 
mon cause among all these inhabitants of the outer ring is already a heroic 
application of the principle of charity, but the map does not even list the 
thinkers from other traditions who get equally sympathetic treatment: pro- 
ponents of the Therevada, Mahayana, Zen, and Vajrayana traditions of 
Buddhism, the psychoanalysts Jacques Lacan and Melanie Klein, and, of 
course, Merleau-Ponty, Husserl, Heidegger, and other phenomenologists. 
Three thinkers within the tradition of cognitive science that somehow were 
left off the map but receive accurate and detailed attention are Marvin 
Minsky, Ray Jackendoff, and James Gibson. And for that matter, even the 
inner circle of archcognitivists get a respectful acknowledgment for their 
contributions. 
Do these authors despise no one? The book is remarkable for the open- 
mindedness and generosity of its interpretations; the authors have clearly 
paid as much good attention to those they are criticizing as to their favorites. 
They thus set a good example-much 
needed in cognitive science-but 
if 
you are like me, you will find yourself wondering if it is too good. If a 
sympathetic treatment of Lacan is the price I must pay for a sympathetic 
treatment of Minsky, am I prepared to pay it? More pointedly, what will it 
be worth? Does the move from traditional academic fisticuffs (good, clean 
Marquis of Queensbury stuff) to a Rortian "conversation" not inevitably 
devalue both the support a good argument can provide, and the clarification 
a good sharp disagreement can yield? This kinder, gentler vision of cognitive 
science runs the risk of diluting its revolutionary impact, but I do not mean 
to suggest that their criticisms are toothless. And to answer my earlier 
question, although these authors despise no one, they do briskly dismiss such 
critics as Popper and Eccles, and Roger Penrose (p. 129). 
As best I can see, the heart of the authors' argument for the need for 
revolution, an argument which I do not yet fully understand, has to do with 
what happens when cognitive science faces up to one of its own implica- 
tions-that 
there is no Self: 
[T]o the extent that research in cognitive science requires more and more that 
we revise our naive idea of what a cognizing subject is (its lack of solidity, its 
divided dynamics, and its generation from unconscious processes), the need for 
a bridge between cognitive science and an open-ended pragmatic approach to 
human experience will become only more inevitable. Indeed, cognitive science 
will be able to resist the need for such a bridge only by adopting an attitude 
that is inconsistent with its own theories and discoveries. (p. 127) 
I think I have recently produced just such a consistent cognitive science 
theory of consciousness with no "solid" Self (Dennett, 1991). Evan Thomp- 
son, one of the coauthors of The Embodied Mind, worked with me during 
1990-91 as a Visiting Fellow at the Center for Cognitive Studies at Tufts, 
while both my book and theirs were in the late stages (too late) of the 
publication process, so neither side has yet had a proper chance to digest 
and respond to the other. Of course, maybe I should stop viewing my book 
124 
BOOK REVIEWS 
This content downloaded from 139.184.14.159 on Mon, 02 Nov 2015 09:44:32 UTC
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

as a conservative extrapolation of the gains of cognitive science, and start 
considering myself a fellow revolutionary. There are some points of striking 
consonance-see 
especially our parallel accounts of the nature (physical, 
metaphysical, epistemological) of color. As the great diversity of the outer 
ring roster of enactivists of Figure 1 suggests, one could well be an enactivist 
without realizing it. 
But it still seems to me that the authors protest too much. In their ex- 
planation of the key term enactive, they draw heavily on the claims by the 
geneticist Richard Lewontin that evolution must be understood from an 
enactive perspective. Lewontin deplores the way adaptationists help them- 
selves to the oversimplification of an external and "pregiven" environment 
that sets problems for the organism. On the contrary, Lewontin typically insists, 
the organism plays an important role in creating and constituting its own 
environment. Varela et al. make a parallel claim about the role of the 
organism in "bringing forth a world." When David Marr (1982) influentially 
encourages us to treat visual systems as solving the problem of "inverse op- 
tics"-How 
does the organism recover the truth about the visible properties 
independently out there in its environment?-he 
helps himself to an over- 
simplification. There is something to this criticism, of course, but just how 
important is it? What are the relative proportions of organismic and ex- 
traorganismic contributions to the "enacted" world? It is true, as Lewontin 
has often pointed out, that the chemical composition of the atmosphere is 
as much a product of the activity of living organisms as a precondition of 
their life, but it is also true that it can be safely treated as a constant (an 
"external," "pregiven" condition), because its changes in response to local 
organismic activity are usually insignificant as variables in interaction with 
the variables under scrutiny. The same is true of the color of objects: They 
have indeed coevolved with the color-vision systems of the organisms that 
perceive them, but, except on an evolutionary time scale, they are in the 
main imperturbable by organisms' perceptual activity. Once we have this 
metaphysical point duly corrected and secured, does it play much of a role 
in ongoing cognitivist research? 
The authors recognize that they need to respond to this hardheaded 
demand that they demonstrate that their view is not just "a refined, Eu- 
ropean-flavored position that has no hands-on applications in cognitive sci- 
ence" (p. 207). If Marr's "inverse optics" is a bad example, what is a good 
example? Rodney Brooks's Intelligence Without Representation (1987). The 
trouble is that once we try to extend Brooks's interesting and important 
message beyond the simplest of critters (artificial or biological), we can be 
quite sure that something awfully like representation is going to have to creep 
in like the tide, in wave after wave. Will our enactive enlightenment lead 
us to say different sorts of things about these sorts of cognitive states, events, 
and processes? Probably. Very different-revolutionarily 
different? It is too 
soon to say, so we will not know for a while whether we need, or are in the 
midst of, a revolution in cognitive science. In the meantime, the authors 
find many new ways of putting together old points that we knew were true 
125 
BOOK REVIEWS 
This content downloaded from 139.184.14.159 on Mon, 02 Nov 2015 09:44:32 UTC
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

but did not know what to do with, and that in itself is a major contribution 
to our understanding of cognitive science. 
Daniel C. Dennett 
Center for Cognitive Studies 
Tufts University 
Medford, MA 02155 
References 
Brooks, R. A. (1987). Intelligence without representation 
(MIT Artificial Intelligence 
Report). Cambridge, MA: MIT. 
Dennett, D. C. (1986). The logical geography of computational approaches: A view 
from the East Pole. In M. Brand & R. M. Harnish (Eds.), The representation 
of 
knowledge and belief (pp. 59-79). Tucson: University of Arizona Press. 
Dennett, D. C. (1991). Consciousness 
explained. Boston, MA: Little, Brown. 
Marr, D. (1982). Vision. San Francisco, CA: Freeman. 
Neisser, U. (1967). Cognitive psychology. 
New York: Appleton-Century-Crofts. 
Neisser, U. (1976). Cognition and reality. San Francisco, CA: Freeman. 
Consciousness 
Explained 
By Daniel C. Dennett. Boston, MA: Little, Brown, 1991. 500 pp. Cloth, 
$28.00. 
People like me, researchers engaged in doing the wet stuff and the nitty- 
gritty of experimental design, but who strongly believe that the important 
questions in cognitive science require careful, methodical philosophical anal- 
ysis, are a lonely bunch. On the one hand (to the right, as it were), many 
(most) of our fellow researchers rarely if ever admit the need for philo- 
sophical reflection apart from Sunday distractions, and certainly do not 
consider the philosopher's trade a central one for scientific research. On 
the other hand (to the left, as it were), many (most) professional philosophers 
merrily go about publishing witty discussions on the fine art of propositional 
distinctions, the arcana of Wittgenstein genius, or such effete topics. In the 
company of the first bunch, I can talk shop, but I quickly get tired. In the 
company of the second bunch, I sometimes learn some amusing quirks, but 
quickly get bored. 
And then there are the rare philosophers like Dennett, who comes straight 
out of the British philosophical tradition from Ryle and Sellars, but who 
stand right next to researchers and speak in their language concerning the 
biological details of neural processes, or the computational achievements of 
neural network, or the possible traps of psychophysical publications. In fact, 
he often publishes in close collaboration with researchers. He is surely the 
kind of philosopher I like to hang out with, but more important than that, 
he is the kind of philosopher who is likely to make a difference in the field. 
Dennett, in fact, has become something of a prototype (in the categorical- 
linguistic sense) for a new breed of younger philosophers. May they multiply 
and prosper in the future for the benefit of us all. 
Yes, you got it right: I enjoyed and appreciated Dennett's magnum opus 
but did not know what to do with, and that in itself is a major contribution 
to our understanding of cognitive science. 
Daniel C. Dennett 
Center for Cognitive Studies 
Tufts University 
Medford, MA 02155 
References 
Brooks, R. A. (1987). Intelligence without representation 
(MIT Artificial Intelligence 
Report). Cambridge, MA: MIT. 
Dennett, D. C. (1986). The logical geography of computational approaches: A view 
from the East Pole. In M. Brand & R. M. Harnish (Eds.), The representation 
of 
knowledge and belief (pp. 59-79). Tucson: University of Arizona Press. 
Dennett, D. C. (1991). Consciousness 
explained. Boston, MA: Little, Brown. 
Marr, D. (1982). Vision. San Francisco, CA: Freeman. 
Neisser, U. (1967). Cognitive psychology. 
New York: Appleton-Century-Crofts. 
Neisser, U. (1976). Cognition and reality. San Francisco, CA: Freeman. 
Consciousness 
Explained 
By Daniel C. Dennett. Boston, MA: Little, Brown, 1991. 500 pp. Cloth, 
$28.00. 
People like me, researchers engaged in doing the wet stuff and the nitty- 
gritty of experimental design, but who strongly believe that the important 
questions in cognitive science require careful, methodical philosophical anal- 
ysis, are a lonely bunch. On the one hand (to the right, as it were), many 
(most) of our fellow researchers rarely if ever admit the need for philo- 
sophical reflection apart from Sunday distractions, and certainly do not 
consider the philosopher's trade a central one for scientific research. On 
the other hand (to the left, as it were), many (most) professional philosophers 
merrily go about publishing witty discussions on the fine art of propositional 
distinctions, the arcana of Wittgenstein genius, or such effete topics. In the 
company of the first bunch, I can talk shop, but I quickly get tired. In the 
company of the second bunch, I sometimes learn some amusing quirks, but 
quickly get bored. 
And then there are the rare philosophers like Dennett, who comes straight 
out of the British philosophical tradition from Ryle and Sellars, but who 
stand right next to researchers and speak in their language concerning the 
biological details of neural processes, or the computational achievements of 
neural network, or the possible traps of psychophysical publications. In fact, 
he often publishes in close collaboration with researchers. He is surely the 
kind of philosopher I like to hang out with, but more important than that, 
he is the kind of philosopher who is likely to make a difference in the field. 
Dennett, in fact, has become something of a prototype (in the categorical- 
linguistic sense) for a new breed of younger philosophers. May they multiply 
and prosper in the future for the benefit of us all. 
Yes, you got it right: I enjoyed and appreciated Dennett's magnum opus 
126 
126 
BOOK REVIEWS 
BOOK REVIEWS 
This content downloaded from 139.184.14.159 on Mon, 02 Nov 2015 09:44:32 UTC
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

