Mining the Past to Construct the Future: 
Memory and Belief as Forms of Knowledge 
1 
Chris Westbury 
Daniel C. Dennett 
The analogy between memory and a repository, and 
between remembering and retaining, is obvious and is to 
be found in all languages; it being natural to express the 
operations of the mind by images taken from things 
material. But in philosophy we ought to draw aside the 
veil of imagery, and to view them naked. 
Thomas Reid, 
Essays on the Intellectual Powers of Man (1815) 
Jacques Monod (1974) observed that "ever since its birth in 
the Ionian islands almost three thousand years ago, Western philoso­
phy has been divided between two seemingly opposed attitudes. Ac­
cording to one of them the true and ultimate reality of the universe 
can reside only in perfectly immutable forms, unvarying by essence. 
According to the other, the only real truth resides in flux and evolu­
tion" (p. 98). Three thousand years of argument has so far failed to 
find a clear resolution to this ancient opposition. There are still two 
committed camps of "Neats" and "Scruffies," who fall on either side 
of the fundamental debate identified by Monod. Some of the most ex­
citing points of intersection between the interests of philosophers and 
scientists today are those at which the apparent incompatibility be­
tween the two camps demands to be resolved-those points at which 
it becomes clear that the stable, neat objects of scientific inquiry are 
attaining their objective status by managing to separate themselves 
(often using scruffy means) from an underlying scruffy flux of dy­
namic phenomena. When we try to understand such objects, questions 
of science merge unavoidably with questions of epistemology. The 
questions that interest us about memory and belief exist at this inter­
section. We will briefly consider each of these phenomena in turn. In 

12 
Mining the Past to Construct the Future 
doing so, we will try to point out some conceptual confusions that 
spring from the way we use their names in informal discourse, and 
emphasize a strong underlying similarity in the ways that memory and 
belief relate to knowledge. 
Memory 
Every event in the world has effects, and the chain of effects that 
spreads from any event continues essentially forever; but only some 
events leave long-lasting traces. We single out the best cases of this for 
special notice: footprints, scars, and various sorts of records. Of all 
the dinosaur footprints that ever pressed into mud, only a tiny frac­
tion are discernible today; of all the clay tablets ever impressed with 
hieroglyphics, only a select few survive-but like the dinosaur foot­
prints, they permit us to read the past in a way that the other long­
lived effects of the same causes do not. Fifty light-years from Earth, a 
sphere of 1947 Jack Benny broadcasts is expanding into the galaxy, 
almost certainly unreconstructible by any technology. If those pro­
grams were not recorded here on Earth, they would be gone forever. 
Events that leave no salient long-term traces can be called inert histor­
ical facts; they happened, but the difference they made no longer 
makes a discernible difference. There is no fixed best way to count 
facts, but by almost ariy usable method we would have to say that 
most historical facts are inert. One of the following is a fact: (a) some 
of the gold in Dennett's teeth once belonged to Julius Caesar; (b) none 
of the gold in Dennett's teeth ever belonged to Julius Caesar. Al­
though one of these statements is true, it is almost certainly beyond all 
powers of investigation to determine which. 
The past consists of all historical facts, inert or recoverable. The 
whole point of brains, of nervous systems and sense organs, is to pro­
duce future, to permit organisms to develop, in real time, anticipa­
tions of what is likely to happen next, the better to deal with it. The 
only way-the only nonmagical way-organisms can do this is by 
prospecting and then mining the present for the precious ore of histor­
ical facts, the raw materials that are then refined into anticipations of 
the future. As Norbert Wiener (1948) pointed out long ago, the fun­
damental method is trajectory sampling or tracking: gathering data 

Mining the Past to Construct the Future 
13 
about the pattern of change in something of interest, then extrapolat­
ing the curve into the future. Whether an organism tracks tempera­
ture, or salinity, or the sun, or a prey, or a mate, or the Dow-Jones in­
dustrial average, the fundamental problem is the same: preventing 
selected historical facts from going inert, at least long enough to ex­
tract their portent for the future. 
In his recent book On the Origin of Objects, Brian Smith (1996) 
avails himself of a similar idea of tracking to develop a metaphysical 
thesis about how the world came to split itself into the experiencer 
and the experienced, into organism and object. In discussing memory, 
he writes, "In order to make a memory more durable than a shadow, 
a . . .  subject must first allow or arrange for an appropriate impression 
to be formed by the event in question, but must then take responsibil­
ity for storing it in such a way as to ensure that it will continue to be 
effective after the event it records has dissipated" (p. 221, emphasis 
added; see also Plotkin, 1994, pp. 149-152). Only organisms that can 
retrieve stored information in order to increase the likelihood of 
achieving some adaptive end will gain any advantage from memory. 
Memory must be rooted in use. 
What is the simplest kind of use to which a rudimentary pro­
tomemory might be put? Consider the visual perception of motion or 
change. An organism's visual system could not tell the difference be­
tween something moving from left to right and something moving 
from right to left unless it had some way of getting the data from two 
moments of time into a single comparison process. Similarly, in order 
to tell that it is getting warmer, not colder, an organism has to have 
some way of "remembering" the temperature in the recent past. We 
put "remembering" in scare-quotes, because although this is the most 
fundamental form of memory, the basis for all others, it need not be 
much like conscious recollection. Protozoan memory, or the memory 
in a tree that reminds it to start pushing out buds in the spring, is not 
like recalling your first-grade teacher. Yet in one fundamental way, 
such functional use of stored information is like memory-that is why 
we call it memory, however scare-quoted. Memory in the fundamen­
tal sense is the ability to store useful information and to retrieve it in 
precisely those circumstances and that form which allow it to be 
useful. 

14 
Mining the Past to Construct the Future 
Computer memory is memory in this fundamental sense-and only 
in this fundamental sense, obviously. The process of changing the 
electromagnetic properties of tiny areas on chips or disks may create 
many long-lasting local effects, but only those count as being stored in 
memory that can later be retrieved by the hardware in the ways in­
tended when they were laid down. Any other changes wrought, how­
ever salient, long-lasting, or effective in altering the system's behavior, 
count as blemishes or scars, not memories. Scars are not memories. A 
dog whose body shows scars inflicted by some encounter but who 
exhibits no heightened caution, no discrimination of the harbingers 
of further scars-in short, who has learned nothing from the en­
counter-has no useful memory of the encounter, even if we others 
can read a lot about it in our examination of the scars. We can extract 
information from the traces left by the event; the dog, apparently, can­
not. 
Where do we draw the line? If one of the effects of the earlier en­
counter is that the dog now limps, and if this limp usefully avoids pain 
and further injury to the limb, does this count as memory? We need 
not answer each such question, but it is important to note that a long­
lasting and salient trace is not enough, and that what more must be 
added-utility-comes in different grades and amounts. At one ex­
treme, we find the paradigmatic cases of memory: conscious, reflective 
beliefs about the past, made manifest in episodes of articulate recollec­
tion: "Share your memories of the war with us, Grandpa." "I'd be de­
lighted to: On April 22, 1943-I can see it as if it were this morning­
! woke to the sound of mortar fire . . . .  " At the other extreme, we find 
a slight tendency to crouch when a passing car backfires-all that re­
mains of a past, once-useful response. 
This twofold requirement-a trace and its utility-raises a quan­
dary that has bedeviled philosophers and psychologists for several 
millennia. In its starkest form, it was articulated in Plato's Meno. In 
that early dialogue, the wealthy Meno challenges Socrates with an ap­
parently paradoxical question: How is that we can ever discover any­
thing new, given that we must either know what we are looking for 
(and therefore have no need to look for it) or not know what we are 
looking for (in which case we will have no way of recognizing it when 
we find it)? Socrates' answer is the doctrine that all knowledge is 

Mining the Past to Construct the Future 
15 
anamnesis: the recollection of innate knowledge, obtained from previ­
ous lives. It is hardly satisfactory. How, Meno might well have gone 
on to ask, do we tell veridical recollection from sheer fantasy? Remi­
niscence is problematical in the same way as knowledge: to recall 
something, we must already know what it is we are trying to recall 
(and therefore have no reason to recall it) or else not know it (and so 
have no ability to recall it). 
In the Theaetetus Plato introduces two metaphors for memory, 
comparing it to an image inscribed on a wax tablet, which may be 
more or less smooth, muddy, and soft, and to a bird in an aviary: 
SOCRAT ES: Now consider whether knowledge is a thing you can 
possess in that way without having it about you, like a man who 
has caught some wild birds-pigeons or what not-and keeps 
them in an aviary for them at home. In a sense, of course, we 
might say that he "has" them all the time inasmuch as he pos­
sesses them, mightn't we? 
TH EA ET ETUS: Yes. 
SOCRAT ES: But in another sense he "has" none of them, though he 
has got control of them, now that he has made them captive in 
an enclosure of his own; he can take and have hold of them 
whenever he likes by catching any bird he chooses, and let them 
go again; and it is open to him to do that as often as he pleases. 
Neither metaphor provides a satisfactory answer to the question 
raised by Meno. If memory is an image carved in a wax tablet, we 
must somehow know where to look on the wax tablet, or at which 
wax tablet to look. If it is a bird in an aviary, we must not only be 
able to call it, but know which one to call and know that it will come 
when we call. Hotspur retorts to Glendower when he claims (in 
Shakespeare's 1 Henry IV) that he "can call spirits from the vasty 
deep": "Why, so can I, or so can any man; But will they come when 
you do call for them?" Meno's problem of needing to know what you 
need to remember in order to remember it still presents a problem for 
modern theories of memory. 
Plato's student Aristotle devoted a short treatise to the problem of 
memory (Aristotle, c. 350 B. c./1941), in which he proposed that 
memory was a picture (eikon) of the past thing remembered. This pie-

16 
Mining the Past to Construct the Future 
ture was causally related to a past object of perception, which was im­
printed into a sense organ that was capable of perceiving it. Aristotle's 
proposal that the object of memory is an accurate picture of a per­
ception, which can simply be consulted as if it were an object of 
perception, largely reduces the problem of memory to the problem of 
perception. In remembering x, we know that it is x for the same rea­
son (whatever that might be!) that we were able to recognize x when 
we first sensed it, because a memory is simply another "viewing" of 
that same sensory impression. This viewpoint defines what was to be­
come the standard representative theory of memory. Memory came to 
be seen as what John Locke (1700) called a "Store-house of our 
Ideas" (p. 150).1 
There are numerous problems with the representative theory of 
memory, most of them echoes of Meno's question. A major difficulty 
is explaining how we can distinguish between imagination and mem­
ory. Aristotle's solution was to introduce the capacity of recognizing 
elapsed time, which allows one to connect the present memory image 
to an earlier act of perception. His conception of how this might work 
rested on a visual analogy, that of seeing objects at different distances 
(Aristotle, c. 350 B.c./1941, p. 615). Earlier memories have receded 
farther into the distance, and so are smaller and less distinct, than 
more recent memories. 
David Hurrie (1739) suggested a way of differentiating memories 
from images that was similar to Aristotle's suggestion. According to 
Hume, what differentiated memory ideas from imaginative ideas was 
not a time stamp but the fact that the ideas of imagination are "fainter 
and more obscure" than the ideas of memory, which strike one with 
"superior force and vivacity" (p. 85). Thomas Reid (1815) was criti­
cal of Hume's view of memory, arguing that if Hume believed (as he 
claimed to) that ideas had only a contingent, rather than a necessary, 
relationship, then there could be no deductive argument that de­
pended on the recognition of a relationship between one idea and an­
other (that is, between a sense idea and a memory idea). Hume had 
himself recognized the difficulty and tried, in an appendix to his book, 
to replace the idea of "vivacity" with the idea of "apprehending the 
idea more strongly or taking a firmer hold of it" (Hume, 1739, 
p. 624). On this attempt, Reid commented dryly, "There is nothing 

Mining the Past to Construct the Future 
17 
more meritorious in a philosopher than to retract an error upon con­
viction, but in this instance I humbly apprehend Mr. Hume claims 
that merit upon too slight a ground" (Reid, 1815, p. 380). Reid's typi­
cally commonsensical solution to the problem begged the question by 
simply accepting that memory, like sense data, was a form of immedi­
ate and noninferential knowledge. (How do I tell a memory from a 
fantasy, Meno? I just do.) 
John Stuart Mill (1869) proposed another mechanism for recogniz­
ing a memory as a memory. He suggested that in accessing a memory 
we run very quickly over all sense impressions since the remembered 
event, and use our understanding of the total number of events to lo­
cate the idea in its temporal location. 
In . . .  recollection there is, first of all, the ideas or simple concep­
tions of the object and acts; and along with those ideas, and so 
closely combined as not to be separable, the idea of my formerly 
having had those same ideas. And this idea of my formerly hav­
ing had those ideas is a very complicated idea, including the idea 
of myself at the present moment remembering, and that of my­
self of the past moment conceiving; and the whole series of the 
states of consciousness, which intervened between myself re­
membering, and myself conceiving. (pp. 330-331) 
Many more recent philosophers have followed Thomas Reid in 
choosing to leave the difficult idea of "pastness" as an unanalyzed 
primitive. For example, William Jaines wrote simply that memories 
were referred back in time by "a general feeling of the past direction 
of time" (James, 1890, p. 650). Similarly, Bertrand Russell (who ulti­
mately remained skeptical of any necessary connection between mem­
ory and belief) suggested that a feeling of pastness and a feeling of fa­
miliarity gave rise to a feeling of belief, and that all three were 
essential constituents of memory (1921, pp. 161-163). (For further 
discussion of how philosophers subscribing to the representative the­
ory have tried to explain the differentiation of memories from imagi­
nation, see Holland, 1954.) 
Ironically, it is Plato's theory, rejected by Aristotle more than two 
thousand years ago, which is perhaps closest in spirit to modern theo­
ries of memory. Plato's theory of anamnesis is not to be scoffed at, 

18 
Mining the Past to Construct the Future 
even if we have to reinterpret his central metaphor in order to make 
any use of the idea. The main point he was making has been rediscov­
ered again and again: there can be no learning-and so no knowl­
edge-from the base of a tabula rasa. It follows that a memory cannot 
just be an isolated atomic fact, complete unto itself. James (1890) 
made this point explicitlyȋ noting that 
what we began calling the "image," or "copy," of the fact in the 
mind, is really not there at all in that simple shape, as a separate 
idea. Or at least, if it be there as a separate idea, no memory will go 
with it. What memory goes with is, on the contrary, a very com­
plex representation, that of the fact to be recalled plus its associ­
ates, the whole forming one "object" ... and demanding probably 
a vastly more intricate brain-process than that on which any sim­
ple sensorial image depends. (p. 651; emphasis in original) 
F. C. Bartlett (1932) would later reemphasize this same point in his 
criticisms of Ebbinghaus' early attempts to study memory with "mean­
ingless" stimuli. He too recognized that for a memory to be recognized, 
there has to be independent knowledge against which it can be com­
pared-how else? Even Skinnerians appreciated the need for an innate 
basis for distinguishing reinforcers, positive and negative. It was a fail­
ure to deal adequately with this necessity for independent knowledge 
that caused so.many problems for the representationalists-they could 
find nothing to which their memory image might be compared, in order 
to recognize it as a memory. To compare it to another memory image 
would hardly do, since that would lead to an infinite regress. 
Meno's question about how we can recognize our memories has 
been recast in its original form, as a question about how to recognize 
our own knowledge. It is a mistake, as everyone acknowledges, to as­
sume that interpretation of recalled knowledge happens only at the 
preloading, perceptual stage-to assume that once knowledge "enters 
memory" (through the front door), it is happily stored away, to be 
"retrieved" intact at later times of "recollection." Though everyone 
recognizes this as a bad view, it still haunts discussions subliminally. 
The importance of interpretation in accessing memory has of 
course been known for a long time. Starting with Bartlett's (1932) fa­
mous experiments examining the recollection of stories, which led him 

Mining the Past to Construct the Future 
19 
to conclude that organisms have an "effort after meaning," it has been 
repeatedly demonstrated that our ability to recall is inextricably 
linked to our assumptions about how the world is, and is subject to 
"top-down" schematization dictated by those assumptions (see Gold­
man, 1986, for a review and analysis of empirical evidence for this 
claim). What we recall is not what we actually experienced, but rather 
a reconstruction of what we experienced that is consistent with our 
current goals and our knowledge of the world. As Bartlett put it: "Re­
membering is not the re-excitation of innumerable fixed, lifeless, and 
fragmentary forms. It is an imaginative reconstruction, or construc­
tion, built out of the relation of our attitude towards a whole active 
mass of organized past reactions or experience, and to a little out­
standing detail which commonly appears in image or in language 
form" (1932, p. 213, cited in Zechmeister and Nyberg, 1982, p. 301). 
The assessment of what constitutes an acceptable reconstruction of 
the past must be dynamically computed by an organism under the 
constraints imposed by its built-in biological biases and the history of 
the interaction of those biases with the environment in which the or­
ganism has lived. The apparently stable objects of memory-the rep­
resentations of the things being recalled-are not retrieved from some 
Store-house of Ideas where they have been waiting intact, but rather 
are constructed on the fly by a computational process. As H. R. Matu­
rana (1970) wrote, "Memory as an allusion to a representation in the 
learning animal of its past experiences is also a description by the ob­
server of his ordered interactions with the observed animal [which 
may be the observer himself]; memory as a storage of representations 
of the environment to be used on different occasions in recall does not 
exist as a neurophysiological function" (p. 37). What we call recollec­
tion can never be more than the most plausible story we come up with 
(or, perhaps, only a story which is plausible enough) within the con­
text of the constraints imposed by biology and history. 
Belief 
The word "belief" is difficult to define, in part because it is used in 
different ways in different contexts. In his closing statements at the 
conference from which the chapters in this volume have been drawn, 

20 
Mining the Past to Construct the Future 
Antonio Damasio pointed out that a person who talked about his be­
liefs about everyday things-about the shape or purpose of door­
knobs, pencils, telephones, and irons-would be taken for either a 
comic or a lunatic (or, as one of us added, a philosopher!). Damasio 
was trying to capture a commonly held intuition: that beliefs cannot 
be about just anything at' all; they must be about important or notably 
uncertain things. In ordinary usage, the term "belief" is reserved for 
referring only to linguistically encoded convictions and doctrines, not 
to the mass of unexpressed and widely held background knowledge 
that we all implicitly use to navigate through our world. 
We would not normally be willing to say that a person who makes 
himself a cup of coffee is thereby expressing his beliefs about the phys­
ical characteristics of electrical outlets, coffee machines, ceramic con­
tainers, hot liquids, and organic compounds such as coffee beans, 
sugar, and milk, or even that he is expressing a belief about the desir­
ability of coffee. He is simply making a cup of coffee. However, 
within the cognitive science and philosophy of mind communities, the 
word "belief" is often used much more generally, to refer to any im­
plicit or explicit information that guides an agent's voluntary actions. 
One benefit of this way of thinking is that it allows us to speak of the 
beliefs of nonhuman agents (see Dennett, 1987a, 1995, 1996). By 
widening the meaning of the word, we lose certainty about exactly 
when it applies. 'Does· the duckling who follows Konrad Lorenz truly 
believe that the large bearded man is its mother? Does the ant follow­
ing a phero!lone trail or the amoeba swimming up a chemical gradi­
ent really believe that following those signals will lead to a food sup­
ply? When we see a cow in a field, do we believe simultaneously that 
our eyes are not fooling us, that an object that looks like a cow is a 
cow, that our memory for names of animals is functioning properly, 
that we are not dreaming, and so on for the thousands of other propo­
sitions that must all be true in order for us to believe that the cow in 
the field is indeed precisely that? Are we to accept that any cognitive 
state must encode all the implicit beliefs which must be held in order 
for that state to be interpreted properly? 
We will consider two possible recent approaches to these kinds of 
questions: the "language of thought" approach and the "intentional 
stance" approach. 

The Language of Thought 
Mining the Past to Construct the Future 
21 
The tradition in cognitive science and philosophy of mind that we 
characterize as the language of thought tradition shares some philo­
sophical roots with the representative theory of memory. This lan­
guage of thought tradition has considered beliefs to be individual data 
structures to be found somewhere in the brain (in the Golden Age of 
Neurocryptology, presumably). To those who hold this strange view, 
this has seemed to follow from the fact that beliefs are, in philosophi­
cal parlance, "propositional attitudes," instances of the formula 
x believes that p, 
where p is replaced by some sentence expressing the proposition be­
lieved. But we need not, and indeed should not, jump so blithely to 
the conclusion that the beliefs about which we want to have theories 
in cognitive science are anything like that. To see why not, consider 
the following experiment, with yourself as subject:2 
Here is a joke. See if you get it. (Newfies are people from New­
foundland; they are the Poles of Canada-or the Irish of 
Canada, if you're British.) 
A man went to visit his friend the Newfie and found him with 
both ears bandaged. "What happened?" he asked, and the New­
fie replied, "I was ironing my shirt, you know, and the telephone 
rang." "That explains one ear, but what about the other?" 
"Well, you know, I had to call the doctor!" 
The experiment yields a positive result if you get the joke. Most peo­
ple do, but not all. If we were to pause, in the fashion of Eugene Char­
niak, whose story-understanding AI (artificial intelligence) program 
(Charniak, 1974) first explored this phenomenon, and ask what one 
has to believe in order to get the joke, we would generate a very long 
list of different propositions. We would need to include propositions 
about the shape of an iron and the shape of a telephone; about the 
supposed fact that when people are stupid they often cannot simulta­
neously do different things with the left hand and the right hand; 
about the fact that the heft of a telephone receiver and an iron are ap-

22 
Mining the Past to Construct the Future 
proximately the same; about the fact that when telephones ring, peo­
ple generally answer them; and many, many more. 
What makes the brief narrative a joke and not just a boring story is 
that it is radically enthymematic; it leaves out a lot of facts and counts 
on the listener's filling them in, which the listener is able to do only if 
she believes all those propositions. Now here is a daft theory about 
how you got the joke-and it is probably not quite fair to Jerry Fodor 
and other language-of-thought fans, .but they haven't offered any al­
ternatives: In come some sentences (exactly the sentences written 
above), through the eyes of those who read the joke and the ears of 
those who hear it. Their arrival provokes a mechanism that goes hunt­
ing for all the relevant sentences-all those on our list-and soon 
brings them into a common workspace, where a resolution theorem 
prover takes over, filling in all the gaps by logical inference. 
Some such sententialist theory of cognitive processing is the direc­
tion in which Fodor has gestured, but nobody has produced a plausi­
ble version. No one believes the theory sketch just given, we trust, but 
even if it and all its near kin (the other sententialist/inference engine 
theories) are rejected as theories about how you got the joke, our list 
of propositions is not for that reason otiose or foolish or spurious. It 
actually does describe cognitive conditions (very abstractly consid­
ered) that do have to be met by anyone who gets the joke. 
We can easily ·imagine running the experiments that would prove 
this. Strike off one belief on that list and see what happens. That is, 
find some people who lack that belief (but have all the others) and tell 
them the joke. They will not get it. They cannot get it, because each of 
the beliefs is necessary for comprehension of the story. In other words, 
we have counterfactual-supporting generalizations of the following 
form: If you don't believe (have forgotten) that p, then you won't get 
the joke. 
Here is an empirical prediction that relies on the scientific probity 
of talking about this list of beliefs, even though the itȉms on that list 
do not refer to anything salient in the head, but are mere abstracta: 
This joke will soon be extinct, rendered too obsolete to provoke a 
laugh in a generation or two. Why? Because in this age of wash-and­
wear clothing, young people are growing up without ever having seen 
anybody iron. Some do not know what an iron looks and feels like, 

Mining the Past to Construct the Future 
23 
and their numbers are growing. For that matter, telephones are chang­
ing shape and heft all the time too, so the essential belief in the simi­
larity of shape and heft of telephone receiver and iron is also going to 
vanish. That belief is not going to be reliably in the belief pool of nor­
mal audiences, so they would not get the joke. You would have to ex­
plain it to them-"Well, back in the olden days, irons sorta looked 
and felt like .. . "-and then of course it would no longer be a joke. 
This example could be multiplied many times over, showing that the 
power of folk psychology or the intentional stance as a calculus of ab­
stracta is not in the least threatened by the prospect that no version of 
Fodor's "language of thought" model of belief is sustained by cogni­
tive neuroscience. 
Note that introspection leaves open the question of what cognitive 
mechanisms are involved in getting the joke. Some people may report 
having had quite detailed imagery while listening to the joke. Others 
may say they "got it" with only the faintest traces of imagery. In either 
case, the list of beliefs on which their amusement depended would be 
surprisingly long. No one has the experience of consciously entertaining 
such a lengthy set of propositions, even though it must be true that the 
information expressed by those propositions is somehow in their pos­
session, and has aptly and swiftly enabled them to see the point. 
We should not be fooled by the apparent immediacy of the reaction 
to the joke-or by the absence of any discernible steps between hear­
ing the joke and getting it, or by the impossibility of listing all the 
propositions required to get the joke-into thinking that those who 
get the joke must therefore have made a mental jump that did not re­
quire any cognitive representation of the intermediate computational 
steps. Such a viewpoint simply reflects a "fossil trace" of the Cartesian 
sententialist metaphor, as if propositions must necessarily be pro­
cessed in their sentential form simply because it is possible and seems 
natural to us to state them in that form. The neural processes that 
allow us to get a joke are, by definition, cognitive processes, however 
nonsentential, emotionally mediated, parallel, and widely distributed 
in the brain they may be. The problem facing neuroscientists who 
wish to understand belief is not to discover how "belief propositions" 
are processed by the brain, but rather to discover if beliefs are 
processed in propositional form at all, and if not, to discover what 

24 
Mining the Past to Construct the Future 
those neural processes which admit of high-level descriptions in terms 
of propositional processing are actually computing. 3 
We consider it extremely unlikely that beliefs are represented in the 
brain as sentence-like data structures. Beliefs are ubiquitous guides 
and influences on our every action and waking reaction, but they are 
not the familiar items of daily phenomenology. We are unaware of 
our beliefs, for the most part. We just act on them. Are such "sub­
propositional" beliefs "memories"? In the fundamental sense defined 
earlier, yes-for they involve the ability to encode useful information 
and to decode it in precisely those circumstances where it can be use­
ful. In the stronger, more common sense of the word, however, they 
are not memories. Any use of the brain's plasticity to store informa­
tion can be counted as memory in the most basic sense, but we must 
be careful not to conflate this sense of the word with the everyday 
concept of memory. 
The Intentional Stance 
Because we do not want to explain beliefs by first assuming their 
existence, in the manner of the sententialist theories that assume the 
existence of proposition-like data structures in the brain, we suggest 
that the most useful way to think of a belief is as an explanatory 
tool, rather than· as an object in need of explaining. Instead of 
continuing the attempt to define a belief as an entity that an organ­
ism might have or not have (in the concrete, binary-valued way 
that a library can have a particular book or a poem can have a par­
ticular line), a belief must be defined in terms of the circumstance 
under which a belief could be justifiably attributed to that organism. 
What is meant when it is asserted that an organism has a belief, we 
propose, is that its behavior can be reliably predicted by ascribing 
that belief to it-an act of ascription we call taking the intentional 
stance. 
The suggestion is not simply that the adoption of such a definition 
might be a heuristic for sidestepping the question of what a belief 
"really" is, but the stronger suggestion that all there is to having a belief 
that p is a system that is efficiently (and, in the strongest cases, most 
efficiently) predictable under the assumption that it believes that p. 

Mining the Past to Construa the Future 
25 
This suggestion is intended to carry ontological, rather than simply 
methodological, weight. 
We do not propose to justify this claim in detail here, as much 
space has already been devoted to that end elsewhere (see Dennett, 
1987a, 1988, 1991). Rather, we want to emphasize only that this defi­
nition means that we must define a (propositional) belief in the same 
way that we have defined a memory, as a particular kind of useful 
knowledge. To say that x believes that p is to assert that x's behavior 
(verbal and otherwise) demonstrates a particular kind of regularity; 
namely, just that kind of regularity which justifies the "projection" 
(the subjective assumption by the observer) of x's intentionality about 
p. Although there might be many different ways in which (and mecha­
nisms by which) x can behave so as to allow for the ascription of in­
tentionality about p, we can be sure that the following must be true of 
all such x's: 
1. x must "know how" (in a loose sense that includes "be struc­
tured so as") to act in order to produce a regularity that allows 
for the ascription of p (and, trivially, must either be able to pro­
duce it or be unable to produce it for purely mechanical or ex­
ternal, rather than epistemological, reasons); 
2. x must be self-motivated (in a loose sense that includes "be 
structured so as") to produce the regularity described above) 
(because simply knowing how to state or act in accordance with 
a belief-or being forced at gunpoint to state or act in accor­
dance with a belief-does not entail believing); 
3. the observer (which may be x himself) who is making the attri­
bution to x of a belief that p must be (implicitly or explicitly) 
satisfied that he is able to discern (independently of whether he 
actually is able to discern) the regularity that x's behavior 
demonstrates. In other words, in order to attribute a belief that 
p, an organism must simultaneously attribute to himself (that is, 
act in a way that seems to him to accord with) the belief "I 
know what it means to believe that p." In order to adopt the in­
tentional stance toward others, one must also adopt it toward 
oneself. 
The third requirement is of particular interest, for a couple of reasons. 

26 
Mining the Past to Constmct the Fuhlre 
The first reason is that the requirement that an organism must be 
satisfied that it is able to discern the intentionality-defining regularity, 
is recursively dependent on the very requirements to which it belongs. 
To be able to discern a regularity in x's behavior is to hold a belief 
about what it means for x to believe that p. It is therefore necessary 
that the attributor fulfill, the three conditions outlined above for 
attributing a belief (in this case, toward himself): he must know how 
to act consistently with his belief that x believes that p, must be self­
motivated to do so, and must be satisfied that he is able to do so. 
The recursion is grounded (that is, infinite recursion on the third 
requirement is avoided) by the fact that the attributor will, by defini­
tion, certainly be satisfied that he is able to recognize just those 
regularities which he himself must be satisfied that he is able to 
recognize. This is not to say that we must know everything that we 
believe, which is not necessarily true, but only that, in order to satisfy 
the above three requirements for believing any proposition p, we must 
also satisfy those requirements for believing another proposition: 
namely, the proposition that we know what it means to believe 
that p. 
The second reason that the third requirement is of particular inter­
est is because it states that the intentional stance can be grounded in 
an organism's own satisfaction with its ability to detect a relevant reg­
ularity, rather than its actual (objectively measurable) ability to detect 
any such regularity. The existence of an implicit or explicit subjective 
satisfaction that an organism can detect an appropriate regularity 
with respect fo a proposition p (the existence of a belief that it knows 
what it means to believe that p) in the absence of any empirical sup­
porting evidence is not a rare or unlikely event: jealous lovers who un­
justly accuse their mates of infidelity, sports fans who treat their home 
team as if it had a consistent personality across changes in its member­
ship, and people who believe political campaign promises, among 
many others in our world, all exhibit signs that they have projected 
belief onto a system that can be demonstrated to be undeserving of the 
honor. In a less forgiving world than the one we humans have man­
aged to create for ourselves, such errors would be little tolerated. Nat­
ural selection would act as the quick and final judge of which systems 
for recognizing intentional patterns had sufficient practical utility. In 

Mining the Past to Construct the Future 
27 
our human world, however, it is possible to mix in a great many idio­
syncratically grounded intentional projection systems with the few 
that are required by us all-hence the great variance in the beliefs that 
human beings are willing to agree they hold. 
Note that the claim that beliefs depend on an organism's ability to 
self-assess its own beliefs should not be interpreted as supporting a 
radical epistemological relativism, since it is evident that the most im­
portant means by which human beings assess their satisfaction with 
their beliefs is by being satisfied that they hold the beliefs that society 
taught them how be satisfied that they held.4 Children raised to be­
lieve that p are much more likely to grow up believing that p than 
children raised to believe that not-p, a fact which has been the 
source of considerable distress in the course of recorded human his­
tory among the more adamant proponents of not-p. 
Many of the objections raised against the view of belief offered by 
the intentional stance spring from a desire once identified by Ludwig 
Wittgenstein as a "need": the desire to maintain a folk psychological 
category of belief, which views belief as some sort of mysterious 
essence inherent in the entity to which the belief is attributed. 
Wittgenstein (1983) wrote: "If you talk about essence-you are 
merely noting a convention. But here one would like to retort: there is 
no greater difference than that between a proposition about the depth 
of the essence and one about-a mere convention. But what if I reply: 
to the depth that we see in the essence there corresponds the deep 
need for a convention" (p. 65). 
Acceptance of the view of belief offered by the intentional stance 
means that a wide variety of objectively different phenomena (includ­
ing those that may demonstrably be modulated by different brain re­
gions within a single species) may justifiably be called belief. The 
demand for a definition which defines belief in terms that are indepen­
dent of situational contingencies is ill founded, in the same way that 
the demand for a detailed but context-free definition of evolutionary 
fitness is unfounded. In both cases, the only definitions that can be 
provided must either be so general as to be unhelpful as an explana­
tory device in any specific situation (for instance, "an organism is fit 
because it is well suited for living in its environment") or so specific 
that no wide generalization of it will be possible (we should not ex-

28 
Mining the Past to Construct the Future 
pect to learn much about why swallows have survived as a species 
from a detailed understanding of the eating and mating habits of a 
species of jellyfish). 
We would like to discourage the demand for a context-independent 
definition of belief, and encourage the idea that the definition of a be­
lief in any particular circumstance is equivalent to the identification of 
the contingencies which allow that belief to be attributable. (Lan­
guage, of course, allows us to produce behaviors that make it very 
easy to attribute beliefs to ourselves and to each other.) In just the 
same way that the biologist who wishes to discuss "fitness" must 
identify the relevant constraints in both the species under discussion 
and the environment in which its members are competing for the 
chance to reproduce, we suggest that the psychologist who wishes to 
discuss "belief" with scientific precision must identify both the envi­
ronment in which the belief under discussion is attributed (that is, the 
relevant rules of interpretation under which the attribution is made) 
and the actions of the organism that fall under those rules of interpre­
tation. 5 
It might be further clarifying to compare the current status of be­
liefs in scientific terminology with the status of genes prior to Crick 
and Watson's identification of DNA as the vehicle of genetic trans­
mission. At that point in time, genes had already been identified by 
their functional roles as characterized in the (over-) simplifications of 
transmission genetics. They were "whatever they are" that could play 
those relatively well-defined roles. The attempt to fit old-style gene 
talk into the 'realities of molecular biology required some large adjust­
ments in the understanding of what a gene might be, to the point that 
serious controversy exists about whether it is right to talk about genes 
at all. 
Although the situation with beliefs is much less sanguine, the dimly 
imagined hope that beliefs may turn out to be like what genes were 
once thought to be-salient structures, identifiable (wiȊh minimal pro­
crustean adjustments) as the vehicles of previously well-defined con­
tent elements-presupposes what is simply not true: that there is a rel­
atively rigorous, precise, predictive science of beliefs and their 
functional interactions. This is the myth of "East Pole" Cognitive Sci-

Mining the Past to Construct the Future 
29 
ence (see Dennett, 1987b, 1998) and the "physical symbol system" 
hypothesis, which has not yet been borne out at all. We can keep this 
fond hope in mind without succumbing to the imperative that urges 
us to consider it an inevitable development. 
Conclusion 
In terms of Monod's dialectical view of the history of philosophy, we 
have offered definitions of memory and belief that fall rather closer to 
the side of the Scruffies than that of the Neats. Although it may be 
dismaying or frustrating to some, the history of the concepts clearly 
demonstrates that neater definitions are likely to be philosophically 
problematical. The complex network of implicit and explicit knowl­
edge that underlies the categories of both "belief" and "memory" 
rests on the ability of that network to both define and recognize its 
own coherence. Belief and memory thus fall under the definition of 
knowledge that the Italian anti-Cartesian philosopher Giambattista 
Vico (1710 /1988) gave nearly three centuries ago: the process of mak­
ing the objects of the mind (or, as we might say today, the apparent 
objects of the mind) correspond to each other in shapely proportion.6 
Because organisms may have developed numerous different methods 
for making the apparent objects of the mind correspond to one an­
other in shapely proportion-and because the methods by which such 
shapeliness may be detected are informed by many different kinds of 
learning-we must be wary of any definition that treats memory and 
belief as if they could be simple primitives existing only inside the 
brain. They are rather summary descriptions, imposed from the top 
down, of a set of diverse and complex mechanisms that are all at­
tempting to achieve a single common end: to keep the useful facts of 
history from going immediately inert. 
References 
Aristotle. (c. 350 B.c./1941). On memory and reminiscence. In The basic 
works of Aristotle (J. I. Beare, Trans.). New York: Random House. 

30 
· Mining the Past to Construct the Future 
Bartlett, F. C. (1932). Remembering. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 
Broad, C. D. (1925/1962). The mind and its place in nature. London: Rout­
ledge and Kegan Paul. 
Charniak, E. (1974). Toward a model of children's story comprehension. Un­
published. MIT lab report 266. 
Dennett, D. (1987a). The intentional stance. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press. 
Dennett, D. (1987b). The logical geography of computational approaches: A 
view from the East Pole. In M. Brand and M. Harnish (Eds.), Problems 
in the representation of knowledge. Tucson: University of Arizona Press. 
Dennett, D. (1988). Precis of The intentional stance. Behavioral and Brain 
Sciences, 11, 495-546. 
Dennett, D. (1991). Real patterns.Journal of Philosophy, 87, 27-51. 
Dennett, D. (1995). Do animals have beliefs? In H. L. Roitblat and J-A 
Meyer (Eds.), Comparative approaches to cognitive science. Cambridge, 
MA: MIT Press. 
Dennett, D. (1996). Kinds of minds. New York: Basic Books. 
Dennett, D. (1998). Brainchildren: Essays on designing minds. Cambridge, 
MA: MIT Press. 
Efran, J., Lukens, M., and Lukens, R. (1990). Language, structure, and 
change. New York: W. W. Norton. 
Goldman, A. I. (1986). Epistemology and cognition. Cambridge, MA: Har­
vard University Press. 
Holland, R. F. (1954). The empiricist theory of memory. Mind, 63, 464-468. 
Hume, D. (1739/1896). Treatise of human nature (L. A. Selby-Bigge, Ed.). 
Oxford: Clarendon Press. 
James, W. (1890/.1950). Principles of psychology, Vol. 1. New York: Dover. 
Locke, J. (1700/i979). An essay concerning human understanding, (P. N. 
Nidditch, Ed.). Oxford: Clarendon Press. 
Malcolm, N. (1963). Knowledge and certainty: Essays and lectures. Engle­
wood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall. 
Marr, D. (1982). Vision. New York: Freeman. 
Maturana, H. R. (1970). Biology of cognition. In H. R. Maturana and F. J. 
Varela. (1980). Autopoesis and cognition: The realization of the living 
(pp. 1-58). Dordrecht, The Netherlands: D. Reidel. 
Mill, J. (1869). Analysis of phenomena of the human mind, Vol. 1. London: 
Long, Green, Reader, and Dyer. 
Monod, J. (1974). Chance and necessity London: Fontana. 
Plato (347 B.c./1928). The works of Plato (I. Edman, Ed.). New York: 
Tudor. 
Plotkin, H. (1994). Darwin machines and the nature of knowledge. Cam­
bridge, MA: Harvard University Press. 
Reid, T. (181511969). Essays on the intellectual powers of man. Cambridge, 
MA: MIT Press. 

Mining the Past to Construct the Future 
31 
Russell, B. (1921). The analysis of mind. London: Allen and Unwin. 
Ryle, G. (1949). The concept of mind. London: Penguin Books. 
Smith, B. C. (1996). On the origin of objects. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press. 
Vico, G. (1710/1988). On the most ancient wisdom of the Italians unearthed 
from the origins of the Latin language (L. M. Palmer, Trans.). Ithaca: 
Cornell University Press. 
Wiener, N. (1948/1991). Cybernetics. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press. 
Wittgenstein, L. (1958). Philosophical investigatio11s. Oxford: Blackwell. 
Wittgenstein, L. (1983). Remarks on the foundations of mathematics. Cam-
bridge, MA: MIT Press. 
Zechmeister, E. B., and Nyberg, S. E. (1982). Human memory: An introduc­
tion to research and theory. Monterey, CA: Brooks/Cole. 
Notes 
1. Notwithstanding his common association with the representative theorists, 
Locke's view of memory was actually more subtle than this metaphor sug­
gests. He goes on to note that "our Ideas being nothing, but actual Percep­
tions in the Mind, which cease to be anything, when there is no perception 
of them, this laying up of our Ideas in the Repository of Memory, signifies 
no more but this, that the Mind has a Power, in many cases, to revive Per­
ceptions, which it has once had ... And in this Sense it is, that our Ideas 
are said to be in our Memories, when indeed, they are actually no where, 
but only there is an ability in the Mind, when it will, to revive them again" 
(p. 150). This passage suggests that Locke did not think of the memory 
simply as a static storehouse of images, but rather as a dynamic ability to 
evoke or reconstruct an image, a metaphor more closely in keeping with 
modern scientific views of memory, which is close to the view of memory 
we champion here. 
2. This example is drawn from Dennett, 1987, pp. 76-77. 
3. David Marr (1982) made a relevant distinction between what he (rather 
misleadingly) called the computational level and a lower level he referred 
to as the algorithmic level. We might prefer to call his computational level 
the functional level, concerned as it is with what function, in an abstract 
and idealized sense, the system under consideration is intended to com­
pute: that is, concerned as it is with competence rather than performance. 
The lower algorithmic level is concerned with the abstract details of how 
that function is actually implemented by the system. (A third, lowest 
level-the hardware level-is concerned with the concrete engineering de­
tails of the implementation of that particular algorithm.) Marr's point was 
that mistakes at the highest (computational) level made it difficult or im-

32 
Mining the Past to Constru(:t the Futurf! 
possible to adequately address questions at the lower levels, because errors 
at the computational level made it difficult or impossible to distinguish be­
tween informative fact and artifact at the lower levels. Looking for propo­
sitions in the brain might be very much like looking for perfect earth­
centered circles in the orbits of the heavenly bodies. The high-level 
requirements of the theory mislead one into blurring a distinction we de­
cidedly do not wish to blur: the one between noise {theoretically neutral 
facts relating to performance) and data {theoretically important facts relat­
ing to competence). 
4. As Efran, Lukens, and Lukens (1990, p. 111) put it in discussing the 
closely related phenomena of meaning: "Although we understand {and 
agree with) the notion that meanings are social constructions, that does 
not imply that they can or should be modified at will. Participating in a 
culture is a commitment to abide by established. language conventions. 
Capricious renaming of actions for short-term gain may entail unexpected, 
hidden, long-term risks. If you cheapen the verbal coin of the realm now, it 
is hard to escape the inflationary effects later." 
5. In actual practice, of course, the rules of interpretation that seem to be 
commonly accepted in the company in which the attribution of beliefs 
takes place, can often be simply assumed by the attributor to be accepted 
by the intended audience of his intentional attribution. If they are not, he 
is communicating with the wrong audience. 
6. This view is reflected in the etymology of "belief." According to the Ox­
ford English Dictionary, the word derives from a degraded form of the 
original Teutonic "galaubian," which means "to hold estimable or pleas­
ing; to be sati$fie.d with," intensified by the addition of the prefix "be." 
Thus, etymologically, a belief is something with which one is thoroughly 
satisfied or much pleased. 

Memory, Brain, and Belief 
Edited by 
Daniel L. Schacter 
Elaine Scarry 
Harvard University Press 
Cambridge, Massachusetts 
London, England I 2000 

Copyright © 2000 by the President and Fellows of Harvard College 
All rights reserved 
Printed in the United States of America 
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data 
Memory, brain, and belief I edited by Daniel L. Schacter and Elaine Scarry. 
p. 
cm. 
Includes bibliographical references and index. 
ISBN 0-674-00061-7 (alk. paper) 
1. Memory Congresses. 
2. Belief and doubt Congresses. 
3. Cognitive neuroscience Congresses. 
I. Schacter, Daniel L. 
[DNLM: 
1. Memory Disorders-physiopathology Congresses. 
2. Brain 
Congresses. 
3. Delusions Congresses. 
4. Knowledge Congresses. 
5. Memory-physiology Congresses. 
6. Self Concept Congresses. 
WM 
173.7 M53253 
2000] 
QP406.M44 
2000 
612.8'2-dc21 
DNLM/DLC 
for Library of Congress 
99-40552 

