Can Machines Think?*
Daniel C. Dennett
Center for Cognit ive Studies, Tufts University
Summary. Much has been wri tten about the Tu ring Test in t he last few years,
some of it preposterously off t he mark. People typ ically mis-imagine the test by
orders of magnitude. This essay is an antidote, a prosthesis for the imagination,
showing how huge t he task posed by the Turing Test is, and hence how unlikely it
is that any computer will ever pass it . It does not go far enough in the imagination-
enhancement department , however, and I have updat ed t he essay with a new
postscript.
1
Can Machines Think?
Can machines think? This has been a conundrum for philosophers for years,
but in their fascination with the pure conceptual issues they have for the most
part overlooked the real social importance of the answer. It is of more than
academic importance that we learn to think clearly about the actual cognitive
powers of computers, for they are now being int roduced into a variety of
sensitive social roles, where their powers will be put to the ultimate test: In a
wide variety of areas, we are on the verge of making ourselves dependent upon
their cognitive powers. The cost of overestimating them could be enormous.
One of the principal inventors of the computer was the great British math-
ematician Alan Turing. It was he who first figured out , in highly abstract
terms, how to design a programmable computing device -
what we now call
a universal Turing machine. All programmable computers in use today are in
essence Turing machines. Over thirty years ago, at the dawn of the computer
age, Turing began a classic article, "Computing Machinery and Intelligence"
with the words: "I propose to consider the question, 'Can machines think?'"
-
but then went on to say this was a bad question, a question that leads
only to sterile debate and haggling over definitions, a question, as he put it,
"too meaningless to deserve discussion" [9]. In its place he substituted what
he took to be a mu ch better question, a question that would be crisply an-
swerable and intuit ively satisfying -
in every way an acceptable substitute
for the philosophic puzzler with which he began.
* Originally appeared in Michael G. Shafto, editor, How We Kn ow: Nobel Confer-
ence XX, Harper & Row, San Francisco, CA , 1985. Reprinted with permission of
HarperCollins Publishers Inc., New York.

296
D. C. Dennett
First he described a parlor game of sorts, the "imitation game," to be
played by a man, a woman , and a judge (of either gender). The man and
woman are hidden from the judge's view but able to communicate with the
judge by teletype; the judge's task is to guess, after a period of questio ning
each contestant, which interlocutor is the man and which the woman. The
man tries to convince the judge he is the woman (and the woman tries to
convince the judge of the truth), and the man wins in the judge makes the
wrong identification. A little reflection will convince you, I am sure, that,
aside from lucky breaks , it would take a clever man to convince the judge
that he was woman -
assuming the judge is clever too, of course.
Now suppose, Turing said, we replace the man or woman with a computer,
and give the judge the task of determining which is the human being and
which is the computer. Turing proposed that any computer that can regularly
or often fool a discerning judge in this game would be intelligent -
would be a
computer that thinks -
beyond any reasonable doubt. Now, it is important to
realize that failing this test is not supposed to be a sign of lack of intelligence.
Many intelligent people, after all, might not be willing or able to play the
imitation game, and we should allow computers the same opportunity to
decline to prove themselves. This is, then , a one-way test; failing it proves
nothing.
Furthermore, Turing was not committing himself to the view (although it
is easy to see how one might think he was) that to think is to think just like
a human being -
any more than he was committing himself to the view that
for a man to think, he must think exactly like a woman. Men and women , and
computers, may all have different ways of thinking. But surely, he thought,
if one can think in one's own peculiar style well enough to imitate a thinking
man or woman, one can think well, indeed. T his imagined exercise has come
to be known as the Turing test .
It is a sad irony that Turing's proposal has had exactly the opposite effect
on the discussion of that which he intended. Turing didn't design the test as
a useful tool in scientific psychology, a method of confirming or disconfirm-
ing scientific theories or evaluating particular models of mental fun ction; he
designed it to be nothing more than a philosophical conversation-stopper.
He proposed -
in the spirit of "P ut up or shut up!" -
a simple test for
thinking that was surely strong enough to satisfy the sternest skeptic (or
so he thought ). He was saying, in effect , "Inste ad of arguing interminably
about the ultimate nature and essence of thinking, why don't we all agree
that whatever that nature is, anyt hing that could pass this test would surely
have it; then we could turn to asking how or whether some machine could be
designed and built that might pass the test fair and square." Alas, philoso-
phers -
amateur and professional -
have instead taken Turing's proposal as
the pretext for just the sort of definitional haggling and interminable arguing
about imaginary counterexamples he was hoping to squelch.

Can Machines Think?
297
This thirty-year preoccupation with the Turing test has been all the more
regrettable because it has focused attention on the wrong issues. There are
real world problems that are revealed by considering the st rengths and weak-
nesses of the Turing test, but these have been concealed behind a smokescreen
of misguided criticisms. A failure to think imaginatively about the test ac-
tually proposed by Turing has led many to underestimate its severity and to
confuse it wit h much less interesting proposals.
So first I want to show that the Turing test, conceived as he conceived it ,
is (as he thought) plenty strong enough as a test of thinking. I defy anyone to
improve upon it . But here is the point almost universally overlooked by the
literature: There is a common misapplication of the sort of testing exhibited
by the Turing test that often leads to drastic overestimation of the powers of
actually existing computer systems. The follies of this familiar sort of thinking
about computers can best be brought out by a reconsideration of the Turing
test itself.
The insight underlying the Turing test is the same insight that inspires
the new practice among symphony orchestras of conducting auditions with
an opaque screen between the jury and the musician. What matters in a
musician, obviously, is musical ability and only musical ability; such feat ures
as sex, hair length, skin color , and weight are strictly irrelevant. Since ju-
ries might be biased -
even innocently and unawares -
by these irrelevant
features, they are carefully screened off so only the essential feat ure, musi-
cianship, can be examined. Turing recognized that people similarly might be
biased in t heir judgments of intelligence by whether the contestant had soft
skin, warm blood , facial features, hands and eyes -
which are obviously not
themselves essential components of intelligence -
so he devised a screen that
would let through only a sample of what really mattered: the capacity to
understand, and think cleverly about, challenging problems. Perhaps he was
inspired by Descartes, who in his Discourse on Method [3] plausibly argued
that there was no more demanding test of human mentality than the capacity
to hold an intelligent conversation:
It is indeed conceivable that a machine could be so made that
it would utter words, and even words appropriate to the presence of
physical acts or obj ects which cause some change in its organs; as, for
example, if it was touched in some spot that it would ask what you
wanted to say to it ; if in another, that it would cry that it was hurt ,
and so on for similar things. But it could never modify its phrases to
reply to the sense of whatever was said in its presence, as even the
most stupid men can do.
T his seemed obvious to Descartes in the seventeenth century, but of course
the fanciest machines he knew were elaborate clockwork figures, not electronic
computers . Today it is far from obvious that such machines are impossible,
but Descartes's hunch that ordinary conversation would put as severe a strain

298
D. C. Dennett
on artificial intelligence as any other test was shared by Turing. Of cours e
there is nothing sacred about the particular conversational game chosen by
Turing for his test; it is just a cannily chosen test of more general intelligence .
The assumption Turing was prepared to make was this: Nothing could pos-
sible pass the Turing test by winning the imitation game without being able
to perform indefinitely many other clearly intelligent actions. Let us call that
assumption the quick-probe assumption. Turing realized , as anyone would,
that there are hund reds and thousands of telling signs of intelligent thinking
to be observed in our fellow creatures, and one could, if one wanted, compile
a vast battery of different tests to assay the cap acity for intelligent thought.
But success on his chosen test, he thought , would be highly predictive of
success on many other intuitively acceptable tests of intelligence . Rememb er,
failure on the Turing test does not predict failure on those others , but success
would surely predict success. His test was so severe, he thought, that noth-
ing that could pass it fair and square would disappoint us in other quarters.
Maybe it wouldn't do everything we hop ed -
maybe it wouldn't appreciate
ballet , or understand quantum physics, or have a good plan for world peace,
but we'd all see that it was surely one of the intelligent, thinking entities in
the neighborhood.
Is this high opinion of the Turing test's severi ty misguided? Certainly
many have thought so -
but usually because they have not imagined the
test in sufficient detail, and hence have underestimated it. Trying to forestall
this skepticism, Turing imagined several lines of questioning that a judge
might employ in this game -
about writing poetry, or playing chess -
that
would be taxing indeed, but with thirty years' experience with the act ual
talents and foibles of computers behind us, perhaps we can add a few more
tough lines of questioning.
Terry Winograd , a leader in artificial intelligence efforts to produce con-
versational ability in a computer, draws our attention to a pair of sen-
tences [11]. They differ in only one word.
The first sentence is this:
The committee denied the group a parade permit because they
advo cated violence.
Here 's the second sentence:
The committee denied the group a parade permit because they
feared violence.
The difference is just in the verb -
advocated or feared. As Winograd
points out, the pronoun they in each sentence is officially ambiguous. Both
readings of the pronoun are always legal. Thus we can imagine a world in
which governmental committees in charge of parade permits advocate vio-
lence in the streets and, for some strange reason, use this as their pretext for
denying a parade permit. But the natural, reasonable, intelligent reading of

Can Machines Think?
299
the first sentence is that it 's the group that advocated violence, and of the
second, that it 's the committee that feared violence.
Now if sentences like this are embedded in a conversation, the computer
must figur e out which reading of the pronoun is meant, if it is to respond
intelligently. But mere rules of grammar or vocabulary will not fix the right
reading. What fixes the right reading for us is knowledge about the world ,
about politics, social circumstances, committees and their attitudes, groups
that want to parade, how they tend to behave, and the like. One must know
about the world, in short , to make sense of such a sentence.
In the jargon of artificial intelligence (AI) , a conversational computer
needs a lot of world knowledge to do its job. But, it seems, if somehow it
is endowed with that world knowledge on many topics, it should be able
to do much more with that world knowledge than merely make sense of a
conversation containing just that sentence. The only way, it appears, for a
computer to disambiguate that sentence and keep up its end of a conversation
that uses that sentence would be for it to have a much more general ability to
respond intelligently to information about social and political circumstances,
and may other topics. Thus, such sentences, by putting a demand on such
abilities, are good quick probes. That is, they test for a wider competence.
People typically ignore the prospect of having the judge ask off-the-wall
questions in the Turing test, and hence they underestimate the competence a
computer would have to have to pass the test. But remember, the rules of the
imitation game as Turing presented it permit the judge to ask any question
that could be asked of a human being -
no holds barred. Suppose then we
give a contestant in the game this question:
An Irishman found a genie in a bottle who offered him two wishes.
"First I'll have a pint of Guinness," said the Irishman, and when it
appeared he took several long drinks from it and was delighted to see
that the glass filled itself magically as he drank. "What about your
second wish?" asked the genie. "Oh well," said the Irishman , "that's
easy. I'll have another one of these!" -
Please explain this story to
me, and tell me if there is anything funny or sad about it .
Now even a child could express, if not eloquently, the understanding that
is required to get this joke. But think of how much one has to know and
understand about human culture, to put it pompously, to be able to give
any account of the point of this joke. I am not supposing that the computer
would have to laugh at, or be amused by, the joke. But if it wants to win the
imitation game -
and that's the test, after all -
it had better know enough
in its own alien , humorless way about human psychology and culture to be
able to pretend effectively that it was amused and explain why.
It may seem to you that we could devise a better test . Let 's compare the
Turing test with some other candidates.

300
D. C. Dennet t
Candidate 1: A computer is intelligent if it wins the World Chess Cham-
pionship .
That's not a good test , as it turns out. Chess prowess has proven to be an
isolatable talent. There are programs today that can play fine chess but can
do nothing else. So the quick probe assumption is false for the test of playing
winning chess.
Candidate 2: The computer is intelligent if it solves the Arab-Israeli con-
flict.
This is surely a more severe test that Turing's. But it has some defects:
it is unrepeatable, if passed once; slow, no doubt; and it is not crisply clear
what would count as passing it. Here's another prospect, then:
Candidate 3: A computer is intelligent if it succeeds in stealing the British
crown jewels without the use of force or violence.
Now this is better. First, it could be repeated again and again, though of
course each repeat test would presumably be harder -
but this is a feature
it shares with the Turing test . Second, the mark of success is clear -
either
you've got the jewels to show for your efforts or you don't. But it is expensive
and slow, a socially dubious caper at best, and no doubt luck would play too
great a role.
With ingenuity and effort one might be able to come up with other can-
didates that would equal the Turing test in severity, fairness, and efficiency,
but I think these few examples should suffice to convince us that it would be
hard to improve on Turing's original proposal.
But still, you may protest, something might pass the Turing test and still
not be intelligent , not be a thinker. What does might mean here? If what
you have in mind is that by cosmic accident, by a supernatural coincidence,
a stupid person or a stupid computer might fool a clever judge repeatedly,
well, yes, but so what? The same frivolous possibility "in principle" holds for
any test whatever. A playful god, or evil demon, let us agree, could fool the
world 's scientific community about the presence of H20 in the Pacific Ocean.
But still, the tests they rely on to establish that there is H20 in the Pacific
Ocean are quite beyond reasonable criticism. If the Turing test for thinking
is no worse than any well-established scientific test, we can set skepticism
aside and go back to serious matters. Is there any more likelihood of a "false
positive" result on the Turing test than on, say, the test currently used for
the presence of iron in an ore sample?
This question is often obscured by a "move" that philosophers have some-
times made called operationalism. Turing and those who think well of his
test are often accused of being operationalists. Operationalism is the tactic
of defining the presence of some property, for instance, intelligence, as being
established once and for all by the passing of some test. Let's illustrate this
with a different example.

Can Machines Think?
301
Suppose I offer the following test -
we'll call it the Dennett test -
for
being a great city:
A great city is one in which, on a randomly chosen day, one can do all
three of the following:
Hear a symphony orchestra, see a Rembrandt and a professional athletic
contest, eat quenelles de brochet it la Nantua for lunch.
To make the operationalist move would be to declare that any city that
passes the Dennett test is by definition a great city. What being a great city
amounts to is just passing the Dennett test. Well then, if the Chamber of
Commerce of Great Falls, Montana, wanted -
and I can't imagine why -
to get their hometown on my list of great cities, they could accomplish this
by the relatively inexpensive route of hiring full time about ten basketball
players , forty musicians, and a quick-order quenelle chef and renting a cheap
Rembrandt from some museum. An idiotic operationalist would then be stuck
admitting that Great Falls, Montana, was in fact a great city, since all he or
she cares about in great cities is that they pass the Dennett test.
Sane operationalists (who for that very reason are perhaps not opera-
tionalists at all, since operationalist seems to be a dirty word) would cling
confidently to their test, but only because they have what they consider to
be very good reasons for thinking the odds against a false positive result, like
the imagined Chamber of Commerce caper, are astronomical. I devised the
Dennett test , of course, with the realization that no one would be both stupid
and rich enough to go to such preposterous lengths to foil the test. In the ac-
tual world, wherever you find symphony orchestras, quenelles, Rembrandts,
and professional sports, you also find daily newspapers, parks, repertory the-
aters, libraries, fine architecture, and all the other things that go to make a
city great. My test was simply devised to locate a telling sample that could
not help but be representative of the rest of the city's treasures . I would
cheerfully run the minuscule risk of having my bluff called. Obviously, the
test items are not all that I care about in a city. In fact , some of them I don 't
care about at all. I just think they would be cheap and easy ways of assuring
myself that the subtle things I do care about in cities are present. Similarly,
I think it would be entirely unreasonable to suppose that Alan Turing had
an inordinate fondness for party games, or put too high a value on party
game prowess in his test . In both the Turing and the Dennett test, a very
unrisky gamble is being taken: the gamble that the quick-probe assumption
is, in general, safe.
But two can play this game of playing the odds. Suppose some computer
programmer happens to be , for whatever strange reason, dead set on tricking
me into judging an ent ity to be a thinking, intelligent thing when it is not.
Such a trickster could rely as well as I can on unlikelihood and take a few
gambles. Thus, if the programmer can expect that it is not remotely likely
that I , as the judge, will bring up the topic of children's birthday parties, or

302
D. C. Dennett
baseball, or moon rocks, then he or she can avoid the trouble of building world
knowledge on those topics into the data base. Whereas if I do improbably raise
these issues, the system will draw a blank and I will unmask the pretender
easily. But given all the topics and words that I might raise, such a savings
would no doubt be negligible. Turn the idea inside out, however, and the
trickster would have a fighting chance. Suppose the programmer has reason
to believe that I will ask only about children's birthday parties, or baseball,
or moon rocks -
all other topics being, for one reason or another, out of
bounds. Not only does the task shrink dramatically, but there already exist
systems or preliminary sketches of systems in artificial intelligence that can
do a whiz-bang job of responding with apparent intelligence on just those
specialized topics.
William Wood's LUNAR program, to take what is perhaps the best ex-
ample, answers scientists' questions -
posed in ordinary English -
about
moon rocks. In one test it answered correctly and appropriately something
like 90 percent of the questions that geologists and other experts thought of
asking it about moon rocks . (In 12 percent of those correct responses there
were trivial, correctable defects.) Of course, Wood's motive in creating LU-
NAR was not to trick unwary geologists into think they were conversing with
an intelligent being . And if that had been his motive, his project would still
be a long way from success.
For it is easy enough to unmask LUNAR without ever straying from the
prescribed topic of moon rocks . Put LUNAR in one room and a moon rock
specialist in another, and then ask them both their opinion ofthe social value
of the moon-rocks-gathering expeditions, for instance. Or ask the contestants
their opinion of the suitability of moon rocks as ashtrays, or whether people
who have touched moon rocks are ineligible for the draft. Any intelligent
person knows a lot more about moon rocks than their geology. Although it
might be unfair to demand this extra knowledge of a computer moon rock
specialist, it would be an easy way to get it to fail the Turing test.
But just suppose that someone could extend LUNAR to cover itself plau-
sibly on such probes, so long as the topic was still, however indirectly, moon
rocks . We might come to think it was a lot more like the human moon rocks
specialist than it really was. The moral we should draw is that as Turing test
judges we should resist all limitations and waterings-down of the Turing test.
They make the game too easy -
vastly easier than the original test. Hence
they lead us into the risk of overestimating the actual comprehension of the
system being tested.
Consider a different limitation of the Turing test that should strike a
suspicious chord in us as soon as we hear it. This is a variation on a theme
developed in an article by Ned Block [1] . Suppose someone were to propose to
restrict the judge to a vocabulary of, say, the 850 words of "Basic English," and
to single-sentence probes -
that is "moves" -
of no more than four words.

Can Machines Think?
303
Moreover, contestants must respond to these probes with no more than four
words per move, and a test may involve no more than forty questions.
Is this an innocent variation on Turing's original test? These restrictions
would make the imitation game clearly finite. That is, the total number of all
possible permissible games is a large, but finite, number. One might suspect
that such a limitation would permit the trickster simply to store, in alphabet-
ical order, all the possible good conversations within the limits and beat the
judge with nothing more sophisticated than a system of table lookup. In fact,
that isn't in the cards. Even with these severe and improbable and suspicious
restrictions imposed upon the imitation game, the number of legal games,
though finite, is mind-bogglingly large. I haven't bothered trying to calculate
it , but it surely exceeds astronomically the number of possible chess games
with no more than forty moves, and that number has been calculated. John
Haugeland says it 's in the neighborhood of ten to the one hundred twentieth
power . For comparison, Haugeland [4, p. 16] suggests that there have only
been ten to the eighteenth seconds since the beginning of the universe.
Of course, the number of good, sensible conversations under these limits
is a tiny fraction, maybe one quadrillionth of the number of merely grammat-
ically well formed conversations. So let 's say, to be very conservative, that
there are only ten to the fiftiet h different smart conversations such a com-
puter would have to store. Well, the task shouldn't take more than a few
trillion years -
given generous government support. Finite numbers can be
very large.
So though we needn't worry that this particular trick of storing all the
smart conversations would work, we can appreciate that there are lots of
ways of making the task easier that may appear innocent at first. We also
get a reassuring measure of just how severe the unrestricted Turing test is by
reflecting on the more than astronomical size of even that severely restricted
version of it .
Block's imagined -
and utterly impossible -
program exhibits the
dreaded feat ure know in computer science circles as combinatorial explosion.
No conceivable computer could overpower a combinatorial explosion with
sheer speed and size. Since
the problem areas addressed by artificial
intelligence are veritable min efields of combinatorial explosion, and since
it has often proven difficult to find any solution to a problem that avoids
them, there is considerable plausibility in Newell and Simon's proposal that
avoiding combinatorial explosion (by any means at all) be viewed as one of
the hallmarks of int elligence.
Our brains are millions of times bigger than the brains of gnats, but
they are still, for all their vast complexity, compact, efficient, timely organs
that somehow or other manage to perform all their tasks while avoiding
combinatorial explosion. A computer a million times bigger or faster than
a human brain might not look like the brain of a human being, or even
be internally organized like t he brain of a human being, but if, for all its

304
D. C. Dennett
differences, it somehow managed to control a wise and timely set of activities,
it would have to be the beneficiary of a very special design that avoided
combinatorial explosion, and whatever that design was, would we not be
right to consider the entity intelligent?
Turing's test was designed to allow for this possibility. His point was that
we should not be species-chauvinist ic, or anthropocentric , about the insides
of an intelligent being, for there might be inhuman ways of being intelligent.
To my knowledge, the only serious and interesting attempt by any pro-
gram designer to win even a severely modified Turing test has been Kenneth
Colby's. Colby is a psychiatrist and intelligence artificer at UCLA. He has a
program called PARRY, which is a compute r simulation of a paranoid pa-
tient who has delusions about the Mafia being out to get him. As you do with
other conversational programs, you interact with it by sitting at a terminal
and typing questions and answers back and forth. A number of years ago ,
Colby put PARRY to a very restricted test. He had genuine psychiatrists
interview PARRY. He did not suggest to them that they might be talking or
typing to a computer; rather, he made up some plausible story about why
they were communicating with a real live patient by teletype. He also had
the psychiatrists interview real, human paranoids via teletype. Then he took
a PARRY transcript, inserted it in a group of teletype transcripts from real
patients, gave them to another group of experts -
more psychiatrists -
and
said, "One of these was a conversation with a computer. Can you figure out
which one it was?" T hey couldn't. They didn't do better than chance.
Colby presented this with some huzzah , but critics scoffed at the sugges-
tions that this was a legitimate Turing test. My favorite commentary on it
was Joseph Weizenbaum's; in a letter to the Communications of the Associ-
ation of Computing Machinery [10, p. 543], he said that, inspired by Colby,
he has designed an even better program, which passed the same test. His also
had the virtue of being a very inexpensive program, in these times of tight
money. In fact you didn't even need a computer for it . All you needed was an
electric typewriter. His program modeled infant autism. And the transcripts
-
you type in your questions, and the thing just sits there and hums -
can-
not be distinguished by experts from transcripts of real conversations with
infantile autistic patients. What was wrong, of course, with Colby's test was
that the unsuspecting interviewers had no motivation at all to tryout any of
the sorts of questions that easily would have unmasked PARRY.
Colby was und aunted, and after his team had improved PARRY he put
it to a much more severe test -
a surprisingly severe test. This time, the
interviewers -
again, psychiatrists -
were given the task at the outset of
telling the computer from the real patient. They were set up in a classic
Turing machine test: the patient in one room, the computer PARRY in the
ot her room, with the judges conducting interviews with both of them (on
successive days). The judges' task was to find out which one was the computer
and which one was the real patient. Amazingly, they didn't do much better,

Can Machines Think?
305
which leads some people to say, "Well, that just confirms my impression of
t he intelligence of psychiatrists!"
But now, more seriously, was this an honest-to-goodness TUring test?
Were there tacit restrictions on the lines of questioning of the judges? Like
the geologists interacting with LUNAR, the psychiatrists' professional preoc-
cupations and habits kept them from asking the sorts of unlikely questions
that would have easily unmasked PARRY. After all, they realized that since
one of the contestants was a real, live paranoid person, medical ethics vir-
tually forbade them from toying with, upsetting, or attempting to confuse
their interlocutors. Moreover, they also knew that this was a test of a model
of paranoia, so there were certain questions that wouldn't be deemed to be
relevant to testing the model as a model ofparanoia. So, they asked just the
sort of questions that therapists typically ask of such patients , and of course
PARRY had been ingeniously and laboriously prepared to deal with just that
sort of question.
One of the psychiatrist judges did , in fact, make a rather half-hearted
attempt to break out of the mold and ask some telling questions: "Maybe
you've heard of the saying 'Don't cry over spilled milk. ' What does that
mean to you?" PARRY answered: "Maybe it means you have to watch out
for the Mafia." When then asked "Okay, now if you were in a movie theater
watching a movie and smelled something like burning wood or rubber, what
would you do?" PARRY replied: "You know, they know me." And the next
questions was, "If you found a stamped, addressed letter in your path as you
were walking down the street , what would you do?" PARRY replied: "What
else do you want to know?"!
Clearly PARRY was, you might say, parrying these questions, which were
incomprehensible to it , with more or less stock paranoid formulas. We see a
bit of a dodge, which is apt to work, apt to seem plausible to the judge, only
because the "contestant" is supposed to be paranoid, and such people are
expecte d to respond uncooperatively on such occasions. These unimpressive
responses didn't particularly arouse the suspicions of the judge, as a matter
of fact, though probably they should have.
PARRY, like all other large computer programs, is dramatically bound by
limitations of cost-effectiveness. What was important to Colby and his crew
was simulating his model of paranoia. This was a massive effort . PARRY
has a thesaurus or dictionary of about 4500 words and 700 idioms and the
grammatical competence to use it -
a parser, in the jargon of computational
linguistics. The entire PARRY program takes up about 200,000 words of
computer memory, all laboriously installed by the programming team. Now
once all the effort had gone into devising the model of paranoid thought
1 I thank Kenneth Colby for providing me with the complete transcripts (including
the J udges' commentaries and reactions), from which these exchanges are quoted.
The first published account of t he experiment is Heiser, et al. [5, p. 149-162] .
Colby [2, pp. 515-560] discusses PARRY and its implications.

306
D. C. Dennett
processes and linguistic ability, there was little if any time, energy, money,
or interest left over to build in huge amounts of world knowledge of the
sort that any actual paranoid, of course, would have. (Not that anyone yet
knows how to build in world knowledge in the first place.) Building in the
world knowledge, if one could even do it , would no doubt have made PARRY
orders of magnitude larger and slower. And what would have been the point,
given Colby's theoretical aims?
PARRY is a theoretician 's model of a psychological phenomenon: para-
noia. It is not intended to have practical applications. But in recent years a
branch of AI (knowledge engineering) has appeared that develops what are
now called expert systems. Expert systems are designed to be practical. They
are software superspecialist consult ants, typically, that can be asked to diag-
nose medical problems, to analyze geological data, to analyze the results of
scientific experiments , and the like. Some of them are very impressive. SRI
in California announced in the mid- eighties that PROSPECTOR, an SRI-
developed expert system in geology, had correctly predicted the existence of
a large, important mineral deposit that had been entirely unanticipated by
the human geologists who had fed it its data. MYCIN, perhaps the most
famous of these expert systems, diagnoses infect ions of the blood, and it does
probably as well as, maybe better than , any human consultants. And many
other expert systems are on the way.
All expert systems, like all other large AI programs, are what you might
call Potemkin villages. That is, they are cleverly constructed facades, like
cinema sets. The actual filling-in of details of AI programs is time-consuming,
costly work, so economy dictates that only those surfaces of the phenomenon
that are like to be probed or observed are represented.
Consider, for example, the CYRUS program developed by Janet Kolodner
in Roger Schank's AI group at Yale a few years ago (see Kolodner [6] [7, pp.
243-280] [8, pp. 281-328]). CYRUS stands (we are told) for Computerized
Yale Retrieval Updating System, but surely it is no accident that CYRUS
modeled the memory of Cyrus Vance, who was then secretary of state in the
Carter administration. The point of the CYRUS project was to devise and
test some plausible ideas about how people organize their memories of the
events they participate in; hence it was meant to be a "pure" AI system, a
scientific model, not an expert system intended for any practical purpose.
CYRUS was updated daily by being fed all UPI wire service news stories
that mentioned Vance, and it was fed them directly, with no doctoring and
no human intervention. Thanks to an ingenious news-reading program called
FRUMP, it could take any story just as it came in on the wire and could
digest it and use it to update its data base so that it could answer more
questions. You could address questions to CYRUS in English by typing at a
terminal. You addressed them in the second person, as if you were t alking
with Cyrus Vance himself. The results looked like this:
Q:
Last time you went to Saudi Arabia, where did you stay?

Can Machines Think?
307
A:
In a palace in Saudi Arabia on September 23, 1978.
Q :
Did you go sightseeing there?
A:
Yes, at an oilfield in Dharan on September 23, 1978.
Q:
Has yo ur wife even met Mrs. Begin?
A:
Yes, most recently at a state dinner in Israel in January 1980.
CYRUS could correctly answer thousands of questions -
almost any fair
question one could think of asking it. But if one actually set out to explore
the boundaries of its facad e and find the questions that overshot the mark,
one could soon find them . "Have you ever met a female head of state?" was a
question I asked it , wondering if CYRUS knew that Indira Ghandi and Mar-
garet Thatcher were women. But for some reason the connection could not
be drawn, and CYRUS failed to answer either yes or no. I had stumped it,
in spite of the fact that CYRUS could handle a host of what you might call
neighboring questions flawlessly. One soon learns from this sort of probing
exercise that it is very hard to extrapolate accurately from a sample perfor-
mance that one has observed to such a system's total competence. It 's also
very hard to keep from extrapolating much too generously.
While I was visit ing Schank's laboratory in the spring of 1980, something
revealing happened. The real Cyrus Vance resigned suddenly. The effect on
the program CYRUS was chaotic. It was utterly unable to cope with the flood
of "unusual" news about Cyrus Vance. The only sorts of episodes CYRUS
could understand at all were diplomatic meetings, flights, press conferences,
state dinners, and the like -
less than two dozen general sorts of activities
(the kin ds that are newsworthy and typical of secretaries of state). It had
no provision for sudden resignation. It was as if the UPI had reported that
a wicked witch had turned Vance into a frog. It is distinctly possible that
CYRUS would have taken that report more in stride that the actual news.
One can imagine the conversation:
Q:
Hello, Mr. Vance, what's new?
A:
I was turned into a frog yesterday.
But of course it wouldn't know enough about what it had just written
to be puzzled, or startled, or embarrassed. The reason is obvious. When you
look inside CYRUS, you find that it has skeletal definitions of thousands of
words, but these definitions are minimal. They contai n as little as the system
designers think that they can get away with. Thus, perhaps, lawyer would be
defined as synonymous with attorney and legal counsel, but aside from that,
all one would discover about lawyers is that they are adult human beings and
that they perform various functions in legal areas. If you then traced out the
path to human being, you'd find out various obvious things CYRUS "knew"
about human beings (hence about lawyers), but that is not a lot. That lawyers
are uni versity graduates, that they are better paid than chambermaids, that

308
D. C. Dennett
they know how to tie their shoes, that they are unlikely to be found in the
company of lumberjacks -
these trivial, if weird , facts about lawyers would
not be explicit or implicit anywhere in this system. In other words, a very
thin stereotype of a lawyer would be incorporated into the system, so that
almost nothing you could tell it about a lawyer would surprise it .
So long as surprising things don't happen , so long as Mr. Vance, for in-
stance, leads a typical diplomat's life, attending st ate dinners , giving speeches,
flying from Cairo to Rome, and so forth, this system works very well. But as
soon as his path is crossed by an important anomaly, the system is unable
to cope, and unable to recover without fairly massive human intervention.
In the case of the sudden resignation, Kolodner and her associates soon had
CYRUS up and running again , with a new talent -
answering questions
about Edmund Muskie, Vance's successor -
but it was no less vulnerable
to unexpected events. Not that it mattered particularly since CYRUS was a
theoretical model, not a practical system.
There are a host of ways of improving the performance of such systems,
and of course, some systems are much better than others. But all AI pro-
grams in one way or another have this facadelike quality, simply for reasons
of economy. For instance, most expert systems in medical diagnosis so far
developed operate with statistical information. They have no deep or even
shallow knowledge of the underlying causal mechanisms of the phenomena
that they are diagnosing. To take an imaginary example, an expert system
asked to diagnose an abdominal pain would be oblivious to the potential im-
port of the fact that the patient had recently been employed as a sparring
partner by Muhammed Ali -
there being no statistical data available to it
on the rate of kidney stones among athlete's assistants. That's a fanciful case
no doubt -
too obvious, perhaps , to lead to an actual failure of diagnosis and
practice. But more subtle and hard-to-detect limits to comprehension are al-
ways present, and even experts, even the system 's designers, can be uncertain
of where and how these limits will interfere with the desired operation of the
system. Again, steps can be taken and are being taken to correct these flaws.
For instance, my former colleague at Tufts, Benjamin Kuipers, is currently
working on an expert system in nephrology -
for diagnosing kidney ail-
ments -
that will be based on an elaborate system of causal reasoning about
the phenomena being diagnosed. But this is a very ambitious, long-range
project of considerable theoretical difficulty. And even if all the reasonable,
cost-effective steps are taken to minimize the superficiality of expert systems,
they will still be facades, just somewhat thicker or wider facades.
When we were considering the fantastic case of the crazy Chamber of
Commerce of Great Falls, Montana, we couldn't imagine a plausible motive
for anyone going to any sort of trouble to trick the Dennett test . The quick
probe assumption for the Dennett test looked quite secure. But when we look
at expert systems, we see that , however innocently, their designers do have
motivation for doing exactly the sort of trick that would fool an unsuspi-

Can Machines Think?
309
cious Turing tester. First, since expert systems are all superspecialists who
are only supposed to know about some narrow subject , users of such systems,
not having much time to kill, do not bother probing them at the boundaries
at all. T hey don't bother asking "silly" or irrelevant questions. Instead , they
concentrate -
not unreasonably -
on exploiting the system's strengths. But
shouldn't they try to obtain a clear vision of such a system's weaknesses as
well? The normal habit of human thought when conversing with one another
is to assume general comprehension, to assume rationality, to assume, more-
over , that the quick probe assumption is, in general, sound. This amiable
habit of thought almost irr esistibly leads to putting too much faith in com-
puter systems, especially user-friendly systems that present themselves in a
very anthropomorphic manner.
Part of the solution to this problem is to teach all users of computers,
especially users of expert systems, how to probe their syste ms before they
rely on them, how to search out and explore the boundaries of the facade.
This is an exercise t hat calls not only for intelligence and imagination, but
also a bit of special understanding about the limitations and actual structure
of computer programs. It would help, of course, if we had standards of truth
in advertising, in effect , for expert systems. For instance, each such system
should come with a special demonstration routine that exhibits the sorts
of shortcomings and failures that the designer knows the system to have.
T his would not be a substit ute, however, for an attitude of cautious, almost
obsessive, skepticism on the part of the users, for designers are often, if not
always, unaware of the subtler flaws in the products they produce. Tha t is
inevitable and natural , given the way system designers must think. They
are trained to think positively -
constructively, one might say -
about the
designs that they are constructing.
I come, then, to my conclusions. First , a philosophical or theoretical con-
clusion: T he Turing test in unadulterated, unrestricted from, as Turing pre-
sented it, is plenty strong if well used. I am confident that no computer in the
next twenty years is going to pass an unrestricted Turing test. They may well
win the World Chess Championship or even a Nobel Prize in physics, but
they won 't pass the unrestricted Turing test . Nevertheless, it is not, I think,
impossible in principle for a computer to pass the test , fair and square. I'm
not running one of those a priori "computers can't think" arguments. I stand
unabashedly ready, moreover, to declare that any computer that actually
passes the unrestricted Turing test will be, in every theoretically interesting
sense, a thinking thing.
But remembering how very strong the Turing test is, we must also rec-
ognize that there may also be interesting varieties of thinking or intelligence
that are not well poised to play and win the imitation game. That no nonhu-
man Turing test winners are yet visible on the horizon docs not mean that
there ar en 't machines that already exhibit some of the important feat ures of
thought. About them, it is probably futile to ask my title question, Do they

310
D. C. Dennett
think? Do they really think? In some regards they do, and in some regards
they don't. Only a detailed look at what they do, and how they are struc-
tured, will reveal what is interesting about them. The Turing test, not being
a scientific test, is of scant help on that task, but there are plenty of other
ways of examining such systems. Verdicts on their intelligence or capacity
for thought or consciousness would be only as informative and persuasive
as the theories of intelligence or thought or consciousness the verdicts are
based on and since our task is to create such theories, we should get on with
it and leave the Big Verdict for another occasion. In the meantime, should
anyone want a surefire, almost-guaranteed-to-be-fail-safe test of thinking by
a computer, the Turing test will do very nicely.
My second conclusion is more practical , and hence in one clear sense more
important. Cheapened versions of the Turing test are everywhere in the air.
Turing's test in not just effective, it is entirely natural -
this is, after all, the
way we assay the intelligence of each other every day. And since incautious use
of such judgments and such tes ts is the norm, we are in some considerable
danger of extrapolating too easily, and judging too generously, about the
understanding of the systems we are using. The problem of overestimation
of cognitive prowess , of comprehension, of intelligence , is not, then, just a
philosophical problem, but a real social problem , and we should alert ourselves
to it, and take steps to avert it .
2
Post script [1985]: Eyes, Ears, Hands, and History
My philosophical conclusion in this paper is that any computer that actually
passes the Turing test would be a thinking thing in every theoretically inter-
esting sense. This conclusion seems to some people to fly in the face of what I
have myself argued on other occasions. Peter Bieri, commenting on this paper
at Boston University, noted that I have often claimed to show the importance
to genuine understanding of a rich and intimate perceptual interconnection
between an entity and its surrounding world -
the need for something like
eyes and ears -
and a similarly complex active engagement with elements
in that world -
the need for something like hands with which to do things
in that world. Moreover, I have often held that only a biography of sorts, a
history of actual projects, learning experiences, and other bouts with reality,
could produce the sorts of complexities (both external, or behavioral, and in-
ternal) that are needed to ground a principled interpretation of an entity as
a thinking thing, an entity with beliefs , desires, intentions, and other mental
attitudes.
But the opaque screen in the Turing test discounts or dismisses these fac-
tors altogether, it seems, by focusing attention on only the contemporaneous
capacity to engage in one very limited sort of activity: verbal communica-
tion. (I have coined a pejorative label for such purely language-using systems:
bedridden.) Am I going back on my earlier claims? Not at all. I am merely

Can Machines Think?
311
pointing out that the TUring test is so powerful that it will ensure indirectly
that these conditions, if they are truly necessary, are met by any successful
contestant.
"You may well be right," Turing could say, "that eyes, ears, hands, and a
history are necessary conditions for thinking. If so, then I submit that nothing
could pass the TUring test that didn't have eyes, ears , hands, and a history.
That is an empirical claim, which we can someday hope to test. If you sug-
gest that these are conceptually necessary, not just practically or physically
necessary, conditions for thinking, you make a philosophical claim that I for
one would not know how, or care, to assess. Isn't it more interesting and
important in the end to discover whether or not it is true that no bedridden
system could pass a demanding TUring test?"
Suppose we put to TUring the suggestion that he add another component
to his test : Not only must an entity win the imitation game, but also must be
able to identify -
using whatever sensory apparatus it has available to it -
a
vari ety of familiar objects placed in its room: a tennis racket, a potted palm,
a bucket of yellow paint, a live dog. This would ensure that somehow the
other entity was capable of moving around and distinguishing things in the
world. TUring could reply, I am asserting, that this is an utterly unnecessary
addition to his test , making it no more demanding than it already was. A
suitably probing conversation would surely establish, beyond a shadow of a
doubt, that the contestant knew its way around the world. The imagined al-
ternative of somehow "prestocking" a bedridden, blind computer with enough
information, and a clever enough program, to trick the TUring test is science
fiction of the worst kind -
possible "in principle" but not remotely possible
in fact, given the combinatorial explosion of possible variation such a system
would have to cope with.
"But suppose you're wrong. What would you say of an entity that was
created all at once (by some programmers, perhaps), an instant individual
with all the conversational talents of an embodied, experienced human be-
ing?" This is like the question: "Would you call a hunk of H20 that was as
hard as steel at room temperature ice?" I do not know what Turing would say,
of course, so I will speak for myself. Faced with such an improbable violation
of what I take to be the laws of nature, I would probably be speechless. The
least of my worries would be about which lexicographical leap to take:
A:
"It turns out, to my amazement, that something can think without hav-
ing had the benefit of eyes, ears, hands, and a history."
B:
"It turns out, to my amazement , that something can pass the Turing
test without thinking."
Choosing between these ways of expressing my astonishment would be
asking myself a question "too meaningless to deserve discussion."

312
D. C. Dennett
Discussion
Q:
Why was Turing interested in differentiating a man from a woman in
his famous test?
A:
That was just an example. He described a parlor game in which a man
would try to fool the judge by answering questions as a woman would
answer. I suppose that Turing was playing on the idea that mayb e, just
maybe, there is a big difference between the way men think and the way
women think. But of course they're both thinkers. He wanted to use that
fact to make us realize that, even if there were clear differences between
the way a computer and a person thought, they'd both still be thinking.
Q:
Why does it seem that some people are upset by AI research? Does AI
research threaten our self-esteem?
A:
I think Herb Simon has already given the canniest diagnosis of that. For
many people the mind is the last refuge of mystery against the encroaching
spread of science, and they don't like the idea of science engulfing the
last bit of terra incognita. This means that they are threatened, I think
irr ationally, by the prospect that researchers in artificial intelligence may
come to understand the human mind as well as biologists understand the
genetic code, or as well as physicists understand electricity and magnetism.
This could lead to the "evil scientist" (to take a stock character from science
fiction) who can cont rol you because he or she has a deep understanding
of what's going on in your mind. This seems to me to be a totally valueless
fear , one that you can set aside, for the simple reason that the human mind
is full of an extraordinary amount of detailed knowledge, as, for example,
Roger Schank has been pointing out.
As long as the scientist who is attempting to manipulate you does not share
all your knowledge, his or her chances of manipulating you are minimal.
People can always hit you over the head. They can do that now. We don't
need artificial intelligence to manipulate people by putting them in chains
or to rt uring them. But if someone tries to manipulate you by controlling
your thoughts and ideas, that person will have to know what you know and
more. The best way to keep yourself safe from that kind of manipulation
is to be well informed.
Q:
Do you think we will be able to program self-consciousness into a com-
puter?
A:
Yes, I do think that it 's possible to program self-conscio usness into a
computer. Self-consciousness can mean many things . If you take the sim-
plest , crudest notion of self-consciousness, I suppose that would be the sort
of self-consciousness that a lobster has: when it 's hungry, it eats something,
but it never eats itself. It has some way of distinguishing between itself and
the rest of the world, and it has a rather special regard for itself.
The lowly lobster is, in one regard , self-conscious. If you want to know
whether or not you can create that on the computer, the answer is yes. It's

Can Machines Think?
313
no trouble at all. The computer is already a self-watching, self-monitoring
sort of thing. That is an established part of the technology
But, of course, most people have something more in mind when they speak
of self-consciousness. It is that special inner light, that private way that it
is with you that nobody else can share, somet hing that is forever outside
the bounds of computer science. How could a computer ever be conscious
in this sense?
That belief, that very gripping, powerful intuition is, I think, in the end
simply an illusion of common sense. It is as gripping as the commonsense
illusion that the earth stands still and the sun goes around the eart h. But
the only way that those of us who do not believe in the illusion will ever
convince the general public that it is an illusion is by gradually unfolding
a very difficult and fascinating story about just what is going on in our
minds.
In the interim, people like me -
philosophers who have to live by our wits
and tell a lot of stories -
use what I call intuition pumps, little examples
that help free up the imagination. I simply want to draw your attention
to one fact. If you look at a computer -
I don 't care whether it 's a giant
Cray or a personal computer -
if you open up the box and look inside and
see those chips, you say, "No way could that be conscious. No way could
that be self-conscious." But the same thing is true if you take the top off
somebo dy's skull and look at the gray matter pulsing away in there. You
think, "T hat is conscious? No way could that lump of st uff be conscious."
Of course, it makes no difference whether you look at it with a microscope
or with a macroscope: At no level of inspection does a brain look like the
seat of consciousness. Therefore, don't expect a computer to look like the
seat of consciousness. If you want to get a grasp of how a computer could
be conscious, it 's no more difficult in the end than getting a grasp of how
a brain could be conscious.
As we develop good acco unts of consciousness, it will no longer seem so
obvious to everyone that the idea of a self-conscious computer is a con-
tradict ion in terms. At the same time, I doubt that there will ever be
self-conscious robots. But for boring reasons. There won't be any point in
making them. Theoret ically, could we make a gall bladder out of atoms?
In principle we could. A gall bladder is just a collection of atoms, but
manufact uring one would cost the moon. It would be more expensive than
every project NASA has ever dreamed of, and there would be no scientific
payoff. We wouldn't learn anything new about how gall bladders work. For
the same reason , I don 't think we're going to see really humanoid robots,
because practical, cost-effective robots don 't need t o be very humanoid at
all. They need to be like the robots you can already see at General Motors,
or like boxy little computers that do special-purpose things.
The theoretical issues will be studied by artificial intelligence researchers by
looking at models that, to the layman , will show very little sign of humanity

314
D. C. Dennett
at all, and it will be only by rather indirect arguments that anyone will
be able to appreciate that these models cast light on the deep theoretical
question of how the mind is organized.
3
Postscript [1997]
In 1991, the First Annual Loebner Prize Competition was held in Boston at
the Computer Museum. Hugh Loebner, a New York manufacturer, had put up
the money for a prize -
a bronze medal and $100,000 -
for the first computer
program to pass the Turing Test fair and square. The Prize Committee,
of which I was Chairman until my resignation after the third competition,
recognized that no program on the horizon could come close to passing the
unrestricted test -
the only test that is of any theoretical interest at all, as
this essay has explained. So to make the competition interesting during the
early years, some restrictions were adopted (and the award for winning the
restricted test was dropped to $2000). The first year there were ten terminals,
with ten judges shuffling from terminal to terminal, each spending fifteen
minutes in conversation with each terminal. Six of the ten contestants were
programs, four were human "confederates" behind the scenes.
Each judge had to rank order all ten terminals from most human to least
human . The winner of the restricted test would be the computer with the
highest mean rating. The winning program would not have to fool any of
the judges, nor would fooling a judge be in itself grounds for winning; high-
est mean ranking was all. But just in case some program did fool a judge,
we thought this fact should be revealed, so judges were required to draw a
line somewhere across their rank ordering, separat ing the humans from the
machines.
We on the Prize Committee knew the low quality of the contesting pro-
grams that first year , and it seemed obvious to us that no program would
be so lucky as to fool a single judge, but on the day of the competition, I
got nervous. Just to be safe, I thought, we should have some certificate pre-
pared to award to any programmer who happened to pull off this unlikely
feat . While the press and the audience were assembling for the beginning of
the competition, I rushed into a back room at the Computer Museum with a
member of the staff and we cobbled up a handsome certificate with the aid of
a handy desk-top publisher. In the event, we had to hand out three of these
certificates, for a total of seven positive misjudgements out of a possible sixty!
The gullibility of the judges was simply astonishing to me. How could they
have misjudged so badly? Here I had commit ted the sin I'd so often found
in others: treating a failure of imagination as an insight into necessity. But
remember that in order to make the competition much easier , we had tied
the judges' hands in various ways -
too many ways. The judges had been
forbidden to probe the contestants aggressively, to conduct conversational
experiments. (I may have chaired the committee, but I didn't always succeed

Can Machines Think?
315
in persuading a maj ority to adopt the rules I favored.) When the judges sat
back passively, as instructed, and let the contestants lead them, they were
readily taken in by the Potemkin village effect described in the essay.
None of the misjudgments counted as a real case of a computer passing
the unrestricted Turing Test , but they were still surprising to me. In the
second year of the competit ion, we uncovered another unanticipated loophole:
due to faulty bri efing of the confederates, several of them gave deliberat ely
clunky, automaton-like answers. It turned out that they had decided to give
the silicon contestants a sporting chance by acting as if they were programs!
But once we'd straightened out these glitches in the rules and pro cedures,
the competition worked out just as I had originally predicted: the computers
stood out like sore thumbs even though there were still huge restrictions on
topic. In the third year, two of the judges -
journalists -
each made a false
negative judgment, declaring one of the less eloquent human confederates to
be a computer. On debriefing, their explanation showed just how vast the
gulf was between the computer programs and the people: they reasoned that
the competition would not have been held if there weren't at least one half-
way decent computer contestant, so they simply picked the least impressive
human being and declared it to be a computer. But they could see the gap
between t he compute rs and the people as well as everybody else could.
The Loebner Prize Competition was a fascinating social experiment, and
some day I hope to write up the inside story -
a tale of sometimes hilarious
misadventure , bizarre characters, interesting technical challenges, and more.
But it never succeeded in attracting serious contestants from the world's
best AI labs. Why not? In part because, as the essay argues, passing the
Turing Test is not a sensible resear ch and development goal for serious AI. It
requires too much Disney and not enough science. We might have corrected
that flaw by introducing into the Loebner Competition something analogous
to the "school figures" in ice-skating competion: theoretically interesting (but
not crowd-pleasing) technical challenges such as parsing pron ouns, or dealing
creatively with enthymemes (arguments with unstated premises). Only those
programs that performed well in the school figures -
the serious competition
-
would be permitted into the final show-off round, where they could dazzle
and amuse the onlookers with some cute Disney touches. Some such change in
the rules would have wip ed out all but the most serious and dedicated of the
home hobbyists , and mad e the Loebner Competition worth winning (and not
too embarrassing to lose). When my proposals along these lines were rejected,
however , I resigned from the committee. The annual competitions continue,
apparently, under the direction of Hugh Loebner. On the World Wide Web I
just found the transcript of the conversation of the winning program in the
1996 competion. It was a scant improvement over 1991, still a bag of cheap
tricks wit h no serious analysis of the meaning of the sentences. The Turing
Test is too difficult for the real world.

316
D. C. Dennett
References
1. Block, N., 1982, "Psychologism and Behaviorism, " Philosophical Review, 90:5-
43.
2. Colby, K. M., 1981, "Modeling a Paranoid Mind," Behavioral and Brain Sci-
ences, 4(4) :515-560.
3. Descartes, R., 1637,
Discourse on Method, LaFleur, Lawrence, trans., New
York: Bob bs Merrill, 1960.
4. Haugeland, J., 1981, Mind Design: Philosophy, Psychology, Artificial Intelli-
gence, Cambridge, MA: Bradford Books/The MIT Press.
5. Heiser, J. F. , Colby, K. M., Faught, W . S., and Parkinson, R. C., 1980, "Can
Psychiatrists Distinguish a Comp uter Simulation of Paranoia from t he Real
T hing? The Limitations of Turing-Like Tests as Measures of t he Adequacy of
Simulations ," Journal of Psychiatric Research, 15(3):149- 162.
6. Kolodner, J. L., 1983, "Retrieval and Organization Strategies in Conceptual
Memory: A Computer Model" (Ph.D. diss.) , Research Report # 187, Dept . of
Computer Science, Yale University.
7. Kolodner, J . L., 1983,
"Maintaining Organization in a Dynamic Long-term
Memory," Cognitive Science, 7:243-279.
8. Kolodner, J. L., 1983, "Reconstructive Memory: A Computer Model," Cognitive
Science, 7:281-328.
9. Turing, A. M, 1950,
"Computing Machinery and
Intelligence,"
Mind,
59(236) :433- 460.
10. Weizenbaum, J., 1974, let ter to t he editor, Communications of the Association
of Computing Machinery, 17(9), September.
11. Winograd , T., 1972, Understanding Natural Language, New York : Academic
Press .

Christof Teuscher (Ed.)
Alan Turing:
Life and Legacy
ofaGreat Thinker
Foreword by Douglas Hofstadter
With 77 Figures, including 10 in Color, and 4 Tables
Springer

Christof Teuscher
Swiss Federal Institute of Technology Lausanne (EPFL)
Logic Systems Laboratory, EPFL-IC-LSL
1015Lausanne
Switzerland
christofteteuscher.cn
http://www.teuscher.ch/christof
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data applied for
Die Deutsche Bibliothek - CIP-Einheitsaufnahme
Bibliographic information published by Die Deutsche Bibliothek
Die Deutsche Bibliothek lists this publication in the Deutsche
Nationalbibliografie; detailed bibliographic data is available in the
Internet at <http://dnb.ddb.de>.
ACM Subject Classification (1998): A.O, F, E.3, 1.2
This work is subject to copyright. All rights are reserved, whether the whole or part of the material is
concerned, specifically the rights of translation, reprinting, reuse of illustrations, recitation,
broadcasting, reproduction on microfilm or in any other way,and storage in data banks. Duplication
of this publication or parts thereof is permitted only under the provisions of the German Copyright
LawofSeptember 9,1965, in its current version, and permission for use must always be obtained from
Springer- Verlag. Violations are liable for prosecution under the German Copyright Law.
springeronline.com
 Springer- Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2004
Originally publishedby Springer-VerlagBerlinHeidelbergNew Yorkin 2004.
Softcoverreprintofthe hardcover1stedition2004
The use of designations, trademarks, etc. in this publication does not imply,
even in the absence of a specific statement, that such names are exempt from
the relevant protective laws and regulations and therefore free for general use.
Cover Design: Kunkell.opka, Heidelberg
Typesetting: Computer to film by author s data
Printed on acid-free paper
45/3142PS 5432 I
ISBN 978-3-642-05744-1           ISBN 978-3-662-05642-4 (eBook)
DOI 10.1007/978-3-662-05642-4

