6
From Typo to Thinko: When Evolution Graduated to Semantic Norms
Daniel Dennett
Natural selection edits with an eye only toward what the message says, not to what it means.
—Richard Powers, The Gold Bug Variations
Darwinian Perspectives on Culture
Do we need a Darwinian theory of cultural evolution? In one sense, certainly. It is
obvious that there are patterns of cultural change—evolution in the neutral sense—
and any theory of cultural change worth more than a moment’s consideration will
have to be Darwinian in the minimal sense of being consistent with the theory of
evolution by natural selection of Homo sapiens. Our species name is well chosen, and
it is culture that makes us the knowing hominid, so a minimally Darwinian theory of
culture must hold that the phenotypic traits that make cumulative culture possible—
mainly, language and the habits of sociality—evolved by natural selection, unaided
by what I call skyhooks: saltations in Design Space that could not be the outcome of
standard evolutionary mechanisms (Dennett 1995). This minimal Darwinism is simply
the denial of the hypothesis that culture is, as it were, a miracle, a gift from God.1 It
maintains in one way or another that natural selection eventually provided the foun-
dations for culture, which then took off and elaborated itself under some regime 
that explains the patterns of cultural change, but that regime need not itself be 
Darwinian in any interesting sense.
For instance, the standard model is an economic one. The theorist says, in effect, if
Darwin will give me Homo economicus, a social group of rational, self-interested indi-
viduals getting and spending, saving and making and trading, I can then use the inten-
tional stance (Dennett 1971, 1987) as the explanatory framework for describing and
accounting for the patterns of cultural evolution. This economic model is used not
just by economists, of course; it is tacitly presupposed by historians and anthropolo-
gists and all the other theorists who treat culture as composed of goods, possessions
of the people, who husband them in various ways, wisely or foolishly. People 

carefully preserve their traditions of ﬁre-lighting, house-building, speaking, counting,
justice, etc. They trade cultural items as they trade other goods. And of course some
cultural items (wagons, pasta, recipes for chocolate cake, etc.) are deﬁnitely goods, and
so we can plot their trajectories using the tools of economics. It is clear from this per-
spective that highly prized cultural entities will be protected at the expense of less
favored ones, and there will be a competitive market where agents both “buy” and
“sell” cultural wares. If a new method of house-building or farming or a new style of
music sweeps through the culture, it will be because people perceive advantages to
these novelties and choose them. If Coca Cola bottles proliferate around the world, it
is because more and more people prefer to buy a Coke. Advertising may fool them.
Then we look to the advertisers, or those who have hired them, to ﬁnd the relevant
agents whose desires ﬁx the values for our cost-beneﬁt calculations. Cui bono? Who
beneﬁts? The purveyors of the goods and those they hire to help them, etc. In this
way of thinking, then, the relative “replicative” power of various cultural goods—
whether Coke bottles, building styles, or religious creeds—is measured in the market-
place of cost–beneﬁt calculations performed, consciously or unconsciously, by the
people.
Biologists, too, make good use of the economic model, explaining the evolution (in
the neutral sense) of features of the natural world by treating them as goods belong-
ing to various members of various species: one’s food, one’s nest, one’s burrow, one’s
territory, one’s mates, one’s time and energy. Cost–beneﬁt analyses shed light on the
husbandry engaged in by the members of the different species inhabiting some shared
environment.2 Not every “possession” is considered a good, however. The dirt and
grime that accumulates on one’s body, to say nothing of the accompanying ﬂies and
ﬂeas, are of no value, or are of negative value, for instance. These hitchhikers are not
normally considered as goods by biologists, except when the beneﬁts derived from
them are manifest.
These economic models of culture are consistent with Darwinism but are not more
speciﬁcally Darwinian. Darwinian evolution provides organisms whose ultimate goal
is self-replication, and who then track the rational if myopic trajectory to that end;
the interactions of such rational agents determine which features of the shared envi-
ronment will proliferate, which will be contested, which despoiled, and so forth. In
these models, cultural traits, however they arise, spread as ﬁtness enhancers, at least
locally considered. Agriculture, cooking, clothing, the wheel, writing, the bow and
arrow—all these cultural innovations are plausibly viewed as improvements that need
not arise from gene mutation and recombination and need not be transmitted geneti-
cally. They are, one might say, infectious phenotypic features. These features, it is pre-
sumed, pass some sort of quality-control test administered by the agents themselves.
They are chosen by evolved organisms and put to use, and if they didn’t “pay for
themselves” in a ﬁtness boost (or at least an apparent ﬁtness boost, myopically con-
134
Daniel Dennett

sidered) they would soon die out, just like genetically transmitted phenotypic varia-
tions. The idea is that if innovations are randomly distributed around neutrality, the
pernicious innovations will hasten the demise (or mating failure) of those who adopt
them; the enhancements will do the opposite, and over the not very long haul the
enhancers will proliferate. This vision allows the possibility, as relatively rare outliers,
of mistakes: either good tricks abandoned by mistake or pernicious tricks persisted in
thanks to some local illusion.
More ambitious models (Feldman and Cavalli-Sforza 1981; Boyd and Richerson
1985) then address the opportunities for coevolution, for interaction between the
items that come to be present or dominant in the cultural marketplace and the geneti-
cally transmitted phenotypes of the persons transmitting and preserving those items.
Clothes do make the man, at least to the extent of diverting selection pressures for
weather-hardiness, so the cultural transmission of clothing sends ripples through the
evolution of human physiology. Similarly, new practices of food gathering and prepa-
ration can reﬂexively change the ﬁtness landscape for digestive capability. Lactose tol-
erance in adults descended from people who herded dairy animals is a well-studied
case. These models are Darwinian in a more than minimal sense because they extend
the perspective of population genetics, the replicator dynamics, to these nongeneti-
cally transmitted phenotypic features, exploring the effects of horizontal and oblique
transmission, for instance. However, they also maintain the basic economic presup-
position of rational agents: Cultural traits are adopted because they are deemed worth
having, because they are supposed, rightly or wrongly, to contribute somehow to the
achievement of one’s more ulterior ends, whatever they may be.
When a rational agent or intentional system makes a decision about which is the
best course of action, all things considered, we need to know from whose perspective
this optimality is being judged. Here things begin to get messy. In nature, genes are
the ultimate units of “self”-interest. That is to say, adaptations in plants and animals
(and simpler life forms) are, by deﬁnition, features that further the summum bonum of
gene replication, directly or indirectly. Are cultural innovations adaptations in this
narrow, genetic sense? It is obvious that many cultural features are deemed by the
populace to be beneﬁcial, functional, adaptive, useful, life-enhancing, or enabling. It
is less clear that these esteemed features play a discernible role in enhancing genetic
ﬁtness, as contrasted with, say, human happiness, the pursuit of which is curiously
orthogonal to genetic ﬁtness. One of the striking trends in human evolution, going
back thousands of years, is the gradual diminution in the proportion of human effort
devoted in any clearly discernible way to the achievement of the fundamental goals
we share with animals: avoiding pain, hunger, and predation, and seeking comfort,
security, and mating opportunities. Even if the peculiar human desiderata of prestige,
power, wealth, beautiful surroundings, recreation, music, toys, and so forth, have dis-
cernible instrumental rationales (improving one’s proﬁle in the contest for mates,
From Typo to Thinko
135

enlarging one’s harem, one’s territory, one’s margin of error), they have more or less
detached themselves from these inaugural foundations and become ends in them-
selves. The young man bought the guitar in order to attract young women, but now
he has become a guitarist who would rather make music than love. As Cavalli-Sforza
and Feldman note,
There are people determined to risk their life to reach the top of Mt. Everest, and others that
spend their life accumulating money, or attempting artistic or scientiﬁc creations, or simply
trying to do as little as possible. It is difﬁcult to subsume all of these choices under a common
schedule admitting no individual variation. (1981: 342)
As they put it,
Control is delegated to a system of poorly understood internal drives and rewards that direct the
activity of the individual. . . . Our very inadequate knowledge of this steering system prevents us
from making ﬁner statements, but it is probably true that the system’s overall activity is directed
towards maximizing self satisfaction of the individual. Important complications arise because we
can satisfy ourselves in many different, competing ways, many of which demand careful advance
planning. (1981: 364)
Feldman and Cavalli-Sforza thus adopt the default assumption, at least in the Western
world, and especially among economists, of treating the agent as a sort of punctate,
Cartesian locus of well-being. What’s in it for me? Rational self-interest. However, while
there has to be something in the role of the self—something that deﬁnes the answer
to the cui bono question for the decision maker under examination, there is no neces-
sity in this default treatment, common as it is. A self-as-ultimate-beneﬁciary can in
principle be indeﬁnitely distributed. I can care for others, or for a larger social struc-
ture, for instance. There is nothing that restricts me to a me as contrasted to an us. I
can still take my task to be looking out for number one while including, under number
one, not just myself, but my family, the Chicago Bulls, Oxfam, the ﬂourishing of mid-
twentieth-century acoustic guitar ﬁnger-picking techniques—indeed anything human
ingenuity can deﬁne and become attached to, making its welfare deﬁnitive of the deci-
sion maker’s “happiness.”
It is not obvious that any other organism strives for its own happiness or anything
like it. If human happiness is our summum bonum (or at least a bonum against which
we do in fact often attempt to measure costs and beneﬁts), how did it arise? It is here
that the prospect of a still more radically Darwinian theory of cultural evolution
becomes attractive. Could the unique varieties of human evaluation that are so dis-
tantly and indirectly anchored to any plausible litmus test of genetic ﬁtness be
accounted for by supposing that human beings have evolved into a condition where
they have become the vectors, the hosts, of a new order of symbionts—competing cul-
tural replicators whose own ﬁtness, deﬁned in standard Darwinian terms of relative
replicative success, has constituted a new sort of entity? An enculturated human being,
136
Daniel Dennett

according to this proposal, is as important a novelty on the evolutionary front as the
eukaryotic cell was at its debut: a uniﬁcation of distinct replicators into a synthetic
organization with a displaced goal or summum bonum. It is no longer just an organ-
ism bent on self-replication, but a person bent on furthering the particular goals and
ideals with which that person identiﬁes. Has our guitarist unwittingly become part of
a guitar’s way of making another guitar? This is a tantalizingly attractive idea, but for
such a perspective to anchor itself ﬁrmly in evolutionary theory, we must take seri-
ously Dawkins’s concept of a meme, and there are reasons to doubt that we should
do that.
Cultural Replicators: A Central or a Peripheral Phenomenon?
In some neighborhoods, ball bearings outnumber rabbit turds; in other neighborhoods
this imbalance is reversed; and in yet other neighborhoods no entities of either variety
are to be found. These differential production patterns change over time, and there
are reasons for them, but they are not, in the main, Darwinian reasons. Not all pro-
duction is replication, and not all distribution is emigration. Variety and similarity are
also found among cultural items, and the question is whether any (or many) of the
reasons for patterns in changing “populations” of cultural items are Darwinian.
Dan Sperber (2000) notes that the dictionary deﬁnition of “memes” is too bland to
be of much interest: “an element of culture that may be considered to be passed on
by non-genetic means,” while a more radical deﬁnition, more faithful to Dawkins’s
arresting proposal, “cultural replicators propagated through imitation,” is far from
obvious. Indeed, it is in need of defense against two objections. The “simplest and
most serious objection” is that the copying of cultural items is in general too low
ﬁdelity to permit natural selection to get a purchase. Compare memes with viruses.
Viruses travel light and carry no copying machines, so they reproduce by entering
cells and tricking the cell’s proprietary copying machines into making spurious copies
of them instead of copying their usual and proper fare, the cell’s own DNA. If memes
are like viruses, as Dawkins and other would-be memeticists have claimed, it is because
they reproduce by exploiting the copying machinery resident in the brains of human
beings. How well does this parallel hold? How good is that machinery? Not good
enough, it seems. We human beings are actually rather bad at the sorts of “mindless”
copying that cells excel at.
Following Williams (1966), Sperber notes that although higher selection biases can
tolerate lower ﬁdelity, it still appears that “mutation” rates among memes would be
so great that any description of the emerging patterns in terms of descent with mod-
iﬁcation, as Darwin put it, would be lip service only. “For memetics to be a reason-
able research program, it should be the case that copying, and differential success in
causing the multiplication of copies, over-whelmingly plays the major role in shaping
From Typo to Thinko
137

all or at least most of the contents of culture” (Sperber 2000: 172). If we are not invet-
erate and talented copyists, we will make poor hosts for our cultural viruses, and 
Darwinian descent with (relatively rare) modiﬁcation will seldom occur. We will need
to look elsewhere to explain the patterns of culture.
Is it so clear that our copying is too low ﬁdelity to work? Dawkins (1999) has
responded to this objection with his example of the origami model of a Chinese junk,
which people learn to make by following a canonical set of simple “self-normalizing”
instructions, but Sperber ﬁnds this misleading, since “the normalisation of the instruc-
tions results precisely from the fact that something other than copying is taking place”
(2000: 169). Sperber lays down three conditions for “true replication”:
For B to be a replication of A,
1. B must be caused by A (together with background conditions).
2. B must be similar in relevant respects to A.
3. The process that generates B must obtain the information that makes B similar to A from A.
It is condition (3), Sperber claims, that is seldom met by cultural transmissions. Infec-
tious laughter is his excellent example of a transmission event that meets (1) and (2)
and fails (3), and he extends his analysis of this case by the fanciful example of ten
sound recorders that trigger each other, but whose productions, in one case, do not
consist of replications, but rather of recognitions, followed by re-productions. Trig-
gered production of this sort is distinct from copying or replication in the one way
that matters for Darwin, according to Sperber. It does not slavishly copy the original;
instead it is inspired by the original to make another of the same sort—but without
any systematic attempt or disposition to reproduce any idiosyncracies of the original.
It normalizes its production to an independent ideal, discarding or not even noticing
any mutations, good or bad, in the original.
Sperber illustrates this point with another ﬁne example, the contrast between a 
nonsense scribble and a ﬁve-pointed star. The nonsense scribble would degenerate
quickly in any series of attempted replications because people are not good copiers of
such productions, while the ﬁve-pointed star would be “copied” with high ﬁdelity,
just as Dawkins says. However, Sperber maintains, the succession of stars would not
really be copies of their predecessors, since the “copyists” would normalize to the
recipe for the drawing procedure, ignoring the details of the individual productions.
Is Sperber looking at the right level of ﬁneness? Dawkins’s point is that a ﬁnite reper-
toire of such triggered productions is not just a good trick for human beings who 
want to heighten their transmission ﬁdelity, it is a Good Trick discovered several
billion years ago by natural selection. Sperber distinguishes copying from merely trig-
gering the production of a similar effect, but a repertoire of such triggers, called an
alphabet, is what makes high-ﬁdelity copying possible, both in cells and in human
culture.
138
Daniel Dennett

Suppose Tommy writes the letters “SePERaTE” on the blackboard, and Billy “copies”
it by writing “seperate.” Is this copying or triggered reproduction? The normalization
to all lower case letters shows that Billy is not slavishly copying Tommy’s chalk marks
but rather is being triggered to execute a series of canonical, normalized acts: make an
“s”; make an “e,” etc. It is thanks to these letter norms that Billy can “copy” Tommy’s
word at all. And he does copy Tommy’s spelling error, unlike Molly, who “copies”
Tommy by writing “separate,” responding to a higher norm, at the level of word
spelling. Sally then goes a step higher, “copying” the phrase “separate butt equal”—
all words in good standing in the dictionary—as “separate but equal,” responding to
a recognized norm at the phrase level. Can we go higher? Of course. Anybody who,
when “copying” the line in a recipe “Separate three eggs and beat the yolks until they
form stiff white cones,” would replace “yolks” with “whites,” knows enough about
cooking to recognize the error and correct it. Above spelling and syntactic norms are
a host of semantic norms as well.
DNA has an alphabet—the famous ACGT—and words, the three-letter codons that
“spell” the twenty amino acids. In fact, the high ﬁdelity of genetic transmission
depends on the subcellular machinery being triggered to “recognize” and “re-produce”
a small repertoire of types, whose idiosyncracies, if any, are ignored, not slavishly
copied: “make a cytosine,” “make a guanine,” etc. There are error-correcting enzymes as
well, but they don’t ascend (as far as we know!) above the level of a spell checker, cor-
recting “typos” by brute template matching against the original.3
Does the human capacity (and irresistible disposition) to respond to higher, seman-
tic norms—our capacity to correct not only typos but what hackers call thinkos—rule
out cultural transmission as a candidate for natural selection? Sperber seems to think
it does. “Contrary to what Dawkins writes,” he claims, “the instructions are not ‘self-
normalizing.’ It is the process of attribution of intentions that normalizes the implicit
instructions that participants infer from what they observe” (Sperber 2000: 171).
Sperber is partly right; the attribution of intentions is the key difference between this
sort of human transmission and genetic replication. The point comes out even more
clearly if we mutate Sperber’s example slightly, adding a point to his star. Consider
the fact that there are two distinct recipes (and many other less obvious ones) for
making a regular six-pointed star:
1. Make a regular hexagon and put equilateral triangle points on each side.
2. Make an equilateral triangle and superimpose on it another one, upside-down.
A series of six-pointed star “replications” might be created by a random alternation
between these two recipes with no loss of ﬁdelity. Which recipe did various individ-
ual copyists follow? It wouldn’t matter, because what is being copied is not the recipe
but the result understood as an intended object having certain features.4
From Typo to Thinko
139

Sperber thinks that this reliance on attribution of intentions on the part of the copy-
ists disqualiﬁes cultural transmission as a Darwinian process of natural selection. He
supposes that this invocation of intelligent, semantically sensitive, intention-
attributing agents in the purported replication process ﬂies in the face of a funda-
mental requirement of Darwinian processes: mindless, purposeless mechanicity. He is
almost right. To see the force of this interesting objection, imagine a creationist variant
on standard neo-Darwinian genetic evolution. It postulates that God watches over
each moment of DNA replication and whenever He sees some copying that is “wrong”
(relative to God’s great plan), he undoes it. Thus when He chooses, he lets mutations
ﬂourish, and when He does not, those mutations get corrected by a gentle miraculous
nudge of the error-correcting enzymes. Here Intelligence is playing a guiding role in
evolution—just the sort of role that orthodox (devout, “fundamentalist”) Darwinians
abjure. As Richard Powers has observed, “Natural selection edits with an eye only
toward what the message says, not to what it means” (1992: 546). Clever human
beings, in contrast, edit with an eye toward meaning. If such clever editors are inserted
into the process of cultural transmission and revision, what would be left of a 
Darwinian theory of culture?
This worry ignores the fact that Homo sapiens is not itself a miracle, a skyhook, but
something that has evolved by nonmiraculous natural selection. Its capacity to
respond to semantic norms is itself something that has evolved under a regime that
could not respond to semantic norms. Before there could be eyes, good for distal per-
ception, there had to be mere photosensitive responders to proximal stimulation, out
of which eyes could gradually be built. Before there could be minds, good for seman-
tic discrimination, there had to be copying machinery that could only discriminate
alphabet letters. Put otherwise, DNA error-correcting enzymes have always responded
to semantic norms, but just local or proximal semantic norms—make a G—as con-
trasted to more distal semantic norms—make a codon for asparagine or make some
lysozyme or make a protein that blocks serotonin uptake, or even make something that will
ﬁght off infection.
Why shouldn’t evolution go right on working once the copying machinery gradu-
ates to less myopic norms? Even our lowest-level mindless copying avails itself of 
correction to a norm. Is there a “highest permissible” level of normalization in any
Darwinian process? Darwin (and Fisher, and Williams, and others) saw the need for a
sufﬁciently “strong principle of inheritance” to keep evolution going, but nothing has
been said about how that ﬁdelity is to be maintained mechanically. Let there be copy-
ists that take themselves to be responding to semantic norms; there will still be a suit-
ably long-distance evolutionary perspective from which their copying efforts, for all
their editorial work, will appear myopic and unwitting, oblivious to—and hence unre-
sponsive to—the larger-scale pattern of differential replication that ensures that a 
Darwinian process is occurring.
140
Daniel Dennett

In “Pierre Menard, Author of the Quixote,” Jorge Luis Borges (1962) tells the fanci-
ful tale of a literary theorist who sets out to compose (not copy, not write from memory)
Cervantes’ great work anew in the twentieth century. This will be an act of bizarre
self-control, since Menard is a Cervantes scholar who no doubt has at least large por-
tions of the text of Don Quixote committed to memory, but Menard is determined to
bracket that memory and create, with his own authorial intentions, all of Cervantes’
sentences anew, like an experienced wheelwright setting out to reinvent the wheel!
He succeeds (though how can he tell?), and Borges tells us: “Cervantes’ text and
Menard’s are verbally identical, but the second is almost inﬁnitely richer” (1962: 42).
In one sense, Menard did not copy or memorize Cervantes’ text, but in another sense,
he did, in spite of his virtuoso self-control, his obsessive act of re-creation. He did,
because, as Sperber puts it, “(3) The process that generates B must obtain the infor-
mation that makes B similar to A from A” (2000: 169) and surely Menard’s prior study
of Cervantes’ text is an essential part of the scholarship that permits him to “compose”
Don Quixote anew. Of course Menard has used a lot of other information as well; 
the surplus is presumably what permits him, unlike an ordinary reader, to claim to
have re-composed, not written down from brute memory, the work. But so what?
According to Borges, the texts are “verbally identical,” so high-ﬁdelity reproduc-
tion has occurred. Imagine a world in which Menards abound, devoting their lives 
to the re-composition of their favorite works. The transmission of texts will proceed
just ﬁne in such a world—as ﬁne as if photocopying machines were the underlying
machinery.
In fact, of course, a pastel version of that fantasy is just what has happened in the
transmission of ancient texts in our world, for seldom if ever have the scribes taking
dictation been entirely uncomprehending of the words they were dutifully “copying,”
and so they have willy-nilly “corrected” whatever they heard in the process of tran-
scribing it. Their corrections have been governed by several levels of norms: ortho-
graphic or lexical, syntactic, and ﬁnally semantical. The imaginary Menard can be
conceived to have “transcribed” the entire poem of Cervantes modulo the “semantic
norm” of the whole text. Most of us lack that highly sophisticated norm; we tend to
fall back on our sense of the gist of such a narrative, or when all else fails, rote memory
or parrotting (but even “parrotting” is not like a parrot’s parrotting—unless it is, as it
very seldom is, a matter of reiterating formulas in a language we don’t understand).
When Sperber notes that in cultural transmission “the information provided by the
stimulus is complemented with information already in the system” (2000: 171) he 
is right, but the same is true of DNA replication. The main difference, so far as I can
see, is that unlike DNA replication, human cultural replication is accomplished by
processes of highly variable semantic depth, responding to perceived (and misper-
ceived) “copying” errors relative to norms at many levels. The alphabets of written
languages provide us with the most vivid and best-understood system of such norms
From Typo to Thinko
141

of replication, but the phenomenon of semantic norms is not directly tied to lan-
guage. Musical notation relies on the staff to digitalize the roughly inked spots, so that
a musician can see at a glance that a chord is A-C#-E-G even though the A is written
almost twice as far beneath the staff as it is “supposed” to be. A sketch of a new sort
of axle for a wagon need not make the wheels exactly round; the user of the sketch
will recognize those irregular closed curves as representations of wheels, which are to
be round, of course. As we move through our various apprenticeships in life, we learn
to perceive new families of categories—new alphabets, in an extended sense—from
which to construct high-ﬁdelity copies. Only a skilled potter can see at a glance what
another potter is doing and copy it or teach it to others.
Consider a chef demonstrating the making of a sauce to an apprentice. The descrip-
tion in words might be “deglaze the pan, reduce the sauce, and thicken with corn-
starch,” but the words aren’t really necessary if the apprentice appreciates the goal of
each process. Here is a series of three analog processes, none of which could be exactly
copied by the apprentice. The cook didn’t measure the water he sloshed into the pan,
didn’t time the reduction period, and added cornstarch freehand until the sauce took
on the desired consistency. The recipe can be transmitted faithfully all the same,
thanks to the shared norms for these analog processes already inculcated in the
apprentice.
If the error correction in the case of memes is semantically appreciative at many
levels, doesn’t this show that cultural evolution is not a mindless algorithm but rather
a system that must invoke high-level semantic comprehension at every juncture? The
variable depth of semantic norms does guarantee that memeticists will have a problem
providing identity conditions for memes that are more severe than the (already severe)
problems afﬂicting the identity conditions for genes. If we consider that the meme
ought to be understood to be the smallest unit of information worth copying, then we
have already accumulated a wealth of understanding of just such problems, which
arise in patent law and the law of copyright and trade secrets. How big is an idea?
When is one idea an illicit copy of another idea? We have no single bedrock criterion
for answering such questions, but we manage quite well with them in practice, count-
ing on the costs of re-invention to stabilize our sense of what is worth copying in par-
ticular cases.5
It is undeniable that cultural transmission depends on comprehension at almost
every juncture. We human beings are just not in the habit of copying formulas we
don’t understand and then passing them mindlessly on to our neighbors. This in itself
is not a fatal blow to the proposed Darwinian theory of cultural evolution because the
intelligent agents active at these junctures are not miraculous. They are themselves
products of earlier mindless evolution; cranes, not skyhooks. Moreover, the compre-
hension they exhibit, even in extreme cases, is typically insufﬁcient to account for the
cultural patterns their many attempts at copying and transmission eventually yield.
142
Daniel Dennett

Just as genetic engineers, for all their foresight and insight into the innards of things,
are still at the mercy of natural selection when it comes to the fate of their creations
(that is why, after all, we are so cautious about letting them release their brainchil-
dren on the outside world), so too the memetic engineer, no matter how sophisti-
cated, still has to contend with the daunting task of winning the replication
tournaments in the memosphere. One of the most sophisticated musical memetic
engineers of the age, Leonard Bernstein, wryly noted this in a wonderful piece he pub-
lished in 1955 in the New York Times entitled: “Why don’t you run upstairs and write
a nice Gershwin tune?” Bernstein had credentials and academic honors aplenty in
1955, but no songs on the Hit Parade.
A few weeks ago a serious composer-friend and I . . . got boiling mad about it. Why shouldn’t we
be able to come up with a hit, we said, if the standard is as low as it seems to be? We decided
that all we had to do was to put ourselves into the mental state of an idiot and write a ridicu-
lous hillbilly tune. (Bernstein 1959: 52)
They failed—and not for lack of trying. As Bernstein wistfully remarked, “It’s just that
it would be nice to hear someone accidentally whistle something of mine, somewhere,
just once” (1959: 54).
His wish came true, of course, a few years later in 1961, when West Side Story burst
into the memosphere. Leonard Bernstein was a brilliant, comprehending, foresighted,
ambitious creator of musical designs that he hoped would replicate like viruses in
brains around the world. He succeeded in a few cases, but so did many musically igno-
rant, lackadaisical, inadvertent exuders of equally infectious melodies. Other un-
forgettable melodies have no identiﬁable composer at all, but have emerged from
untold rounds of differential replication. A theory that can encompass, and ultimately
explain, all such varieties of cultural production will need to track the differential
ability of authorless and authored items to get people to harbor them and pass them
on, with or without comprehension.
Notes
1. The demands of this minimal Darwinism are far from trivial, and the ferocity with which 
Darwinian accounts of the evolution of language and sociality are attacked by some critics from
the humanities and social sciences shows that mere consistency with evolutionary theory is not
yet an accepted constraint in many quarters. This is a fact of life that we must deal with; fear of
the thin edge of the wedge misleads many who hate the idea of a strong Darwinian theory of
cultural evolution to resist conceding even consistency with evolutionary theory as the obvious
requirement it is.
2. Such organisms need not be deemed to be making conscious decisions, of course, but the
rationality, such as it is, of the “decisions” they make is typically anchored to the expected beneﬁt
to the individual organism. See, e.g., McFarland’s (1989) distinction between an organism’s goal
function and its cost function, and Dennett (1989).
From Typo to Thinko
143

3. One might be tempted to treat the tolerance for variant “spellings” for proteins—e.g., there
are over a hundred different ways of “spelling” lysozyme—as a sort of higher-level norm cor-
rection, but this is not strictly parallel since the copying at each locus is by local spelling, without
ad lib interchange, except for mutations.
4. Following Sperber and Wilson’s (1986) reasoning in a different domain 1986 we can note that
no complicated (“Gricean”) reasoning is required by the individual vectors in the series of trans-
missions, since they need not reconstruct the hidden recipe behind the production but simply
use the optimality assumptions built into the intentional stance to home in on the intended
production. It may often be difﬁcult to reverse engineer the recipes for cultural products (styles
of pottery, for instance) (Boyd and Richerson, 2000), but it is not typically necessary, since the
intented properties of the result can be read off so readily.
5. There is considerable debate among memeticists about whether memes should be deﬁned as
brain structures or as behaviors, or as some other presumably well-anchored concreta, but I think
the case is still overwhelming for deﬁning memes abstractly, in terms of information worth
copying (however embodied) since it is the information that determines how much design work
or R and D does not have to be re-done. That is why a wagon with spoked wheels carries the
idea of a wagon with spoked wheels as well as any mind or brain could carry it.
References
Bernstein, L. 1959. Why don’t you run upstairs and write a nice Gershwin tune? Reprinted in
the joy of music (pp. 52–62).
Borges, J. L. 1962. Pierre Menard, author of the Quixote: Labyrinths: Selected Stories and Other
Writings. New York: New Directions, pp. 75–88.
Boyd, R., and Richerson, P. J. 1985. Culture and the evolutionary process. Chicago: University of
Chicago Press.
Boyd, R., and Richerson, P. J. 2000. Memes: Universal acid, or a better mouse trap? In R. Aunger
(ed.), Darwinizing culture (pp. 143–162). Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Dawkins, R. 1999. Foreword to Susan Blackmore, The meme machine. Oxford: Oxford University
Press.
Dennett, D. C. 1971. Intentional systems. In D. Dennett (ed.), Brainstorms. Philosophical essays
on mind and psychology (pp. 220–242). Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press.
Dennett, D. C. 1987. The intentional stance. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press.
Dennett, D. C. 1989. “Cognitive ethology: Hunting for bargains or a wild goose chase?” In A.
Monteﬁore and D. Noble, (eds.), Goals, no-goals and own goals: A debate on goal-directed and inten-
tional behaviour (pp. 101–116). London: Unwin Hyman.
Dennett, D. C. 1995. Darwin’s dangerous idea: Evolution and the meanings of life. New York: Simon
& Schuster.
144
Daniel Dennett

Feldman, M. W., and Cavalli-Sforza, L. L. 1981. Cultural transmission and evolution: A quantitative
approach. Monographs in population biology 16. Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press.
McFarland, D., 1989. The teleological imperative. In A. Monteﬁore and D. Noble (eds.), Goals,
no-goals and own goals: A debate on goal-directed and intentional behaviour (pp. 211–228). London:
Unwin Hyman.
Powers, R. 1992. The gold bug variations. New York: Harper Perennial.
Sperber, D. 2000. An objection to the memetic approach to culture. In R. Aunger (ed.), Dar-
winizing culture (pp.163–173). Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Sperber, D., and Wilson, D. 1986. Relevance: A theory of communication. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT
Press.
Williams, G. C. 1966. Adaptation and natural selection. Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press.
From Typo to Thinko
145

Evolution and Culture
A Fyssen Foundation Symposium
A Bradford Book
The MIT Press
Cambridge, Massachusetts
London, England

© 2006 Massachusetts Institute of Technology-
All rights reserved. No part of this book may be reproduced in any form by any electronic of
mechanical means (including photocopying, recording, or information storage and retrieval)
without permission in writing from the publisher.
MIT Press books may be purchased at special quantity discounts for business or sales promotional
use. For information, please email special_sales@mitpress.mit.edu or write to Special Sales
Department, The MIT Press, 55 Hayward Street, Cambridge, MA 02142.
This book was set in Stone sans and Stone serif by SNP Best-set Typesetter Ltd., Hong Kong and
was printed and bound in the United States of America.
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Evolution and culture : a Fyssen Foundation symposium / edited by Stephen C. Levinson and
Pierre Jaisson.
p. cm.
"A Bradford book."
Includes bibliographical references and index.
ISBN 0-262-12278-2 (alk. paper)—ISBN 0-262-62197-5 (pbk. : alk. paper)
1. Cognitive neuroscience—Congresses. 2. Human evolution—Congresses.
3. Brain—Evolution—Congresses. 4. Culture—Congresses. 5. Social evolution—Congresses.
I. Levinson, Stephen C. II. Jaisson, Pierre. III. Fyssen Foundation.
QP360.5.E966 2005
612.8'233-dc22
2005043348
1 0 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1

