THE BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1978), 1,41-91
Printed in the United States of America
How adaptive behavior is
produced: a perceptual-
motivational alternative to
response-reinforcement
Dalbir Bindra
Department of Psychology, McGill University, 1205 McGregor Ave , Montreal, PQ
Canada H3A 1B1
Abstract: The sway that the response-reinforcement framework (Spencer, Thorndike, Hull, Skinner) has held on the behavioral
sciences for nearly a hundred years is finally ending. The strength of this framework lay in providing concepts and methods for study-
ing the effects of hedonic (reinforcing) stimuli on the repetition of specified responses acquired in instrumental training situations of
various kinds. Its weakness lay in the invalidity of its central assumptions, stimulus-response association and response-reinforcement,
which could not deal with motor-equivalence and flexibility (or "intelligence") in behavior. To the four decades of incisive criticism on
particular theoretical and empirical grounds, a more comprehensive challenge to the response-reinforcement framework is now added
by the newer ideas about the nature of cognitive, motivational, and response-production processes that have emerged from the work of
ethologists, neuroscientists, and cognitive psychologists. An alternative framework, incorporating the newer ideas, is clearly needed.
The particular framework proposed here is based on the ideas of perceptual learning of stimulus-stimulus correlations and of a moti-
vational (rather than reinforcing) role of hedonic (incentive) stimuli. According to it, an act is produced when its act-assembly is acti-
vated by a pexgo (perceptual representation) of a certain eliciting stimulus complex (ES). When certain eliciting stimuli are correlated
with incentive stimuli, they acquire motivational properties that serve to strengthen the pexgos generated by those eliciting stimuli
and thereby increase the probability of activation of the corresponding act-assemblies. Motivation thus influences response produc-
tion, not by directly instigating "existing" responses, but by modulating the strength of pexgos of eliciting stimuli for the succession of
acts that comprise a response. Therefore, a response is always constructed afresh on the basis of current perceptions; not even a stable
and stereotyped response occurs as a mere activation of a preformed motor program. The topography of any response that emerges is
determined by the nature of the motivational state and the momentary spatiotemporal distribution of eliciting stimuli of changing moti-
vational valence.
By suggesting that the animal learns the overlapping and nested correlations between the stimulus events that commonly occur in a
given situation, and by separating what is learned from the processes of response production, the proposed perceptual-motivational
framework seems capable of dealing with the problems of motor equivalence and flexibility in adaptive behavior. Some implications of
this approach for further behavioral and brain research on such problems as behavior modification, learning by observation of models,
analysis of causality, and search for neural substrates of learning and response production, are outlined.
Keywords: act-assembly, behavior modification, central motive state, classical conditioning, contingency organization, eliciting stim-
ulus, incentive motivation, instrumental training, learning, response production, two-factor theory
More than a hundred years ago, even before the publication of
Darwin's (1859) theory of natural selection, two "evolutionary
philosophers," Alexander Bain (1868) and Herbert Spencer
(1872 - 73), combined the idea of selection with that of hedonism
and proposed the first psychobiological view of adaptive actions
of animals and man. Their view was that through diffuse dis-
charges of nervous energy to muscles, many random movements
are produced spontaneously, and that those movements that are
followed by pleasure tend to be selectively strengthened and
maintained, and that those that are followed by pain are selec-
tively enfeebled and abandoned. This favors successful adapta-
tion and species preservation because evolutionary pressures
have determined that things that are affectively pleasant for a
species are by and large beneficial to that species, and things that
are affectively unpleasant for the species are generally harmful
to the species. The mechanism Bain and Spencer invoked was
this: hedonically pleasant stimuli release large discharges of
nervous energy toward the nerves and muscles that are or have
recently been active, so that the motor channels underlying ac-
tion that successfully leads to pleasant stimuli are made more
permeable; painful stimuli act in the reverse way, making the
motor channels less permeable.
This postulate of the strengthening or weakening influence of
hedonic stimuli on the neural channels involved in recent move-
ments served as the core around which the response-reinforce-
ment view of learning and behavior modification gradually took
shape (see Postman, 1947). Early in this century, Thorndike
(1911) suggested that learning is the formation of new situation-
response connections, which are strengthened or weakened by
reward and punishment - the law of effect. He applied this to
the problem of teaching. Hull (1943) developed a complete
system of behavior based on the idea of stimulus-response
associations and their reinforcement by drive reduction. This
system was elaborated for the study and interpretation of a wide
range of phenomena, such as those of social learning, anxiety,
and psychotherapy (Dollard & Miller, 1950; Miller & Dollard,
©1978 Cambridge University Press
0140-525X/78lDBIND002$04 0010
41

Bindra: A perceptual-motivational view of adaptive behavior
1941; Mowrer, 1939; 1960a). Concurrently, Skinner (1938, 1953),
less interested in the explanation of behavior and more in the
principles of its control, developed a response-reinforcement
technology that proved useful in training and remedial
procedures for varied problems of education, health, and social
management (see Skinner, 1959). All this produced a climate of
opinion in which the response-reinforcement framework or para-
digm came to dominate both the theoretical and practical aspects
of the study of behavior.
This climate of opinion seems to have cushioned the response-
reinforcement framework from a variety of criticisms that were
articulated against it over nearly half a century. But now the cu-
mulative thrust of several incisive theoretical and empirical ob-
jections is beginning to make the criticisms appear more
pertinent and to be taken more seriously. However, such
remains the sway of the response-reinforcement framework that
those who work within it have not ventured beyond offering
minor modifications or extensions, presumably believing the
basic tenets of the framework to be essentially sound. The pur-
pose of this paper is (a) to summarize and restate the reasons why
the basic tenets of the response-reinforcement framework are in-
valid - that the difficulties cannot be simply patched up with
minor revisions; (b) to define the elements of a theoretical al-
ternative to the response-reinforcement idea; and (c) to propose
a tentative framework that indicates the direction in which we
might reasonably proceed in the long task of developing a
coherent and complete account of the production of adaptive be-
havior.
The first step is obviously to describe what the response-rein-
forcement framework and its basic tenets really are. This is
perhaps best done by contrasting the response-reinforcement
and incentive-motivational assumptions about the role of rein-
forcing stimuli (pleasure and pain) in the learning and perfor-
mance of responses. The idea of incentive-motivation is an old
one (Crespi, 1942; Hull, 1952; Logan, 1960; Rescorla & Solomon,
1967; Seward, 1956; Sheffield, 1966), and it was often invoked as
a subsidiary principle within the response-reinforcement frame-
work. During the past two decades, attempts have been made to
use the concept of incentive-motivation as the basis for develop-
ing an alternative approach to the study and interpretation of
adaptive behavior (Bindra, 1968, 1969a, 1974,1976; Bolles, 1972;
Mowrer, 1947, 1960b). A comparison of the concepts of response-
reinforcement and incentive-motivation should therefore bring
out and illustrate the differences in their basic tenets.
Response-reinforcement versus incentive-motivation
Everyone recognizes that hedonic stimuli - objects and events
that typically give pleasure or pain - are important in the produc-
tion and modification of behavior. There are two ways in which
they may exert their influence. First, they may serve as rein-
forcers - rewards or punishments - of the actions that the animal
has just performed, and may thereby influence the future
probability of occurrence of those actions. Second, they may
serve as incentives - stimuli that induce particular motivational
states - and thereby influence a wide range of subsequent ac-
tions. If you receive some pleasant news in a letter, you may
repeat the actions that led to the reading of the news (going to
your mail box, taking the letter out of the envelope, unfolding it,
etc.), but it may also induce an expansive mood that may alter
several aspects of your behavior in the hallway, at the morning
coffee break, and in relation to casual visitors. Clearly, a pleasant
stimulus may influence subsequent behavior either by making it
more likely that prior ("reinforced") responses will be repeated
or by inducing motivational changes that facilitate the same or
other responses, or by some combination of the two.
Common sense sees no difference between the reinforcing
and motivational interpretations of the role of hedonic stimuli in
behavior; many popular aphorisms, such as "spare the rod, spoil
the child" and "flattery will get you everywhere," are vague
enough to be consistent with both interpretations. Nor was the
difference clearly seen by those thinkers who wrote about the
role of pleasure and pain in the control or explanation of human
actions; Machiavelli, Hobbes, Bentham, and Freud remained ob-
scurely ambiguous on this point. Modern psychologists and
other serious students of behavior have too often failed to take
account of the difference. Since hedonic stimuli used as rein-
forcers (rewards and punishments) for particular responses on a
given occasion may, on subsequent occasions, induce a certain
motivational state (i.e., lead to anticipation of those hedonic
stimuli), a clear conceptual separation between the possible
response-reinforcement and incentive-motivational roles of he-
donic stimuli has been slow to emerge.
The three essential differences between the two may be
explained with reference to Table 1. First, the response-rein-
forcement hypothesis assumes that behavior modification
produced in a given stimulus situation (SS) is dependent on the
contiguity or correlation between what the animal was doing,
under the given stimulus and organismic conditions, at the time
of presentation of some hedonic stimulus, that is, on the
response-reinforcement contingency (R:SH or S:Sreinf). The in-
centive-motivation hypothesis assumes that the behavior
modification is dependent on the contiguity or correlation
between what the animal was perceiving, under the given stim-
ulus and organismic conditions, at the time of presentation of the
hedonic stimulus, that is, on the stimulus-incentive contingency
(R:SHorS:SI).
Second, at least implicitly, the 
response-reinforcement
hypothesis attributes the learning reflected in the animal's be-
havior to the selective strengthening of some sort of neural con-
nection between the central representation of the stimulus situa-
tion (ss) and the central representation of the response (r); the
locus of association is the ss-r connection (stimulus-response or
S-R learning). According to the incentive-motivation hypothesis,
on the other hand, the learning consists of the selective
strengthening of some sort of neural connection between the
central representation of the stimulus that was being perceived
(s2) and the central representation of the hedonic stimulus (sH);
the locus of association is the s2-sH connection (stimulus-
stimulus, or S-S learning). I shall call the momentary central
representation that underlies the perception of a stimulus a
pexgo of that stimulus (see Bindra, 1976, Chapter 5); pexgo is an
acronym for presently excited gnostic organization.
The third difference concerns the postulated or implied
mechanism of response production on the test trial. According to
the response-reinforcement hypothesis, a pexgo of the stimulus
situation (ss), since it has become more strongly connected to a
particular response (say, R2), gives rise to R2, rather than to other
responses (say, Ri or R3). According to the incentive-motivation
hypothesis, on the other hand, a pexgo of a particular stimulus
(say, S2) generates a pexgo of the hedonic stimulus (sH) and
thereby generates the same motivation (central motive state or
cms) as is normally generated by the hedonic stimulus (SH) itself;
this central motive state, in combination with the detailed
sensory-spatial features of the situation, then determines what
response will emerge. Thus, according to the response-reinforce-
ment view, the response that is produced is a repetition of the
response that was selectively strengthened from among other
preexisting responses; in contrast, according to the incentive-
motivation view, the (unspecified) response that is produced is a
fresh construction dependent on the motivational state and the
pexgo generated by the prevailing stimulus situation. I shall
explain this further in a later section.
Objections to the response-reinforcement idea
As early as the 1920s, Lashley took strong exception to the type
of neural model implied in the idea that adaptive behavior de-
42
THE BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1978), 1

Bindra: A perceptual-motivational view of adaptive behavior
Table 1. Response-reinforcement 
and incentive-motivation 
hypotheses of the role ofhedonic stimuli (SH) in response production
(1)
Hypothesis
Reinforcement
Motivation
(2)
Training trial (s)
rSSl 
S l ' S 2 ' S 3
L S S ] 
Ri,R2,R3
rssi 
S l' S 2' S s
L S S J 
Ri,R2,R3
:SH
:SH
(3)
Test trial
Behavior modified
Behavior modified
(4)
Critical
contingency
R2:SH
S2:SH
(5)
Association
learned
ss—r2
S 2 - s H
(6)
Mechanisms of
response production
SS->ss^r2-»R2
T3
Si->si
S2-»S2-sH-*cms-*R?
S3-»S3
Note: An animal is put in a certain stimulus situation (SS). The animal perceives various stimulus configurations (Si, S2, S3, etc.), and it also displays some
responses (Ri, R2, R3, etc.). Now the animal is presented with a hedonic stimulus (SH, say a highly palatable food). At the time of presentation of SH, the
animal is both doing something (say, R2) and perceiving something (say, S2), as in column 2. When the animal is subsequently tested in the same situation
(column 3), its behavior is modified in some respects (learned behavior modification). So far there is no difference between the two views. The difference
arises when one asks how SH influenced the behavior of the animal. These differences concern what contingency is considered important (column 4), what
associations of neural representations (small case letters) are formed (column 5), and what mechanisms are postulated for responseproduction (column 6).
pends on the activation of distinctive stimulus-response (i.e.,
sensory-motor) neural channels, and that learning consists in the
strengthening of connections in particular channels (e.g.,
Lashley & McCarthy, 1926). He pointed out that the same
response, defined in terms of a certain outcome, may be
produced on different occasions by the use of different muscles,
involving the activation of different motor channels. One may
protect one's eyes against strong light by shielding them with a
hand, by turning one's head, or by turning the whole body
around. How can this "motor equivalence" (substitutability of
movements) involved in a response be reconciled with the idea
that learning consists of the selective strengthening and weaken-
ing of specific sensory-motor connections? There is no way in
which a reconciliation can be achieved within the response-rein-
forcement framework, because it rests on the idea of a selective
influence on the specific action the animal has just performed.
With the required selective reinforcement of particular sensory-
motor channels there can be no motor equivalence or flexibility,
and the strengthening of such sensory-motor junctions (stimulus-
response associations) is the only mechanism of learning pro-
vided by this framework.
Over the next three decades, the above fundamental argument
against the idea that the locus of learning is stimulus-response
association was repeated, in different terms, by Kohler (1929),
Allport (1937), and Tolman (1932, 1948, 1949). In view of these
criticisms, the only way left to hold on to the stimulus-response
association idea was to abandon concern with the problem of
how different movements (sensory-motor channels) can produce
the same response, and to consider the response as the ultimate
unit for behavioral analysis. This is essentially what Skinner
(1935) had advocated, saying that a response is defined not by its
specific movements, but in terms of certain measurable environ-
mental outcomes Learning theorists thus turned to the "func-
tional relations" between generic stimuli and generic responses,
without regard to what specific sensory or motor components
they were made of (see Hilgard, 1956). While this circumvention
of the problem of motor equivalence may have "emancipated"
psychology from a neurological straitjacket, it did so only by
evading the fundamental problem of how adaptive behavior is
put together; it sacrificed explanation to the empirical goal of
enunciating descriptive principles.
This atheoretical approach was extended to the second main
tenet of the response-reinforcement framework, the idea that he-
donic (reinforcing) stimuli strengthen stimulus-response func-
tional relations. Skinner (1950), being more concerned with con-
trolling behavior than with understanding its mechanisms, had
taken no clear stand on how reinforcing stimuli reinforce
responses. This position was now more explicitly articulated by
others (e.g., Premack, 1959). Concern with the processes by
which hedonic stimuli influence learning and performance was
thus gradually abandoned by learning theorists in favor of the
empirical principle that response-reinforcement 
somehow
changes the functional relations between stimuli and responses.
But difficulties arise even within such an empirical reinforce-
ment principle. First, the phenomena of latent learning, sensory
preconditioning, and problem solving show that a good deal of
learning and behavior modification can occur without the rein-
forcement of any specific responses (see Kimble, 1961, Chapter
8). Second, experiments on learning without responding (e.g.,
response substitution, learning while paralyzed) make it clear
that not even the occurrence of a response during learning, let
alone reinforcement, is necessary for demonstrating a learned
behavior change (e.g., Dodwell & Bessant, 1960, Kohler, 1925;
Solomon & Turner, 1962). If the response is not there, then what
functional relation is reinforced? Third, it has been shown that
many phenomena of adaptive behavior, such as "instinctive ac-
tions" described by ethologists, "adjunctive" (or displacement)
activities, and observational learning may fall outside the
domain of the response-reinforcement framework (e.g., Bandura
& Walters, 1963; Falk, 1971; Tinbergen, 1951). Finally, it has
been repeatedly demonstrated by the proponents of the
response-reinforcement view that this framework provides an
inadequate account even of the details of behavior in operant
training experiments that use explicit response-reinforcement
contingencies in training (e.g., Breland & Breland, 1961: Shet-
tleworth, 1975; Staddon & Simmelhag, 1971).
Agreeing that the response-reinforcement framework, as tradi-
tionally conceived, is inadequate, several authors have offered
new schemes that try to deal with the above findings by supple-
menting the response-reinforcement idea in some way. Some
(e.g., Bolles, 1972; Estes, 1969; Walker, 1969) have suggested
that, in addition to S-R associations, S-S, R-S, and R-R associa-
tions may also be learned. Two-factor theorists (e.g., Mowrer,
1947; Rescorla & Solomon, 1967) have explicitly incorporated a
motivational factor as an essential aspect of learned behavior
modifications; thus while the response "selection" is thought to
depend on the principle of response-reinforcement, response in-
stigation is said to depend on classically conditioned incentive-
motivation. Still others (e.g., Hearst & Jenkins, 1974; Staddon &
Simmelhag, 1971) have proposed that there are two components
of adaptive behavior; one component (e.g., "sign tracking" or
"interim" activities) involves S-S associations and incentive-mo-
tivation while the other component (instrumental responding or
"terminal" activity) involves S-R associations and response rein-
forcement. Though all these theoretical schemes show some ad-
vantage in handling the above findings at an empirical level,
THE BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1978), 1
43

Bindra: A perceptual-motivational view ot adaptive behavior
they do not come to grips with the problem of how a new stim-
ulus-response relation actually gets learned. They continue to
resort to the principle that reinforcement strengthens stimulus-
response association, without explaining how the problem of mo-
tor equivalence is to be solved. As we have seen, without
explaining how different movements or acts can function as the
same response, the idea of the strengthening of specific stimulus-
response associations by reinforcement turns out to be in-
consistent with the observed flexibility of behavior. If the focus
is on explaining the flexibility of adaptive behavior, the
response-reinforcement idea must be completely abandoned -
even as a subsidiary principle.
In view of these difficulties, some thinkers have tried to
imagine ways in which hedonic stimuli may influence behavior
without strengthening specific stimulus-response associations.
One approach is cybernetic (e.g., Estes, 1972; Miller, 1963;
Mowrer, 1960b). It assumes that hedonic stimulation serves as an
energizer of some process underlying the response-in-progress,
so that once a response has occurred, its continuance or repeti-
tion depends on continual modulation by the energizing process,
variously described as "amplifier," "go mechanism," "emotion,"
etc. This is essentially a motivational view, but one that fails to
deal with the initial production of the response; it also assumes
that the role of motivation is merely to energize responses that
lie ready-made in some store. A related view (e.g., Bolles, 1972;
Estes, 1972; Konorski, 1967) is that the animal learns the relation
between a response as a stimulus entity and reinforcement, so
that the "idea" of a response leads to the expectancy of reinforce-
ment, and this expectancy somehow instigates the production of
that response, or the energizing of the idea of a response by the
expectancy leads to that response. The difficulty with this view
is the same as that with William James's (1890) theory of volun-
tary action: It ignores the problem of the translation of a
response-reinforcement expectancy or the energizing of the idea
of a response into the production of that response. There is little
doubt that animals learn the correlations between their actions
and the consequences of those actions, and this explains the sur-
prise animals show when normal consequences fail to follow, but
the learning of this correlation in no way explains how that
specific action gets produced. What, for example, is the func-
tional relation between the (motor) processes that produce a
reaching response and the (sensory or conceptual) processes that
represent the idea of that response?
Elements of a new approach
If the response-reinforcement idea is to be wholly discarded,
how might we proceed toward formulating an alternative ap-
proach to the study and explanation of adaptive actions? Tradi-
tionally, those who have criticized the inadequacy of the
response-reinforcement framework for handling flexibility of be-
havior have invoked some cognitive (Tolman, 1932, 1948) or mo-
tivational (Mowrer, 1947, 1960a, 1960b) concepts. The general
thrust of such concepts (e.g., cognition, expectancy, emotion,
etc.) is that the motor output comprising a response is separated
from current sensory inflow by the intervention of some central
system of knowledge or motivation, and it is this system, not
sensory-motor associations, that determines what the response
will be. It is assumed that such a central system somehow
flexibly adjusts the motor output to the ever-changing stimulus
and organismic conditions.
The idea of a central system (cognitive or motivational or
something else) not rigidly tied to any specific response is cer-
tainly the minimum requirement for dealing with the problem of
flexibility. But a difficulty with this idea is that it has remained
too general and vague, and no specific principles of response
production have emerged from it. An adequate account must in-
dicate not only how flexibility might be achieved but also how
the occurrence of whatever specific response occurs on a given
occasion is determined. The response-reinforcement view was
developed to deal with the latter but failed to cope with the
former; the reverse appears to be the case with cognitive
(Tolman, 1932) and motivational (Mowrer, 1960b) views.
During the past three decades, the work of ethologists,
neuroscientists, and cognitive psychologists, as well as of learn-
ing theorists, has produced many new findings. I have recently
reviewed these 
findings 
and have abstracted a few
neuropsychological concepts as the elements of a new approach
to the explanation of adaptive behavior (Bindra, 1976). These
neuropsychological concepts suggest a view of cognitive, moti-
vational, and response-production processes that is quite dif-
ferent from the conception of these processes on which the
earlier accounts of adaptive behavior were based. Before outlin-
ing a new framework I shall briefly review some of the important
emerging ideas. This review deals with four suggestions that are
pertinent to any account of adaptive behavior. These questions
are: (1) How are stimuli perceived? (2) How is knowledge of the
environment represented in the brain? (3) What is the nature of
the motivational factor? (4) How does motivation influence
response production?
Perception (pexgo). How are the environmental stimuli, in
relation to which an animal acts, represented in the brain - how
are they perceived? The idea that has been gaining acceptance
since the 1940s is that a stimulus is perceived when an existing
representation of it in the brain is activated by the current
sensory inflow. The existing representation has been called cell-
assembly, prototype, template, ideal, and so forth. The essential
idea is that structural representations of stimuli as such (trian-
gles, apples, words, etc.) exist in the brain and that they need
only to be triggered by a certain complex of stimulus features to
cause perception. In opposition to this view, I have suggested
that no structural representation of a stimulus as such exists in
the brain, and that perception involves the generation of a
pexgo - spatially and temporally ordered activation of certain
structural gnostic elements or pexgo components. The gnostic
elements are gnostic-neurons and gnostic-assemblies, the latter
being acquired through individual experience. The generation
of a pexgo depends on both the current sensory inflow and
central neural influences from contingency organizations
representing knowledge of the environment (see below).
It is unnecessary here to reproduce the reasons for introducing
the concept of pexgo or to show in detail how it differs from other
perceptual constructs (Bindra, 1976, Chapter 5; Bindra, 1977).
However, it is important to note two points. First, my view im-
plies that there is no such thing as the pexgo of a certain object;
the same object is likely to generate different pexgos on different
occasions, depending on the exact stimulus features (as well as
the sensory modalities) represented in the current sensory inflow
and on the exact nature of the central influences. The second im-
plication is that the pexgo generated describes not some abstract
ideal or concept of the stimulus, but that the content and tem-
poral ordering of the activation of gnostic-neurons and gnostic-
assemblies that make up a pexgo is determined by moment-to-
moment fluctuations in both current sensory inflow and central
influences. In other words, the primacy and critical importance
of the details of current sensory and central inflow is retained in
my view of perception; this is essential if the animal is to adjust
to moment-to-moment stimulus fluctuations of its internal and
external environment.
Knowledge (contingency organization). It now seems fairly
well agreed that the knowledge that an animal acquires of its en-
vironment consists not of stimulus-response units or habits but of
the correlations that exist between various events that typically
occur in a given situation (Bindra, 1976, Chapters 6 and 7;
Mackintosh, 1974). For example, a rat learns that being put on a
carrying stand (Event 1 or Ex) is correlated with being taken to an
experimental room (E2), E2 is correlated with being put in an ex-
44
THE BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1978), 1

Bindra: A perceptual-motivational view of adaptive behavior
perimental chamber (E3), E3 is correlated with an empty (wait-
ing) period of 50 seconds (E4), E4 is correlated with the onset of a
tone (E5), and E5 with the target event, delivery of food (E6 or
ET). Elsewhere I have explained how learned correlations are
different from associations, and how a neural contingency orga-
nization 
representing a correlation (positive or negative)
between two events may develop through experience (Bindra,
1976, Chapter 6).
There are three points about situational correlations and con-
tingency organizations that should be borne in mind for the
present discussion. First, a contingency organization that
represents a positive correlation, E^E^ links the pexgo
components of Et (pE,) with the pexgo components of E2 (pE2)
in such a way that the activation of pE! (by EJ results in the an-
ticipatory priming of pE2 even before (in the absence of) the oc-
currence of E2; the momentary level of such anticipatory excita-
tion of the pexgo components of E2 is a function of the predicted
imminence of E2 (which in turn depends on the average time in-
terval between Ex and E2 during learning). Second, the correla-
tions that exist between the events of a situation are multiple and
overlapping; El is correlated not only with E2, but also with E3,
E4, E5, and ET, and E2 is correlated not only with E3, but also
with E4, E5, and ET, and so on. This means that the total anticipa-
tory primed excitation of ET is determined not only by E5, but by
the context as a whole - the usual sequence of events (Ej, E2, E3,
and E4) that precedes E5; the disruption of this context would at-
tenuate the primed excitation of ET produced by E5 (alone). The
third point is that correlations that describe the usual sequence
of events in a situation are nested; the correlations of E! encom-
pass the correlations of E2, and those of E2 encompass those of
E3, and so on This means that a greater number of contingency
organizations are weakly excited by the earlier events (in the
given situation), but fewer contingency organizations are
strongly excited by later events; this corresponds to the fact that
the target event (ET) is weakly predicted by the earlier events
and is strongly predicted by the later events in the given context.
Thus the nested arrangement insures that the level of primed
excitation of a certain event is proportional to the imminence of
its occurrence.
It should be clear that the main functional outcome of the per-
ception of an event, E,, in a given, familiar situation, is the antici-
patory priming of the pexgo components of events (E2, E3, etc.)
correlated with or predicted by Ej in that situation. Thus the per-
ception of subsequent (predicted) events is facilitated by the
earlier (predictive) events; priming of, say, pE2 by pE! facilitates
the perception of E2. This means that the knowledge that an
animal acquires of a situation provides a basis for facilitating the
perception of ("attending to") the likely future events. This
general view of knowledge representation in terms of overlap-
ping and nested correlations, contingency organizations that
prime pexgo components and facilitate the perception of
predicted events, and the dependence of the level of primed
excitation on context, offers considerable scope to any new ap-
proach for dealing with the problem of flexibility.
Motivation (central motive state). Concerning the nature of the
motivational factor, the traditional idea has been that motivation
is primarily, if not exclusively, a matter of internal, organismic
conditions (food depletion, dehydration, changes in hormonal
levels, and other metabolic variations). In contrast, the newer
concept of motivation rests on the observation that motivation is
as much a matter of external stimulation by hedonic stimuli (in-
centive objects and events) as it is of internal organismic condi-
tions. The evidence for the importance of environmental
stimulation in the generation of motivational states has come
from three independent lines of inquiry: neurophysiological
(e.g., Pfaffmann, 1969), psychological (e.g., Bindra, 1968; Pfaff-
mann, I960; Young, 1948), and ethological (see Hinde, 1966,
Chapter 15). As opposed to neutral stimuli, hedonic (or "affec-
tive," or "emotional," or "reinforcing," or "releasing," or "incen-
tive" - whatever one calls them) stimuli have the property of
reliably producing appetitive or aversive reactions and being af-
fectively pleasing or discomforting. They include sights, sounds,
tastes, odors, temperatures, and cutaneous textures that are pro-
vided by such biologically important objects, events, and situa-
tions as food, water, a sexual partner, a nest, the call of a
distressed offspring, the shape of a predator, and injurious levels
of heat or cold. The organismic conditions are important in that
they serve as "gates" or limits within which certain particular in-
centive stimuli become effective (Bindra, 1969b). However, no
motivation for a particular goal is generated by the organismic
conditions per se; the generation of particular goal-directed mo-
tivational states is critically a matter of environmental incentive
stimulation. (The earlier anticipatory-goal-response view, that
incentive-motivational effects are themselves dependent on
sensory feedback [the rg-sg mechanism] from previously rein-
forced responses [e.g., Amsel, 1962; Spence, 1960], is also now
known to be untenable. Conditioned stimuli can generate moti-
vational effects independently of the occurrence of any
particular visceral or consummatory responses that might have
been reinforced [for a review, see Bindra, 1968; Rescorla &
Solomon, 1967].)
One implication of this incentive view of motivation is that the
environmental stimulus that generates a motivational state can
also serve as the goal stimulus to which the action is directed.
This provides an uncomplicated mechanism for the coordination
of motivation and action. For example, an eating central motive
state would direct (or attract) the animal to the very environ-
mental stimuli that played a part in generating that state. This
kind of mechanism appears to be a more plausible basis of coor-
dinating motivation and action than the "drive stimuli" idea of
Hull (1943), which has been found to be inadequate (see
Kendler, 1946).
Motivational influence (pexgo priming). Concerning the role
of motivation in response production, the idea implicit in earlier
accounts has been that the performance of a response involves
two steps: its selection by a certain associative factor (e.g., habit,
discriminative stimulus) or a cognitive factor (e.g., expectancy,
reasoning), and its instigation by the motivational factor (Hull,
1943; Skinner, 1953; Tolman, 1932). Thus the motivational factor
has been thought to influence behavior primarily by a direct ef-
fect on response production. Recent evidence makes this tradi-
tional but still widely held view quite untenable.
The critical evidence comes from experiments involving
electrical stimulation through electrodes implanted in the
hypothalamic-limbic "motivational sites" of the brain. When ap-
propriate pulses are passed through an electrode implanted, say,
in the "feeding" site, even a satiated animal will begin to show
food-directed behavior. It has been shown that the site of
electrical stimulation is not tied to any specific class of
responses, but determines only the general goal (Flynn, 1967;
Miller, 1961; Roberts & Kiess, 1964). For example, the site of
stimulation determines whether an animal would become in-
clined to attack, eat, or copulate; the specific actions (approach,
lever-press, maze-traversal) depend on the requirements of the
situation and may vary greatly. Thus motivational influence is
not specifically tied to any particular forms of motor organiza-
tions.
An important point about the above experiments is that the
situation and the organismic state of the animal may be held
constant, yet the electrical stimulation at different sites makes
the animal act in relation to different objects (food, sexual
partner, attackable object, etc.) in the situation or to different
aspects (stimulus features) of those objects (Flynn, 1967;
Roberts, Steinberg, & Means, 1967). This means that the genera-
tion of a motivational state makes certain environmental stimuli,
or some features of those stimuli, relatively more effective than
they would otherwise be at that time. In other words, a motiva-
tional state may serve to bias the generation of pexgos of environ-
THE BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1978), 1
45

Bindra: A perceptual-motivational view of adaptive behavior
mental stimulus complexes that characterize particular types of
goal or incentive objects. I have suggested that the mechanism of
such ("attentional") bias could be the selective motivational
priming of the pexgo components of certain relevant environ-
mental stimuli through contingency organizations and motiva-
tional states (Bindra, 1976, Chapters 9 and 10; 1977). Whether or
not the mechanisms of motivational influence I have suggested
turn out to be tenable, it now seems reasonable to assume that
motivational states influence the production of directed
responses, not by a direct influence on motor outflow, but by
influencing perceptual processes.
The above brief account of the change in ideas about percep-
tion, knowledge representation, nature of motivation, and the
locus of motivational influence suggests that any new framework
for the study and explanation of adaptive behavior should, at
least in these respects, be quite different from the earlier ones.
Of couse, the proposed concepts of perception, knowledge, and
motivation can serve as elements of several different types of
new frameworks. One such framework that I have been
gradually putting together over the past several years (Bindra,
1968, 1969a, 1974, 1976) is outlined here.
A perceptual-motivational framework
The framework I outline here is tentative and incomplete, of-
fered more as a fresh starting point and avenue of approach
rather than as a formal theory. It incorporates the elements
formulated in the last section, but also makes some additional
assumptions. Though conceived as a framework for the study of
behavior at all levels, I shall be concerned here with only animal
behavior in typical learning experiments - the type of problems
to which the response-reinforcement framework was most
directly addressed. In order to encourage its further elaboration
and revision, I shall outline the framework in the form of a few
tentative assumptions and principles.
Motor organization. The motor system generates three forms of
muscular action: viscerosomatic reactions, transactional
(consummatory or defensive actions), and instrumental re-
sponses. Viscerosomatic reactions, such as phasic changes in
heart rate, insulin release, salivation, and breathing, are
produced either as reflexive responses to specific, simple stimuli
(e.g., a loud sound) or as accompaniments of particular emotional
(motivational) states, such as those of pain, fear, and anger, which
in turn are produced by particular stimulus complexes (shapes,
sounds, textures, etc.). Transactional actions, such as eating,
drinking, sniffing, grooming, copulating, biting, and struggling to
get free of a predator, are performed when the animal is in
contact with an environmental object, including parts of its own
body. Instrumental responses, such as walking, climbing, lever-
pressing, and head-turning, bring the animal close to a particular
stimulus (or otherwise make the stimulus available) or take it
away from a particular stimulus (or otherwise make the stimulus
disappear). Though adaptive behavior frequently requires close
integration of the three forms of action, the mechanisms that
produce each are probably quite different, and there is no fixed
or necessary relation among the three forms even when they are
aspects of a common adaptive sequence. Here we shall be
concerned mainly, though not exclusively, with instrumental
responses.
Transactional actions and instrumental responses are com-
posed of sequences of certain acts. An act (e.g., reaching, stand-
ing) is a unit of behavior that consists of a unified set of move-
ments; in the mature animal, an act occurs as a whole in an all or
none fashion and its occurrence is completed in no more than
half a second. The final step in the production of an act is the acti-
vation of an act-assembly - a neural organization that temporally
orders the excitation of certain movement commands (for further
details, see Bindra, 1976, Chapters 3 and 4).
An act-assembly, like a gnostic-assembly, is organized through
individual experience; both these neural organizations are
structural and both are "small" (i.e., account for no more than
half a second of organized neural activity). All the longer
instances of behavior, that is, most transactional actions and
instrumental responses, represent only functional organizations
that are put together fleetingly from act-assemblies for a
particular occasion. There are no (structural) motor programs
lasting more than half a second; thus, there is no lasting or
"memory" basis for the long sequences of acts that comprise a
typical transactional action or instrumental response. The in-
tegrated appearance of such actions is achieved by continual
influences on act-assemblies, so that an old sequence can be
interrupted and changed within a fraction of a second; ulti-
mately, this possibility of rapid change is the basis of behavioral
flexibility.
Perception and action. The production of any act - the activa-
tion of an act-assembly - is determined jointly by the animal's
current organismic condition, motivational state, and sensory
inflow from within its body and from the environment. Assuming
that all the factors except the external environment are held
constant, the production of any action will depend critically on
the presence of a certain stimulus complex in the situation. An
environmental stimulus complex that is critical for the produc-
tion of a certain act may be called an eliciting stimulus (complex)
or ES for that act. The main concept of eliciting stimulus is
derived from the ethological concept of "releasing stimulus"
(Baerends and Krmjt, 1973; Tinbergen, 1951). Since the same
motor and muscular system must serve a variety of needs, any
defined act may be produced by several different eliciting stim-
ulus complexes; there is many-to-one mapping of eliciting stim-
ulus complexes to acts. An eliciting stimulus complex may in-
volve only one sensory modality or more than one.
Note that an eliciting stimulus complex need not be equivalent
to an object as such; it may be a complex consisting of certain
aspects (features) of objects and certain features of a background;
for example, a stimulus complex that has been found to be effec-
tive in producing egg-rolling in gulls is a combination of certain
features of the egg and certain features of the background. Typi-
cally, it is the relative rather than the absolute dimensions of
stimulus features that comprise an eliciting stimulus complex.
An aspect of an eliciting stimulus complex that is extremely im-
portant in the production of acts is the spatial location of the stim-
ulus complex in relation to the animal; for example, a monkey
may use its right arm to reach for a toy presented to its right vi-
sual field and its left arm when it is presented in its left visual
field.
Any eliciting stimulus complex, to be effective in producing an
act, must be perceived - it must generate a pexgo involving the
activation of several gnostic-neurons and gnostic-assemblies.
Other things remaining constant, what an animal does depends
on what it perceives. The probability that a specified act will be
produced is a function of the strength of the pexgo generated by
an eliciting stimulus complex for that act. The factors that de-
termine the type and strength of the pexgo generated will be dis-
cussed below.
The mechanism by which a certain pexgo is translated into a
particular act is not known and little attempt has been made to
investigate it. I have speculated that the basis of the cor-
respondence between pexgos and acts lies in the period of per-
ceptual learning when gnostic-assemblies and act-assemblies are
being simultaneously formed under the influence of the same
eliciting stimulus complexes (Bindra, 1976, Chapter 5). This
problem of the meaningful relation between perception and ac-
tion is a fundamental one for psychology; the general approach I
have proposed invites a serious study of it.
Spontaneous activity. Any experimental chamber may be
thought of as made up of many eliciting stimulus complexes
46
THE BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1978). 1

Bindra: A perceptual-motivational view of adaptive behavior
(ESs) distributed in the enclosed space. The effectiveness of the
various ESs in activating an act-assembly producing the cor-
responding act (sniffing, scratching, scanning, grooming, freez-
ing, etc.) is dependent, other things being equal, on the salience
and incentive properties of the ESs. Salience is a function of
stimulus prominence (in relation to the background stimulus fea-
tures) and novelty. With increasing familiarity (habituation) to
the situation, an animal will gradually stop acting in relation to
the less prominent stimuli, and eventually show little activity of
any kind. However, if some of the ESs have some appetitive or
aversive incentive properties, and the animal is in a relevant
organismic condition, then it will continue to act in relation to
those ESs. The point of these observations is that the spon-
taneous activity that an animal displays in an enclosure is not
"random" activity, but consists of very specific acts produced
jointly by highly specific ESs and particular organismic and mo-
tivational conditions (Bindra, 1961; Bindra & Palfai, 1967).
Suppose the animal is hungry and there is a piece of food in
the chamber. The smell or sight of food in the presence of the
organismic state of hunger will create a central motive state of
feeding, and this motivational state, together with the proximal
and distal stimuli, will determine the viscerosomatic, transac-
tional, and instrumental aspects of the animal's action (as shown
in Figure 1A). In general, the animal will, after some exploration
of the chamber, move in the direction of the food (instrumental
response) and, once in contact with the food, will begin to eat it
(consummatory action). The basis of this action is that a pexgo
generated by the ES (food) creates a motivational state that in
turn 
further 
excites (motivational 
priming) the gnostic-
assemblies representing certain features of the food. Thus a mo-
ment later a stronger pexgo of food-in-a-certain-location is
generated and this results in the activation of the corresponding
act-assembly; each successive act is thus determined, moment
by moment, by a fresh pexgo.
Learning. As explained in a previous section, learning or ac-
quiring knowledge of the environment involves the building of
contingency organizations that represent correlations between
various stimulus events in particular situations. We can now say
that the correlations an animal learns are between the various
eliciting stimulus complexes (ESs) that make up a given situa-
tion. Some of the ESs are neutral (ESN) while others have appeti-
tive or aversive incentive properties (ES1) Thus, the animal can
learn four types of correlations: ESN:ESN, ESN:ES!, ES'iES1, and
ES^ES*. A main tenet of the proposed framework is that build-
ing contingency-organization representations of such stimulus-
stimulus (ESx:ES2) correlations is the sole basis of learned
modifications of behavior. The correlation of primary interest in
typical learning experiments is that between a neutral or condi-
tioned stimulus (CS or ESN) that predicts something about the
probability, place, and time of occurrence of a reinforcing, incen-
tive, or unconditioned stimulus (US or ES1).
There are three main propositions that describe how stimulus-
stimulus correlations are learned and how the learning of cor-
relations is related to modifications of behavior:
1 
The learning of a stimulus-stimulus (e g., ESX:ES2) correlation de-
pends on the perception of the concomitant and noncomitant occurrences
of the two ESs. Several conditions (e g., stimulus salience) are known to
determine the type of correlation acquired and the rate of correlation
learning (see Bindra, 1976, Chapter 6). Once learned, a pexgo generated
by ESX will prime the pexgo components of ES2, thereby producing, in ad-
vance, some of the same neural (pexgo) consequences that are produced
by ES2 itself (see Figure IB).
2. If ES2 happens to be an incentive stimulus (ES2'), then ESj will ac-
quire incentive-motivational properties of the same type (appetitive or
aversive, etc.) as are possessed by the ES1. This means that the learning of
the correlation ES1:ES2
I will give ESj the capability of generating a
central motive state and thereby priming pexgo components of ESj and
facilitating the generation of a stronger pexgo of ESi at the next moment
(Figure 1C). The animal is therefore likely to act in relation to ESi, the
Response components
Approaching
Hunger
Hunger
•^- Approaching
•^-Eating
*»» Salivating
Response components
-*» Approaching
•>» Salivating etc
Figure 1 The process of response production. (A) Before Learning. This
shows what happens when food is presented to a food-deprived animal.
The central (peiceptual) representation of food odor (f) combines with the
central neural consequences of food depletion to generate an eating
central motive state (e), which excites the sensory-motor coordinations in-
volved in appetitive actions generally and directly activates the regulatory
autonomic mechanisms, which produce viscerosomatic reactions. The
central motive state also further excites the specific food-odor representa-
tion and thereby produces an instrumental approach toward the food. The
excitation of the central representation of the contact-stimulus features of
food (e.g., its taste) activates consummatory response components.
(B) During learning. This shows what happens during the early stages of
conditioning. The pairing of a light with food results in the learning of a
CS:US contingency, which is shown as broken-line reciprocal connec-
tions between the central representations of light (1) and food (f). These
connections make the light an effective predictor of food.
(C) After learning. This shows what happens after conditioning has been
successfully achieved. On a test trial, when the presentation of food is
withheld, the central representation of light (1) through its learned contin-
gency with food, excites (f) and thereby creates the eating central motive
state, which then enhances the excitation of first (f) and then (1). Again
the perception of the distal stimulus features of the light produces instru-
mental approach responses directed at the light. If the animal is able to
make contact with the light, it may also display some consummatory acts
that may resemble to some degree those elicited by the contact stimuli of
food (e.g., gnawing, licking, biting), but the whole consummatory action
would not occur because the light source lacks the stimulus features of an
edible object. This model explains why the conditioned response may
only partly resemble the unconditioned response. Actions in relation to
the light would, of course, continue only until the food gets presented;
then the greater motivational value of food would make the animal's ac-
tions directed in relation to it.
[Copyright 1974 by the American Psychological Association. Reprinted by
permission.]
THE BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1978), 1
47

Bindra: A perceptual-motivational view of adaptive behavior
exact form of the action being determined by both the nature of the central
motive state generated and the stimulus features of ES! (not ES2). Though
based on the Pavlovian conditioning concept of signaling, this view of
learning is not the old response-substitution view of classical condition-
ing. That view suggests that the response produced by the initially neu-
tral, conditional, or signaling stimulus is the same as the one elicited by
the primary incentive or unconditioned stimulus, but this is seldom true
(see Kimble, 1961, Chapter 3; Konorski, 1948). According to my view, the
new learned response is determined, not by the primary incentive or un-
conditioned stimulus, but by the type of motivational state generated by
the conditioned stimulus (CS or ES) and by its detailed stimulus features
in relation to the total situation.
3. For the acquisition of a new, specified response, the ESs for the
various component acts (At, Au, . . . An) of that response, say, Eb ESU . . .
ESn, must acquire incentive-motivational properties. That is, ES for each
component act of the response must be treated as a conditioned stimulus
predicting an incentive stimulus (ESiES1) as described above. Further, in
order to make each component act occur at the right place in the sequence,
we would need to ensure that the strengths of pexgos Ej, Eit. . . En would
reach their maxima in that order. This would be best achieved by arrang-
ing the type of overlapping and nested contingencies described before,
that is, by arranging ES1 to be presented when the total response (ESrAi,
ESu-Aji, . . . ESn-An) has been completed. This is essentially what is done
in instrumental training.
When a response is said to be reinforced in a typical instru-
mental training experiment, we have the condition whereby the
ESs for the successive acts required to complete that response
are followed, after different durations, by ES1, so that the ESs be-
come conditioned incentive stimuli and enhance their own
efficacy for producing the corresponding acts at the correct place
in the sequence.
It should be clear that the fundamental processes of correlation
learning, generating conditioned incentive-motivation, pexgo
priming, and the activating of act-assemblies, are the same in
both the classical and instrumental training procedures. In the
classical procedure, an extraneous, arbitrary stimulus is used as
the CS, while in the instrumental procedure the ES for an arbi-
trarily selected response serves as the CS; in both cases the basis
of learning is the ES(=CS):ESJ contingency. Since the ESs for a
to-be-trained instrumental response are usually not known, the
procedure of instrumental training serves as a way of ensuring
that the unknown ESs for the specified response come to be
followed by the incentive stimulus. In other words, ". . . arrang-
ing a response-incentive contingency is the best way so far dis-
covered for ensuring the animal will observe the critical stimulus
features [ES] which must enter into the stimulus-incentive con-
tingency [ES:ES!] for producing the specified response. . . ."
(Bindra, 1974, p. 208).
The concept of eliciting stimulus was not used in the tradi-
tional accounts of either classical conditioning or instrumental
training. The reason for this is not far to seek. In the case of
classical conditioning, the Unconditioned Stimulus or US (e.g.,
food) serves both as the eliciting stimulus for the response (e.g.,
for salivation) and as the hedonic stimulus, the unconditioned or
incentive stimulus (US or ES1), so that it would be redundant to
recognize an ES apart from the US that elicits the response to be
conditioned. In the case of instrumental training, the reason for
not employing the concept of eliciting stimulus lies in the lack of
concern with the first occurrence of a response; accounts of
instrumental training deal mainly with how a response is rein-
forced by a reinforcing stimulus (Sreinf) after it has first occurred
"spontaneously" in the training situation. The fact that eliciting
stimuli are not formally considered in instrumental training does
not mean that they do not exist or that they do not have a role in
the production of a specified response or its particular
components. Knowledge of appropriate eliciting stimuli is often
informally used in designing a suitable experimental environ-
ment for a given species and a specified response (see Hinde &
Stevenson-Hinde, 1973; Seligman & Hager, 1972). The proposed
framework allows a formal recognition of ESs in accounts of
learning. This is important, for to say that the first response oc-
curs "spontaneously" is to ignore an essential part of the
phenomenon to be explained.
Response-production. As described above, a typical experi-
mental situation consists of a spatial distribution of several ESs
of varying unconditioned or conditioned incentive value, and the
relative valence of ESs keeps on changing from moment to mo-
ment as successive events occur and new contingencies come
into play. Given an animal that has been trained in such a situa-
tion, how can we predict what it will do at a given moment? The
most general principle determining response production seems
to be this: An animal will move toward an ES that is of greater ap-
petitive motivational valence or of lesser aversive motivational
valence than other ESs in that situation at that time.
This principle that links response production to a spatial
gradient of motivational valence is sufficient to explain the
production of the sequence of acts that, say, take a hungry rat
from the start box to the goal (food) box of a runway, or take a rat
from an electric-shock chamber to a safe chamber, and so on. The
readiness and speed with which such locomotory responses are
made depend on the steepness of the gradient. If a tone pre-
viously associated with food is sounded while the rat is still in
the start box, its departure to the food goal box will probably be
delayed, as will that of a rat trained to avoid the start box if a tone
signaling an electric shock is sounded at or near the goal (safe)
box. So far as I know, no systematic studies of the effects of
changing the spatial location of ESs on the topography and speed
of responses have been undertaken, though there has been
considerable interest in the effects of extraneous conditioned
stimuli on instrumental responding (Rescorla & Solomon, 1967).
The above considerations suggest that response production is
determined, not by the absolute motivational valence of an ES
but by its valence relative to other ESs and their spatiotemporal
location in the situation. One implication is that no stable
response will emerge in a situation in which there is no
spatiotemporal gradient of motivational valence. There is some
support for such an idea. Working with pigeons, Gamzu and
Williams (1971) arranged an experiment in which the incentive
stimulus (grain) had a certain probability of occurrence during
CS presentation (illumination of a key) and a certain probability
of occurrence during the inter-CS interval. They found that birds
began to approach and peck the light key, but only when the in-
centive probability was greater during the CS than during the
inter-CS interval. When, without reducing the probability of in-
centive presentation during the CS interval, Gamzu and
Williams made the incentive probabilities in CS and inter-CS in-
tervals equal (nondifferential conditions), the pigeons stopped
pecking at the key during its illumination (CS) as well as when it
was not illuminated (inter-CS interval). Differential motivational
valence for the CS and the background were necessary for the
response to develop and be sustained. Other studies point to the
same conclusion (see Lajoie & Bindra, 1976). It should be noted
in passing that these findings are inconsistent with the idea that
responding under such CSiES1 contingencies is maintained by
adventitious R:ES! (response-reinforcement) contingencies; if
this were the case, then pecking at the CS should have persisted
during the nondifferential condition, because the probability of
grain presentation was not altered in the CS period.
Since the relative incentive valence of a particular stimulus
may be enhanced by discriminative training, the more dif-
ferentiated the ES is made through discriminative training, the
more reliable would be the emergence of a response correspond-
ing to that ES. In the instrumental procedure, since the incentive
stimulus is presented only when the animal has made the
specified response (i.e., has observed the critical ES), the elicit-
ing stimulus easily becomes a highly differentiated discrimina-
tive stimulus compared to other situational stimuli. This ac-
counts for the emergence of reliable and stable environmentally
directed responses in the instrumental procedure, as compared
48
THE BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1978), 1

Bindra: A perceptual-motivational view of adaptive behavior
to the relative variability of environmentally directed responses
in the classical procedure.
In applying this account to instrumental responses that are not
defined in relation to obvious spatial landmarks, that is, to instru-
mental skills such as arbitrary movements (head-turns, lever-
pressing, chain-pulling, etc.), I have suggested that response dif-
ferentiation in the learning of these skills is ultimately stimulus
discrimination learning, that is, learning that different specific
features have different correlations. This discrimination is
between some of the detailed spatial and temporal features of the
ESs in relation to which the skill is performed. Thus, all forms of
instrumental learning, whether involving gross approach and
withdrawal acts in relation to spatially differentiated stimuli
(e.g., goal box) or arbitrary skills involving refined acts, may be
regarded as special cases of stimulus-stimulus correlation learn-
ing. The apparent differences in, say, maze learning and learning
an arbitrary skill may result from the finer perceptual differentia-
tions the animal is required to learn when the experimenter
makes reinforcement (ES1) contingent on the occurrence of a
highly skilLed response (with highly refined ESs). This sugges-
tion needs to be examined experimentally.
Flexibility. A corollary of the above account of response produc-
tion is that a response as such is not a fixed, "preexisting," entity
that is "selected" for production, but that it takes shape in the
course of being produced, and that the main determiner of the
detailed form or topography of any response is the momentary ef-
fectiveness of the various ESs in the situation. Thus, a response
has no continuous existence in the brain; it is a fresh construction
each time it occurs. This dependence of a response on the mo-
ment-to-moment changes in the current sensory inflow and the
central influences from contingency organizations, as well as
central motive states, allows for variations in response
components from occasion to occasion; so long as the overall
context remains the same, variation or substitutability of acts can
occur without altering the total outcome. This substitutability of
acts is motor equivalence at the behavioral level.
But, now, if flexibility is not a problem, how can we account for
the stereotypy (uniformity and stability) that is characteristic of
most responses trained by the instrumental procedure in the
laboratory? The essential answer to this is that the basis of the
stereotypy of a laboratory-trained response lies in the fixedness
(lack of variation) of the spatiotemporal distribution of stimuli
throughout the training and test trials; the response stereotypy
disappears as soon as the spatiotemporal distribution of the situa-
tional ESs is substantially altered (see Bindra, 1974, 1976,
Chapter 12). Because this spatiotemporal distribution is seldom
rigidly fixed in the natural environment of animals, the develop-
ment of stereotyped instrumental responses is rare.
An aspect of flexibility other than substitutability of acts in a
response is the relative "functional autonomy" of a response
after substantial training. For example, it is well known that a
habit (e.g., a maze habit), once well established, will be
performed effectively even if the animal is deprived of some
sensory functions that were necessary or important during the
initial acquisition (e.g., Honzik, 1936). This appears to raise a
problem for the proposed framework, for if each act is produced
by a particular ES, then how can a response as a whole be com-
pleted effectively in the absence of what was, during training, a
critical ES?
The traditional answer to this question has been to postulate
the development of some kind of motor program (based on feed-
back or central motor neural integration) that can be completed
without some of the stimulus (or sensory) elements initially re-
quired for its development. But, as has been repeatedly ob-
served, a motor program of this kind is inconsistent with the
flexibility observed in normal behavior (Bindra, 1976, Chapter 4;
Lashley, 1951). On the other hand, one of the tenets of the
present framework is that motor organizations - act-assemblies -
are "small," producing acts lasting a fraction of a second. If this
Before learning
Stimulus configuration 
S
Sensory representation
Pexgo activated
Act-assembly
Sensory-motor coordination
organization
After learning
Stimulus configuration 
S
Sensory representation
Pexgo activated
Act-assembly
Sensory-motor coordination
organization
Figure 2 
A perceptual hypothesis of response integration. Before learn-
ing the act-assembly (a) of each act in the sequence is activated by a pexgo
(p) of a certain eliciting stimulus complex (S). After learning, contingency
organizations (pi:p2; p2:p3) enable Si to complete the whole sequence
without requiring any support from S2 and S3.
is so, how can the occurrence of long chains of integrated acts be
explained without the presence of the ESs that determine each
act in the sequence?
The general answer suggested here is that responses consist-
ing of long chains of acts are integrated, not through feedback or
motor organization, but through central contingency organiza-
tions that make a pexgo of one environmental stimulus (ES{) ca-
pable of priming the pexgo components of the next stimulus
(ESH) even in the absence of that stimulus (ESu) or its sensory
inflow. Thus, once contingency organizations representing the
correlations of a certain situation have been developed, the
production of the response will become partly independent of
the environmental support needed initially, as shown in Figure
2. The integration is not motor, but a correlational integration of
pexgo components. By removing the mechanism of integration
from the motor system to the perceptual system, the present sug-
gestion (a) leaves the motor system free to serve many masters,
and (b) makes substitution and innovative adjustments to sudden
stimulus changes possible in the course of the performance of
the response.
Some implications
Elsewhere I have explained how the kind of framework I have
outlined here may be used to derive plausible interpretations of
several hitherto perplexing phenomena of learning, including
"instrumental conditioning" of visceral reactions, motivational
modulation of instrumental behavior, observational learning,
and compound conditioning (Bindra, 1974, 1976). Lajoie and I
have also shown how the present ideas can clarify some of the
THE BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1978), 1
49

Bindra: A perceptual-motivational view of adaptive behavior
difficulties that have arisen in the interpretation of certain results
of experiments on autoshaping, omission-training, and super-
stitious responses (Lajoie & Bindra, 1976). Here I briefly indi-
cate some research questions and redirections of research effort
suggested by looking at the problem of adaptive behavior within
the proposed framework.
First, if the basis of learned modifications of behavior lies in
the acquisition of specific types of incentive properties by
certain eliciting stimuli, then we should try to learn more about
eliciting stimuli. Considerable progress has recently been made
by ethologists in the elucidation of the stimulus configurations
that tend to be salient for a species and elicit or promote the oc-
currence of particular acts (see Eibl-Eibesfeldt, 1974; Hinde,
1966). The proposed framework provides a theoretical base for
findings of this type and encourages a more refined analysis of
the eliciting stimuli for various movements and acts. Such
knowledge is likely to be useful to those interested in the shap-
ing of desired transactional and instrumental actions, as well as
in the improvement of perceptual-motor skills.
Second, a central postulate of the proposed perceptual-
motivational framework is that the form and frequency of an
instrumental action are determined, not so much by the incen-
tive value of any particular stimulus in the situation, but by the
relative valence of the various situational stimuli and by the pat-
tern of their distribution in space and time. This means that the
emphasis in the analysis of behavior should be not on relating
specified responses to specified stimuli, but on the study of the
total range of actions that occur in relation to larger spatial and
temporal segments of an animal's environment. Further, one of
the deductions from the present framework is that the stereotypy
and persistence of certain responses, such as superstitious
routines, avoidance responses, and neurotic symptoms, may
arise from the continuing uniformity and stability of the
spatiotemporal distribution of incentives in the situations to
which individuals happen to be confined. This idea has obvious
implications for therapeutic behavior modifications in man.
Third, if the occurrence of a specified response at a given time
in a certain situation is determined not by whether or how much
that response has been reinforced previously, but on the extent
to which the eliciting stimuli for that response currently
predict - are contingently related to - the occurrence of certain
incentive stimuli, then the principles for the training or modifica-
tion of specific responses must be worked out anew without
reference to response-reinforcement. It follows that the control
of behavior in a given situation is to be gained not by reinforcing
(rewarding or punishing) specific responses, but by making the
eliciting stimuli for the specific responses more effective by link-
ing them to incentive stimuli and by rearranging the spatiotem-
poral distribution of the critical stimuli in the situation. Further,
if learning involves the building of contingency organizations
through observing environmental events, then, in order to learn
to perform a new response, an animal does not necessarily have
to be first made to display that response. This makes learning by
observation an important principle of learned behavior modifica-
tion, especially in the adult animal. Thus, learning by observa-
tion of models (copying, imitation, etc.) need no longer be
considered as a special form of learning, but as one in which the
demonstrator or model plays a part in making the novice or the
learner observe the critical stimuli and their relations (Bindra,
1974).
Fourth, the proposal that learned behavior modifications rest
on the building of contingency organizations that reflect the de-
pendencies or correlations among various situational stimuli
makes possible a unified treatment of learning and cognition.
Elsewhere I have elaborated upon the proposition that "cogni-
tions" postulated to account for complex forms of perception,
meaning, recall, and problem solving are ultimately constella-
tions of overlapping and nested contingency organizations, each
developed by the observation of stimulus-stimulus relations as in
a simple learning experiment (Bindra, 1976, Chapters 6, 13, 14,
15). The study of the development of the ability to abstract
knowledge of causal relations - what has been called "develop-
ment of causality" - is from the present viewpoint an aspect of
the general problem of learning the correlations we observe in
our environments.
Fifth, and finally, the proposed perceptual-motivational frame-
work suggests a vastly different approach to the study of the
neural mechanisms of learning and motivation than the approach
that follows from the response-reinforcement framework. At
present, the search for the neural substrate and mechanisms rests
largely on the assumption that the process of "selection" of a
response is separate from the motivational processes that insti-
gate its occurrence. This assumption has led to the search for (a)
the loci of particular motivational states, (b) the loci of the motor
organizations of particular responses, and (c) the pathways
through which a influences b. But, contrary to the implications of
this approach, particular motor organizations cannot be tied ex-
clusively to a single motivational state, and most motor organiza-
tions must impartially serve various motivational states in order
to generate adaptive actions.
The present perceptual-motivational framework suggests that
the motivational states influence response production by prim-
ing the central perceptual representations (pexgos) of environ-
mental eliciting stimuli, thereby rendering those stimuli more
potent or effective. From this viewpoint, the important pathways
of motivational influence must be those that project from motiva-
tional (say, limbic) sites to the sensory-perceptual representation
of the very stimuli in relation to which the (appropriate) response
is to be made. Since responses as such do not lie ready-made in
particular motor structures but are constructed afresh on each oc-
casion, the precise motor output involved in the production of a
response must be activated through continual impulses from per-
ceptual organizations to motor organizations. The elucidation of
the neural relations of perceptual structures with motivational
structures on the one hand and with act-organization structures
(premotor areas) on the other thus becomes an important task for
physiological psychology.
The replacement of the response-reinforcement framework by
the perceptual-motivational framework does not, of course, mean
that all aspects of adaptive behavior will now, suddenly, be fully
understood. The painstaking task of doing careful, analytic
studies must go on as ever; the point of this article is that future
studies are likely to be more fruitful in elucidating the principles
and mechanisms of adaptive behavior if the questions to be
studied are formulated in terms of the proposed perceptual-moti-
vational framework. If this framework is adopted as a working
base, the emerging analyses and interpretations of classical con-
ditioning (Asratyan, 1974; Bindra, 1976; MacKintosh, 1974,1975;
Rescorla & Wagner, 1972; Sutherland & MacKintosh, 1971) must
form an important part of the further elaboration of the frame-
work.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The preparation of this paper was supported by grants from the National
Research Council of Canada (No. A 7918) and the Ministry of Education of
the Province of Quebec.
REFERENCES
Allport, G. W. Personality: A psychological interpretation. New York:
Henry Holt & Co., 1937.
Amsel, A. Frustrative nonreward in partial reinforcement and discrimina-
tion learning. Psychological Review, 1962, 69:306-328.
Asratyan, E. A. Conditional reflex theory and motivational behavior. Acta
Neurobiologia Experimental, 
1974, 34:15-31.
Baerends, G. P. and Kruijt, J. P. Stimulus selection In R. A. Hinde and J.
Stephenson-Hinde (eds) Constraints on learning: Limitations and
predispositions. New York: Academic Press, 1973.
Bain, A.The Senses andthe Intellect. (3rd ed.) London: Longmans, Green,
1868.
50
THE BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1978), 1

Bindra: A perceptual-motivational view of adaptive behavior
Bandura, A. & Walters, R. H. Social Learning and Personality
Development New York: Holt, Rinehart, & Winston, 1963.
Bindra, D. Components of general activity and the analysis of behavior.
Psychological Review, 1961,68:205-215.
Neuropsychological interpretation of the effects of drive and incentive-
motivation on general activity and instrumental behavior.
Psychological Review, 1968, 75:1-22.
The interrelated mechanisms of reinforcement and motivation, and the
nature of their influence on response. In W. J. Arnold & D. Levine
(eds.),Nebraska Symposium on Motivation: 1969. Lincoln, Nebraska:
University of Nebraska Press, 1969 (a).
A unified interpretation of emotion and motivation. Annals of the New
York Academy of Sciences, 1969,159:1071-1083 (b).
A motivational view of learning, performance, and behavior modifica-
tion. Psychological Review, 1974, 81:199-213.
A theory of intelligent behavior. New York: John Wiley & Sons, 1976.
The cognition-motivation connection: Going beyond attention. Address
given at the annual meeting of the Canadian Psychological Associa-
tion, Vancouver, B C, June, 1977.
& Palfai, T. Nature of positive and negative incentive-motivational ef-
fects on general activity. Journal of Comparative and Physiological
Psychology, 1967,63:288-297.
Bolles, R. C. Reinforcement, expectancy, and learning. Psychological
Review, 1972,79:394-409.
Breland, K. & Breland, M. The misbehavior or organisms. American
Psychologist, 1961,16:681-684.
Crespi, L. P. Quantitative variation of incentive and performance in the
white rat. American Journal of Psychology, 1942,55:467-517.
Darwin, C On the origin of species. London, Murray, 1859.
Dodwell, P C, & Bessant, D. E. Learning without swimming in a water
maze. Journal of Comparative and Physiological Psychology, 1960,
53:422-425.
Dollard, J., & Miller, N. E. Personality and Psychotherapy. New York:
McGraw-Hill, 1950.
Eibl-Eibesfeldt, I. Love and Hate. New York: Schocken Books, 1974.
Estes, W. K. Reinforcement in human learning In J. Tapp (ed.), Rein-
forcement and Behavior. New York: Academic Press, 1969
Reinforcement in human behavior American Scientist, 1972, 60:723-
729.
Falk, J. L. Theoretical Review. The nature and determinants of adjunctive
behavior. Physiology and Behavior, 1971, 6:577-588.
Flynn, J. P. The neural basis of aggression in cats. In D C. Glass (ed.),
Neurophysiology and Emotion. New York: The Rockefeller
University Press, 1967.
Gamzu, E., & Williams, D. R. Classical conditioning of a complex skeletal
response. Science, 1971,171:923-925.
Hearst, E. & Jenkins, H. M. Sign-tracking: The Stimulus-Reinforcer Rela-
tion and Directed Action. Austin, Texas: The Psychonomic Society,
1974.
Hilgard, E. R. Theories of learning. (2nd ed.) New York: Appleton-
Century-Crofts, 1956
Hinde, R. A. Animal behaviour New York: McGraw-Hill, 1966.
& Stevenson-Hinde, J. (eds.). Constraints on learning: Limitations and
Predispositions London: Academic Press, 1973.
Honzik, C. H. The sensory basis ot maze learning in rats. Comparative
Psychology Monographs, 1936,13 (Whole No. 64), 113.
Hull, C. L. Principles of Behavior. New York: Appleton-Century, 1943.
A Behavior System; an Introduction to Behavior Theory Concerning
the Individual Organism. New Haven, Connecticut: Yale University
Press, 1952.
James, W= The Principles of Psychology. New York: Holt, 1890.
Kendler, H. H. The influence of simultaneous hunger and thirst drives
upon the learning of two opposed spatial responses of the white rat.
Journal of Experimental Psychology, 1946,36, 212-220.
Kimble, G. A. Hilgard and Marquis' Conditioning and Learning. New
York: Appleton-Century-Crofts, 1961. (2nded.)
Kohler, W The Mentality of Apes New York: Harcourt Brace, 1925.
Gestalt Psychology. New York: Liveright, 1929.
Konorski, J. Conditioned reflexes and neuron organization. Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press, 1948.
Integrative Activity of the Brain. Chicago: University of Chicago Press,
1967.
Lajoie, J., & Bindra, D. An interpretation of autoshaping and related
phenomena in terms of stimulus-incentive contingencies alone. Ca-
nadian Journal of Psychology, 1976,30:157-173.
Lashley, K. S. The problem of serial order in behavior. In L. A. Jeffress
(ed.), Cerebral Mechanisms in Behavior. New York: Wiley, 1951.
& McCarthy, D. A. The survival of the maze habit after cerebral injuries.
Journal of Comparative and Physiological Psychology, 1926,6:423-
433.
Logan, F. A. Incentive. New Haven, Connecticut: Yale University Press,
1960.
MacKintosh, N. J. The Psychology of Animal Learning. New York:
Academic Press, 1974.
A theory of attention: Variations in the associability of reinforcement
with reinforcement. Psychological Review, 1975,82:276-298.
Miller, N. E. Learning and performance motivated by direct stimulation of
the brain. In D. E. Sheer (ed.), Electrical Stimulation of the Brain.
Austin, Texas: University of Austin Press, 1961.
Some reflections on the law of effect produce a new alternative to drive
reduction. In M. R. Jones (ed.), Nebraska Symposium on Motivation:
1963. Lincoln, Nebraska: University of Nebraska Press, 1963.
& Dollard, J. Social Learning and Imitation. New Haven, Connecticut:
Yale University Press, 1941.
Mowrer, O. H. A stimulus-response analysis of anxiety and its role as a
reinforcing agent. Psychological Review, 1939,46:553-565.
On the dual nature of learning - a re-interpretation of "conditioning"
and "problem-solving." Harvard Educational Review, 1947,17:102-
148.
Learning Theory and the Symbolic Processes. New York: John Wiley,
1960 (a).
Learning Theory and Behavior. New York: John Wiley, 1960 (b).
Pfaffmann, C. The pleasures of sensation. Psychological Review, 1960,
67:253-268.
(ed.) Olfaction and Taste. Proceedings of the Third International Sym-
posium. New York: Rockefeller University Press, 1969.
Postman, L. The history and present status of the law of effect.
Psychological Bulletin, 1947,44:489-563.
Premack, D. Toward empirical behavior laws. I. Positive reinforcement.
Psychological Review, 1959,66:219-233.
Rescorla, R. A., & Solomon, R. L. Two-process learning theory: Rela-
tionships between Pavlovian conditioning and instrumental learning.
Psychological Review, 1967,74:151-182.
& Wagner, A R. A theory of Pavlovian conditioning: Variation in the ef-
fectiveness of reinforcement and nonreinforcement. In A. H. Black &
W. F. Prokasy (eds.), Classical Conditioning II: Current Research
and Theory. New York: Appleton-Century-Crofts, 1972.
Roberts, W. W., & Kiess, H. O. Motivational properties of hypothalamic
aggression in cats. Journal of Comparative and Physiological
Psychology, 1964,58:187-193.
Steinberg, M. L., & Means, L. W. Hypothalamic mechanisms for sexual
aggressive, and other motivational behaviors in the opossum, Didel-
phis virginiana./ourraa/ of Comparative and Physiological
Psychology, 1967,64:1-15.
Seligman, M. E P., & Hager, J. L. (eds.). Biological boundaries of learn-
ing. New York: Appleton-Century-Crofts, 1972.
Seward, J. P. Drive, incentive, and reinforcement. Psychological Review,
1956,63:195-203.
Sheffield, F. D. A drive-induction theory of reinforcement. In R. N. Haber
(ed.), Current Research in Motivation. New York: Holt, Rinehart and
Winston, 1966.
Shettleworth, S. J. Reinforcement and the organization of behavior in
golden hamsters: Hunger, environment and food reinforcement.
Journal of Experimental Psychology: Animal Behavior Processes.
1975,1:56-87
Skinner, B. F. The generic nature of the concepts of stimulus and
response. Journal of General Psychology, 1935,12:40-65.
The Behavior of Organisms: An Experimental Analysis, New York: Ap-
pleton-Century-Crofts, 1938.
Are theories of learning necessary? Psychological Review, 1950,
57:193-216.
Science and Human Behavior. New York: Macmillan, 1953.
Cumulative Record. New York: Appleton-Century-Crofts, 1959.
Solomon, R. L., & Turner, L. H. Discriminative classical conditioning in
dogs paralyzed by curare can later control discriminative avoidance
responses in the normal state. Psychological Review, 1962, 69:202-
219.
Spence, K. W. Behavior Theory and Learning. Selective Papers. Engle-
wood Cliffs, N.J.: Prentice-Hall, 1960.
Spencer, H. The Principles of Psychology. 2 vols. New York: D. Appleton,
1872-73.
Staddon, J. E. R., & Simmelhag, V. L. The "superstition" experiment: A
reexamination of its implications for the principles of adaptive be-
havior. Psychological Review, 1971, 78:3-43.
THE BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1978), 1
51

Commentary I Bindra: A perceptual-motivational view of adaptive behavior
Sutherland, N. S., & MacKintosh, N. J. Mechanisms of Animal Discrimi-
nation Learning. New York: Academic Press, 1971.
Thorndike, E. L. Animal Intelligence. New York: Macmillan, 1911.
Tinbergen, N. The Study of Instinct. Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1951.
Tolman, E. C. Purposive Behavior in Animals and Men. New York:
Century, 1932.
Cognitive maps in rats and men. Psychological Review, 1948,55:189-
208.
There is more than one kind of learning. Psychological Review, 1949,
56:144-155.
Walker, E. L. Reinforcement - "the one ring". In J. T. Tapp (ed.), Rein-
forcement and Behavior. New York: Academic Press, 1969.
Young, P. T. Appetite, palatability and feeding habit: A critical review.
Psychological Bulletin, 1948,45:289-320.
Open Peer Commentary
Among those who will provide Continuing Commentary on this article in a later
issue is E A Asratyan. Commentaries submitted by the qualified 
professional
readership of this journal will also be considered for publication
Note: Commentary reference lists omit works already cited in target article (as
indicated by op cit)
by M. E. Bitterman,
Laboratory of Sensory Sciences, University of Hawaii, Honolulu, Hawaii 96822
Bindra's S-S contiguity theory of instrumental, learning. Bindra proposes
what is in essence an S-S contiguity theory of instrumental learning, recog-
nizing that the principal problem for any such theory is to arrange for the
translation of purely afferent linkages into action; the animal must not be left,
as Guthne (1935) put it, "buried in thought" Various solutions to this problem
have been offered in the past, and it is too bad that Bindra does not consider
their relation to his own 0 H Mowrer (1960; also this Commentary) has sug-
gested, for example, that the animal continually scans its repertoire of
responses Once initiated in this way, a previously rewarded response (Ra)
is facilitated by interoceptive feedback from the response (SR 3), which is
assumed to have acquired activating properties by contiguity with reward
Much earlier, Morgan (1894) suggested a preexisting connection between
the sensory center for the feedback from any response and the motor center
for that response (SRa-Ra) When the animal is returned to the experimental
situation (Si) and remembers the previously rewarded response (Si -SRa),
the response tends, therefore, to be initiated At the same time, the reward
(S2) is remembered (SRa-S2), and the response is facilitated by a "control
center" that reads the hedonic value of S2, an unrewarded response (Rb)
may be remembered (S-| -S p^), but it is not made because its feedback (SRI-, )
has no facilitating associations Bindra relies on a preexisting connection
between some component of Si (Sa) and Ra(Sa-Ra), which is responsible for
producing the response in the first place (Sa is the "eliciting stimulus" or ES
for Ra) Rewarding Ra ensures the contiguity of Sa with reward, in conse-
quence of which Sa acquires "incentive-motivational" properties that
facilitate Ra
What all of these theories have in common is the assumption of condi-
tioned activation - the occurrence of Ra is held to be facilitated because
some stimulus (or sensory center) acquires activating properties as a result
of pairing with reward They differ as to how Ra is selectively activated It
should be noted in passing that Bindra's dichotomy of response-reinforce-
ment and incentive-motivational theories is a false one Hull (1952) and
Spence (1956) were no less incentive-motivational theorists than is Bindra,
although they traced the acquisition of incentive-motivational properties to
S-R (S-rG) rather than to S-S linkages and the selection of rewarded
responses to other S-R linkages established and strengthened in the course
of training. In any case, all of these theories face a common difficulty If, with
food as R2, we accept salivation as an index of the incentive-motivational
properties acquired by some afferent precursor of Ra, the theories lead us to
expect that Ra will always be preceded, or at least accompanied, by saliva-
tion, but that is not the case For example, Ellison and Konorski (1964)
trained dogs to press a panel in response to one stimulus, the ninth press
producing a second stimulus that soon was followed (noncontingently) by
food The animals pressed but did not salivate to the first stimulus, and when
the second stimulus was turned on they salivated but did not press As
Mackintosh (1974; also this Commentary) has recently concluded in a review
of this literature, the "data make it difficult to see how the initiation of an
instrumental chain of responses can be motivated by an incentive system
whose operation is in any way directly mirrored by overt CRs " One might
argue, of course, that other measures would give results more favorable to
these theories, but if incentive-motivational properties are conditioned ac-
cording to the same laws as salivation, why should results for other measures
be different? The results for salivation are, in fact, just what conditioning
theory would lead us to expect; in instrumental training, reward is best
predicted, not by the sensory antecedents of the rewarded response, but by
its sensory consequences
While Bindra's unique contribution to the theory of instrumental learning is
the idea of a preexisting connection between some eliciting stimulus and the
rewarded response that is activated as the stimulus acquires incentive-moti-
vational properties by contiguity with reward, he relies heavily on another
and more familiar mechanism of behavioral change: as the ES is paired with
reward, it comes also to elicit responses like those elicited by the reward it-
self, among the most important of which, apparently, is approach (Birch &
Bitterman, 1949) "The most general principle determining response produc-
tion," Bindra tells us, is that "an animal will move toward an ES that is of
greater appetitive motivational valence 
than other ESs in that situation at
that time." He notes that conditioned approach alone will account for instru-
mental performance in locomotor situations, such as runway or maze, in
which the animal is rewarded for going to a particular place, and then asserts
that the learning of manipulative responses, such as pressing a lever or pull-
ing a chain, is like maze learning except that "finer perceptual differentia-
tions" are required Is manipulative learning a special case of conditioned
approach, or are locomotor and manipulative learning alike only in that both
involve "stimulus-stimulus correlation?" The relation between the two kinds
of task and the mechanisms of mastery is far from clear
Although Bindra criticizes response-reinforcement theorists for defining
responses in terms of "measurable environmental outcomes" rather than
"specific movements," he himself is apt to define them in the same way-
see, for example, his list of "transactional acts" (eating, struggling to get free
of a predator) or instrumental responses (walking, climbing, lever-pressing)
There seems, in fact, to be no other practical way of thinking about behavior
Furthermore, for all his talk about the "fresh construction" of responses each
time they occur, Bindra fails in my opinion to provide any new insight into the
problem of response equivalence that plagues all connectionist theories (of
which Bindra's certainly is one) Mere variability is not very difficult to deal
with; one has only to assume that a range of stimuli and a range of move-
ments with a common environmental effect become involved in the learning
over a series of trials (Hull, 1943). The real difficulty is presented by the oc-
currence of appropriate movements clearly outside the range of those
displayed in training when new constraints are imposed on the animal, as,
for example, when a monkey that has been trained to operate a mechanism
with one hand operates it successfully with the other hand upon being de-
prived of the use of the first (Lashley, 1924). I find no solution to this problem
in Bindra's theory, nor for that matter even the promise of a solution in any
nonconnectionist theory
REFERENCES
Birch, H. G., and Bitterman, M. E. Reinforcement and learning: The
process of sensory integration. Psychological Review. 56:292-308,
1949.
Ellison, D. G., and Konorski, J. Separation of salivary and motor responses
in instrumental conditioning. Science. 146:1071-2.1964.
Guthrie, E. R. The Psychology of Learning. New York, Harper & Brothers,
1935.
Hull, C. L. Principles of Behavior. New York: D. Appleton-Century Com-
pany, 1943.
A Behavior System. New Haven, Conn., Yale University Press, 1952.
Lashley, K. S. Studies of cerebral functions in learning. IV. The theory
that synaptic resistance is reduced by the passage of the nerve im-
pulse. Psychological Review. 31:360-75.1924.
Mackintosh, N. J. The Psychology of Animal Learning. New York,
Academic Press, 1974.
Mowrer, O. H. Learning Theory and Behavior. New York, John Wiley and
Sons, 1960.
Spence, K. W. Behavior Theory and Conditioning. New Haven, Conn.,
Yale University Press, 1956.
52
THE BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1978), 1

Commentary/ Bindra: A perceptual-motivational view of adaptive behavior
by A. H. Black
Department of Psychology, McMaster University, Hamilton, Ontario, Canada LBS
4K1
Is Bindra's theory of adaptive behavior radical enough? There is much to
be admired in Bindra's effort to formulate a new theory of how adaptive be-
havior is produced-in particular, the attempt to deal with complex
psychological processes in a rigourous and consistent manner There are,
however, some questions raised by the formulation These fall into two cate-
gories The first is concerned with the details of the formulation The second
asks whether Bindra has gone far enough in breaking with the behaviouristic
tradition
1 Bindra's formulation 
Bindra rejects the position that particular
responses are reinforced because it does not deal with the fact that animals
can substitute one act for another in order to reach a goal without being
specifically trained to do so Bindra labels this "motor equivalence" and
deals with it under the general heading of the flexibility of adaptive beha-
viour I do not want to argue with Bindra's point that S-R formulations cannot
deal with response flexibility, although one might do so, I suppose, by call-
ing upon notions such as the habit family hierarchy Rather, I would question
Bindra's formulation because it seems to have difficulties in accounting for
the specificity of the effects of reinforcement
Suppose that one shapes a rat to raise one limb, then to lower it, and so on
Bindra's account of such learning is as follows An animal learns correlations
between stimuli that elicit a given act and reinforcing outcomes that follow
the act The central representations of these stimuli acquire incentive motiva-
tional properties because they predict reinforcing outcomes As a result, the
animal's motivational states biases it to attend to the eliciting stimuli which
elicit the appropriate act It seems to me that this view implies that two dif-
ferent stimuli must have been paired with the reinforcing outcome in order for
two responses to have been elicited, because all other factors were pre-
sumably the same during the shaping of each response To identify the elicit-
ing stimulus with the response itself won't do for obvious reasons To identify
the eliciting stimulus with the idea of the response would help, but Bindra re-
jects this because, I think, it would result in his theory's becoming indistin-
guishable from the response reinforcer theory for all practical purposes The
eliciting stimuli must, therefore, be environmental But what are the specific
stimuli that elicit limb raising, and what are the specific stimuli that elicited
limb lowering? The identification of such eliciting stimuli is crucial to
Bindra's formulation 
But they are not identified 
Bindra criticizes the
response-reinforcement theories because "they do not come to grips with the
problem of how a new stimulus-response relation actually gets learned " The
elicitation principle that Bindra proposes (and which he points out has not
really been investigated) is too vague to provide much of an improvement
One may raise the same question in another way Bindra notes that ani-
mals learn about the correlation between responses and outcomes Suppose
that the following sequence of events and responses is reinforced: stimulus
1, stimulus 2, response 1, reinforcement Why not assume that the central
representation of the response (or the idea of performing the response, to put
it another way) is primed by stimulus 2, and that this can influence response
performance? Why is priming by some unspecified eliciting stimulus a more
satisfactory assumption?
2 The break with tradition 
In some sense, Bindra's formulation is a
radical break with the response-reinforcement view He tries to explain
instrumental learning as a form of learning about the relationships among
certain representations of stimuli But it is not radical enough, I think, on two
counts
First, he does not, it seems to me, permit the brain to carry out operations
much more complex than those specified by traditional learning theorists-
in particular learning about correlations What about, for example, the sorts
of things Tolman talked about -the formation of spatial cognitive maps, and
the complex operations that can be performed on such maps?
More important, Bindra's formulation admits to only one form of learning -
about correlations among central representations of stimuli "A main tenet of
the proposed framework is that building contingency-organization rep-
resentations of such stimulus-stimulus (ES1.ES2) correlations is the sole
basis of learned modifications of behavior" It seems to me more satisfactory
to accept that animals can learn different things under different circum-
stances, and, as a consequence, employ different strategies to solve a given
problem One might argue, for example, that animals learn about correla-
tions among stimuli, some of which elicit responses under one set of circum-
stances, and may form S-R associations under other circumstances, and
perhaps both under still other circumstances When an animal is reinforced
in a given arm of a T-maze, it may associate that location with food and move
toward that location because of the location's "appetitive motivational va-
lence," or it may learn to make a particular right or left turn at the choice
point, and so on Data reported by Hicks (1964) and Mackintosh (1964; see
also this Commentary) suggest that animals learn about locations during the
early stages of training in the T-maze and learn particular turns after longer
periods of training In short, perceptual-motivational learning affects adap-
tive behaviour under one set of conditions and response-reinforcement
learning under another A theory which incorporates the possibility for dif-
ferent types of learning is more satisfactory, at least for me, than the single
type of learning theory proposed by Bindra
REFERENCES
Hicks, L. H. Effects of overtraining on acquisition and reversal of place
and response learning. Psychological Reports, 1964,15,459-462.
Mackintosh, N. J. "Overtraining, transfer to proprioceptive control and
position reversal Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psychology,
1964,16,26-36.
by Robert C. Bolles
Department of Psychology, University of Washington, Seattle, Wash 98195
The more things change . . . This paper, Bindra's latest theoretical state-
ment, provides a clear view of the position he has been developing for the
last few years I am quite in sympathy with this theoretical position and would
endorse several of its basic tenets I heartily approve of Bindra's rejection of
the response as the fundamental unit of learning and his reciprocal em-
phasis on stimulus learning I like his rejection of reinforcement mechanisms
and his emphasis on complementary motivational mechanisms I also share
Bindra's belief that the long-neglected problem of response production now
demands the careful attention of learning theorists, and I was most interested
to see how he addressed this problem I enjoyed reading the paper
But I had a strange feeling that I had been through it all before-not in
Bindra's writings, but somewhere else Where? Was it d6ja vu? No, I finally
realized, it was Guthrie Guthrie had said it all back in 1935 I had not
recognized it at first because the language was so different But it was
Guthrie all right Bindra uses quite different language and he is concerned
with quite different behavioral phenomena, but these superficial differences
notwithstanding, his theory is clearly Guthrian in content, just as Estes'
superficially different mathematical learning theory was clearly Guthrian
The flavor is unmistakable; Bindra is a Guthrian! Consider the following
points:
Reinforcement Bindra has no special reinforcement mechanism; when
learning occurs it is said to be due entirely to experience The critical feature
of experience is correlation rather than contiguity, and that is a real dif-
ference between Bindra and Guthrie
Motivation Bindra has no drive-type of motivator; there is no energizing ef-
fect of deprivation or intense stimulation 
Such treatments produce
organismic conditions that act as gates enabling some stimuli rather than
others to be effective The stimuli most affected by this switching action are
"incentive" stimuli, which are known by their capacity to elicit behavior In ef-
fect, then, motivation is created by the presence of certain behavior-eliciting
stimuli; for Guthrie, too, motivation was created by the presence of what he
called "maintaining stimuli" And in both theories, motivation is simply
manifest in the occurrence of certain behaviors
The stimulus The situation is too molar for Bindra's explanatory purposes
Stimulus objects are too molar Even stimulus dimensions and features will
not suffice The stimulus field is viewed, as Guthrie viewed it, as an ever-
changing panorama of minute events, partly external and partly internal Ele-
ments in this vast, complex field come and go as the organism moves about
and changes its posture and orienting behaviors This is pure Guthrie While
Guthrie had trouble specifying before the fact what the effective stimulus
was, Bindra must have still more trouble, because his stimulus field can in-
clude not only stimulus elements actually present but also previously
experienced elements that have been associated with those actually
present
The response. Behavior is also viewed atomistically Actions are com-
posed of acts, which are events lasting no more than half a second After
THE BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1978), 1
53

Commentary/ Bindra: A perceptual-motivational view of adaptive behavior
raising our hopes by bringing up the question of response production,
Bindra dashes them by announcing that responses are elicited by eliciting
stimuli Just how the translation from stimulus to response is made is not
specified; this awaits further investigation Meanwhile, the response is
assumed to occur because of the eliciting stimulus This is precisely the kind
of relationship that Guthrie called an S-R association
Reductionism Both Bindra and Guthrie indicate that ultimate reality lies in
the nervous system, and that current psychological theorizing is little more
than a stopgap measure until the operation of the nervous system is better
understood
Timeliness At a time when nearly everyone believed in the S-R associa-
tion, Guthrie attributed all learning to the acquisition of S-R associations To-
day, when S-S mechanisms are in vogue, Bindra attributes all learning to the
acquisition of knowledge about stimulus events and their correlations This
shift from response learning to stimulus learning appears to be a major
change in content But is it such a big change, or is it more a matter of
perspective and terminology? Between stimulus input and response output
Bindra interposes two theoretical linkages, a learned one to a hypothetical
effective stimulus (pexgo) and a fixed one from there to the response Guthrie
treated the second linkage as learned rather than fixed, but it was a strange
one-trial, all-or-none kind of learning For Guthrie, the trial by trial changes
that occur in behavior were due to the changing relationship between the
input stimuli presented to the animal and the effective stimuli that actually
control behavior But this is just Bindra's first, learned linkage Thus, the dif-
ference between the theories seems to be more semantic than syntactical
Complexity By making all learning stimulus learning and by emphasizing
the enormous wealth of stimuli that might be effective at any given moment,
Bindra has put the entire burden of explaining the complexity of behavior on
the complex organization of the stimulus field Then the syntactical rules that
generate behavior can be made simple indeed This was also Guthrie's
strategy
Testability Guthrie's theory has stood for more than 40 years, almost
unscathed by the results of laboratory investigation. Bindra's renovation
should likewise stand for many years to come
REFERENCE
Guthrie, E. R., Association by contiguity. Reprinted in: Koch, S. (Ed.),
Psychology: A Study of a Science, New York: McGraw-Hill, 1957, 92-
157.
by D. A. Booth
Department of Psychology, University of Birmingham, P O Box 363,
Birmingham B15 2TT, England
A long stride towards sense in psychology. 
Behavior is the pattern of
responses to an interpreted complex of current stimuli Behavior is acquired
by classical conditioning, that is, the building of representations of the con-
tingencies amongst stimuli
Bindra's advocacy of these two theses, central to his position, is an im-
portant contribution to the current development of behavioral and brain
sciences Moreover, these themes now appear more widely and are pushed
further than Bindra's account implies The commonsense realistic view of
mind and behavior has been crippled for two centuries or more by fallacies
from physicalist and dualist metaphysics, but scientific theorising and ex-
perimental design is at last returning to reality. Thus, Bindra has my general
support-while he also has my specific criticisms for reflecting the new
mood in only a limited way He adds physiologising and antimentalism,
which, in my view, are otiose He retains unnecessary elements of drive
theory He does not attempt to defend conditioning theory against charges
that it is cumbersome and slippery I take these limitations briefly in turn
Bindra's analysis is behavior theory Yet, even more in his book (1976 op
cit) than in this article, he presents his view as brain theory Dressing one up
as the other helps neither psychology nor neuroscience, nor does it advance
the final defeat of dualism 
The neurologising beloved of McGill
psychologists and Russian conditioners typically neither adds to the be-
havioral predictions from the theory nor provides neuroscientists with
manageable experimental issues The help that the neuroscientist currently
needs from the psychologist is accurate detailing of the brain's input-output
relationships - the mental processes within behavioral organisation Further-
more, psychology will not be reduced to neurophysiology; the two will be
married In my specialty at least (motivation), no such marriage has yet even
been consummated (Booth, 1976, pp 453-58; Friedman & Strieker, 1976)
Decades after the later Wittgenstein (1953), Bindra (not alone) regards
percepts, thoughts, concepts, desires, and the like as occult entities or
ghostly machinations At least his terminology suffers in consequence
Words like "pexgo," "gnostic assembly," and "central motive state" mean
what percept, belief, and motivational or emotional state have ordinarily
meant, despite what bad philosophy and its manifestations in introspec-
tionist and environmentalist psychologies have tried to twist them to mean
Thinking or other mental activity does not subsist in some unobservable
nonbehavioral world Of course, the detailed organisation of someone's
thoughtful silence and immobility is not usually evident from the instan-
taneous physical appearance of that person and his situation - but then
neither is the nature of almost any piece of behavior
Bindra's account of action seems weakened by this residual physical ism,
notwithstanding his appreciation for Lashley's and Skinner's awareness of
the problem of response equivalence There can be no burking the fact that
action is intentional-that is, directed by the perceived consequences of
physical movement or nonmovement of limb, larynx, or whatever. Giving an
account of such behavioral structures is in the first instance a problem in
psychology, and not in neurology, as Bindra takes it Furthermore, the mere
bundling of involuntary reactions may not create intentionality In his concern
to refute response-reinforcement learning, Bindra appears to regard the no-
tion that a reinforced response can contribute to a conditioned incentive
stimulus complex as more of a problem than learning to understand conven-
tional symbols, for example Where I am in accord with Bindra is in his
program of working out the results of assuming that intentional aspects of be-
havior are based on the same learning mechanism as involuntary aspects of
behavior 
Uttley (1976), for example, has illustrated this approach in
mathematical brain theory, relating it to both neurophysiology and the
Rescorla-Wagner conditioning theory. Bolles's (1976 and this Commentary)
new edition of Theory of motivation is remarkable for its persistence in advo-
cacy of the R-S "reinforcement" view of learning in the face of repeated ad-
missions that the S-S "associative" analysis does at least as well Motiva-
tions and emotions, operants and respondents, could both be selected into
the stream of behavior by biases resulting from conditioned expectancies
Bindra follows the tradition that bodily states of the organism set the effec-
tiveness or otherwise of external stimuli I have suggested that we could take
the S-S view even more radically and consider the possibility that any per-
ceptible bodily state can also be a conditioned or unconditioned stimulus
that ••elicits behavior in conjunction with other eliciting stimuli from the
external environment (Booth, 1977a,b) Extreme drive states and their
energising of behavipr or limiting of learning have been studied, but the
more relevant exploration of the normal range of need states or hormonal or
drugged conditions as stimuli for selecting behavior has hardly begun
Bindra's account of conditioned motivation seems to assume that condi-
tioning is stimulus substitution, not adaptive expectancy formation (his
Figure 
1) 
Conditioned responses are different from unconditioned
responses, not only because the eliciting stimuli are presented in different
contexts, as Bindra rightly emphasizes, but also because the appropriate
reaction inbuilt to a predictive stimulus is not necessarily the same as the
reaction inbuilt to the predicted stimulus
Bindra's view that "what an animal does depends on what it perceives"
and on what perception it has acquired, is being applied much more widely
than Bindra indicates, even in the much broader treatment in his book (1976
op cit) 
Miller, Galanter, and Pribram (1960) overprecipitately rejected all
forms of conditioning theory as incompatible with the hierarchy that ap-
peared necessary to action and cognition The motivational processes
generally treated hierarchically by ethologists can be accounted for by
parallel S-R connections in interaction, e g by reciprocal inhibition (Ludlow,
1976) A wide range of human problem-solving behavior can be described in
terms of minimally structured collections of situation-act connections
(Newell & Simon, 1972) Such an organisation is highly flexible and adaptive
because the particular connection that is operative at any instant is the one
that is most closely specified by the momentary situation that has been
created by the environment and the previous operation of other connections
Such a theoretical approach to cognition has the great advantage that it can
be operationalised in a way that can be checked directly against experi-
mental results (including computer simulation if desired) Like Harrison
(1972), I have urged (against the psycholinguistic establishment) that
54
THE BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1978), 1

Commentary/ Bindra: A perceptual-motivational view of adaptive behavior
mechanisms of language reception and production should be treated in
similar terms, not just at the early stage when the infant's language is ob-
viously S-R, but even in adulthood (Booth, 1978) With language, as with
other cognitive behavior, theories based on complex hierarchical fixtures
may have more to do with logic than with mental processes
A realistic theory of human behavior-even of the rat's spontaneous
behavior-may have to be cumbersome Collation of myriad facts and
execution of routine calculations within a theory may have to be delegated to
computer programs This can cause antagonism Yet simplistic theory is de-
lusion Minds and brains are highly engineered universes Nevertheless,
there is a further issue of whether conditioning theory is unnecessarily cum-
bersome Suppes's (1969) reduction of finite automata (and hence all
specifiable behavior) to a theory of S-S conditioning and S-R processing has
been countered by Arbib (1969) as implausibly time-consuming because of
a highly constrained learning process Suppes and Scandura have their own
ripostes (Scandura, 1976) and it would be interesting to have Bindra's
Clearly, Bindra would not permit us to compare cognition with a discrete ap-
proach to a single conditioned incentive stimulus It would be foolish to com-
pare motor control with elicitation of a reflex or perception with the firing of a
bug detector, and yet motor and perceptual integration are readily treated as
combinations of reflex-mediating mechanisms and of detector-type neural
connections, respectively [cf Kupfermann and Weiss, this issue] Two areas
in which the complexity of coordinating such theorising to experiment seems
to be adequately tackled would be applications of Newell and Simon's ap-
proach in developmental psychology (e g , Young, 1975) and the editor of
the Journal of Experimental Psychology Animal Behavior Processes presid-
ing over experimental rivalries between his own and other variants of condi-
tioning theory
This last example may also be helping to refute the notion that "cognitive"
behavior theory is too slippery to be scientifically useful Nevertheless,
Bindra's approach, and any liberal expectancy conditioning or causal per-
ception theory of behavior, should be recognised as in part a paradigm, not a
specific set of hypotheses Furthermore, the conditioning paradigm can
explain anything, just like the Skinnerian radical environmentalist language,
because each is a paradigm centred on a tautology For Skinner, an operant
is reinforceable behavior and a reinforcement is what maintains behavior
(and al! behavior is apparently prejudged operant until proved otherwise) In
conditioning theory, the circular definition would be that the conditioning
stimulus (or US) is whatever consequence of a stimulus (the CS) changes the
response to that CS, and the changed response (or CR) is whatever behavior
the CS comes to elicit when the CS-US contingency is imposed In both
cases, the tautology is an apparatus for getting a grip on the particular facts
Bindra has plenty of good criticisms of particular response-reinforcement
hypotheses However, in the end neither his approach nor his rival will be
refuted, I suspect One will prove more effective to elaborate than the other
REFERENCES
Arbib, M. A. Memory limitations of stimulus-response models.
Psychological Review. 76:507-10. 1969.
Bolles, R C. Theory of Motivation, 2nd ed Harper & Row, New York,
1976.
Booth, D A. Approaches to feeding control. In: T. Silverstone (ed.), Ap-
petite and Food Intake Abakon, West Berlin, 1976.
Satiety and appetite are conditioned reactions. Psychosomatic
Medicine. 39:76-81. 1977 (a).
Appetite and satiety as metabolic expectancies In: Y Katsuki, M Sato,
S Takagi, and Y. Oomura (eds.), Food Intake and Chemical Senses.
University Park Press, Baltimore, 1977 (b).
Language acquisition as the addition of verbal routines. In: P. T. Smith
and R. N. Campbell (eds.), Psychology of language. Plenum, New
York, 1978.
Friedman, M. I., and Strieker, E. M. The physiological psychology of
hunger: A physiological perspective. Psychological Review. 83:409-
31. 1976.
Harrison, B. Meaning and Structure: An Essay in the Philosophy of Lan-
guage. Harper & Row, New York, 1972.
Ludlow, A. R. The behaviour of a model animal. Behaviour. 58:131-72.
1976.
Miller, G. A., Galanter, E., and Pribram, K. Plans and the Structure of Be-
havior. Holt, Rinehart & Winston, New York, 1960.
Newell, A. & Simon, H A. Human problem solving. Prentice-Hall, En-
gelwood Cliffs, N.J , 1972.
Scandura, J M. (ed.). Structural learning, II Issues and approaches
Gordon & Breach, New York, 1976.
Suppes, P. Stimulus-response theory of finite automata. Journal of
Mathematical Psychology. 6:327-55. 1969.
Uttley, A. M. Neurophysiological predictions of a two-pathway informon
theory of neural conditioning. Brain Research. 102:55-70. 1976.
Wittgenstein, L. Philosophical Investigations. Blackwell's, Oxford, 1953.
by A. Charles Catania
Department of Psychology, University of Maryland, Baltimore County, Baltimore,
Md 21228
What constitutes explanation in psychology. I have no inclination to argue
that behavior is modified through contiguity of responses with hedonic
stimuli, or that learning consists of strengthening neural connections
between central representations of stimuli and central representations of
responses, or that the mechanism of response production involves some
kind of connection between gnostic organizations and particular responses
Yet these are the terms in which Bindra characterizes the "response-
reinforcement idea," and it is for these conceptions that he is proposing "in-
centive-motivational" alternatives I find so little of the theoretical framework
of the contemporary experimental analysis of behavior represented in either
of the positions outlined by Bindra that the temptation is to say nothing
Models of the C N S (conceptual nervous system) have been recurrent fea-
tures in the history of learning theory, but except for Sherrington's deduction
of the existence of the synapse from behavioral data, such models have not
much contributed to our progress
The crux of the problem seems to lie with what constitutes explanation in
psychology Bindra hints at this when he contrasts his views with those of
other learning theorists; his references to Skinner seem more peripheral than
those to others such as Hull and Mowrer (see also this Commentary) He
states that Skinner was "less interested in the explanation of behavior and
more in the principles of its control," and that the concept of the operant
"sacrificed explanation to the empirical goal of enunciating descriptive
principles " But without descriptive principles based on empirical findings,
what would there be to explain? It is curious that those who give priority to
explanation over description see even the descriptive concepts of other
theorists as explanatory Thus, Bindra says, "If the focus is on explaining the
flexibility of adaptive behavior, the response-reinforcement idea must be
completely abandoned " The contemporary operant view of reinforcement,
however, is not explanatory at all Instead, reinforcement is a name for a
particular type of behavioral phenomenon When we have shown that a
response has become more likeiy because the response has produced a
particular consequence, we say that the response has been reinforced The
name involves no commitment to how widespread this phenomenon is in the
behavior of organisms, nor does it rule out the possibility that changes in
behavior can occur in other ways In this context, Bindra's critique of the
"response-reinforcement idea" seems simply irrelevant
The history of learning theory includes many debates over the nature of
explanation One argument is that research effort can be misdirected by
theories that give the appearance of explanation In this context, consider the
explanatory substance of Bindra's account For example, in discussing moti-
vational influence, Bindra states that "the generation of a motivational state
makes certain environmental stimuli, or some features of those stimuli, rela-
tively more effective than they would otherwise be at that time " But how can
we define motivational state? Clearly, we speak of motivation when we are
considering those variables that change the relative effectiveness of stimuli
as reinforcers or as punishers (Bindra would prefer to speak of their hedonic
valence ) In Bindra's statement, therefore, I find not an explanation of some
property of behavior, but rather an indirect definition of motivation Yet for
Bindra the central motivational state now takes on a life of its own, and in
other places becomes part of the explanation of behavior The tautology that
is implicit in such theorizing sometimes even becomes explicit (For
example, when Bindra states that "Assuming that all the factors except the
external environmental are held constant, the production of any action will
depend critically on the presence of a certain stimulus complex in the situa-
tion," or that "Other things remaining constant, what an animal does depends
on what it perceives ")
Related problems exist with valences and salience and other terms, but for
me Bindra's most critical terminology is that of hedonic stimuli There are two
THE BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1978), 1
55

Commentary/ Bindra: A perceptual-motivational view of adaptive behavior
major empirical developments that bear on the nature of those stimuli that we
call reinforcing or punishing, and I do not see how Bindra's system deals
with them In both instances, the difficulty is that such stimuli are relatively
and not absolutely defined Bindra admits the relativity of "motivational va-
lences," but for him "hedonic 
stimuli have the property of reliably produc-
ing appetitive or aversive reactions and being affectively pleasing or dis-
comforting They include sights, sounds, tastes, odors, temperatures, and
cutaneous textures that are provided by such biologically important objects,
events, and situations as food, water, a sexual partner, a nest, the call of a
distressed offspring, the shape of a predator, and injurious levels of heat or
cold " I do not see how Bindra's account deals with the reversibility of rein-
forcers, as demonstrated by Premack, or with the maintenance of behavior by
schedules of response-produced aversive events, as demonstrated by
Kelleher and Morse Premack, for example, has shown that running can rein-
force a rat's drinking or drinking can reinforce its running, depending on the
organism's relative deprivation of drinking or running How, then, can run-
ning and drinking be classified in terms of Bindra's distinction between
transactional and instrumental responses? Kelleher and Morse have shown
that an electric shock that suppresses or punishes a monkey's lever presses
when every press produces shock generates high rates of responding when
presses produce shock according to a 10-minute fixed-interval schedule
How does the language of incentive or hedonism help us to deal with these
different effects of electric shock? My guess is that these findings will have
substantial impact on the fundamental concepts of the analysis of behavior,
but I do not see much recognition of or room for them in Bindra's account
(Kelleher & Morse, 1968; Premack, 1959op cit)
Over roughly the past two decades, psychology has been suffering from an
epidemic of paradigm clashes The major clash, of course, was between
cognitive psychology and behaviorism, as shown by Chomsky's 1959 review
of Skinner's Verbal Behavior The "alternative framework" proposed by
Bindra, with its heavy emphasis on perception, provides another instance,
characterized as a clash between "response-reinforcement" and "incentive-
motivation" paradigms Bindra speaks of the "climate of opinion in which the
response-reinforcement framework or paradigm came to dominate both the
theoretical and practical aspects of the study of behavior" and which
"cushioned the response-reinforcement framework from a variety of
criticisms that were articulated against it over nearly half a century" One
irony is that a compelling issue in Chomsky's psycholinguistics is not dealt
with in Bindra's system Chomsky had objected to behavioral accounts in
terms of stimulus-response associations (S-R theories) on the grounds that
they were inadequate to the flexibility of verbal behavior Associative chains,
described in terms of sequential dependencies or Markov processes, could
not generate grammatical structure 
Chomsky's criticisms were not
particularly relevant to Skinner's behavioral account because Skinner was
not an S-R theorist But they are relevant to Bindra because the treatment of
sequential behavior as chaining remains problematical whether the
sequences are generated as S-R units through feedback from the periphery
or are moved inside as successively activated central systems (Bindra's
pexgos) Perhaps this issue could be dealt with in terms of branching and
converging concurrent sequences, but I do not see any such developments
as part of Bindra's system
Pexgos and motivational states are not behavior, and Bindra's account of
the production of responses or act sequences by these central organizations
allows so many degrees of freedom that it can hardly be called explanation
The concepts are necessarily anchored only remotely to the phenomena of
behavior For this reason, I find Bindra's account more reactionary than revo-
lutionary Although it is vastly different in detail, its philosophy of science has
more in common with Hull than with the contemporary analysis of behavior
Cognitive and behavioral approaches exist in great variety, and we will un-
doubtedly continue for some time to hear the differences among them
spoken of in terms of paradigm clashes We have yet to establish an effective
language for the science of behavior, and that task must be one of our
highest priorities An effective descriptive system may change our criteria for
explanation; we will look for behavioral explanations of behavioral events,
instead of appealing to alternative levels of analysis that have only
hypothetical status For example, it is a kind of explanation to say that a
particular response occurred because it was elicited rather than because it
was reinforced Such distinctions are an essential component of an experi-
mental analysis, but they are attenuated by accounts, like Bindra's, that
assume an eliciting stimulus complex as part of the explanation of every act
I believe that in the long run the advantage will go to those approaches that
stay close to the subject matter of behavior Perhaps the perspective to be
gained will make the clashes discussed here seem like little more than skir-
mishes on the outskirts The defense of the experimental analysis of behavior
will certainly remain simple as long as attacks fall only on other varieties of
behaviorism, with which it has little in common
REFERENCES
Chomsky, N. Review of B. F. Skinner's Verbal Behavior. Language, 1959,
35, 26-58.
Kelleher, R. T. & Morse, W. H. Schedules using noxious stimuli: III.
Responding maintained with response-produced shocks. Journal of
the Experimental Analysis of Behavior, 1968,11, 819-838.
by Daniel C. Dennett
Department of Philosophy, Tufts University, Medford, Mass 02155
Requisition for a pexgo. Bindra's points about the flaws in his predecessors
are well taken - and could be taken farther - but his own view, for all its ap-
parent novelty, has something naggingly familiar about it What is it exactly
that makes the proposed theory look so old-fashioned (to me)? I think the
answer can be seen if we reflect on a trend discernible in the history of be-
haviorism As Bindra points out, such phenomena as latent learning and
response substitution soon showed behaviorists that the laws and
mechanisms proposed were insufficient; animals (even rats) were too smart
to be explicable by the simple mechanistic models of reinforcement and
conditioning then available Skinner's response, as Bindra notes, was to
retreat from models of conditioning mechanisms and settle for an analysis of
"functional relations," and, as Bindra observes, this evaded "the funda-
mental problem of how adaptive behavior is put together" For those who did
not follow Skinner's lead, but continued to grapple with the "fundamental
problem," the result was an inexorable if reluctant migration of behavioristic
theory toward more "cognitive" characterizations of the theoretical entities
posited (See Broadbent, 1961; Taylor, 1964 and BBS 1:2; and Dennett, 1975,
for overviews of this trend from different perspectives )
The rationale for this trend can be seen more clearly in retrospect than it
could be at the time, especially now that cognitive or intentional (Dennett,
1971; Haugeland, this volume, next issue, forthcoming) formulations are no
longer viewed with horror It was usually easy enough for the behaviorist to
say (in the privacy of his own room) what the shortcomings of his particular
theoretical entities were: they did not vary, but remained constant (as they
ought to have) in rough concomitance with what one would call the perceiv-
able meaning of the situation, if one could only permit oneself such locu-
tions One had hoped for laws of nature, on the model of the laws of chemical
combination for instance, but when the laws that suggested themselves
turned out not to handle the data, a subtle and relatively unrecognized (one
might even say repressed) shift in tactic occurred: the search for laws of na-
ture relating presumably simple theoretical entities (e g , stimuli and
responses) was displaced by what in retrospect can be seen to have been an
effort to design theoretical entities of some complexity with the requisite
powers to accommodate the data It was a shift, in Haugeland's terms, (this
volume, next issue, forthcoming) from a derivational-nomological enterprise
to a systematic enterprise, but without abandoning the trappings and
preconceptions of the former style of science Thus a premium was still
placed on framing laws to relate the theoretical entities and on equations to
characterize their interaction, even though what was being done was
essentially system-designing at ever more cognitive, less mechanistic levels
of abstraction As Bindra says: "The general thrust of such concepts (e g ,
cognition, expectancy, emotion, etc ) is that the motor output comprising a
response is separated from current sensory inflow by the intervention of
some central system of knowledge or motivation, and it is this system, not
sensory-motor associations, that determines what the response will be It is
assumed that such a central system somehow flexibly adjusts the motor
output to the ever-changing stimulus and organism conditions "
Somehow, but how? The question invites speculation about systems:
"what if we tried to do it with some parts with functions A,B,C, 
?" What
Bindra offers us is a fairly advanced set of design proposals in this tradition,
but still couched in vestigial "laws of nature" talk
What this tends to conceal, from theorist and onlooker alike, is that the
design proposals are not full-fledged structural blueprints {the end-product
56
THE BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1978), 1

Commentary/ Bindra: A perceptual-motivational view of adaptive behavior
of a solved design problem), but an elaborate collection of functional
specifications of sub-system parts, specifications that set the problem for the
designer, rather than solve it For instance, Bindra says, "According to the in-
centive-motivation hypothesis, 
a pexgo of a particular stimulus (say, S2)
generates a pexgo of a hedonic stimulus (sH) and thereby generates the
same motivation (central motive state or cms) as is normally generated by
the hedonic stimulus (SH) itself; this central motive state, in combination with
the detailed sensory-spatial features of the situation, then determines what
response will emerge " This is presented as a hypothesis (a sketch of a law
to be tested), when in fact it can only be viewed as a sketch of a design pro-
posal the feasibility of which is utterly uncertain because of the semi-
disguised intentionalistic characterization of the sub-system parts and func-
tions
The disguises come off when one asks what the equivalence classes are
and what the individuating characteristics of the entity-types are What
makes a pexgo a pexgo of a stimulus S2 (i e , a stimulus of type S2- - a solu-
tion to the problem of stimulus generalization or pattern recognition is
presupposed from the outset)? Not merely that the pexgo was simply caused
or triggered by an S2 type stimulus, for pexgos are representations of stimuli
or stimulus situations (Direction to the engineer: make me some pexgos to
represent each important type of stimulus, please) Next, this pexgo
"generates" a pexgo of the hedonic stimulus (sH) (Note to engineer: do not
forget to build in a conditionable hedonic-stimulus-pexgo generator as part
of each pexgo ) And this thereby ("thereby" because that is the way Wought
to work) "generates the same motivation (central motive state or cms) as is
normally generated by the hedonic stimulus (SH) itself 
" What counts as
same central motive state? Our equivalence class here is undisguisedly
intentional: a particular cms is a token of a particular cms-type if and only if
that token has the function of determining "in combination with the detailed
sensory-spatial features of the situation" a response appropriate to that
particular cms type (See Dennett, 1971, on intentionality and appeals to ap-
propriateness )
Is it possible to design parts with these features and powers and then get
them to work together in the ways proposed? Who knows? One might get
some hint of the answer by turning Bindra's proposal over to the Artificial In-
telligence (A I) types (see Pylyshyn et al , this issue), whose stock in trade is
taking such sketchy design proposals and trying to come up with ways of im-
plementing them But I suspect we will not have to wait long for an answer
The sorts of suggestions Bindra makes seem to me to propose structures
much less sophisticated than structures already known by the A I community
not to be powerful enough to model very intelligent behavior I do not expect
that they wili believe Bindra when he claims that '"cognitions' postulated to
account for complex forms of perception, meaning, recall, and problem solv-
ing are ultimately constellations of overlapping and nested contingency or-
ganizations, each developed by the observation of stimulus-stimulus rela-
tions in a simple learning experiment"
There is an abundance of reasons for viewing askance the freewheeling
system-designing of the A I school, but one makes a mistake if one contrasts
that enterprise with the apparently "more scientific," apparently law-seeking
enterprise instanced here by Bindra, for the two are really the same: both
schools are trying to design systems powerful enough to explain the data,
but the latter school suffers from the great disadvantage of thinking it is doing
something else
REFERENCES
Broadbent, D. Behavior. London, Methuen, 1961.
Dennett, D. Intentional Systems Journal ofPhilosophy. 68. 87-106. 1971.
Why the law of effect will not go away Journal of the Theory of Social
Behavior. 5. 169-87.1975.
Taylor, C. The Explanation of Behavior. London, Routledge & Kegan
Paul, 1964.
by Robert Epstein
Department of Psychology and Social Relations, Harvard University, Cambridge,
Mass 02138
Reinforcement, explanation, and B. F. Skinner. In the famous 1924 debate
between John Watson and William McDougall, McDougall predicted that
Watson's "peculiar dogmas" would soon "fade away like the insubstantial
fabric of a dream, leaving not a wrack behind" (Watson and McDougall,
1928, p 92) Bindra now tells us that at least one dogma that Watson's suc-
cessors have successfully fostered for more than fifty years has finally seen
its day But his attack has two major shortcomings: First, it is based on
certain misconceptions about at least one important formulation of the rein-
forcement concept, and second, the "new" view that he offers is not so new
Bindra spends much time criticizing a straw man, namely a hedonic view
of reinforcement For Bindra, a "basic tenet" of the reinforcement view is that
behavioral consequences are effective by virtue of their value as "pleasure
and pain," "rewards and punishers," and in terms of how "pleasant" they are
But a hedonic view of reinforcement was rejected by many early behaviorists
(cf Meehl, 1950) and is far from the representative view of modern be-
havioristic formulations
Skinner clearly and explicitly rejected the hedonic view of reinforcement
(e g , Skinner, 1938, p 62 op cit), and even Thorndike was careful to define
"satisfiers" and "annoyers" in terms of their observable effects rather than
their putative hedonic value (e g , Thorndike, 1931, p 36) Skinner's concept
of reinforcement, as elaborated by his students (e g , Catania, 1973; and this
Commentary), may be briefly stated as follows: If we can show that a
response increases in frequency because (and only because) it is followed
by a particular stimulus, we call that stimulus areinforcer, and its presenta-
tion, reinforcement Reinforcement, so defined, is a term we invoke when we
observe certain relations between events in the world It is neither a circular
concept, nor a hedonic concept It is simply a name we give to certain facts
Bindra lists what he believes to be three important characteristics of the
reinforcement concept He says, first of all, that a reinforcement "hypothesis"
"assumes" that behavior is modified because of a contiguity between be-
havior and "hedonic" stimuli But there is no reinforcement "hypothesis"; the
term is invoked only to label certain facts Moreover, that response-stimulus
contiguity affects subsequent responding is not an "assumption"; it, too, is a
fact And, as mentioned above, hedonism need not be part of the reinforce-
ment concept
Second, Bindra claims that implicit in the reinforcement view is an
assumption about neural connections, and he then proceeds to pose his own
set of assumptions about these connections But Skinner's view of reinforce-
ment explicitly avoids such weak assumptions, as Bindra himself briefly
notes later is his essay
Finally, Bindra objects to the fact that reinforcement is said to act only on
one particular response, which is then "more strongly connected" to a
stimulus situation But Skinner has managed without any connectionistic
assumptions, and, as Bindra correctly notes, he avoided the so-called motor
equivalence problem by defining a response class in terms of its measurable
effects
In short, not one of Bindra's characterizations of the concept of reinforce-
ment is appropriate to Skinner's formulation Bindra's presentation would
have been more effective had it addressed itself more directly to Skinner's
view, especially considering the great impact that Skinner's work has had on
modern psychology
The few comments that Bindra does make about Skinner's position are
inaccurate He says, for example, that Skinner promoted a position that
"sacrificed explanation to the empirical goal of enunciating descriptive prin-
ciples " But Skinner never "sacrificed explanation"; he simply dispensed
with "explanation" that appealed to hypothetical constructs in favor of expla-
nation in terms of antecedent and current observables It is also not true, as
Bindra claims, that Skinner took "no clear stand on how reinforcing stimuli
reinforce responses" ( e g , see Skinner, 1953, pp 81-84 op cit) 
Finally,
Bindra is disturbed because a variety of experimental phenomena indicate
that learning can take place although no obvious response-reinforcement
pairings have occurred and that reinforcement does not account fora// be-
havior But these phenomena do not indicate a failure of the concept of rein-
forcement, only that the concept has been misunderstood (Skinner, 1977)
Reinforcement is not an account of all behavior; it is a name for one important
relationship between behavioral and environmental events
Bindra's own model suffers from some of the faults of the straw man it is
supposed to replace For one thing, it ignores certain data Bindra looks to
research in classical conditioning for understanding of the learning process
He seems to believe, in fact, that all behavior is elicited and thus arbitrarily
excludes data from his consideration that demonstrate consequential con-
trol
Bindra's program, furthermore, is reminiscent of early British associa-
tionism, clearly evident in a main "tenet" of his program that "building
THE BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1978), 1
57

Commentary/ Bindra: A perceptual-motivational view of adaptive behavior
representations 
of stimulus-stimulus correlations is the sole basis of
learned modifications of behavior" He is concerned with the acquisition of
"knowledge," and, as John Locke did in the fourth edition of his Essay,
Bindra invents a phenomenon of association ("correlation") of ideas
("representations" of stimuli) as an explanation for observed changes in be-
havior As was true for Locke, Bindra's theory of unobservables is not sup-
ported by current physiological knowledge, and hence, is still more
philosophy than science
As is true of any theory that depends on hypothetical constructs, Bindra's
theory is ultimately at the mercy of observed events in behavior and environ-
ment, no matter what physiological mechanisms are eventually unearthed
The theory could not have arisen if orderly relationships between such events
had not been observed, and the theory's maintenance must always be sub-
ject to these relationships Skinner's work has done much to clarify the rela-
tionships between behavioral and environmental events and has established
a body of data that construct theories such as Bindra's can only serve
REFERENCES
Catania, A. C. The concept of the operant in the analysis of behavior. Be-
haviorism, 1973,1:103-116.
Meehl, P. On the circularity of the law of effect. Psychological Bulletin,
1950,47:52-75.
Skinner, B. F. Herrnstein and the evolution of behaviorism. American
Psychologist, 1977,32:1006-1012.
Thorndike, E. L. Human Learning. New York: Century, 1931.
Watson, J. B. and McDougall, W. The battle of behaviorism. London:
Kegan Paul, 1928.
by John C. Fentress
Department of Psychology, Dalhousie University, Halifax, Nova Scotia, Canada
B3H4J1
Defining behavioral representations. Bindra addresses two important and
related questions The first is how we divide processing stages into mean-
ingful dimensions for subsequent analysis The second is how we account
for the observed fact of response variability
These are largely matters of behavioral taxonomy How do we divide the
universe into meaningful compartments and seek rules of relationship
among these compartments? Several points arise here First, divisions in be-
havioral research (e g , "pexgos") are abstractions They are not "things "
Second, the abstractions of "pexgos," "gnostic units," and so forth, are in
some sense arbitrary 
Their reality is difficult to evaluate outside the
particular conceptual framework within which they are proposed Third, cate-
gories can easily take on a unitary quality Yet most of these categories can
be fractionated further as analysis proceeds Fourth, categories are easily
assumed to be independent of one another This assumption is frequently
contradicted by empirical evidence Each of these four points is illustrated in
the literature on motivation ("drive") (e g , Hinde, 1959; Fentress, 1976)
These points can be extrapolated to still more perplexing problems For
example, how separate are such popular categories as perception, motiva-
tion, learning, and so forth? To what extent do the boundaries that separate
one category from another shift in time (Fentress, 1978)?
Bindra's various postulates are logical in the abstract sense But are they
also biological? Certainly the postulate of changing processes at early
stages of a complex and poorly understood temporal network of events can
yield a change in observed output That is logic, as any pencil and paper
exercise will clearly demonstrate
But how strong are the supporting biological (or behavioral) data? Bindra
argues against the idea of preexisting responses, but how are we to take
this? The potentiality for exhibiting certain responses and not others exists
for any species or individual at some level, although one must presumably
agree that relevant circuitry not activated at a given moment may fail to
"exist" in a full functional sense This is obvious logic
More directly to the point is Bindra's assertion that "current perceptions"
necessarily dictate the final form of any observed motor act Yet there are
data for both vertebrate and invertebrate species indicating that reliable and
complex patterns of motor output can be maintained in the absence of
normal sensory input (e g , Fentress, 1973; Doty, 1976; Hoyle, 1976) The ad-
vantage of these studies is that sensory channels can be defined and
manipulated without ambiguity Of course, they do not (logically) address
fully the more complex issues raised by Bindra Yet they do bear upon his
arguments
One aspect of Bindra's approach that is particularly important is his
recognition of dynamic regulation of behavior at several processing stages
This is a clear advance over static models in which control elements are
viewed independently from their spatiotemporal surround The latter models
are exercises in pseudoprecision
An analogous pseudoprecision can arise, however, when a large number
of variables are postulated and then connected by equations (or arrows)
Surprising experimental data are too easily accounted for by the addition,
subtraction, or other alteration in connections between abstractly defined
"boxes " The intrinsic defining characteristics of the boxes themselves be-
come immune to modification; that is, their basic properties are assumed
The essential question here is, what observations would alter the defining
characteristics of "pexgos" as opposed to the relations between "pexgos"
and other processing dimensions? What types of observation would lead one
to abandon the pexgo construct as opposed to adding, subtracting, or
otherwise modifying rules of connectivity among "pexgos," "motivational
states," "valences," and so forth?
Bertrand Russell is said to have argued that if given more than three vari-
ables ("postulates") and all possible rules of connectivity between them, he
could (logically) account for all but the most complex manifestations of na-
ture While Bindra clearly has proposed an advance over previous S-R and
response-reinforcement models (which are blatantly inadequate), I wonder
whether the thinking he uses remains rooted in the basic form of logic from
which these models were derived I would be interested to see Bindra ad-
dress such issues further
I suspect that future models in behavioral biology will have to take a much
more relativistic stance, in which separated dimensions of behavioral
expression are recognized as convenient yet arbitrary abstractions whose
refinement will depend upon the logic of defining these dimensions in part
as a function of their rules of relationship and data that are explicitly bio-
logical as well as logical
REFERENCES
Doty, R. W. The concept of neural centers. In: J. C. Fentress (ed)., Simpler
Networks and Behavior, Sinauer Associates, Sunderland, Mass., 1976.
Fentress, J. C. Specific and nonspecific factors in the causation of behav-
iour. In: P. P. G. Bateson and P. H. Klopfer (eds.), Perspectives in
Ethology. Plenum Press, New York, 1973.
Dynamic boundaries of patterned behavior: interaction and self-
organization. In: P. P. G. Bateson and R. A. Hinde (eds.), Growing
Points in Ethology. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 1976.
Ethological models of hierarchy and patterning of species-specific be-
havior. In: E. Stainoff and P. Teitelbaum (eds.), Handbook for
Neurobiology: Motivation. Plenum Press, New York, 1978 (in press).
Hinde, R. A. Unitary drives. Animal Behavior. 7:130-41,1859.
Hoyle, G. Approaches to understanding the neurophysiological bases of
behavior. In: J. C. Fentress (ed.), Simpler Networks and Behavior.
Sinauer Associates, Sunderland, Mass. 1976.
by John P. Flynn
Department of Psychiatry, Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven, Conn
06520
Sensory vs. motor effects of brain stimulation. In arguing against the idea
that motivation influences behavior by a direct effect on responses, and in
favor of a primary effect on the perceptual processes, Bindra presents as
critical evidence experiments involving electrical stimulation at "motiva-
tional sites" in the brain
Movements elicited by electrical stimulation of the brain are flexible, and
adjustments to the changing situation do occur Nonetheless, Bindra's exclu-
sion of direct effects on response is too sweeping, since there are motor
responses determined by stimulation at attack sites in the brain In our work,
the paw with which a cat strikes a rat is exclusively contralatera! to the side of
the brain stimulated, even though the cat may be greatly handicapped in the
use of that paw (Flynn, Edwards, & Bandler, 1971) A cat in which the py-
ramidal tract innervating the cells corresponding to the contralateral paw is
severed, and the opposite side is intact, continues to use the partially dener-
vated limb, even though an intact limb is available The influence of stimula-
tion upon motor systems involved in striking was demonstrated by elec-
58
THE BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1978), 1

Commentary/ Bindra: A perceptual-motivational view of adaptive behavior
trophysiological experiments on the forelimb biceps motoneurons (Edwards
&Flynn, 1972)
Electrical stimulation at attack sites in the brain influences the effective-
ness of certain environmental stimuli in eliciting behavior, but the influence
is not limited, as Bindra suggests, to the sensory sphere Many of the effects
observed in our laboratory have been of a reflex nature, and could be
explained in terms of influence on either the motor or the sensory side of the
arc However, a study of a reflex involving placing the paw on an object im-
plicates the sensory side of the arc The receptive field for the elicitation of
the reflex increases in size, as the intensity of stimulation is increased, in ac-
cord with the sensory dermatomes rather than in accord with the motor in-
nervation (Bandler & Flynn, 1972) It should be noted that the vigor of the mo-
tor response increases with intensity
Another example of the influence of hypothalamic stimulation on sensory
mechanisms is provided in an experiment by Beagley and Holley( 1972) De-
prived rats learned to press a bar to obtain food These rats, which could also
be induced to press a bar for food and to eat by stimulation of the
hypothalamus, were trained to press only while signal lights were on Each
eye received light solely from a single small bulb mounted on the top of the
rat's head When both lights were on, the rat pressed the bar If a single light
was on, the rat pressed the bar when the contralateral eye was illuminated,
and not while the ipsilateral eye was illuminated Shifing to stimulation of the
opposite side of the brain produced the same phenomenon This response
was a learned response; its occurrence depended on illumination of the
contralateral eye
The basic question that Bindra raises of the flexibility and adjustment of
the motor responses to present stimuli probably has to be answered in terms
of the breadth of motor activities available to the naturally induced state, as
opposed to the limited number available in the electrically induced state
Differences in terms of the number of sensory routes by which an act may be
brought about appear in our data The state-dependent reflex of mouth open-
ing can be elicited by both visual and tactile stimuli when some sites are
electrically stimulated At other sites, only tactile stimuli are effective, When
a natural state is induced probably the whole gamut of responses is avail-
able
REFERENCES
Bandler, R. J., and Flynn, J. P. Control of somatosensory fields for striking
during hypothalamically elicited attack. Brain Research. 38:197-
201. 1972.
Beagley, W. K., and Holley, T. L. Hypothalamic stimulation facilitates
contralateral visual control of a learned response. Science. 196:321-
22. 1977.
Edwards. S. B., and Flynn, I. P. The corticospinal control of striking in
centrally elicited attack behavior. Brain Research. 40:51-65. 1972.
Flynn, J. P., Edwards, S. B., and Bandler, R. J. Changes in sensory and mo-
tor systems during centrally elicited attack. Behavioral Sciences.
16(1):1-19. 1971.
by C. R. Galliste!
Department of Psychology, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pa 19174
The irrelevance of past pleasure. The S-R conception has indeed proved to
be an unsatisfactory analysis of learned behavior The continuing commit-
ment to such a view is an impediment to attempts to find a physiological
basis for learning Many such attempts hinge on finding a suitable model
system, a system that displays the crucial features of learning and is amena-
ble to neurophysiological experimentation (e g , Berger, Alger, & Thompson,
1976; Mpistos & Collins, 1975; Norman, Buchwald, Villablanca, 1977) If
one's conception of the crucial features of learning is erroneous, then these
attempts are doomed at the outset One is looking for a square model of a
round phenomenon
Does Bindra's alternative satisfactorily explain behavior in traditional
instrumental paradigms? I am not sure, because it is not clear how it deals
with two traditional objections to the explanation of instrumental learning in
terms of incentive or the remembrance of past pleasure The first objection is
that the appetitive phase begins (almost by definition) in the absence of the
assumed-to-be-pleasurable goal stimuli One must ask what incites and
directs the appetitive phase It cannot be the memory of the pleasure af-
forded by the goal or the memory (record of correlations, etc ) of what leads
to the goal These are with the animal always, but the animal only occa-
sionally pursues the goal The rat, in a familiar but large and complex envi-
ronment, only goes to the food source 5-8 times a night (personal observa-
tion) The knowledge of the environment that enables the rat to go directly to
the food must be there even during the period when the rat chooses not to go
there This knowledge (or, in neuropsychological terms, this engram) cannot,
therefore, explain why the rat does or does not choose to go there Bindra's
way out seems tortured He argues that certain organismic states determine
whether or not a given incentive will actually incite In order for food to create
a "central motive state of feeding" the animal must already be hungry (see,
second paragraph of section on Spontaneous Activity) The "hungriness" of
the animal, which antedates and selectively makes possible the appetite-
whetting effect of the food, carries so much of the explanatory burden that
one wonders why the focus on incentive
The second objection to the incentive theory is that the pleasantness or un-
pleasantness of a stimulus is contingent on the animal's state The sweet that
is pleasant when one is hungry is neutral or unpleasant when one is sated
(Cabanac, 1971) It would be more adaptive to have an animal's behavior
governed by a present need for, say, salt and oriented by a memory of where
salt has been found than to have behavior both impelled and oriented by
whether the salt was unpleasant or aversive when found The animal may
have been hypernatremic when the salt-iick was found and the salt therefore
hedonically neutral (Krieckhaus & Wolf, 1968) If the memory of recent
pleasure or displeasure were decisive, then those of us who rise from the
Thanksgiving table nauseated by the sight of turkey should be ambivalent at
the prospect of a Christmas turkey In fact, however, although my memory of
the displeasure brought on by surfeit is still fresh as I write this, I am hungry
right now and would welcome that noble bird Latent learning studies show
that much the same is true of animals: A stimulus that had negative hedonic
significance when last experienced becomes the goal toward which action
tends when the animal's needs have changed (Strieker & Wilson, 1970)
Incentive theories assume that pleasure begets desire; Cabanac's (1971)
work shows the reverse is often true: pleasure consists in experiencing what
one desires The philosopher Ryle (1969) makes the same point Animals
often pursue past pleasures and avoid past displeasures only insofar as the
present desire (need, specific drive) matches the past desire Incentive,
therefore, often cannot explain desire, and the effect of a specific drive on the
use made of memory remains to be explained
To the extent Bindra's formulation can allay these criticisms, it may be use-
ful in analyzing the behavior of the rat in traditional instrumental paradigms
However, it seems not to apply to many learning phenomena Consider, for
example, the nestling bunting, which learns the center of rotation of the night
sky and months later uses this knowledge to help orient its maiden migratory
flying (Emlen, 1970) Consider the rat in Olton's (1976) 8-arm radial maze It
notes the arms it has sampled, and carefully a voids them in order to sample
other arms, even though it has received and eaten food in the already sam-
pled arms Consider the female digger wasp She makes a stereotyped re-
connaissance fiight over her egg-containing burrow, during which she notes
its location vis-a-vis near and far landmarks Subsequently, when she has
found prey for the hatched larvae to eat, she homes on her burrow from a
hundred or more meters away She homes successfully even when she is
captured during her journey and released again at a different point of the
compass (van Beusekom, 1948; van lersel & van den Assem, 1965; Thorpe,
1950) Consider the chimpanzee, which watches food hidden at a dozen dif-
ferent spots and when released moves systematically from spot to spot
gathering the food it saw hidden (Menzel, 1973 and this Commentary) In all
these adaptive behaviors, learning plays a crucial role, yet I do not see that
Bindra's formulation applies to them The pleasure the rat may derive from
eating in a sampled arm does not explain why or how it avoids that arm until
it has sampled the others The pleasure the nestling may experience in
watching the stars does not explain how or why it abstracts the center of rota-
tion; nor does it explain the use the bird makes of the knowledge gained from
its juvenile astronomy Can finding the center of rotation be thought of as
learning a correlation? The notion of learned correlation does not explain
why animals record only selected aspects of the information derivable from
experience Perception and memory are more differentiated than is implied
by the notion of stimulus-stimulus correlations Correlation is too vague Nor
does the notion of incentive explain the diverse ways in which the record of
what past experience has taught is used to govern present behavior I think
THE BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1978), 1
59

Commentary/ Bindra: A perceptual-motivational view of adaptive behavior
we will have to be more specific about exactly what is recorded in the
engrams and how the system uses the engram to control behavior The only
cognitive-map theorist who has been sufficiently explicit so that one could
build a working model is Deutsch (1960)
However, Deutsch's ingenious and explicit model cannot be applied to
some of the examples cited above The examples were deliberately chosen
to suggest the heterogeneity of learning phenomena A unified theory of
learning may be a pot at the end of a rainbow What we may find in searching
for that pot is that the principles of learning depend both upon the species
and upon the type of problem that the learning helps to overcome There may
be no general principles of learning, only problem-specific principles (Rozm
& Kalat, 1971) We must content ourselves for the foreseeable future with
much less sweeping models We should attempt to formulate the principles
of learning underlying, say, homing behavior in diverse species and diverse
contexts Here, the logical structure of the problem may have forced a limited
class of solutions upon the innumerable species whose lifestyle requires
homing We should not expect that the principles underlying the learning that
makes homing possible will apply to the learning that makes possible other
kinds of behavior (bird-song dialects, diet selection, language, etc)
Bindra's formulation takes no account of problem specificity
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
I thank Jeff Wine for a valuable critical reading. The expense of
manuscript preparation was underwritten by National Science Founda-
tion Grant BMS75-16339.
REFERENCES
Berger, T. W., Alger, B., & Thompson, R. F. Neuronal substrate of classical
conditioning in the hippocampus. Science, 1976,192:483-484.
Beusekom, G. van. Some experiments on the optical orientation in Phi-
lanthus triangulum Fabr. Behaviour, 1948,1,195-225.
Cabanac, M. Physiological role of pleasure. Science, 1971,173:1103-1107.
Deutsch, J. A. The structural basis of behavior. Chicago: University of
Chicago Press, 1961.
Emlen, S. T. Celestial rotation: Its importance in the development of mi-
gratory orientation. Science, 1970,170:1198-1201.
Iersel, J. J. A. van, & Assem, J. van den. Aspects of orientation in the dig-
gerwasp Bembix rostrata. In "Learning and Associated Phenomena
in Invertebrates." Animal Behaviour. Suppl. 1,1965.
Krieckhaus, E. E., & Wolf, G. Acquisition of sodium by rats: Interaction of
innate mechanisms and latent learning. Journal of Comparative and
Physiological Psychology, 1968,65:197-201.
Menzel, E. W. Chimpanzee spatial memory organization. Science, 1973,
182:943-945.
Mpitsos, G. J. & Collins, S. D. Learning: Rapid aversive conditioning in
the Gastropod Mollusk Pleurobrachaea. Science, 1975,188:954-956.
Norman, R. J., Buchwald, J. S., & Villablanca, J. R. Classical conditioning
with auditory discrimination of the eye blink in decerebrate cats.
Science, 1977,196:151-153.
Olton, D. S., & Samuelson, R. J. Remembrance of places passed: spatial
memory in rats. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Animal Be-
havior Processes, 1976,2:97-116.
Rozin, P., & Kalat, J. W. Specific hungers and poison avoidance as adap-
tive specializations of learning. Psychological Review, 1971, 78:459-
487.
Ryle, G. Chapter4: "Pleasure," mDilemmas. Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press, 1969.
Strieker, E. M., & Wilson, N. E. Salt-seeking behavior in rats following
acute sodium deficiency. Journal of Comparative and Physiological
Psychology, 1970,72:416-420.
Thorpe, W. H. A note of detour behaviour with Ammophila pubescens
Curt. Behaviour, 1950,2:257-264.
by R. M. Gilbert
Addiction Research Foundation, 33 Russell Street, Toronto, Ontario, Canada M5S
2S1
Misconceptions about the origins of behavior. Bindra addresses issues
that we used to debate earnestly as undergraduates in the late 1950s Do
organisms learn relations between stimuli, or between stimuli and
responses? Is what an organism perceives at the time of learning more im-
portant than what the organism is doing? Is behavior the result of the history
of its reinforcement, or of the motivational and incentive-producing
properties of current stimuli? What is learning, anyway7 Who knows? Who
cares?
Bindra cares because he wants to be able to elucidate the "principles and
mechanisms of adaptive behavior" That was our aim in the 1950s We got
nowhere, and the only concrete result of the whole exercise was the genera-
tion in many of us of revulsion for a kind of theorizing about the nervous
system that had much of the obscure unreality of scholastic philosophy and
little of its human interest
Had Bindra been our guide to this netherworld of hypothetical neural
constructs we might not have been so blighted His presentation is well-
organized and pulls no punches He provides a broad historical context
(more than half the cited material was published before 1962), a magisterial
sweep of problems of behavior ranging from auto-shaping to the acquisition
of knowledge, and promise of substantial progress if his view of things
prevails. My overwhelming sense on reading his article was nevertheless
one of d6ja vu, chased by a conviction that speculation of this kind about the
nervous system has hardly advanced.
To be fair, this lack of advance is part of Bindra's point. Bindra believes
that conceptualization about behavior has been sidetracked by the he-
gemony of what he describes as the "response-reinforcement framework"
What Bindra means, I think, is, first, that there has been too much emphasis
on the experimenters' view of what organisms are doing, and not enough on
the organisms' view of what experimenters are doing -too much emphasis
on action and reaction, in other words, and not enough on perception
Second, Bindra wants to promote the incentive properties of hedonic
stimuli such as food and electric shock at the expense of the reinforcing
properties of these stimuli This means, as far as I can ascertain, that for
Bindra the important aspect of the delivery of food to a hungry animal in a
particular situation is not the strengthening of the behavior that happens to
precede the presentation of food, so that this particular behavior is more
likely to occur when the situation recurs It is, rather, the ability of the food to
infuse the situation with the power to induce anticipation of food in the
animal
To buttress his description of essentials, Bindra reaches into the
organism's brain where he postulates many "central representations" of
stimuli and behavior, and a neural condition known as a "central motive
state" Proxies for stimuli and their perception are given the acronym
"pexgo," from presently excited gnostic organization Proxies for behavior
are called "act-assemblies"
At the core of Bindra's treatise is the assertion that learned behavior arises
because a pexgo of a particular stimulus aspect of a situation generates a
pexgo of food presentation (or whatever hedonic stimulus was last noticed
by the animal in conjunction with the stimulus), which generates the same
central motive state as food presentation itself, which together with "the
detailed sensory-spatial features of the situation" produces the response
In a rare appeal to data, Bindra adduces studies of the effects of
electrically stimulating the hypothalamic-limbic "motivational sites" of the
brain via implanted electrodes Animals thus aroused do not emit behavior
that is specific to each stimulated site The site appears to determine only the
general direction of the behavior The specific actions depend very much on
the particular situation These observations are provided as evidence for a
central motive state Evidence for other neural constructs and relationships is
not given The lack is admitted in the case of the critical "mechanism by
which a certain pexgo is translated into a particular act," but it is not clear to
this commentator that the other postulates can be given much substance
Even the cited evidence for the central motive state should be a cause for
cynicism Probing the brain in 1978 is still very much a hit-and-miss affair In
1966, when the last of the data Bindra adduces were gathered, electrical
stimulation of the brain was conducted with the same order of finesse as that
of an inquisitive child exploring the functioning of a computer with a screw-
driver
Stripping Bindra's analysis of its neurophysiological speculation, it seems
to me that what is being proposed is a two-level mechanism for the determi-
nation of behavior At the more general level, a "situation" determines the
broad features of behavior, according to the experience of the organism in
the situation More locally, behavior is determined by "detailed sensory-
spatial features of the situation "
Likewise, behavionsts who emphasize behavior have been flexible in the
units of their investigation - not a bad strategy for a scientist, when it is re-
membered that Charles Darwin in his The Origin of Species did not even
60
THE BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1978), 1

Commentary/ Bindra: A perceptual-motivational view of adaptive behavior
consider the problem of speciation Behavior selected for analysis has
ranged from general categories such as school attendance to very particular
acts such as pressing a bar within a certain force band Implicit in this
eclecticism is the assumption that the relationships between reinforcing
stimuli, behavior, and stimuli that come to occasion behavior hold for many
levels of analysis The situation of "being at home after breakfast" occasions
"preparation for school" in a child with a probability that depends on the
child's experience of consequences of behavior emitted in that situation The
emission of parts of the preparation, such as the details of tying a shoelace,
is similarly dependent on the history of consequences of very local acts oc-
curring during the action of very local stimuli Viewed in this way the two
frameworks are hardly different
Bindra asserts two differences between the frameworks, even aside from
differences in assumed or implied neurophysiologica! mechanisms He
claims that situations in which hedonic stimuli occur can acquire
significance for the organism even when no specific response is reinforced,
whereas the response-reinforcement framework does not allow this Even
apart from the impossibility of determining that no specific response is rein-
forced, this difference is really no difference at all, because most scientists
who emphasize behavior allow that stimuli can acquire significance when
they are paired with significant stimuli (e g , Staddon, 1972)
The second asserted difference concerns the flexibility of the behavior that
occurs in a situation in which a hedonic stimulus has previously been
experienced Bindra's formulation of the actual production of such behavior
is vague, but depends on the concept of an "eliciting stimulus complex" that,
via the previously mentioned pexgos and act-assemblies, gives rise to a
specific act lasting less than half a second with a probability that depends
on the relative "motivational valence" of the complex Flexibility is assured,
according to Bindra, because longer instances of behavior are "put together
fleetingly from act-assemblies for a particular occasion," and because "an
old sequence can be interrupted and changed within a fraction of a second"
according to "moment-to-moment changes in the current sensory inflow and
the central influence from contingency organizations, as well as central mo-
tive states" allowing "substitutability of acts" and "motor equivalence at the
behavioral level " Clearly this mechanism is as flexible as anyone could
want; so flexible, in fact, as to almost obviate utility, although it should also
be noted that a certain rigidity of relationship between eliciting stimulus
complexes and specific acts is supposed, which, undiluted by further refine-
ment of the mechanism, could impose severe restraints upon an organism's
repertoire All this is contrasted with the response-reinforcement framework,
which Bindra says provides only for repetition of previous behavior and
therefore cannot encompass flexibility This false characterization requires
more substantial rebuttal, for here we may be right at the heart of what, from
his title, should be the focus of Bindra's argument, namely the production of
adaptive behavior
Leaving aside for the moment the difficult problem of defining "adaptive"
(which Bindra ignores), it is reasonable to assert that an adaptive system can
be of two forms Either it is so programmed as to anticipate every change in
the environment, and to behave appropriately, or it embodies mechanisms
for variation in output and for selection by the environment of appropriate
variants (Gilbert, 1972) Obviously a single system can embody both forms
The evolution of organisms provides a good example of a largely un-
programmed system, depending profoundly on variation and selection, but
with constraints on the former imposed by the chemistry of the substrate Be-
havior change may be an example of a mixed system, with phylogeny provid-
ing certain programmed responses and important constraints on both varia-
tion and selection The so-called response-reinforcement framework almost
precisely parallels these system requirements The emphasis has been on
selection, that is, reinforcement, but variation has not been ignored
Variation in behavior, which is the source of adaptivity, seems to be in-
trinsic to the business of response reproduction, as much as phenotypic
variation is intrinsic to the reproduction of organisms The fact that a rein-
forced response may not be duplicated precisely provides a rich source of
"new" behavior that can, in turn, be selected 
Segal (1972), in her
comprehensive discussion of the provenance of instrumental behavior,
describes many other sources of new behavior, including induction by depri-
vation and by releasing stimuli, and what she calls "emotional induction,"
namely "operations that 
are insufficient to guarantee the occurrence of
any particular topography, but that set the stage for a certain range of stimuli
to be effective in inducing or releasing a delimited range of topographies "
This last process sounds suspiciously like Bindra's description of the role of
the central motive state The difference is important, however Segal's
analysis of how adaptive behavior occurs is well within the response-rein-
forcement framework and, as such, makes no appeal to neural fictions
A salient feature of Bindra's article is the absence of any discussion of the
relation between ontogeny and phylogeny in the production of behavior,
notwithstanding the inclusion of the term "adaptive" in the title That is partly
why the article sometimes seem unreal, for phylogeny is the stuff of adapta-
tion Bindra should be contrasted with Hermstein (1977a), who has also
launched a recent attack on the response-reinforcement framework, but did
so from a biological perspective, that is, one that recognizes that instru-
mental behavior has two kinds of provenance Hermstein, like Bindra, em-
phasized what he regards as shortcomings in the treatment of motivational
variables Skinner (1977) replied by further invoking phylogeny, which Herm-
stein (1977b) described as an unnecessary strategy The interchange is rich,
and is mentioned here only to suggest the poverty of an analysis that ignores
evolution
"Adaptive" is, in any case, a loaded term that should be avoided It not
only implies ends, thereby incurring problems of teleology in its use, but it
also suggests hierarchies of ends, thereby raising considerations of
metaphysics and morality Many actions (e g , suicide while fertile) may not
be adaptive from the point of view of preserving the individual or even the
species, but presumably they conform to the usual relationships that de-
termine behavior In discussing flexibility, Bindra seems to confuse adap-
tivity with creativity The former, if it means anything at all, refers to appro-
priate adjustment to a changed environment, which is a process entirely
within the ambit of the response-reinforcement framework The latter term
refers to useful new behavior, the organized production of which will
probably defy analysis for a very long time whatever framework is espoused
In short, Bindra's article provides no good reason for completely discard-
ing the "response-reinforcement framework," as Bindra would have us do
Indeed, often his alternative seems so similar as to cause wonder as to why
differences should be emphasized Two differences nevertheless remain
conspicuous Bindra's "perceptual-motivational" alternative invokes much
speculation about neurophysiology and little about phylogeny Behaviorists
interested in behavior have developed much interest in the latter and main-
tain little in the former Which strategy is more appropriate to the changing
circumstances of our knowledge remains debatable
REFERENCES
Gilbert, R. M. Variation and selection of behavior. In: R. M. Gilbert and
J. R. Millenson (eds.), Reinforcement: Behavioral Analyses. Pp. 264-
76. Academic Press, New York, 1972.
Hermstein, R. J. The evolution of behaviorism. American Psychologist.
32:593-603. 1977a.
Doing what comes naturally: a reply to Professor Skinner. American
Psychologist. 32:1013-16.1977b.
Segal, E. F. Induction and the provenance of operants. In: R. M. Gilbert
and J. R. Millenson (eds.), Reinforcement: Behavioral Analyses. Pp.
1-34. Academic Press, New York, 1972.
Skinner, B. F. Hermstein and the evolution of behavior. American
Psychologist. 32:1006-12.1977.
Staddon, J. E. R. Temporal control and the theory of reinforcement
schedules. In: R. M. Gilbert and J. R. Millenson (eds.), Reinforce-
ment: Behavioral Analyses. Pp. 212-62. Academic Press, New York,
1972.
by Ernest R. Hilgard
Department of Psychology, Stanford University, Stanford, Calif 94305
With reinforcement in trouble, what about motivation? - Bindra's alterna-
tive This is a very thoughtful discussion of problems with which Bindra has
been concerned for many years, as evidenced by his many previous dis-
cussions, some book length (1959, 1976) It is good to have this accessible
version of his matured theory
In order to comment briefly on something that deserves more extensive
discussion, I shall consider three major thrusts of his argument: first, that the
response-reinforcement position has become outmoded; second, that the
perceptual-motivational alternative is sound from a psychological point of
view; third, that the theory can gain support from neurophysiology
Critique of response-reinforcement In this Bindra is on firm ground and in
THE BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1978), 1
61

Commentary/ Bindra: A perceptual-motivational view of adaptive behavior
good company, for even many of those who were earlier strongly committed
to the reinforcement position have since preferred to modify their views I
suppose that the chief holdouts are those most strongly committed to the or-
thodoxies of the Skinnerian position, but this standpoint, despite its obvious
successes in the management of performances under many circumstances,
has long been characterized as an engineering achievement rather than as a
contribution to theory, (Verplanck, 1954)
The perceptual-motivational alternative as a psychological theory The al-
ternative theory has to be viewed in the context of the popular cognitive or
information-processing theories with which it competes There are many
overlaps, such as learning to pay attention to relevant information sources,
remembering the contingencies, and so on It would take more space
than I have to make detailed comparisons It is probably fair to say that the
information-processing theories have been a little weak on the motivational-
affective aspects, but developments such as those of Rescorla (1969) on fear
conditioning do not seem too remote from those of Bindra Abelson (1963)
early made a distinction between "hot" and "cold" cognition, with the idea
that "hot" cognitions are emotionally and motivationally loaded, whereas
"cold" cognitions are very intellectual Most information-processing models
tend to fall on the "cold" side
Even so, Bindra has tended to remain pretty close to drive notions by em-
phasizing stimuli associated with hunger, thirst, and the like in his descrip-
tions of the affective or motivational components This may be due to his
preoccupation with animal learning, because that is where the response-
reinforcement theory held sway In human learning, language is important
(as Pavlov noted in his "second signal system"), and there is more to be said
about enduring intense emotions and moods as they affect human learning
and decision processes (Janis & Mann, 1977)
The treatment of these topics is a thoughtful one, and in characterizing the
paper briefly I have overlooked much of its richness in detail
The neurophysiological interpretation of the alternative. Most of us are fully
convinced that mental events are rooted in the anatomy and physiology of
the nervous system We are not equally convinced about the fruitfulness of
speculations concerning the relationships between psychological findings
and neural events Obviously there are well-established facts at both levels
that have not yet been coordinated, and these separate knowledges have
scientific status in their own right That is, facts such as visual acuity, or color
vision, do not require for their validation knowledge of the retina or the
central connections of visual mechanisms; correspondingly, the courses of
nerve fibers in the optic chiasma, or from the lateral geniculate bodies to the
cortex can be mapped without necessary recourse to psychology It is a hap-
pier state when the facts are brought into coordination, as when the fineness
of visual acuity and the coarseness of the cellular mosaic of the retina are
brought together through a knowledge of the synthesis provided by smal I eye
movements; then we are more comfortable with the resulting "explanation,"
which means that the related facts are coordinated without contradiction Un-
fortunately, it is easier to draw the illustration from perception than from
learning
There is the danger of making use of the C N S as a "conceptual nervous
system," as Skinner once defined it I am a little uneasy about calling central
perceptual representations pexgos, and then treating them as substantive,
for example," 
perception involves the generation of a pexgo - spatially
and temporally ordered activation of certain structural gnostic elements or
pexgo components The gnostic elements are gnostic-neurons and gnostic-
assemblies " Although unintended, this sounds a little too much like an "en-
gram" as the basis for memory Of course memory must somehow be
represented, and pexgos must somehow be represented, but the representa-
tion as described seems to me a little cavalier The important search that
Bindra recommends, however, is not for these hypothesized elements, but for
the locus of the motivational influences on learning, in which the central roles
of perception and knowledge displace the prior emphasis upon response
This is a desirable search pattern
REFERENCES
Abelson, R. Computer simulation of'hot' cognition. In: S. Tomkins and S.
Messick (eds.), Computer Simulation of Personality. New York;
Wiley, 1963.
Bindra, D. Motivation, a Systematic Reinterpretation. New York, Ronald
Press, 1959.
Janis, I. L., and Mann, L. Decision Making: A Psychological Analysis of
Conflict, Choice, and Commitment. New York, Free Press, 1977.
Rescorla, R. A. Conditioned inhibition of fear. In: N. J. Mackintosh and
W. K. Honig (eds.), Fundamental Issues in Associative Learning.
Halifax, Nova Scotia, Dalhousie University Press, 1969.
Verplanck, W. S. and B. F. Skinner. In: Estes, W. K. et al., Modern
Learning Theory. New York, Appleton-Century-Crofts, 1954.
by Stewart H. Hulse
Department of Psychology, The Johns Hopkins University,
Baltimore, Maryland 21218
The problem of serial order in adaptive behavior: why not some formal
cognitive structure. There are many things to commend the approach out-
lined in this article Some suggest to me things of the past or directions for
further development other than those Bindra has proposed, however For
one, he has pushed theoretically important structures underlying behavior
upstream and inside the organism, which is certainly where they belong We
have had peripheral S-R reinforcement models for too long But he seems far
more successful in dealing with certain aspects of this process than with
others I like his discussion of the relationship between eliciting stimuli and
pexgos, but these ideas were clearly foreshadowed by Lawrence (1963) in
his concept of the "stimulus-as-coded " The concept of an act-assembly as a
short-duration building block for overt behavior subject to rapid and flexible
modification is also useful. But it conjures the problems inherent in a micro-
molar analysis of behavior (Logan, 1960), and it fails to solve the problem so
masterfully expressed by Lashley (1951) of how syntactic structures of
whatever kind can be so rapidly produced in behavior, e g , the pianist's ar-
peggio, all of which do call for the concept of some pre-programmed in-
tegrating schema for the overt production of muscle movement Taub's
(1976) work with deafferented primates raises similar questions about the
central programming of motor control [see Roland et al, this issue] Granted
that Bindra's system is probably sufficiently flexible to handle these matters,
the problem may be that it is almost too flexible Much behavior, once un-
derway, is not easily modified by eliciting stimuli, and some of it requires
longer than the half-second that Bindra postulates as a temporal boundary
for an act. Any golfer will testify that a swing, once underway, is virtually im-
possible to stop given some unusual "extraneous" eliciting stimulus In fact, I
wonder if Bindra has adequately explored the realm of preprogrammed mo-
tor responses with respect to their modifiability - or lack of it
A more general, and perhaps more important, concern has to do with
Bindra's postulation of a linear, chain-like organization for behavior One of
the great contributions of models of human information processing has been
to move away from linear, list-generated models and to explore the ad-
vantages of other organizations for behavior, such as hierarchies We have
recently been trying with some success (Hulse, in press; Hulse & Dorsky,
1977) to apply principles derived from hierarchically based models to the
manner in which animals learn serial patterns of stimulus events The end
product in overt behavior is a linear organization of responses in time, but the
underlying formal structure to which the animal must respond is best
described by models based in general on hierarchical arrangements of rela-
tions among stimulus events General discussions of this approach, and
some of the problems it presents, may be found in Restle (1970) and Jones
(1976). Bindra comes close, perhaps, to this idea in his concept of "contin-
gency organizations" and their nested relation, but I fail to detect that he has
in mind anything more than a linear structure in which overlapping contin-
gencies vary in strength and so excite successive components in an overt
response system after the fashion of a response chain Perhaps I misin-
terpret, but the problem is of sufficient importance, I think, that it might war-
rant further exploration within Bindra's system Dewey (1898) identified the
problem to some extent in his criticism of the concept of the reflex arc;
Lashley (1951) certainly reemphasized it; and the matter remains of
significant importance for new theories of adaptive behavior that we develop
today
By and large, however, Bindra has been organizing and reconceptualizing
a vast amount of information, a task that few are willing to undertake today
He is to be commended and, if anything, encouraged to go even farther
afield in restructuring the way we think about models for adaptive behavior in
animal learning
REFERENCES
Dewey, J. The reflex arc concept in psychology. Psychological Review,
1898,3:357-370.
62
THE BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1978), 1

Commentary/ Bindra: A perceptual-motivational view of adaptive behavior
Hulse, S H Cognitive structure and serial pattern learning by animals In
S. H Hulse, H. Fowler, and W. K. Honig (Eds.) Cognitive processes
in animal behavior. Hillsdale, N.J.: Erlbaum, 1978.
Hulse, S. H., & Dorsky, N. P. Structural complexity as a determinant of
serial pattern learning. Learning and Motivation, 1977, 8:488-506.
Jones, M. R. Levels of structure in the reconstruction of temporal and
spatial serial patterns. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human
Learning and Memory, 1976, 2:475-488.
Lawrence, D. H. The nature of a stimulus: Some relationships between
learning and perception. In S. Koch (Ed.) Psychology: A study of a
science Vol. 5. New York: McGraw-Hill, 1963.
Restle, F. Theory of serial pattern learning: Structural trees. Psychological
Review, 1970,77:481-495.
Taub, E. Motor behavior following deafferentation in the developing
mature monkey. In R. M. Herman, S. Grillner, P. S. G. Stein and D. G.
Stuart (Eds.) Neural Control of Locomotion New York: Plenum,
1976.
by Francis W. Irwin
Department 
of Psychology, 
University 
of Pennsylvania, 
3815 Walnut 
St,
Philadelphia, Pa 19104
Some comparisons of Bindra's theory with a 
situation-act-outcome
system Bindra's development of an alternative to response-reinforcement
theories of behavior is of special interest to anyone who, like myself, has un-
dertaken a similar task (Irwin, 1958, 1961, 1966, 1971, 1974) Like Tolman
(1932 op cit ) and some more recent cognitive theorists Bindra and I be-
lieve that instrumental behavior depends upon the organism's cognitions of
contingencies relating environmental events to each other and to its be-
havior, and upon differential values of events to the organism What invites
comparison of our theories is their marked divergence in program, theory,
and metatheoretical presuppositions, of which a few instances are dis-
cussed below
Theory and metatheory First, Bindra aims to provide hypothetical neural
mechanisms adequate to account for intelligent behavior His rather informal
system, as I understand it, can be described as atomistic and connec-
tionistic, the input elements being neural representations of perceptual fea-
tures combined into wholes called "pexgos," and the output elements being
"movements" that are constituents of unitary all-or-none "acts" that in turn are
combined into "responses " The various combining operations take place in
intricately organized neural structures called "gnostic assemblies" and "act
assemblies " Pexgos are interconnected by "associations" (as in his Table
1) that represent "learned contingencies" between successive events Be-
cause pexgos and acts are fleeting and never twice identical, they must be
constructed afresh upon each occurence by the gnostic and act assemblies
These structures and interconnections are required to accomplish remark-
able feats of creative organization, and ! confess that I do not see clearly how
they do it; even a highly simplified mathematical or computer model might
help here
My moderately formalized system takes a wholly different path It attempts
to construct psychological concepts from purely behavioral evidence by
means of three primitive terms, "situation," "act," and "outcome," and certain
discrete-trial binary-choice procedures, called standard experiments With
this equipment, SAO theory (named from the initials of its primitives) claims
to provide empirical criteria of three fundamental psychological processes,
viz , "discrimination," "preference," and "act-outcome expectancy " Addi-
tional processes are defined upon this basis, such as "detection," "desire,"
"aversion," and "neutrality," and an empirical distinction is made between
"intentional" and "nonintentional" behavior Although SAO theory rests upon
purely behavioral conceptions, it welcomes psychophysical and psy-
chophysiological hypotheses Bindra's theory (Bindra, 1976 op cit) is
boldly fleshed out with specific hypothetical neural mechanisms designed to
account for a multitude of phenomena, to which these comments cannot
begin to do justice SAO theory, on the other hand, has proceeded cau-
tiously, and in its present stage of development is an incomplete skeleton
that suggests and organizes a variety of hypotheses that have been
developed rather opportunistically to show how the system works
Second, relatively few explicitly psychological terms are embedded in
Bindra's system; the main instances are perception and certain hedonic or
affective notions called variously pleasure, pain, pleasantness, unpleasant-
ness, discomfort, valence, appetite, aversion, and the like, which are not
defined nor given behavioral criteria This rather extreme informality raises
the question whether the theory is committed to psychological concepts at
ail 
Perception, for example, enters the theory only as that which is
represented by pexgos, which in turn are purely neural organizations; this
suggests that perception might de dispensed with altogether, without
damage to the theory SAO theory, on the other hand, explicitly denies the
identity of psychological phenomena with whatever physiological states and
processes may be associated thereto (Irwin, 1971, p 107) I fear that, for
Bindra, perception, pleasure, pain, and the like are "private experiences"
(Bindra, 1976 op cit) in sharp contrast to SAO theory's attempt to objectify
such notions, as illustrated by its treatment of "consciousness" (Irwin, 1971,
pp 107-108)
Third, according to Bindra, explanation is the successful reduction of a
phenomenon to a more "molecular" level SAO theory takes a phenomenon
to be explained if it is deducible from a generalization or law, whether or not
the generalization involves physiology
Fourth, informality in the theory may have heuristic advantages in enabling
the theorist to extend the scope of his ideas freely over a broad field and
perhaps thereby discover unexpected regions of applicability Bindra is, I
think, well served in this respect At the same time, risks of unnoticed in-
consistencey or circularity are increased As an apparent instance of the lat-
ter point, consider the statement that certain stimuli "have the property of
reliably producing appetitive or aversive reactions and being affectively
pleasing or discomforting," where it is doubtful that the terms of the conjunc-
tion are independently definable in Bindra's system A similar difficulty oc-
curs with his claim that "the most general principle determining response
production" is that "an animal will move toward an ES that is of greater ap-
petitive motivational valence or of lesser aversive motivational valence than
other ESs in the situation at that time "
Motivation Bindra and SAO theory treat motivation in much the same way,
if one makes rather generous allowance for differences in language and em-
phasis upon the roles of stimuli His "incentive stimuli" and the "desired"
and "aversive" events of SAO theory overlap greatly, if not completely It is
true that such events as "being a member of a prestigious group" and "being
thrown into jail" are possible desired or aversive events in SAO theory; I
would be happy to know what Bindra would say about them, since they are
hardly stimuli Bindra's "central motive states" are conceived of as physio-
logical, whereas SAO's "preferences" are behavioral dispositions that are
defined relative to standard preference experiments; in practice however, I
see little difference between them The theories agree that motivation is not
defined by tendencies to perform actions that are specific to particular mo-
tives It therefore seems odd to find reference in Bindra's Figure 1 to a central
motive state of "eating;" aside from Epstein and Teitelbaum's (1961)
demonstration that rats can sensitively regulate their food-intake by pressing
a bar for intragastric injections of food without either the ordinary "consum-
matory acts" of eating or the usual tastes, smells, and sensations associated
with those acts, can bar-pressing be eating?
Cognitions of contingencies Act-outcome expectancies, complementary
pairs of which represent contingencies between acts and outcomes, are
basic to SAO theory (Irwin, 1966, 1971), and event-event expectancies, of
which acts are not elements, have recently been given significant roles
(Irwin, 1974), although their behavioral criteria remain to be established In
Bindra's theory, "learned correlations" among eliciting stimuli (ESs) are cru-
cial, but correlations between acts and subsequent stimuli, although ac-
knowledged, are much less prominent For example, in the lower half of
Bindra's Table 1, both kinds of contingency could arise, but only the sti-
mulus-stimulus relation enters the diagram Examples of learned correlations
strikingly represent the organism as a passive spectator of events pro-
grammed by an experimenter (Bindra, 1976 op cit, Table 7 1, p 146) It is
extremely difficult to understand how the fine-tuned temporal organization of
Bindra's "overlapping and nested" contingencies among events can survive
the organism's concurrent behavior; obviously, whether one ES does or does
not occur after another often depends altogether upon how the organism
behaves in the interval The difficulty would be compounded when the
organism's own behavior interacts with that of others in social situations,
prey-predator relations, and the like
REFERENCES
Epstein, A N. & Teitelbaum, P. Regulation of food intake in the absence
of taste, smell, and other oropharyngeal sensations. Journal of Com-
parative and Physiological Psychology, 1961, 55:753-759.
THE BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1978), 1
63

Commentary I Bindra: A perceptual-motivational view of adaptive behavior
Irwin, F. W. An analysis of the concepts ofdiscrimination and preference.
American journal of Psychology, 1958, 71:152-163.
On desire, aversion, and the affective zero. Psychological Review, 1961,
68:293-300.
Criteria of expectancy. Psychological Review, 1966,73:327-334.
Intentional behavior and motivation: A cognitive theory. Philadelphia:
J. B. Lippincott & Co., 1971.
Toward a cognitive theory of acquired value. Invited address before the
Eastern Psychological Association, Philadelphia, Pa., April 20, 1974.
by H.M.Jenkins
Department of Psychology, McMaster University, Hamilton, Ontario L8S 4K1,
Canada
Signal learning and response learning. I would like to comment on the most
radical feature of Bindra's thesis: the claim that the sole basis for learned
modifications of behavior is the learning of correlations between eliciting
stimulus complexes {ESs) Although Bindra writes "There is little doubt that
animals learn the correlations between their actions and the consequences
of those actions 
," he nevertheless believes that this learning is not a de-
terminant of performance It is important to understand that Bindra's proposal
is not merely to reject some specific version of how response-outcome learn-
ing might work, but to reject the general idea that response-outcome learn-
ing, however conceived, has a function
In my view Bindra's arguments for denying a role to response-outcome
learning are not compelling and his attempt to substitute universal causation
by elicitation is mistaken
Bindra's argument against assigning any role to response-outcome learn-
ing begins by citing phenomena such as motor equivalence and sensory
preconditioning, which cannot readily be explained by the theory that
response-outcome learning is the sole basis for learned behavior But no
matter how interpreted, these phenomena do not imply the absence of a role
for response-outcome learning when a reinforcer is made to depend on a
specific form or property of responding
The critical part of Bindra's argument is his contention that there is a spe-
cial difficulty in conceiving how the learning of a response-outcome relation
can be translated into the production of a response-a difficulty somehow
avoided in the translation of learned stimulus-stimulus relations into
responses 
Is it especially difficult to conceive of a translation from
response-outcome learning? Consider a possible account in cognitive lan-
guage The occurrences of certain response-outcome sequences (perhaps
those involving surprising outcomes) are represented in memory and stored
in relation to the stimulus conditions in which they occurred When the situa-
tion recurs the representations may be retrieved If on the occasion of the
retrieval the outcome has a positive valence, a control center calls for the
execution of that motor program that corresponds to the stored representa-
tion of the response A more detailed, and more physiologically oriented,
model for translating response-outcome learning into action has been
described by Milner (1970, pp 405-6) It is not my intention to defend a
particular scheme for translating a representation of response-outcome rela-
tions into action but only to argue that the problem is no more baffling than
the problem of translating a representation of stimulus events into action
Another objection offered by Bindra is that response-outcome learning
provides no way of accounting for the first appearance of the response I am
sure Bindra would agree, however, that we are rarely in a position to identify
an external eliciting stimulus In the absence of evidence to the contrary the
most plausible assumption would appear to be that the immediate cause of a
response sometimes lies in internal processes and sometimes in external
stimuli No advantage is gained by denying the possibility of internally
initiated responses
Consider now Bindra's own account of response production As the result
of the contingent presentation of ESs the first presented ES, or signaling
stimulus, acquires incentive value or motivational valence The principle of
response production is that "an animal will move toward an ES that is of
greater appetitive motivational valence or of lesser aversive motivalence
than other ESs in that situation at that time " From this statement it appears
that Bindra considers the autoshaping experiment to be the prototype of
response production It is of course true that animals sometimes approach
the signaling stimulus as though it were the appetitive object being signaled
But, as is evident from a scattered literature (e g , Zener, 1937; Stepien and
Stepien, 1965; Konorski, 1967; Kupalov, 1969), a signal will often initiate ac-
tion toward the food site in advance of food delivery In Bindra's theory ac-
tions directed toward the food site would be explained by supposing that the
signaling stimulus renders fixed features of the environment conditionally
excitatory (see also Moore, 1973) Movement in any direction would be
viewed as the product of a hypothetical profile of valences attaching to fea-
tures of the environment But until the principles for the transfer of valence
from the CS to other features of the environment are formulated we will not
have an explanation of response production in the classical conditioning, or
signaling, experiment
The most difficult problem for Bindra's theory of response poduction is to
account for the shaping of responses, and response properties, through
response-contingent reinforcement He suggests that response-contingent
reinforcement has its effect because it ensures that the animal will be observ-
ing whatever stimulus elicits the response just prior to the presentation of the
reinforcing stimulus Although in shaping the true contingency is with
respect to the response, the animal behaves, according to Bindra, as though
the contingency were with respect to a specific feature of the external envi-
ronment One might say that the animal is always a victim of a sensory super-
stition
In order to hold this view one must believe that for every shapable
response or property there is a specific eliciting stimulus or set of eliciting
stimuli This is hard to accept for shapable responses and response
properties without spatial orientation These would include responses such
as repeated circling and properties such as rate, mterresponse times, and
the force of response
For the sake of exploring Bindra's argument further let us accept that each
time the response specified by the shaping contingency is made the animal
observes an environmental feature To fix ideas, suppose a pigeon has been
shaped to move its head rapidly back and forth between two spots Accord-
ing to Bindra, it is being pulled from side to side by oscillating valences of
the two spots But the spots are not in fact being turned on and off, and they
are not the cause of a behavior; rather, the behavior causes the spots to be
seen one after the other "Looking at spots one after the other" is in fact a
response and for that reason the shaped performance cannot be assigned to
purely external causation
There are many attractive features of Bindra's theory but I see no reason to
abandon the commonsense view that animals are sufficiently flexible to learn
that outcomes are dependent on responding in certain ways as well as to
learn that outcomes may depend only on external signals
REFERENCES
Milner, P.M. Physiological psychology. New York: Holt, Rinehart and
Winston, 1970.
Moore, B. R. The role of directed Pavlovian reactions in simple instru-
mental leaning in the pigeon. In R. A. Hinde and J. S. Hinde (Eds.),
Constraints on learning. New York: Academic Press, 1973. Pp. 159-
188.
Konorski, J. Integrative activity of the brain. Chicago: University of
Chicago Press, 1967.
Kupalov, P. S. The formation of conditioned place reflexes. In M. Cole and
I. Maltzman (Eds.), Contemporary Soviet psychology. New York:
Basic Books, 1969. Pp. 735-762.
Stepien, I. and Stepien, L. The effects of bilateral lesions in precruciate
cortex on simple locomotor conditioned responses in dogs. Ada Bio-
logiae Experimentalis, 1965,25:387-394.
Zener, K. The significance of behavior accompanying conditioned salivary
secretion for theories of the conditioned response. American Journal
of Psychology, 1937,50:384-403.
by Howard H. Kendler
Department of Psychology, University of California, Santa Barbara, Calif 93106
Decision rules, decision rules. Two general orientations are possible for
evaluating Bindra's stimulating article One is to operate within the frame-
work of his theoretical speculations and assess them in relation to the avail-
able evidence The other is to view his efforts within an historical-methodo-
logical perspective to understand the decision rules that are employed to
evaluate the theory's explanatory power as well as to judge its future
potential.
The former approach is impossible because of limitations of space, and
admittedly, of my knowledge A shift of interest from general problems of
theories of animal learning (Kendler, 1959) to specific issues of human
64
THE BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1978), 1

Commentary/ Bindra: A perceptual-motivational view of adaptive behavior
developmental changes in discrimination-shift and classificatory behavior
(Kendler & Kendler, 1975) precludes my serving as an expert in analyzing all
the empirical issues encompassed by Bindra's conception In spite of this
drawback, some benefit may accrue from uncovering certain methodological
decisions and attitudes implicit in Bindra's conception.
Bindra exhibits a cavalier willingness to interpret certain complex
phenomena as simple refutations of "the traditional response-reinforcement
principle " For example, he offers the phenomenon of latent learning as be-
ing inconsistent with the "response-reinforcement principle" In support of
his conclusions he cites Kimble's box score (1961 op cit), which lists more
studies finding latent learning than those that did not Ignored in this box
score, however, is the most informative of all the California-type latent learn-
ing studies (Kanner, 1954) Kanner tried twice to replicate the original
California latent-learning studies (Blodgett, 1929; Tolman & Honzik, 1930)
without success In his third attempt, he was successful because he em-
ployed guillotine instead of swinging doors, and detained both the rewarded
and nonrewarded (latent learning) subjects in the end box for a lengthy time
period It is important to note that when transfer tests were employed to de-
termine whether the latent learning subjects learned as much as the food-
rewarded animals, the results definitely supported a negative answer Cogni-
tive theories of animal learning, or Bindra's perceptual-motivation model,
would be hard put to explain these results
I am neither implying that a "response-reinforcement" model can explain
all latent learning data nor am I trying to resurrect the latent learning con-
troversy My point is that the same decision rules should be employed to
judge evidence against one's own theory as against an opposing theory I
would defy any theory, including Bindra's model, to offer a detailed in-
terpretation of latent learning studies that would meet a stringent criterion of
explanation It should be noted that the decision rule to employ a "box-score
method" to resolve theoretical issues represents a pathetic commentary on
the status of psychological theorizing
Another decision rule implicit in Bindra's paper is that the "reinforcement-
model" is a frozen theoretical entity For example, he argues that the drive
stimulus idea is untenable because it has been found that rats can learn two
opposed responses under simultaneous hunger and thirst drives (Kendler,
1946) Although this study was designed to test Hull's (1943 op cit) drive
stimulus explanation of the findings (Hull, 1933; Leeper, 1935) that rats are
capable of acquiring differential reactions based solely on internal condi-
tions, the negative results obtained do not automatically make "inadequate"
the notion of a drive stimulus The point is that whenever a theorist obtains
results that are inconsistent with his hypothesis, he need not reject his
general theory or any basic concept within it He has the option to modify his
theoretical assumptions so that the anomalous results can be explained This
was done (Kendler, 1946op cit) without dispensing with the drive stimulus
concept Much subsequent data (eg , Levine, 1953) have supported the
theoretical usefulness of the drive stimulus concept The significant meth-
odological point is that a theory cannot be rejected on the basis of results of
so-called crucial experiments because such studies are never really crucial
We must recognize that the "response-reinforcement" model, like other
formulations, is more of an ongoing research program than a frozen
theoretical entity (Lakatos, 1970) Evaluations of research programs, which in
the strict sense can never be final, depend upon whether the program is
progressive in the sense of enlarging its empirical realm especially by pre-
dicting novel results and/or by becoming more precise, or whether the
program is degenerating in the sense of continually adding ad hoc assump-
tions to account for a mounting number of anomalous results
Bindra's conception of the core assumptions of the "response-reinforce-
ment" model differs from mine (Kendler & Spence, 1971) He maintains such
a formulation is rigidly committed to the acquisitions of specific responses
and thus is incapable of dealing with facts of behavioral flexibility A his-
torical view suggests otherwise; the early emphasis on stimulus-response
associations was in part due to the methodological concern of meeting the
standards of natural science objectivity: S-R language forces its user to think
in terms of manipulable experimental variables and observable responses
But the neobehavioristic research program is not necessarily committed to a
rigid response reproduction view; theoretical mechanisms can be, and have
been, developed to explain behavioral variability The significant strategic
issue is at what point in the "theoretical bridge" between the independent
and dependent variable should the nature of the response be specified A
single-unit S-R model specifies the nature of the response relatively early
along the bridge, while cognitive theories aspire to do this rather late The
danger of the former position is that the model cannot cope with facts of be-
havioral flexibility, while the risk of the latter orientation is that the behavioral
estimate may not be generated, leaving the subject "buried in thought"
Bindra believes he has solved this problem by proposing a model that in
essence makes the common-sense distinction between thought and action
This may prove to be a giant step forward, but we will know this only when his
"perceptual-motivational model" matures beyond its present stage of
development which Bindra describes " 
as a fresh starting point and
avenue of approach rather than as a formal theory" I would be more opti-
mistic about its ultimate success if it were not so strongly committed to one
kind of learning It may be that the response-reinforcement model is an ap-
propriate representation of some kinds of learning (Kendler & Kendler,
1975)
Perhaps the greatest obstacles to the potential success of Bindra's model
are the possible explanatory limitations of behavioral theories Behavioral
theories have been notably unsuccessful in resolving their fundamental con-
troversies, for example, one-trial versus incremental learning, serial versus
parallel processing, the necessity of postulating different memory stores,
latent learning, and so forth Perhaps behavior is too much of an open system
to allow definitive tests of the basic assumptions of its theories Perhaps this
is why all general behavioral theories have ultimately degenerated One
hope that Bindra would probably share is that the truth about these funda-
mental behavioral assumptions can be ascertained when they are rigorously
translated into testable neurophysiological assumptions There is, however,
no guarantee that such translations will be possible We shall see!
REFERENCES
Blodgett, H. C The effect of the introduction of reward upon the maze
performance of rats. University of California Publications in
Psychology. 4:113-34. 1929.
Hull, C. L. Differential habituation to internal stimuli in the albino rat.
Journal of Comparative Psychology. 16:255-73.1933.
Kanner, J. H. A test of whether the "nonrewarded" animals learned as
much as the "rewarded" animals in the California latent learning
study. Journal of Experimental Psychology. 48:175-84. 1954.
Kendler, H. H. Learning. Annual Review of Psychology. 10:43-88. 1959.
and Kendler, T. S. From discrimination learning to cognitive develop-
ment: A neobehavioristic odyssey. In: W. K. Estes (ed.), Handbook of
Learning and Cognitive Processes,vol. 1. Hillsdale, N.J., Erlbaum
Associates, Inc , 1975.
Kendler, H. H., and Spence, J T. Tenets of neobehaviorism. In: H. H.
Kendler & J T. Spence (eds ), Essays in Neobehaviorism: A Memorial
Volume to Kenneth W. Spence. New York, Appleton-Century-Crofts,
1971.
Lakatos, I. Falsification and the methodology of scientific research
programmes. In: I. Lakatos and A. Musgrave (eds.), Criticism and the
Growth of Knowledge. Cambridge, Cambridge University Press,
1970.
Leeper, R. The role of motivation in learning: A study of the phenomenon
of differential motivational control of the utilization of habits. Journal
of Genetic Psychology. 45:3-40. 1935.
Levine, S. The role of irrelevant drive stimuli in learning. Journal of Ex-
perimental Psychology. 45:410-16. 1953.
Tolman, E. C, and Honzik, C. H. Degrees of hunger, reward and non-
reward, and maze learning in rats. University of California Publica-
tions in Psychology. 4:241-56.1930.
by Peter R. Killeen
Department of Psychology, Arizona State University, Tempe, Ariz 85281
Pexgo: a plausible construct in need of data. Here is a brave new approach
to the problem of how behavior is evoked, coordinated, and strengthened
The central question is whether the pexgo, and its fellow-travelers the act-
assembly and eliciting stimulus, carry their weight in explanatory power, or
whether they just add to the load of intervening constructs that currently
burden experimental psychology
An explanation is achieved, some say, when the student stops asking
questions-when the bedrock of prior assumptions is finally tapped The
"generic nature of the concepts 'stimulus' and 'response'" explained the
"stimulus and response equivocation paradoxes" for many of us But if the
operant was defined by the three-term contingency, how could we get by so
long by operationally defining one of the terms as a switch closure, ignoring
THE BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1978), 1
65

Commentary/ Bindra: A perceptual-motivational view of adaptive behavior
the other terms and their interaction with it? "Operant" was a promissory
note, requiring that we fill in the details of response induction, elicitation, and
constraint by the eliciting stimulus context But it seemed easier to study
schedule effects, letting the lever or key winnow the wheat of operant
responses from the chaff of interim behavior and terminal behaviors of
deviant topography This mechanized sorting technology has saved us much
labor and much thought But it left hidden in the box much that was im-
portant, behaviors that can no longer be ignored
Bindra's constructs are not necessary for the analysis of most of the
operant conditioning and animal behavior studies that have appeared in our
literature; it would be a mistake to infer that they are therefore not necessary
for the study of animal behavior Because inductive empiricism has lagged,
speculative theorizing must lead, and unfortunately must do it with little in the
way of a data base to guide it Tolman's "vicarious trial and error" responses
were never adequately investigated, nor was his "searching for the stim-
ulus," nor was Skinner/Estes1 stimulus sampling theory The important role
of feedback stimuli in the free food phenomenon, the powerful and asym-
metric observing response effect, the ubiquity of sign-tracking - these
phenomena underscore the creative role that stimulus effects can have in the
control of behavior Discriminative stimuli do not just turn operants on and
off
Skinner's treatment of seeing as behavior, subject to manipulation by de-
privation, discriminative and reinforcing operations is no less radical than
Bindra's discussion of the pexgo But what did "seeing" do for Skinner9 It
was often a "precurrent" behavior, effective because it brought the organism
into contact with stimuli that released desired behaviors Skinner readily
moves responses inside the skin of the organism; why does he insist on
keeping stimuli outside? In urging that "seeing does not imply something
seen" he denigrates the utility of "sensations, images, and theory con-
geries " But once inside an organism, how do we tell the difference between
emancipated seeing and a sight? He quotes "a recent book" that contained
the sentence "A system of emancipated ideas temporarily seizes control of
the brain" and says "The facts are as well described by saying a system of
responses is temporarily pre-potent In either case we have still to ask
'Why?111 (Skinner, 1953, op cit)
Although Bindra's "ideas" are tied closely to the environment and to one
another and although they do not have to seize control, for they have always
had it, we still have to ask "Why?" Why is his account to be pre-
ferred? As Bindra notes, the proposed concepts "can serve as the elements
of several different types of new framework" His own construction, then,
must be seen as an arrangement of the explanatory elements that is only in-
completely 
constrained by the scant data 
Indeed, the constructs
themselves - perception, knowledge, and motivation - are still so vague that
they are more sentiments than elements
Why, for instance, can acts take no longer than half a second, necessitat-
ing an "act-assembly" to keep coordinated movements straight? Although
we are dealing with a conceptual nervous system, we can still be parsimo-
nious in detail Let our acts be of various lengths, synthesized out of smaller
acts This retains all the flexibility of the act-assembler Perhaps too much,
for not all "old sequences can be interrupted and changed within a fraction
of a second", try picking up a tune in the middle
Why, in Figure 1C, does not the central representation of food, generated
by the light, elicit the approaching and eating behaviors, as it did in 1B? Why
is control of responding transferred to the pexgo of light, instead of the light's
becoming a more certain elicitor of the food pexgo, which would continue to
control behavior? The way it stands, one wonders why a light pexgo should
elicit gnawing, and so forth-unless it is a foodlike light pexgo, an un-
necessary redundancy I suspect the problem is one of graphics rather than
of theory One struggles for ways to represent the blending of stimulus con-
trol and the veering directions it imparts to behaviors, with two dimensional
monochromatic media being little better than linear discourse
Whereas 
I wholeheartedly endorse 
Bindra's stand on incentive-
motivation, spatio-temporal valence gradients, and the4 interplay between
CNSs and environmental control, I remain neutral on his Perceptual-
Motivational Alternative The positive valence of its novelty is balanced by
the attraction of Skinner's response orientation - I feel more in control when I
think of seeing as behavior than when I think of pexgos vying every few centi-
seconds for the control of my next move Neither alterative is forced by the
data But Bindra had more data at his fingers when he erected his framework,
leaving it more commodious, and no one has yet started pouring concrete
Let's see now, if I take the arrows at the bottom of Figure 1, and bend them
around, so that
by M. J. Klingsporn
Department of Psychology, Wichita State University, Wichita, Kans 67208
On explanation, familiarity, and response sequencing. In his paper Bindra
continues the development of his position that incentive-anticipation is the
prototype of all learning Since the paper is a bit brief I found it necessary to
include under my considerations elaborations given by Bindra in his 1968
and 1974 Psychological Review articles as well as in his book A Theory of In-
telligent Behavior
The theory has shown considerable progress in its development over the
years Basically, I find myself strongly in support of those aspects of the
theory developed earlier, but not quite so comfortable with the more recent
development of his "pexgo" concept Let me first sketch what I perceive to
be the major solid features of the theory, adding an occasional "Amen," and
then I shall raise some questions regarding some of what I suspect are more
minor features that may be still in a state of development flux
First some general comments The theory is atomistic in that it assumes
that both gnostic assemblies (percepts) and act assemblies (directed motor
movement) can be decomposed 
into fundamental and irreducible
components consisting of gnostic neurons and motor neurons Furthermore it
is reductionistic, both the atoms and the larger functional organizations be-
ing putative physiological entities In these respects the theory is similar to
Hebb's (1949) Previous attempts to articulate physiological concepts with
psychological concepts rich enough to explain complex behavior have been
premature Perhaps the time is ripe now, perhaps it never will be At any rate
this commentator is not qualified to judge this aspect of the theory The
theory attempts and succeeds, up to a point, to be a truly explanatory theory
Descriptions are not meaningful unless they are tied together by explanatory
constructs [see also Bramerd, this volume, next issue, forthcoming] Bindra
is to be applauded here Finally, the theory is "monistic" in that learning is
assumed to be a single process, all learning involves the construction of
gnostic assemblies, and these assemblies function both in knowing (the 'g'
in pexgo stands for gnostic) and in behaving No schemata intervene to store
memories or to account for recognition via some matching process
Of course Bindra makes allowances for the recognition process Sensory
features can presumably be activated apart from the development of gnostic
assemblies This event would result in one's failing to identify what one has
encountered When the stimulus activates a pexgo, then one recognizes the
stimulus object Thus the gnostic assembly nicely handles recognition
However, it is not clear that it will allow for distinctions of familiarity in the
recognition process Not only do I recognize a particular object as a plate,
but I am aware that it is the same plate I saw five minutes ago, which was
given to me by a friend two weeks ago While Bindra makes some provisions
for pexgos differing with respect to intensity of arousal, it is not clear that this
single dimension makes sufficient provisions for the complex distinctions
one can make with respect to familiarity
Similar questions can be raised regarding motor involvement I know how
to throw a ball; I can claim that I intend to throw the ball five minutes from
now; I can be "set" to throw it upon command, or I can, in an emergency,
throw the ball without conscious preparation It is not clear that the motor
readiness associated with a pexgo is such as to allow for all these distinc-
tions I realize that Bindra has been primarily concerned with accounting for
sub-human animal data, which attenuates the above criticisms somewhat
Nevertheless, the theory, to be complete, must ultimately come to grips with
these issues
I am a bit uncomfortable with Bindra's hypothesis that integrated se-
quences of responses are neither chained together nor organized in hierar-
chies as the TOTES of Miller, Galanter, and Pribram (see Pribram, this Com-
mentary), but seem to be multiply linked conglomerates An example helps
clarify this issue Suppose a rat is conditioned to run a maze with choice
points, A, B, and C in that order The central motive state of hunger together
with the sight of A arouses the components of the pexgo pA, which makes
ready response A which, as response A unfolds, introduces stimuli from B,
which makes ready response B, etc , pA is also correlated with pC as well as
pB, and all of them with the anticipated food, so that if leg B of the maze were
removed, the organism would be able to complete the final leg without
somehow simulating the running of B as the chaining hypothesis would seem
66
THE BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1978), 1

Commentary/ Bindra: A perceptual-motivational view of adaptive behavior
to require So far, so good! Now suppose we sequence responses in the
same location For example, suppose levers A, B, and C must be pressed in
order in an operant box If short circuiting is possible, why wouldn't it occur
in this situation to abort the normal sequence of responses leading to
response C immediately? The levers are close enough so that to see one
alone is nearly impossible If an initial intensity differential leads to response
A, the feedback from response A could augment pB etc, but then how could
one ever master a sequence wherein the "same" response occurs more than
once? For example, the sequence A-B-A-C requires response A to augment
pB on one occasion and pC on the other Similar difficulties obtain in the
temporal double-alternation response as well as the detour problem
The rejection of the notion of a reinforcement event strengthening the
association of stimuli to responses has been brilliantly defended by Bindra
on previous occasions The difficulty one has in accounting for motor equiva-
lence with such a theory leads this commentator to prefer an S-S theory Of
course, one could define a "response class" as all responses that affect the
environment the same way, as the operant folk are prone to do However, if
one opts for an explanatory theory, rather than a description of control tech-
niques, one must inquire as to the nature of such functional equivalence
Functionally equivalent responses require concomitant representations of
the corresponding stimulus configuration such as schemata, or Bindra's
pexgo, to provide a basis for such functionally equivalent response classes
REFERENCE
Hebb, D. O. 1949. The organization of behavior. John Wiley and Sons,
New York.
by Frank A. Logan
Department of Psychology, University of New Mexico, Albuquerque, N M 87131
Intelligent vs. stupid behavior, or learning concepts vs. responses. Be-
cause Bindra's article ranges from very broad conceptual issues to rather
specific analytic details, and many of the latter draw importantly on his other
recent publications, I shall confine my comments to the general orientation of
his approach as reflected in this article 
Bindra has quite clearly
characterized the several related approaches to the fundamental issue of
"What is learned?" In this regard, he aligns himself with those who focus on
the purposive variability and adaptive flexibility of behavior For example,
Tolman believed that behavior can never be understood in terms of specific
responses; the behavioral component of a means-end-readiness or a sign-
gestalt-expectation is a performance that may encompass a wide diversity of
specific responses adapted to the prevailing circumstances Tolman was
joined in this position by Lashley, whose rats successfully traversed mazes
in spite of extensive cortical damage that severely impaired motor perfor-
mance as initially practiced To such theorists, the obvious implication is that
organisms know a great deal more than at least appears to be implied by
traditional S-R conceptions
Historically, theorists of this persuasion have played the role of critics of
S-R theory, with paltry little in the way of explicit theory susceptible to attack
Although much of Bindra's case rests on the presumed inadequacy of the
response-reinforcement approach, he has proposed at least the rudiments of
an alternative formulation that may go beyond merely identifying problem
areas However, in this article at least, Bindra does more by way of telling us
how he thinks about topics ranging from instrumental acts to observational
learning than he does in providing a specific theory amenable to experi-
mental analysis
For my part, I have been driven in the diametrically opposite direction My
view can be traced to Guthrie, who contended that his cats did not learn the
experimenter's concept of the act of escaping from a puzzle box, but rather
learned the very particular movements that happened to eventuate in es-
cape I have extended this thesis (in the reference cited by Bindra) to include
the quantitative as well as the topographical features of a response My own
thesis is much stronger than that organisms can learn particular speeds and
amplitudes when the conditions of reinforcement require finely tuned perfor-
mance; they inevitably and automatically do learn the micromolecular fea-
tures of behavior the very way it is practiced
It would be easy but fruitless to argue the case on the basis of examples I
am confident that for every instance of intelligent behavior in which, for
example, a chimp assembled two sticks to make a longer tool, there is a
contrasting instance of stupid behavior in which, for example, a chicken
pranced helplessly behind the barrier of an umweg problem And I side with
Hull in contending that an adequate theory must equally account for
maladaptive behavior as for adaptive behavior
My preference is to begin with the fine-grained details of responses and to
build these up to intelligent behavior through response generalization and
acquired equivalence Bindra's preference is to begin with perceptual orga-
nization and attribute stupid behavior to restricted environmental stimulation
and limiting conditions of motivation My belief is that perceptual organiza-
tion is a necessary feature of an adequate general theory of behavior, but it
remains to be seen whether Bindra, or others of similar orientation, can sus-
tain the thesis that perception alone is sufficient My hunch is that Bindra's
further elaboration of the notion of act-assemblies will soften the edges
between our positions
by N. J. Mackintosh
Laboratory of Experimental Psychology, University of Sussex, Brighton, England
Limits on reinterpreting instrumental conditioning in terms of classical
conditioning. There is much to admire, and much with which I agree, in
Bindra's paper We should, I think, accept, far more than has been generally
accepted, that the changes in behavior an experimenter observes, in a condi-
tioning experiment are a consequence of his subject's learning relationships
between stimuli and reinforcers Responses once thought to be paradigm
cases of operants, strengthened or weakened by their consequences in ac-
cordance with the law of effect, now appear to depend largely on stimulus-
reinforcer contingencies Pigeons peck illuminated response keys, not so
much because the response of pecking is strengthened by the subsequent
delivery of food, but rather because the sight of the key is associated with
food Wherever a supposedly instrumental response moves the subject in
space, as when a rat runs down an alley into a goal-box, or jumps from one
compartment to another of a shuttle-box, the instrumental contingencies of
reinforcement (food is contingent on running, or escape from shock on jump-
ing) necessarily produce correlations between external stimuli and changes
in reinforcement It is probable that these latter correlations are the more im-
portant: the rat learns that the goal-box is associated with food, or one com-
partment of the shuttle-box with shock, and appropriate approach and avoid-
ance behavior is established in exactly the sort of way Bindra has proposed
So far, so good Bindra is, in effect, arguing that classical conditioning is
more important than has generally been recognised and that a process of
classical conditioning will explain many instances of supposedly instru-
mental conditioning The question remains whether a complete takeover bid
is feasible Not all instrumental responses, as Bindra notes, move the subject
in space It is true that a rat must be in a particular location in order to press a
lever protruding from one wall of an experimental chamber, but the fact that
he is in that location does not guarantee that he will press it We can grant
that the contingencies of an instrumental experiment will ensure that only a
highly restricted set of stimuli (pressure on and contact with the lever in addi-
tion to a close view of it) will be correlated with food; it remains a matter of
some speculation whether these "finer perceptual differentiations" are
sufficient to explain the skilled performance of the well-trained rat Moreover
many instrumental responses need not be defined in relation to external
stimuli at all A dog may be trained to flex his foreleg to obtain food or avoid
shock, when these responses have no other effect on the external environ-
ment Experimental intervention may remove all, or most, external stimuli that
normally accompany the performance of an instrumental response, as when
pigeons are required to peck a key in a totally darkened chamber, or
monkeys to press a lever that they can neither see nor feel In all of these
cases, instrumental responding is maintained or can be established de
novo, but it is difficult to see how such instrumental learning can be reduced
to "stimulus discrimination learning" in the ordinary sense of that term It
seems more plausible to suppose that animals have learned in this sort of
case (as in perhaps others) a correlation between their responding and its
consequences I agree with Bindra that the ability to learn such a relationship
does not in and of itself explain why the animal's behavior changes (equally
agree that William James' (1890 op cit) ideomotor theory is not the most
plausible explanation of voluntary action: thinking of a response is not the
same as executing it What we need, however, is a fully developed theory of
instrumental performance I am not convinced that we can get rid of the prob-
lem by assimilating all instrumental learning to classical conditioning
THE BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1978), 1
67

Commentary/ Bindra: A perceptual-motivational view of adaptive behavior
by James E. Mazur
Department of Psychology and Social Relations, Harvard University, Cambridge,
Mass 02138
Reinforcement is dead; long live reinforcement theories. Because I think
of myself as a reinforcement theorist, I read with great interest articles claim-
ing that the concept of reinforcement should be put to rest In making such a
suggestion, Bindra links the term "reinforcement" with a series of highly
questionable positions These include: 1) the idea that very specific stimuli
are connected to very specific responses through the process of reinforce-
ment - a notion that cannot account for the "adaptiveness" or "flexibility" of
motor behavior, 2) the belief that all behaviors can be readily modified by
operant conditioning procedures, a belief that is at odds with many findings
concerning "instinctive" or "species-specific" behavior patterns (e.g,
Bolles, 1970 and this Commentary; Tinbergen, 1951), and 3) the position that
reinforcement is a necessary ingredient for all learning, a position that can-
not account for phenomena such as latent learning, sensory preconditioning,
and observational learning Whereas some reinforcement theorists may have
held these views in the past, I contend that they are not prevalent today
Before discarding the concept of reinforcement, we should at least examine
its current meaning
Unfortunately, use of the term has been anything but consistent Textbooks
usually define reinforcement as the presentation of some stimulus (a rein-
forcer) following a response, which increases the strength of that response
This definition is ambiguous, for reinforcement might refer to either the
procedure of following responses with certain stimuli or to the effect, the
increase in the strength or probability of a response Both usages appear in
the literature Furthermore, psychologists have suggested that reinforcement
can occur in the absence of any external stimulus, because a behavior may
produce interoceptive stimuli that are themselves rewarding (Skinner, 1971)
To make matters worse, the term is not invoked just when there is a change in
behavior It is also applied to behaviors in a "steady state," where an
organism has become fully acquainted with the procedure and its behavior
has stabilized (Hermstein, 1970) Thus "reinforcement" may refer to a
procedure for presenting stimuli, or it may involve neither a procedure nor an
observable stimulus The term is used when a behavior increases, or when it
is maintained at some stable level Because the term can mean so many
things, it is not surprising that misunderstandings frequently arise between
its advocates and its critics
This does not mean that reinforcement theorists can make no important
contributions to the study of behavior On the contrary, their subject matter is
central to a science of behavior - the factors that determine an organism's
choice of behaviors and the pattern of these behaviors through time In dis-
cussing this problem of "response-production," Bindra suggests that "the
form and frequency of an instrumental action are determined, not so much by
the incentive value of a particular stimulus in the situation, but by the relative
valence of the various situational stimuli and by the pattern of their distribu-
tion in space and time " Bindra's position is similar to my own view that dif-
ferent behaviors (or more precisely, the stimuli resulting from different be-
haviors) have different subjective values for the organism, and a behavior's
relative duration will depend on its current relative value to the organism
(Mazur, 1975, 1977) Other reinforcement theorists have also suggested that
the probability, duration, or strength of a behavior is determined by its value
to the organism (Baum & Rachlin, 1969; Cohen, 1975; Killeen, 1972 and also
see this Commentary; Miller, 1976; Premack, 1965, 1971; Rachlin, 1971)
Thus at least among some researchers, the search for the determinants of be-
havior has proceeded from externally-presented stimuli to the subjective
value of these stimuli for the organism This change is one that Bindra would
probably approve of, yet the term "reinforcement" has remained and it is
often used as almost a synonym for "subjective value "
If this hypothetical construct of "subjective value" is to have any predictive
worth, it must retain as close a connection as possible to observable events
Bindra makes no concrete predictions about the three-way relationship
between E, pE, and R, but this relationship must often be straightforward
Many studies have found simple relationships between such factors as the
rate, duration, or delay of reinforcer presentations and the rate, duration, or
intensity of instrumental behaviors (de Villiers, 1977) Thus, in many cases,
the experimenter need not explicitly consider the "subjective values" of the
alternative behaviors because measurable aspects of the external stimuli
(reinforcers) are sufficient to predict a subject's behavior quite accurately
This experimental strategy by no means implies that the researcher believes
that no representation of the stimulus exists in the organism's nervous
system Some such representation must exist for every stimulus influencing
the creature's behavior, and in some cases it may be a very distorted reflec-
tion of the external stimulus
I suggest that although many modern reinforcement theorists study the
relationships between stimuli (reinforcers) and responses, their implicit
assumption is that Es do not control behavior directly, but only via pEs, the
organism's subjective representations of stimuli and their values The or-
derliness of the data (de Villiers & Hermstein, 1976; Navarick&Fantino, 1976
and see also Navarick, this Commentary) suggests that their research
strategies are not foolhardy, but their use of the term "reinforcement" sub-
jects their writings to ambiguities and misconceptions Perhaps Bindra is
correct when he says that the term should be abandoned; if not, researchers
may never be able to straighten out all the confusion Researchers might use
the terms "hedonic stimulus" or "contingent stimulus" when referring to an
external stimulus and "subjective value" or "valence" when discussing the
organism's internal representation of the importance of that stimulus
The terminology of behavior analysis is of secondary importance, for the
research of reinforcement theorists will continue in any case The orderly
relationships between reinforcers and responses cannot be ignored The
significance of this research will be a matter for future assessment I, for one,
am very optimistic about its importance for the understanding of behavior
REFERENCES
Baum, W. M., and Rachlin, H. C. Choice as time allocation. Journal of the
Experimental Analysis of Behavior. 12:861-74.1969.
Bolles, R. C. Species-specific defense reactions and avoidance learning.
Psychological Review. 77:32-48.1970.
Cohen, I. L. The reinforcement value of schedule-induced drinking.
Journal of the Experimental Analysis of Behavior. 23:37-44.1975.
de Villiers, P. A. Choice in concurrent schedules and a quantitative
formulation of the law of effect. In: W. K. Honig and J. E. R. Staddon
(eds.), Handbook of Operant Behavior. Englewood Cliffs, N.J.,
Prentice-Hall, 1977.
de Villiers, P. A. and Hermstein, R. J. Toward a law of response strength.
Psychological Bulletin. 83:1131-53.1976.
Hermstein, R. J. On the law of effect./ournaZ of the Experimental
Analysis of Behavior. 13:243-66.1970.
Killeen, P. The matching law. Journal of the Experimental Analysis of Be-
havior. 17:489-95.1972.
Mazur, J. E. The matching law and quantifications related to Premack's
principle. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Animal Behavior
Processes. 1:374-86.1975.
Quantitative studies of reinforcement relativity. Journal of the Experi-
mental Analysis of Behavior. 27:137-49.1977.
Miller, H. L. Matching-based hedonic scaling in the pigeon. Journal of the
Experimental Analysis of Behavior. 26:335-47.1976.
Navarick, D. J., and Fantino, E. Self-control and general models of choice.
Journal of Experimental Psychology: Animal Behavior Processes.
2:75-87.1976.
Premack, D. Reinforcement theory. In: D. Levine (ed.), Nebraska Sympo-
sium on Motivation. Lincoln, Neb., University of Nebraska Press,
1965.
Catching up with common sense or two sides of a generalization: Rein-
forcement and punishment. In: R. Glaser (ed.), The Nature of Rein-
forcement. New York, Academic Press, 1971.
Rachlin, H. On the tautology of the matching law. Journal of the Experi-
mental Analysis of Behavior. 15:249-51. 1971.
Skinner, B. F. Beyond Freedom and Dignity. New York, Vintage Books,
1971.
&yE.W.Menzel,Jr.
Department of Psychology, SUNY at Stony Brook, Stony Brook, N.Y 11794
Reinforcement theory: an experimenter-oriented rather than a subject-
oriented philosophy. I have always found myself in basic agreement with
Professor Bindra's writings, and the present article is no exception However,
the more experimental data I see cited in favor of perceptual-motivational al-
ternatives to response-reinforcement, the more I wonder whether they are
necessary here Quite possibly logical or philosophical considerations alone
would suffice to settle this issue
The key assumption behind response-reinforcement (and behavioristic
theories in general) is that events are best described from the experimenter's
68
THE BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1978), 1

Commentary/ Bindra: A perceptual-motivational view of adaptive behavior
rather than the subject's point of view If one accepts this assumption without
question, it does seem plausible that not only "reinforcers" (objects) but also
"reinforcement" and other psychological processes can ultimately be
defined in terms of the operations and procedures the experimenter uses;
that the subject's behavior can similarly be defined; that the effects of an ob-
ject or event upon behavior often seem "automatic"; that accounting for the
variance of a subject's behavior is equivalent to explaining it; and that to ask
what correspondence, if any, exists between the experimenter's point of view
and the subject's point of view is unnecessary
If I were studying the behavior of rocks I might accept these assumptions;
but it seems to me that for most psychologists (including at least some be-
haviorists) even a complete and highly parsimonious description from the
point of view of an "objective" experimenter remains totally trivial unless it
can somehow be transformed into statements that make sense from alterna-
tive points of view, most particularly that of one's subject In other words, we
ask different questions of living beings than we would ask about rocks; and if
anyone doubts this, I ask him to look at the titles of any journal in psychology
or animal behavior he cares to examine If this makes psychology dualistic,
so be it
Let me give a concrete example of what I mean Imagine that, like Rene
Descartes when he first got the idea for his analytical geometry, I found that I
could completely and parsimoniously describe the movements of a fly on a
ceiling by noting, at any given time, its distance (and the distance of its
various body parts) from the walls of the room Would this constitute an ade-
quate psychological or behavioral description? For a Cartesian geometer or
Newtonian physicist who was content to ask no questions about the fly that
he would not ask about any other object or "point in space," it obviously
might But even here some serious problems remain My description thus far
is not an "unbiased" view of reality; it is, rather, a statement about what the
world might look like if the front-left corner of the room were one's zero point,
and the walls of the room were one's frame of reference, and space were
empty, homogeneous, and isotropic, and distance relationships were transi-
tive, and all our measurements were made with absolute precision But
neither I nor any other living being (only some fictitious and idealized "stan-
dard observer" into whose shoes I have been trying to place myself) really
sees the world in this fashion In brief, the very axioms of Cartesian geometry
and classical mathematics are psychophysical assumptions which are
known from the outset to be arbitrary, freely chosen and freely modifiable if
this will better suit our purposes as students of nature The principal justifica-
tion for such descriptions in psychology is not that they are "true" but that
they are convenient, reliable and extremely simple-at least in principle-
and they are widely accepted by other experimenters as a standard of com-
parison against which we can contrast other, more interesting descriptions
By what criteria, then, can we decide on the best description? My own
answer to this question (at least in the present context) is that we do not know
until we have first of all discovered what "axioms" and what metrics are ap-
propriate from the point of view of one's principal subject-which in the
present case I shall take to be the fly rather than myself And this inevitably
gives rise to psychophysical and perceptual questions about the fly, includ-
ing (for example): What does the fly's zero point seem to be? What is its
frame of reference (if not the walls of the room)? To what degree and in what
senses is its space non-empty, nonhomogeneous and anisotropic? To what
degree are distance relationships transitive for it? Does the fly's system
remained fixed and constant over time; and if not, what rules govern the
changes that do occur? Until such questions have been answered, any talk
about having measured the fly's behavior or the features of its world should
be construed in a nonpsychological and provisional sense
To carry the argument one step further: Functional classifications of ob-
jects (for example, terms such as reinforcer, food, fear object, sex object) are
no more definable from the point of view of the experimenter alone than are
the foregoing spatial concepts, for they have no meaning without reference to
a live and perceiving subject, and there is probably no object whose effects
are invariant across time, across contexts, across species, and across indi-
vidual subjects To accurately predict that a particular object will function as
a reinforcer, the experimenter must obviously first of all know something
about his subject's abilities and predilections, and only after this can he rely
upon his knowledge of what is in the "object as such " Thus, for example,
before I would assume that a banana actually will function as a reinforcer, I
would assure that the subject is a monkey (say) rather than a cat, that he
knows or is capable of discovering that this object is out there in the environ-
ment, that he will detect its similarity to other objects he has encountered on
previous occasions and thus recognize its potential value for himself, and so
on Furthermore, before I can be said to have explained how this object func-
tions as a reinforcer, it seems to me that I am obliged to explain how the sub-
ject can know and do these things, and not simply take his knowledge as
well as my own for granted In short, the same psychophysical considera-
tions apply to all objects and events in general, and in this sense the distinc-
tion between "pure psychophysics" and the "psychophysics of reinforce-
ment" collapses, at least if one is trying to discover the point of view of one's
subject How does the subject (as well as the experimenter) distinguish
between "pure, neutral psychophysical stimuli" and "impure" ones, or
classify objects, if not by perception? Here is where response-reinforcement
theory tends to become either silent or circular; and this is why I see no real
alternative to a subject-oriented perceptual-motivational theory of some sort
Professor Bindra's theory seems a bit more experimenter-oriented than it
needs to be; but it is certainly a step in the right direction
A subject-oriented approach does not, incidentally, imply that one really
can get out of one's own skin and literally describe the world in precisely the
way it would look from the point of view of a monkey or a fly It implies only
that insofar as we do utilize subjective information and ask subject-oriented
questions, we should not pretend to do otherwise For that matter, however,
can we as objectivists really place ourselves in the shoes of a "standard ob-
server" whose perceptual and motivational organization is also quite non-
human? In either case we are obviously indulging in metaphors; and I fail to
see how the former sort of metaphor is any more harmful than the latter
by O. Hobart Mowrer
Department of Psychology, University of Illinois, Champaign, III 61820
Learning theory, a will-o-the-wisp? It is extremely difficult - I am tempted to
say impossible-to prepare, in brief or even extended scope, a critique of
Bindra's paper that is incisive and all-inclusive His paper, I feel, is para-
doxical because the realities with which it purports to deal are paradoxical
Some twenty years ago, when I was preparing a two-volume treatise on the
psychology of learning that I then believed represented a substantial, if not
epochal advance in learning theory, I recall the following comment by a
colleague: "There has been a long succession of learning experiments
which, at least in the eyes of the experimenters, provided definitive support
for some specific conception of the learning process, but which would be
discredited by later research quite as effectively as earlier theories had
been " Of the appearance and decline of differing conceptions of the learn-
ing process there seems to be no end; and despite Bindra's evident convic-
tion that he now, at long last, has at least a "tentative" hold on the real thing, it
seems unlikely that his postulations will have exceptional stability or du-
rability
At the outset of Bindra's paper one is reminded of E C Tolman's book,
Purposive Behavior in Rats and Men (1932 op cit) in which the latter writer,
even then, was likewise in revolt against the "traditional response-reinforce-
ment principle " Tolman held that, in the course of learning, living organisms
do not require stereotyped responses but, instead, "cognitive maps," "that
this leads to that," and that performance is thereafter determined by these
cognitions, and what Bindra calls "incentive-motivation," that is, what it is
that an organism wants at a particular point in time and space But although
Tolman's work was an effective blow to Watsonian Behaviorism, it did not
prevent the emergence, in B F Skinner's book, The Behavior of Organisms
(1938, op cit) of a form of Behaviorism that was destined to be even more
far-reaching and influential than that of J B Watson ever was
Common sense and common experience favor the view that learning in-
volves specific cognitions rather than specific behaviors For example, I
recently needed to do a number of errands, and in preparation I made a list of
the things I wanted to do (so I would not forget any of them), and then I
mapped out or planned, "in my head," the most efficient sequence or route
for doing these things I had never before performed this particular sequence
of acts, and probably never shall again, hence giving the lie to the view that
what we learn is a particular sequence or course of actions But everyone
knows, and from time immemorial has known, how to make creative and
novel plans of this kind, so where do we go from here?
Such knowledge and behavior involve a mystery: How does physical
energy emitted by stimuli in one's environment or generated in one's own
body get translated into conscious processes? It would appear that Bindra
THE BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1978), 1
69

Commentary/ Bindra: A perceptual-motivational view of adaptive behavior
thinks he has solved the "mind-body" problem or the paradox of psycho-
physical interaction; at least he does not refer to it as an obstacle He uses
both physicalistic and mentalistic terminology-as we all do in common
speech; but there is a staggering perplexity here, when one stops to think of
it, and Bindra does not even discuss it So far as I can see, Bindra has not
dispelled this ancient source of perplexity, and I personally doubt that
anyone ever shall [see Roland et al, this issue; Haugeland, next issue]
Behaviorism is an attempt to develop an admittedly simplistic (if one is
honest about the matter) conception of behavior change that is based
entirely upon merely observing correlations between events (behavior and
reinforcement) in the physical world, and Bindra admits that this "framework"
has certain "strengths," recognized by Skinner and innumerable others for
thousands of years before him; and Bindra does not, I believe, demonstrate
that his framework is stronger or more useful, although certainly conceptually
more intricate And, of course, the behavionsts are left with the embarrass-
ment of explaining what they mean by "observing "
The Bindra paper is hard reading One problem is that certain "technical"
terms are not defined or only weakly so; and phrases such as "modulating
the strength of pexgoes of eliciting stimuli" and "overlapping and nested
correlations between stimulus events" are exceedingly hard to grasp In
such instances, it is often difficult to discriminate between nonsense and
profundity I confess that this was a difficulty that I frequently experienced in
reading, and rereading, this paper
It is certainly true that recently there has been a widespread upswing in the
use of cognitive and perceptual language on the part of learning theorists,
thus representing a strident deviation from the language of Skmnenan Be-
haviorism; but, as we have seen, Tolman and associates staged a similar re-
volt against Watsoman Behaviorism nearly half a century ago, and that had
immediate but not lasting effects Will the present renaissance of cognitive
psychology (with which I have a certain sympathy) be any more enduring?
The trouble is, as I have earlier suggested, that in psychology we seem to be
vexed with certain paradoxes that, because of an apparent and perhaps
understandable inability of the mind (or organism) to fully understand itself,
are doggedly persistent
by Edward J. Murray
Department of Psychology, University of Miami, Coral Gables, Fla. 33124
Implications for clinical behavior modification. One of the most important
developments of the last few decades in the area of mental health has been
the emergence of clinical behavior modification Based on the idea that be-
havioral disturbances are learned rather than the product of a medical
disease, the behavior modification movement promised a whole new
technology based on principles developed in scientific psychological labo-
ratories Yet, in spite of some exciting practical applications, the behavior
modification movement today is in a state of ideological crisis and
theoretical confusion (e g , Lazarus, 1977)
The ideological crisis centers around the realization that the principles of
learning on which most clinical behavior modification procedures were
based are simply not adequate to explain the phenomena encountered by
clinicians attempting to solve practical problems To a large extent, the prin-
ciples of learning that have failed the practicing behavior modifier are those
included by Bindra in the response-reinforcement framework that has
dominated the behavioral sciences for so long a time The theoretical issues
raised by Bindra about direct response strengthening, behavioral flexibility,
perceptual learning, and cognitive processes are paralleled by practical
difficulties in clinical behavior modification (e g , Murray and Jacobson,
1978)
A great many behavior modification programs based on the response-rein-
forcement theory have been established for disturbed children in family and
school settings, for institutionalized juvenile delinquents, for hospitalized
psychiatric patients, and other specialized populations Although these pro-
grams start out successfully, they frequently begin to run into serious difficul-
ties and limitations Too many events are difficult to explain in terms of direct
reinforcement Successfully reinforced adaptive behavior often fails to
generalize from the home to the school In fact, children sometimes get better
in one situation and worse in another When adequate control groups are
utilized, changes attributed to reinforcement frequently turn out to be due to
normal developmental processes, the attention shown to the child, or more
complex changes in the social systems involved
As clinicians depart from the conceptual constraints of the response-
reinforcement position, the behavior modification procedures may become
more effective For example, many programs start out modifying behavior
with very concrete reinforcers such as candy, tokens, and even money Since
this method of behavioral control departs from social reality, concrete rein-
forcers are "faded out" in favor of the natural contingencies in the environ-
ment that involve social approval, reciprocal support, self-reinforcement
standards, and so on Of course, these natural contingencies were there all
along so what the concrete reinforcement procedure seems to have done is
focus attention on the way the social environment works
Going even further, it seems that many reinforcement programs in clinical
settings operate as somewhat awkward means of teaching patients about
social contingencies, about the nested correlations between informational
and hedonic stimuli and between responses and stimuli Except for special
groups such as the severely retarded, this information can be taught in more
effective ways dependent on perception rather than response shaping Thus,
most progressive behavior modification programs now emphasize observa-
tion of models, vicarious conditioning, verbal instructions, dramatic
demonstrations, symbolic rehearsal, and group discussion In other words,
the focus of behavior modification has shifted to the transmission of informa-
tion
It is interesting to note that the importance of observational learning in
clinical situations was resisted for a considerable period of time because of
the adherence of early behavior modifiers to the response-reinforcement
position Attempts were made to derive such observational learning from
response-reinforcement principles reminiscent of the latent learning con-
troversy It took a great deal to break through this conceptual logjam and
open up the newer technology The perceptual emphasis of Bindra's ap-
proach is definitely consistent with these developments in clinical behavior
modification
The problems of flexibility in behavior that Bindra addresses have also
been problems in clinical behavior modification Again, the practical
difficulty seems related to the response-reinforcement concept Early at-
tempts at behavior modification emphasized the conditioning or extinction of
specific responses Such treatment tended to have limited success One
example is systematic desensitization for phobic stimuli Originally the idea
was to replace the fear response with something like a relaxation response to
the specific fearful stimulus This procedure turned out to be of limited
clinical usefulness A more effective procedure is to teach relaxation as a
coping response to use in a variety of fearful situations Even more powerful
is teaching the patient a number of coping responses including assertive-
ness, self-statements, fantasies, and strategies for application to many situa-
tions, even those not forseen by the clinician The change is from dealing
with specific responses to teaching general principles
The motivational aspect of Bindra's theory also bears on very recent
developments in clinical behavior modification. One of the earlier theoretical
embarrassments of behavior therapy was that eliminating one small prob-
lem, such as a phobia, often had a positive effect on many other problems in
the person's life For example, teaching a somewhat timid boy to swim
seemed to enhance his self-esteem beyond ordinary expectation So, too, a
juvenile delinquent earning tokens for work with an automated learning ma-
chine sometimes changes his entire attitude The process is similar to the ex-
pansive mood after receiving a pleasant letter described by Bindra The
effect of such hedonic events is not simply reinforcing but emotional The in-
dividual does not just increase the frequency of the most contiguous
response but changes the perception of the entire environment Perhaps
even more important the person changes his perception of himself The em-
phasis today in clinical modification is also on the person's perception of his
efficacy and competence
In conclusion, Bindra's theory of perception-motivation is a welcome al-
ternative to the response-reinforcement theory with respect to its implications
for clinical behavior modification Rather than abandoning the learning ap-
proach for a sheer empiricism, turning to a better conception of learning
such as Bindra's perception-motivation theory, may provide a meaningful
foundation for behavior modification procedures
REFERENCES
Lazarus, A. A. Has behavior therapy outlived its usefulness? American
Psychologist, 1977,32:550-554.
70
THE BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1978), 1

Commentary/ Bindra: A perceptual-motivational view of adaptive behavior
Murray, E. J. and Jacobson, L. I. Cognition and learning in traditional and
behavior therapy. In S. L. Garfield and A. E. Bergin (Eds.). Handbook
of Psychotherapy and Behavior Change. (Second Edition.) New York:
John Wiley and Sons, 1978.
by Douglas J. Navarick
Department of Psychology, California State University, Fullerton, Fullerton, Calif
92634
A framework with no foundation: comments on Bindra's perceptual-
motivation theory of response production Throughout Southern California,
housing units in various stages of construction dot the landscape The stages
of construction eventually become familiar to any casual observer After the
lot is cleared, a concrete slab is poured for the foundation Then, a wooden
frame is bolted to the foundation and the skeleton of the house takes shape
In later stages of construction, wooden sheets are added, followed by roofing
and siding materials Although the units differ in size and style, they all incor-
porate a skeletal frame that has been firmly anchored to a concrete founda-
tion This is apparently a fundamental principle of housing construction, and
one would hope that it would some day become a principle of theory
construction in the behavioral sciences Professor Bindra proposes a frame-
work for the study of adaptive behavior that, lacking a foundation, is not likely
to bear the weight of experimental evidence
The theory is built on the concept of "motor equivalence"; a given
response, "defined in terms of a certain outcome," may be effected at dif-
ferent times by different muscles The concept of motor equivalence, or be-
havioral "flexibility," is said to be inconsistent with the behavioristic view that
organisms learn specific stimulus-response associations Whatever the
validity of that inference, the concept of motor equivalence is not a proper
foundation for theory building, as it is an assumption, not a concrete fact
Recent developments in operant psychology underscore the tentative nature
of the concept It is well known that Skinner's concept of the response is a
generic one Occasionally, a rat presses a bar with the left paw and occa-
sionally it presses the bar with the right paw, but the effects of these different
movements upon the environment are the same; a switch closes The
justification for ignoring differences in movements and defining the response
as a switch closure is the orderliness of functional relations obtained
between independent variables and behavioral units so defined But "or-
derliness" is very much in the eye of the beholder; a function on a cumulative
record may appear orderly and smooth at a distance of five feet from the eye,
but variable and choppy at a distance of five inches Although a molar defini-
tion of the response has proven useful in studies on a wide variety of sub-
jects, molecular perspectives on response definition are receiving increas-
ing attention as investigators look more closely at temporal and sequential
patterns of responding For example, investigations of choice behavior in pi-
geons suggest that in some circumstances, a sequence of pecks on the left
and right keys can function as a unit (Shimp, 1976) Because the criteria for
defining behavioral units are still under development, any view regarding the
equivalence of movements must be regarded as tentative We shall be able
to address the issue of motor equivalence only when we can give a definitive
reply to the question, "What is a response?"
In addition to being premature, the proposed framework seems much too
vague to serve any useful purpose in guiding research efforts toward a reso-
lution of the issues which Bindra has raised Nowhere in the paper do I find
clear operational definitions of the central concepts of "act," "act-assembly,"
"sensory representation," and "pexgo " Even on the theoretical level, a major
gap exists 
Bindra rejects the behavioristic view that organisms learn
stimulus-response associations He also rejects the cognitive view that
organisms learn to "expect" reinforcements on the grounds that no
mechanism is specified by which expectations are translated into actions
What mechanism is proposed to fill this void? There is a vague suggestion
that "pexgos" and "act-assemblies" develop under the influence of the same
"eliciting stimulus complexes," but what is the nature of this influence? How
is it different from an association? These fundamental issues are not ad-
dressed in the paper, nor is there any clear indication of how we might go
about seeking a resolution None of the directions for future research dis-
cussed at the end of the paper point directly to the problem
In sum, the proposed framework is premature It is vague It is confusing It
testifies to the advisability of postponing the construction of theoretical struc-
tures until they can be anchored to firm empirical foundations
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
Preparation of this commentary was supported by National Institute of
Mental Health Grant MH-26644 to California State University, Fullerton.
REFERENCE
Shimp, C. P. Organization in memory and behavior./ourna/ of the Experi-
mental Analysis of Behavior, 1976.
by J. M. Notterman
Department of Psychology, Princeton University, Princeton, N J 08540
Feedback systems invite tautological constructs. Bindra's article has fine,
well-reasoned objectives, and I agree with most of them Regrettably, the
article's model-building does not speed the paper toward attainment of these
objectives, but away from them The otherwise excellent contribution begins
to drift as soon as I read that perception initiates behavior because of" 
a
pexgo involving the activation of several gnostic-neurons and gnostic-
assemblies " A pexgo is defined earlier as "The momentary central
representation that underlies the perception of a stimulus 
pexgo is an ac-
ronym forpresently excited gnostic organization "
Before proceeding further, I must extract what I consider to be the two
major ideas in Bindra's formulation (I am more confident of my having
pinpointed the first than I am of the second ) First The traditional loop-
concept of learning and performance (motivation-»cue->response-»rein-
forcement, with the last component returning to influence the first) must be
expanded to include a couple of key neglected facts These are: a) The func-
tional character of each of the four respective components changes, as
response follows response 
b) Each of these changing components
contributes to the organism's overall, momentary perception (not simply dis-
crimination) of what it must do in order to obtain reinforcement, and therefore
to its overall incentive to produce the appropriate (or adaptive) response
Second None of the constructs (e g , programs, schemata, templates, per-
ceptual traces) offered by today's mutually opposing camps of motor outflow
(essentially, Lashley's functional assembly position) and motor inflow
(James's kinesthetic feedback position), is sufficient to account for an
organism's continually changing reorganization of perception and sub-
sequent action [See Roland, this issue ]
Although both these ideas make substantive contributions, I am left uneasy
by their being connected to an assumed central representation involving the
activation of gnostic-neurons and gnostic-assemblies In what way am I to
distinguish a gnostic-neuron from a non-gnostic-neuron? Is even my attempt
at distinction a meaningful one? I get the feeling that I am being seduced into
having faith in a modernized, dynamic version of an engram (the long
sought-for physical or chemical analog of a learned response), even though I
know full well that such is not Bindra's objective Nor am I reassured upon
reading the following statement in the fifth (and last) of the list of research im-
plications: "The elucidation of the neural relations of perceptual structures
with motivational structures on the one hand and with act-organization struc-
tures (pre-motor areas) on the other thus becomes an important task for
physiological psychology " Of course, Bindra is properly objecting to wire
models of the brain So did Lashley, but he did not get very far with the en-
gram (Robinson, 1973, pp 88-101) So did Kohler, but he did not do much
better with psychophysical isomorphism (Kohler, 1969, pp 63-93) Notwith-
standing, both Lashley and Kohler made significant contributions to experi-
mental methodology and to science Let us therefore attend to the article's
four other implications for research I shall comment on each, as I abstract
them:
1 We should learn more about eliciting stimuli I agree, and-in fact-
have made some modest contributions toward that end (Notterman and
Mintz, 1965, chaps 1, 4, 6, 7; Notterman, Filion, and Mandriota, 1971)
2 We should expand the number of options available to an organism in a
standard experimental situation, so that we can study " 
the relative va-
lence of the various situational stimuli 
" "This idea has obvious implica-
tions for therapeutic behavior modifications in man" [see Murray, this
Commentary] I happen to agree, but more importantly, so do clinical
psychologists (Levine and Fasnacht, 1974), theoreticians of abnormal
psychology (Krasner, 1976), and psychoanalysts (Moore, 1974) And they do
so in the absence of pexgos, or even superegos
3 We should construct laboratory environments in such a manner as to
reinforce an organism for observing how well eliciting stimuli predict the
THE BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1978), 1
71

Commentary/ Bindra: A perceptual-motivational view of adaptive behavior
occurrence of incentive stimuli We are enjoined to do so because" 
learn-
ing by observation of models (copying, imitation, etc) need no longer be
considered as a special form of learning, but as one in which the demonstra-
tor model plays a part in making the novice or learner observe the critical
stimuli and their relations" (Bindra, 1974 op cit) 
In both of the key studies
cited in the reference, learning by modeling groups was superior to that of
controls However, so was the learning by merely observational groups (i e ,
non-modeling, but lookmg-on in one manner or another, without active re-
production of the demonstrator's behavior) Groesbeck and Duerfeldt (who
did one of the cited experiments) remark: "If exposure to the learning situa-
tion without a demonstrator provides the same results as exposure with a
demonstrator, there is probably a better term to explain the phenomenon
than 'observational learning ' A simple construct such as stimulus enhance-
ment would be more parsimonious" (Groesbeck and Duerfeldt, 1971, pp 4 1 -
43)
4 We should " 
study 
the development of the ability to abstract
knowledge of causal relations-what has been called 'development of cau-
sality' - (which) is from the present viewpoint an aspect of the general prob-
lem of learning the correlations we observe in our environments " I wish that
space had allowed Bindra to make contact with others who have expressed
similar concerns (for example, Kant's "apperception," Piaget's "conception,"
and Harry Stack Sullivan's "protaxic, parataxic, and syntaxic" cognitive
modes of organizing experience)
In sum, I respect Bindra's objectives However, I am uncomfortable with
the article's constructs For any construct to be considered as contributing to
an effect, it must be specifiable independently of that effect Otherwise, we
have sheer tautology This basic principle is especially germane when we
examine feedback systems (regardless of whether they are response-
reinforcement or perceptual-motivational), which - precisely because of
their circularity - almost invite tautological explanations
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This work was supported by the Army Research Institute under grant
DAHC19-76-G-0012.
REFERENCES
Groesbeck, R. W. and Duerfeldt, P. H. Some relevant variables in
observational learning of the rat. Psychonomic Science, 1971, 22:41-
43.
Kohler, W. The task ofgestalt psychology. Princeton: Princeton
University Press, 1969.
Krasner, L. On the death of behavior modification. American Psychologist,
1976,31:387-388.
Levine, F. M. and Fasnacht, G. Token rewards may lead to token learning.
American Psychologist, 1974,29:816-820.
Moore, R. Imprisoning abstractions. Contemporary Psychoanalysis, 1974,
10:503-510.
Notterman, J. M., Filion, R. D. L., and Mandriota, F. J. Perception of
changes in certain exteroceptive stimuli. Science, 1971,173:1206-
1211.
Notterman, J. M. and Mintz, D. E. Dynamics of response. New York:
Wiley, 1965.
Robinson, D. N. The enlightened machine. Encino, Calif.: Dickenson,
1973.
by Karl H. Pribram
Department of Psychology, Stanford University, Stanford, Calif 94305
Stimulus theory and response theory: their complementarity and
neurobehavioral basis. In this paper, as in his previous work, Bindra makes
a case for a "perceptual (incentive)-motivational" alternative to "response-
reinforcement" as the guide for behavior Although I am in sympathy with
many of Bindra's aims, I take serious exception to some of the logic by which
they are carried through Most of my objections concern a failure to take into
consideration the rich body of knowledge about the nervous system and its
relationship to behavior This knowledge makes possible clarification of con-
cepts that in their current dress tend only to obfuscate and produce
unproductive controversy
Bindra points out that response-reinforcement theory emphasizes what an
organism is doing, while the incentive-motivation theory emphasizes what
the animal is perceiving But is this really a fundamental difference? As
Bindra points out later in the paper, perception is dependent on attention
Reinforcement theorists might suggest that "attention" involves overt or im-
plicit "looking" or "listening," and so forth, that responses become dif-
ferentially reinforced
The problem with any attempt to bring conceptual order into a controversy
such as the one addressed by Bindra is that the opposing views must first ac-
cept the definitions of their opponents Thus Bindra clearly recounts Skin-
ner's definition of a response as a certain measurable environmental out-
come He then correctly points out that this circumvents the problem of motor
equivalence But he also goes on to say that "while this circumvention of the
problem of motor equivalence may have 'emancipated' psychology from a
neurological straightjacket, it did so only by evading the fundamental
problem of how adaptive behavior is put together"; and he dismisses the
entire problem by stating that "it [this definition of response] sacrificed
explanation to the empirical goal of enunciating descriptive principles "
Although this description applies to operant behaviorism, it need not be
that way In ch 12 and 13 of Languages of the Brain (1971), I show how ex-
periments on the precentral classical motor cortex of primates can be in-
terpreted to demonstrate the encoding of the environmental consequences of
behavior Others such as Bernstein (1967) and his followers in the Soviet
Union (Gel'fand et al, 1971) and Turvey (1973; see also Fowler and Turvey,
this issue) and his colleagues in the United States have explored in detail
how coordinate structures are developed and how these incorporate the fea-
tures of the environment necessary to carrying out an action For us, an act is
therefore more than a sequence of muscle contractions or movements - a
conception of "act" that differs from Bindra's and was necessitated by the
results of neurobehavioral and behavioral experiments Our conceptions
fully account for motor equivalence and can encompass the response-
reinforcement theory of guides on behavior But note: substantively, by mak-
ing essential the environmental consequences of behavior rather than its
muscular contractions, the sensory aspect of motor control is emphasized In
fact, I once dubbed the motor cortex of the brain the sensory cortex for action
(Pribram et al, 1956), a view shared by Penfield (1956) and Dusser de
Barenne and McCulloch (1938) Does not a "response" so considered
provide its own "incentive-motivation," which is, of course, "reinforcing"7
Neurophysiology and neuropsychology can take us even further The con-
trol of muscle contraction is in the mam effected by way of a ser-
vomechanism, a feedback mechanism in which the control is exercised on
the muscle receptor rather than on contractile muscle itself [see also Roland,
this issue] Movement is thus regulated according to principles akin to those
operating homeostatic mechanisms (and not those that make of the motor
cortex a piano keyboard) Miller, Galanter, and Pribram (1960, ch 2) detail
the revision of the conception of reflex behavior that this entails (making a
reflex-arc concept untenable) and suggest in the remainder of the volume the
consequences for psychology necessitated by this revision We use the term
"Image," while Bindra uses "presently excited gnostic organization" or
"pexgo" - but are not the conceptions identical? Images are formed of tests
between sensory input and a representation of prior experience (genetic or
individual); pexgos are "momentary representations that underlie [i e , are
excited by the input to produce] the perception of a stimulus "
My point is that I believe "response-reinforcement" theory and "incentive-
motivation" theory to be complementary views of the selfsame process and
that neurobehavioral analysis and cognitive (e g , information and image
processing) theory can clarify this complementarity " "Incentive-motivation"
is a theory couched in stimulus language "Response-reinforcement" is a
theory couched in response language 
Since stimulus and response
mutually imply each other, one of the terms has to take precedence, and the
fault of stimulus-response psychologies was that they attempted to make a
chain out of a mutual implication (Estes, 1959; Pribram, 1971; Skinner, 1976)
Bindra continues this fault when he pits response-reinforcement theory
against incentive-motivation theory Logically, the two theories ought to
imply each other mutually, and in the above paragraphs I have attempted to
show that substantively as well as logically they so do
If the two theoretical frames are in fact complementary, each should have
strengths (explanatory powers) that the other lacks Read in this light,
Bindra's paper makes many excellent points that warrant his claim to a "new
approach " Response-reinforcement theory and practice has provided a low
yield of explanation and even of lawful relationships My own remedy has
been initially to enrich response theory in terms of a computer metaphor that
could, with a reasonable amount of work, be turned into a neurophysiological
model (Miller, Galanter, & Pribram, 1960; Pribram. 1960) Then I turned to
72
THE BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1978). 1

Commentary/ Bindra: A perceptual-motivational view of adaptive behavior
enriching stimulus theory by recourse to optical information (i e , image)
processing in terms of holography that has been, with a reasonable amount
of work, turned into a neurophysiological model
Bindra has chosen to dispose of response theory up to now But "pexgo" is
a cognitive structure and as such is a response organization Bindra may
well have to devote more and more of his theorizing to these pexgos - how
do they create "motivational states"? How are eliciting stimuli correlated with
incentive stimuli? And how do "viscerosomatic" and "transactional pexgos"
get together, and these with "instrumental pexgos"? Or do they? And what
about "act assemblies" and "gnostic-assemblies"? These are problems in
cognitive neurophysiology that probably will take any investigator away from
specifications of the stimulus responsible for incentive-motivation
REFERENCES
Bernstein, N. The Coordination and Regulation of Movements. New York,
Pergamon Press, 1967.
Dusser de Barenne, J. G., and McCulloch, W. S. Functional organization
in the sensory cortex of the monkey (Macaca mulatta). Journal of
Neurophysiology. 1:69-85. 1938.
Estes, W. K. The statistical approach to learning theory. In: S. Koch (ed.),
Psychology: A Study of a Science, vol. 2. New York, McGraw-Hill,
1959.
Gel'fand, I. M., Gurfinkel, V S., Tsetlin, H. L., and Shik, M. L Some prob-
lems in the analysis of movements. In: I M. Gel'fand, V. S. Fomin,
and M. T. Tsetlin (eds.), Models of the Structural-Functional Organi-
zation of Certain Biological Systems. Pp. 329-45. Cambridge, Mass.:
MIT Press, 1971.
Miller, G. A., Galanter, E. H., and Pribram, K. H. Plans and the Structure
of Behavior New York, Henry Holt & Company, 1960.
Penfield, W. Functional localization in temporal and deep sylvian areas.
In: The Brain and Human Behavior Proceedings of the Association,
Dec. 7 and 8, 1956, New York, N.Y Baltimore, The Williams & Wil-
kins Co., 1958.
Pribram, K H. The Intrinsic Systems of the Forebrain. In: J. Field, H. W.
Magoun, and V. E. Hall (eds.), Handbook of Physiology,
Neurophysiology II. Pp. 1323-44. Washington: American Physio-
logical Society, 1960.
Languages of the brain: Experimental Paradoxes and Principles in
Neuropsychology. Englewood Cliffs, N.J., Prentice-Hall, Inc., 1971
Kruger, L., Robinson, R., and Berman, A. The effects of precentral le-
sions on the behavior of monkeys Yale Journal of Biology and
Medicine. 28:428-43. 1955-56.
Skinner, B. F. About Behaviorism. New York, Vintage Books, 1976.
Turvey, M. T. Peripheral and central processes in vision: inferences from
an information processing analysis of masking with pattern stimuli.
Psychology Review. 80, 1,1973.
by J. S. Rosenblatt
Institute of Animal Behavior, Rutgers University, Newark College of Arts and
Sciences, Newark, N J 07102
Behavioral evolution and individual development. After my initial timidity
to comment on a theoretical article that sets out to revise our thinking about
response-reinforcement, which I consider the province of learning theorists
with whom I have not had contact since my graduate school days, I realized
that, to paraphrase G B Shaw, reinforcement is much too important a con-
cept to be left in the hands of learning theorists alone Like many concepts of
whose history I am ignorant, reinforcement derives historically from evolu-
tionary theory, as Bindra makes clear by quoting Bain and Spencer, so that
its recent entry into ethological thinking is in fact a reentry That ethologists
are exploring "natural reinforcers" of learning as an aspect of the current em-
phasis on "constraints on learning" indicates that the concept has received a
fresh source of energy that is likely to sustain it for some time There can be
little doubt that ethologists have sensed the underlying analogy between
natural selection as a "reinforcer" of adaptive behavior traits in phylogeny
and selection by reinforcing incentives of stimulus-response contingencies
as the basis of individual adaptation in ontogeny A paradigm that seemingly
links two closely related disciplines, namely, behavioral evolution and indi-
vidual development, is not likely to give way even to Bindra's strong and in-
telligent arguments, whose effect would be to upset the entire concept of
reinforcement The author, I am sure, is aware of this, so let us move on
My comments will be confined to the main issue to which Bindra ad-
dresses himself: the failure of reinforcement theory to deal adequately with
the problem of flexibility in responses, which the present theoretical alterna-
tive is intended to remedy Flexibility of responses and the adaptive nature of
this flexibility is achieved by two processes, according to Bindra The first is
exemplified by viewing motor responses not as fixed integrated patterns that
are triggered by sensory stimuli but as responses created anew each time a
pattern of stimulation recurs; the effect, therefore, is that responses are able
to vary flexibly according to variations in the pattern of incoming stimulation
There has been much evidence around for a long time supporting this view of
how motor responses are formed, but we cannot ignore contrary evidence
( e g , Fentress, 1972; Gray and Lissman, 1946; von Hoist, 1935; etc)
that some motor responses do have the character of triggered responses:
relatively simple and unpatterned stimuli produce complex patterned
responses (e g , swimming movements, forelimb grooming, etc ) It is not in-
compatible with Bindra's views to consider that there must be a range of
flexibility-inflexibility with respect to sensory-motor relationships and the or-
ganization of motor responses
The second basis of flexibility of motor responses, according to Bindra, is
based upon his views concerning the locus of learned associations As long
as the learned association is regarded as being between a stimulus and a
response, it is difficult to see how substitute responses, leading to flexibility,
could replace the original learned response By shifting the locus of learning
to sensory-sensory relationships and having them feed into motivational
systems before the response is determined, he has opened the possibility
that a range of alternative responses is available, depending upon the per-
ceptual-motivational processes that are aroused It is evident that sensory
patterning of motor responses, the first basis for response flexibility, and per-
ceptual-motivational determination of motor responses are closely interde-
pendent processes for achieving flexibility of motor responses
However, the problem of response flexibility, now shifted from the motor
response side of behavior to the perceptual and motivational sides, still re-
quires to be dealt with, and it is here that I find that difficulties arise Of
course, by proposing a multiplicity of determining factors for the eventual
motor responses, Bindra already provides a basis for flexibility, since dif-
ferent combinations of these factors will result in a corresponding variety of
re? 
nses The motivational component ensures that this variety of
responses will be focused and organized in relation to the incentive
But how do perceptual and motivational processes themselves gain flexi-
bility, or is flexibility an inherent property of these processes? If so, in what
does the flexibility reside? It is here, I believe, that a developmental analysis
is rquired to trace the ontogeny of flexibility in perceptual-motivational
processes and their relationship to motor processes The work of Bateson on
visual perceptual development in chicks would contribute to such an
analysis by showing that the chick builds its perception of the parent from
multiple single instances in which she is viewed from slightly different an-
gles, and that the chick actively seeks these different views of her Our
studies on home orientation in kittens have shown an even earlier stage of
perceptual development, before vision, in which orientation to the home is
based upon the combined use of thermotactile and olfactory stimuli in a
complex pattern In many species of altricial mammals, the beginning of
olfactory-based responsiveness introduces the earliest release from the
reflex-like determination of responses by thermotactile stimuli, which may, in
fact, be one of the earliest forms of flexibility during development
During early development among altricial mammals one can see even
more clearly than in mature animals how sensory stimuli provide the basis for
motivational processes at the same time that they elicit and guide responses
by means of which the newborn reaches the incentive At this early age,
however, this dual role of sensory stimulation may result in lack of flexibility,
since alternative motor patterns would have little chance of emerging How is
this situation altered during development such that while maintaining the
same basic relationship between perceptually-based motivational pro-
cesses and motor responses, nevertheless, flexibility arises within the
system?
These statements are not to be viewed as criticisms of Bindra's theory but
rather as suggestions for research and thinking that need to be done if the
theory is to gain the strength it will need to dislodge reinforcement theory
from its paradigmatic position
REFERENCES
Bateson, P. P. G. (1966) The characteristics and context of imprinting.
Biological Reviews, 41, 177-220.
THE BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1978), 1
73

Commentary/ Bindra: A perceptual-motivational view of adaptive behavior
Fentress, J. C. (1972) Development and patterning of movement se-
quences in inbred mice. In The Biology of Behavior, J Kiger (Ed.),
Corvallis: Oregon State University, Pg. 83-132.
Gray, J. and Lissmann, H. W. (1946) Further observations on the effect of
deafferentation on the locomotory activity of amphibian limbs.
Journal of Experimental Biology, 23, 121-132.
Hoist, E. von (1935) Erregungsbildung und Errengungsleitung im
Fishruckenmark. Pflugers Archiv Physiologie, 235, 345-359.
by T. A. Ryan
Department of Psychology, Cornell University, Ithaca, New York 14853
Bindra's theory from the perspective of human motivation: unit size,
stimulus centering, and the value of neural theory. For someone whose
main concern has been human motivation, I find it a surprise to find
response-reinforcement theory treated as just now "finally ending " Tolman
and Lewin clearly dominate the theoretical climate in current theories of
human motivation Nowadays I even find myself playing devil's advocate for
the S-R view because present students find it difficult to believe that the ap-
proach could once have been taken seriously and that intelligent men could
have really expected it to succeed At the same time, it must be admitted that
there are still residues of the Hullian era influencing theories of human moti-
vation, and even of human cognition Apparently Bindra finds these residues
still more noteworthy in the field of animal behavior, and he is in a better
position than I to judge the need for a review of the shortcomings of the rein-
forcement view
This commentary will consist mainly of raising questions concerning
Bindra's account of motivation, questions about things that he does not ex-
plicitly deal with in his paper Raising these questions is not meant to imply
that they cannot be answered, but rather it is hoped that the questions will
serve as "eliciting stimuli" for further explanations of the assumptions un-
derlying the theory
Some characteristics of the general behavioristic position still seem to be
retained in Bindra's account, and my first questions concern the reasons for
retaining these assumptions One of these presuppositions is the desirability
of reducing behavior to small units as opposed to working with large be-
havioral units, as is common in studies of human motivation A very important
characteristic of Hull's approach was the reductionist assumption that all be-
havior can be reduced to component S-R units and that the explanation of
complex behavior involves the same assumptions as those of the single S-R
unit This reductionist assumption was, of course, common to all be-
havioristic theories, otherwise there is no justification for the amount of effort
and money spent on investigations of the white rat In contrast, students of
human motivation have given up the hope of finding a reductionist solution
and are taking human behavior in the common-sense large units in which it is
found-going shopping, typing this paper, giving a lecture Behavior may
still be broken down into units for specific purposes, but there is no assump-
tion that there is a single set of natural "atoms" to which everything can be
reduced This is one of the important ways in which the influence of Lewin is
much stronger than that of Hull While Hull (1943 op cit) spoke of "molar"
units, this merely meant that he was not concerned with the ultimate reduc-
tion to physiological terms and his unit was as small as it could be without
switching to physiological concepts
On this issue of reductionism and the appropriate units for a theory of be-
havior, I find Bindra very close to Hull His "act" is about the same size as
Hull's "molar" response - in the mature animal, the act takes "no more than
half a second " Hull took great pains to spell out the manner in which com-
plex behavior was put together out of the basic response units -this was a
major concern of the theory and the reason for the introduction of such con-
cepts as the rG-sc mechanism (Hull, 1952 op cit) 
In other words, Hull
recognized the difficulties with simple chaining of S-R units and tried to
provide for more Gestalt-like organization of large behavioral units In fact,
when I play my devil's advocate role, one of the advantages to be cited for
the Hullian view is its specific and detailed explanations for complex be-
havior In this regard it was more specific and more testable than the "cogni-
tive" views
While Bindra shifts from an S-R account to an S-S account, there are still
important similarities to Hull The "S-S" terminology is really a misleading
usage imposed long ago by the dominant S-R theory Clearly S's are not
associated with each other Either one S is connected or associated with a
cognitive phenomenon such as an expectation, "idea" or"pexgo," or else no
stimuli are involved at all, only two cognitive phenomena Bindra's pexgos,
contingency organizations, expectancies, and soon, seem functionally to be
very similar to the ideas of classical associationism The S-S terminology is
really a way of avoiding the use of forbidden experiential terms such as
ideas, perceptions, or expectations, while actually introducing these con-
cepts into the theory Nevertheless, the S-S shorthand has become so
widespread it can be useful, as long as we do not take it literally After all,
Hull's rG-sG mechanism-the fractional antedating goal response-was a
device for including anticipation and expectancy in a response-oriented
theory Bindra's account seems to be just as atomistic except that he chains
S-S units instead of S-R units This does provide for greater flexibility on the
motor side, but it is still an atomistic account very close to classical associa-
tionism Bindra does not deal explicitly with the problem of elementarism,
and neither his article nor his book (1976 op cit) makes reference to Lewin
or other current writers on human motivation such as McClelland, Atkinson,
or Weiner Yet if a theory is expected to have general significance not only for
the white rat but also for man, it is precisely this kind of fundamental question
that must be faced We therefore need to know Bindra's justification for his
form of atomism and how he expects this to form a basis for treating human
motivation (For a more extended discussion of the problem of reductionism
in action and motivation, see Ryan, 1970)
Another similarity between Bindra's account and that of behaviorism is
generally that stimuli play a dominant role in both, and my second question
has to do with the justification for this emphasis The concern with eliciting
stimuli is very reminiscent of Watson and Hull Yet there are clear instances
in human activity and even in animal behavior in which the immediate situa-
tion is irrelevant or plays only a minor role Often it is not even certain that
there are internal stimuli involved, unless we want to destroy the usefulness
of the term completely by speaking of "central stimuli" In both this article
and in his 1976 book, Bindra seems to claim that there is no truly spon-
taneous behavior in the sense that there are always eliciting stimuli, if we
look for them It could be argued that many of the most important problems of
motivation, especially in the human organism, are cases in which there are
no important eliciting stimuli To deny the importance of stimuli in such
cases does not mean that we deny that there are causes or determinants of
the behavior Much of human behavior is intentional (it is determined by
intentions), but where are the eliciting stimuli that are crucial to such be-
havior (Ryan, 1970)? In short, an adequate motivational theory cannot be
built upon S's, even "eliciting" S's or on S-S's alone To be sure, it is an ad-
vance to recognize that stimuli operate by way of perceptions Motivation,
however, can be independent of perception Bindra recognizes this when he
discusses planning, but really provides no theory of planning beyond the no-
tion that S-S units or pexgos can be chained to form "contingency organiza-
tions " Clearly, a theory of planning or of intentional behavior requires more
than such a promissory note My question here, then, is a very broad one:
What kind of specific contribution can the theory be expected to make to the
analysis of intentional behavior, planning, or other behavior that is or seems
to be independent of any eliciting stimuli? I do not ask for final validated
answers, but only for examples of the kind of specific answers that could
conceivably come out of this kind of approach
My third general question has to do with the value of introducing physio-
logical mechanisms as well as "molar" constructs such as stimuli,
responses, expectancies, or other "psychological" constructs. Bindra takes
for granted that such physiological theorizing contributes significantly to the
total system I, however, am skeptical of the value of such theorizing at the
present stage In order to specify my question more clearly, it is necessary to
explain the bases of my skepticism First, I am concerned with the contribu-
tion of neural theory to the total motivation theory as a way of explaining be-
havior There is a clear choice here in that it is conceivable that a complete
explanatory theory of behavior can be constructed without reference to the
nervous system After all, Hull's system was such a system and it did not fail
because of any lack of theorizing about neural function; it failed because it
did not make satisfactory testable predictions about animal or human be-
havior The reason for introducing neural constructs, then, is not that they are
necessary for a complete theory, but because they may make some contribu-
tion to the explanatory success of the theory Such theorizing might serve
several functions:
1 If the neural model is based upon physiological evidence, it can serve
to correct psychological theorizing that is based upon either explicit or tacit
74
THE BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1978), 1

Commentary/ Bindra: A perceptual-motivational view of adaptive behavior
assumptions concerning the nature of neural function 
Thus current
neurophysiological findings make the simple switchboard concepts of the
S-R psychologists implausible or at least highly oversimplified With regard
to this function, my impression, perhaps unjustified, is that Bindra's neural
model is not based upon substantial physiological evidence Instead, it
seems to be a construct derived primarily from psychological facts and
theories
2 If the theory is largely conjectural and based only loosely upon physio-
logical evidence, it may suggest new approaches to psychological theoriz-
ing, or it may make more plausible theories that seem to be contrary to pre-
vious general assumptions about the nervous system Thus Hebb (1949)
performed the great service of showing that a drastically different conception
of neural function could be formulated and could be used to free our
psychological theorizing from tacit assumptions about the general operation
of the central nervous system The nature of Bindra's model does not seem to
change the nature of the psychological theory In fact, the general theory
seems to be very close to Tolman's The properties of the "pexgo" seem to be
derived from current cognitive theories that both perceptions and memories
are produced rather than being patterns called up intact from some sort of
store That is, the theories are based upon psychological evidence and the
pexgo, in turn, is based upon these theories Moreover, the theories are still
subject to considerable debate, which becomes important to our next point
The present question is how the pexgo construct has modified the
psychological theory, and I have been unable to find such modifications
The above possibilities were concerned with the possible contributions of
neural modeling to psychological theory Another possible function is to
make suggestions to neurophysiologists to aid in the pursuit of their own
problems 
Even if we had a complete and completely successful
psychological theory at the "molar" level, there are still those who are cu-
rious about the neurological mechanisms underlying the psychological
events While we as psychologists do not need to be concerned with this
problem, and may even be better off not getting involved in it, this does not
preclude others from being concerned with the problem For this purpose it
could be useful to translate aspects of the psychological theory into a neural
model In the long run, neural research based upon the theory could feed
back to correct, expand, or help to substantiate the psychological theory (but
only in the long, probably very long, run, and the validity of the theory can be
checked more rapidly by purely psychological research ) It must be em-
phasized that this function of modeling is dependent for its success upon the
plausibility of the theory as an account of the psychological facts A prema-
ture model, based upon unsubstantiated theory, runs the risk of wasting the
time of the neurophysiologist as well as of the psychologist
We are therefore brought back to the question of the validity and useful-
ness of the psychological theory Until that is established, the neural model
is of doubtful value For this reason, my first two questions concerning the
elementarism of the psychological theory and the emphasis upon eliciting
stimuli are of primary importance The value of the neural mode! depends in
a critical way upon the validity of the psychological aspects of the theory
Because of the shortness of the space avai lable, I have concentrated upon
the questions that trouble me and have had to skip my many agreements with
the article The questions that I have raised are perennial questions that
constantly trouble psychological theorists, and I am merely trying to provoke
Bindra into further work on these questions I must emphasize, however, that I
am in strong agreement with the general "cognitive" approach that is
examplified there and support him fully on the advantages of the S-S over the
S-R reinforcement view I am sure that the article will be stimulating and
influential in our pursuit of motivational theory
REFERENCES
Atkinson, J. W., An introduction to motivation. Princeton, N.J., D. Van
Nostrand Co. 1964.
Hebb, D. O. The Organization of Behavior. John Wiley & Sons, New
York, 1949.
Lewin, K. Field theory in social science. N.Y. Harper, 1951.
McClelland, D. C, Atkinson, J. W., Clark, R. A , and Lowell, E. L., The
achievement motive. N.Y., Appleton-Century-Crofts, 1953.
Ryan, T. A. Intentional Behavior: An Approach to Human Motivation.
Ronald Press Co., New York, 1970.
Weiner, B. Theories of motivation: From mechanism to cognition.
Chicago, Markham Publishing Co., 1972.
by Kurt Salzinger
New York State Psychiatric Institute, 722 West 168th Street, New York, N Y 10032,
and Polytechnic Institute of New York
A death too soon reported. There is no end to the announcements of the
recent or impending death of behavior theory Bindra tries to make his argu-
ments stronger by dating behavior theory's beginnings further back than is
usually the custom, referring to Spencer (1872-3) The more typical
procedure is to blame Skinner for the sins of Watson Apparently, these
critics believe that age alone is a sign of the lack of validity of a theory or an
approach of study In any case, history hangs heavily on those of us who
continue to consider ourselves behaviorists
Bindra raises two sets of issues beyond the simple one of age: The first one
talks of empirical findings and criticisms made by ethologists and cognitive
psychologists about some particular forms of behavior The second set of
issues relates to the question of what kind of theory is best for psychology, at
least at our present level of knowledge and procedural expertise
Let us look first at the criticisms of the ethologists (I have responded to the
arguments by cognitive psychologists elsewhere [Salzinger, 1973] and will
therefore not discuss them here ) The words "biological constraints" loom
large in this area We are persistently confronted with findings a little bit akin
to those made public by anthropologists when they used to confound us with
yet another different approach to life and living The ethologists thus have
been showing how different animals are, and how futile the search for
universality must therefore be, when one wishes to talk of general laws of
learning Moreover, having shown an instance of learning that seems to be
different for a particular animal or for a particular response in the same
animal, they immediately reach for their burial tools
To be sure, the phenomenon of autoshaping has inspired a large number
of clarifying experiments It has by no means, however, elicited a uniform
reaction of "disaster" Thus Hermstein (1977) believes that behavior con-
trolled in the manner of autoshaping can best be explained in terms of a con-
cept of some behaviors reinforcing themselves; Skinner (1977), in response
to Hermstein's article, discussed autoshaping by attributing its special ef-
fects to the phylogenic character of some responses; he pointed out that
responses may be phylogenic in character at onetime (such as being inves-
tigatory under some conditions) and operant under others (such as when a
reinforcer is made contingent on the same response Finally, Schwartz and
Gamzu (1977) say, based on their review of the literature, that no new laws
need to be constructed to explain the data on autoshaping; they show that
the interaction of the principles of operant and respondent conditioning
explain this phenomenon
The last point relates to the second set of issues raised by Bindra
Essentially, Bindra believes not only that a psychological theory must satisfy
the criterion of consistency of behavioral data, but also that its descriptions
must lead directly to a "reasonable" physiological substrate The question is
whether any behavioral theory can be validated by the flimsy notion of the
physiological underpinnings of behavior Is it useful to conjecture about the
nature of the physiological correlates of the behavioral processes, or is it
more useful to worry about the consistency of the scheme that explains the
behavior at its own level? Surely the new findings in the behavioral literature
which appear so contradictory to Bindra must be resolved at a behavioral
level before they can be used for elucidating the physiological level or
before the physiological level can elucidate them This is where the con-
troversy really exists: not in what the data say but rather, whether what the
data say should be reconciled at the behavioral or at the physiological level
Furthermore, the physiological level is reconciled, not in actual physio-
logical findings, but in physiological deductions several stages removed
from actual experiments It is here where I believe that Bindra will lead us
astray-away from the laboratory and into the never-never land of physio-
logical speculation and into a slower, more lingering version of the death of
behaviorism that he prematurely reports
REFERENCES
Hermstein, R. J. The evolution of behaviorism. American Psychologist,
1977,32:593-603.
Salzinger, K. Inside the black box, with apologies to Pandora. A review of
Ulric Neisser's Cognitive Psychology. Journal of the Experimental
Analysis of Behavior, 1973,19:369-378.
Schwartz, B. & Gamzu, E. Pavlovian control of operant behavior. In W. K.
Honig & J. E. R. Staddon (Eds.) Handbook of Operant Behavior.
Englewood Cliffs, N.J.: Prentice Hall, 1977.
THE BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1978), 1
75

Commentary/ Bindra: A perceptual-motivational view of adaptive behavior
Skinner, B. F. Herrnstem and the evolution of behaviorism. American
Psychologist, 1977,32:1006-1012.
by S. Stefan Soltysik
Mental Retardation Research Center, UCLA School of Medicine, Los Angeles,
Calif 90024
Omnipotent pexgos and the goddess parsimony. I concur with Bindra's
criticism of an S-R-reinforcement psychology, but, instead of expanding on
this theme, I would like to discuss a few points in the explanatory part of the
present article and his recent book (Bindra 1976 op. cit) His alternative to
the S-R approach is an updated S-S learning theory In this conceptual
framework the responses appear to be a by-product of "pexgos," i e,
hypothetical dynamic neural representations of perceived or imagined envi-
ronmental stimuli A brief summary of this version of the S-S theory will help
to clarify my comments: (1) some stimuli are so-called eliciting stimuli (SEs)
and will elicit responses whenever they are perceived or imagined with
sufficient intensity; and, (2) some stimuli possess positive hedonic value and
will, because of that, enhance (prime) the pexgos of other stimuli (for
instance SEs) if the latter become conditioned stimuli (CSs) predicting the
occurrence of the "hedonic" rewards
These two tenets are applied to the case of discriminated instrumental
responses in the following way: (3) Instrumental CS (i e., a Skinnenan SD) be-
comes a signal of reward (i e , a Pavlovian food CS), and this endows it with
the property of an "incentive motivational" agent Incentive motivational exci-
tation leads to the recreation of the proper pexgos of eliciting stimuli of the
instrumental response, which in turn excite the "assembly of the motor act"
It is not clear to me why the "multipurpose movements" (a term borrowed
from Lorenz 1973) that constitute the bulk of instrumental behavior and do not
have any definite, strong ties with the environmental stimuli, should be
elicited by "primed pexgos" of external stimuli The voluntary character of
most instrumental responses derives from the fact that they are freed from the
tyranny of eliciting stimuli and are accessible to several motivational
systems The weaker the reflexive bond of a particular motor act with its SE
the better its instrumental conditionability The purely perceptual S-S theory
could include such responses by postulating kmesthetic pexgos and assum-
ing that they have a weak eliciting function, revealed only in conjunction with
motivational excitation This would bring us close to Pavlov (1932, 1936) and
Konorski(1967, 1974)
If the instrumental responses were really elicited by the pexgos of their im-
plicit SEs, then the "transactional" responses with their strong SEs would be
the best candidates in the organism's motor repertoire for instrumental con-
ditioning Studies on scratch and yawn reflexes (Jankowska and Soltysik
1960, Soltysik 1975) have shown that, although there is a certain degree of
quasi-instrumental conditioning of these responses, it differs in some im-
portant ways from the "voluntary" (locomotor or manipulatory) type of instru-
mental learning First, these instrumental transactional reflexes seem to
retain their involuntary character (Thomdike 1911, Kupalov 1948, Yakovleva
1952, Fedorov 1955) Secondly, they are unstable and tend to "degenerate"
(Thomdike's term [1911 op cit]) Thirdly, they become contaminated with
imitations of clearly voluntary character, described by different authors as a
"so-called voluntary" (Yakovleva 1952, Fedorov 1955) or "sham" form of a
particular reflex pattern (Jankowska and Soltysik 1960) Fourthly, the instru-
mental conditioning of a true form of scratching (Fedorov called it involuntary
or subcortical) was explained (with some evidence for it) by the learned
sensitization of the receptive field for its SE (Jankowska and Soltysik 1960)
We have coined a term "operant sensitization" (Soltysik 1975) that seems
quite compatible with the "SE-pexgo priming," although we postulated a dif-
ferent mechanism, namely, a positive gating in the afferent pathway Kupalov
(1948) and Fedorov (1955) were even closer to Bindra's position in
hypothesizing direct facilitation of the cortical "points" representing the SEs
of these involuntary responses and ascribing the facilitation to the food
signalling function of these SEs (incentive motivation?)
The important point is that, whatever their mechanism, such "instrumental"
responses differ considerably from instrumental responses of non-reflexive
character, and their handicaps can be attributed to the fact that they
possess, or are bound by, the eliciting stimuli Obviously, the priming of the
pexgos of SEs, although possible, does not constitute an efficient
mechanism of learning
Finally, concerning the "incentive" role of food signals, it was Konorski
who recognized long ago (Miller and Konorski 1928, Konorski and Miller
1930) that SDs and food signalling CSs are very different conditioned stimuli,
both in their motivational value (SDelicits approach, striving behavior, while
CS inhibits it), and in their signalling (informational) role: food CS heralds an
obligatory occurrence of food, while the SD signals only conditional
availability of food, depending on the instrumental response These views
were later confirmed (Soltysik et al 1976), and I proposed a new mechanism
for incentive motivation (1975) That food CSs are poor elicitors (motivators)
of instrumental responses was found in several studies (Azrin and Hake
1969, Meltzer and Brahlek 1970, Miczek and Grossman 1971, Kelly 1973,
LoLordo et al 1974, Harvey 1977), and a good separation of food signalling
and instrumentally "motogenic" functions was demonstrated (Ellison and
Konorski 1964, Miyataand Soltysik 1971)
In summary, one gets the impression that the adherence to a single prin-
ciple of S-S learning sacrifices heuristic flexibility implicit in a more open ap-
proach that accepts more than one mode of plasticity in organisms' neurobe-
havioral machinery
REFERENCES
Azrin, N. H. and Hake, D. F. Positive conditioned suppression: Condi-
tioned suppression using positive reinforcers as the unconditioned
stimuli. Journal of the Experimental Analysis of Behavior, 1969,
12:167-173.
Ellison, G. D. and Konorski, J. Separation of the salivary and motor
responses in instrumental conditioning. Science, 1964,146:1071-
1072.
Fedorov, V. K. Physiological characteristics of the motor analyzer in dog.
Leningrad: Medgiz, 1955 (in Russian).
Harvey, R. A. The effect of first- and second-order appetitive conditioned
stimuli on food-reinforced bar pressing. M.A. Thesis, Dept. of
Psychology, San Diego State University. 1977.
Jankowska, E. and Soltysik, S. Motor conditioned reflexes established
from unconditioned motor reflexes reinforced by food. In: Central
and Peripheral Mechanisms of Motor Activity in Animals. Moscow:
Izd. Akad. Nauk SSSR, 1960,61-69. (in Russian)
Kelly, D. D. Long-term pre-reward suppression in monkeys unaccom-
panied by cardio-vascular conditioning. Journal of the Experimental
Analysis of Behavior, 1973,20:93-104.
Konorski, J. Integrative activity of the brain. Chicago: University of
Chicago Press, 1967.
Konorski, J. Classical and instrumental conditioning: The general laws of
connections between "centers." Ada Neurobiologiae Experi-
mentalis, 1974,34:5-13.
Konorski, J. and Miller, S. L'influence des excitateurs absolus et condi-
tionnels sur les reflexes conditionnels de l'analysateur moteur. C. R.
Soc. Biol. 1930,104:911-913.
Kupalov, P. S. Involuntary reactions to conditioned food stimuli. In:
Trudy Ob'edinennoi Sessii, Posv. 104etiu so dnia smerti I.P. Pavlova.
Moscow: Izd. AMN SSSR, 1948,67-78.
LoLordo, V. M. McMillan, J. C. and Riley, A. L. The effects upon food
reinforced pecking and treadle-pressing of auditory and visual signals
for response-independent food. Learning and Motivation, 1974,
5:24-41.
Lorenz, K. Die Ruckseite des Spiegels. R. Piper & Co. Verlag, 1973.
Meltzer, D. and Brahlek, J. A. Conditioned suppression and conditioned
enhancement with the same positive UCS: An effect of CS duration.
Journal of the Experimental Analysis ofBehavior, 1970,13:67-73.
Miczek, K. A. and Grossman, S. P. Positive conditioned suppression: Ef-
fects of CS duration. Journal of the Experimental Analysis of Be-
havior, 1971,15:243-247.
Miller, S. and Konorski, J. Sur une forme particuliere des reflexes condi-
tionnels. C. R. Soc. Biol 1928,99:1155-1157.
Miyata, Y. and Soltysik, S. Effect of food-satiation and food-deprivation
upon the conditioned reflexes established by the Ellison-Konorski
separation procedure. Ada Neurobiologiae Experimental, 1971,
31:47-58.
Pavlov, I. P. The reply of a physiologist to psychologists. Psychological
Review, 1932,39:91-127.
Pavlov, I. P. Physiological mechanism of the so-called voluntary move-
ments. Trudy Fiziol. Lab. I.P. Pavlova, 1936,6:115-118. (in Russian).
Soltysik, S. Post-consummatory arousal of drive as a mechanism of incen-
tive motivation. Ada Neurobiologiae Experimental, 1975,35:447-
474.
Soltysik, S. "Operant sensitization" and some remarks on unit recording
in conscious animals. In: Brain Mechanisms in Mental Retardation.
76
THE BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1978), 1

Commentary I Bindra: A perceptual-motivational view of adaptive behavior
UCLA Forum in Medical Science, Vol. 18. N. A. Buchwald and
M. A. B. Brazier (Eds.) New York: Academic Press, 1975, pp 373-377.
Soltysik, S., Konorski, J., Holownia, A. and Rentoul, T. The effect of condi-
tioned stimuli signalling food upon the autochthonous instrumental
responses in dogs. Act a Neurobiologiae Experimentalis, 1976,
36:277-310.
Yakovleva, V. V. Establishment of conditioned reflexes to a complex
kinesthetic stimulus (to the so-called involuntary movements).
Zhurnal Visshei Nervnoi Deiatel'nosti, 1952, 2:305-316 (in Russian).
by Arthur W. Staats
Department of Psychology, University of Hawaii at Manoa, Honolulu, Ha 96822
Bindra's perceptual-motivational theory and social behaviorism's emo-
tional-motivational theory: separatism exemplified. Bindra's perceptual-
motivational theory has many similarities with the motivational theory of
social behaviorism, which is called emotional-motivational theory or, in ab-
breviation, the A-R-D theory of motivation, with the initials standing for the
emotional (or attitudinal), reinforcing, and incentive (or directive) functions of
motivational stimuli The fact that Bindra makes no reference to this motiva-
tional theory indicates that this is a case of separatism It is important to draw
attention to the relationships between the two similar theories The scholar in
this area needs this information for there are important elaborations and
bodies of knowledge involved in each that should be known It is also im-
portant to consider this as an example of a more general separatism in
psychology, a separatism that impedes the advance of unified knowledge
This commentary will concern the similarities of the two theories of motiva-
tion in rectifying the present separatism To begin, A-R-D theory was
developed in the context of the failure of the classical learning theories to
treat adequately various topics and questions For example, Skinner's
operant approach entirely separates classical (emotional) conditioning and
instrumental conditioning, failing to indicate the interrelations involved
A-R-D theory began (see Staats, 1963) by indicating that stimuli that have
elicited emotional responses wouid, because of this, also have reinforcing
properties (thereby independently defining the reinforcement value of
stimuli) Bindra utilizes the same basic principle, also referring to Bentham,
Hobbes, and Freud as examples of the common-sense confusion of pleasure
and pain (positive and negative emotional responding) with reinforcement,
topics that social behaviorism has treated much more extensively (see
Staats, 1963, Chapter 14, especially pp 513-523)
A-R-D theory states that there are stimuli that elicit emotional responses in
the organism on a biological basis These responses are of a positive or
negative sort Positive emotional responses can have peripheral manifesta-
tions that differ from each other, as well as a common central process This is
true of negative emotional responses as well The stimuli that elicit pleasure
or pain in the individual can serve to reward or punish, as the case may be
One central process in the formation of the individual's emotional-
motivational system (the stimuli that have emotional-motivational functions
for the individual) involves how formerly neutral stimuli come to elicit emo-
tional responses in the individual A-R-D theory says the process is basically
classical conditioning (Staats, 1963, 1968, 1975) although the circum-
stances may differ widely, and conditioning may take place on a linguistic or
cognitive basis Bindra has the same principle in his theory (see his second
principle) In his terms, central representation of the emotional state is con-
nected to the representation (pexgo) of the formerly neutral stimulus
To continue, a crucial aspect of A-R-D theory is the indication of how emo-
tion-eliciting stimuli perform motivational functions One motivational func-
tion involves what stimuli will reward or punish the organism; a second in-
volves the incentive or directive power such stimuli will have on behavior
Unlike other theories, A-R-D theory explains the incentive function, that is
why the organism strives to obtain positive emotional stimuli and strives to
avoid negative emotional stimuli This incentive function comes about
through learning 
When the organism approaches a positive emotional
stimulus, he is reinforced by contact with the stimulus since the stimulus has
reinforcement value As a consequence, he learns specifically to approach
that stimulus But he also learns generally to make approach responses
when being stimulated to experience a positive emotional response and to
make avoidance responses in the opposite case
The important thing is that the organism has thousands of such
experiences He thus learns many approach and avoidance instrumental
responses under the control of the stimulus produced by the appropriate
emotional response This process has been described fully (Staats, 1963,
1968, 1975) and depicted graphically to show that there are many stimuli that
elicit an emotional response in the organism and the emotional response can
mediate any of a number of instrumental responses (see, for example, Staats,
1975, p 110) Bindra has these principles and mechanisms in his theory, at
least in part, describing the "many-to-one mapping of eliciting stimulus com-
plexes to acts," as well as the fact that the one central motive state tends to
elicit many different instrumental responses Bindra describes the class of
instrumental (and transactional) responses, as well as the putting together of
act-assemblies As in A-R-D theory, there is an additional principle involved
to the effect that other situational stimuli, aside from the emotional (A-R-D)
stimulus, determine which of the class of approach or avoidance responses
will occur It is central that while Bindra indicates that the motivational state
has tendencies to elicit a large class of approach or avoidance instrumental
responses, he does not indicate why, seemingly assuming that unlearned
mechanisms are involved
To conclude this brief description, once the organism has acquired the
mechanism by which the positive or negative emotional response will tend to
elicit a large class of approach or avoidance instrumental responses, that
mechanism then provides the means by which the organism will immediately
respond to new stimuli without prior instrumental training "[A]ny stimulus
that 
comes to elicit an emotional response, will by virtue of eliciting the
emotional response also tend to elicit all of the approach responses the indi-
vidual has already learned" (Staats, 1975, p 111) This is one of the bases for
the flexibility that Bindra refers to repeatedly, and he states the principle in-
volved clearly in a manner that is the same as in A-R-D theory
A number of additional principles and analyses are the same in the two
theories; only some of these can be mentioned here For example, (1) like
Bindra A-R-D theory (Staats, 1968, p 45; 1975, pp 114-116) presents the
principle of the relative strengths of emotional stimuli, and ties the principle
in with deprivation-satiation (see, for example, Staats and Warren, 1974); (2)
A-R-D ties the motivational theory in with physiological mechanisms (see
Staats, 1975, Ch 15) relating the motivational properties of stimuli to the
limbic system (Staats, 1975, pp 536-537) as does Bindra; (3) A-R-D theory
treats the topic of motivation in terms of external stimulation and internal
emotional conditions as does Bindra; (4) A-R-D theory (see, for example,
Staats, 1968, pp 50-53) has repeatedly indicated that, as Bindra puts it, the
"environmental stimulus that generates a motivational state can also serve as
the goal stimulus to which the action is directed" (5) A-R-D theory has been
used to explain animal learning phenomena such as autoshaping and
transfer of control (see Staats and Warren, 1974); (6) A-R-D theory has always
included focal treatment of classical conditioning, as does Bindra
Bindra indicates that it is important that motivational theory extend to the
human level The motivational theory of social behaviorism does this exten-
sively-in social psychology, personality theory, clinical psychology,
psychometrics, the social sciences, and so on - and the scholar of motiva-
tion needs to know this The weakness of the present day pre-paradigmatic
separatism of psychology is shown in the present example, where two highly
relevant theories have remained separated If unified theory is to be sought in
the study of behavior, we must begin to bridge the many separatistic gaps
that are now existent in our field, including the present one
REFERENCES
Staats, A. W. (with contributions by C. K. Staats). Complex human
behavior. New York: Holt, Rinehart and Winston, 1963.
Staats, A. W. Social behaviorism and human motivation: Principles of the
attitude-reinforcer-discriminative system. In A. G. Greenwald, T. C.
Brock, and T. M. Ostrom (Eds.), Psychological foundations of
attitudes. New York: Academic Press, 1968.
Staats, A. W. Social behaviorism. New York: Holt, Rinehart and Winston,
1975.
Staats, A. W., and Warren, D. R. Motivation and three-function learning:
Deprivation-satiation and approach-avoidance to food words. Journal
of Experimental Psychology, 1974,103:1191-1199.
by Donald G. Stein
Department of Psychology, Clark University, 950 Main Street, Worcester, Mass
01610
Perception as response. In his recent paper, Bindra claims to offer a new
and constructive approach to the traditional S-R principle of learning;
THE BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1978), 1
77

Commentary/ Bindra: A perceptual-motivational view of adaptive behavior
however, I regretfully did not find his presentation particularly illuminating
Insofar as this particular manuscript is concerned, nothing new has been of-
fered; it has all been said before, as far as I can tell, by theorists such as
Lashley, Bartlett, Tolman, and Hebb, to name a few
It may be an injustice to the concepts Bindra is trying to elucidate, but my
charge was to evaluate this particular paper as it is presented; it seems to me
that the reader should not be required to read his previous book to ap-
preciate and understand the points raised in the present article
Let me begin my commentary with some of the basic points that Bindra
discusses He argues that the response-reinforcement hypothesis assumes
that behavior-modification produced in a given stimulus situation (SS) is de-
pendent on the contiguity between what the animal was doing at the time of
presentation of some hedonic stimulus The incentive-motivation hypothesis
assumes that behavior modification is dependent on contiguity with what the
animal was perceiving at the time of the hedonic stimulus presentation The
point that / wish to make here is that perception /s a response, albeit a very
complex one, involving many sensory and motor systems; i e, perception
often involves the total organism, not just a particular sensory system! If we
accept that perception is indeed a response to various energies impinging
on organisms undergoing various changes in state at different times, then the
principal distinction between Bindra's position and the S-R position he de-
cries becomes blurred 
He should clearly define "perception" and
"response" and carefully delineate the differences between them If he
believes that "perception is simply a passive reflection of reality," and not a
response of the organism, he should say so
At the "neural level," the distinction Bindra tries to make between his and
the S-R position is vague-he suggests that there occurs a "selective
strengthening of some sort of neural connection between the central
representation 
[of a perceived stimulus-which as I have said is a
response] 
and the representation of the hedonic stimulus [italics ad-
ded ]" This is not all that different from the "typical" S-R position itself, and,
like it, relies primarily on hypostatization as a weak form of explanation As
Bindra himself states that "the central motive (which determines the incen-
tive value of stimuli) determines what response will emerge " While this may
not be quite as "mechanistic" as the S-R notion of response chaining, itsf/7/
remains a very deterministic (albeit superficial) approach to explaining moti-
vation, learning and memory, and at the neural-systems level of analysis it
has no particular heuristic or explanatory value
At this point, I want to make it clear that I generally agree with Bindra that
the S-R approach is limited and doesnof deal realistically with what we know
about brain functions and behavior - there is no argument here I contend,
however, that Bindra's "theoretical" treatise provides no further understand-
ing of brain functions although his paper does serve to reiterate what others
have already claimed (Pribram, 1971; see also this Commentary)
Let me deal with some more of the specific points he raises I have already
discussed the question of whether "stimuli" are perceived, i e , "out there,"
or rather a creation and therefore actually a response of the organism to
energy impingements (Bartley, 1958) Second, is "knowledge of the environ-
ment represented in the brain" as Bindra suggests? Does the brain passively
reflect "input from sensory inflow" or have we here a case of the reification of
handy metaphors to replace descriptions of the complex events taking place
in the CNS that permit the organism to "perceive," that is, to "create" its envi-
ronment (see Von Uexkull, 1957, for example) Bindra argues forcefully that
many factors determine an organism's "response repertoire"-yet he falls
back on the naive and highly mechanistic notion of "gnostic neurons" con-
trolling and determining the behavior of the organism This implies that there
are specific "command neurons," (cf Kupfermann and Weiss, this volume)
papal cells, grandfather cells or some such, which somehow "know" the true
nature of the "real" world because, supposedly, they have a "window on it"
and can "process information" which accurately reflects reality There is no
evidence for this hypothesis; it is simply a belief based on inference and
speculation concerning the "meaning" of firing patterns of single neurons
(action potentials, IPSPs, EPSPs, etc ) in the brain in response to activation of
sensory cells perturbed by energy impingements To make the logical jump
from perturbation of these units to "knowledge" of the environment in all its
richness and complexity is an act of faith, which we may, or may not, wish to
indulge in - the elegant work of Hubel & Wiesel notwithstanding!
Sometimes the most effective way to evaluate a theoretical position is to
"dejargonize" it and then see if anything new or innovative emerges A
theoretical offering should be just as valuable, or even more so, if it can be
innovative and offer new principles in simple language
Permit me to apply this translation of a few of the "principles" proposed by
Bindra For example he states that:
a "There is no such thing as the 'pexgo' of a certain object; the same ob-
ject is likely to generate different pexgoes on different occasions."
Trans. Objects in the environment may be perceived differently at dif-
ferent times depending upon the subject's motivation, arousal and qualities
of the object itself
b. "It should be clear that the mam functional outcome of the perception of
an event, E1, in a given, familiar situation, is the anticipatory priming of
pexgo components of events (E2, E3, etc ) correlated with or predicted with
E1 in that situation Thus, the perception of subsequent (predicted) events is
facilitated by the earlier (predictive) events
Trans • Organisms have selective attention tuned by previous experience.
One response (perception) may lead to another In other words, organisms
think!
c "If some ESs have some appetitive or aversive incentive properties, and
the animal is in a relevant organismic condition, then it will continue to act in
relation to those ESs "
Trans What an animal does depends on its needs!
d " 
arranging a response-incentive contingency is the best way so far
discovered for ensuring the animal will observe the critical stimulus features
[ES] which must enter into the stimulus-incentive contingency [ES.ES1] for
producing the specified response "
Trans . Rewarding an animal practically guarantees that it will pay atten-
tion to subsequent presentations of stimuli deemed important by the experi-
menter in a test situation
In general, each of the points offered by Bindra can be re-defined in
simpler terms When this is done, it is difficult to find anything that has not
been suggested, in one form or another by Thomdike (1911 op cit), Guthne
(1957) or other, more contemporary learning theorists Certainly, with respect
to understanding brain functions, Bindra's suggestions offer little, if any,
explanation of the specific neuronal mechanisms that underlie or mediate
learning and memory Proposing that there are "gnostic" neurons that control
"cognition" is also hypostatization; it simply states that since we observe
organisms learning, there must be something responsible, i e., there is learn-
ing because there is learning! There are few, if any, new and direct
hypotheses that can be experimentally verified and this is perhaps the major
weakness of Bindra's presentation
Bindra's comments on flexibility represent the best part of his paper He is
probably right in stating that there is "no continuous existence of a response
in the brain", that each is a fresh construction depending upon many
organismic and environmental factors This means that there are many ways
to achieve a given goal and that often, but not always, responses can be sub-
stituted, one for another, in achieving a given end While Bindra is correct in
this observation, it should be noted that Lashley repeatedly stressed this
point in his earlier writings, and there are few who would doubt this conten-
tion today The main point is that we still are in the dark as to the physio-
logical mechanisms that control much of our behavior Strictly deterministic
and Cartesian models of neural functions and/or behavior in whatever lan-
guage they are couched are inadequate to account for the complex
phenomena we call cognition and memory, whether they are based on the
relationship between stimuli and response(s) or between stimuli themselves
Lashley (1960), Bartlett (1932), Tolman (1948 op cit, 1949), and others have
recognized this long ago and perhaps a careful re-reading of their ideas and
concepts may now be in order
REFERENCES
Bartlett, F. C. Remembering. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press,
1932.
Bartley, S. H. Principles of Perception. New York: Harper & Brothers,
1958, (Chap. 1).
Guthrie, E. R. Association by contiguity. In: Koch, S. (Ed.), Psychology: A
Study of a Science. New York: McGraw-Hill, 1957, (Chap. 3,92-157).
Lashley, K. The neuropsychology of Lashley. In: Beach, F., Hebb, D. O.,
Morgan, C. and Nissen, H. (Eds.). The neuropsychology of Lashley.
New York: McGraw-Hill, 1960, (Chaps. 8,23 and 31).
78
THE BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1978), 1

Commentary I Bindra: A perceptual-motivational view of adaptive behavior
Pribram, K H. Languages of the Brain Engle wood-Cliffs, NJ : Prentice-
Hall, 1971, (Chap. 5 [91-93] and Chap 6).
Tolman, E. C. There is more than one kind of learning. Psychological
Review., 1949,56:144-155.
Von Uexkiill, J. Instinctive Behavior In: Schiller, C. H. (Ed ) New York:
Int Universities Press, 1957, (Chap. 1, part 1).
by Richard C. Teevan
Department of Psychology, State University of New York at Albany
Skinner, Maslow, and common sense Bindra's paper has two essential
purposes: (1) to show why and how the basic tenets of the response-rein-
forcement framework are invalid, and (2) to propose a framework that he
believes will do the job (of accounting for adaptable behavior) better For the
reasons he advances, plus many others advanced by other persons, I agree
with his first purpose and, therefore, will concentrate on the second purpose
in the rest of this commentary
According to Bindra's abstract, "An act is produced when its act assembly
is activated by a pexgo (perceptual representation) of a certain eliciting
stimulus complex (ES)" At different points in the paper, Bindra defines a
pexgo as (a) a perceptual representation; (b) momentary central representa-
tion that underlies the perception of a stimulus; and (c) a presently excited
gnostic organization I do not believe that I will do great injustice to the con-
cept if I use the first of these He defines an act assembly as, "a neural orga-
nization that temporarily orders the excitation of certain movement com-
mands " I shall use the word act here since it seems obvious from his state-
ment quoted above that there is presently no way to tell them apart
Bindra further says that, "When certain eliciting stimuli are correlated with
incentive stimuli, they acquire motivational properties that serve to
strengthen the pexgos generated by those eliciting stimuli and thereby
increase the probability of activation of the corresponding act assemblies "
Thus motivation influences response production by "modulating the strength
of pexgos of eliciting stimuli for the succession of acts that comprise a
response " In another part of the paper Bindra states that what the animal
learns is correlations between stimulus events - SS
Finally, Bindra states that "the production of any act is determined jointly
by the animal's current organismic condition, motivational state, and sensory
inflow from within its body and from the environment"
To me, all this boils down to the following: an animal has an organismic
condition (he is hungry) He becomes motivated (incentive eliciting stimuli
exist both within and without his body) He has pexgos that are correlated
with other pexgos (he has learned what leads to what) These lead to acts
Bindra remarks that "the mechanism by which a certain pexgo is translated
into a particular act is not known" -1 do not know it either The reason the
animal stops acting in a given direction is not specified in this paper
In 1948, Tolman published his, "Cognitive Maps in Rats and Men"
(Tolman, 1948 op cit) It is so well known that I will not try to abstract it here
Suffice it to say that he was proposing a cognitive alternative to the response-
reinforcement view of learning and that his system was composed of correla-
tions between stimuli (the animal learns what leads to what) He, like Bindra,
felt that there were perceptual representations in the animal's brain (cogni-
tive maps? pexgos?) and that the system was more complicated than was
thought by the response-reinforcement theorists I can see no real difference
(except for language) between what Tolman said in 1948 and what cognitive
theorists (including Bindra) are saying now Thus, I do not believe that
significant progress has been made in this field of theory in the last twenty-
nine years
Does this mean that they were giants in those days and "they just don't
make them like that any more?" In my opinion, the answer to that question is
a resounding "NO " I believe that if you had been walking down the street of
a large city in 1900 (or earlier) and had asked a reasonably well-educated
person, "How is adaptive behavior learned?" he would have given
essentially the same answer (again in different language) that was given by
Tolman in 1948 (op cit) This answer, of course, was not satisfactory to many
psychologists of the twenties through the forties and it is not satisfactory now
The theory is too vague; it leads directly to too few operational definitions; it
is not specific enough; it is not testable enough; it does not predict
Therefore, we had psychologists trying to give us more scientific theories
and those, being more testable, have been tested and found wanting
I am saying, then, that we began with a common sense view of how adap-
tive learning took place We replaced that with a more scientific, testable
view We found that that view did not work We are now back with the com-
mon sense view It is probable that the common sense view is correct I, for
one, certainly feel much more comfortable with it than with any other view
However, it would seem that we need a great deal more data (maybe espe-
cially physiological data) before we can do anything with that view
I do not believe that Skinner (oper cit) has been telling us that theory is
not important, any more than Maslow has been telling us that we should not
do controlled experiments with the "higher" human motives Maslow has
been telling us to learn as much as we can, in any way we can, about the
"higher" human motives and this may lead us to be able to do controlled ex-
periments with them Skinner, I believe, is telling us that at present we do not
know enough to build the kind of theories we want and need I think he is tell-
ing us to learn as much as we can about learned behavior-to build a
technology-and that might lead us into the kind of theories we want and
need Our penchant for theory is sometimes hard to believe We even have
mathematical model theories when we have no idea of what to put into them
Maybe it is time we listened to people like Skinner and Maslow
by Ernst von Glasersfeld
Department of Psychology, University of Georgia, Athens, Ga 30602
Another minor revision, or the disregard for control theory and the
analysis of inductive feedback systems. Many who have in the past taken
issue with the dogmatic simplifications and distortions perpetrated in the
name of Behaviorism will tend to agree with Bindra's introductory declaration
that "the basic tenets of the response-reinforcement framework are invalid"
and that "the difficulties cannot be simply patched up with minor revisions "
Reading on, however, it soon becomes clear that different critics of that
framework may have quite different ideas as to which basic tenets are invalid
and what major changes would have to be made in our view of behavior in
order to arrive at a more plausible explanatory framework or model
Bindra, clearly, is struggling to get away from the primitive assumption that
behavior is determined in a direct, linear cause-effect way by stimuli Yet he
undermines his efforts and minimizes his chances of success by perpetuat-
ing a terminology that inevitably brings with it much of the traditional be-
haviorist conceptualization Learning, he postulates, consists in the forming
of an association between a perceptual stimulus Snand the hedonic stimulus
SH, and this learned association then manifests itself because Sn comes to
generate "the same motivation (central motive state cms) as is normally
generated by the hedonic stimulus (SH) itself" And, he adds, "this central
motive state, in combination with the detailed sensory-spatial features of the
situation, then determines what response will emerge " Contrary to S-R
theory (according to which a response is "emitted" under certain stimulus
conditions because it was linked to one or more of the stimuli by means of
reinforcement), Bindra proposes that the organism does not have a repertoire
of response behaviors, but that each individual response "is a fresh
construction dependent on the motivational state and the pexgo (i e,
presently excited gnostic organization) generated by the prevailing stimulus
situation "
I would suggest that the word "motivation" is being used here in two rather
different senses and that this is misleading because, in conjunction with the
term "hedonic stimulus," it makes it all but impossible to focus on the crucial
connection between motivation and satisfaction On the one hand, a hedonic
stimulus is said to generate motivation (and to transmit this capacity to other
stimuli by association), and this motivation No 1 leads to the construction of
a response behavior that, on the basis of "structural gnostic elements" (struc-
tured, presumably, by prior experience), is expected to lead to some kind of
consumption (or avoidance) and hence to satisfaction On the other hand,
there is the organism's general motivational state, that is to say, motivation
No 2, which refers to the kind of consuming the organism wants or is driven
to look for at the moment (e g , hunger) The indiscriminate use of "motiva-
tion" for both these items hides the fact that when Bindra talks about
"detailed sensory-spatial features of the situation" determining "what
response will emerge," or "an environmental stimulus complex that is critical
for the production of a certain act," he is making the tacit assumption that the
organism, in its prior experience, has established that, given certain
"sensory-spatial features" or "environmental stimulus complexes," certain
ways of acting are likely to lead to particular forms of satisfaction In other
THE BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1978), 1
79

Commentary/ Bindra: A perceptual-motivational view of adaptive behavior
words, if we are discussing "learning" (and not primary reflexes), the central
representation of the visual stimulus I call "apple" becomes a hedonic sti-
mulus only after I have at least once (a) bitten into an apple, (b) liked the
result, and (c) in some way recorded that connection If from this we form the
hypothesis that the satisfaction derived from biting into an apple generates a
specific kind of association between the apple-stimulus and the act of biting,
we get a rather widely applicable principle or model that, of course, is really
no more or no less than the well-known principle of inductive inference As
Maturana (1970) put it: "The living system, due to its circular organization, is
an inductive system and functions always in a predictive manner:- what oc-
curred once will occur again " For the inductivist, the association between
stimulus and response is, of course, not causal but instrumental in that it be-
comes an operative link if, and only if, the organism wants or needs the kind
of satisfaction that was experienced in conjunction with that stimulus and
that act (i e , when there is motivation No 2)
Though Bindra says "there is little doubt that animals learn the correlations
between their actions and the consequences of those actions," he maintains
that these correlations in no way explain how specific actions get produced
This difficulty, I would suggest, arises only if one assumes that the sensory
signals out of which an organism builds up its "central representation" of a
perceptual stimulus or stimulus configuration (e.g , an object-concept of ap-
ple) are data that are altogether different in kind or dimension from the
proprioceptive signals out of which the organism builds up central
representations of its motor acts [see Roland, this issue] 
From a
cyberneticist's point of view, they are all input (Powers, 1973) That is to say,
they are all proximal, and the problem of making combinations with distal
stimuli simply cannot arise for any organism, because there is no such thing
as a distal stimulus in an organism's experience (Only an observer can
meaningfully distinguish "distal" and "proximal" relative to an observed
organism ) Also, there is a considerable body of evidence from work with in-
fants that indicates that the representation of objects, as items independent
of the infant's motor activity involved in touching or grasping them, is only
gradually and laboriously developed and externalized (Piaget, 1937) [see
also Brainerd, this volume, next issue, forthcoming]
The main problem Bindra sees in the formulation of "specific principles of
response production" springs from two sources First, his rigid and rather ar-
bitrary dichotomy between fixed "motor programs" that last half a second or
less, and "long sequences of acts" for which, he says, "there is no lasting
'memory' basis" Since he considers the short acts to be rigidly fixed and
stimulus dependent, he needs an altogether different mechanism for the
construction of "act-assemblies " Second (and this, I believe, is due also to
his profound involvement in the traditional behaviorist conceptualization), he
completely disregards the principles of control theory and hierarchical feed-
back systems (Craik, 1966; MacKay, 1966; McFarland, 1971), which, ever
since the pioneering work of Craik and Wiener in the 1940s, have given us
not only theoretical but also functioning models of goa! directed motor pro-
grams and act-assemblies that operate on the basis of continuous, situation-
specific adaptation
In short, from this reader's point of view, Bindra's proposal is still an at-
tempt at "minor revision" that does not get away from the traditional tenet that
living organisms are passive receivers of stimuli to which they react accord-
ing to pseudo-mechanical principles A detailed analysis of what is covered
by the term "gnostic organization" would, I believe, reveal the indispensabil-
ity of induction and of inductively built-up representations of desirable and
undesirable states and events that can then serve as goals in the assembly of
adaptively modifiable behaviors
REFERENCES
Craik, K. J. W. The Nature of Psychology. Cambridge, Cambridge
University Press, 1966.
McFarland, D. J. Feedback Mechanisms in Animal Behavior. New York,
Academic Press, 1971.
MacKay, D. M. Cerebral organization and the conscious control of action.
In: J. C. Eccles (ed.), Brain and Conscious Experience, Pp. 422-45.
New York, Springer, 1966.
Maturana, H. R. Neurophysiology of cognition. In: P. L. Garvin (ed.),
Cognition: A Multiple View. New York, Spartan Books, 1970.
Piaget, J. La Construction du Reel Chez LEnfant. Neuchatel, Delachaux
et Niestle, 1937.
Powers, W. T. Behavior: The Control of Perception. Chicago, Aldine,
1973.
by J.M. Warren
Laboratory for Research in Animal Behavior, The Pennsylvania State University,
University Park, Pa. 16802
Neural mechanisms and Occam's razor. Many readers will be highly pre-
pared to respond favorably to Bindra's paper; it is in part a sermon to the
converted on the shortcomings of classical S-R association theories of
learning Everyone who has watched unrestrained animals has stories to
illustrate the fact that laboratory animals frequently act as if they were more
highly motivated to gain information about their environment than to reduce
homeostatic drives; for example, I recently observed that mice that had lost
30 per cent of their initial body weight during two days of water deprivation
spent much more time exploring than drinking in an unfamiliar enclosure
where water was freely available More formal grounds for skepticism re-
garding S-R theories were provided to many in graduate school where one
was entertained with recitals of the many deficiencies of S-R learning
theories, of defects like S-R theorists' inability to provide a plausible account
of motor equivalence, latent learning or sensory preconditioning
There are thus experiential and theoretic reasons why the reader will be
sympathetic to a theory like Bindra's that emphasizes sensory-sensory cor-
relations and deemphasizes specific sensory-motor linkages, as seems
necessary to deal, for instance, with the phenomenon of motor equivalence
Bindra does more than this He also presents in considerable detail a
model for associative learning in terms of changes in sensory, perceptual,
and motivational processes In addition, he presents theoretical arguments
to show that research in six areas in behavioral and neural science is desir-
able to assess the validity of his theoretic model
I have, however, two critical comments on Bindra's paper First, it is un-
fortunate that Bindra has chosen to call responses like eating, gnawing, lick-
ing, and biting (Figure 1) "consummatory" acts Responses that are
consummatory in their appropriate context may appear as displacement or
instrumental responses in other contexts The execution of consummatory
acts is sometimes neither necessary nor sufficient to terminate a behavioral
sequence Bindra's use of the term consummatory response is particularly
paradoxical since some ethologists have brought forth evidence that ex-
posure to consummatory stimuli is more important than execution of the
consummatory response in punctuating sequences of behavior
Second, I suspect it will be a long time before definite tests of the neu-
rological mechanisms for learning implicit in Bindra's theory can be made; it
is unlikely that the black boxes and their functions in the theory will be
spatially segregated in the central nervous system It is, however, likely that
behavioral phenomena recalcitrant to explanation in terms of an S-S model
will appear Consider the compensation to distorted sensory input that oc-
curs in mammals Human beings adapt rather quickly to prisms that distort
their visual input, but only if they are allowed to be active while wearing the
distorting lenses is adequate recalibration observed With what is the altered
visual input associated to permit compensation for the distorting lenses?
With proprioceptive feedback from the muscles? Or with some central com-
mand center for the motor system? It is rather difficult to obtain disjunctive
results from human subjects, but Taub's (op cit, Hulse, this Commentary)
studies of monkeys subjected to virtually total destruction of the propriocep-
tive nerves from the limbs and trunk show that a very high degree of motor
control may survive elimination of proprioceptive information from the body
[see Roland et al , this issue] It thus seems possible to hold a modified S-R
explanation of compensation for distorted sensory inputs (Held, 1968)
I do not allude to the experiments on compensation to distorted sensory in-
formation to impugn Bindra's theory in respect to the phenomena he attempts
to explain, but only to raise the possibility that natural selection need not
have acted parsimoniously in respect to learning mechanisms Conceivably,
there are different mechanisms for different forms of learning and both S-S
and S-R may apply to specific behavior domains
REFERENCE
Held, R. (1968) Dissociation of visual functions by deprivation and rear-
rangement. Psychologische Forschung, 31, 338-348.
by Edward A. Wasserman
Department of Psychology, The University of Iowa, Iowa City, Iowa 52242
Bindra's theory: some successes and precursors. Over the past ten years,
Bindra has been developing a cognitive-motivational theory of learning The
80
THE BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1978), 1

Commentary/ Bindra: A perceptual-motivational view of adaptive behavior
present paper describes the current status of this important approach to the
study of learning and behavior The central tenets of Bindra's theory are that
an organism forms an internal representation of repeated external stimuli and
that particular motivational and stimulus conditions combine to produce
specific autonomic and somatic reactions
These two tenets are closely allied with the fundamental distinction
between learning and performance Speaking to this distinction, Bindra first
holds that learning involves the elaboration of stimulus-stimulus associa-
tions; he explicitly excludes response-stimulus association as a factor
influencing behavior change Secondly, Bindra holds that indirect activation
of a central motivational state by a signalling stimulus provokes particular
autonomic and skeletal reactions in relation to the response-eliciting
properties of the external signal The emphasis that Bindra places on
response elicitation counters the frequent criticism of cognitive learning
theories that such notions leave the organism behaviorally rooted and
"buried in thought"
Clearly, any theory that disavows the importance of response-stimulus
association in behavior modification represents a dramatic departure from
prevailing contemporary thought Such a radical reformulation seems indi-
cated by an extensive series of experiments on the conditioning of directed
locomotor and manipulative behaviors using the stimulus pairing operations
of Pavlovian conditioning (Hearst & Jenkins, 1974 op cit, see also Jenkins,
this Commentary)
As originally reported by Brown and Jenkins (1968), hungry pigeons learn
to approach and peck at a small key whose illumination signals the
response-independent delivery of food Such "sign-tracking" seems quite
difficult to explain on the basis of response-stimulus association First, the
original response most contiguous with food delivery is not the one that ulti-
mately becomes most prominent Initially, the pigeon turns toward and looks
at the key light signal Later, it begins to spend more time in the vicinity of the
key Finally, it comes reliably to approach and peck the lighted key These
progressive changes in responding to the lighted key cannot be readily ac-
counted for by response-stimulus association; however, the changes can be
explained by Bindra's more flexible formulation, according to which the con-
ditioned response "is a fresh construction each time it occurs," depending
upon "the momentary effectiveness of the various eliciting stimuli in the
situation " Second, vigorous pecking of the key light signal arises and
persists even when pecks prevent grain delivery (Williams & Williams, 1969):
contrary to the premise of response-stimulus association, but consistent with
Bindra's stimulus-stimulus association tenet
Historically, stimulus-stimulus association is connected with the classical
research of Pavlov (1927) and with the presumably limited number of effector
systems that are modifiable by stimulus pairing operations Of course,
Pavlov never felt that the conditioning principles that he discovered applied
only to glandular and visceral reactions, and research on sign-tracking cer-
tainiy supports Pavlov's original suppositions as to the generality of his con-
ditioning principles Another historical misconception surrounds the degree
to which behaviors conditioned with Pavlov's procedure are mere "replicas"
of unconditioned responses A careful reading of Pavlov's (1927, p 22) con-
ception of "stimulus substitution" reveals that such substitutability applies
only to artificial conditioned stimuli (such as lights and buzzers) standing for
natural conditioned stimuli (such as the appearance and odor of food) The
diverse motor and secretory reactions to conditioned stimuli that Pavlov and
others (Zener, 1937) observed seem quite consistent with Bindra's account
of conditioning and performance in which "the new learned response is de-
termined by the type of motivational state generated by the conditioned
stimulus and by its detailed stimulus features in relation to the total situa-
tion " Bindra's theory also accommodates the important finding in sign-track-
ing that approach and pecking emerge to localized visual stimuli even when
the reinforcing stimulus elicits neither of these behaviors (Wasserman, 1973;
Woodruff & Williams, 1976) And his account nicely embraces the finding
that approach-with-contact arises to a localized stimulus paired with an ap-
petitive reinforcer, whereas escape-avoidance arises to the same signal
when unpaired with an appetitive reinforcer (Wasserman, Franklin, & Hearst,
1974), for according to this view, the most general principle determining
response production seems to be that "an animal will move toward an elicit-
ing stimulus that is of greater appetitive motivational valence or of lesser
aversive motivational valence than other eliciting stimuli in that situation at
that time "
Anticipating that others will criticize Bindra's theory for the difficulty it cur-
rently has in explaining response differentiation (Notterman & Mintz, 1965;
see also Notterman, this Commentary), learned helplessness (Maier,
Seligman, & Solomon, 1969), and the instrumentalization of autonomic be-
haviors (Miller, 1969), let me conclude with some historical remarks pertinent
to the inclusion of instrumental conditioning within the domain of stimulus-
stimulus association
Although not acknowledged by Bindra, this suggestion was made several
years ago by Birch and Bitterman (1949; see also Bitterman, this Com-
mentary) These authors, too, laid great stress on only one form of learning,
which they termed sensory integration - "a process of afferent modification
which depends primarily upon contiguity of stimulation and which can occur
in the absence of need-reduction" (p 305) How does this approach deal
with instrumental conditioning? "In the Skinner box, for example, the rat
experiences food only in the vicinity of the lever As the lever and other local
stimuli acquire food-properties, the animal orients to these stimuli and the
only responses which appear are those which they elicit The critical features
of the stimulus situation may in this way be differentiated out of the mass, and
the range of behavior accordingly restricted" (p 306) This earlier construc-
tion is then quite similar to Bindra's without the trappings of incentive motiva-
tion
Finally, although Skinner's classical (1938 op cit) concept of the operant
explicitly omitted reference to eliciting environmental stimuli, his earlier
(1935) distinction between operants and respondents relied, in part, on the
nature of supporting environmental stimuli 
Respondents "require no
external point of reference in their elicitation or description," whereas
operants "require points of reference for their elicitation which are not sup-
plied by the organism itself, but by the stimulus" (p 68) Bindra expects no
important functional difference between learning under these different
stimulus conditions, and research in sign-tracking supports this expectation
REFERENCES
Birch, H. G., and Bitterman, M. E. Reinforcement and learning: The
process of sensory integration. Psychological Review 56:292-308.
1949.
Brown, P. L., and Jenkins, H. M. Auto-shaping of the pigeon's key-peck.
Journal of the Experimental Analysis of Behavior. 11:1-8. 1968.
Maier, S. F., Seligman, M. E. P., and Solomon, R. L. Pavlovian fear condi-
tioning and learned helplessness: Effects on escape and avoidance
behavior of (a) the CS-US contingency and (b) the independence of
the US and voluntary responding. In: B. A. Campbell and R. M
Church (eds.), Punishment and aversive behavior. Pp. 299-342. New
York, Apple ton-Century-Crofts, 1969.
Miller, N. E. Learning of visceral and glandular responses. Science
163:434-45. 1969.
Notterman, J. M., and Mintz, D. E. Dynamics of response. New York,
Wiley, 1965.
Pavlov, I. P. Conditioned reflexes. Oxford, Oxford University Press, 1927.
Skinner, B. F. Two types of conditioned reflex and a pseudo-type. Journal
of General Psychology. 12:66-77. 1935.
Wasserman, E. A. Pavlovian conditioning with heat reinforcement
produces stimulus-directed pecking in chicks. Science. 181:875-77.
1973.
Wasserman, E. A., Franklin, S. R., and Hearst, E. Pavlovian appetitive
contingencies and approach versus withdrawal to conditioned stimuli
in pigeons. Journal of Comparative and Physiological Psychology.
86:616-27. 1974.
Williams, D. R., and Williams, H. Auto-maintenance in the pigeon: Sus-
tained pecking despite contingent non-reinforcement. Journal of the
Experimental Analysis of Behavior. 12:511-20. 1969.
Woodruff, G., and Williams, D. R. The associative relation underlying
autoshaping in the pigeon. Journal of the Experimental Analysis of
Behavior. 26:1-13. 1976.
Zener, K. The significance of behavior accompanying conditioned salivary
secretion for theories of the conditioned response. American Journal
of Psychology. 50:384-403. 1937.
by Roderick Wong
Department of Psychology, University of British Columbia, Vancouver, B C,
Canada, V6T1W5
Behavioral flexibility in learning situations: adaptive or adaptable be-
havior? The issues to which Bindra's paper is addressed concern the
mechanisms of adaptive action by laboratory animals in typical learning
THE BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1978), 1
81

Commentary/ Bindra: A perceptual-motivational view of adaptive behavior
situations Although the paper is entitled, "How Adaptive Behavior is
Produced," it might be more semantically appropriate to entitle it "How
Adaptable Behavior is Possible " The term "adaptive" usually refers to bio-
logical fitness arising from selection processes; more specifically, the selec-
tion processes operate upon survival and success in reproduction and social
organization rather than on learning ability It seems to me that Bindra is
dealing with the processes that enable laboratory animals to show be-
havioral change when the situation seems to demand it In that respect,
Bindra is concerned with the behavioral adaptability and flexibility of indi-
vidual organisms rather than with adaptive behavior perse Learning may be
a mode of adaptation, but it is only one of many alternate modes For this
reason, I wonder whether Bindra's perceptual-motivational framework is ap-
propriate for "the study of behavior at all levels" as tentatively promised
However, in dealing with an explanation of "animal behavior in typical learn-
ing experiments," Bindra's framework is most impressive
More specifically, this paper deals with the explanation of what Bindra
(1976 op cit ) has called "intelligent behavior - the types of purposive,
foresightful, and innovative actions that characterize the biological adapta-
tion of man and related animals " The approach deals with the psychology of
learning from the perspective of the "general process" rather than the
"adaptive-evolutionary" paradigm 
Bindra is more concerned with the
mechanisms of intelligent behavior common to all mammals than he is with
the special adaptations required for "real-world learning" (Rozin, 1977) The
Darwinian adaptation-evolutionary viewpoint emphasizes adaptation and se-
lection for phenotypes that deal most effectively with environmental prob-
lems Much of real-world learning consists of specialized adaptations; exam-
ples include food selection (Barker, Best, and Domjam, 1977), species
recognition (Brown, 1975) and song-learning in birds (Marler, 1970) I raise
the issue of paradigms not as a criticism of the goal that Bindra is attempting
to achieve but as an attempt to clarify the perspective of his particular frame-
work
It appears that Bindra's framework can account for many aspects of learn-
ing that have eluded the traditional learning framework Problems of motor
equivalence and behavioral flexibility are adequately handled in Bindra's
framework I think that his framework can also deal with the phenomenon of
"exposure learning" suggested by Sluckin (1964) In that respect, this frame-
work can deal with many features of imprinting in the laboratory setting, and
may thus suggest some mechanisms to account for a phenomenon usually
studied by researchers interested in specialized adaptations However, I am
not sure how Bindra would explain the results of the Krieckhaus (1970) and
Krieckhaus and Wolf (1968) demonstrations of the rat's "innate recognition"
of sodium despite the fact that prior associations or correlations between the
stimulus (sodium that is ingested) and the need (the state of sodium deple-
tion) were minimal or nonexistent
Bindra has developed a model of behavior change that prescribes the
necessary elements and the rules governing their operation in the system
Within this framework, predictions can be made about the adaptable be-
havior of mature, adult mammals in specified situations I would be
interested to see Bindra's discussion of developmental aspects of learning in
future papers The developmental emphasis of Bindra's (1959) earlier con-
ception of motivation has not been emphasized in his present treatment
I would also like to see how Bindra's framework would deal with individual
differences in learning ability I have recently summarized the data on infan-
tile stimulation and appetitive learning and concluded that performance dif-
ferences between handled and nonhandled rats are not solely due to learn-
ing (Wong and Wong, 1978) When learning differences appear to be
evident, the outcome is due to emotionality differences Although handled
rats seem to be more efficient than nonhandled rats in coping with environ-
mental contingencies in the laboratory, their superiority does not appear to
be due to differences in contingency organizations of the sort discussed in
Bindra's paper How would Bindra conceptualize the effects of environ-
mental enrichment on the facilitation of problem-solving skills in mammals?
How would he deal with emotional reactivity differences and their effects on
performance?
REFERENCES
Barker, L. M., Best, M. R. and Domjam, M. (Eds.) Learning mechanisms
in food selection. Baylor: Baylor University Press, 1977.
Bindra, D. Motivation: A systematic reinterpretation New York: Ronald,
1959.
Brown, J. L. The evolution of behavior. New York: Norton, 1975
Krieckhaus, E. E. Innate recognition aids rats in sodium regulation.
Journal of Comparative and Physiological Psychology, 1970, 73:117-
122.
Krieckhaus, E. E. and Wolf, G. Acquisition of sodium by rats: Interaction
of innate mechanisms and latent learning. Journal of Comparative
and Physiological Psychology, 1968,65:197-201.
Marler, D. Birdsong and speech development: Could there be parallels?
American Scientist, 1970,58:669-673.
Rozin, P. The significance of learning mechanisms in food selection:
Some biology, psychology and sociology of science. In L. M. Barker,
M. R. Best and M. Domjam (Eds.), Learning mechanisms in food se-
lection. Baylor: Baylor University Press, 1977.
Sluckin, W. Imprinting and early learning. London: Methuen, 1964.
Wong, R. and Wong, B. Infantile handling and learning: A critical review.
The American Journal of Psychology, 1978 (in press)
by W.Scott Wood,
Department of Psychology, Drake University, Des Moines, Iowa 50311
In defense of descriptive behaviorism, or theories of learning still aren't
necessary. Bindra offers what he calls a new framework for the explanation of
adaptive behavior, one based upon perceptual learning and the motivational
role of stimuli and not another version of a response-reinforcement model
According to Bindra, a new approach is needed because reinforcement
theories of a descriptive nature, such as Skinner's, or those of a more
hypothetically structured kind, such as Hull's, contain major weaknesses
The tenets of a hypothetical reinforcement model that Bindra questions are
that learning depends upon contiguity between a response and a reinforcer,
that learning can be implicitly or explicitly attributed to the selective
strengthening of a connection between neurological representations of a sti-
mulus situation and a response, and that evoking a given neural stimulus
representation gives rise only to the previously connected response
The problems that Bindra sees with an empirical or descriptive reinforce-
ment principle are that learning sometimes can occur without the reinforce-
ment of any specific response, sometimes even without the occurrence of a
response at all, that some forms of responding, including instinctive be-
havior, remain unanalyzed, and that some contemporary researchers are un-
satisfied with the adequacy of a simple reinforcement account for all the
details of responding, even within the framework of an operant conditioning
experiment But Bindra also identifies a more fundamental flaw in a descrip-
tive reinforcement principle, which is that such an approach offers no real
explanation of how adaptive behavior is put together at all
Before considering Bindra's alternative model, it is important to separate
his epistemological criticism of a descriptive reinforcement principle, that it
offers no valid explanation of adaptive behavior, from the more empirical
one, i e that it is somehow incomplete or inaccurate Presumably a con-
tinuing strategy of empiricism could come to grips with the facts Bindra cites
as evidence against the descriptive account by stating more or different
functional relationships between environmental variables and the various
behavioral events under question, such as adjunctive behavior and so forth
As a matter of fact, the current criticism of Skinner's operant behaviorism,
which suggests that the approach depends upon a single and all-inclusive
reinforcement principle, is simply wrong (Skinner, 1977) But even if such
criticism were correct, one could conceivably alter or expand the number of
functional relationships within the system without invoking the central
nervous system In other words, Bindra's criticism of current reinforcement
theories, empirical and hypothetical, does not necessarily imply that the only
improvement lies in the development of a different hypothetical-neurological
theory; one could instead look for more, or more accurate, descriptive state-
ments of environmental-behavioral relationships
At this point, we reach an intellectual impasse To Bindra and many other
learning theorists, an improved or expanded network of descriptive prin-
ciples still would not provide the kind of explanatory theory they are seeking
(Staddon, 1973) To some behaviorists, however, the description of func-
tional relationships relating manipulate or controllable environmental
events to observable behavioral outcomes does constitute explanation, and
in fact the most useful kind of explanation of behavior that psychology can
provide (Baum, 1974; Skinner, 1953, Ch III, op cit.) And Bindra is correct,
too, in saying that such functional relationships do not imply any within-
organism biological or neurological interconnections Reinforcement is no
82
THE BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1978), 1

Commentary/ Bindra: A perceptual-motivational view of adaptive behavior
more than a name for a class of behavioral control methods that collectively
depend upon the manipulation of consequences for their effect, a set of
instructions to scientists about how to control behavior (Catania, 1973 and
this Commentary; Skinner, 1969, op cit, Ch 6; Wood, 1976) That this class
may be large or small or potentially replaceable by more effective
procedures is another issue This kind of an approach to scientific explana-
tion is not unique to Skinner and other operant behaviorists, of course; it also
was the strategy recommended by Bacon, and for many of the same reasons
(Kaufman, 1968) It emphasizes control, not contemplation; engineering, not
hypothesizing It is an approach to science that by its very nature leads
directly to social application, just as it was intended to in New Atlantis 
or
Walden Two
An alternative strategy, which emphasizes formal theory construction and
research designed to test hypotheses, has been followed many times, too,
particularly late in the development of certain fields such as physics
However, such success as this approach has had has led some philosophers
and scientists to identify the hypothetico-deductive approach as the
scientific method, with the unfortunate result that newer sciences in the be-
havioral and social fields have tended to adopt it almost without question
Skinner (1956) argues that this emphasis on theory construction and
hypothesis testing fails to recognize and give appropriate consideration to
the earlier stages in the development of physical sciences where research
necessarily focuses upon experimental control and fact-finding In asking
whether theories of learning were even necessary in psychology, Skinner
(1950, op cit) opposed any attempt to explain behavioral facts "which ap-
peals to events taking place somewhere else, at some other level of observa-
tion, described in different terms, and measured, if at all, in different dimen-
sions," and specifically listed mentalistic, physiological, and conceptual-
neurological theories as examples He argued instead for research designed
to relate orderly behavioral changes to manipulable environmental vari-
ables, an approach that would become appropriately theoretical only with
the development of a formal system of minimal terms to represent
comprehensively the collected descriptive relationships
In any event, whether one attempts to relate behavioral facts in terms of
conceptual theories that depend upon explanatory models in other dimen-
sions (such as, for example, pexgos), or simply attempts to systematize the
data at the observational level, the facts one works with must be firmly es-
tablished We have seen in the last several years the emergence of data that
apparently test the reinforcement account but, as I have argued above, a
descriptive reinforcement principle is essentially unassailable; appro-
priately understood, it is not a theory or model at all, but rather a method of
behavioral control And, as even Bindra noted, it is a method that has worked
quite successfully outside the laboratory as well as within it The question
now is whether these contrary data need a new conceptual-neurological
explanation, as Bindra offers, or whether closer attention to strictly environ-
mental variables can result in satisfactory descriptive accounts for their oc-
currence? It is certainly possible to reevaluate empirically the adequacy of
the reinforcement principle without positing gnostic cell assemblies (Honig
&Staddon, 1977)
The important behavior to consider in choosing between pursuing re-
search intended to identify functional relationships and research that tests
hypothetical-neurological models seems to me to be that of the scientists
and not the subjects And without prejudicing the argument by using the term
"reinforcement" as descriptive (explanatory) of the events of the last few
decades of experimental psychology, one still sees formal learning theory as
being about where it was in the 1940s, at least for all practical purposes,
regardless of whether cognitive terms are now beginning to appear in some
formulations This situation can be contrasted with the exploding ramifica-
tions of operant or descriptive behaviorism, where today, for example, vir-
tually every school teacher can incorrectly use the term "negative reinforce-
ment " If, as Guttman (1977) commented, a single reinforcement principle is
almost commonsensically inadequate, wherein lies the strength of the no-
tion? It is, quite simply, that reinforcement is a behavioral control method, a
way of dealing with behavior, and not just, or even, an explanatory model It
is applicability, not theoretical refinement, that has virtually enthroned the
reinforcement principle in behavioral psychology
How then to react to Bindra's new model? I suggest that replacing one
hypothetical-neurological account of adaptive behavior with another is as
likely to be useful as is strengthening a house of cards by calling for a new
deck It may appear to some academic learning theorists that emphasizing
perceptual-motivational constructs instead of stimulus-response ones,
whether couched in neurological terms or not, is a big shift in intellectual
focus Perhaps it is, but unless such a revision produces concrete methodo-
logical improvement in the control of behavior, the change is illusory If one
seeks to dethrone reinforcement, look for better ways to control behavior, not
"explain" it
REFERENCES
Baum, W. Definition in behavior science: A review of B. B. Wolman's
Dictionary of Behavioral Science. Journal of the Experimental
Analysis of Behavior, 22:445-51.1974.
Catania, A. C. The concept of the operant in the analysis of behavior.
Behaviorism, 1:103-16.1973.
Guttman, N. On Skinner and Hull: A reminiscence and projection.
American Psychologist, 32:321-28.1977.
Honig, W. K., and Staddon, J. E. R. Handbook of Operant Behavior.
Englewood Cliffs, N.J., Prentice-Hall, Inc., 1977.
Kaufman, A. F. The aims of scientific activity. The Monist, 2. 1968.
Skinner, B. F. A case history in the scientific method. American
Psychologist, 11:221-33. 1956.
Contingencies of Reinforcement: A Theoretical Analysis. New York,
Appleton-Century-Crofts, 1969.
Herrnstein and the evolution of behaviorism. American Psychologist,
32:1006-1012.1977.
Staddon, J. E. R On the notion of cause, with applications to behaviorism.
Behaviorism, 1:25-63. 1973.
Wood, W. S. Language, truth, and the law of effect. A paper presented at
the 84th convention of the American Psychological Association,
Washington, D.C., 1976.
Author's Response
by Dalbir Bindra
A behavioristic, cognitive-motivational, neuropsychological
approach to explaining behavior.
The commentaries prompted by my paper vary greatly in tone,
from the kind and supportive to the rather pungent and grudging,
yet they are remarkably similar in the issues they raise for dis-
cussion. This makes it easy to concentrate on the substantive
points and to deal with the commentaries en bloc instead of
singly. My task is also made easier by the fact that frequently a
question raised by one commentator has been answered by
another; I trust the commentators will read one another.
What is new?
According to a proverb often quoted in academic circles, a
person goes through three stages on the way to accepting a new
theoretical position: (1) "This is nonsense." (2) "There is nothing
new in this." (3) "I have been saying this all along." While each
of these three attitudes is well represented in the above com-
mentaries, the second is perhaps the most common. The usual
form it takes is the statement that "what Bindra proposes is in
essence the same as ... (insert someone else's earlier proposal)."
A problem with judgments of sameness is that they depend on
the momentary purposes of the observer; any two things can be
called "same" or "different" depending on the aspect under
consideration and the required level of discrimination; that is, on
the criterion of sameness. The concepts of atom (Democritus),
monad (Kepler), and wave-particles (Schrodinger) are the same if
one considers them merely as examples of atomism, but they are
different if one considers the theories of matter of which each is a
THE BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1978), 1
83

Response/Bindra: A perceptual-motivational view of adaptive behavior
part-the theoretical framework or "paradigm" within which
each was elaborated. Clearly, it can be correct to say that the
three concepts of matter are the same if one selects a lax rather
than a stringent criterion of sameness.
So Bitterman can be correct in saying that Bindra's proposal is
the same as Mowrer's if he chooses to compare the two formula-
tions on the importance both ascribe to motivation and to ignore
their differences on such points as the nature of motivation
(central neural state versus feedback from peripheral visceral
commotion) and the determination of the initial response (de-
termination by motivational state and elicitating stimuli versus
scanning of response repertoire). But Mowrer and Teevan, with
at least equal justification, say that Bindra follows in the footsteps
of Tolman, and Wasserman says that Bindra's position resembles
that of Pavlov (1927) and of Birch and Bitterman (1949)! Simi-
larly, Bolles is not wrong in saying "Bindra is a Guthrian," nor
Logan in saying that he (Logan), not Bindra, is a Guthrian. Nor is
Stein's "It's all been said before by Lashley, Bartlett, Hebb . . ."
necessarily a hyperbole. None of these statements is really un-
true - or wholly true.
This historical scholarship raises no useful issues whose dis-
cussion would advance our understanding of adaptive behavior.
Certainly, the types of similarities explored by the commentators
would make important components of a lesson in the historical
continuity of scientific ideas, as well as a reminder of how slow
the progress in understanding can be. But it is doubtful whether
such historical considerations have any useful part to play in the
evaluation of the validity of a framework as given.
The task that the commentators and I share jointly is that of
examining the validity of what I have, to give it a convenient
label, called a "perceptual-motivational" framework, as it stands
today. Since science has no absolute scale of validity (i.e.,
absolute truth is not known), we can only evaluate the validity of
any given framework relative to that of other current frameworks
that bear on the explanation of the same phenomena. The most
meaningful comparison frameworks for the present task are, of
course, those of response-reinforcement and cognitivism. [See
Haugeland et al., next issue.] One criterion especially relevant to
the evaluation of a broad framework is the extent to which
workers in other areas have found it useful or developed parallel
concepts. In this regard I am gratified to find support from Rosen-
blatt, representing ethology, Staats, representing social psy-
chology, and Murray, representing clinical psychology.
What of operant behaviorism and systems modeling?
One subclass of the response-reinforcement frameworks is Skin-
ner's operant (or descriptive) behaviorism. Skinner and his
school profess no interest in explaining behavior, that is, dis-
covering how adaptive responses are produced or by what un-
derlying processes a response is put together. Operant behav-
iorism limits itself to empirical analysis and aims at formulating
exact descriptive principles of behavior and reaping the benefits
of behavior control that such knowledge makes possible. Since
Skinner and his followers have chosen not to get involved in the
problem of explaining behavior, my discussion of how adaptive
behavior is produced has no critical bearing on what they are try-
ing to achieve.
Catania and Wood recognize this. Catania observes, correctly,
that my paper has little to do with the "framework of the contem-
porary experimental analysis of behavior" and that my passing
(historical) references to Skinner are quite peripheral to the ob-
jective of my paper. Epstein, Mazur, Navarick and Salzinger
have apparently missed this point. These commentators have
come out in a fighting defense of operant behaviorism - and of
Skinner! No such defense is needed. Operant behaviorism is
unassailable as a technology - and a useful technology - of be-
havioral control; and Skinner (even undefended) will remain one
of the loftiest figures of our discipline. As I pointed out in my
paper, the operant behaviorist's view of the task of psychology is
not wrong; it is only limited in that it disregards the basic
scientific problem of explaining behavior in terms of underlying
processes. Knowledge of underlying processes implies the ca-
pability of control, but control may be achieved without that
knowledge.
In the domain of the current cognitive frameworks there is also
a subclass not directly concerned with explanation. These may
be described as "systems-modeling" frameworks. These frame-
works, though cognitive in the sense that they consider
knowledge to be relatively independent of responses, are
described in the language of engineering systems, information-
processing and artificial-intelligence. It should be evident that
modeling cognitive processes in terms of engineering functions
(e.g., storage, filter, feedback, feedforward, scanner, subroutine,
retrieval) is not the same as searching for the underlying
processes themselves. The engineering functions in the systems
are analogical descriptions, not descriptions (more or less
hypothetical) of the real underlying processes. Thus, like
operant technology, cognitive systems-modeling frameworks
likewise fail to aim at explanation. [See Pylyshyn et al., this
issue.]
Dennett and von Glasersfeld have overlooked this resem-
blance between operant behaviorism and systems-modeling
frameworks of cognition. While agreeing with me that operant
behaviorism evades the problem of explanation, they neverthe-
less advocate systems models, failing to see that the actual brain
processes underlying cognition are not the same as the engineer-
ing models our brains can formulate. Craik, whom von Glasers-
feld mentions approvingly, knew this well. Craik wrote "... we
want to know how our brains work - not to explain other things
on the basis of the fact that they work" (Craik, 1966, p. 75, op. cit.
in von Glasersfeld, this Commentary). Dennett's design
engineer may be able to put together certain intelligent func-
tions, but that will not tell us how the brain produces intelligent
actions, consciousness, or intentionality.
Thus, the perceptual-motivational framework I have proposed
is in competition with neither operant behaviorism nor systems
models of cognition; those are altogether different enterprises.
My framework is in competition with those other reinforcement
and cognitive frameworks and formulations that address
themselves to the problem of explaining adaptive behavior in
terms of the real (brain) processes that produce it.
It is a source of some confusion that operant behaviorists
portray themselves as the sole custodians of behavioristic
psychology, and systems modelers of cognitive functions seem to
regard themselves as the exclusive executors of cognitive
psychology. This narrow view of behavioristic and cognitive
psychology results in my being regarded by Salzinger as antibe-
havioristic and by Dennett as not cognitive enough. From their
perspectives, these commentators see operant behaviorism and
systems-modeling frameworks as two opposing and jointly
exhaustive approaches in psychology. They have not understood
the behavioristic and cognitive movements in psychology. These
are neither contradictory nor do they cover the whole domain of
the discipline. One can indeed consider me to be, like Hunter,
Tolman, and Lashley, a cognitive psychologist in that I believe
the processes representing knowledge of the world to be
somewhat independent of sensory-inflow and motor-outflow
processes and to have a life of their own not rigidly tied to
particular responses. And like these theorists, I am also a be-
havioristic psychologist in the sense that I believe the processes
underlying the phenomena of intelligent behavior and con-
sciousness (whether we call the processes mental, neural, or
something else) to be discoverable only by dispassionate study
of, and careful speculation based upon, behavioral data; there is
no direct introspective window on the mind. Cognition and be-
havioristics can go hand in hand.
84
THE BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1978), 1

Response/Bindrs.: A perceptual-motivational view of adaptive behavior
Why the neurologizing?
It is a fair guess that all the commentators are monists and
believe that the development of the unified view of nature to
which science aspires would require the phenomena of the mind
(intelligent behavior and consciousness) to be explained in or
translatable into neural terms. Thus, it would be surprising if
most scientists in the fields of the behavioral and brain sciences
did not look upon a neuropsychological bridge between the two
domains as a goal - if not the eventual destiny - of the two fields
of investigation. From this perspective, the genuine explanation
of a phenomenon at the behavioral level is achieved only when it
is shown, at least in principle, how it is translatable into the
phenomena at the next lower level of analysis (i.e., neurological).
[See Haugeland et al., next issue.]
It was this orientation that prompted me several years ago to
look carefully at the newer findings in the neurosciences and to
try to formulate a coherent set of neuropsychological constructs
for explaining the varied phenomena of adaptive behavior - from
instincts to remembering and problem solving. The result was
my monograph, A Theory of Intelligent Behavior (1976), in
which I explain how the evidence from neurophysiology,
clinical neurology, and behavioral investigations dictates the
postulation of some such concepts as pexgo, act-assembly, con-
tingency organization, central motive state, and the like. In the
paper now under commentary it was not possible to explain the
reasons for these new constructs, and their exact meaning and
implications may not have been fully understood by some com-
mentators. I apologize for this, and am grateful to those who, like
Booth, Hilgard, Klingsporn, and Soltysik were able to examine
the monograph as well.
Pribram says that in developing my theoretical scheme I have
failed to take into consideration existing knowledge about the
nervous system. This is obviously not the case (Bindra, 1976, chs.
2, 3, and 4). What is true is that the constructs I have formulated
from my reading of the neural and behavioral evidence are dif-
ferent from those that Pribram (1971, this Commentary) has sug-
gested. In particular, the ways in which he and I handle motor
organization, perception, and attention are quite different, and I
have explicitly pointed out the shortcomings of his constructs.
One shortcoming, from my viewpoint, is that he has not made a
distinction between the experienced percept or image on the
one hand and some earlier process like pexgo, which, together
with different subsequent processes, might be the basis of a per-
cept, an image, a memory, or a discriminative response. I think it
might be profitable to discuss the relative merits of Pribram's
neuropsychological constructs and mine, but his supposition that
I have ignored the brain is wrong.
There are those who see little point to what they call "neu-
rological speculations." Catania, Dennett, Gilbert, Hilgard, Ryan,
Salzinger, & Warren have, each in his own way, questioned
the value of neuropsychological constructs. The main concerns
seem to be that such constructs are somewhat ad hoc,
insufficiently constrained, with too many degrees of freedom, too
tautological and "flimsy" to serve as useful "underpinnings" of
behavior, or that they are premature. These views, I submit
(and the point has been made before, Hebb, 1977), are charac-
teristic of those who look at the work of neurosciences from afar.
Those who are not themselves involved in examining neuro-
physiological findings or choosing between alternative types of
constructs on the basis of available neurophysiological evidence
are likely to be oblivious of the constraints that neurophysio-
logical evidence places on neuropsychological constructs;
understandably, they tend to look upon such unfamiliar
constructs as ad hoc or tautological. It should also be noted that
just because a construct is derived only from behavioral evi-
dence (e.g., short-term storage, reinforcement, association, drive)
does not necessarily make it less vague or tautological than
neuropsychological constructs. Since the latter are subject to
dual constraints (of neurophysiology and behavior), they have
the possibility of becoming even more "firm" and meaningful
than purely behavioral constructs. The prematurity argument is
vitiated by the fact that description and explanation often go
hand in hand, and to wait for impeccable description before start-
ing a search for explanation is to wait forever. Further, as Booth
and Killeen have pertinently noted, even the most empirical of
concepts of operant behaviorists (e.g., stimulus, response) have
some hidden tautological or theoretical base that, though it may
be more familiar or implicit, is not necessarily more valid.
A general antipathy is evident in the commentaries to
constructs that have some neural base or reference. My concepts
of pexgo, act-assembly, gnostic-assembly, etc., have formed easy
targets for derision and obloquy. The basis of serious criticism in
most cases does not lie in considerations of the usefulness of the
construct but in the general sentiment that either a new word is
being used for something that already has a suitable name (e.g.,
pexgo for percept) or that the neural ring of the new word makes
it appear to refer to a brain reality that is only speculative. The
criticism is misguided. Pexgo is not the same thing as percept,
and the reason for introducing the concept of pexgo is that such a
construct is needed to separate a percept (the experience) from
an underlying process. At an earlier time, distinctions were in-
troduced to separate sensation from perception and impression,
idea from image, memory from imagination, action from inten-
tion, and so on. The enterprise of refining experience and
explanatory ideas has been going on for a long time and will
continue. The question to ask in each case is whether the new
construct refers to some entity, experienced or hypothetical, that
is required for completing a description or an explanation. The
question of the source of the name for the construct (emotion,
quark, eidolon, etc.) is a separate issue; the name by itself does
not, or should not, make a construct more or less useful. In the
case of pexgo, the need for the construct became evident while
considering what is known about the psychology and neurology
of perception, and the name (presently excited gnostic organiza-
tion) reflects this. Pexgo is not meant to replace either percept or
hypercomplex cells, but it is meant to replace "template"; pexgo
is needed to deal with the uniqueness of each perceptual
experience. To criticize this construct because it is derived from
two types of evidence or constraints (psychological and
neurophysiological) instead of only the psychological is absurd
and, theoretically, suicidal. The issue is the need for or value of a
concept, not whether it has a mentalistic or a neural ring to it.
For an avowed antidualist, Booth's stand on neurologizing is
puzzling. He hopes that psychology and neurophysiology will be
married but is against their mixing; apparently, he would like
them to stay in pristine isolation until the magic moment of wed-
lock, when, at once, all will be well. My view is that to be ideally
united - married or not - they must grow into each other, and
this requires constant give and take and "dressing one up as the
other" to see how far the two bodies have become one. The unity
of science will not be achieved by perfecting different bodies of
knowledge in isolation, but by trying continually to link them
and perfect them together. Attempts to picture what perception
and meaning might be in neural terms have clarified the
psychologists confusion over whether perception without mean-
ing is possible (yes, it is). And attempts to neurologize (McGill
and Russian style) about language have guided neuroanatomical
investigations. Booth has missed the point that advances in
science come from many diverse and unexpected sources, and
there is little point in putting a ban on neurologizing (or anything
else) on the basis of a presupposition about what is or is not "the
right approach" to the advancement of knowledge.
What is incentive motivation?
Most students of behavior now seem to accept the idea that he-
donic stimuli ("reinforcers" or "incentives") can generate (in-
THE BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1978), 1
85

Response/Bindra: A perceptual-motivational view of adaptive behavior
centive) motivation and that the latter can influence the produc-
tion of responses. The question that remains an issue is whether
hedonic stimuli, apart from generating incentive-motivation, also
have 
response-reinforcing 
properties 
(i.e., capability 
of
strengthening S-R linkages). Several commentators (e.g., Bolles,
Hilgard, Rosenblatt) appear willing to consider the motivational
function of hedonic stimuli to be an important one in response
production, but none (with the possible exception of Booth and
Wasserman) are willing to accept my position that all the be-
havioral effects of hedonic stimuli are of motivational origin and
that, therefore, hedonic stimuli serve no response-reinforcing
function, in the sense of strengthening S-R linkages.
As I pointed out in my paper, the distinction between the
response-reinforcement and incentive-motivational roles of he-
donic stimuli has not been an easy one to understand. It is not
surprising, therefore, that the remarks of a few commentators
show some confusion on this point. Gallistel and von Glasers-
feld, for example, talk about the connection between "motiva-
tion" or "drive" and "satisfaction" or "pleasure" (thereby reviv-
ing the Hullian concept of drive-reinforcer connection) and then
wonder about the need for the concept of incentive-motivation.
They miss the point that the incentive-motivation concept has
been designed to replace both the drive and the reinforcer (or
satisfier) concepts, and is not meant to be synonymous with
either. They view "motivation" (drive) as something that deter-
mines "the kind of consuming the organism ... is driven to look
for." But it is known that drives (e.g., "hunger" or the organismic
condition produced by food deprivation), in the absence of envi-
ronmental (unconditioned or conditioned) incentive stimulation,
fail to produce goal-directed responses (see Bindra, 1968, 1976,
Bolles, 1972; oper. cit.). Thus the factor that is critical in the orga-
nization of goal-directed responses, what the animal "is driven to
look for," must be something other than the organismic state per
se. The essential point of the incentive-motivation concept is
that it is the inherent or acquired hedonic (affective) properties
of certain (incentive) stimuli that generate the type of motiva-
tional factor, central motive state (cms), required for producing
goal-directed responses. The generation of a cms is influenced
by organismic conditions, but the goal that is pursued is de-
termined by the cms. Gallistel and von Glasersfeld's idea that
internal "motivation" first determines what satisfactions are
desired, and that some system (or homunclus) then matches the
satisfactions desired to appropriate memory or action, amounts to
only a statement of the problem. The framework I have outlined
includes a possible mechanism by which particular central mo-
tive states might influence the production of goal-directed
responses. Several other points raised by Gallistel and von
Glasersfeld, as well as by Booth, Bitterman, Catania, Ryan, and
Wong, have been dealt with in some detail in earlier statements
(Bindra, 1968,1969,1974,1976, oper. cit.).
Pribram's remark that response-reinforcement and incentive-
motivation hypotheses concerning the role of hedonic stimuli in
behavior are "complementary views of the self-same process"
also points to some confusion about what the distinction
between the two views really is. Pribram notes that the response-
reinforcement hypothesis is couched in response terms and the
incentive-motivation hypothesis in stimulus terms, and then,
observing that both stimulus and response are implied in
response production, concludes that the two hypotheses refer to
the same underlying processes. Though the hedonic conse-
quences of adaptive responses are achieved by both stimulus-
related and response-related processes, it does make a difference
whether the mechanism of such responses involves the linking
of hedonic stimuli to responses or to stimuli. The two postulated
mechanisms are quite distinct and would involve different
neural circuitry. Pribram may be correct in the sense that both
mechanisms may operate, but he is clearly wrong in suggesting
that they are complementary aspects of the same underlying
processes.
Ryan has asked how I would deal with the problem of human
motivation. Hilgard's point about "cold" and "hot" cognitions
provides me with a way to indicate a general line of reply. In my
scheme the priming of perceptual representations (pexgos), on
which the response ultimately depends, arises from two sources:
priming from knowledge or cognitive structures (contingency or-
ganizations) and priming from motivational states. Since the lat-
»ter frequently depends on the former (conditioned motivation),
whereas the former (cognitive priming) need not depend on the
generation of any specific motivational state, it is reasonable to
distinguish between "cold" and "hot" cognitions. I agree with
Hilgard that human actions, decisions, and so forth, may be made
mainly based on cold cognitions (see Bindra, 1976, op. cit., Chs.
13 and 14), but I am inclined to think that when motivation (af-
fect, emotions) is involved in human actions, the motivational
arousal remains dependent on organismic conditions even when
the conditioned incentive signals belong to the cool, second
signalling system, or language.
How does motivation influence response?
Flynn has examined my proposal that motivation (cms) de-
termines response production by influencing the latter's per-
ceptual aspects rather than by a direct control over motor
outflow. He cites evidence showing that hypothamamic stimula-
tion can have an effect on sensory-perceptual mechanisms; this
supports my view. However, Flynn considers too sweeping my
denial of a direct motivational influence on motor outflow. The
difference of opinion here may be more apparent than real.
Two problems make a clear answer difficult. One is that the
facilitation of an observed response (whether a reflex, move-
ment, or consummatory action) by a motivational intervention
does not by itself tell us whether the locus of the facilitatory
influence lies in sensory structures, motor structures, or both. A
related problem is the lack of agreement over what structures are
to be called motor: Sperry (1952) once remarked that producing
motor outflow is what the brain is for; whereas Pribram calls the
motor cortex the "sensory cortex for action"! I have taken the
conservative position that only sites whose stimulation leads re-
liably to the production of particular movements ("movement
commands") are to be called motor (see Kupfermann & Weiss,
this issue). The points of origin of such movement commands
("sensory-motor coordination organizations") receive topo-
graphically differentiated input from current sensory inflow
(exteroceptive, postural, proprioceptive), as well as from per-
ceptual and motivational structures. The question then is
whether input from motivational structures is on presynaptic af-
ferent neurons or on postsynaptic movement commands. I am in-
clined to think that all extrinsic neural influences at this level are
likely to be on presynaptic processes; that is why I say there is no
direct motivational (or cognitive) influence on motor outflow.
Flynn's argument that there may be a direct motivational
influence on motor outflow rests on his findings that (a) stimula-
tion at certain hypothalamic sites can facilitate reflexive
components of attack, and (b) that this facilitation effect is seen
only when the reflex is elicited on the side contralateral to that of
hypothalamic stimulation. However, though neat and important,
these demonstrations do not unequivocally answer the question
of where in the reflex arc the motivational influence operates:
They only show that the neural projections involved are highly
specific topographically. Neither the reflex nature of the
responses nor the lateral specificity of motivational influence
dictates that the effect is on the postsynaptic movement com-
mands. I believe that an examination of my account of sensory-
motor coordination organizations (Bindra, 1976, op. cit., Ch. 3)
would clarify the context of my proposition that motivation does
not influence motor ouflow directly and would show that the dif-
ference between Flynn's position and mine may be a difference
only of terminology.
Booth's idea that "any perceptible bodily state" can serve as a
86
THE BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1978), 1

Ke.9pon.se/Bindra: A perceptual-motivational view of adaptive behavior
partial determiner of response output is intriguing but a bit ob-
scure. I agree with Booth's (1977) proposition that conditioning
plays an important part in satiety and appetite; in this case the
mechanism of conditioning is readily understandable. But the
mechanism by which a bodily state (what I call "organismic con-
dition") may determine response output is not obvious. One
question is whether a given organismic condition (e.g., a
hormonal change or gastric distension) influences motor outflow
by itself, as a cue, or by producing a change (through its interac-
tions with some incentive stimulation) in a central motive state.
Another question is whether the behavior induced by a certain
organismic condition can per se be meaningfully said to be goal
directed in a way that is relevant to that organismic condition
(see Bindra, 1968, op. cit.). It would be good to get further
elaboration of Booth's ideas on these points.
One type of learning or more?
The phrase "type of learning" is ambiguous. As shown in Table
1, type could refer to either the nature of linkage (associationistic
or cognitive) or to the nature of things that are linked, that is, the
locus of learned change (sensory-sensory, sensory-motor, or mo-
tor-motor). Traditionally, type has meant the latter, and argu-
ments have involved the question of the "locus of linkage."
Commentators who have addressed this question - Bitterman,
Black, Booth, Bolles, Hilgard, Jenkins, Kendler, xMackintosh,
Mowrer, Soltysik, Wasserman - seem agreed that the formation
of sensory-sensory linkages is important in learning and that
such linkages, in the absence of the formation of new sensory-
motor linkages, may be sufficient to account for a good many
phenomena, 
including 
certain 
instrumental 
learning
phenomena. This is a big step forward from the situation in the
1950s. However, with the possible exception of Booth, Soltysik,
and Wasserman, these commentators are unwilling to abandon
Table 1. Commentators' apparent preference for types of learning,
defined by nature and locus of presumed linkage.
Nature of linkage
Associative:
Contiguity learning involving
simple mediation (e.g., direct
connections)
Cognitive:
Correlation learning involving
complex mediation (e g., con-
tingency organizations)
Locus of linkage
Sensory-
sensory"
Bindra
Jenkins
Kendler
Soltysik
Warren
Bindra
Bitterman
Black
Bolles
Jenkins
Mackintosh
Mowrer
Pribram
Wasserman
Sensory-
motor
Black
Catania
Gilbert
Jenkins
Kendler
Logan
Notterman
Soltysik
Warren
Bolles
Mackintosh
Pribram
Motor-
motor
Bindra
Pribram
"in the case of what is called response-outcome learning, the linkage is
presumed to be between the sensory representation (percept or idea) of R
(i.e., SR) and the sensory consequences of another stimulus (SX), hence this
is treated as sensory-sensory learning.
the idea that sensory-motor linkages are necessary or that they
play an important part in some types of learning phenomena.
The general sentiment seems to be that it is "safer" ("nature may
not have been parsimonious," "nothing is gained by denying S-R
learning," etc.) to recognize both sensory-sensory and sensory-
motor types of learning. This kind of gratuitous eclecticism is not
sufficiently compelling to counteract the strong reasons (given in
my paper) that make the idea of learning sensory-motor (S-R)
linkages implausible.
Logan remains perhaps the only commentator who hopes to
find the answer to the problems of learning and cognition wholly
in terms of S-R learning. His approach is to concentrate on the
micromolar features of behavior; He hopes then to show how
these ultimate S-R elements can combine to yield intelligent be-
havior. Curiously, his path may land him very close to my posi-
tion, for he is likely to be led to inquire as to the sensory and
other determiners or eliciting conditions of each individual
movement of which an animal is capable (see Notterman). And
once the problem of all the different ways in which a movement
may be produced - all the different functions it may serve - is
posed, the untenability of learned S-R connections will, I hope,
become apparent Although Logan continues to work within the
response-reinforcement framework, I think his empirical work
may contribute a good deal to the elaboration of the perceptual-
motivational framework.
Table 1 shows that most other commentators accept (at least)
two types of learning, in the sense of two loci of linkage (sensory-
sensory and sensory-motor). I differ from them in accepting two
types of learning in the sense of two types of linkage processes,
one associationistic, involving fairly direct connections, and the
other cognitive, involving complex contingency organizations
representing stimulus correlations. In my monograph (Bindra,
1976, op. cit., Chs. 4 and 5), I have made the point that the
processes underlying the development of (sensory-sensory)
gnostic-assemblies, and (motor-motor) act-assemblies are dif-
ferent from those involved in the development of contingency
organizations. In my paper I emphasized only S-S correlation
learning (involving contingency organizations) because I was
concerned mainly with the type of mammalian learning
phenomena 
that 
have 
traditionally 
interested 
"learning
theorists" and those concerned with animal behavior.
Warren has raised the problem of compensation to distorted
sensory input (e.g., distorting visual input by prisms) and has
suggested the possibility that there may exist two quite distinct
domains of learning, each involving different processes. As
explained above, I agree with this, in the sense of two types of
linkages. Associationistic sensory-sensory linkages may be in-
volved in the compensation phenomena, as well as in the acqui-
sition of initial perceptual motor coordinations. I am also ready to
entertain the possibility that in this type of direct-connection
learning new sensory-motor linkages may be formed, but even
though experience of movement appears necessary for com-
pensation, and proprioceptive feedback (see Roland et al., this
issue) appears irrelevant, I wonder whether the postulation of
sensory-motor linkages will help explain the compensation
phenomena. One reason for my doubt is that the movements re-
quired for achieving compensation need not be those of the limb
involved in the test for compensation. I am also uncertain
whether Pribram's idea of movement control by homeostatic
mechanisms would be helpful here. Nor am I satisfied with my
own account (Bindra, 1976, op. cit., Ch. 3) of the compensation
phenomena, and I welcome further discussion of it.
Is the ideomotor concept tenable?
Black, Gilbert, Jenkins, and Soltysik have the misgiving that my
account leaves the production of an instrumental response tied to
environmental eliciting stimuli and their central representations
(pexgos), and thus negates the apparent internal or voluntary
THE BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1978), 1
87

Re.spon.se/Bindra: A perceptual-motivational view of adaptive behavior
control of responding. Jenkins and Soltysik suggest that inner
control, such as what might be based on memory representation
of a kinesthetic pexgo of a response (image or idea of a response),
would save response production from the "tyranny of eliciting
stimuli." It is not clear why they regard pexgos of environmental
stimuli (e.g., visual pexgos) as exercising "external" control and
pexgos of responses (e.g., kinesthetic pexgos) as exercising
"internal" control, for in fact both types are equally central, and
the sensory input on which each is based is equally peripheral.
Quite apart from this terminological point, there are three
reasons why I have found this concept of ideomotor action,
subscribed to in various ways by James, Konorski (oper. cit.), and
Pavlov, to be unacceptable.
First, what Soltysik calls the tyranny of control by external
stimuli may also just as legitimately be called the necessary guid-
ing role of such stimuli in directing the animal's actions away
from unexpected obstructions and toward particular environ-
mental targets. If a response is to be efficient in terms of an envi-
ronmental outcome, then it must remain, at least partly, under
the control of either environmental stimuli themselves (early in
training) or the priming of their pexgos (later in training). Ignor-
ing this role of the pexgos of external stimuli would result in
inefficient or misdirected action.
Second, no movement can have an address (i.e., be directed to
an environmental target) without the integration of postural in-
formation, proprioceptive information from the responding
limb(s), and information about the location (relative to the mov-
ing limb) of the external target. Elsewhere I have explained how
these three sources of current sensory information may be in-
tegrated to produce an environmentally directed movement
(Bindra, 1976, op. cit.y Chap. 3). Jenkins and Soltysik say that
some responses are internally induced whereas others are
externally elicited, but this is inconsistent with the obvious re-
quirement of the integration of diverse (including external)
sources of information in the production of any movement.
Without such integration, a movement produced by a kinesthetic
pexgo would remain undirected and rigidly inflexible, and the
tyranny of kinesthetic-pexgo control would match the tyranny of
eliciting stimuli. Both external control and internal control can
be tyrannical if they are envisaged as the sole determiners of a
response. In my scheme, this potential tyranny of rigid control is
eliminated by ascribing a role to motivation in response
production (in the determination of the form of the response) and
by assuming that a response as such has no permanent
representation (kinesthetic or other) but is constructed afresh
each time it occurs by the unique combination of activated con-
tingency organizations and primed pexgos, with the current
sensory inflow, exteroceptive and interoceptive, always playing
a necessary (though not necessarily decisive) role. The necessity
of recognizing such dynamic control finds support in the com-
mentaries of Booth and Fentress.
Third, perhaps the most serious shortcoming of the
kinesthetic-pexgo hypothesis is that it leaves unclear how - by
what mechanism - the kinesthetic pexgo leads to the production
of the corresponding movement. As Mackintosh puts it, thinking
of a response is not the same as executing it. The fact that instru-
mental responses can be performed, and perhaps acquired, even
when the responding limb has been deafferented (see Bindra,
1976, op. cit.y Ch. 4), also makes it implausible that the ideomo-
tor hypothesis can provide a workable explanation of instru-
mental responding.
Soltysik has raised another objection. This concerns the results
of attempts at instrumental training of reflexive "transactional"
acts, such as scratching. He argues that since such acts have
strong eliciting stimuli, my account would make them readily
trainable, say, when followed by food, whereas in fact such train-
ing is difficult and the animal's behavior frequently shows
certain peculiarities. In attempts to train grooming in the rat, I
have also observed the types of behavioral peculiarities noted by
Soltysik. Consider training to scratch. If a dog happens to scratch
at a given moment, it must be assumed, in my scheme, that a
certain motivational and eliciting stimulus (say, some minor
tickle on the abdomen) has made the dog scratch a particular spot
on its abdomen. The ES (tickle) would by itself be ineffective if
the animal were in some other motivational state, such as fear,
just as contact stimuli of food would not make the animal eat if it
were at the moment afraid or sated. Now, suppose we arrange a
training procedure such that as soon as the dog happens to
scratch, the experimenter gives it its favorite food. If the animal
eats the food, we would expect that the ES (tickle) would acquire
the same motivational properties as those of food. We should
then expect that the tickle stimulus (which "normally" elicits
scratching) would now create a motivational state of eating, so
that the response that emerges should be different from the one
produced when the same ES appears in a different (noneating)
motivational state. In other words, the initially pure acts of
scratching would become motivationally "contaminated," to use
Soltysik's term. This change in motivational state produced
through the experimental procedure is sufficient reason for the
relatively unstable and peculiar scratching shown by the animal
following "instrumental training." Such motivational confusion
is probably also a factor in the phenomenon of lack of "prepared-
ness" for certain types of instrumental training (e.g., Shet-
tleworth, 1975, op. cit.); M. J. Morgan (personal communication)
has elaborated on this motivational interpretation of the pre-
paredness concept. Can the ideomotor concept deal with these
findings?
A related point raised by Soltysik is that, in apparent contradic-
tion to my view, conditioned stimuli (CSs), when presented in an
instrumental situation, have properties quite different from the
properties of discriminative stimuli (SDs) in instrumental train-
ing. I have already dealt with this question (Bindra, 1974, 1976,
op. cit.), and shown, in terms of my formulation, why appetitive
CSs often have suppressive effects on appetitive instrumental
responses, whereas aversive CSs typically have facilitatory ef-
fects on aversive instrumental responses. Again Soltysik does not
say how such findings might be approached in terms of the
ideomotor concept.
How are skills acquired?
The main question raised by Black, Jenkins, and Mackintosh
concerns instrumental training. They seem to find it inconceiv-
able that the shaping of arbitrary responses by the instrumental
procedure can be accounted for without ascribing some role to
"response-outcome learning." Note that they are willing to drop
the response-reinforcement principle as such, but-maintain that
the learning of the relation between (pexgo or percept of) a
response and (pexgo of) an outcome is necessary for the produc-
tion of instrumental learning and that (pexgos of) eliciting
stimuli are not.
Jenkins' argument is twofold. He first argues that by combin-
ing the idea of response-outcome learning with certain cognitive
concepts, it may be possible to deal with the problem of how the
learning of a relation between the percept of a response and the
percept of an outcome (reinforcement) may be translated into the
production of a particular response. But in arguing this he
invokes a motor program, its storage, and its retrieval - ideas that
I have shown in an earlier section of this reply and elsewhere
(Bindra, 1976, op. cit., Chs. 4, 11, 12) to be utterly untenable. He
realizes that the response-outcome learning hypothesis as
presently developed cannot deal with response production ade-
quately, but he looks hopefully to some cognitive demon to do
the trick. Since he does not offer any specific new hypothesis as
an alternative to my account of response production in terms of
eliciting stimuli, his conviction that response-production could
be explained in terms of response-outcome alone becomes a
proclamation of faith rather than a debatable hypothesis.
88
THE BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1978). 1

Response/Bindra: A perceptual-motivational view of adaptive behavior
Jenkins then questions the adequacy of my account. Can we
identify eliciting stimuli? Yes, at least in a statistical way, we can
and do: Every time we arrange an instrumental training experi-
ment with a new species, we construct the experimental environ-
ment in a way that would provide the eliciting stimulus
configuration for the "operant" we want to train (see Bindra,
1976, op. cit., Ch. 3, for further discussion of the concept of elicit-
ing stimulus). Why, in an autoshaping experiment, does a signal
(CS) sometimes initiate an action toward the reinforcement site
(say, food receptacle) rather than toward itself? It is because the
momentary motivational valence of a site (CS site or food site) is
determined by the imminence of the unconditioned stimulus
(e.g., food) predicted by that site at a given moment, and the
exact response that emerges depends on the location of the
animal at the time of CS onset and the average interval between
the CS and reinforcement. Even in the case of instrumental train-
ing (e.g., lever-pressing for food), a rat initially continues to go to
the food receptacle before going to the lever (because the moti-
vational valence of the food receptacle is relatively high); it is
only when the rat learns that the lever-receptacle sequence
brings the food more quickly than the receptacle-lever sequence
that the relative motivational values of the two sites change in
favor of the lever. Elsewhere I have discussed several specific
examples of response determination by the changing relative
motivational valence of different sites (Bindra, 1976, op. cit.,
Chaps. 11, 12, and 13).
But the crux of the matter in the problem of instrumental learn-
ing lies in the shaping of skills involving no apparent spatial
response differentiation, that is, responses such as head turning,
leg-lifting, and chain pulling. Black has summarized the
concerns of many by challenging me to give an account, in terms
of my formulation, of the acquisition of a leg-lifting response.
Perhaps the first point to note is that, although it is easy to train a
leg-lifting response by the classical-conditioning procedure (e.g.,
tone followed by a brief electric shock to the limb), it is rather
difficult to train such a response by the normal instrumental
method (i.e., waiting for the leg-lifting response to occur "spon-
taneously" and then "reinforcing" it). The Russian and Polish
studies in which a leg-lifting response is trained instrumentally
leave little doubt that such responses are difficult to train without
considerable intervention by the experimenter (pushing or pull-
ing the leg, etc.); success is slow and uncertain, and performance
is frequently unstable and erratic.
In Black's example, the response as defined has two
components, Ri and R2. If each of the components requires its
own eliciting stimulus, Si and S2, then how can the response oc-
cur in the absence of the actual eliciting stimuli? The difficulty
Black has in interpreting the production of such skilled actions
consisting of two or more components may arise because he has
ignored two concepts that are important in my account. One is
the idea that any given training situation consists of several
stimulus events, Si, S2, S3, and so on, each usually occurring at a
particular point in a fairly stable sequence. Therefore not only
does a correlation exist between one critical eliciting stimulus
and the incentive stimulus, but several successive stimulus
events bear overlapping and nested correlations with the incen-
tive stimulus; it is the contingency organizations representing
these correlations that determine the sequential production of
the successive components of a multicomponent response. The
second concept Black has ignored is that of predicted im-
minence, which determines that the priming of pexgos of various
eliciting stimuli reaches a critical level at a particular point in
time in relation to the sequence of eliciting stimuli. With these
two concepts it becomes possible to show how a long sequence
of response components could be produced in proper order by
the sequential priming of pexgo components of the eliciting
stimuli that were originally (during training) necessary for the ac-
quisition of the skill (see Bindra, 1976, op. cit., Chs. 7 and 11).
How plausible my account of skilled actions turns out to be in
the light of further studies remains to be seen. What can be said
now is that, given the various fundamental difficulties with the
response-reinforcement and response-outcome learning
(ideomotor-action) hypotheses, my classical-conditioning ap-
proach to instrumental learning appears to be the most promising
at this time. I am pleased to see that Booth and Wasserman are
also inclined to support this view. It would be useful if Black,
Jenkins, and others were to suggest some new ideas about instru-
mental training to provide a real challenge to the framework I
have proposed.
Is phylogeny relevant?
Those who work within the response-reinforcement framework
have of course been revising and improving their formulations to
deal with criticism and new findings. Some have recognized that
the learning of certain types of responses, such as sign-tracking
(Hearst & Jenkins, 1974, op. cit.) and interim activities (Staddon
& Simmelhag, 1971, op. cit.) may not follow the response-rein-
forcement principle. Their position is that the response-rein-
forcement principle, as it is currently understood, is adequate for
dealing with certain types of learning, but that other principles
may have to be formulated for other types of learning
phenomena. Rather than questioning the response-reinforce-
ment principle, they assign to it a more limited role in behavior.
Others are beginning to consider several newly discovered
phenomena of behavior ("preparedness," species differences,
"biological constraints," etc.) and to examine what modifications
their study might require in the response-reinforcement frame-
work. Thus, Herrnstein (1977, op. cit. by Gilbert), in response to
the thrust of the currently popular "biological context" and
ethological analyses of behavior, has suggested that greater at-
tention should be paid to the particularities of species, stimuli,
responses, drives, and reinforcers in the analysis of behavior. But
he too fails to offer any revision that would address the funda-
mental difficulties of the response-reinforcement framework
(what he calls "behaviorism"). Rather, he is content to specify
how these particularities "feed into the quantitative laws of be-
havior," that is, the laws of response reinforcement. Herrnstein's
suggestions may make the response-reinforcement framework
more appealing to some, but they do not in any way come to grips
with the basic inadequacy of the response-reinforcement prin-
ciple for explaining how adaptive behavior, flexible and fluent, is
actually put together.
Gilbert recognizes one inadequacy and tries to deal with it
within the response-reinforcement framework. The problem is
that of "the origins of behavior" - the first occurrence of operants
before they can be reinforced. Two sources of "new behavior,"
he says, following Segal (1972 cited by Gilbert), are "releasing
stimuli" and "emotional induction." Of course, releasing stimuli
are what I have specifically considered as a subset of eliciting
stimuli 
(the 
critical determiners 
of particular 
response
components) and emotional induction corresponds to my
assumption that motivation enters into determining the form of
any action that emerges at a given moment. Realizing that in sug-
gesting this modification to the response-reinforcement frame-
work he has come precariously close to ideas that form an im-
portant part of my own account of how adaptive behavior is
produced, Gilbert backtracks and simply asserts that his account
is "well within the response-reinforcement framework." Without
saying exactly how releasing stimuli and emotional induction are
to be fitted into his framework, he changes the subject.
Gilbert's second tack is to focus on biology - but his biology
would exclude the brain! He points out, correctly, that the secret
of the adaptive mechanisms of behavior lies in evolution or
phylogeny. Next, he appeals, implicitly, to the currently
fashionable analogy between evolution and learning and sug-
gests that response variation, like individual variation of the
members of a species, is "intrinsic to the reproduction of
THE BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1978), 1
89

Response /Bindra: A perceptual-motivational view of adaptive behavior
organisms,'' and that response reinforcement, like survival suc-
cess in evolution, is the basis of selective advantage gained by
certain responses. The origin of different and new operants must
then lie in the processes that produce variation in response
output. Well, what are these variation-producing processes?
Instead of addressing this question (which may bring him back
to releasing stimuli and emotional induction), Gilbert falls back
on phylogeny and the inherent ubiquity of phenotypic variation
as a biological fact. Just as many biologists do not concern
themselves with the mechanisms underlying genetic mutations
(observed as phenotypic variation), so also Gilbert does not wish
to address this question of mechanisms, and is content with the
study of the principles that give selective advantage to particular
operants. Clearly, this whole exercise of appealing to phylogeny
has been used as a way of evading the central question of the real
processes that determine the (initial) production of responses
and response variation. There is perhaps some justification for
biologists to be hesitant about trying to discover the processes
that have led, in the remote past, to the particular genetic varia-
tions necessary for the emergence of a given species. But
processes that produce response variation are not buried in the
remote past; they can be investigated directly if one chooses to
do so. This brings me back, full circle, to the statement in my
paper that operant behaviorists have elected not to address the
problem of explaining behavior - of discovering the real
mechanisms that produce it.
The origin of the evolution-learning analogy lies in the writ-
ings of Herbert Spencer. It is unfortunate that this infelicitous
analogy has been taken up so seriously by many present-day
psychologists who, perhaps in response to the writings of
ethologists, have "gone biological." Although early ethologists
were inclined to think that a certain behavior could be said to
have been explained if it could be considered as "adaptive" in
terms of the (presumed) history of the species, most present-day
ethologists are seeking genuine explanations of behavior in
terms of its immediate causation. I hope that the current fad of
going biological does not lead psychologists into the ethological
thinking of the 1950s and thus distract them from seeking real
explanations in terms of real processes. (Several issues related to
phylogeny and behavior were discussed at a symposium on
human ethology held recently at Bad Homburg. A volume
reporting the proceedings of the symposium is now in prepara-
tion.)
Motor programs or constructed responses?
Catania, Fentress, Gilbert, Hulse, Killeen, Klingsporn, and
Rosenblatt indicate I need to explain further why I oppose
the idea that preorganized motor programs are the basis of what
we observe as long and unified responses, such as traversing a
runway, pressing a lever, and typing a word or phrase. The
problem is to explain how such responses show both flexibility
(spontaneous adjustment) and fluency (coherence, speed,
stability, etc). The dilemma is this: flexibility requires that the
response be interruptible and changeable in the course of execu-
tion, and thus that the acquired functional segments of motor
outflow be small and discrete, while fluency requires that the
response be coherent and ballistic, and thus that the acquired
functional segments of motor outflow be large and unified. Tradi-
tionally, both the response-reinforcement and the cognitive
frameworks have concentrated on fluency and thus postulated
the development of large (long), unified functional segments,
called "motor programs" and "schemata." However, it is evident
that a motor segment that functions as a unit can be large only at
the expense of flexibility. If a head turn to the right is part of a
unitary motor program of walking toward the right, then
responses requiring other combinations involving a right turn of
the head (e.g., to nod at someone) will be interfered with. Simi-
larly, if a stimulus display, CON, always triggers a central
schema corresponding to CONCUBINE, then the perception or
reading of CON, CONE, and CONUNDRUM will be interfered
with. On the basis of such considerations, as well as in view of
evidence from patients with certain motor disorders (Bindra,
1976, chs. 3 and 4), I have proposed that the structural motor or-
ganizations that develop through individual experience (act-
assemblies) represent rather small (about 500 msec) segments of
behavior (acts), and that a response as a whole is constructed
from these small segments. Such small segments of motor
outflow (act-assemblies) would provide fluency at the level of act
components of a response, while making it possible for a
response as a whole (lever-pressing or maze-running or reading a
word) to be constructed afresh, flexibly, as different preexisting
act-assemblies are called into play by momentary circumstances.
The fact that I discard the idea of motor program in favor of
fresh response construction has led Hulse to assume that I
subscribe to some sort of peripheral chaining idea as the basis of
response production. This is not so. I have specifically rejected
the idea of chaining in all its various forms (including central
chaining) on the basis of the same evidence (deafferentiation
studies, etc.) that Hulse and Klingsporn cite (Bindra, 1976, ch.
4). And like them I believe that an explanation of flexible and
fluent responding must be found in terms of central organization.
My point of departure is that even the types of central organiza-
tion that Lashley (1951) and Miller, Galanter, and Pribram (1960,
this Commentary) have suggested are inadequate. Their con-
cepts of central preorganized scanning systems or hierarchical
TOTES are not sufficiently distinguishable from the central
chaining concept; and merely calling the central organization a
"flexible motor program" is to beg the question (Bindra, 1976,
pp. 256-58). I have no objection to using the term program to
describe the central organization that produces a fluent yet flex-
ible response. What I maintain is that such a program could not
be a motor program or a structural "preprogrammed" one; it
must be a program that gets constructed as it is being executed
and has only a fleeting functional existence. Such a program
would involve a continuous process of moment-to-moment selec-
tive activation of act-assemblies by perceptual-cognitive-motiva-
tional processes. It is the act-assembly that functions as a unit
and can be triggered as a whole; a response is not triggered but is
always constructed afresh and involves the successive activation
of a large variety of act-assemblies. The main point is that
(central) act-assemblies are not linked to each other to form a
continuous motor program; each act-assembly has to be triggered
independently by its own antecedent "selection" processes,
thereby maintaining flexibility.
Rosenblatt has pointed out that some behaviors made up of
fairly long chains of acts nevertheless give the appearance of be-
ing triggered rather than constructed. In support of this, he cites,
the remarkable work of Fentress and his colleagues [op. cit. and
this Commentary, q.v.], showing that a rather long chain of
grooming acts in the mouse, once started, may be completed
even in the absence of the normal consequences of grooming
acts (contact of the grooming limb with the face). A point to note
is that actions such as grooming (and swimming in the fish) are
repetitive and species-typical, and it is likely that we are dealing
here with some special mechanisms by which one act creates the
condition for triggering the same act (circular reflex) or the next
act in the series (chain reflex). Such mechanisms have been
demonstrated in scratching and "walking" in the decerebrate
dog and in ingestion and swallowing in the normal animal. So
Fentress's examples may not be contrary to the proposition
that each organized unit of motor outflow in itself represents only
a brief segment of behavior, though these may be repeated for a
long time due to special reactivation or sequencing mechanisms.
Nonetheless, I agree with Rosenblatt that the sensory-motor rela-
tions relevant to different movements must vary in their "open-
ness" or flexibility (from spinal reflexes to the "higher reflexes"
of the brain).
90
THE BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1978). 1

Re5p0n.se/Bindra: A perceptual-motivational view of adaptive behavior
Falsifiability or where do we go from here?
Five commentators, Bitterman, Hilgard, Irwin, Kendler, and
Mowrer, were among the stalwarts of the 1940s and 1950s who
shaped learning theory and helped generate the spirit of op-
timism about the prospect of genuine understanding of the mind,
animal and human, normal and abnormal. It is dismaying to find
that now three of them appear to have given up hope - have
thrown in the sponge. Bitterman says that no theory, connec-
tionist or nonconnectionist, holds promise of a solution. Kendler,
now apparently more concerned with rectitude (being fair) in the
decision rules for assessing evidence than with leaping to bold
conclusions that appear to lie on the truthful track, remarks,
"Perhaps behavior is too much of an open system to allow defini-
tive tests of the basic assumptions of its theories." And Mowrer,
calling the mind-body problem the paradox of psychophysical
interaction, doubts that anyone ever shall "dispel this ancient
source of perplexity." Their dissatisfaction with the present state
of our knowledge is understandable. What is dismaying is that
they no longer appear willing even to suggest what, from their
vantage points, may appear to be profitable new approaches to
follow. I hope this pessimistic "drop out" sentiment is not conta-
gious. Certainly Hilgard and Irwin have remained steadfast and
realistic, patiently assessing the gains, however small, but keep-
ing in full view all that remains to be done.
Booth, Irwin, Killeen, and Menzel are clearly optimistic, or at
least hopeful, about continued progress in the understanding of
behavior. The source of their optimism seems to lie in the cur-
rent attempts at developing new frameworks for the study of be-
havior rather than merely new hypotheses within old frame-
works. Though they all point to shortcomings in the framework I
have proposed, it is gratifying to me that they think that the
framework may hold promise for making some advance toward
understanding behavior.
But on what grounds do we decide that one framework is bet-
ter, more promising, than another? Kuhn has noted that at some
point in time the ad hoc assumptions of a framework (paradigm)
become so numerous and tedious that the structure becomes
shaky and begins to give way to other, competing frameworks.
Menzel talks about the appropriateness of axioms and matrices as
bases for choice. Fentress would rather be guided by biology
than by logic. Killeen looks for a balance between inductive em-
piricism and speculative theorizing. Ryan asks for a proper,
molar unit of analysis. My view is that the relative validity of a
framework is best decided by how consistent or compatible it is
with other related domains of knowledge (e.g., neurosciences,
ethology, developmental biology) and how far it integrates exist-
ing knowledge from diverse fields of research into a unified
scheme. What all these ideas point to is that the choice between
alternative frameworks is a matter that involves wider Weltan-
schauung or philosophical considerations than does the choice
between more specific hypotheses about explaining particular
phenomena or findings. Falsifiability, in the narrow sense in
which this term is commonly used, may be sufficient for choos-
ing between alternative hypotheses, but it has little to do with
choosing between alternative frameworks.
This point is not understood by all the commentators.
Several - Bitterman, Bolles, Dennett, Logan, and Navarick
among them - have said or hinted that a weakness of what I
propose is that it is not explicit or specific enough to be falsifiable
and that, therefore, it is of little value. What must be a rather nar-
row reading of Popper (1959) seems to have made many
psychologists regard falsifiability in the sense of goodness of fit
with data as the primary, if not the sole, criterion of the validity
in science. Such an attitude can do as much harm as a complete
neglect of Popper's message. Falsifiability by data has its place
in science, but not a supreme, overriding position. If science is
the enterprise of building a unified view of nature, then the
soundness of a theoretical framework in terms of its compati-
bility with other domains of knowledge is as important as the ex-
plicitness and testability of specific hypotheses within the frame-
work.
The competition between frameworks, then, must go on in
terms of considerations of overall plausibility rather than only in
terms of specificity and falsifiability. A framework is not a
finished theory but a working domain to be gradually "filled in"
by more specific propositions whose truth or falsity can be more
directly and simply determined. It is this process of filling in that
eventually brings into the open weaknesses of a framework —
weaknesses that may form a basis for new, improved frame-
works. Competition between frameworks thus goes on and be-
comes more acute and specific as the frameworks are made more
specific and exact. The choice between alternative frameworks at
any given time is not reached merely by accumulating data and
falsifying particular hypotheses; hundreds of hypotheses may be
confirmed within a framework that is basically wrong (e.g., the
drive-reduction hypothesis of reinforcement or the retrieval
hypothesis of recall). But, in the end, no framework gets fully
refuted; it only gets bypassed or superseded because some other
framework begins to make more sense.
Conclusion
It should be clear that the general approach implied in the
proposed perceptual-motivational framework is behavioristic in
the sense that the phenomena to be explained are described in
behavioral terms and the primacy of behavioral data in postulat-
ing and testing explanatory constructs is assumed. The approach
is also cognitive-motivational in its assumption that knowledge
representations 
(contingency 
organizations) 
and 
affective
processes (central motive states) are not rigidly tied to particular
responses but determine the latter through the modulation of
perceptual processes. Finally, the approach is neuropsycho-
logical in the sense that it postulates explanatory constructs that
are compatible with contemporary understanding in the relevant
neurosciences.
I regret that owing to space and time limitations I have been
unable to respond to several other interesting questions raised in
the thoughtful commentaries that so many colleagues were
generous enough to make on my paper.
REFERENCES
Hebb, D. O. What he gives with one hand. Contemporary Psychology,
22:849,1977.
Lajoie, J., & Bindra, D. An interpretation of autoshaping and related
phenomena in terms of stimulus-incentive contingencies alone. Ca-
nadian Journal of Psychology, 30:157-173,1976.
Popper, K. R. The logic of scientific discovery. New York: Basic Books,
1959.
Sperry, R. W. Neurology and the mind-brain problem. American Scientist,
40:291-312,1952.
THE BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1978), 1
91

