64  Scientific American, March 2015
	 No secret is safe in the digital age. The implications for our 	
OUR TRANSPA
SCIENCE AND SOCIET Y

March 2015, ScientificAmerican.com  65
institutions are downright Darwinian By Daniel C. Dennett and Deb Roy
RENT FUTURE
Illustrations by Zohar Lazar

66 Scientiﬁ c American, March 2015
 M
ORE THAN HALF A BILLION YEARS AGO A SPECTACULARLY CREATIVE 
burst of biological innovation called the Cambrian explosion 
occurred. In a geologic “instant” of several million years, or -
ganisms developed strikingly new body shapes, new organs, 
and new predation strategies and defenses against them. Evo-
lutionary biologists disagree about what triggered this prodi-
gious wave of novelty, but a particularly compelling hypothesis, 
advanced by University of Oxford zoologist Andrew Parker, is that light was the trigger. Parker 
proposes that around 543 million years ago, the chemistry of the shallow oceans and the atmo-
sphere suddenly changed to become much more transparent. At the time, all animal life was 
conﬁ ned to the oceans, and as soon as the daylight ﬂ ooded in, eyesight became the best trick in 
the sea. As eyes rapidly evolved, so did the behaviors and equipment that responded to them. 
Whereas before all perception was proximal—by contact or by 
sensed diﬀ erences in chemical concentration or pressure waves—
now animals could identify and track things at a distance. Preda-
tors could home in on their prey; prey could see the predators 
coming and take evasive action. Locomotion is a slow and stupid 
business until you have eyes to guide you, and eyes are useless if 
you cannot engage in locomotion, so perception and action 
evolved together in an arms race. This arms race drove much of 
the basic diversiﬁ cation of the tree of life we have today.
Parker’s hypothesis about the Cambrian explosion provides an 
excellent parallel for understanding a new, seemingly unrelated 
phenomenon: the spread of digital technology. Although advanc-
es in communications technology have transformed our world 
many times in the past—the invention of writing signaled the end 
of prehistory; the printing press sent waves of change through all 
the major institutions of society—digital technology could have 
a greater impact than anything that has come before. It will 
enhance the powers of some individuals and organizations while 
subverting the powers of others, creating both opportunities and 
risks that could scarcely have been imagined a generation ago. 
Through social media, the Internet has put global-scale 
communications tools in the hands of individuals. A wild new 
frontier has burst open. Services such as YouTube, Facebook, 
Twitter, Tumblr, Instagram, WhatsApp and SnapChat generate 
new media on a par with the telephone or television—and the 
speed with which these media are emerging is truly disruptive. 
It took decades for engineers to develop and deploy telephone 
and television networks, so organizations had some time to 
adapt. Today a social-media service can be developed in weeks, 
and hundreds of millions of people can be using it within 
months. This intense pace of innovation gives organizations no 
time to adapt to one medium before the arrival of the next. 
The tremendous change in our world triggered by this 
media inundation can be summed up in a word: transparency. 
I N B R I E F
Some 540 million years ago  the vari-
ety of organisms living in the primordi-
al seas skyrocketed. One hypothesis is 
that the sudden transparency of the 
oceans drove this evolutionary frenzy. 
This Cambrian explosion  provides an 
analogy for understanding how digi-
tal technology will transform society. 
Transparency of information will put 
pressure on organizations to evolve.  
Animals adapted  with exoskeletons, 
cam ouﬂ age and methods for distract-
ing opponents. With secrets hard to 
keep, states and corporations will de-
velop analogous armaments. 
The new transparency  will ultimately 
lead to the creation of new types of 
organizations. Natural selection will fa-
vor the quickest and most ﬂ exible 
among them. 
Daniel C. Dennett  is University Professor and co-director 
of the Center for Cognitive Studies at Tufts University. His most 
recent books are Intuition Pumps and Other Tools for Thinking and 
(with Linda LaScola) Caught in the Pulpit: Leaving Belief Behind. 
Deb Roy is an associate professor at the Massachusetts Institute 
of Technology, director of the Laboratory for Social Machines, 
based at the MIT Media Lab, and chief media scientist at 
Twitter. He also serves on the World Economic Forum’s 
Global Agenda Council on Social Media. 
nd
ute

March 2015, ScientificAmerican.com  67
We can now see further, faster, and more cheaply and easily 
than ever before—and we can be seen. And you and I can see 
that everyone can see what we see, in a recursive hall of mirrors 
of mutual knowledge that both enables and hobbles. The age-
old game of hide-and-seek that has shaped all life on the planet 
has suddenly shifted its playing field, its equipment and its 
rules. The players who cannot adjust will not last long. 
The impact on our organizations and institutions will be 
profound. Governments, armies, churches, universities, banks 
and companies all evolved to thrive in a relatively murky epis-
temological environment, in which most knowledge was local, 
secrets were easily kept, and individuals were, if not blind, 
myopic. When these organizations suddenly find themselves 
exposed to daylight, they quickly discover that they can no lon-
ger rely on old methods; they must respond to the new trans-
parency or go extinct. Just as a living cell needs an effective 
membrane to protect its internal machinery from the vicissi-
tudes of the outside world, so human organizations need a pro-
tective interface between their internal affairs and the public 
world, and the old interfaces are losing their effectiveness. 
CLAWS, JAWS AND SHELLS 
In his 2003 book, In the Blink of an Eye, Parker argues that the 
external, hard body parts of fauna responded most directly to 
the riot of selection pressures of the Cambrian explosion. The 
sudden transparency of the seas led to the emergence of cam-
era-style retinas, which in turn drove rapid adaptation of claws, 
jaws, shells and defensive body parts. Nervous systems evolved, 
too, as animals developed new predatory behaviors and, in re­­
sponse, methods of evasion and camouflage. 
By analogy, we might expect organizations to respond to the 
pressure of digitally driven social transparency with adapta-
tions in their external body parts. In addition to the organs they 
use to deliver goods and services, these body parts include infor-
mation-handling organs of control and self-presentation: public 
relations, marketing and legal departments, for instance. It is 
here we can see the impact of transparency most directly. 
Through social networks, rumors and opinions now propagate 
across the globe in a matter of days if not hours. Public relations 
and marketing departments face new demands to “join the con-
versation”—to respond to individuals on their terms, in an intel-
ligible, honest and conversational way. Organizations that need 
weeks or months to develop communications strategies gated by 
slow-moving legal departments will find themselves quickly out of 
sync. Old habits must be rewired, or else the organization will fail. 
Easier access to data has enabled new forms of public com-
mentary grounded in comprehensive empirical observations. 
Data journalist Nate Silver demonstrated as much during the 
2012 U.S. presidential elections. While some news organizations 
spun why-our-candidate-will-win narratives based on cherry-
picked polling data, Silver gave us explanatory narratives 
grounded in all polling data. Not only did Silver predict the elec-
tions with uncanny accuracy, but by openly sharing his method-
ology, he also eliminated any doubt that he merely got lucky. 
With transparent public polls increasingly available, news orga-
nizations and political analysts that spin selectively grounded 
stories are going to face an increasingly difficult existence. 
Consumer goods manufacturers face a closely re­­­lated chal-
lenge. User reviews of products and services are changing the 
balance of power between customers and compa-
nies. A brand’s marketing ef­­forts lose influence as 
the opinions of other consumers become more pow-
erful. Responsive companies are learning to quickly 
and publicly respond to complaints and negative 
reviews. And if the reviews are overwhelmingly neg-
ative, the only choice is to change or drop the prod-
uct. Pouring money into marketing mediocre prod-
ucts no longer works. 
Small groups of people with shared values, 
beliefs and goals—particularly those who can coor-
dinate quickly in a crisis using ad hoc channels of 
internal communication—will be best at the kind of 
fast, open, responsive communication the new 
transparency demands. To draw a contrast with 
large hierarchically organized bureaucracies, we 
might call these organizations “ad­hocracies.” As the 
pressures of mutual transparency in­crease, we will either wit-
ness the evolution of novel organizational ar­rangements that 
are far more decentralized than today’s large organizations, or 
we will find that Darwinian pressures select for smaller organi-
zations, heralding an era of “too big to succeed.”
THE HALF-LIVES OF SECRETS
U.S. Supreme Court justice Louis D. Brandeis, an early champion 
of transparency, is often quoted on the topic. “Sunlight is said to 
be the best of disinfectants,” he famously wrote. He was right, of 
course, both metaphorically and literally. But sunlight can be 
dangerous, too. What if in our zeal for purification, we kill too 
many friendly cells? What about the risk of destroying the integ-
rity or effectiveness of organizations by exposing too much of 
their inner workings to the world? 
Brandeis was an enemy of secrecy. He apparently thought 
that the more transparent institutions became, the better they 
would be. More than a century later we can see that the cam-
paign he helped to initiate has had many successes. But in spite 
of much political rhetoric about the unalloyed virtues of trans-
parency, secrecy in the halls of power is still maintained—and 
for good reasons. 
A biological perspective helps us see that transparency is a 
mixed blessing. Animals, even plants, can be seen to be agents 
with agendas. Informed by their sensory organs, these agents act 
When organizations find 
themselves exposed to 
daylight, they quickly discover 
that they can no longer  
rely on old methods; they 
must respond to the new 
transparency or go extinct. 

to further their own welfare. A human organization 
is similar. It is an agent composed of large numbers of 
working, living parts—people. But unlike the cells that 
make up plants and animals, people have wide inter-
ests and perceptual abilities. An animal or plant does 
not have to worry about its cells jumping ship or start-
ing a mutiny; except in the case of cancer, the cells 
composing multicellular life-forms are docile, obedi-
ent slaves. People, in contrast, are individually pow-
erful and intensely curious about the wider world. 
It was not always so. In earlier times, dictators 
could rule quite inscrutably from behind high walls, 
relying on hierarchical organizations composed of 
functionaries with very limited knowledge of the 
organization of which they were a part and even less 
information about the state of the world, near and 
far. Churches have been particularly adept at thwart-
ing the curiosity of their members, keeping them uninformed or 
misinformed about the rest of the world while maintaining a 
fog of mystery around their internal operations, histories, 
finances and goals. Armies have always benefited from keeping 
their strategies secret—not just from the enemy but from the 
troops as well. Soldiers who learn the anticipated casualty rates 
of an operation will not be as effective as those who remain 
oblivious about their likely fate. Moreover, if an uninformed sol-
dier is captured, he will have less valuable information to 
divulge under interrogation. 
One of the fundamental insights of game theory is that 
agents must keep secrets. An agent who reveals “state” to anoth-
er agent has lost some valuable autonomy and is in danger of 
being manipulated. To compete fairly in an open market, manu-
facturers need to protect the recipes for their products, their 
expansion plans and other proprietary information. Schools 
and universities need to keep their examinations secret until 
the students take them. President Barack Obama promised a 
new era of government transparency, but despite significant 
improvements, large arenas of secrecy and executive privilege 
are enforced as vigorously as ever. This is as it should be. Eco-
nomic statistics, for instance, need to be kept secret until they 
Watch Dennett and Roy give talks on our digital future at  ScientificAmerican.com/mar2015/transparency
SCIENTIFIC AMERICAN ONLINE 	
“Very few things will be secret 
anymore, and those things 
which are kept secret  
won’t stay secret very long....  
The real goal in security now 
is to retard the degradation  
of the half-lives of secrets.” 
 
—Joel Brenner, former nsa senior counsel

March 2015, ScientificAmerican.com  69
are officially revealed to prevent insider exploitation. A govern-
ment needs a poker face to conduct its activities, but the new 
transparency makes this harder than ever before. 
Edward Snowden’s revelations about the inner workings of 
the National Security Agency demonstrate how in the era of 
transparency, a single whistle-blower or mole can disrupt a mas-
sive organization. Although Snowden used traditional news 
or­­ganizations to leak information, social-media reaction and 
am­­plification assured that the news stories would not die, put-
ting sustained widespread pressure on the nsa and the federal 
government to act. 
The nsa’s outer “skin” is adapting dramatically in response. 
The mere fact that the agency publicly defended itself against 
Snowden’s accusations was unprecedented for an organization 
that has long resided behind a veil of complete secrecy. Big chang-
es within the organization are inevitable as it sorts out what kinds 
of secrets it will be able to keep in this more transparent world. As 
Joel Brenner, former senior counsel at the nsa, reflected on the 
sudden shift of the agency’s operating environment at a December 
2013 panel hosted at the MIT Media Lab, “Very few things will be 
secret anymore, and those things which are kept secret won’t stay 
secret very long.… The real goal in security now is to retard the 
degradation of the half-lives of secrets. Secrets are like isotopes.” 
As optimists, we would like to believe that this period of tur-
moil will push us toward organizations better aligned with the 
moral codes of civil society and powerful novel ways to correct 
deviant organizational behavior. But we cannot rule out a per-
manent weakening of our intelligence organizations that will re­­
duce their abilities to identify threats.
 INFORMATION CHAFF 
In their evolutionary arms race, the Cambrian fauna invented a 
bounty of evasive measures and countermeasures, and this arse-
nal of tricks has grown ever since. Animals have developed cam-
ouflage, alarm calls to warn of approaching threats, bright mark-
ings that falsely advertise them to potential predators as being 
poisonous. The new transparency will lead to a similar prolifera-
tion of tools and techniques for information warfare: campaigns 
to discredit sources, preemptive strikes, stings, and more. 
Nature has inspired devious armaments before. The cloud of 
ink released by cephalopods fleeing a predator was reinvented in 
aerial warfare as chaff—confusing clouds of radar-reflective met-
al scraps or dummy warheads that could attract defensive mis-
siles. We can predict the introduction of chaff made of nothing 
but megabytes of misinformation. It will quickly be penetrated, 
in turn, by more sophisticated search engines, provoking the gen-
eration of ever more convincing chaff. Encryption and de­cryption 
schemes will continue to proliferate as well, as organizations and 
individuals struggle to preserve their privacy and reputations. 
 SPECIATION OF ORGANIZATIONS 
A final implication of our Cambrian analogy is that we should 
soon witness a massive diversification of species of organiza-
tions. It has not happened yet, but we can look for early signs. 
In the U.S., a new class of corporation, the B Corp, was recently 
created to recognize the need for ventures with double bottom 
lines optimized for both profit and social purpose. Google and 
Facebook broke with tradition by enacting unusually powerful 
voting rights for their founders, yielding publicly traded compa-
nies that remain privately controlled, enabling the founders to 
steer their companies based on their long-term plans with rela-
tive indifference to the quarterly whims of Wall Street. The orga-
nized protests during the Arab Spring, enabled by social media 
and unrivaled in their combination of scale and speed of forma-
tion, are perhaps also a new kind of (ephemeral) human organi-
zation. Time will tell, but it appears that we might be at the cusp 
of a radical branching of the organizational tree of life. 
The speed with which transparency will shape an organiza-
tion depends on its competitive niche. Commercial companies 
are most exposed to the effects of public opinion because cus-
tomers can easily switch to alternatives. If left untended, a con-
sumer brand built over decades can unravel in months. Church-
es and sports leagues are somewhat more protected because of 
the deep-rooted cultural habits and network effects of faithful 
churchgoers and sports fans. But when child abuse or head inju-
ries that quietly persisted through the pre-Internet ages surface 
under the glare of mutual transparency, even the mightiest 
churches and sports leagues must adapt or perish. 
Most sheltered from immediate evolutionary pressures are 
systems of government. Protests fueled by social media can top-
ple rulers and ruling parties, but the underlying organs of the 
state tend to continue relatively unperturbed by changes in polit-
ical leadership. State machinery faces little competitive pressure 
and is thus the slowest to evolve. Yet even here we should antici-
pate significant change, because the power of individuals and 
outsiders to watch organizations will only in­crease. Under popu-
lar pressure, governments are opening access to vast new 
streams of raw data produced by their internal operations. Cou-
pled with advances in large-scale pattern analysis, data visualiza-
tion, and data-grounded professional and citizen journalism, we 
are creating powerful social feedback loops that will accelerate 
transparency of organizations. 
There is a self-limiting aspect to this emerging new human 
order. Just as ant colonies can do things that individual ants can-
not, human organizations can also transcend the abilities of in­­
di­viduals, giving rise to superhuman memories, beliefs, plans, ac­­
tions—perhaps even superhuman values. For better or for worse, 
however, we are on an evolutionary course to rein in our super-
human organizations by holding them accountable to individual 
human standards. This self-regulating dynamic, enabled by ac­­
celerating human-machine communicative capabilities, is as 
unique to our species as human language itself. 
MORE TO EXPLORE
In the Blink of an Eye: How Vision Sparked the Big Bang of Evolution.   
Andrew Parker. Basic Books, 2003. 
The Social Cell: What Do Debutante Balls, the Japanese Tea Ceremony,  
Ponzi Schemes and Doubting Clergy All Have in Common?  Daniel Dennett  
in  New Statesman, Vol. 140, No. 5084, pages 48–53;  December 19, 2011. 
No Place to Hide: Edward Snowden, the NSA, and the U.S. Surveillance State. 
 Glenn Greenwald. Metropolitan Books, 2014. 
The Coming Entanglement: Bill Joy and Danny Hillis.  Interview by Steve Mirsky in 
ScientificAmerican.com; February 15, 2012.  www.scientificamerican.com/podcast/
episode/the-coming-entanglement-bill-joy-an-12-02-15 
FROM OUR ARCHIVES
How Should We Think about Privacy?  Jaron Lanier; November 2013. 
scientificamerican.com/magazine/sa

