Artificial Life: A Feast for the Imagination 
DANIEL C. DENNEq-'I" 
Center for Cognitive Studies 
Tufts Universi O, 
Medford, MA 0215_5 
U.S.A. 
A Review of Christopher G. Langton (ed.), Artificial Life, Addison- 
Wesley, Redwood City, CA, 1989, 564 pp. plus annotated bibliography 
and index (655 pp. total) (Volume VI of the Santa Fe Studies in the 
Sciences of Complexity), $21.50. 
In 1956 history was made at Dartmouth, at a summer conference 
organized by John McCarthy which inaugurated (and baptized) the field of 
Artificial Intelligence (AI). The fathers of the field were all there: 
McCarthy, Minsky, Samuel, Simon, Selfridge, and they took their inspira- 
tion from Alan Turing and John von Neumann, whose combined genius 
had given the world not only the serial computer, but also a strikingly 
clear vision of its cognitive powers. Thirty-one years later, in September of 
1987, a meeting was held at Los Alamos which may in time overshadow 
the Dartmouth meeting and its aftermath: the first international Artificial 
Life (AL) conference, drawing together thinkers from around the world 
whose work might be said to owe its inspiration to one of John von 
Neumann's other great ideas: the idea of self-replicating cellular automata. 
Not that all workers in AL concern themselves directly with either self- 
replication or cellular automata. Indeed one of the most striking features 
of the volume under review, the proceedings of the first Artificial Life 
conference, is the great diversity of approaches, goals, and grain-sizes 
of the simulations presented and discussed. This is an extraordinarily 
rich volume, exciting in tone, kaleidoscopic in its perspectives and 
contributions. 
AI is known for its simulations of cognitive competences modeled 
"from the top down" and perhaps the most basic difference between AI 
and AL is that most AL simulations are adamantly bottom up in design 
philosophy. While some of the virtues of bottom-up modeling are now 
familiar, especially in the manifestos of the connectionists, broader, deeper 
reasons are offered here. In Vehicles (MIT Press, 1984), Valentino 
Braitenberg put forward his "law of uphill analysis, downhill synthesis" 
which made the compelling point that it is simply much harder to figure 
out the inner machinery of something whose behavior you have data on 
Biology and Philosophy 5: 489--492, 1990. 

490 
DANIEL C. DENNETT 
than to figure out the behavior of something whose innards you synthesize 
(or just posit). Several authors in the present volume press a more radical 
epistemological point: there is a fundamental difference between the 
architectures and powers of systems designed in the two different ways, 
due in part to the epistemological limitations on analyst-designers. Dif- 
ferent versions of this claim are developed by Christopher Langton in the 
introduction, and by Pauline Hogeweg. As Francis Crick has often noted, 
"Orgel's Second Law" is that Mother Nature is smarter than you are. 
Human designers, being far-sighted but blinkered, tend to find their 
designs thwarted by unforeseen side-effects and interactions, so they try to 
guard against them; Mother Nature, myopic, but with lots of time and the 
broadest of perspectives, is equipped to take advantage of side-effects and 
interactions. The result is a very different style of system, whose saliencies 
are about as often emergent properties as, shall we say, skeletal properties. 
And to think that only a few years ago "'emergence" was such a loaded 
term that 1 felt I had to coin the softener "innocently emergent properties" 
to forestall premature dismissal! 
The ideology of AL is in most other regards in harmony with the 
ideology of mainstream AI, and I found myself wondering with some 
amusement whether modern-day vitalists will arise to do battle against 
"strong AL,'" shoulder to shoulder with John Searle. The gauntlet is laid 
down in a ringing declaration in the Introduction: 
Life is a property of )brm, not matter, a result of the organization of matter rather than 
something lhat inheres in the matter itself. Neither nucleotides nor arnino acids nor any 
other carbon-chain molecule is alive -- yet put them together in the right way, and the 
dynamic behavior that emerges out of their interactions is what we call life. it is effects, 
not things, upon which life is based -- life is a kind of behavior, not a kind of stuff -- 
and as such, it is constituted of simpler behaviors, not simpler stuff. (P. 41 ) 
A common design theme encountered in various guises here is organ- 
isms and other systems getting along without benefit of headquarters -- or 
at least bosses. Even when entities have heads (and hence, in one sense, 
headquarters), their headquarters emerge on closer inspection to be 
unoccupied. The homunculi have all gone away, leaving nothing but 
machinery behind. This is the essence of von Neumann's great idea, and 
hence it grows on one, but initially it is an alien and vaguely repellent idea. 
Consider, for instance, this simple but eerie description of von Neumann's 
basic idea: 
Then the parent organism, making use of a memory-stored description of itself, directs 
the construction arm to move from cell to cell and to emit pulses so as to produce a 
configuration of cells that is identical to that of the original organism (though initially 
lacking the "genetic" memory contents of the original). The parent organism then reads 
its memory a second time and loads a copy of the "genome" information into the 
memory unit of the offspring organism. The parent organism then injects a pulse to turn 

ARTIFICIAL LIFE 
491 
on the new organism and withdraws its constructing arm. This completes the artificial 
organism's self-reproduction. (Richard Laing, 51 ). 
Even if we are enthusiastic about this idea in some applications, we 
want to exempt ourselves (we want to exempt our selves). The problem is 
that it seems as if we at least are very different: we are top-down, 
centered, globally directing. We feel like von Neumann machines, not 
parallel processors. That is why we have such a dizzy sensation when we 
encounter "the alternative", why we impute a soul to a termite colony, 
a behind-the-scenes presence to be the Central Processing Unit. Our 
(apparent) centeredness must be explained, and the more we learn about 
biological mechanisms, the more our (apparent) centeredness appears 
unique in the biosphere. Elsewhere there is Nobody Home. Reflection 
may convince us that we already know that our own sense of centeredness 
must be something of an illusion, that ultimately we will be explained in 
all our privacy by "more of the same" -- the same kind of modeling 
exhibited in this volume -- but the imaginative chasm is not yet bridged by 
this observation. 
The thought-experimental explorations of design-space presented in 
this volume illuminate the nature of biological possibility, the deepest 
principles of organization. Reproduction, growth, and self-repair are 
talents just as exquisite and initially awe-inspiring as cognition, and thanks 
to these pioneers, we are now beginning to see how they are possible in a 
"mere mechanism". Philosophers with an occupational bias in favor of 
cognition should also note that both reproduction and self-repair involve 
as a matter of logic some reflexivity, some self-examination, and thus 
invoke themes dear to our hearts. 
"Bottom up" means really bottom up in this book. Neurons are vastly 
too complicated as starting points for some of the investigations, which 
deal with such Urquestions as: is it possible for random shuffling to get to 
the threshold for self-replicating DNA (Rasmussen)?; how does asym- 
metry in morphogenesis get started from a symmetrical gamete (Turing, 
initially, but followed up in several ways in this volume)? These are 
explorations in what we might call proto-biology, but there are also simu- 
lations of whole creatures, whole colonies, whole ecosystems, modeled at 
different levels, investigating different questions. 
There are ingenious new toy problems, many of them strongly reminis- 
cent of the "blocks worlds" of AI, but with novel twists. They strike me as 
equally deep -- sometimes deeper than the toy problems of AI -- even 
while they avail themselves of the same sort of audacious oversimplifica- 
tions, ideas such as the entire economy of nutrition and metabolism boiled 
down to a "tax" on moving, decrementing a single variable incremented 
according to an "intake" schedule. 
RAM, a simulation platform developed at UCLA, is clearly a magnifi- 

492 
DANIEL C. DENNETT 
cent vehicle for exploration, but so is MIRROR, a rather differently 
inspired system from Holland. Norman Packard's "bugs" in an artificial 
ecosystem can be very illuminatingly compared to Richard Dawkins' 
"Blind Watchmaker" program (complete with a crystal-clear account of 
the Pascal code behind the scenes). One of the deliberate simplifications 
of Dawkins' system is what Packard calls extrinsic adaptation, and one can 
discern in the differences between Packard's and Dawkins' approaches the 
substance of the issues that still divide Dawkins from such anti-adapta- 
tionists as Lewontin and Gould. 
The simulations span the space from ultra-abstract ("computational 
metabolism", "typogenetics" and "Petworld") to ultra-concrete (LEGO 
robots, the prospects of nanotechnological robots that might "live" in your 
bloodstream, making repairs and performing other services). The color 
plates of various simulated life forms from the molecular to the macros- 
copic are gorgeous. There is a good mix of straightforward presentation of 
running simulations on the one hand and speculation and moral-drawing 
on the other. In addition to the authors mentioned above, I particularly 
recommend K. Eric Drexler's observations on "M systems" versus "O 
systems", which explore the fundamental differences between designed 
and evolved systems, the relative powers of diffusive versus channelled 
transport, matching versus positional attachment, and the reasons why 
(engineer-) designed systems can't evolve. 
One can see that AL has learned from the errors and controversies of 
AI -- but not enough! Some of the rhapsodic advertisements for particular 
systems are all too reminiscent of the overselling of AI, but the spirit of 
constructive criticism is refreshing, and there is very little badmouthing. 
Will it come later? I hope not. Will AL revolutionize biology the way AI 
has revolutionized psychology? I think there is a good chance that it will, 
and for similar reasons. Philosophers, in the meantime, will find in this 
opening manifesto a feast for the imagination. 
NOTE 
i Nicholas Humphrey and I sketch a model for the process of self-creation in 'Speaking 
for Our Selves: An Examination of Multiple Personality Disorder', Raritan, Summer, 1989. 

