ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE 
3 
CORRESPONDENT'S REPORT 
Recent Work in Philosophy 
of Interest to AI 
Daniel Dennett 
Philosophy Department, 
U.S.A. 
Tufts University, 
Medford, 
MA, 
Some philosophers have written about AI directly, and some have written 
about topics that people in AI are, or ought to be, interested in. I will usually 
concentrate on the latter variety both because it is less likely to come to your 
attention on its own, and because it is generally better work. Philosophy's 
potential contribution to the field is not exhausted--or even very well 
represented--by philosophical proofs of the field's impossibility or futility, 
arguments about how to interpret the Turing test, or even friendly arguments 
about how AI solves philosophical problems. But there has been some in- 
formed discussion by philosophers about these topics, and since this is my first 
column I will take some backward glances, and not restrict myself to the most 
current work. 
I expect that few will need to be introduced to John Searle's well-known 
paper, "Minds, Brains and Programs," published together with much furious 
commentary and a reply from Searle in Behavioral and Brain Sciences 3 (3) 
(1980) 417-458. A further critical discussion--indeed a fatal dissection--can be 
found in Douglas R. Hofstadter's "Reflections" on Searle's piece in The Mind's 
I: Fantasies and Reflections on Self and Soul (Basic Books, New York, 1981), 
composed and arranged by Hofstadter and myself. Searle has pointed out a 
minor (and inadvertent) misquotation in these 'Reflections' that will be cor- 
rected in any subsequent printings of the book: where Searle said "bits of 
paper" Hofstadter has him saying "a few slips of paper". Readers are hereby 
warned not to let the difference in connotation bias their appreciation of 
Hofstadter's rebuttal. I have been told that a review by Searle of The Mind's I 
is forth coming the New York Review of Books, which should make interesting 
reading since Searle (correctly) views our book as a defense of what he calls 
"strong AI"--which he takes himself to have refuted. While I am into 
self-advertisement, I might as well add that the chapter on "Further Reading" 
Artificial Intelligence 19 (1982) 3-5 
0004-3702/82/0000-0000/$02.75 © North-Holland 

4 
D. DENNE'I'T 
in the Mind's I provides a wealth of references, with commentary, to the 
philosophical literature people in AI should know--up-to-date as of pub- 
lication, 1981. One might in fact consider this column and its successors to be 
semi-annual supplements to that chapter. 
Another swipe at Searle is taken by Richard Rorty in "Mind as Ineffable", 
forthcoming in Synthese this summer, along with a reply by me. Rotty's piece 
provides a useful overview of the recent history of 'philosophy of mind'--made 
no less useful by being drastically overstated (my reply to his paper tries to 
correct that). 
A good, provocative piece of philosophy of mind is Paul Churchland's 
"Eliminative Materialism and the Propositional Attitudes" in J. Philosophy 78 
(2) 1981. That journal is in general the place to look if you are going to keep 
track of just one philosophy journal. It is the more or less official journal of 
record of the whole field, and moreover it has been particularly strong in 
publishing in the areas that would tend to interest people in AI: philosophy of 
logic, of language, of mind, of science. For instance, if you want to learn about 
situation semantics--the hottest new topic in philosophical logic--you will find 
two of the three published papers in J. Philosophy. 
What is situation semantics? It is a logic of 'propositional attitudes' and 
perception-talk, in some ways a successor or rival to Montague semantics. It is 
the brainchild of the mathematician Jon Barwise and the philosopher John 
Perry. Their analysis of perception-talk depends heavily on a distinction (drawn 
by Fred Dretske) between epistemic seeing and non-epistemic seeing: I can 
see, non-epistemically, a brown cow without realizing it is brown or a cow--I 
may 'get it all wrong' but still it is out there being seen by me. Epistemic seeing 
involves seeing things as this or that, and seeing that such and such is the case. 
One of Barwise's initial inspirations came from considering the AI use of the 
term scene analysis in computer vision projects. Barwise decided that scenes 
were promising items in an ontology that carves nature at its joints, and with 
Perry developed that concept of situations and scenes (which are, as one would 
expect, what one sees when one observes a situation). A co-authored book is 
'forthappearing', according to the ajathors, and in the meantime one can read 
three papers. First, Barwise and Perry, "Semantic Innocence and Uncom- 
promising Situations" in Midwest Studies in Philosophy 5 (University of Min- 
nesota Press, 1981) 387-403. (Midwest Studies is not a journal, but a yearbook 
of invited articles by the leading philosophers on a particular topic. The first 
half dozen volumes have been excellent.) Then two papers by Barwise, "Scenes 
and Other Situations", J. Philosophy 78 (7) (1981) 69-97, and "Situations, and 
Attitudes", J. Philosophy 78 (11) (1981) 668-691. 
J. Philosophy 78 (11) also contains a paper by Searle, "Intentionality and 
Method", which "attempts to draw some of the methodological conclusions 
implicit in a series of studies" he has published on intentionality. The last few 
pages of this paper offer some reflections on what Searle calls 'the back- 

CORRESPONDENT'S REPORT 
5 
ground'--the mass of world lore (roughly speaking) that he thinks to be 
necessary equipment for any believer. This idea is of course a close descendant 
of the views of Searle's Berkeley colleague, Hubert Dreyfus. Searle's discussion 
of it sidles close to the Frame Problem of AI without explicitly mentioning it, 
or even (so far as I can see) illuminating it--but rather like a bulge in the orbit 
of Mercury, his remarks indirectly reveal the presence of a weighty problem in 
the vicinity. 
I have recently embarked on something of campaign to introduce the Frame 
Problem to philosophers, in the expectation of stimulating some useful work 
from my field on this most philosophical of AI problems. I hope I will soon be 
able to recommend some results in successor columns. 

