Reviews
ApPRAISING GRACE
VVhat evolutionary good is God?
BY DANIEL C. DENNETT
Torah crOWl!, Lemberg, Galicia, 1764-73
CREATION OF THE SACRED:
TRACKS OF BIOLOGY
IN EARLY RELIGIONS
by Walter Burkert
Harvard University Press, 1996
255 pages; $29.95
A
LL HUMAN GROUPS, IT
seems, have practiced
religion. Groups have
gone without agri-
culture, without clothing, without
laws, without money, without the
wheel or without writing, but not,
apparently, without religion. Ritual
burial of humanity's hominid an-
cestors may even predate spoken
language, the other striking differ-
ence that separates people from all
other species. Religion, moreover,
does not seem to have been a mere
passing phase in human evolution;
even in the most technocratic and
materialistic corners of contempo-
rary civilization, religion has found
niches in which to flourish.
Why does it exist? With Creation of the Sacred, the dis-
tinguished historian of ancient religion Walter Burkert, a
professor of classics at the University of Zurich, joins the
impressive ranks of scholars who have addressed that
question. Unlike most of the others, though, he believes
that the perspective of contemporary evolutionary biolo-
gy can sharpen the questions and illuminate the issues. He
is right. Dozens ofinsights leap from the pages ofthis fas-
cinating book, arresting observations that cut across the
standard banalities.
On the face ofit, there are plenty ofreasons for religion
not to exist. As Burkert notes, gods are expensive-some-
times ruinously so. "Give till it hurts,"
the bejeweled
preacher exhorts the rapt congregation gathered into the
revival tent. And for as long as people have owned things
ofvalue, they have done just that, pouring their hard-won
wine onto the ground, burning their most prized livestock
or even their children on sacrificial
altars, living in shacks and caves
while
collectively
building
vast
temples and mausoleums. "Spar-
tans stopped warfare to celebrate
their festivals even at crucial mo-
ments," Burkert writes. "jews de-
cided to
die rather than defend
themselves on the Sabbath." Such
lavish and deliberate "squandering"
of time and resources is the hall-
mark of religion. Spending scarce
resources on elaborate granaries or
cisterns seems eminently reasonable
to our pragmatic age; but why on
earth
did
ancient peoples build
even grander edifices for the bones
of their dead?
Any phenomenon that appar-
ently exceeds its functional justifi-
cation cries out for explanation.
The activity is, in a word, uneco-
nomical, and as the economists are
forever reminding us, there is no
such thing as a free lunch. Evolu-
tionary biologists agree:
in
the
long run, features of the evolving world do not persist
unless they can pay for themselves. In addressing the evo-
lutionary value of religion, Burkert approaches the job
with laudable detachment and frequent flashes oftart hu-
mor. In the end he does not provide a single unified an-
swer, let alone a confirmed one, to the question of the
origin of religion. But he does open up the territory,
raising many new-and investigable-questions while
organizing a wealth of historical detail for the benefit of
future sleuths.
B
UR KERT BEGINS WITH A TEMPTING PARAL-
lel, comparing the practice of sacrifice, vir-
tually ubiquitous in the world's religions,
with the sacrifice of "part for whole" observable in non-
human species. The fox gnaws off its own paw to escape
the trap. The bird suddenly effects a "terror molt," shed-
ja ,w ary/Februar y 1997· THE SCIE N CES
39

ding its feathers to wrench itself free of an attacker. "This
is not," Burkert writes,
to postulate a definite inherited program ofbehavior, encoded ge-
netically and passed on in continuous evolution from more prim-
itive to higher living beings and culminating in man. The exam-
ples from different species are not connected by a continuous chain
ofevolution.. . . We are dealing with analogies, not homologies.
At the same time, he writes, "it would be equally difficult
to hold that these human rituals and fantasies owe their
whole existence to some form of intraculturallearning, to
observation or empathy, or to sheer creative fantasy."
If the transmission of sacrificial ritual from the animal
world to the human world is neither entirely genetic nor
entirely cultural, what else could explain it? Burkert sug-
gests that there is "a biological 'landscape' underlying ex-
perience," and that such a landscape could indeed provide
the pathway. Uniformities or regularities in the environ-
ment itself are just as reliable "transmitters" of pattern as
genes or culture are, provided the experiencers have
enough intelligence to recognize it. No one marvels that
people in all cultures settle near water, any more than they
marvel that people in all cultures believe that 2 plus 2 is
equal to 4. Reinvention is the analogue in culture ofcon-
vergent evolution in genetics. It marks the absence of any
shared transmission pathway, and it is always a serious pos-
sibility whenever a ubiquitous feature makes sense. That
religions all use visual symbols, for instance, is no evi-
dence that there is either a symbolism gene or a symbol-
ism tradition being transmitted; symbolism is too obvi-
ously good an idea . If widely separated religions invoke
the samcsymbols, however, that raises questions-though
the answers might not be obvious. A tough case is the ap-
parently independent invention of the swastika by wide-
ly different groups.
A
PARTLY SHARED "13I0LOGICAL LANDS CAPE,"
however, would not yet explain how an in-
nate appreciation of part-for-whole sacri-
fice could get transmogrified into the excesses of human
ritual sacrifice. One would also need to explain how, for
instance, religious ceremonies honoring dominant figures
who remain (mostly) invisible might arise out of domi-
nance hierarchies and submission rituals among the indi-
viduals within a species; how oaths accompanied by fero-
ciously inflicted pain might evolve asbehavioral innovations
unconsciously designed to combat the problem ofdefection
from the group; and so on.
There is no dearth ofpossible models ofsuch evolution.
A feature of religion might be like
• morlcy: a well-designed cultural innovation, so obviously
useful that one would expect it to be discovered again
and again; an instance of convergent social evolution
from which societies always benefit. But if the utility of
a religious feature (like the utility ofthe pheromone trails
laid down by social insects to coordinate the activities of
their fellows) can be understood only in the context of
the group, the feature raises the question ofwhat condi-
tions must be in place for such group selection to take
place within a Darwinian framework;
40
THE SC IENC ES ' J """'fT)'/Fd""dYl' 1'1'17
• a pyramid scheme: a cleverly designed con game passed on
(culturally) through the generations of an elite group,
who alone benefit from it, at the expense of outsiders;
• a pearl: a beautiful by-product of a rigid, genetically
controlled mechanism responding to an unavoidable
irritation;
• a bowerbird's bower: a product of something analogous to
runaway sexual selection, the elaboration of biological
strategies caught on a positive-feedback escalator;
• shivering: an apparently pointless agitation of the body
that actually has a benign role to play in maintaining a
homeostatic balance, benefiting the individual in most,
but not all, circumstances in which it occurs; or
•
SIlCCZiIlR: an activity often driven by invading parasites
that have commandeered the organism, driving it to
destinations that benefit them, whatever its effects on
the organism.
The truth about religion might well be an amalgam of
several such explanations, or of others. All such hy-
potheses seek to explain religion by uncovering some
benefit, some work done to pay the costs. But they dif-
fer strikingly on one issue: cui bono? Who or what is the
principal beneficiary?

Burkert would like to argue, from Darwinian principles,
that religion must serve human interests:
Becauseon the whole the history of religions hasbeen a story of
success, a good strategy for survival in the long run must have
been at work. In other words, a certain survivalfitness ofreligion
has to be granted.
B
UT SURVIVAL FITNESS FOR WHOM? THE "OB-
vious" answer to would-be Darwinians is hu-
manity, the species Homo sapiens sapiens as a
whole. Evolutionary theory, however, has shown that nat-
ural selection does not operate for the good of the species;
it confers competitive advantages only on individual or-
ganisms or, in some cases, on groups of organisms. Even
if-as seems highly probable from Burkert's account-re-
ligion has often served human interests and has been se-
lected for those benefits, the case that needs to be made is
more complex than Burkert recognizes. Here is one of his
stabs at summarizing his main hypothesis: "religion, once
entrenched as a cultural phenomenon, brought definite ad-
vantage to certain individuals and thus was likely to multi-
ply their and their adherents' chances of offspring and
hence their genes, to the detriment of the nonreligious."
James Hampton, The Throne of the Third Heaven of the
Nation's Millennium, The General Assembly, 1950-64
But that is only one of the interesting evolutionary hy-
potheses to consider. There are more ways ofbeing a good
Darwinian naturalist about culture than Burkert realizes.
One ofthe best-savored ironies in the history ofscience
is that Charles Darwin wrestled vainly for years with his
theory's major problem while the solution was right under
his nose. The problem was blending inheritance: why
aren't the features an organism inherits simply an equal mix
ofits parents' features, so that all the differences among in-
dividuals in a species eventually average out? The solu-
tion-indivisible genes-was in Gregor Mendel's ground-
breaking monograph on pea plants, a copy of which lay
unappreciated in Darwin's study.
It is a similar irony that Burkert has read Richard
Dawkins's 1976 book The Selfish Gene but missed its im-
plications for clarifying the foggiest part of his own ac-
count:
call it the problem of blending explanations.
Dawkins emphasizes the importance ofcui bono, showing
that evolutionary theorists have often misled themselves by
failing to ask, at every juncture, just whose interests are be-
ing advanced: those ofthe individual; ofan elite; ofthe so-
cial group as a whole; ofcertain so-called selfish genes that
organisms carry; or even of the selfish vehicles of cultural
transmission, which Dawkins calls memes. (Memes are
complex ideas-in the sense of something one might
patent or copyright, not in the sense of an element of ex-
perience. The idea of the wheel is a meme; so is the idea
ofhijacking airplanes-a meme that tends to replicate even
though it is not beneficial to people.)
Burkert abruptly dismisses memes as mere metaphor
and hence tends to overlook the possibility ofradically dif-
ferent answers to the question of beneficiary. As a conse-
quence, he sometimes fails to notice when his attempts at
explanation wander between quite distinct possibilities,
mixing considerations of varying relevance and ignoring
the disparate implications of his hypotheses. That is a sur-
prising lapse, since Burkert is well aware of the pitfalls of
simplistic Darwinism.
W
HAT IS THE RELATION, THEN, BETWEEN GE-
netic and cultural transmission? Burkert gets
part ofthe story right: "Information survival
asserts itself side by side with and even instead ofgenetic sur-
vival." He sees that those two kinds of survival are parallel
and at least partly independent processes of selection and
replication. But the theorist he then turns to is not Dawkins
but the father of sociology, Emile Durkheim. "If we adopt
the Durkheimian concept of 'collective representations,' we
might ask, why do people accept them, and why certain ones
among them?" The answer he considers is the oft-noted
possibility that people are duped into accepting them by an
elite, but he ignores the prospect that even the elite might be
duped into accepting them-by the religious memes them-
selves, in effect, parasitically exploiting proclivities they have
'discovered' in the human cognitive-immune system.
Burkert persistently overlooks that possibility. At the
outset he lists widespread phenomena that "must be pre-
sumed to fulfill basic functions for human social life in all
its forms, even ifit is easy to imagine alternatives." Indeed,
those phenomena mayfulfill basic functions for us, but they
Jall"arylFel>rlldry /997· THE SCIENCES
41

Kota guardianfigure (mbulungulu), Gabon, nineteenth century
may also do us no good at all, rather earning their keep by
serving cultural parasites whose only master is their own
replication. For instance, the meme declaring that reason is
an inappropriate arbiter in matters iiffaith serves the replicative
interests of whatever meme it joins, automatically deflect-
ing rational criticism. That is obvious when it joins forces
with preposterous ideas, such as trance channeling ("Don't
you see? The trance is broken whenever a skeptic gets too
close!"). But in every case it serves those interests inde-
pendently of the actual value of the idea it helps to pros-
per. Another example is the idea that eternal damnation
will be the fate of any who deny the creed; like the idea
that calamity will befall the person who breaks the chain in
a chain letter, it fosters dissemination-a term whose ety-
mology is a fine fossil trace of cultural evolution.
Burkert presents all the right pieces, but he never quite
puts them together. He clearly sees, for instance, that
Affliction is made bearableby an ultimate if nonempirical answer
to the grieving one's question, "why." To introduce the unseen
is to interrupt the closed functional chain of events-which also
means that religion is never fully integrated into any system of
society bur retains some character of"otherness."
In other words, religion keeps its distance (like a medium
or a stage magician), always reserving the right to duck out
ofsight or to decline to perform whenever the scrutiny be-
comes too intense. But Burkert does not note that that
power need not be consciously appreciated by the elite
who are its vectors. Something has to select that widespread
feature. If it is not consciously selected by the elite, what
42
THE SCIENCES· ja""",y I Fl'b"'d ry 199 7
force favors it? Memetic selection itself: memes having that
feature tend to persist in human environments.
Burkert does understand the need for a contrast be-
tween cultural and genetic fitness. "Religions are estab-
lished by learning," he writes. "They are propagated both
through imitation and through explicit verbal teaching.
Traditions developed in this way can evidence a kind of
cultural fitness for survival without any genetic basis." But
Burkert's appeal to cultural fitness needs some clarification.
Sometimes he seems to think it refers to the genetic fitness
ofpeople who have already acquired the cultural meme; at
other times he recognizes that genetic fitness can be beside
the point. Sixty generations of priestly celibacy in the still
robust tradition ofRoman Catholicism surely make it clear
that a meme can survive without a supporting gene.
The Shakers carried the idea of celibacy even further,
prohibiting procreation among all their members, notjust
the clergy. That policy contributed, surely, to their ex-
tinction, but it need not have done so. One way the Shak-
ers increased their flock was by giving refuge to widows
and orphans; when changing social conditions drained
that pool of potential converts, the Shakers became ex-
tinct. But that was not a foregone conclusion, as a
thought experiment shows:
Imagine a sect ofsuper-Shakers that hits upon a creed of
enormous proselytizing power. For one reason or another
people convert to this religion in droves-and never bear
children. Instead they proselytize the heathen. The pattern
persists for a thousand years (let's say). Its persistence would
receive a Darwinian explanation, but notin terms ofthe en-
hanced genetic fitness of the individuals that transiently em-
body the cultural group. The genetic fitness of the hypo-
thetical celibates is zero-they leave no grandchildren at all.
Indeed, if their faith swept to fixation, converting all the
members ofour species, it would promptly extinguish both
the species and itself; but that extreme boundary condition
has no leverage to force all the patterns actually discernible
in human history to pay their dues to genetic fitness. The
memes perspective is obligatory to explain such phenome-
na-if they occur. And one cannot even frame the ques-
tions that would determine whether they occur without
entertaining the memes perspective as a tool of inquiry.
I
DWELL ON BURKERT'S SHORTCOMINGS ONLY BE-
cause he has whetted my appetite beyond what
he can satisfy with his feast of good suggestions.
As usual, God is in the details, but let me sketch Burkert's
tentative answers to two key questions.
Ulhyshould rituals take theforms they do? Consider Burk-
ert's account of the rituals that initiate adolescents into
adulthood in many cultures. Why do such rituals take
place? Why do other species not engage in them?
Initiation rituals are anything but natural. . . . Rituals are com-
plicated, ambivalent, and not seldom opaque even to those who
practice them [emphasis added]. . . . It makes more sense to see
them as cultural attempts to make the "facts oflife" manageable
and predictable; to perform an act of artificial social creation, as
if to veil biology. In performing such ritualspeople act as if the
adolescent, male or female, could not simply grow adult on his
or her own, but must be made a man or woman by society.

Siva Nataraja, Warangal temple lintel, India, twelfth century
As a general rule, animals do not have a clue about why
they do what they instinctively do, and the human ani-
mal is no exception; the deeper purposes ofour so-called
instincts are seldom transparent to us. The difference be-
tween us and other species is that we care about our ig-
norance. Human adolescents question the strange things
that are happening in them. They want the changes of
puberty to make more sense than they do. Many cultures
oblige them with an opulent festival of excess meaning,
and "this provides a verbalized sort of script to accom-
pany natural change."
Burkert's account is plausible, but it neglects Dawkins's
cui bono. Is the initiation ceremony, like good folk
medicine, a fine if ill-understood palliative for a genuine
ache; or is it, like bad folk medicine, something adoles-
cents would be better off without? Could it be that cere-
monial traditions persist even though they no longer serve
any useful social function but merely ride piggyback on
the meme for tradition itself? (Think of the song "Tradi-
tion" in Fiddler 011 the Roof.)
The characteristically human desire
to know why
could be the motivating source
of many other rituals and prac-
tices. Just as menarche does ,
plagues and other catastrophes
stir compelling new demands
for explanation: Why us? What
did we do wrong? The weather,
for instance, is a handily chaot-
ic, and hence incomprehensible
and
unpredictable,
source
of
punishment and reward. Such
reflective puzzlement is a spur
to
science,
but
until
science
came along, one had to settle
for
personifying
the
unpre-
dictable and trying desperately
to control or appease it.
If cults were typically found-
ed in response to
disaster or
plague, why are cults proliferat-
ing
today? What
calamity
is
driving people into them? The
answer seems to be a general
aporia: a loss of meaning or of
nerve, a thirst for simple an-
swers in the face of overwhelm-
ing complexity. I suspect it is
the last oppression that weighs
the
heaviest-notwithstanding
the fact that "we" are under-
standing ever more of our sur-
roundings, conquering disease
and
overwhelming
the
com-
plexities of nature with scientif-
ic theories. For not everyone
belongs to this "we." For many
people the scientific culture is as
threatening to a personal sense
of self-determination as Mar-
tians
with
incomprehensibly
advanced
technology
would seem to you or me. The reaction of such people
is not unreasonable: if you can't join 'em, beat 'em.
B
URKERT'S SECOND KEY QUESTION IS: WHY
should religion so reliably home in on the ritual
practice ofgivillgg[{ts toallunseen Cod?The an-
swer has several threads. First, there is the well-known
profile of superstitious belief, so hard for its practitioners
to disconfirm in experience. As B. E Skinner demonstrat-
ed some years ago, pigeons rewarded with food on a ran-
dom schedule invent "superstitious behavior"-elaborate
rituals growing out of whatever they were doing when
they first got the food.
Burkert notes how the phenomenon can apply to cer-
tain religious practices: "If asked why they keep to their
strange and sometimes bizarre religious ceremonies, so-
called primitives will usually reply that they would fall
sick ifthey didn't." The occasional spontaneous remission
provides just the random reinforcement schedule re-
quired. Moreover, the survivors, when there are sur-
j '"11'dr),/l'd,,"ar)' 1997· THE SCI EN CE S
~3

liE GROUP LE
D
R
110
CCEPTS
injerior status to a deity is
employ;".!? a cunnino stratagem.
One's connn ands ca,.ry more weight
with a bigs:er boss behin d them,
vivors, will have lots ofhunches about what they did right.
But there is more to religious gift giving than a super-
stitious attempt to control the future. People often turn
over their life savings to perfectly visible individuals
whom they deem to be the givers ofgreat gifts ofone in-
tangible kind or another. The religious gift is typically
made to an invisible god, not just to the current king or
boss or earthly benefactor.
That practice might have arisen in response to a scale ef-
fect. What happens to the alpha, or dominant, male or fe-
male in any social group if the band is successful and gets
progressively bigger? Must the group disintegrate or splin-
ter? Perhaps. And perhaps that happened, amoebalike,
thousands of times before some innovation enabled a larg-
er group to stabilize. Such an innovation might have been
the discovery, by an alpha, that there was additional safety
in declaring oneselfto be a mere messenger who, as Burk-
ert puts it, "administers the power of the stronger one
without running the full risk of responsibility."
Accepting inferior status to a deity is a cunning stratagem.
Group leaders who rely on it, wittingly or otherwise, will
thrive. As every subordinate knows, one's commands carry
more weight when they are accompanied by the threat to
tell the bigger boss if they are
disobeyed. (Variations on
the
stratagem are well known to
Mafia underlings and used-car
salesmen.) At the apex of pow-
er, any dictator depends on the
fidelity of his immediate staff,
any two or three ofwhom could
easily overpower him. Since he
can't go around with
dagger
drawn all his life, putting the fear
ofa higher power in his subordinates' heads is a good way of
ensuring loyalty. In fact, an unspoken detente probably ex-
istsbetween chiefpriest and king: the power ofeach depends
on the other, and together they need the gods above.
A
HUNDIU D YEARS BEFORE BURKERT, ANOTH-
er
classical
scholar,
Friedrich
Nietzsche,
stressed the economic rationale behind such a
hierarchy of divine authority. It is no accident, he wrote in
On the Genealogy cfMorals, that worshipers often beseech the
gods to "forgive us our debts." (I fmd myself reminded of
Nietzsche's view ofreligion almost every time I take my re-
turnable bottles and cans to the local "redemption center.")
Although Burkert never mentions Nietzsche-a thought-
provoking silence, given the common ground they tread-
he strikes similar notes when he describes how religion un-
derpins trade. To buy and sell, people need to respect the
property of absent owners. They must become self-master-
ing, self-admonishing, in a way no other species is-no easy
task, considering how naturally devious people are. Fear of
the gods provides a stable guarantor of the system.
Nietzsche's insistence that religion is needed to "breed an
animal lI'it1l the right to make promises" can be seen in Burk-
ert's discussion of oaths. "Oaths are ... strategies of tricky
humans endowed with language, who will match every at-
tempt at validation with new attempts at deception." Early
oaths involved not just laying a hand on a Bible, he tells us,
but taking entrails in hand, dipping hands in blood and even
more shocking encounters, designed, it seems, to ensure the
"unforgettable imprint of psychic terror." Such escalating
costliness recalls the so-called handicap principle that the
zoologist Amotz Zahavi ofTel Aviv University proposed in
the 1970s (and that has somehow eluded Burkert's gaze).
Only costly advertising, Zahavi said, carries its credibility
on its sleeve. Evolutionary theorists have applied the prin-
ciple to such biological extravagances asstag horns and pea-
cock tails, noting how their very inconvenience broadcasts
the superior fitness of the animals that bear them.
D
ARWIN'S BJUAKTHROUGH IN BIOLO GY GIUW
out ofhis deep knowledge ofa wealth ofem-
pirical details scrupulously garnered by hun-
dreds ofpre-Darwinian, non-Darwinian natural historians.
Burkert stands in a similar relation to the wealth ofscholar-
ship accumulated about religious practices, attitudes and ar-
tifacts through the ages. Creation o.fthe Sacred includes anal-
yses of signs and divination; the relation between social
gift-giving (as distinguished, importantly, from ordinary
economic exchange) and religious ritual; tattoos; the use of
precious metals in religious ar-
tifacts; the role of narrative in
human
culture;
and
much
more. Burkert is in a good po-
sition to appreciate the rele-
vance ofsuch hard-won facts-
typically
unimagined by the
scholars who uncovered them.
His strength, then, is more as
the alert and imaginative guide
to the availableresources than as
a theorist. That distinction suggests a fine division of labor:
let those who would specialize in the theory ofthe evolution
of religion be instructed by his pioneering work . Other in-
dispensable contributors to the interdisciplinary project will
be scholars who are as encyclopedic in their knowledge of
Asian, African and American religions asBurkert isabout the
Mediterranean and European religions he knows best.
It is disconcerting to note, however, that it may be dif-
ficult to enlist many ofhis scholarly humanist colleagues in
such collaborative research. An author's defenses, like an
animal's, imply a great deal about the world in which he
lives. Burkert's book shows altogether too many signs that
any attempt to introduce evolutionary considerations into
a discussion ofcultural topics is bound to run into a wall of
hostile incomprehension at first. All the more need, then,
for a seasoned interpreter. Burkert knows his audience and
has taken major steps toward solving the problems ofdiplo-
macy necessary for effective communication. His experi-
ence and fluency in the land ofculture studies far outweigh
the minor, and easily amended, gaps in his scientific
knowledge. A world of research opportunities beckons.•
DANIEL C. DENNE1T is distil/xuished arts and sciences professor
and the director o.fthe Centerfor Cognitive Studies at T,!{ts Uni-
versity in Meilford, Massachusetts. He is theauthor o.fBrainstorms,
Elbow Room, Consciousness Explained, Darwin's Danger-
ous Idea and Kinds of Minds.
44
TH E SCIENCES· Jdlllld'y /rcb",,,,y I YY 7

