 
 
Journal of Philosophy, Inc. is collaborating with JSTOR to digitize, preserve and extend access to The Journal of Philosophy.
http://www.jstor.org
Journal of Philosophy, Inc.
Review 
Author(s): Daniel C. Dennett 
Review by: Daniel C. Dennett 
Source: 
 
 
The Journal of Philosophy, Vol. 90, No. 4 (Apr., 1993), pp. 193-205
Published by: 
 
Journal of Philosophy, Inc.
Stable URL: 
 
http://www.jstor.org/stable/2940971
Accessed: 18-12-2015 05:49 UTC
Your use of the JSTOR archive indicates your acceptance of the Terms & Conditions of Use, available at http://www.jstor.org/page/
 
info/about/policies/terms.jsp
JSTOR is a not-for-profit service that helps scholars, researchers, and students discover, use, and build upon a wide range of content 
in a trusted digital archive. We use information technology and tools to increase productivity and facilitate new forms of scholarship. 
For more information about JSTOR, please contact support@jstor.org.
This content downloaded from 140.127.23.2 on Fri, 18 Dec 2015 05:49:37 UTC
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

BOOK REVIEWS 
193 
thought that is phenomenally and reflectively unconscious, as is al- 
lowed by the reflective view), then we can also accept an objective 
third-person notion of consciousness, without giving up the Orwel- 
lian/Stalinesque distinction. Although I have singled out a confu- 
sion of access and phenomenal consciousness for special mention, I 
have no illusion that there is one false step that is the root of all 
Dennett's difficulties. Instead, as often in philosophy, we have a 
complex network of mutually supporting confusions. 
Toward the end of the book there is some explicit discussion of 
inverted qualia, Frank Jackson's Mary, and other conundra. There is 
no doubt that Dennett is eliminativist about "qualia" (so his attitude 
to qualia is very different from his attitude to consciousness), but as 
Owen Flanagan (op. cit.) points out, since Dennett takes it to be of 
the essence of "qualia" that they are ineffable, atomic, nonrela- 
tional, incomparable, and incorrigible, he has put them in the cate- 
gory of things inaccessible from the third-person point of view (re- 
minding us of Norman Malcolm on dreams). But a reasonable advo- 
cate of phenomenal consciousness allows the possibility of their 
scientific study. So what Dennett says about "qualia" has little rele- 
vance to phenomenal consciousness. 
The unfortunate thing about this book is that Dennett's own mul- 
tiple-drafts theory is true of the book itself. He has given us a num- 
ber of interesting but conflicting views that he has not forged into a 
coherent whole. 
NED BLOCK 
Massachusetts Institute of Technology 
The Rediscovery of the Mind. JOHN SEARLE. Cambridge: MIT Press, 
1992. 270 p. Cloth $22.50. 
Everyone agrees that consciousness is a very special phenomenon, 
unique in several ways, but there is scant agreement on just how 
special it is, and whether or not an explanation of it can be accom- 
modated within normal science. John Searle's view, defended with 
passion in this book, is highly idiosyncratic: what is special about 
consciousness is its "subjective ontology," but normal science can 
accommodate subjective ontology alongside (not within) its other- 
wise objective ontology. Once we clear away some widespread con- 
fusions about what science requires, and dismiss the misbegotten 
field of cognitive science that has been engendered by those confu- 
sions, the subjective ontology of the mind, he claims, will lose its 
aura of unacceptable mystery. 
0022-362X/93/9004/193-205 
? 1993 The Journal of Philosophy, Inc. 
This content downloaded from 140.127.23.2 on Fri, 18 Dec 2015 05:49:37 UTC
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

194 
THE JOURNAL OF PHILOSOPHY 
I. SEARLE'S CHALLENGE 
Searle sees himself as an iconoclast, waging lonely battle against "the 
tradition" -the 
"mainstream orthodoxy" of functionalistic material- 
ism that has unjustly captured the flag of the scientific establish- 
ment. Unsullied common sense is his chief ally, and his frequent 
invocations of common sense and its endorsement of his views give 
the book a characteristic populist flavor. Recognizing, however, that 
common sense has had an embarrassing history of bowing to scien- 
tific revolution in the past, Searle is particularly intent to challenge 
the arguments that claim that functionalism (and its family of sup- 
porting doctrines) is nothing more than an application of standard 
scientific method to the phenomena of mind. He identifies seven 
propositions that compose the "foundations of modern material- 
ism" (10-1), and undertakes to show that each of the seven is "at 
best, false." Here they are: 
(1) Where the scientific study of the mind is concerned, consciousness 
and its special features are of rather minor importance. . . . (2) Science 
is objective.... 
(3) Because reality is objective, the best method in the 
study of the mind is to adopt the objective or third-person point of 
view.... (4) From the third-person, objective point of view, the only 
answer to the epistemological question 'How would we know about the 
mental phenomena of another system?' is: We know by observing its 
behavior ... (5) Intelligent behavior and causal relations to intelligent 
behavior are in some way the essence of the mental ... (6) Every fact in 
the universe is in principle knowable and understandable by human 
investigators. ... 
(7) The only things that exist are ultimately physical, 
as the physical is traditionally conceived, that is, as opposed to the 
mental. 
I think he is almost exactly right about this foundational list. As a 
targeted representative of orthodoxy, I for one accept all seven 
propositions, with only one demurrer: I would insist, in a revision of 
(1), that consciousness, while of major importance, is an advanced 
or derived mental phenomenon, not the foundation of all intention- 
ality, all mentality. Since I would insist that cognitive science is wise 
not to start with consciousness, I endorse the spirit of (1), as Searle's 
discussion (18-9) makes plain. So, aside from that revision of empha- 
sis, I would say Searle has done a good job of identifying the enemy 
and its foundational assumptions. (I am also happy to accept his 
attempt at a cognitivist credo of sorts on 197-8.) 
Searle has discovered that the whole cognitivist enterprise "hangs 
together," thanks to a lot of detailed supporting arguments, some of 
them counterintuitive, others quite generally accepted. He realizes 
that, if he is going to have any hope of defeating the parts of it he is 
This content downloaded from 140.127.23.2 on Fri, 18 Dec 2015 05:49:37 UTC
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

BOOK REVIEWS 
195 
dead set against, he is going to have to attack it root and branch. 
The central doctrine of cognitive science is that there is a level of 
analysis, the information-processing level (there may be more than 
one, depending on how we count), intermediate between the phe- 
nomenological level (the personal level, or the level of conscious- 
ness) and the neurophysiological level. Searle sees that his position 
requires that this central doctrine be entirely and hopelessly mis- 
taken. "There are brute, blind neurophysiological processes and 
there is consciousness, but there is nothing else" (228). 
Cognitive science has had twenty years or so to hammer out its 
enabling assumptions, and allowing for a good measure of overstate- 
ment and misunderstanding, it has actually got its act together 
pretty well by now. So Searle has a monumental task. It all has to 
come tumbling down, or it will not budge. Attacking such a well-for- 
tified tower of prevailing wisdom is not a job for the faint-hearted, 
but Searle has never lacked for confidence in the clarity and truth of 
his own vision. Indeed, his supreme self-confidence is the one fixed 
point that emerges from the shifting interpretations of the inten- 
tions that are suggested by what he has written, as we shall see. 
People are not, in general, daft. This obvious fact gives Searle 
pause. He frequently expresses his astonishment that the other side 
could endorse such monumentally silly doctrines, but that is just 
what his analyses tell him, so he calls them as he sees them. "If I am 
right, we have been making some stunning mistakes" (246). He used 
to stop there, but in this book there has been a subtle but important 
change in his meta-opinion: "How is it that so many philosophers 
and cognitive scientists can say so many things that, to me at least [my 
emphasis], seem obviously false" (3)? Searle may find it a bizarre 
sociological fact that his common sense is not everybody's, but now 
he bows to that fact and thus accepts the burden of proof (however 
misplaced in the eyes of eternity) of showing that his "obvious facts" 
are so much as true. This is progress. 
Here is the nub of Searle's case: "Because mental phenomena are 
essentially connected with consciousness, and because consciousness 
is essentially subjective, it follows that the ontology of the mental is 
essentially a first-person ontology" (20). He goes on: "The subjectiv- 
ist ontology of the mental seems intolerable. It seems intolerable 
metaphysically that there should be irreducibly subjective, 'private' 
entities in the world, and intolerable epistemologically that there 
should be an asymmetry between the way that each person knows of 
his or her inner mental phenomena and the way that others from 
outside know of them" (21). Just so, but Searle calls this realization a 
crisis. Orthodoxy (or at least my version of it) says the crisis is not 
This content downloaded from 140.127.23.2 on Fri, 18 Dec 2015 05:49:37 UTC
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

196 
THE JOURNAL OF PHILOSOPHY 
really so bad, since the vaunted "essential" and "irreducible" subjec- 
tivity of consciousness dissolves under analysis. We can have our 
consciousness and objective science, too-at 
the cost of some ini- 
tially disorienting counterintuitiveness. Searle claims, on the con- 
trary, that we can have consciousness and common sense, too. 
There is no denying that, at the outset, common sense is on 
Searle's side. It does seem just crashingly obvious that no gradualist 
bridge could be built between the intimate world each of us en- 
counters in his own subjectivity and the alien, inscrutable world of 
billions of brain processes going on in our skulls. In the past, 
Searle's defense of his home truths has concentrated on trying to 
demonstrate the absurdities of the alternative positions, and he reit- 
erates and elaborates these negative arguments here, but now he has 
also taken on the task of evincing in some detail the positive implica- 
tions of his view and defending them. This is valuable. Self-exposure 
to rebuttal is generally more accurate than imputed exposure, which 
always invites the charge of uncharitable interpretation. In the 
course of making his positive case, Searle resolutely catalogues some 
of its rather costly implications, which I should think will seriously 
diminish the allure of an initial allegiance to his version of com- 
mon sense. 
II. SEARLE'S POSITIVE ACCOUNT 
First there is the metaphysical extravagance (at best just peculiarity 
or at worse incoherence) of subjective ontology. Searle's use of this 
term is unprecedented and unobvious, and he never tells us just 
what he means by ontology, beyond distinguishing it vehemently 
from epistemology, but we can see why he feels constrained to use 
such a curious expression. He wants to insist that the subjectivity of 
the mental is not merely an epistemological fact-e.g., 
a fact about 
how others cannot know what I can know about what is going on in 
my mind-but 
he cannot permit himself to say that it is simply an 
objective fact that each mind is a locus of subjectivity, for that would 
play right into the hands of those who champion the third-person 
point of view. The objective facts about someone's subjectivity are 
precisely the subject matter of what I call heterophenomenology- 
phenomenology from the third-person point of view-and 
Searle 
cannot accept that such an investigation could, in principle, exhaus- 
tively account for what is the case. Consciousness is more special 
than that, on his view, and hence cannot be just one more bit of 
objective ontology, the objective phenomenon of subjectivity loci 
scattered about in the world. That is why the so-called subjectivity of 
a robot, which has a limited and potentially mistaken fund of infor- 
mation about its environment, could not be real subjectivity, in 
This content downloaded from 140.127.23.2 on Fri, 18 Dec 2015 05:49:37 UTC
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

BOOK REVIEWS 
197 
Searle's view, since this is manifestly an objective phenomenon, 
readily and exhaustively investigatable from the objective point 
of view. 
Part of Searle's attempt to make a comfortable home for this 
unique doctrine is a thought experiment that is so central to his 
argument that I must present it at length. 
Imagine that your brain starts to deteriorate in such a way that you are 
slowly going blind. Imagine that the desperate doctors, anxious to alle- 
viate your condition, try any method to restore your vision. As a last 
resort, they try plugging silicon chips into your visual cortex. Imagine 
that to your amazement and theirs [not mine!-DCD], 
it turns out that 
the silicon chips restore your vision to its normal state. Now, imagine 
further that your brain, depressingly, continues to deteriorate and the 
doctors continue to implant more silicon chips. You can see where the 
thought experiment is going already: in the end, we imagine that your 
brain is entirely replaced by silicon chips. . . . In such a situation there 
would be various possibilities. One logical possibility, not to be ex- 
cluded on any a priori grounds alone, is surely this: you continue to 
have all of the sorts of thoughts, experiences, memories, etc., that 
you had previously; the sequence of your mental life remains unaf- 
fected (65-6). 
Searle finds this prospect "empirically absurd" but still a logical 
possibility, and goes on to consider other possibilities. 
A second possibility . .. is this: as the silicon is progressively implanted 
into your dwindling brain, you find that the area of your conscious 
experience is shrinking, but that this shows no effect on your external 
behavior. You find, to your total amazement, that you are indeed los- 
ing control 
of your external 
behavior. 
. . . [You have become 
blind, 
but] you hear your voice saying in a way that is completely out of your 
control "I see a red object in front of me." . . . It is important in these 
thought experiments that you should always think of it from the first- 
person point of view. Ask yourself, 'What would it be like for me?' and 
you will see that it is perfectly conceivable for you to imagine that your 
external behavior remains the same, but that your internal conscious 
thought processes gradually shrink to zero. From the outside, it seems 
to observers that you are doing just fine, but from the inside you are 
gradually dying. 
In a third variation, "we imagine that the progressive implanta- 
tion of the silicon chips produces no change in your mental life, but 
you are progressively more and more unable to put your thoughts, 
feelings and intentions into action." Your body becomes paralyzed 
and the doctors, to your conscious horror, decide to give you up for 
dead (67). Searle never explicitly says that these three variations 
This content downloaded from 140.127.23.2 on Fri, 18 Dec 2015 05:49:37 UTC
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

198 
THE JOURNAL OF PHILOSOPHY 
exhaust the relevant possibilities, but he implies it in his discussion: 
"The point of these three variations . .. is to illustrate the causal 
relationships between brain processes, mental processes, and exter- 
nally observable behavior" (68). When he goes on to analyze the 
second variation, he egregiously misdescribes its contribution. He 
says: 
In the second case, we imagined that the mediating relationship be- 
tween the mind and the behavior patterns was broken. In this case, the 
silicon chips did not duplicate the causal powers of the brain to produce 
conscious mental states [my emphasis], they only duplicated certain in- 
put-output functions of the brain. The underlying conscious mental 
life was left out (68). 
But that is only one of the logically possible interpretations of his 
second variation, by Searle's own lights. The other is the crucial one: 
while you (remember, you are to imagine this from the first-person 
point of view) are dying, another consciousness is taking over your 
body. The speech acts you faintly hear your body uttering are not 
yours, but they are also not nobody's! They are the speech acts of a 
new consciousness, remarkably willing to call itself by your name 
and recall your memories, exploit your skills, etc., but just not you. 
This is surely logically possible, for it is simply a reminder of Searle's 
first logically possible variation: a silicon consciousness is possible- 
in this case it just is not you. 
So the crucial claim of Searle's that I italicized above is a non 
sequitur. The second variation does not "illustrate" what he says it 
does. If the "underlying conscious mental life" was "left out" it is 
only because Searle's insistence on the first-person point of view 
encouraged you to overlook the possibility. Maybe the silicon chips 
duplicated the causal powers to produce consciousness and maybe 
they did not. The problem with this 'maybe'-and 
this goes to the 
heart of Searle's attempt to "naturalize" subjective ontology-is 
that Searle has left us no resources at all with which to investigate it. 
It is presumably a mind-bogglingly important matter whether there 
are two consciousnesses associated with this body or just one, but 
neither objective neurophysiology (united with objective silicon- 
ology) nor your first-person point of view can shed any light at all on 
whether there is, or is not, another "subjective ontology" created by 
the second variation. Of course, from the point of view of the doc- 
tors, there would never be any way at all of distinguishing the first 
variation from the second variation-that 
is something that only you 
could ever know about, and you could never communicate it! It is 
This content downloaded from 140.127.23.2 on Fri, 18 Dec 2015 05:49:37 UTC
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

BOOK REVIEWS 
199 
only by ignoring these implications that Searle can say that the 
"irreducibility" of consciousness, with its subjective ontology, "has 
no untoward scientific consequences whatever" (124). 
I find myself in Searle's predicament here. I cannot see how 
Searle could simply have overlooked this gaping loophole in his 
thought experiment. But there it is. Suppose I am flat wrong; sup- 
pose he has seen this apparent loophole and has decisively refuted it 
on many occasions. How then can he resist sharing this refutation 
with his readers, since it would counter such an obvious move for 
the opposition to make? I am baffled. 
A second hard-to-swallow feature of Searle's positive view is the 
connection principle: "all unconscious intentional states are in princi- 
ple accessible to consciousness" (156). For instance, I have not for- 
gotten what my boyhood home looks like, though I very seldom 
think about it, and during the times when I am not consciously 
thinking about it, some state of my brain keeps the memory alive (or 
amenable to resurrection). This state of my brain is about my boy- 
hood home-it 
has intentionality-and 
the connection principle re- 
quires that no state of my brain could be about anything unless its 
intentional content were in principle directly experienceable by me. 
(This is because only a conscious state could have the "aspectual 
shape" that is the hallmark of intentionality-but 
so far as I can see, 
the aspectual shape of an intentional state is what other theorists 
might call the description under which it is appreciated in conscious- 
ness, and I do not see that Searle has given good reasons for ruling 
out unconscious descriptions.) The main task of the connection prin- 
ciple is to rule out the wide variety of intentionalistic formulations 
ubiquitous in cognitive science. Noam Chomsky has said there is 
something in the brain (something like a rule or a principle) that is 
about possible grammars, and David Marr has said there is some- 
thing in the brain (something like a primal sketch) that is of an object 
in the visible world, but when these theorists go on to insist, as they 
do, that these so-called representations in my brain are not recover- 
able by me in the manner of the memory of my boyhood home, they 
are talking nonsense. The mere "as if" intentionality of such so- 
called representational states is a hoax at worst, a metaphor at best. 
It is neither necessary nor illuminating to characterize any such in- 
termediate states or processes in intentional terms. (It is crucial to 
Searle to erect an absolute barrier here-no 
way can you pile up "as 
if" intentionality until it amounts to the real thing! Perhaps that is 
why he likes to concentrate on the simplest, most trivial cases from 
cognitive science, such as the Ponzo illusion [231ff]-because 
in 
such cases there is less imaginative tug in the direction of the pile.) 
This content downloaded from 140.127.23.2 on Fri, 18 Dec 2015 05:49:37 UTC
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

200 
THE JOURNAL OF PHILOSOPHY 
There are curiosities about Searle's positive arguments in defense 
of the connection principle, but setting those aside, consider one of 
its more awkward implications. For Searle, "[c]onsciousness is an 
on/off switch; a system is either conscious or not" (83), and we do 
not yet know where to draw the line as we descend the phylogenetic 
scale: "I have no idea whether fleas, grasshoppers, crabs, or snails 
are conscious" (74). He wants to leave these questions to the neuro- 
physiologists, who will explore them by looking for evidence of "me- 
chanical-like tropisms to account for apparently goal-directed behav- 
ior in organisms that lacked consciousness" (75). Now, suppose that 
the neurophysiologists find it tempting to describe the "mechanical- 
like tropisms" in some spider in intentional terms: "State A of the 
spider's nervous system represents the location of the fly in the web, 
and state B represents the best route, and state C represents the 
second-best route to the fly" (or something like that). Is this real 
intentionality or mere as if intentionality? For Searle there can be no 
middle ground; spiders could not be held to be "sort of" conscious. 
If spiders are conscious, the neurophysiologists can succumb to the 
temptation with equanimity; these spider-brain states really are in- 
tentional states. If spiders are not, the neurophysiologists are com- 
mitting the cardinal sin of cognitive science. How are they supposed 
to know which they are doing? 
In fending off this embarrassing question, Searle must go to re- 
markable lengths to deny that it could ever be reasonable to give an 
intentionalistic or representational interpretation of a "mechanical- 
like" feature of a nervous system. He grants that there is a "func- 
tional" story to be told, for instance, about how the brain arrives at 
depth or distance judgments. "But there is no mental content what- 
ever at this functional level" (234, Searle's emphasis). He then puts 
to himself the following quite reasonable retort from the cognitive 
scientists: "the distinction does not really make much difference to 
cognitive science. We continue to say what we have always said and 
do what we have always done, we simply substitute the word 'func- 
tional' for the word 'mental' in these cases." To answer this, he is 
obliged to maintain that not only is there no information-processing 
level of explanation for the brain, there is also really no "functional 
level" of explanation in biology: "To put the point bluntly, in addi- 
tion to its various causal relations, the heart does not have any func- 
tions. When we speak of its functions, we are talking about those of 
its causal relations to which we attach some normative importance" 
(238). Now, I have often been viewed somewhat askance for sug- 
gesting that in some regards functionality is in the eye of the be- 
This content downloaded from 140.127.23.2 on Fri, 18 Dec 2015 05:49:37 UTC
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

BOOK REVIEWS 
201 
holder.' Searle has gone me one better, because he has forsworn the 
possibility of an intermediate position; there are only brute facts and 
brute falsehoods for Searle. So, while he and I are in agreement that 
the intentional level combines "the causal with the normative," he 
must go on to assert that "the actual facts of intentionality contain 
normative elements, but where functional explanations are con- 
cerned, the only facts are brute, blind physical facts and the only 
norms are in us and exist only from our point of view" (238). It 
turns out, then, that function-talk in biology, like mere "as if" in- 
tentionality-talk, is not to be taken seriously. Only artifacts made by 
genuine, conscious human artificers have real functions! Airplane 
wings are really for flying, but eagles' wings are not; if one biologist 
says they are adaptations for flying and another says they are merely 
display racks for decorative feathers, there is no sense in which one 
biologist is closer to the truth. If, on the other hand, we ask the 
aeronautical engineers whether the airplane wings they designed are 
for keeping the plane aloft or for displaying the insignia of the 
airline, they can tell us a brute fact. 
I should mention that Searle devotes a considerable portion of 
the positive side of his book to developing his theses about what he 
calls the background and the network, and the relation he sees be- 
tween these. These passages are often interesting, but I could not 
see that the details were anything other than a restatement in some- 
what novel (but not improved) terms of familiar facts about con- 
sciousness, duly recognized by earlier theorists. They raise some 
difficulties for Searle's own view, which he solves, but I could find 
no salient challenges to "orthodox" functionalism among any 
of them. 
III. SEARLE'S VIEW OF THE OPPOSITION 
As I said at the outset, Searle sees that his view is not just a minor 
disagreement with one feature of this orthodoxy; he must declare 
the opposition to be wrong from the ground up. Faced with the 
difficulty of finding common ground from which to launch non- 
question-begging arguments for such a revolutionary proposal (8- 
9), Searle recognizes that he must mount a less direct campaign. In 
chapter two, he presents a diagnosis of the historical path to error, 
from behaviorism and the early formulations of the identity theory, 
through various forms of functionalism and eliminative materialism, 
more or less up to the present state of play. This is a promising tactic 
1 See, for instance, The Intentional Stance (Cambridge: MIT, 1987), pp. 269- 
86, 314-21. 
This content downloaded from 140.127.23.2 on Fri, 18 Dec 2015 05:49:37 UTC
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

202 
THE JOURNAL OF PHILOSOPHY 
under the circumstances. If he can show that he is an acute and 
sympathetic interpreter of the processes of thought that have led to 
the impasse, we shall at least be given grounds for supposing that he 
may indeed have uncovered an overlooked opportunity of major 
proportions. But the execution of this review is unfortunate, and his 
other discussions of alternative positions later in the book are 
equally unprepossessing. We enter a world of breathtaking oversim- 
plification, everything black and white, with no shades of gray per- 
mitted. 
This makes sympathetic interpretation difficult. On numerous oc- 
casions, he seems to be willfully ignoring the best interpretation of 
his opponents, seems to be willfully oblivious of well-known argu- 
ments in the literature. The intentional-stance reasoning supporting 
this appearance is straightforward. For instance, surely Searle 
(a) is acquainted with the many arguments against the coherence of 
the inverted-spectrum case (43); 
(b) knows that Ruth Millikan's position is not refuted by such a simple 
objection (50); 
(c) is familiar with David Rosenthal's improvement on the Wittgen- 
steinian position he dismisses so abruptly (146, and in a different 
regard, 17 1); 
(d) has encountered and understood at least a few of the subtleties in 
Donald Davidson's discussions of self-deception (148); 
(e) has not forgotten how John Haugeland's discussion of these issues 
obviates his claims (203-5). 
If these premises are true, one reasons, he must be deliberately 
ignoring these points, confident that his lay readers will be none the 
wiser. Either that or worse: he actually intends to express contempt 
for these authors-as 
if to say "their objections to my position are 
so ludicrous they are not worth even mentioning." There are other 
cases to consider. For instance, can Searle seriously believe that the 
mere fact that someone else can know better than I whether I am 
"jealous, angry, or feeling generous" (145) scores a hit against any 
actually maintained doctrine of incorrigibility? This looks like delib- 
erate misdirection of the lay reader. 
But there is also evidence against this interpretation. To me, the 
most persuasive evidence is that he treats friend and foe alike. 
Would a deliberate distorter treat his fellow critics of cognitive 
science as cavalierly as Searle treats Saul Kripke (38-40), Thomas 
Nagel (100-3), Colin McGinn (104-5), and Ned Block (163-4)? I 
have my own disagreements with each of these authors, but I would 
not endorse any of Searle's accounts of what is wrong with them. It 
was a refreshing experience to feel such sympathy for them, as well 
This content downloaded from 140.127.23.2 on Fri, 18 Dec 2015 05:49:37 UTC
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

BOOK REVIEWS 
203 
as for my worthy opponents within the "orthodox" tradition: Paul 
Churchland (46-7), Jerry Fodor (50), and Chomsky (242-5)-to 
say 
nothing of poor Sigmund Freud (151-2). 
So we should look for some way to block the reasoning that 
seemed so persuasive, by denying premises (a-e) and their kin. The 
hypothesis that Searle has actually not read the literature he pur- 
ports to criticize can be rejected out of hand. Is it possible that 
although Searle has at one time or another read all the literature, 
and understood it at the time, he has actually forgotten the subtle 
details, and (given his supreme self-confidence) not bothered to 
check his memory? For instance, has he simply forgotten that what 
he calls his reductio ad absurdum of my position (81) is a version of 
an argument I myself composed and rebutted a dozen years ago?2 
There is evidence of extreme forgetfulness right within the book. 
For instance, he poses an excellent question and answer on page 32, 
and promises "[l]ater on I will show that both the question and the 
answer are incoherent," but I can find nowhere in the later pages 
where he does anything that I can construe as even attempting to 
make good on this promise. 
More substantively, it is utterly central to his discussion of his 
thought experiment about silicon-chip implants, as we saw, that ap- 
parently intelligent behavior has no conclusive or even probative 
bearing on whether an entity is conscious. A "zombie" who per- 
fectly fools the doctors (or Turing testers) into thinking it is 
conscious must be a genuine possibility for Searle. But he forgets all 
this (apparently!) when forty pages later (107) he sets out to explain 
the evolutionary advantage of consciousness, which, he says "serves 
to organize a certain set of relationships between the organism and 
both its environment and its own states": consciousness, he says, 
"gives us much greater powers of discrimination than unconscious 
mechanisms would have.... 
The hypothesis I am suggesting then is 
that one of the evolutionary advantages conferred on us by con- 
sciousness is the much greater flexibility, sensitivity, and creativity 
we derive from being conscious" (109). If that is true, it actually 
favors my alternative reading of the second variation. You yourself 
should reason: since my body continues to exhibit the "flexibility, 
sensitivity and creativity" that I always used to exhibit, odds are 
there is a silicon consciousness providing these benefits! These pas- 
sages on evolution flatly contradict his earlier insistence that con- 
sciousness is entirely independent of "control powers," and revoke 
2 "True Believers," in A. F. Heath, ed., Scientific Explanation (New York: Ox- 
ford, 1981), pp. 53-75; see esp. pp. 61-2. 
This content downloaded from 140.127.23.2 on Fri, 18 Dec 2015 05:49:37 UTC
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

204 
THE JOURNAL OF PHILOSOPHY 
his denial of orthodox claims (4) and (5) above, so the principle of 
charity leaves the hypothesis of forgetfulness the only refuge. 
But is such extreme forgetfulness all by itself really plausible? 
There is yet another possible interpretation. At several points, 
Searle insists he has done his level best to interpret his opponents; 
we might try taking him at his word. Perhaps his bull-in-the-china- 
shop routine is not a policy, and not the result of forgetfulness, but 
a necessity. Perhaps when he attempts to see what an author is going 
on about, he translates what he reads into the only terms he can 
understand-one 
comic-book version or another. Someone less 
self-confident might reason: "I must be missing something; these 
colleagues of mine are coming out too stupid for words!" But if this 
occurs to Searle, it does not prompt any serious consideration 
by him. 
The superficially implausible hypothesis that Searle has been un- 
able to entertain the sophisticated versions of his opponents' views is 
helped along by noting that someone who, like Searle, begins with 
the firm conviction that these matters are black-and-white, on-or- 
off, yes-or-no, is going to be constitutionally unsympathetic toward, 
and hence impatient with, those who announce they have rather 
intricate arguments in support of intermediate positions. It takes 
some genuine effort to suspend disbelief, and Searle admits to hav- 
ing had to work hard at taking seriously the views he is attacking. I 
know only too well how hard it is to curb my own impatience with 
those who set out on what seem to me to be manifestly bootless 
exercises in subtlety. If Searle is guilty of colossal impatience, he is 
only exhibiting in extreme form a failing we all share to one degree 
or another. 
Finally, of course, we could try to take seriously the humbling 
possibility that Searle has actually underestimated the size of his 
Herculean task; he is simply right-and 
the rest of us are so hope- 
lessly in the grip of the pseudo-sophisticated confusions he imputes 
to us that we are still unable to get our heads around the simple 
truths of which he is trying to remind us. It can hardly be credited 
that it was Searle's intention to leave his philosophical targets with 
no agreeable alternative to the thesis that we are so disabled. Never- 
theless, we could try to maintain this well-nigh-incredible (to us, of 
course!) prospect as a working hypothesis. In fact, I have attempted 
this. I have reasoned that, if he really were right, when I turned to 
his positive arguments from as neutral a perspective as I could mus- 
ter, I would find it surprisingly difficult to find any plausible diag- 
noses of fallacious argument or overlooked possibilities on his part. 
But I do find apparent contradictions and major gaps in that posi- 
This content downloaded from 140.127.23.2 on Fri, 18 Dec 2015 05:49:37 UTC
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

BOOK REVIEWS 
205 
tive account-I 
noted some of them in the previous section-so 
I 
can breathe easily. 
In the end, I find I have no strong opinion on which of the 
remaining interpretations of Searle is the truth (or what proportions 
of truth lie in each of them). And it is a welcome implication of my 
own view that although all of these patterns can be considered real 
up to a point,3 there may be no deeper fact of the matter about what 
Searle really believes about the arguments of his colleagues. From 
his own first-person point of view, however, he may know better (or 
at least think he does). If so, there will be occasions for him to 
attempt to communicate that plain truth to us. 
What, then, of the challenge from common sense with which we 
-and 
Searle-began? 
Such a powerful hunch does not fall to the 
ground just because one philosopher fails to provide any support 
for it. I wish I were in a position to say, "If this is the best that the 
defenders of 'intrinsic subjectivity' can do, then this particular 
aspect of common sense is history," but I have no faith in the ante- 
cedent. I expect that others, perhaps inspired by Searle's campaign, 
will come along with better, more responsible arguments; it is still 
too early for the "orthodox" to declare victory. 
DANIEL C. DENNEIT 
Tufts University 
3 See "Real Patterns," this JOURNAL, 
LXXXVIII, 
1 (January 1991): 27-51. 
Human Morality. SAMUEL SCHEFFLER. New York: Oxford University 
Press, 1992. 150 p. Cloth $26.00. 
Human Morality, as the title suggests, attempts to reconcile the im- 
peratives of morality with the imperatives of our humanity. Since, 
for Samuel Scheffler, moral imperatives must finally be understood 
as human imperatives, this book ultimately attempts to reconcile us 
with ourselves. The value of this book lies in Scheffler's patient 
recognition that this is no easy matter. Our self-imposed demands 
come from potentially conflicting sources, and a true reconciliation 
must account for the disparate sources of human motivation. In 
effect, Scheffler is trying to strike the mean between the "Aristote- 
lian" and the "Kantian" strains in our moral thinking. On the one 
hand, morality must be a recognizably human institution, bound to 
0022-362X/93/9004/205-1 
1 
? 1993 The Journal of Philosophy, Inc. 
This content downloaded from 140.127.23.2 on Fri, 18 Dec 2015 05:49:37 UTC
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

