 
The University of Chicago Press and Philosophy of Science Association are collaborating with JSTOR to digitize, preserve 
 
and extend access to Philosophy of Science.
http://www.jstor.org
Review 
Author(s): Daniel C. Dennett 
Review by: Daniel C. Dennett 
Source: 
 
 
Philosophy of Science, Vol. 55, No. 4 (Dec., 1988), pp. 653-654
Published by: 
 on behalf of the 
The University of Chicago Press
Philosophy of Science 
 
Association
Stable URL: 
 
http://www.jstor.org/stable/187535
Accessed: 27-09-2015 13:52 UTC
Your use of the JSTOR archive indicates your acceptance of the Terms & Conditions of Use, available at http://www.jstor.org/page/
 
info/about/policies/terms.jsp
JSTOR is a not-for-profit service that helps scholars, researchers, and students discover, use, and build upon a wide range of content 
in a trusted digital archive. We use information technology and tools to increase productivity and facilitate new forms of scholarship. 
For more information about JSTOR, please contact support@jstor.org.
This content downloaded from 150.135.239.97 on Sun, 27 Sep 2015 13:52:21 UTC
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

BOOK REVIEWS 
WILIAM LYONS. The Disappearance of Introspection. Cambridge, Mass.: A Bradford Book/ 
The MIT Press (1986), xv + 193 pp. $22.50 (cloth). 
What, if anything, is introspection? "'Introspection"' Ryle observed, "is a term of art 
and one for which little use is found in the self-description of untheoretical people." Lyons 
quotes this passage approvingly, but underestimates the extent to which this fact might 
confound his efforts. Since introspection is not only a term of art, but an ill-defined one, 
it has meant different things to different theorists. According to Lyons, theorists have 
thought, confusedly, that introspection is a "special and privileged executive monitoring 
process" (p. 113), and their efforts to accommodate this special phenomenon in their the- 
ories of the mind/brain have led them to "bizarre" solutions, "fantastic and incredible 
suggestions brought on by assuming that 'introspection' is a meta-process that monitors 
first-level occurrences of perception, memory, imagination, thinking, and so on" (p. 123). 
There is no such meta-process, according to Lyons; what has been confusedly called "in- 
trospection" is just a certain variety of "operations by perceptual memory and imagination 
when their operations are at the level of conscious attention" (p. 124). 
The first two parts of the book are devoted to criticism of earlier theories, and there can 
be little doubt that Lyons' quarry, as he portrays it, is a conception we should all wish to 
disappear. First, Lyons patiently presents the history of the introspectionist psychologists- 
Wundt, Titchener and their rivals-and 
their downfall; this is followed by an account of 
the behaviorist successors-Watson, 
Skinner and their rivals-and 
their downfall. Much 
of this material is unfamiliar to philosophers, and it adds a refreshing perspective to stale 
debates. Then he turns his critical attention to the philosophers of mind: Armstrong's idea 
of introspection as brain-scanning, and my own elaboration of Putnamian functionalistic 
ideas of introspective reports as the expression in "printouts" of logical states of the brain's 
"program". His criticisms of these proposals are then taken to clear the decks for his own 
positive account, which occupies the third part of the book. 
Lyons makes many good observations about the phenomena in question, and the short- 
comings of various theories of them, but he is confounded by his insufficient appreciation 
of a problem with all the literature on the topic (his own and my own included): too much 
reliance on metaphor and handwaving. In order to compose the opposition into targets 
suitable for criticism, Lyons must time and again make assumptions about just how literally 
these theorists meant to be taken, and about just how they would extend their accounts to 
other cases not explicitly discussed. And time and again, in my estimation, he ends up 
imputing more folly to his predecessors than they actually exhibited, though their own 
reliance on handwaving and metaphor invites just such reconstruction. In the process of 
rendering his rivals explicit and literal on the issues that concern him, he pushes them into 
extreme ("true blue") positions on such issues as reduction versus elimination, the prop- 
erties of mental images, privileged access, and the way subjects' reports might be infor- 
mative about their brain states. The bizarre, fantastic, incredible theories he then attacks 
are thus to some extent his own creations, descendants of theories that sometimes tackle 
issues with which his own positive account does not come to grips. This leaves him, at 
best, replacing a seriously confused idea by a vague and noncommittal idea. 
Lyons' positive theory is that what is called introspection is actually "replay" (always 
in scare-quotes) of processes of perceptual memory and imagination. We are not given a 
theory of the operation of perceptual memory and imagination, nor any account of what 
their being "at the level of conscious attention" might come to. Suspicions arise about 
how any theory of these residual phenomena would avoid the pitfalls of the bad old visions. 
Lyons asserts: "We do not need to 'introspect' in order to say what we are looking at, 
hearing, tasting, smelling, or feeling" (p. 150). But what do we do, in order to say these 
things? Surely any theory of how we say what we are looking at, etc., must posit some 
"meta-level" activity to accommodate the obvious facts about the phenomena. For in- 
653 
This content downloaded from 150.135.239.97 on Sun, 27 Sep 2015 13:52:21 UTC
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

654 
BOOK REVIEWS 
stance, on such occasions we offer (as Lyons himself often puts it), an "edited" or "in- 
terpreted" version of what we are looking at (etc.)-and 
can, for instance, refrain from 
issuing a report on details of our experience that are not deemed worthy of report-but 
in order to achieve this circumspection, this capacity to "edit" or "interpret" or "censor", 
something "meta" must be going on. If Lyons thinks a theory can be given that denies 
this, he offers us no reasons to agree with him. 
Again, privileged access takes some heavy blows in the early chapters, but in the end 
Lyons ends up endorsing a variety of privileged access-incorrigibility 
about content, but 
not about veracity of content (pp. 130-132)-that 
is not so "thin" as he makes out; it is 
(apparently) the very notion of privileged access that he applauds me for abandoning (pp. 
77-78). And Lyons' own way with imagery has at least as much handwaving in it as any 
other current version, for example: "What is not stored are 'pictures'. 
. . What is stored 
is an abstraction from the myriad perceptual data " (p. 135). 
Lyons' book thus makes contributions to philosophical work on introspection at two 
levels. At the first, intended level, he makes many acute observations on the pitfalls and 
false temptations of theory, and on the nature of the phenomena. On another, unintended 
level, his book is an eloquent witness to the futilities of investigations carried out at such 
a level of handwaving that the participants have difficulty recognizing when they are agree- 
ing with each other. Daniel C. Dennett, Tufts University. 
STEPHEN 
E. BOER AND WILLLM G. LYCAN. Knowing Who. Cambridge, Mass.: A Bradford 
Book/The MIT Press (1986), xii + 212 pp. $22.50 (cloth). 
Readers of the previous work of these authors (especially those familiar with Bill Ly- 
can's work) will expect detail and clarity combined with an alarmingly omnivorous appetite 
for the literature. Knowing Who is no exception, though potential readers should realize 
that the technical development of the semantics is forbiddingly dense in places. Hence this 
books is no easy read. But aficionados of the propositional attitude semantics industry will 
not want to miss it. 
The book focuses on a particular species of propositional attitude ascriptions: locutions 
of the form "X knows who N is" where N is the proxy for a name, a description, or a 
demonstrative. But the book is of wider interest than this would suggest, for three central 
chapters develop a general theory of the semantics of propositional attitude sentences. The 
primary interest of the work is semantic rather than psychological, that is, on the truth 
conditions of knowing-who locutions rather than the nature of the psychological states 
those locutions report (though the latter is not entirely neglected). I will start by sketching 
the theoretical background, and then outline the intuitive idea of the authors' treatment of 
knowing-who. (I have neither the space nor the competence to assess its technical devel- 
opment.) 
The central innovation of the book is to combine and develop two familiar ideas: the 
"two factor" theory of attitude individuation and the "paratactic" analysis of attitude sen- 
tences. The two factor theory of attitude ascription holds that we group (for example,) 
belief tokens into types according to two different but co-equal criteria, depending on our 
theoretical purposes. If we are interested in the explanation of behavior, we group tokens 
into types by virtue of similarity of conceptual role. If our purposes are the explanation 
of success or failure of behavioral plans, we group tokens into types via identity of the 
belief tokens' truth conditions. Lycan has for some years defended the importance of this 
approach by showing how it provides a natural solution to Kripke's puzzle about belief 
(4.2), the nature of beliefs about ourselves (6.1), and how it helps unravel the tangles 
about "de re" belief (5.3). Indeed, one virtue of the book is its bringing these discussions 
together in an accessible place. The opacity of propositional attitude inscriptions in general, 
and knowing-who constructions in particular, is a reflex of our two different schemes of 
attribution. Attributions guided by the criterion of conceptual role are necessarily opaque, 
for two terms being co-referential is notoriously insufficient for their having the same 
conceptual role. 
The second idea is to take over, develop, and formalize the Davidsonian analysis of 
This content downloaded from 150.135.239.97 on Sun, 27 Sep 2015 13:52:21 UTC
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

