BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1995) 18,807-811
Printed in the United States of America
Continuing Commentary
Commentary on Daniel C. Dennett and Marcel Kinsbourne (1992) Time and the observer: The where and when
of consciousness in the brain. BBS 15:183-247
Abstract of the original article: We compare the way two models of consciousness treat subjective timing. According to the standard
"Cartesian Theater" model, there is a place in the brain where "it all comes together," and the discriminations in all modalities are
somehow put into registration and "presented" for subjective judgment. The timing of the events in this theater determines subjective
order. According to the alternative "Multiple Drafts" model, discriminations are distributed in both space and time in the brain. These
events do have temporal properties, but those properties do not determine subjective order because there is no single, definitive
"stream of consciousness," only a parallel stream of conflicting and continuously revised contents. Four puzzling phenomena that resist
explanation by the Cartesian model are analyzed: (1) a gradual apparent motion phenomenon involving abrupt color change (Kolers &
von Griinau 1976), (2) an illusion of an evenly spaced series of "hops" produced by two or more widely spaced series of taps delivered to
the skin (Celdard & Sherrick's "cutaneous rabbit" [1972]), (3) backwards referral in time, and (4) subjective delay of consciousness of
intention (both reported in this journal by Libet 1985a; 1987; 1989a). The unexamined assumptions that have always made the
Cartesian Theater so attractive are exposed and dismantled. The Multiple Drafts model provides a better account of the puzzling
phenomena, avoiding the scientific and metaphysical extravagances of the Cartesian Theater: The temporal order of subjective events is
a product of the brain's interpretational processes, not a direct reflection of events making up those processes.
"Multiple Drafts" of subjective experience
viewed within a microgenetic framework
for cognition and consciousness
Joseph Glicksohn
Department of Criminology, Bar-Han University, Ramat Gan, 52100, Israel.
glick@ccsg.tau.ac.il
Abstract: The notion of "multiple drafts" is one that has attracted the
attention of researchers working within the "microgenetic" framework to
perception and cognition, deriving from the work of Heinz Werner (1948).
Dennett and Kinsboume's (1992) position can be further explored with
reference to this earlier literature. The present commentary attempts to
ground the D&K model within this larger theoretical debate.
Although I empathize with Dennett and Kinsboume's (D&K)
(1992) position regarding "Multiple Drafts" of subjective experi-
ence, I wish to draw their attention and that of the BBS readership
to the fact that this notion has a long history in cognitive and
developmental psychology. Let me try to ground the D&K model
within an encompassing theoretical debate.
First, consider the concept of regression in cognitive develop-
ment. By regression I mean a shift to a mode of cognition that is
characteristic of an earlier stage of functioning, one that may be
either long-term and general (regression) or short-term and local
(reversion). Basically, the problem is whether regression or rever-
sion can be accommodated by the developmental theory. In the
following discussion, I have substituted "draft" for "structure and
content" to show the "Multiple Drafts" notion in a wider perspec-
tive. Subissues of the problem of regression involve the following:
(1) Are former drafts retained after progressive development,
and if so, what is their relation to the more advanced drafts that are
presently dominant?
(2) If the former drafts are available, then how do they interact
with the more advanced drafts? Furthermore, under what condi-
tions do these former drafts become accessible, and what purpose
do they serve if more progressive drafts are dominant?
A unilinear developmental framework, such as that of Piaget
(1970) does not accommodate notions of regression and reversion.
Piagets stages of cognitive development are hierarchically or-
dered: progression through successive stages entails an evolution
of cognitive structures along a continuum of logicomathematical
consistency. Thus, there can only be a progression, that is, a
nondescending monotonic developmental trend. Furthermore,
cognitive development a la Piaget entails the evolution of more
advanced cognitive structures which result from the transforma-
tion of the earlier ones (Pinard & Laurendeau 1969). Thus there
can be no regression in any sense as there is nothing to which to
regress.
In contrast, a nonlinear developmental framework, such as the
organismic-developmental framework of Werner and his students
(Langer 1970; Werner 1948; 1957), does provide for regressive
and reversive experiences. Werner (1948) suggested that less
developed systems become subordinated to and regulated by
more developed systems but are not lost. The former drafts,
though available, are not readily accessible - unless the system is
faced with a stressful situation or a novel or difficult task. Werner's
(1948) organismic-developmental approach at the ontogenetic
level has its counterpart at the microgenetic level, and the latter
seems particularly related to D&K's target article.
D&K note (p. 185) that
at any one point in time there are multiple 'drafts' of narrative fragments
at various stages of'editing' in various places in the brain. Probing this
stream at different intervals produces different effects, elicits different
narrative accounts from the subject. ... If one probes 'too early,' one
may gather data on how early a particular discrimination is achieved in
the stream, but at the cost of disrupting the normal progression of the
stream.
Compare this quotation to the following one from an article that
appeared 35 years earlier (Smith 1957):
The process of visual perception should not be confused with what is
generally called percepts, which are products of the process fitted into a
frame of reference of outside reality. It would be even more correct to
say that percepts normally are the products of late phases in a process of
organization, the preparatory phases of which are therefore valid
objects of study. . . . First of all, we have to assume that these stages do
not generally produce percepts; only rarely do we become aware of our
own perceptual processes. . . . It is more natural to assume that
© 1995 Cambridge University Press
O14O-525X/95$9.OO+.1O
807

Continuing Commentary
preparatory stages often differ from end stages because they have not
been able to produce percepts. Such premature products of early stages
would probably be suppressed, at any rate, in favor of something more
suitable for the frame of reference of outside reality. . . . When the
perceptual process is inhibited . . . early stages of the perceptual pro-
cess can be forced to produce a percept.
This is the general line adopted by researchers working within
the "microgenetic" framework to perception (Flavell & Draguns
1957), microgenesis being Werner's (1956) term for the micro-
developmental unfolding of a cognitive process (for a recent
review, see Siegler & Crowley 1991). Microgenetic theory origi-
nated with the Leipzig school of Gestalt Psychology, which had an
organismic-developmental orientation. Werners emphasis was
thus on the developmental sequence of stages through which any
cognitive process unfolds. Though it is similar to contemporary
notions of information processing, the major difference is that the
microgenesis of cognition is in certain respects quite similar to
the ontogenetic stage-by-stage progression of cognition. That is,
the stages of information processing are analogous to the stages of
developing cognition. The microgenetic sequence of perception
comprised a number of major phases:
the initial perception is that of a diffuse, undifferentiated whole. In the
next stage figure and ground achieve some measure of differentia-
tion. . . . Then comes a phase in which contour and inner content
achieve some distinctiveness and a tentative, labile configuration re-
sults. Finally, the process of Gestalt formation becomes complete with
the addition of elaborations and modifications of the skeletal Gestalt
(Gestaltgeriist) achieved in the previous stage. (Flavell & Draguns
1957, p. 198)
Terming this "skeletal Gestalt" a previous draft ties in the micro-
genetic approach with D&K's "Multiple Drafts" model.
Whether or not one can have access to a previous draft has
important theoretical consequences. For example, are there pre-
vious drafts of experience that can be tapped using hypnosis (for a
critical review of this issue, see Nash 1987). Clearly, irrespective of
whether empirical evidence supports the notion of hypnotic age
regression, this can, on theoretical counts, only be a developmen-
tally stage-consistent local reversion, which presupposes both the
acceptance of the organismic-developmental approach of Wemer
(1948) and a "statist" or "interactionist" viewpoint concerning
hypnosis (see Glicksohn 1987; Spanos 1986). Similarly, can one
disrupt the normal unfolding of the drafts via the use of contem-
plative mediation (Brown 1977; Deikman 1977) to slow down the
temporal sequence of experience and thereby externalize these
drafts (see Goodblatt & Glicksohn 1989-90, for some poetic
examples)? Again, one must assume not only that there are
multiple drafts but that earlier versions can also be accessed.
I suggest that D&K try to explore the extent to which the
"Multiple Drafts" model may be the microgenetic one discussed
in this commentary.
Consciousness and timing
David Salter
Department of Psychology, University of Newcastle upon Tyne, England
NE1 7RU. davld.salter@newcastle.ac.uk
Abstract: This commentary addresses three distinctions: the relationship
of conscious to unconscious processes, whether these processes are single
or multiple, and the distinction between vehicle and content. Also consid-
ered are questions of the relationship between multiple drafts to con-
sciousness, the oneness of phenomenal perception as an illusion, the role
of consciousness in the redrafting process, and finally the update fre-
quency for attentional revision.
Asking the right questions. Dennett and Kinsboume (1992;
D&K) make explicit the incongruities of a serially unfolding
consciousness. The incongruity is as if the unitization of time has
so seriously misled us about the nature of our consciousness that,
in error, we measure the consciousness of observed events by the
objective time at which the light rays passed through, say, the
retinal lens. To replace such a misconception, D&K propose a
much more convincing analogy of multiple drafts (MD) to de-
scribe the distributed processing in the brain. In presenting their
lively thesis, D&K focus on what seem to be the right kinds of
questions to accentuate the false incongruities arising from Carte-
sian materialism and, in so doing, they provide much better
explanations for the evidence from earlier investigations and
experimental paradigms that were designed to provide answers to
previous questions that now seem to be wrongly formulated (see
the section below on vehicle/content).
Some preliminary distinctions will be briefly discussed to pro-
vide a context before addressing two main considerations. The
first distinction is the relationship of conscious to unconscious
processes, and the second concerns whether those processes may
be considered to be single or multiple. The third distinction is
between vehicle and content.
Conscious/unconscious. This distinction raises an important
question as to whether consciousness is an all-or-none phenome-
non or whether, what appears to be more likely, there is a
continuum of intermediate states between the two extremes. This
continuum may be characterised as complex, with many local
transformations (i.e., modular structures) that can be influenced
by variable thresholds (i.e., learning and experience). The actual
quality of consciousness will therefore depend on the nature of the
cognitive task and the specific brain activities involved. In visual
studies manipulating metacontrast effects with presentation be-
fore masking (See Breitmeyer 1984, for review), the differentia-
tion of a lower objective threshold from a higher subjective one
reveals a region of perceptual uncertainty, with longer intervals
before target presentation, within which subjects are able to
report with increasing confidence in the correctness of their
response but without having awareness of the target presented
(Cheesman & Merikle 1985). This ability of knowing without
awareness (see Schachter et al. 1988) appears to be a more general
property of cognitive functioning that includes all aspects of
perception and action that are prior to consciousness (see
Holender 1986, however, for a more conservative conclusion).
Previous explanations of perception using information mea-
sures have equated the capacity for discriminative perception
exclusively with consciousness and have thus ignored all the
unconscious information processing outside the immediate focus
of attention: tantamount to excluding unconscious processes from
behavior altogether. In contradiction to this view, I wish to argue
that unconscious operations are preeminently important because
they influence discriminative responding directly, with functions
for which consciousness, or rather selective attention, can be no
substitute. Intentional actions are not informed and instructed by
conscious processing alone, as D&K acknowledge.
Serial/parallel. The assumption of precise linear measurement
for timing conscious events with commensurability at some privi-
leged point of access (what might be termed a Turing Tape model
of consciousness) is mistaken precisely because it presumes brain
activities similar to those of serial von Neumann programs instead
of multiple streams of information within a modular architecture.
Given that parallel operations in neural networks are probably the
norm, such a parallel architecture need not exclude separate,
semiserial information pathways (defined as requiring few if any
nonlinear network transformations), being "tunneled" through the
system. These perceptual-action pathways will develop most con-
spicuously when the consequent action requires only a predeter-
mined, ballistic-type response, though even then strict seriality is
unlikely. There is the further consideration that (at least apparent)
semiserial or tunneled pathway activity is possible at various
functional levels: from very basic behavioral reflexes to higher
levels of semantic representation. But the evidence cited by D&K
indicates that the perceptual congruence of events as we subse-
quently perceive/remember them will always persuade us con-
sciously to infer a closer temporal relationship than was necessarily
808
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1995) 18:4

the case at their inception: "We perceive - and remember -
perceptual events, not successively analyzed trickle of perceptual
events or attributes locked into succession as if pinned into place
on a continuous film" (D&K 1992, p. 200). Only the advent of
precise millisecond measurements in more recent experimental
paradigms has made it explicitly apparent that such timing effects
sometimes also present paradoxes.
Yet the scientific claim to have carried out serial, or absolute,
timing of the perceptual events based on such results is imme-
diately undermined if nonlinear transformational relationships
across metalevel cognitive functioning have not been taken into
account; such a serial psychological model, like the conceptual
assumptions of a Newtonian time clock, works satisfactorily after a
fashion, but only within the slippage that characterises normal
perception and a relatively large-scale operational context. Confu-
sion between vehicle and content constantly arises, perhaps for
similar reasons.
Vehicle/content, the confusion which arises from the inability
to distinguish between vehicle and content is central to the
argument that D&K present. It is evident that attempting to pin
down the exact timing of content by relying exclusively on the
vehicle of the representation will always present potential prob-
lems for scientific explanation. A specific case in point was the use
of the dynamic perceptual flow of the oscilloscope clock spot as a
timedate stamp in the Libet (1985) paradigm because the method,
although ingenious, failed to convince because it was unable to
monitor the different functional levels of processing and the
consequences of those transformational changes (Salter 1989).
Yet to separate operationally the vehicle from content too rigidly
presents another conceptual difficulty because the perceptual
transformation from vehicle to content provides the power for the
semantic engine. The two therefore need to be functionally
related because, as D&K point out, the brain appears to represent
events in ways that make "most ecological sense" (D&K 1992,
p. 197), the product of the brain's interpretative processes. Such
interpretative perceptions will not necessarily be veridical al-
though the probabilities of objective functional success need to be
consistently stable for reasons of survival.
A notable exception to veridical correctness in perception is the
"cutaneous rabbit," which provides a vivid example of the brain's
interpretative capacity to produce coherent and retrospective
judgements of spacetime events based on multiple distributed
operations across different functional levels. To explain this coher-
ence in terms of a "filling in" exercise for a linear story line cannot
be a satisfactory explanation, as D&K rightly aver, because such
infill would lead to all kinds of counterevolutionary consequences.
A separate but related issue involves consciousness itself. It
seems to be a major error to equate the transition from vehicle to
content exclusively with the emergence of conscious awareness of
meaning, and thereby to infer that semantic processing cannot
operate outside consciousness. Rather, content can be subsumed
by unconscious processing interacting with any current attentional
activity; to conclude otherwise is to ignore the overwhelming
evidence from observations about our behavior.
If we focus our attention on the content of an information
stream at a particular functional level (as, for example, when we
selectively attend to a list of words presented to one ear in a
dichotic situation), the timing of vehicle with content is positive
and highly correlated. This correlation immediately becomes less
secure, however, as soon as the local constraints at that level of
analysis are withdrawn to allow more extensive grouping and
interpretation (such as syntactic parsing and semantic interpreta-
tion of the same list of words). If sequential timing is relevant to
interpretation, then a sequence of perceptual events (such as (A):
tl, t2, t3, etc.) after processing might make much better ecological
sense to the perceiver if, by acknowledging the results of this wider
interpretative context, their sequence of arrival were transformed
into the reverse order (B). Even so, no recruitment of conscious-
ness need be required for this transformation to take place. For an
outside observer then to suggest that one series, (B), is paradoxical
Continuing Commentary
in relation to the other, (A), neglects the nature of these intermedi-
ate semantic transitions. Moreover, this relative timing reversal of
events need not imply any metaphysical rearrangement of an
objective time sequence (see Penrose 1989, p. 445). Although
different versions of time events (vehicles) might be processed in
parallel, eventually only one (content) version will be remem-
bered. In the general case, this means that the temporal properties
of a vehicles arrival will occasionally make a meaningful and
lasting contribution to the stored content.
The observations above are quite compatible with D&K's argu-
ment for multiple drafts with continual updating, which captures
the idea of parallel processing distributed over a given spacetime
region in the brain. If an additional assertion is accepted, that most
semantic processing operates outside conscious awareness, then
this modification removes any theoretical power that might be
derived from the distinction between Stalinesque and Orwellian
procedures. Such a conclusion concurs with my reading of the
D&K's Multiple Drafts model, but leaves other specific queries
unresolved.
Multiple Drafts (MD) model: Some queries. It is useful at the
outset to consider how well Cartesian materialism, compared to
the MD model, explains a specific metacontrast recovery phe-
nomenon. I refer to the effect of a second mask (M2) which
disinhibits the effects of a first mask (M1) on a target's (T) visibility.
The striking aspect of this particular combination of masks is that
target recognition becomes optimal when the second mask actu-
ally precedes the sequence (thus, M2-T-M1) without necessarily
affecting Mi's visibility (reported in Breitmeyer 1984, chapter 9).
The effect of the second mask that precedes the sequence cannot
be satisfactorily explained by a model of Cartesian materialism
specifying immediate activation of consciousness awareness; the
MD model, with concurrent activation and relative timing flex-
ibility, provides a much better explanation for this sequence of
double masking.
But given that concurrent activity in different parts of the brain
is a viable and more accurate description of psychological process-
ing, what an analogy of multiple drafts leaves unresolved is the
nature of the relationship between different drafts. Other masking
studies provide evidence that implicit processing may involve
multiple semantic versions prior to the selected conscious one, as
work with polysemous words (Marcel 1980) shows, for example.
This raises questions of the relationship of any one draft to all other
current versions, to follow the drafting analogy more exactly, to the
state of consciousness. Yet another query concerns the extent to
which the latest draft is separable from any earlier versions, given
the implication that the last drafting is the one that matters for
conscious awareness. This in turn raises questions about the status
of any earlier version which- may, or may not, influence later
versions depending on subsequent events. A plausible working
hypothesis in answer to such queries is to suggest that dynamic,
nonlinear transformations continuously update the current ver-
sion and, as a byproduct, cause consciousness. This proposal leaves
unanswered questions about the status of all previous, superseded
versions, if they exist at all, in relation to consciousness, but it also
has the effect of relegating their status to a relatively background
category of residual brain activity.
A further query concerns how the inferred oneness of phenom-
enal perception is achieved. The short answer is that the oneness is
an illusion; consciousness is a series of snatches, or "more carefully
handled" catches of available information, which coalesce because
the "environment" (external or internal) provides a relatively
stable, contextual entity (see Harnad on Approximation and
context-driven convergence, 1987, p. 538).
But this suggestion does not address the deeper question of
whether consciousness itself plays any active role in the redrafting
process (see Sellen & Norman 1992). Although immediately
acknowledging the appropriate cautionary provisos for the regres-
sive error that such a notion invites, there remains the question of
the source of "editorial' control in the multiple drafts analogy. To
rephrase the question, in the MD model, how is the intentional
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1995) 18:4
809

Response/Continuing Commentary
initiative recruited to provide the control that is manifest in, say,
the skilled performance of the concert pianist who can simul-
taneously juxtapose two quite different rhythmical patterns with
their appropriate timing and accentuation to create a unique
qualitative interpretation (Shaffer 1985)?
To attempt to explain how such creative unity emerges from
disparate diversity, two concepts are briefly considered. The first is
that of feedback loops across levels and between perceptual-action
operations. The second requires a connectionist network that
allows interaction between conceptually driven and data-driven
operations across all levels; this system would accommodate such a
top-down function as editorial control. D&K speak of "the pro-
cesses of editorial revision . . . to the continued demand of cogni-
tive control" (p. 200) and the multiple drafts model lays stress on
the processes of editorial revision by means of the continual
updating of data-driven processes, thus avoiding the dangers of a
central editor. But this description is only partially satisfactory
because it seems to leave the source of the conceptually driven
initiatives obscure in the analogy of multiple drafts (the complete
answer perhaps lies outside the scope of their original target
article in preference for the fuller explication set out in Dennett
1991).
Finally, it is necessary, in order to relate to the timing of events
in consciousness, to consider the update frequency for attentional
(i.e., conscious) revision. The assumption of different levels re-
quires that this frequency vary across levels, with lower-level data-
driven operations automatically updating more frequently than
upper levels. Perception with editorial revision will thus merge
imperceptibly into the processes of memory so that if the percep-
tual update is still further extended to include memory as an
extension of perceptual revision, then its update frequency could
become open-ended.
Although an M D model accounts for variability and the redraft-
ing of space and time sequences, the frequency specification of the
semantic update at an optimal operational level does require
specification. How does one otherwise explain the surprise, even
consternation, of Grey Walters (1963) subjects at the carousel's
apparent anticipation of their intention? So, within the constraints
of normal operational processing, what might this interval be?
Evidence from various sources such as fixation times in reading
(see Rayner 1983) or the effects of delayed auditory feedback and
attention (Salter 1970) points to an average "editorial" period
approximating to 200-250 milliseconds in the first instance, de-
pending on the operator and the cognitive task involved. But the
amount of information that can be successfully reviewed within
this time period also depends directly on the amount of learning
experience with the relevant materials (Salter 1973), which in
itself encompasses the idea of interpretative levels of processing. A
200 msec time estimate for an optimal level of brain processing
neither excludes slower decisions or revisions nor the possibility
that operations of attentional processing can be speeded by giving
the initiating information priority in channeling, even though this
can only be done at the cost of relinquishing more holistic
perception and the deeper understanding that provides the rich-
ness to conscious existence.
D&K's useful application of multiple drafts to questions of
timing, displacing a Cartesian theatre of the mind, is itself timely
and appropriate. Their contention is valid that a "central stage"
analogy of consciousness is still widespread, and their target article
helps to dispell its pernicious effects on our thinking about
consciousness.
Authors' Response
Multiple drafts: An eternal golden braid?
Daniel Dennett and Marcel Kinsbourne
Center for Cognitive Studies, Tufts University, Medford, MA 02155.
ddennett@diamond.tufts.edu
Abstract: Glicksohn and Salter both raise good questions that
force us to clarify our position. We agree with much of their
commentary, with a few caveats. Glicksohn wrongly assumes that
later drafts must be "more advanced" and Salter speaks of "recruit-
ment into consciousness," which invites (but does not require) a
Cartesian interpretation. Their suggestions about the time course
of "editorial" revision of the multiple drafts and the possibility of
restoration of the information in abandoned drafts are possible
extensions of the Multiple Drafts Model.
We have learned that the issues we raised are very difficult
to think about clearly, and what "works" for one thinker falls
flat for another and leads yet another astray. So it is
particularly useful to get these reexpressions of points we
have tried to make. Both commentaries help by proposing
further details for the Multiple Drafts Model, and by asking
good questions. They either directly clarify, or force us to
clarify, our own account. They also both demonstrate how
hard it is for even sympathetic commentators always to
avoid the very habits of thought the Multiple Drafts Model
was designed to combat. While acknowledging and expand-
ing on their positive contributions, we must sound a few
relatively minor alarms.
Glicksohn assumes that later drafts are "more ad-
vanced," but this flirts with the pervasive mythology of the
trip to the summit of consciousness, "advancing" all the way.
At any time, we may suppose, there are just as many drafts
that are, as it were, over-the-hill and degenerating. Better
yet: There is no nonarbitrary way to identify a summit - a
place where the "most advanced" drafts pass by for inspec-
tion.
The main thrust of Multiple Drafts is well captured by
Salter in his penultimate paragraph. Enough information
may often be available to fuel more than one version of
reality. Then drafts compete in Pandemonium-like rivalry
(Dennett 1991), and the rivalry is resolved in favor of one
over the rest (the one that "makes most ecological sense") -
but not for good. The competition is never-ending. There is
no definitive or archival draft. As Salter remarks, update
frequency, great in the early stages, declines as perception
recedes into memory. Reinterpretation in memory may
continue indefinitely—is this perhaps Hofstadter's (1979)
"eternal golden braid?" - depending on the contextual
(cuing) conditions that from time to time arise.
As Glicksohn observes, percepts do not instantaneously
arise in the mind in their full richness. Not only micro-
genesis, but any perceptual theory would acknowledge this,
and would posit intermediary ("incomplete") stages or
representations that precede in rapid succession the (defin-
itive?) conscious percept. Microgenetic theory differs from
current information processing stage theories in that it
characterizes this progression as gradual differentiation (of
initially global percepts) rather than stepwise integration
(of fragmentary sense data). Glicksohn and Salter both
wonder what might be the fate of preliminary stages
810
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1995) 18:4

Response/Continuing Commentary
(drafts). Once superseded, could they be recovered? As
Salter contends, we "relegate their status to a relatively
background category of residual brain activity." That makes
them poor candidates for episodic remembering, but leaves
them the potential to exert "unconscious" priming effects.
But before being superseded, Glicksohn asks, could a draft
that is customarily preconscious under extreme circum-
stances be experienced? After all, as Salter points out, a
draft can be meaningful although preconscious. Glicksohn
raises the interesting possibilities that "contemplation"
could simulate such a lesion effect and that hypnotic
regression might reinstate in awareness a draft that long ago
faded into oblivion. A radically altered context might so
powerfully bias the competition between drafts that a new
winner takes all.
The Multiple Drafts Model should not be taken to rule
out these possibilities. We suggest, for instance, that if a
transformation from draft to draft is slowed down by
pathology, then before it is revised the earlier draft might
persist long enough to enter into the patterned activity that
underlies current experience (Kinsbourne 1988).
In spite of these useful clarifications, both commentators
exhibit lapses into Cartesian thinking, or at least ominously
Cartesian ways of expressing themselves. There does not
exist, to use Salter s words, a process such as "recruitment
of consciousness" (into what?), nor any place where the
"vehicles arrival" is recognized (by whom?). As both com-
mentators acknowledge in other contexts, no central expe-
riencer confers a durable stamp of approval on any particu-
lar draft.
Salter asks, "what is the source of editorial control"? We
consider the "editing" to be accomplished by top-down
feedback from circuitry that embodies constraints garnered
from experience, expectancy, and context. The editing is
not an exogenous act of supervision, but part of the self-
organizing functioning of the network, at the same level as
the circuitry that conveys information bottom-up.
Salter suggests an average "editorial" period of about
200 msec. Perhaps this is about as long as a representation
can be modified before it has been around long enough to
be incorporated into consciousnesss dominant focus?
(Kinsbourne 1994). An event that is anticipated might more
summarily pass through the editing process than an ambig-
uous one. Like Salter, we avoid the trap of treating editing
time as a constant (the perceptual moment) and thereby
conserve the flexibility of the Multiple Drafts Model.
References
Breitmeyer, B. C. (1984) Visual masking. Clarendon Press. [DS]
Brown, G. P. (1977) A model for the levels of concentrative meditation.
International Journal of Clinical and Exjwrimental Hypnosis 25:236-
73. [JG1
Cheesman, J. & Merikle, P. M. (1985) Word recognition and consciousness. In:
Reading research: Advance in theory and practice. Vol. 5, D. Besner, T. G.
Waller & G. E. MacKinnon, eds. 
[DS]
Deikman, A. (1977) Bimodal consciousness and the mystic experience. In:
Symposium on consd(ntsness, P. R. Lee et al., eds. Penguin. 
[JG]
Dennett, D. C. (1991) Consciousness explained. Little, Brown. 
[rDCD, DS]
Dennett, D. C. & Kinsbourne, M. (1992) Time and the observer: The where and
when of consciousness in the brain. Behavioral and Brain Sciences 15:183-
247. [JG, DS]
Flavell, J. H. & Draguns, J. (1957) A microgenetic approach to preception and
thought. Psychological Bulletin 54:197-217. 
[JG]
Glicksohn, J. (1987) Hypnotic behaviour revisted: A trait-context interaction.
Behavioral and Brain Sciences 10:774-75. [JG]
Goodblatt, C. & Glicksohn, J. (1989-90) The poetics of meditation: Whitman's
meditative catalog. Imagination, Cognition and Personality 9:75-86. 
[JG]
Grey Walter, W. (1963) Presentation to the Ostler Society, Oxford University,
Oxford, England. 
[DS]
Hamad, S. (1987) Category induction and representation. In: Categorical
percefMon: The groundwork of cognition, S. Hamad, ed. Cambridge
University Press. 
[DS]
Hofstader, D. R. (1979) Godel, Esclier, Bach: An eternal golden braid. Basic
Books. 
[rDCD]
Holender, D. (1986) Semantic activation without conscious identification in
dichotic listening, parafoveal vision, and visual masking. A survey and
appraisal. Behavioral and Brain Science 9:1-23. 
[DS]
Kinsbourne, M. (1988) Integrated field theory of consciousness. In:
Consciousness in contemporary science, A. J. Marcel fit E. Bisiach, eds.
Clarendon Press. 
[rDCD]
Kinsboume, M. (1994) Models of consciousness: Serial or parallel in the brain.
In: The Cognitive Neurosciences, M. S. Gazzaniga, ed. MIT Press. 
[rDCD]
Langer, J. (1970) Werner's comparative organismic theory. In: Carmichael's
manual of child psychology, Vol. 1, P. H. Mussen, ed. Wiley. [JG]
Labet, B. (1985) Unconscious cerebral initiative and the role of conscious will in
voluntary action. Behavioral and Brain Sciences 8: 529-66. 
[DS]
Marcel, A. J. (1980) Conscious and preconscious recognition of polysemous
words: Locating the selective efforts of prior verbid context. In Attention
and Performance VIII, R. S. Nickerson, ed. Erlbaum. 
[DS]
Nash, M. (1987) What, if anything, is regressed about hypnotic age regression? A
review of the empirical literature. Psychological Bulletin 102:42-52. 
|JG]
Penrose, R. (1989) The emperor's new mind. Oxford University Press. 
[DS]
Piaget, J. (1970) Piaget's theory. In: Carmiehael's manual of child psychology, Vol.
lm P. H. Mussen, ed. Wiley. [JG]
Pinard, A. & Laurendeau, M. (1969) "Stage' in Piaget's cognitive-developmental
theory: Exegesis of a concept. \n:Studies in cognitive development: Essays in
honor of Jean Piaget, D. Elkind & J. H. Flavell. eds.. Oxford University
Press. 
[JG]
Kayner, R. (1983) Eye movements in reading. Academic Press. 
[DS]
Salter, D. (1970) Delays nnd decisions in language. Ph.D. thesis, University of
Sheffield, Sheffield, England.
(1973) Shadowing at one and at two ears. Quarterly Journal of Experitnental
Psychology 25:549-56. 
[DS]
(1989) Voluntary process and the readiness potential: asking the right
questions. Behavioral and Brain Sciences 12:181-2. 
[DS]
Sellen, A. J. & Norman, D. A. (1992) The psychology of slips. In: Experimental
slips and human error, B.J. Barr, ed. Plenum Books. 
[DS]
Shatter, D. L., McAndrews, M. P. & Moscovitch, M. (1988) Access to
consciousness: dissociations between implicit and explicit knowledge in
neuropsychological syndrome. In: Thought without language, L. Weiskrantz,
ed. Clarendon Press. 
[DS]
Shaffer, H. (1985) Performances of Chopin, Bach and Bartok: Studies in motor
programming. Cognitive Psychology 13:327-76. 
[DS]
Siegler, R. S. & Crowley, K. (1991) The microgenetic method: A direct means
for studying cognitive development. American Psychologist 46:606-
20. 
[JG]
Smith, G. (1957) Visual perception: An event over time. Psychological Review
66:304-13. 
[JG]
Spanos, N. P. (1986) Hypnotic behavior: A social-psychological interpretation of
amnesia, analgesia, and "trance logic." Behavioral and Brain Sciences 9:449-
466. 
[JG]
Werner, H. (1948) Comparative psychology of mental development. International
Universities Press. 
[JG]
(1956) Microgenesis and aphasia. In: Developmental processes: Heinz Werner's
selected writings, Vol. 2, S. S. Barten & M. B. Franklin, eds. International
Universities Press 
[JG]
(1957) The concept of development from a comparative and organismic point
of view. In: Developmental processes: Heinz Werner's selected writings. Vol.
1, S. S. Barten & M. B. Franklin, eds. International Universities
Press 
[JG]
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1995) 18:4
811

New Editorial Office Address
The BBS Editorial Office has moved to Southampton, United Kingdom.
Please address all BBS correspondence to:
Behavioral and Brain Sciences
Department of Psychology
University of Southampton
Southampton SO171BJ
United Kingdom
New Instructions for Authors and Commentators
(1) All Commentaries and Responses will, like Target Articles, have
abstracts (~60 words). This is to ensure full coverage by abstracting
services.
(2) In addition to the hard copies of all submissions, we will also require
an electronic version, either by email or on disk. This is to prepare the
way for electronic processing of all submissions. Disks should be in
Word™ or WordPerfect™ for Macintosh or IBM-compatible format.
Target articles should be sent to the new BBS address in Southampton listed
above.
Commentaries and Responses should be sent to:
Behavioral and Brain Sciences
Cambridge University Press
Journals Department
40 West 20th Street
New York, NY 10011^211
email: bbs@cup.org
BBS Email Address
bbs@ecs.soton.ac.uk
BBS Associates: Those of you who have not done so are asked to send us
your email address so you may receive electronic Calls for Commentators.

