may particularly beneﬁt from systematically
addressing these issues. For instance,
subjects may be able to evaluate the mean
of a group of elements to detect whether
relevant information is present, but do they
maintain a precise enough representation
of the variability of the group to conduct
valid discriminations? What about identify-
ing the absolute mean or variance of an
ensemble statistic? If observers can do
these tasks in the periphery, would such
performance also be reﬂected in their sub-
jective percepts? Alternatively, the degree
of unconscious processing involved might
differ across tasks.
One particularly intriguing idea is that there
may be a canonical decision type that one
tends to make in the periphery (i.e., a
decision observers tend to make as a
default) during navigation of the world out-
side the laboratory. Intuitively, for the
periphery such decisions may be relatively
coarse grained and driven by summary
statistics. 
Interestingly, 
it 
has 
been
reported that subjective conﬁdence rat-
ings in different tasks may inﬂuence each
other 
[8], 
so 
our 
performance 
in
this canonical decision may inﬂuence sub-
jective perception in other decisions as
well.
Concluding Remarks
Peripheral vision suffers in terms of proc-
essing sensitivity and can provide only a
noisy representation of the visual surround
[9]. Aggregating over these noisy esti-
mates can provide an accurate ‘gist’ of
the world that contributes to performance
in a given task. However, higher-order,
metacognitive processes might be neces-
sary to produce subjective reports that are
more reliable indicators of conscious
experience [10]. Therefore, we posit that
by using tools that quantify both task per-
formance and metacognitive awareness,
as well as considering how ‘ﬁne-grained’
the decisions are in experiments, this ﬁeld
will excel in generating precise hypotheses
and gathering relevant data to more fully
explain the true phenomenology of the
visual periphery.
1Department of Psychology, University of California, Los
Angeles, 1285 Franz Hall, Box 951563, Los Angeles, CA
90095-1563, USA
2Brain Research Institute, 695 Charles E. Young Drive
South, Los Angeles, CA 90095, USA
*Correspondence: odegaard.brian@gmail.com
(B. Odegaard).
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.tics.2016.06.005
References
1. 
Cohen, M.A. et al. (2016) What is the bandwidth of per-
ceptual experience? Trends Cogn. Sci. 20, 324–335
2. 
Green, D.M. and Swets, J.A. (1966) Signal Detection The-
ory and Psychophysics, Wiley
3. 
Maniscalco, B. and Lau, H. (2012) A signal detection
theoretic approach for estimating metacognitive sensi-
tivity from conﬁdence ratings. Conscious. Cogn. 21,
422–430
4. 
Solovey, G. et al. (2015) A decisional account of subjective
inﬂation of visual perception at the periphery. Atten. Per-
cept. Psychophys. 77, 258–271
5. 
Rahnev, D. et al. (2011) Attention induces conservative
subjective biases in visual perception. Nat. Neurosci. 14,
1513–1515
6. 
Fleming, S.M. and Lau, H.C. (2014) How to measure meta-
cognition. Front. Hum. Neurosci. 8, 443
7. 
Lee, D.K. et al. (1999) Attention activates winner-take-all
competition among visual ﬁlters. Nat. Neurosci. 2,
375–381
8. 
Rahnev, D. et al. (2015) Conﬁdence leak in perceptual
decision making. Psychol. Sci. 26, 1664–1680
9. 
Azzopardi, P. and Cowey, A. (1993) Preferential represen-
tation of the fovea in the primary visual cortex. Nature 361,
719–721
10. Lau, H. and Rosenthal, D. (2011) Empirical support for
higher-order theories of conscious awareness. Trends
Cogn. Sci. 15, 365–373
Letter Response
Ensemble
Perception,
Summary Statistics,
and Perceptual
Awareness:
A Response
Michael A. Cohen,1,*
Daniel C. Dennett,2 and
Nancy Kanwisher1
The extent to which perception is rich or
sparse is a foundational issue in con-
sciousness studies. According to those
who claim that perception is rich, observ-
ers are aware of more information than
they can attend to or remember [1].
Meanwhile, those who believe perception
is sparse directly link awareness to the
ﬁnite capacities of attention and working
memory [2–4]. However, this view is often
criticized since these limited mechanisms
are thought to be unable to account for the
impression of a rich, detailed perceptual
experience that most observers have [5].
In our recent article [6], we argued that this
criticism is misguided and that these sup-
posedly limited cognitive mechanisms can
support a much richer perceptual experi-
ence than is often claimed. By represent-
ing information as visual ensembles and
summary statistics [7], observers are able
to perceive far more than just a few items
at a given time. Summary statistics give
observers access to some information
about the entire scene in the form of an
ensemble 
percept. 
We 
claimed 
that
ensembles and summary statistics explain
the intuitive sense of a rich perceptual
experience without having to rely on a
new type of conscious experience, namely
phenomenal consciousness [1]. Put more
simply, the sparse view is not so sparse
after all.
In response to our article, McClelland and
Bayne [8] suggest that there are two alter-
nate views of the data we described: a
deﬂationary view and an overﬂow view.
According to the deﬂationary view, ensem-
ble representations are not a part of
phenomenology at all and only affect post-
perceptual judgments. While this is a logical
possibility, it is unclear what reason there is
to believe that this is the case. More
broadly, what empirical evidence could
there be to support this claim? If partici-
pants can attend to, remember, openly talk
about, and even conﬁrm their experience of
an ensemble percept, what reason is there
to believe that such representations are not
consciously experienced?
McClelland and Bayne also put forth an
overﬂow view of ensemble representa-
tions in which observers are phenomenally
aware of the individual items that make up
an ensemble but are simply unable to
store those individual items in memory.
Trends in Cognitive Sciences, September 2016, Vol. 20, No. 9 
643

Again, while this is a logical possibility, it is
unclear how to empirically verify that such
ﬂeeting 
perceptual 
experiences 
exist.
What evidence could conﬁrm that observ-
ers consciously experience information
that is not ever attended to, remembered,
or used to make any types of decisions
[9]? McClelland and Bayne suggest that
further development of no-report para-
digms might one day empirically verify
the idea of perceptual overﬂow [10]. While
we do not want to discourage the devel-
opment of new methods and paradigms,
it is unclear how it will be possible to verify
or probe the contents of conscious expe-
rience when observers’ reports are not
considered.
Instead, we are largely in agreement with
Odegaard and Lau [11] who argue that
what is needed is the generation of precise
hypotheses for which we can then gather
the relevant data. Overall, we believe
researchers working towards understand-
ing consciousness should focus on scien-
tiﬁcally tractable questions for which there
are experimental paradigms that can con-
ﬁrm or reject a particular hypothesis. In this
case, we believe there are many outstand-
ing issues regarding the perception of
ensembles and summary statistics that
can shed light on the nature and quality
of perceptual experience.
1Department of Brain and Cognitive Sciences, McGovern
Institute for Brain Research, Massachusetts Institute of
Technology, Cambridge, MA, USA
2Center for Cognitive Studies, Department of Philosophy,
Tufts University, Medford, MA, USA
*Correspondence: michaelthecohen@gmail.com
(M.A. Cohen).
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.tics.2016.06.007
References
1. 
Block, N. (2011) Perceptual consciousness overﬂows cog-
nitive access. Trends Cogn. Sci. 15, 567–575
2. 
Cohen, M.A. et al. (2012) The attentional requirements of
consciousness. Trends Cogn. Sci. 16, 411–417
3. 
Baars, B. (1989) A Cognitive Theory of Consciousness,
Cambridge University Press
4. 
Dehaene, S. (2014) Consciousness and the Brain, Viking
Press
5. 
Lamme, V. (2010) How neuroscience will change our view
on consciousness. Cogn. Neurosci. 1, 204–220
6. 
Cohen, M.A. et al. (2016) What is the bandwidth of per-
ceptual experience? Trends Cogn. Sci. 20, 324–335
7. 
Whitney, D. et al. (2014) From textures to crowds: multiple
levels of summary statistical perception. In The New Visual
Neurosciences (Wener, J.S. and Chalupa, L.M., eds), pp.
695–710, MIT Press
8. 
McClelland, T. and Bayne, T. (2016) Ensemble coding and
two conceptions of perceptual sparsity. Trends Cogn. Sci
20, 641–642
9. 
Cohen, M.A. and Dennett, D.C. (2011) Consciousness
cannot be separated from function. Trends Cogn. Sci.
15, 358–364
10. Tsuchiya, N. et al. (2015) No-report paradigms: extracting
the true neural correlates of consciousness. Trends Cogn.
Sci. 19, 757–790
11. Odegaard, B. and Lau, H. (2016) Methodological consid-
erations to strengthen studies of peripheral vision. Trends
Cogn. Sci 20, 642–643
Spotlight
The Beneﬁts and
Costs of a Rose-
Colored Hindsight
Andreas Kappes1 and
M.J. Crockett1,*
Self-serving biases lead people to
see themselves and their future
through 
rose-colored 
glasses.
New research by Kouchaki and
Gino suggests this rosy view also
extends backwards: memories of
unethical behavior are less vivid
than memories of good deeds. This
so-called ‘unethical amnesia’ has
many individual beneﬁts, but also
carries social costs.
‘A moral being is one who is capable of
reﬂecting on his past actions and their
motives–of approving of some and disap-
proving of others’ (Charles Darwin, The
Descent of Man, and Selection in Relation
to Sex)
Charles Darwin argued that a deﬁning fea-
ture of human morality is an ability to
reﬂect upon past misdeeds [1]. However,
recent work by Kouchaki and Gino [2]
questions this ability. In nine studies, par-
ticipants were asked to either remember
events in which they cheated, imagine
possible events in which they could have
cheated, or were given the opportunity to
actually cheat. A few days later, they were
asked to recall the details of these events.
In each of the studies, participants who
cheated (or imagined cheating) recalled
the events less vividly compared to par-
ticipants who did not cheat. This so-called
‘unethical 
amnesia’ 
only 
affected the
experience of recollecting one's own
immoral actions; people reported remem-
bering vividly others’ unethical behavior,
as well as personal events that were
unpleasant but not immoral. Unethical
amnesia had clear beneﬁts for dishonest
participants, relieving the emotional dis-
comfort spurred by their immoral actions.
However, unethical amnesia also had
social costs: the less vividly and clearly
participants perceived their unethical past,
the more they cheated again later. The
ﬁndings are consistent with the idea that
people 
seek 
to 
balance 
self-interest
against maintaining a positive self-con-
cept [3]. Unethical amnesia allows people
to behave selﬁshly while preserving a
moral self-image.
What cognitive mechanisms might give
rise to unethical amnesia? The fact that
it was observed several days after cheat-
ing, but not immediately after, implicates
biased retrieval rather than biased encod-
ing. Research on motivated forgetting
shows that suppression of unwanted
memories during retrieval interferes with
long-term retention of the undesirable
memory traces [4]. This effect is cumula-
tive, 
such 
that 
the 
more 
times 
an
unwanted memory is suppressed, the less
likely it will be remembered. As a result,
people might selectively forget the more
unﬂattering chapters of their past. Such
retrospective editing of memories in the
service of a positive self-image in some
ways resembles prospective editing of
beliefs, which leads to unrealistic optimism
[5]. The learning process here is biased in
a way that causes people to integrate good
news but neglect bad news when updat-
ing their beliefs. The studies by Kouchaki
and Gino imply that self-enhancing biases
can operate retrospectively as well as
644 
Trends in Cognitive Sciences, September 2016, Vol. 20, No. 9

