BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1988) 11, 233-273
Printed in the United States of America
Tactical deception in primates
A. Whiten and R. W. Byrne
Psychological Laboratory, University of St. Andrews, St. Andrews, Fife
KY16 9JU, Scotland
Abstract: Tactical deception occurs when an individual is able to use an "honest" act from his normal repertoire in a different context
to mislead familiar individuals. Although primates have a reputation for social skill, most primate groups are so intimate that any
deception is likely to be subtle and infrequent. Published records are sparse and often anecdotal. We have solicited new records from
many primatologists and searched for repeating patterns. This has revealed several different forms of deceptive tactic, which we
classify in terms of the function they perform. For each class, we sketch the features of another individual's state of mind that an
individual acting with deceptive intent must be able to represent, thus acting as a "natural psychologist." Our analysis will sharpen
attention to apparent taxonomic differences. Before these findings can be generalized, however, behavioral scientists must agree on
some fundamental methodological and theoretical questions in the study of the evolution of social cognition.
Keywords: animal cognition; deception; evolution; intentionality; manipulation; mind; primates; representation; scientific method;
social intelligence
1. The significance of tactical deception
Deception is currently a topic of significant theoretical
interest in the behavioral sciences (Mitchell & Thompson
1986a; Trivers 1985). Such attention follows in the wake of
the prediction that communication should be molded by
natural selection so as to manipulate other individuals,
rather than to serve the function traditionally attributed
to it, of efficiently transmitting honest information
(Dawkins & Krebs 1978). Thus, although the subject of
deception may once have appeared a narrow one, its
nature and distribution within the animal kingdom has
now shifted to center stage in our attempts to understand
social evolution. For those who are concerned not only
with social evolution but with the evolution of mind,
there are further implications of deceptive behavior to
consider; notably, the utility of a capacity for "mind-
reading" in any society where overt behavior belies
deceptive intentions (Humphrey 1983; Krebs & Dawkins
1984).
The flexibility of response allowed by such a capacity is
by no means characteristic of all deceptive phenomena.
This is perhaps clearest in the best-known classes of
natural deception - bodily camouflage and mimicry
(Wickler 1968), where a display borrowed from another
species or part of the environment becomes a permanent
fixture. Even if we turn from morphological deception,
which usually occurs between different species, to behav-
ioral deception within a species, we find that the com-
monest cases reported are those where some individuals
of one sex exhibit a fixed mimicry of the behavior of the
other (e.g., Thornhill 1979; review in Weldon & Burg-
hardt 1984). It was to contrast this with the flexibility of
the deceptions we observed in baboons that we intro-
duced the term "tactical deception" (Byrne & Whiten
1985). We defined the behaviors of interest as "acts from
the normal repertoire of an individual, used at low fre-
quency and in contexts different from those in which it
uses the high frequency (honest) version of the act, such
that another familiar individual is likely to misinterpret
what the acts signify, to the advantage of the actor" (p.
672).
"Tactical" thus refers to the capacity to shift one part of
the behavioral repertoire flexibly into a deceptive role,
according to the context. One example we gave involved a
baboon suddenly adopting the alert posture and horizon
watching normally shown when an important entity like a
neighboring group or predator has been spotted, al-
though in this case no such entity existed. The baboon
was being chased aggressively by another, who stopped
to look for the focus of interest and as a result never
resumed the chase.
We specified "familiar individuals" to emphasize that
(again by contrast with most of the inter- and intraspecies
cases already mentioned above) such acts are taking place
in a community of mutually recognizable individuals
which places severe constraints on the exercise of decep-
tive behavior (Cheney & Seyfarth 1985b; van Rhijn &
Vodegel 1980). "Crying wolf is likely to be recognized as
such if repeated too often with the same dupe, and there
may be other ramifications of such detection, such as the
loss of help from others, which can be so important in
primate society (e.g., Datta 1983; Nishida 1983; de Waal
1986a).
Primates might be thought to be well established as
exponents of tactical deception, but their reputation for
this particular type of social expertise has largely been
promoted by just two representatives of the order: by
chimpanzees, and by people who have studied them.
This is not a flippant remark, because members of the
latter group - such as Kohler (1925), van Lawick-Goodall
(1971; 1986), Menzel (1974), Woodruff and Premack
(1979), and de Waal (1982) - appear to share a common
scientific attitude, perhaps best described as a lack of
© 1988 Cambridge University Press 
0140-525X188 $5.00+ .00
233

Whiten & Byrne: Primate deception
sympathy with "mindless" behaviorism, which the skep-
tic might suggest is at the root of chimpanzees' notoriety.
Does chimpanzee research attract scientists who are keen
to find "cleverness," or are chimpanzees really special?
We shall return to this question later, but we introduce
it here to emphasize that a situation has developed in
which it is not unusual for chimpanzee deception to be
discussed in the literature, whereas, in our experience,
deception in other primates is seriously discussed infor-
mally by primatologists but has seldom found its way into
the respectability of scientific publications. In our earlier
paper (Byrne & Whiten 1985) we suggested that this
might be because deception of familiar individuals living
in the intimacy of a primate group is likely to be subtle
and restricted to relatively rare occurrences (see Moyni-
han 1982 and Quiatt 1984 for further analysis of such
dynamics). Any one researcher thus collects only anec-
dotal data and is coy about trying to publish these. How
can science come to grips with such phenomena?
Here we present one approach. Together with the
definition of tactical deception given above, we have
published our own records, following this with a ques-
tionnaire circulated to 115 primatologists selected mainly
from membership lists of the International Primatological
Society. We will not rehearse here the details of the
questions asked (see Whiten & Byrne 1986) because for
present purposes it is sufficient to know that we asked for
records of behavior matching our definition and exam-
ples. Our intent was not to collect a "representative
primate sample," for although this would be desirable it is
not possible given the current state of observational
opportunities across the primate order. Rather, we
wished to explore the possibility that a small corpus of
material from one study, when pooled with that from
others, might start to reveal some overall primate
pattern.
In Section 2 we describe the resulting picture of tactical
deception in primates, discussing as appropriate the
evidence required for ascription of deception in the first
place, and evidence that actors are representing psycho-
logical attributes of other individuals involved. In Section
3 we consider the nature of the differences between
primate species in the repertoire of deceptive action, the
role of creative intelligence in producing such behavior,
and how we should study such phenomena in the future.
2. The range and scope of tactical deception in
primates
2.1. Admissibility of evidence
We can consider whether a proffered example is truly a
case of deception from the point of view of either the actor
or the recipient. If one individual is deceived by the
behavior of another it does not necessarily follow that the
actor's behavior was intended to achieve this, or that the
deceptive behavior serves some biological function; an
individual may be deceived, for example, by accident. To
say that the behavior is deceptive from the actor's point of
view will, however, imply that its "purpose" (either in the
sense of its functional design, or its goal or intention) is to
deceive (Thompson 1986).
We have received examples which are dubious on
either count - that the behavior did not have a deceptive
purpose, or that nobody was actually deceived - but we
have included in the corpus all 75 records submitted as
candidate instances of tactical deception. The aim is
simply to throw the net widely and open-mindedly to
begin with, if only to generate a discussion of the ambigu-
ities that need to be resolved in order to build more
refined databases in the future. For the moment, how-
ever, we will exclude cross-species deceptions that have
long been known to occur in the artificial conditions of
captivity (Hediger 1950); such data raise special problems
of interpretation. On the other hand, we have included
the few published records we have discovered that are
interpreted by authors as instances of deception.
2.2. The players
There are only a limited number of "parts" that primates
play in these sorts of social interaction. We find it helpful
to label some of these. All examples necessarily involve at
least an actor (the AGENT) whose behavior we are classify-
ing, and at least one individual (the TARGET) who poses
the problem that the AGENT'S behavior appears designed
to deal with. Things are more complicated, however,
because another individual may be involved. The DUPE is
the individual deceived by the AGENT, and all the exam-
ples in this article naturally include a DUPE; however, in
some triadic interactions we shall see that the DUPE is not
necessarily the TARGET; rather, the DUPE acts as a social
TOOL whereby the AGENT manipulates the behavior of
the TARGET. Finally, there is the case where a FALL GUY is
the victim of the AGENT'S manipulation of the TARGET.
2.3. Classifying the players' performances: A functional
taxonomy
To understand what is happening in the variety of in-
stances which make up our corpus of material, some form
of classification is necessary. It will always be possible to
classify such data in a number of ways (see Miles 1986;
Mitchell 1986; Russow 1986; de Waal 1986a). We offer
here a classification based on the functional consequences
of the deceptive act concerned - what the AGENT can
achieve by influencing the psychology and behavior of the
TARGET and others. Thirteen subclasses of deception
distinguished in this way are grouped within the five
major functional classes of concealment, distraction,
creating an image, manipulation of target using social
tool, and deflection of target to fall guy. Each example
quoted in illustration is annotated with author, species,
and its reference number in the complete catalogue of
records collated up to 1985 (Whiten & Byrne 1986).
2.4. Classifying states of mind: A psychological
taxonomy
A functional classification, since it refers only to the
consequences of the AGENT'S behavior, says nothing in
itself about the AGENT'S psychology. Many of the records
encourage us to believe in the possibility of a more
revealing taxonomy, however, one that distinguishes
differences in the psychological demands on the AGENT;
in particular, capacities for "mind-reading." We have
taken the opportunity to assess such capacities where the
data justify it, but to attempt a complete taxonomy of
234
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1988) 11:2

Whiten & Byrne: Primate deception
deception that reflects the true mental complexity in-
volved would be rash given only the data currently
available.
The evidence which allows us to make distinctions on
the basis of mind reading is patchy but merits public
scrutiny and discussion because of its significance for our
understanding of the nature of primate cognition. To this
end, we focus on what must be represented in the brain of
the AGENT about the states of other individuals - states for
which psychological, or what Dennett (1983) called
"mentalistic," terms are appropriate descriptors. Two of
the concepts used here require further explanation.
2.4.1. Representation. By "representation" we mean sim-
ply a neurally coded counterpart of some aspect of the
world. We shall not be concerned here with how the
social world is coded in the brain so much as with what is
represented: What entities are discriminated during the
classification and decision processes of primate social
cognition?
The concept of representation is of course central to
artificial intelligence (AI), and it has been argued that one
of the main benefits of AI to behavioral scientists lies in an
enforced precision of expression in models of psychologi-
cal processes (Boden 1977). This and other links between
AI and the study of human cognition have accumulated so
fast that a hybrid discipline of cognitive science is now
established (e.g., Anderson 1983; Pylyshyn 1984). Al-
though links with animal psychology are more tentative
and contentious (Dickinson 1980; Roitblat and commen-
taries 1982), framing hypotheses about primate social
cognition in terms of hypotheses about specific entities
represented in the AGENT is an important step in the
study of social intellect. The notion that the evolution of
primate intelligence can be explained as an adaptation for
handling the complexities of the social environment
(Chance & Mead 1953; Humphrey 1976; Jolly 1966) is an
exciting one and the focus of increasing attention in
primatology and related disciplines (Cheney & Seyfarth
1985a; Cheney et al. 1986; Byrne & Whiten 1988). How-
ever, much of the existing literature involves assertions
which are frankly woolly. We aim at a more explicit
approach to just where it gets us to consider primates as
"natural psychologists" (Humphrey 1983).
2.4.2. Psychological terms. To be of real interest as a
"psychologist," the primate must be representing not
merely the behavior of others, but phenomena which
merit psychological labels, such as what others "believe"
or "intend." We already began relying on such terms in
the functional classification described earlier, for it is
difficult to envisage any definition of deception which
does not entail some conception of the deceived indi-
vidual misinterpreting the behavior of the deceiver. We
are forced to use psychological terms such as "misin-
terpretation" to talk sensibly about the behavior of in-
terest. For example, the first major functional class,
concealment, requires the observer to decide that a
consequence of the AGENT'S behavior is that the TARGET
doesn't know where the concealed object is. But in a
psychological classification, the issue becomes whether
the AGENT, in addition to the observer, is representing
the possibility that the TARGET doesn't know the object's
location.
We want to argue that this does not imply an an-
thropomorphic approach, nor indeed any kind of subjec-
tive approach in which there is no room for objective
agreement between observers about the class to which
any particular instance of behavior belongs (see Silver-
man 1983). The worry among many behavioral scientists
[e.g., Skinner: "The Operational Analysis of Psychologi-
cal Terms" BBS 7(4) 1984] is of course that psychological
terms must refer to private mental states which are
beyond any objective study. But we would appeal here to
Wittgenstein (1953), who argued that a child, as an
apprentice language user, must gain an understanding of
a psychological term by noticing which aspects of behav-
ior are picked out publicly by the language-using commu-
nity as being relevant to that term. On this model of the
way in which psychological terms acquire meaning for us,
the attribution of mental states to others should not be
regarded as a subjective affair. If the language-learning
child, working from observable behavior, finds psycho-
logical terms both indispensable and unproblematic, it is
surely wise to assess their utility for scientists working
under a similar constraint.
One objection to this approach is that the implied close
correspondence between a behavioral description and a
psychological category appears to make the latter redun-
dant, and we seem to be drawn back to a mindless
behaviorism. Our reply is that a psychological represen-
tation is an economical one. A psychological term picks
out a limited set of relevant characteristics in a complex
array of behavior and context; these could be described in
nonpsychological terms, but only at much greater length
(Bennett 1978). Our argument about the human as scien-
tific psychologist applies also to the case of the primate as
psychologist.
First, psychological distinctions can be made by a
primate on the basis of observations of behavior. As
Bennett (1976) argues:
There can also be languageless beliefs about beliefs.
We human observers can get plenty of evidence as to
what animal B believed on various occasions, and can
establish and test theories which support predictions
about what he will believe on some further occasion;
and all our data for this consists in behavior of B's which
is perceptible by animal A as well. So A can have all the
epistemic intake that would be needed for beliefs about
B's beliefs, (p. 110)
Second, decision making is likely to be more efficient if
information processing (by the AGENT, about animal B)
proceeds up to the appropriate hierarchical level (Daw-
kins 1976), which in some cases will be the one corre-
sponding to the patterns of B's behavior and its context
which we distinguish and label with psychological lin-
guistic terms. To quote Bennett again (1978) commenting
on Premack and Woodruffs evidence (1978) that chim-
panzees can represent other individuals' states of mind:
"for Sarah to get from [behavioral] data to prediction by a
route which didn't attribute beliefs to the human actor
she would need an extremely complex inference, where-
as she could get there without undue complexity if along
the way she had hypotheses about the human's mental
states" (p. 559). Premack and Woodruff themselves con-
clude that "the ape could only be a mentalist . . . he is
not intelligent enough to be a behaviorist" (p. 526). To
illustrate the implications of this conceptual framework
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1988) 11:2
235

Whiten & Byrne: Primate deception
with a concrete example anticipating the data section
which follows, we propose that one monkey must be
representing another's attention if and only if, when faced
with extensive variations in the second monkey's eye,
head, and body movements, the one common factor to
which adjustment is made is the monkey's attentional
focus.
The way the resulting psychological classification
maps onto the functional one is that the form of any
representation is related to the goal the act in question is
designed to achieve. So, for example, where the AGENT
adjusts his behavior to attain the functional consequence
of concealing an object from a TARGET (in other words,
concealment is a goal for the AGENT), the AGENT must
represent the relevant psychological state of the TARGET
- that the object is concealed, from the viewpoint of the
TARGET. Accordingly, after giving the functional defini-
tion of each subclass followed by illustrative examples of
it, we discuss the further evidence required to demon-
strate the AGENT'S corresponding mental representation
of another individual's state of mind.
2.5. A taxonomy oi deception In primates
In what follows, each example is quoted together with its
index number in the complete catalogue (Whiten &
Byrne 1986). Undated records are responses to our
questionnaire.
2.5.1. Concealment (A). Here the AGENT'S behavior func-
tions to conceal something from the TARGET.
Hiding from view (Al). The function of this class of
behavior is to hide an object (or a part of the AGENT, or the
AGENT'S whole self) by screening it from the TARGET'S
view. In the case of this first subclass, we will be generous
with examples that also illustrate the psychological dis-
tinctions we are pursuing.
Example (No.26, Kummer, hamadryas baboons): The unit
was resting. An adult female spent 20 minutes in gradually
shifting in a seated position over a distance of about 2 metres
to a place behind a rock about 50 cm high where she began to
groom the subadult male follower of the unit - an interaction
often not tolerated by the adult male. As I was observing from
a cliff slightly above the unit, I could judge that the adult male
leader could, from his resting position, see the tail, back and
crown of the female's head, but not her front, arms and face;
the subadult male sat in a bent position while being groomed
and was also invisible to the leader. The leader could thus see
that she was present, but probably not that she groomed. The
only aspect that made me doubt that the arrangement was
accidental was the exceptionally slow, inch by inch shifting of
the female. This had in fact caused me to focus on her
behavior so long before she had reached the final position.
Example (No. 66, de Waal 1982, chimpanzees): Dandy and a
female were courting each other surreptitiously. Dandy be-
gan to make advances to the female, whilst at the same time
restlessly looking around to see if any of the other males were
watching. Male chimpanzees start their advances by sitting
with their legs wide apart revealing their erection. Precisely
at the point when Dandy was exhibiting his sexual urge in this
way, Luit, one of the older males, unexpectedly came round
the corner. Dandy immediately dropped his hands over his
penis concealing it from view.
Example (No. 67, de Waal 1982, chimpanzees): On another
occasion Luit was making advances to a female while Nikkie,
the alpha male, was lying in the grass about 50 metres away.
When Nikkie looked up and got to his feet, Luit slowly shifted
a few paces away from the female and sat down, once again
with his back to Nikkie. Nikkie slowly moved towards Luit,
picking up a heavy stone on his way. His hair was standing
slightly on end. Now and then Luit looked round to watch
Nikkie's progress and then he looked back at his own penis,
which was gradually losing its erection. Only when his penis
was no longer visible did Luit turn around and walk towards
Nikkie. (p. 49)
De Waal quotes other similar examples (Nos.99, 100)
and Dunbar describes one like Kummer's, except that the
female hid her whole self from her harem male while
mating with a subadult male (No. 12, gelada). The follow-
ing differs in that a physical object is concealed:
Example (No.3, Altmann, yellow baboons): An animal that
has found a choice food item sometimes tries to keep the food
out of sight, e.g. by turning its back.
What in these records would constitute evidence that
concealment is achieved by means that are fruitfully
interpreted as acting like a "psychologist?" Is the AGENT'S
behavior adjusted to, and therefore dependent on, repre-
sentation of the ability of the TARGET to perceive an object
depending on its screening from the TARGET'S viewpoint?
Such evidence is apparent in the Kummer example, for
the female was not acting on any simple egocentric or
AGENT-centered rule such as moving until she could not
see the leader; rather her posture was finely adjusted to
what the leader could see and thus based on a TARGET-
centered representation. By contrast, there is insufficient
data in the first chimpanzee example to cast doubt on the
simpler idea that the behavior was driven by an AGENT-
centered rule like "put hand in front of penis. " That a
TARGET-centered rule more like "avoid Nikkie seeing my
erect penis" is guiding Luit in the next example is
evidenced by his visual monitoring behavior back and
forth between his penis and Nikkie's location (and view-
point). Without such monitoring behavior, "turning one's
back" on someone, although it sounds like an inherently
TARGET-centered behavior, could just be the AGENT'S
effort not to see the TARGET.
These examples show, as we pointed out in Section 1,
that evidence which best helps us to make distinctions
among representations underlying behavior emerges
when the latter is adjusted to tbe TARGET'S appraisal of
the situation, in the face of variations in the physical
configuration of TARGET and AGENT.
Acoustic concealment (A2). Here the AGENT acts
quietly, such that the TARGET'S attention is not attracted.
Example (No. 13, Dunbar, gelada): Kummer noted "acoustic
hiding" in captive gelada - the suppression of the loud
vocalisations which when given by males when females
groomed them can be heard from more than 100m away;
Kummer observed that when a female was removed together
with the subordinate male from his captive group and the two
were placed in a side cage with auditory but not visual contact
with the rest of the group, the male suppressed his loud call
when the female finally succumbed and groomed with him. In
the field we have also noted this. The animals do not give the
shrill (in the case of the female) and loud (in the case of the
male) post-copulation calls that are very characteristic of this
236
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1988) 11:2

Whiten & Byrne: Primate deception
species. Copulations in these circumstances are totally silent.
Instances of acoustic hiding of either kind perhaps amount to
5 or 6 all told.
Similar cases have been reported in chimpanzees
(No.84, de Waal 1982; No.81, de Waal 1986a). However,
acoustic concealment is shown in contexts other than
mating. Whitehead (No. 20) provided lengthy and de-
tailed documentation of the way in which two individuals
in one group of howling monkeys inhibited their roars
until in a position to do so with maximal surprise to a
second group, thus gaining preferential access to a
resource.
The issue of mental representation here parallels the
case of visual hiding; instead of evidence that the behavior
is flexibly adjusted to what the TARGET can see, we must
ask about its adjustment to what the TARGET can hear.
However, because the latter does not depend on a line of
sight, the requisite observations may be more difficult to
obtain and are not clear in any of the above examples;
indeed, it may be that there is little requirement for such
sophisticated adjustment in natural situations.
Here is a challenge for future observation. Is there any
evidence for an AGENT acting more or less quietly accord-
ing to the likelihood that a TARGET can hear him? If
Kummer's hamadryas female (No. 26) were making a
noise in her surreptitious actions, would she pause or act
more carefully if she noticed the leader watching her?
Would she wait until he was "listening to something else"
before continuing?
Inhibition of attending (A3). In this subclass, the
AGENT avoids looking at a desirable object when such
looking would lead one or more TARGETS to notice it.
Example (No.2, Fossey, gorillas): S's group travelling slowly
between feeding sites in a relatively straight line along a
narrow trail. Four other animals behind S in a line. S looks up
into Hypericum tree and spies a nearly obscured clump of
Loranthus vine. Without looking at those behind her, she sits
down by the side of the trail and begins to self-groom intently
until the others have passed her and all are out of sight some
15 feet ahead. Only then did S stop "self-grooming" to rapidly
climb into the tree, break off the vine clump and descend with
it to the trail to hastily feed on it before running to catch up
with the group.
Similar examples in chimpanzees were offered by
Plooij (No.24), Menzel (Nos.89, 91, 93; 1974), van Law-
ick-Goodall (No. 86; 1971) and de Waal (No.69; 1982).
These include evidence, as convincing as Fossey's find-
ing, that one individual is inhibiting attention to an object
so as to avoid giving cues to other individuals. The one
candidate monkey example provides no more than a hint
that the same inhibition may occur, in the final "acciden-
tal" phase:
Example (No. 7, Ashe, mangabeys): The old female mangabey
would often use distracting tactics to get at food when the
male was sitting over it. She would pace around him, keeping
her eye on the food and in coming closer would "accidentally"
walk over a piece of food which would, of course, remain in
her hand as she strolled off.
However, inhibition of attention may be more common
when we are dealing with purely social interactions in
monkeys, no object being involved:
Example (No.64, de Waal 1986a, rhesus macaques): Subordi-
nates sometimes ignore threats they must have seen. They sit
frozen still, with a body position indicating readiness for
flight, and look around, especially slightly upward, while
avoiding turning the head in the dominant's direction (al-
though they seem to monitor the dominant by means of
peripheral vision).
Example (No. 6, Altmann, yellow baboons): Mothers with
weanlings will often "ignore " (avoid visual contact with) their
milk-begging offspring. Ignoring as a social strategy, used in
many situations, is widespread and was described in my
rhesus monograph. It may be the most common form of
deceptive behavior.
Similar examples were given for chimpanzees (Nos.78,
80, de Waal 1986a). If the AGENT is acting as psychologist,
this is a particularly interesting class of behavior: To the
extent that the AGENT'S behavior is appropriately tailored
to changing configurations of the two players, it implies
that the AGENT represents the power of the TARGET to use
the AGENT'S attention to guide his (the TARGET'S) own
attention. The AGENT as psychologist is analysing the
TARGET as a psychologist analysing the AGENT - what
Dennett (1983) described as third-order intentionality, to
be contrasted with the second-order intentionality appar-
ent in the hamadryas example of hiding from 
view.
Evidence for such tailoring would be that looking was
inhibited only when the TARGET'S position allowed him to
see the AGENT, and only when the AGENT'S direction of
gaze was visible to the TARGET - for example, if either
player turned his back on the other, we would want to
know whether the AGENT was then prepared to look at the
locus concerned. In general, this evidence is lacking. The
fact that Fossey's gorilla S inhibited her attention only
while the other gorillas were present is suggestive, but
clearly we would need more detail to show that S was
taking into account her companions' powers of attention,
rather than their mere presence.
2.5.2. Distraction (B). The next four classes all involve
behavior which functions to distract the TARGET'S atten-
tion from some locus at which it is directed, toward a
second locus. This is deception when there is nothing that
would merit attention at the second location, whereas
there would ordinarily be something when the nondecep-
tive behavioral counterpart was performed by the AGENT.
The following classes distinguish the different ways in
which the AGENT'S behavior can function to shift the
TARGET'S attention to a second locus.
Distract by looking away (Bl). The AGENT distracts the
TARGET'S attention from one locus by looking away toward
another locus in such a way that the TARGET also looks
there.
Example (No. 73, Byrne & Whiten 1985, chacma baboons):
Subadult male ME attacks one of the young juveniles who
screams repeatedly, pursuing ME while screaming (this is
common when aid has just been successfully solicited). Adult
male HL and several other adults run over the hill into view,
giving aggressive pantgrunt calls; ME, seeing them coming,
stands on hindlegs and stares into the distance across the
valley. HL and the newcomers stop and look in this direction;
they do not threaten or attack ME. No predator or baboon
troop can be seen through 10 X 40 binoculars.
Byrne and Whiten reported a further case (No.74) and
similar examples were quoted for chimpanzees (No. 82,
de Waal 1986; Nos.22, 25, Plooij). Plooij confirmed that
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1988) 11:2
237

Whiten & Byrne: Primate deception
such behavior can function to deceive. In one instance, a
young chimpanzee, Pom, became too familiar and started
grooming him. Finding that staying motionless was no
discouragement, "I tried another way to get rid of her.
Having observed her mother deceive Flint, I did the
same. While sitting, I suddenly looked in a particular
direction, moving my head a little from left to right,
acting as if there was something to be seen in the distance.
It worked! Pom looked as well and looked back at me
again. I continued acting and she walked in that direc-
tion" (No. 23).
This class of behavior is functionally the reverse of
inhibition of attending (A3), because it involves getting
the TARGET to attend to some trivial locus when his
attention is already on the crucial one, whereas in inhibi-
tion of attending the function is to prevent attention to a
locus as yet unnoticed. But cases of both A3 and Bl,
where they become goal-directed, do share the necessity
for the AGENT to be more of a psychologist, representing
not just the TARGET'S attention (as discussed above for Al
[hiding from view] and A2 [acoustic concealment]) but
the ability of the TARGET to use the ACENT'S attention to
direct his own. Evidence for the latter includes looking
away at a plausible focus of interest (e.g., distant and
complex scenes rather than a nearby cliff" face), and only
looking away when this behavior can be seen by the
TARGET (we might expect the AGENT to stop looking away
if the TARGET turned his back). All the examples are
consistent with the AGENT'S making such discriminations,
but none are conclusive and in the future more care
should be taken to describe how looking away is adjusted
to the behavior of the TARGET.
Distract by looking away with linked vocal signal (B2).
The AGENT distracts the TARGET'S attention from one
locus by looking away at another locus and vocalizing in
such a way that the TARGET looks there or at least loses the
original focus of attention.
Example (No.27, Gautier, guenons): A threatens and chases B
with aggressive calls. His/her calls evoke the same calls from
C, D . . . cornered, B emits a social alarm call while looking
at a hypothetical predator. The animals ascend the trees and
the aggressive chase ends, at least for the present.
Very similar examples were given by de Waal (No. 103,
1986, chimpanzees) and Seyfarth (No. 88, in Dennett
1983, vervets).
Evidence for the AGENT representing the TARGET'S
capacity for changing his attentional focus may be harder
to get in this subclass than the last, because a single alarm
vocalization may be enough to achieve the effect (as
opposed to needing more continuous modulation of visual
attention) and because a broadcast signal does not need to
take into account the nuances of attention that visual
signals do. Perhaps, as suggested for looking away, there
will be observable differences regarding whether the
AGENT performs such behaviors in circumstances which
are plausible to the TARGET (e.g., not giving a deceptive
eagle alarm in the undergrowth; not giving a deceptive
leopard alarm in the canopy).
Distract by leading away (B3). The distraction in this
case is achieved by the AGENT'S leading the TARGET away
from the first locus to another one, allowing the AGENT to
return to the first free of competition.
Example (No.87, van Lawick-Goodall 1971, chimpanzees):
One day, when Figan was part of a large group and, in
consequence, had not managed to get more than a couple of
bananas for himself, he suddenly got up and walked away.
The others trailed after him. Ten minutes later he returned,
quite by himself- and, of course, got his share of bananas. We
thought this was coincidence - indeed, it may have been on
that first occasion. But after this the same thing happened
over and over again - Figan led a group away and returned,
later, for his bananas, (p. 96)
Other examples where repeated use of the "leading
away" tactic makes clear its deceptive function were
given by Menzel (Nos.95, 96, 1974, chimpanzees). In
some examples it is not so clear that the leading away
performed a deceptive function, as opposed to merely
being followed by an opportunistic return (No.77, Byrne
& Whiten 1985, chacma baboons; No.8, Ashe, manga-
beys).
Turning to the issue of representation, this behavioral
class is complicated in that we must consider the pos-
sibility of two sequential goals: to lead the TARGET away
from the first locus, and to return to it unaccompanied -
the basis of a simple plan. Each of these subgoals entails
representing different aspects of the TARGET'S psychol-
ogy.
With respect to the first goal, the AGENT must repre-
sent the TARGET'S attention (to the AGENT), assuming that
the TARGET must attend to the AGENT as a prerequisite to
being led away. But although this may suffice in some
cases (the mere departure of the AGENT then being
sufficient to cause the TARGET to follow), in others the
TARGET may evaluate the desirability of following the
AGENT. Evidence for the latter would be tailoring of the
AGENT'S actions to variations in the motivation of the
TARGET; for example, waiting until the TARGET'S interest
in the first locus drops to a level where it can be counter-
balanced by being led away. No such evidence is available
yet.
Pursuing the second goal - returning unaccompanied -
requires either that the TARGET should cease to attend to
the AGENT, or that the TARGET should, although still
paying attention to the AGENT, judge that it is no longer
worthwhile to follow the AGENT. Representation of the
TARGET'S motivation to follow would be indicated by
such evidence as waiting until the AGENT became in-
terested or engaged in some new activity before return-
ing to the first locus, and adjusting the form and timing
of the return to any tendencies on the part of the TARGET
to follow. Such records may already be available - it is
certainly feasible to collect them - but do not appear to
be in print yet.
Distract with intimate behavior (B4). Here the distrac-
tion is achieved by the AGENT'S shifting the TARGET'S
attention to some part or extension of his own body,
which is highlighted gesturally or posturally.
Example (No.62, Strum, in Jolly 1985, olive baboons): One of
the female baboons at Gilgil grew particularly fond of meat,
although the males do most hunting. A male, one who does
not willingly share, caught an antelope. The female edged up
to him and groomed him until he lolled back under her
attentions. She then snatched the antelope carcass and ran.
(p. 412)
Other examples involve grooming, facial expressions,
embracing, presenting, and missile throwing (No.63, de
Waal 1986a, rhesus macaques; No. 61, Winner, in Ett-
linger 1983, chimpanzees; No.28, Gautier, guenons;
238
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1988) 11:2

Nos.9, 10, Ashe, mangabeys; No. 101, de Waal 1986a,
chimpanzees; No. 11, Dugmore, sakis).
Where such a tactic is seen to be goal-directed, the
AGENT must be representing the TARGET'S attention,
which is to be distracted. However, unlike in the case of
leading away, there is not the same opportunity to keep
the deception hidden. In the example above, the re-
source just has to be grabbed while the AGENT'S attention
is distracted, the deception thus being made obvious and
presumably difficult to repeat.
There is an alternative explanation for this class of
behavior, one that does not impute a deceptive intention
and will often be hard to refute: When the most preferred
course of behavior is thwarted by the TARGET, execution
switches- to the next most preferred activity (grooming in
the above example) which coincidentally distracts the
TARGET and allows the AGENT to switch back to his most
preferred activity. Evidence which would count against
this "blind opportunism" interpretation would be behav-
ioral characteristics which were tailored to achieving
distraction; in the above example, not just any grooming,
but specifically the kind (under the chin for example) that
would encourage the TARGET to "loll back" and forget the
meat. If the AGENT doesn't attempt a grab as soon as the
TARGET'S eyes move off the meat, but chooses a time
when response is more sluggish, we have further cause to
conclude that the AGENT is taking the TARGET'S attention
into account. A different approach to testing the oppor-
tunism hypothesis lies in computing the a priori proba-
bility of the AGENT'S performing the distracting act at that
precise moment by chance. This would actually be the
beginning of an analysis of the statistical likelihood of the
"unplanned" hypothesis. This statistical approach could
be combined with discriminating those instances in
which the behavior is appropriate to the goal of distrac-
tion, narrowing the a priori probability of, for example,
grooming under the TARGET'S chin at just that moment.
Repeated occurrences of a particular type of tactic could
make such an analysis fruitful. In the meantime, there is
one report that demonstrates (limited) planning on the
basis of both the tailoring and the statistical criteria: A
chimpanzee was chasing another, who ran behind a tree.
He threw a brick at her on one side, yet moved to catch
her on the side to which her attention predictably shifted
(No. 101, de Waal 1986a).
2.5.3. Creating an image (C). Now we move on to cases
where the AGENT'S behavior functions to portray the
AGENT in a way that, rather than merely affecting the
TARGET'S attention as in A and B above, causes the
TARGET to misinterpret the behavior's significance for the
TARGET in other ways. The two classes below are dis-
tinguished by the way the behavior acts to create this
impression.
Present neutral image (Cl). The deception involves
behavior which is simply nonthreatening, just in the
sense that it is of little or no significance to the TARGET.
Example (No.l, Fossey, gorillas): Majority of group day
nesting within a 25 feet radius with low-ranking Q at the edge
of the group. After intently gazing at P (a desirable infant)
from the side-lines, Q stares in the opposite direction, circles
and begins bending down branches for a nest. After mo-
mentarily sitting in the nest, Q, with gaze averted from P,
gets up and moves a few feet closer to repeat the activity of
Whiten & Byrne: Primate deception
"nest-building." After roughly 40 minutes and 6 "nests" later,
Q was sitting next to dominant female E and gazing directly at
infant P.
Example (No.65, de Waal 1982, chimpanzees): Yeroen hurts
his hand during a fight with Nikkie. . . . Yeroen walks past
the sitting Nikkie from a point in front of him to a point behind
him and the whole time Yeroen is in Nikkie s field of vision he
hobbles pitifully, but once he has passed Nikkie his behavior
changes and he walks normally again. For nearly a week
Yeroen's movement is affected in this way whenever he
knows Nikkie can see him. (p. 47)
Example (No.99, de Waal 1986a, chimpanzees): The most
dramatic instance of self-correction occurred when a male,
who was sitting with his back to his challenger, showed a grin
upon hearing hooting sounds. He quickly used his fingers, to
push his lips back over his teeth again. The manipulation
occurred three times before the grin ceased to appear. After
that, the male turned around to bluff back at his rival, (p. 113)
On other occasions Yeroen was observed to be "feign-
ing to be in a very good mood" (No. 98, de Waal 1982).
Note also the self-grooming done by the gorilla S in
example No. 2, already described.
Only one monkey example was given but it could
represent a fairly common behavior, very similar to what
is claimed for Yeroen's mood-feigning above: (No.5, Alt-
mann, yellow baboons): "Occasionally I have seen an
animal remain very calm as it got progressively closer to
another individual, then suddenly launch an attack."
If it is appropriate to regard the AGENT as acting as a
psychologist in any of these cases, then what distingui-
shes this class from those described above is that instead •
of the AGENT needing to represent the attention of the
TARGET and what the TARGET is likely to be able to see,
what is required is a representation of the TARGET'S
interpretation or evaluation of the AGENT'S behavior. In
other words, the AGENT as psychologist is here adjusting
his future behavior to the current state of the TARGET'S
evaluation of the AGENT'S behavior, rather than using a
set of discrete rules of the sort: "if T does x, do y . . . if T
does m, do n. . . . " In the case of Fossey's gorilla Q,
information which might be integrated to compute this
current state includes past and current signs of ner-
vousness by the mother, E; Q's current credibility given
her past use of this tactic; and reasons for E to be
mistrustful, such as recent threats to the infant P, or the
current approach of others sharing Q's intent. The struc-
ture of Q's behavior - that she built six nests, with gaze
averted - indicates that her behavior may well have been
sensitively adjusted to such an evaluation on the part of E.
However, a sceptic must argue that she could have been
following a simpler rule such as: "if E stands and picks up
P, make a nest." Again we need more information; it is
only where we can describe Q's acts as adjusted to the
state of E's evaluation across variation in several different
contextual variables such as those suggested above that
we start to gain real power from the idea of the primate as
psychologist.
Present affiliative image (C2). Here the image present-
ed is not merely neutral but is interpretable as affiliative.
Example (No.4, Altmann, yellow baboons): Every day, one
can see females approach mothers, pretend to be primarily
interested in grooming the mother when what they are really
after is an opportunity to sniff, touch or hold her infant. (As a
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1988) 11:2
239

Whiten & Byrne: Primate deception
result, mothers with young infants are often very well
groomed.)
"But is the mother really deceived?" asks Altmann:
"Surely the multiparous ones know exactly what's going
on!" Altmann hits the nail on the head here. We must be
particularly sceptical about whether such behavior is
deceptive in the sense that the TARGET misinterprets it;
rather, the affiliative act by the AGENT may represent a
benefit to the TARGET which fully compensates for the
resource the AGENT gains from the TARGET. This is
nevertheless an interesting class of possible deception,
for if we find it difficult to weigh these costs and benefits,
so might the interactants! If the AGENT makes any psycho-
logical assessment, this will have to include a representa-
tion of the TARGET'S assessment of likely benefit/cost
ratios. This alone could place special demands on social
intellect to avoid the mistrust apparent in the following
case:
Example (No. 68, de Waal 1982, chimpanzees): If Puist is
unable to get a hold of her opponent during a fight, we may
see her walk slowly up to her and then attack unexpectedly.
She may also invite her opponent to reconciliation in the
customary way. She holds out her hand and when the other
hesitantly puts her hand in Puist's, she suddenly grabs hold of
her. This has been seen repeatedly and creates the impres-
sion of a deliberate attempt to feign good intentions in order
to square accounts. Whether we regard it as deceit or not, the
result is that Puist is unpredictable. Low-ranking apes hesi-
tate when she approaches: they mistrust her. (p. 66)
Further similar chimpanzee examples are given by de
Waal (Nos. 102 and 104). The same provisos apply as in Cl
(present neutral image) concerning the extra detail which
would be required as evidence of the AGENT'S representa-
tion of the TARGET'S evaluation of the AGENT'S behavior.
2.5.4. Manipulation of TARGET using social TOOL (D). SO far
we have been concerned with dyadic interaction. Al-
though sometimes several individuals might be involved,
the essential nature of the deception could be charac-
terized using the AGENT and TARGET scheme. For exam-
ple, when an AGENT conceals something from several
other individuals, it makes sense to think of this as
involving parallel dyadic AGENT-TARGET interactions. By
contrast, in this form of deception and the next it is
essential to describe the deception in at least triadic
terms.
The function of the behavior in the first class is to
manipulate one individual, the TOOL, SO as to affect the
TARGET to the AGENT'S benefit. The following subclasses
are differentiated on the basis of the way the deception
functions within this social configuration.
Deceive TOOL about AGENT'S involvement with TARCET
(Dl). The function of the AGENT'S behavior is to mislead
the TOOL about the significance of the involvement, or
the behavioral interaction, between the AGENT and the
TARGET (we specify "involvement" because in some cases
the TARGET may see just a static tableau, rather than an
active interaction between AGENT and TARGET).
Example (No. 71, Byrne & Whiten 1985, chacma baboons):
Adult female ML is feeding where a patch of turf has been
loosened. Young juvenile PA tentatively approaches and
although ML makes no threat, PA screams. As happens in the
normal context, JG, the only adult male of the group, runs
towards them and ML retreats, leaving PA to feed on the food
source. Two minutes later this sequence is repeated. Five
minutes later the same sequence recurs. JG again acts as if the
vocalisation signified an attack by ML on PA, but this time he
chases ML for 20 m, jumps upon her and lunges as though to
bite her. (p. 670)
Byrne and Whiten describe two other examples
(Nos. 70, 72). In a further case (No.29, Rasmussen, yellow
baboons) the benefits accruing through such exploitation
are clear:
Example: There were 13 adult males in the troop we studied,
and coalitions of two to six mid-low ranking males frequently
challenged the two highest ranking males for possession of
oestrus females. The eighth-ranking male, KMO (who was
fairly old, judging from tooth wear) was particularly adept at
gaining courtships in this way. . . . (Commonly) when an-
other male initiated the coalition, KMO joined in the back-
ground, then ran off" with the female when the consorting
male chased the initiator. If KMO was deliberately "using"
the other coalition members in the above example, it may be
because he'd learned through experience that he could often
run off with an oestrus female when her consort was occupied
chasing another adult male. . . . Using coalitions to obtain
females, KMO ended up with a total number of days consort-
ing potentially fertile females that was second only to the
highest ranking male in the troop.
If the AGENT is acting as psychologist in any of these
examples, he will be representing one individual's (the
TOOL'S) evaluation of the significance of an interaction
between two other individuals - the TARGET and the
AGENT. In the case of the juvenile baboon PA above, the
fact that the scream was uttered in a situation in which the
TOOL had no evidence of a genuine attack on PA indicated
that the behavior was being adjusted according to the
TOOL'S (inferred) evaluation. In all three records PA only
screamed when potential helpers were available but out
of sight. The plausibility of the tableau presented to the
TOOL was maintained by PA's desisting from feeding until
the TARGET had been chased off.
Deceive TOOL 1 about TOOL 2'S involvement with
TARGET (D2). Here four individuals are involved, the
function of the AGENT'S behavior being to mislead the
TOOL about the significance of the configuration or behav-
ioral interaction existing between a second TOOL and the
TARGET.
Example (No.21, Snowdon, patas): Frequently sub-adult
males would carry an infant and then approach the adult male.
They would start to tease the male, and then when he finally
reacted, the infant would squeal, arousing all of the females in
the group who would then chase the male around the com-
pound for several minutes.
In this example there is little to warrant interpreting
the AGENTS (sub-adults) as psychologists.
Deceive TARGET about ACENT'S involvement with TOOL
(D3). Here it is the TARGET who is deceived about the
significance of the configuration or behavioral interaction
caused by the AGENT'S action on the TOOL.
Example (No. 16, Dunbar, geladas): A yearling was geckering
and mewing at its mother after failing to gain access to the
female's nipples while she was feeding. So it then moved
across to the harem male who was grooming with another
female nearby and geckered and mewed at them. They
ignored. So the infant hit out at the male's back, then pulled
his cape. The male ignored. So after holding onto his cape for
a few seconds, the infant pulled it again. This time the male
240
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1988) 11:2

Whiten & Byrne: Primate deception
turned round and hit out at the infant. The infant then ran
across to its mother, who had looked up at the commotion.
When the infant approached, the mother allowed it to go on
the nipple at once, and then she moved off carrying the infant
away from the male.
Dunbar describes three more variations on this theme
(Nos.14, 15, 17).
The AGENT as psychologist has a task exactly equivalent
in complexity to that involved in subclass Dl (represent-
ing the judgment by one individual of the significance of
what is happening between two others); it is just that the
roles of TOOL and TARGET are now reversed. This reversal
represents an important distinction in classifying what is
going on within the range of primate deception; we need
not repeat the earlier discussion (2.5.4.) of grounds for
establishing such representations. In the case of the
gelada infants above, it would be important to note
whether, after only a mild response by the male, the
infant looks at the mother to check whether she appears
anxious enough to treat the infant as if he needs support.
2.5.5. Deflection of TARGET to FALL GUY (E). The function of
this class of behavior is to divert the TARGET posing the
problem toward a third party, the FALL GUY. Unlike the
TOOL in class D, whom the AGENT causes to take an active
part in dealing with the TARGET problem, the FALL GUY is
an essentially passive victim in the sequence.
Example (No. 19, Sugiyama, Japanese macaques): No. 5-103
(5 year old just matured male and transferred from troop B)
came and began to eat. No. 3-42 (24 year old 2nd ranking
male) came near from behind him. When No. 5-103 noticed
No. 3-42, there was only 3m between them; the former
looked aside, vocally attacked a feeding female nearby and
chased her 5m away. Seeing them, No. 3-42 also barked and
chased to follow her for a few metres. During this time No.
5-103 ate wheat again for half a minute and then walked away.
I observed the same type of behavior more than 50 times
during the 27 year study.
Byrne and Whiten give similar examples where the
problem thus dealt with is a threat or attack (Nos.75, 76;
1985). The tactic is also used when competing for groom-
ing (No. 18, Dunbar, geladas) and for food, as shown in the
following example, which continues the incident de-
scribed earlier (No. 62, sect. 2.5.2) by Strum (No. 83 in
Jolly 1985, olive baboons): "Later the same male killed
again. Again she groomed him. This time he kept a hand
on the carcass. She left off grooming, and chased after his
favorite female. He dithered, but at length went to his
friend's defence. The first female promptly doubled back
to snatch the antelope."
Such examples share with the other triadic ones the
requirement that the AGENT acting as psychologist must
represent the judgment made by one individual (in this
case the TARGET) about what is taking place between two
other individuals (in this case the AGENT and FALL GUY).
The difference between this class and the last lies in the
AGENT'S need to select the individual who is to be the
FALL GUY. Clearly, an individual must be chosen who has
the right characteristics to engineer a deflection of the
TARGET. In the Strum example, the choice of the male's
"favorite" female is just this sort of evidence which - if
there is more of it - we can use to assess the extent to
which the AGENT'S behavior is indeed being adjusted to
the TARGET'S evaluation of the social situation.
3. The questions
3.1. Are there phylogenetic differences In tactical
deception?
In the above classification, any one indexed record may
be limited to a single event, or, as in several contribu-
tions, it may be generic, mentioning that similar behavior
has been seen repeatedly. We must therefore be cautious
in any numerical comparisons. It seems safest to indicate
simply the presence or absence of evidence for each type
of deception (Table 1) and to put forward the following as
working conclusions which may stimulate more confirm-
ing or disconfirming data.
3.1.1. Chimpanzees versus gorillas. Coming full circle
from our opening remarks about the reputation of chim-
panzees for deceit, we note that they alone are cited for
nine of the thirteen classes of deception, compared with
two for gorillas. At least three alternative hypotheses
might account for this difference. One is that insofar as
Table 1. Presence (*) and absence (—) of current candidate examples of tactical deception in primates (based on corpus
in Whiten b Byrne 1986)
Class of 
Create
deception: 
Conceal 
Distract 
image 
Use tool 
Deflect 
Null 
No.
Subclass 
Al 
A2 
A3 
Bl 
B2 
B3 
B4 
Cl 
C2 
Dl 
D2 
D3 
E
Prosimian 
— 
— 
— 
— 
— 
— 
— 
— 
— 
— 
— 
— 
— 
* 
7
Callitrichid 
_
_
_
_
_
_
_
_
_
_
_
_
_ 
* 
7
Cebid 
_
*
_
_
_
_
*
_
_
_
_
_
_ 
_ 
3
Colobine 
— 
— 
— 
— 
— 
— 
— 
— 
— 
— 
— 
— 
— 
* 
6
Cercopithecine 
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
* 
* 
59
Hylobatid 
_
_
_
_
_
_
_
_
_
_
_
_
_ 
* 
5
Pongo 
_
_
_
_
_
_
_
_
_
_
_
_
_ 
_ 
2
Gorilla 
_
_
*
_
_
_
_
*
_
_
_
_
_ 
* 
10
Pan 
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
_
_
_
_ 
_ 
12
Note: An entry (*) in the penultimate column (Null) indicates at least one response stating that no tactical deception has been
observed. The last column shows the number of workers to whom the questionnaire was circulated for each taxonomic group.
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1988) 11:2
241

Whiten & Byrne: Primate deception
deceptive competence is concerned, chimpanzees are
superior in social intellect. Another hypothesis is that in
the stable intimacy of a gorilla family group there are few
opportunities for individuals either to get away with
deception or to profit from doing so, whereas the opposite
is true in the fluidity of chimpanzee society. If so, the
explanation of the observed chimpanzee-gorilla dif-
ference would be "ecological" rather than "mental" and
we would really expect gorillas to be able to generate
behavior in the other seven subclasses of deception. Of
course, even if an intellectual difference exists it might
have been caused, through natural selection, by a dif-
ference in social ecology! Another explanation for the
apparent difference is that all the chimpanzee examples
come from captive or provisioned animals, for whom
particularly intensive and continuous records have been
made. However, one cannot precisely quantify such bias
by counting man-hours of observation per species, since
in different studies the focus of attention varies, and it is
this focus which governs the possibility of subtle behav-
iors being seen.
3.1.2. Chimpanzees and "triadic" deception. Despite the
number of chimpanzee examples, there is none in the last
four subclasses of deception described above, which
involve inherently triadic manipulations. This is surpris-
ing because it is natural to think of multiple social interac-
tions as the most cognitively demanding. For example,
because of its relatively high frequency in chimpanzees, it
has been suggested that triadic play facilitates the devel-
opment of complex social skills (Smith 1982). Have chim-
panzee watchers really not seen behavior of classes D and
E? If they have not, perhaps we need to ask whether
chimpanzees are too socially intelligent to be duped by
such tableaux as those presented in the D and E records
above.
3.1.3. Taxa exhibiting no tactical deception. There is no
evidence for tactical deception in some taxa. One of the
contributors recording a null finding offers an explanation
apparently based on an "evolutionary threshold" (No. 47,
Dugmore, lemur): "I would regard catta especially as not
having the intelligence for such an action." However, we
have only three (null) replies from those who study
prosimians; we must accordingly remain agnostic on this
issue until more data are in. Since we published our
definition of tactical deception, examples which seem to
fit in have been reported in stomatopods (Caldwell 1986)
and birds (Munn 1986) and it would be surprising if
equivalent behavior were beyond the capacity of a pri-
mate. Again, we must consider alternative ecological
explanations. Callitrichids and hylobatids, for instance,
are typically observed in monogamous family groupings
which encourage a high degree of cooperation; hence
deception, if it is indeed an available option, would
seldom be beneficial.
It is always difficult to solicit negative findings, but we
trust that displaying the current state of knowledge in
Table 1 will encourage further responses that will clarify
the picture. When a larger corpus of data is available, it
will be important to distinguish between the following
three explanations for any species differences in frequen-
cy of deception: (1) variation in observation time and
quality between species; (2) ecological differences which
affect the opportunity for benefits from deceit; and (3)
genuine intellectual differences. [See also Houston &
McNamara: "A Framework for the Functional Analysis of
Behavior" BBS 11(1) 1987.]
3.2. Is creative Intelligence Involved?
In all our discussions so far, the social intelligence of
primates has been limited to the orchestrating of behavior
towards some social goal; the associated concept of repre-
sentation has been used repeatedly to refer to the level at
which the AGENT'S analysis of the TARGET is being under-
taken. Because of the paucity of relevant data in our
current corpus, we have necessarily neglected the more
specific issue of the extent to which the pursuit of these
social goals is achieved by innovations in behavior (Kum-
mer & Goodall 1985) which would warrant the term
"creative intelligence" (Humphrey 1976).
What will we have to investigate in order to address
this issue? Like workers in artificial intelligence we have
allowed the term representation to include processes of
perceptual classification (for example, representing the
current attention of the TARGET), but psychologists often
distinguish between perception and representation, the
latter referring only to the coding of experience which is
stored across time and used to guide behavior which may
occur long after the original experience. When the social
representations we have already discussed are preserved
in memory in this way, we have the basis for a further
sense in which the primate becomes a psychologist, for
social representations could be used to construct a predic-
tive model of the minds of potential TARGETS, which could
subsequently be used to deal with a relatively novel
problem presented by a TARGET.
For example, an AGENT'S representation of the ability
of others to use the AGENT'S attention to direct their own
could be used in generating behavior to solve a new social
problem, either by withholding attention to things com-
peted for (A3: concealment of attention) or by using a shift
of attention to distract (Bl: distract by looking away). This
is what Plooij did in the example of Looking away (No. 23,
Sect. 2.5.2), but do the primates themselves do it? To
determine that, we need a situation where a primate
generates deceptive behavior whose appropriateness
hinges not merely on the TARGET'S current behavior nor
on the AGENT'S previous reactions to such behavior, but
rather on prediction about novel acts that the TARGET
should perform according to a theory (held by the AGENT)
about how some part of the TARGET'S mind works. We are
grateful to Plooij for the following example (No. 24), which
appears to illustrate both novelty and the phenomenon of
counterdeception:
One chimp was alone in the feeding area and was going to be
fed bananas. A metal box was opened from a distance. Just at
the moment when the box was opened, another chimp ap-
proached at the border of the clearing. The first chimp quickly
closed the metal box and walked away several metres, sat
down and looked around as if nothing had happened. The
second chimp left the feeding area again, but as soon as he was
out of sight, he hid behind a tree and peered at the individual
in the feeding area. As soon as that individual approached and
opened the metal box again, the hiding individual ap-
proached, replaced the other and ate the bananas.
242
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1988) 11:2

Whiten & Byrne: Primate deception
3.3. The study of deception and mind-reading: Are we
proceeding In the right way?
Finally, before we design a new questionnaire with the
expectation of collecting a larger corpus of upgraded
quality, a number of methodological questions arise. As
we had hoped, the collation of a body of disparate records
has allowed a larger pattern to emerge, one that inspires
more confidence than the anecdotes from a single study.
Many suggestive records do not constitute one conclusive
one, however. In the majority of cases there is clear
evidence of deceit, but whether this is mediated by the
AGENT'S mental representation of the TARGET'S psychol-
ogy remains uncertain in most cases. For further prog-
ress, the quality of each individual record must be
improved.
Before we suggest how this can be done, we must ask
whether anecdotal data, even of high quality, are ade-
quate to the task. Woodruff and Premack (1979; and see
Premack & Woodruff 1978, for an analysis of related
issues) imply that they are not, arguing that an experi-
mental approach is necessary to test hypotheses about the
psychological causes of deceptive actions. Unfortunately,
"their scrupulous efforts to force their chimps into non-
anecdotal, repeatable behavior that manifests the intel-
ligence they believe them to have engenders the frustrat-
ing side effect of providing prolonged training histories
for the behaviorists to point to in developing their rival
conditioning hypotheses as putative explanations" (Den-
nett 1983, p. 348). Conversely, Silverman (1986), work-
ing with a pig-tailed macaque, found that where a certain
level of social insight was not shown, there always re-
mained a likelihood that the experimental set-up did not
offer an adequate context for the demonstration of the
monkey's natural competence. Perhaps wary of such
problems, de Waal (1986a) has suggested a freer experi-
mental approach, one that amounts to setting up facilitat-
ing contexts to encourage spontaneous intentional decep-
tion: For example, "let an ape be alone in a room,
monitored by a video camera, where he or she is tempted
to do something which he or she knows is not allowed by
the experimenter. The forbidden act should be such that
evidence for it may afterwards be detected. The predic-
tion is that the ape will attempt to remove the evidence
before the experimenter arrives" (p. 117).
Such experiments may indeed provide much needed
control over the otherwise elusive occurrence of deceit
(Cheney & Seyfarth 1985b), but they should not be seen
as necessarily confined to the laboratory. The neatest
cases of primate field experimentation involve deceiving
the animals by playbacks of taped calls (Cheney &
Seyfarth 1980), and this paradigm can be adapted for the
study of deception itself (Seyfarth & Cheney 1988).
If science had to rely exclusively on experimental
manipulation, astronomy would be in bad way; so too
would most of field research in the behavioral sciences.
What is essential is to make predictions which can be
tested not only by further experiments but also by further
observations. It has been argued that the most sophisti-
cated instances of primate deception to date have been
collected from free ranging animals (Smith 1986). The
important thing here is to know exactly what to attend to
when the crucial but perhaps rare events of interest occur
- and this is true even when they can to some extent be
"set up," as advocated by Dennett (1983) and de Waal
(1986a). All the material on which the present target
article is based, though mostly extracted from written
records, is basically retrospective; what is needed now is a
set of guidelines to our contributors which spells out
exactly what to record in the future. In presenting the
taxonomy of deception above, we have already addressed
the question of what will constitute adequate evidence
that the AGENT has representations of the psychological
states of others; we also pointed to grounds for skepticism
in treating some of the putative examples as deception.
Commentary will be welcome on these issues, and in
general on our framework for the scientific study of
primates as psychologists. This should enable the very
best guidelines to be agreed upon, so that future theory
can be based on more solid evidence than is available
now. To set this process in motion, we suggest the
following guidelines and questions.
3.3.1. The role of "anecdotes." We have tried to show
above that even unique anecdotal reports are valuable at
this stage of our enquiry. At the very least, they may
indicate the tip of an iceberg which merits deeper investi-
gation; for this reason it will be important to collect and
publish further isolated cases, particularly where these
expand the phenomena catalogued. We have drawn at-
tention in the text to the details which can make a single
observation valuable. In such a case, the description of
the context and historical antecedents of the event are
likely to be crucial.
But can anecdotes ever be more than a jumping off
point for more systematic work? We propose that the
answer must be "no," although this does depend on what
is meant by an anecdote. We suggest that no single
observation can be regarded as definitive evidence in
support of a hypothesis (e.g., that a certain species is
capable of intentional deception). There are two major
reasons for skepticism. One is that in many cases the
relevant evidence involves very fine distinctions in be-
havior, such as exactly where two or three animals are
looking from moment to moment, and the reliability of
such observations can become established only when
they are repeated. Second, a single instance may in many
cases simply represent a coincidence.
All this leads us to emphasize the value of multiple
records. Quite apart from the question of reliability, and
although we have noted reasons why deception may
occur only rarely, surely only those classes of deception
that occur more than once will ultimately be of interest!
Already in the corpus outlined above, several contrib-
utors are credited with clusters of similar records; it was
such repetitions in our own observations that led us to
attempt the present exercise (see Byrne & Whiten 1985;
Table 1). In addition, when we have clear records of the
same method of deception from independent observers of
the same or even different species, we can be confident
that a real pattern of behavior exists. Such concordances
already exist in the corpus.
Even if we encourage the contribution of multiple
records in the future, however, problems remain. One is
reporter bias. The approach we have adopted for the
present exercise tends to select just positive cases. [See
also Rosenthal & Rubin: "Interpersonal Expectancy Ef-
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1988) 11:2
243

Commentary/Whiten & Byrne: Primate deception
fects" BBS 1(3) 1978.] Although the act described as
deceptive may appear to be nicely adapted to such a
function, the null hypothesis that it occurred at that
instant for other reasons has to be addressed. What is the
"control" frequency of such acts? Perhaps the gorilla who
built six nests usually builds that many. Perhaps the
baboon who groomed the male with the meat groomed
him nearly all the time anyway. Reporter bias is the
failure to record such negative occurrences as a baseline
against which the hypothesis of deceptive functioning can
be evaluated. In the case of the baboon groomer, we
suggested that an approach to this issue would be to
calculate the probability that, in any one minute, she
would be grooming this particular male's chin; if the
probability is 1/1,000, then this is the probability of
making a "false positive" error in rejecting the null
hypothesis that the female just happened to groom the
male in this way at such an opportune time. This approach
could be used as a general technique for handling the
problem of reporter bias. It does of course place greater
demands on observers, who must make many more
observations than just the deceptive episodes. In short, in
terms of our definition of deception, observers must
record both the honest and deceptive behavioral counter-
parts.
Given these provisos, we can ask for evidence bearing
on various hypotheses: that the act was deceptive; that it
involved the AGENT representing the viewpoint and/or
beliefs of others; and that it originated through a specific
mechanism, for example, trial-and-error learning.
3.3.2. Evidence for deception. In addition to a bald de-
scription of a putative instance of deception, what is the
basis for believing that the putative DUPE was indeed
deceived and, in particular, that the AGENT'S behavior
was not accidental but was functionally or intentionally
deceptive? As we proposed above, such questions can be
approached quantitatively. For example, if the frequency
of response by the putative DUPE is significantly less
when the chimpanzee AGENT covers his penis with his
hand than when he doesn't (No. 66, sect. 2.5.1), then
there is evidence of deception (in this case through
concealment).
3.3.3. Evidence that the AGENT has representions of psy-
chological states. There is probably no substitute here
for the observer reading the discussion of examples in the
taxonomy above. Then what we need to ask is: Did the
AGENT achieve deception by tailoring his behavior to the
social context in a way that requires the AGENT to repre-
sent another individual's psychological state? Clearly,
observers attuned to the distinctions involved can ensure
that the relevant events are recorded (e.g., Kummer 1982
and his "hiding from view" record above; the 1985 Byrne
& Whiten records of "deceive tool about AGENT'S involve-
ment"; and de Waal's 1986a record of "distract with
intimate behavior"). It is essential that the observer
decide in advance what needs to be recorded as occurring
(and as not occurring). Retrospective reconstruction may
suffer bias.
3.3.4. Evidence for the origins of the deceptive act. In our
first questionnaire we asked for "any evidence specifying
the causation or ontogeny of the behavior: evidence that it
is, for example, intelligent, insightful, innovative, the
product of trial-and-error learning or imitation, or that
any of these can be ruled out." To many, such distinctions
constitute the most important issues concerning decep-
tion (Mitchell 1986) and it is accordingly interesting that
even our most assiduous respondents could contribute
next to nothing on this question. Is the question then
worth repeating? Does it need to be made more explicit?
If we have a complete record of the behavioral history of
an individual, we should be able to record the occurrence
of (for example) imitation or innovative behavior without
any experimental intervention. Hence we presume that
this gap in our knowledge reflects only practical difficul-
ties to date - particularly since the present corpus is
based on such a retrospective exercise. We anticipate that
systematic prospective studies will be fruitful.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We thank D. Dennett, A. McKinlay, and D. Perrett for their
important comments on earlier versions of this paper.
Open Peer Commentary
Commentaries submitted by the qualified professional readership of
this journal will be considered for publication in a later issue as
Continuing Commentary on this article. Integrative overviews and
syntheses are especially encouraged.
Darwin, deceit, and metacommunication
Stuart A. Altmann
Department of Biology, University of Chicago, Chicago, III. 60637
What is the nature of the deceptions that primates use, and what
is the nature of primates that enables them to deceive and be
deceived? Whiten & Byrne (W&B) have focused on the second
of these two questions, seeking evidence that the agent of a
deception has "representations of the psychological states of
others." The first question is no less intriguing and is more
readily operationalized.
We recognize deception in animals by observing their behav-
ior, not by observing their mental processes. However, al-
though we can describe the deceptive behavior of the actor in a
particular instance, no refinement of that description and no
extension of the process of description to other instances will
suffice to elucidate the nature of deception. The reason for this is
that no defining motor pattern of behavior is involved. Decep-
tion is not a form of behavior, it is a type of relationship.
The essence of tactical deception is that it involves a false
metasignal that is responded to as if it were true. Let me explain.
Consider first a nondeceptive form of metacommunication
(Bateson 1955; 1956). One primate lunges at another, jaws open.
How should the target individual respond? That depends on
other, ancillary behaviors of the actor that precede or accom-
pany this-lunge. If those ancillary acts include gambolling and a
"play-face," then the lunge will be reacted to as play. The
gambolling and the play-face are cues to the target animal about
the set of contingencies that will prevail in the subsequent
interaction: that the mouth-on-flesh that follows the lunge will
not be forceful enough to draw blood or even hurt - a nip and not
a bite. Now, the play behavior per se is, like any other interac-
244
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1988) 11:2

Commentary/Whiten & Byrne: Primate deception
tion, a sequence of communicative acts; at each step in the
interaction, the behavior of one individual is responded to by
another. Thus, gambolling and the play-face are signals about
other signals - they are metasignals. Such metasignals commu-
nicate the context, the mood or, less metaphorically, the signal-
response contingencies of subsequent interactions. [See also
Smith: "Does Play Matter" BBS 5(1) 1982.]
In this example, no deception is involved. The open-mouthed
lunge that accompanied the gambol was indeed a prelude to a
nip and not a bite. Play-fighting is very similar to physical
combat. Play metamessages enable the participants to discrimi-
nate between these two classes of messages. Suppose, however,
that one individual gambolled up to another and, when at close
range, launched an aggressive attack. Its victim, taking its cue
from the gambol, would be unprepared; it would neither have
time to flee nor to get into position to defend itself. We would
say that the victim was deceived. The gambolling approach was
a metasignal that said, in essence, "My behavior will be playful
and therefore harmless." The subsequent attack reveals that this
is false.
Two ways of producing a false metasignal are available: Either
change the behavior or change the metasignal. Switching from a
nonchalant or even playful approach into an attack approach, as
described above, illustrates the first. W & B's first example of
tactical deception illustrates the second. A baboon being chased
aggressively by another suddenly adopts the alert scanning
posture normally given upon the approach of a predator or
neighboring group, thereby switching the context from you-
against-me to us-against-them.
Teasing shows how complex deception can get. Teasing in-
volves rapid alternation between two types of metamessages,
one of which says, "This is just play," the other, "This is really
serious." At each step, the metasignal of the moment reveals
that the preceding metasignal was false, that is, deceptive.
Although such complex forms of deception may be restricted to
humans, the many examples of tactical deception compiled by
W & B show how widespread the manipulation of metasignals is
among primates.
As for Darwin and metacommunication, he was prescient, as
usual. His descriptions of animal behavior contain many exam-
ples of metasignals, perhaps none so cogent as the following
(Darwin 1896, p. 63): "When my terrier bites my hand in play,
often snarling at the same time, if he bites and I say gently,
gently, he goes on biting, but answers me by a few wags of the
tail, which seems to say, 'Never mind, it is all fun. ..." [D]ogs
do thus express, and may wish to express, to other dogs and to
man, that they are in a friendly state of mind."
Learning how to deceive
John D. Baldwin
Department of Sociology, University of California at Santa Barbara, Santa
Barbara, Calif. 93106
Throughout their target article Whiten & Byrne (W&B) show a
clear preference for cognitive models of causation; however,
only in their last paragraph (3.3.4) do they deal directly with the
question of causation, asking whether primatologists have any
evidence that deception results from insight, innovation, "trial-
and-error learning, or imitation." They point out that the ques-
tion of causation may be one of "the most important issues
concerning deception," but they note that their "respondents
could contribute next to nothing on this question."
First, let me make it clear that I have no commitment to any
given theory of the causation of deception. Different types of
deceptive acts may be influenced by various combinations of
evolutionary and ecological causes, operant conditioning and
observational learning (which W&B call "trial-and-error learn-
ing" and "imitation"), and cognitive or insightful processes.
Given the preliminary nature of the research on deception, it
may be premature to prejudge the relative importance of the
numerous relevant causes. Although W&B clearly favor cog-
nitive theories, it might be wiser to use Chamberlin's (1965)
method of multiple working hypotheses - eschewing favorite
hypotheses and seeking data on all relevant hypotheses so as to
evaluate each one fairly with the minimum of bias.
W&B show a willingness to incorporate evolutionary and
ecological hypotheses (sect. 1 and 3.1) into their theory, but
they assiduously avoid conditioning and learning, flippantly
dismissing them as "mindless behaviorism" (sect. 1 para. 6; sect.
2.42, para. 3). There is not a single serious attempt to evaluate
the merits of learning theory for the study of deceptive behav-
ior. In rejecting "mindless behaviorism," they have dismissed
the huge literature on comparative psychology, conditioning,
and learning, with data on detour learning, problem solving,
generalization, learning sets, creativity, and so forth - which
may be relevant to deception.
Since W&B are willing to deal with evolutionary and ecologi-
cal causes, I will focus on their failure to draw upon learning
theory. Lloyd Morgan's canon (Morgan 1894) cautions us about
interpreting behavior in terms of "a higher psychical faculty if it
can be interpreted as the outcome of the exercise of one that
stands lower in the psychological scale." If learning theory is
adequate for explaining certain types of deceptive behavior, it
may be unwise for W&B to generate only cognitive theories for
the behavior. Since there is considerable evidence for the
importance of both operant conditioning and observational
learning in primate behavior (Baldwin & Baldwin 1981), some
forms of deception may be based on learning.
Operant conditioning could begin when one individual's
behavior accidentally deceives another; W&B do admit that
some acts of deception may be accidental or coincidental (e.g.,
sect. 3.3.1). Any accidental deceptive act that was reinforced -
by access to food, water, sexual interaction, grooming, and so
forth, or by escape from an aversive experience - would become
more likely to be emitted in the future. The phenomenon of
generalization helps explain how a deceptive act learned in one
situation might be emitted under different conditions later.
After several repetitions, more sophisticated deceptions might
emerge as the behavior was shaped into more complex and
subtle forms. Since such learning could begin in infancy - for
example, during social play - an individual might learn rela-
tively complex deceptive skills by adulthood.
Although there is not enough space here to construct operant
hypotheses for every behavioral class W&B describe, testable
and falsifiable operant hypotheses can be generated for all those
classes. For example, concealment (Al, A2), not looking (A3),
distracting by looking away or leading away (Bl, B2, B3), and
other deceptions often involve avoidance, response inhibition,
or slowed movements; all these patterns are common results of
punishment and negative reinforcement. If an animal has an
aversive experience after revealing its presence or showing that
it possesses a prized piece of food, the showy behavior is likely to
become inhibited. Strong punishment might lead to rapid
learning of quieter, more surreptitious responses. There is, of
course, mediation by the central nervous system (as in the
learning of all species), but describing this mediation as "mental
representations" tells us little about the exact nature of the
mediatorial processes. Instead of speculating about the mental
representations the animal might use, it may be more fruitful
(for analyzing the learning process and predicting future re-
sponses) to describe the types of behaviors that were punished,
the contingencies of punishment, the context in which punish-
ment occurred, and the social cues that become discriminative
stimuli for future responses.
Observational learning requires more cognitive mediation
than does operant conditioning (Bandura 1986). There is a
substantial literature showing that many primates can learn
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1988) 11:2
245

Commentary /Whiten & Byrne: Primate deception
from observing others (Baldwin & Baldwin 1981), although the
nature of their cognitive representations is difficult to infer. It is
possible that many if not all of the forms of deception described
by W&B could be learned by observation; if the imitation was
adequately skillful, it might be rewarded and reinforced in the
observer's behavior repertoire.
In order to evaluate the learning hypotheses, scientists will
need to collect data on histories of reinforcement, punishment,
observational learning, and related context events. Although
W&B fear that such data may produce the "frustrating side
effect" of supporting "conditioning hypotheses ' (sect. 3.3, para.
2), these data are crucial for evaluating their cognitive hypoth-
eses: If it can be shown that the principles of operant condition-
ing and observational learning are not adequate to explain
deception, then evolutionary and cognitive hypotheses become
more credible. Since W&B are clearly concerned with evaluat-
ing the role of cognition in deception, they may make more
progress by collecting serious data on learning than by dismiss-
ing it as "mindless behaviorism."
Thoughts about thoughts
Jonathan Bennett
Philosophy Department, Syracuse University, Syracuse, N.Y. 13244
Do any nonhuman animals have thoughts? If so, do any have
thoughts about thoughts? At first sight it looks promising to try
to get at the second question through cases of deception: we may
find that one animal (Agent) is motivated by a desire to produce
an erroneous or ignorant state of mind in another animal (call her
Patience), which implies that Agent mentally represents Pa-
tience's state of mind to himself. Before getting into the details,
let me lay out the groundwork in my own way.
In all the cases we have to consider, the upshot of Agents
conduct that is relevant to his desires is some behavior on the
part of Patience. We aren't going to have evidence that he
sought to alter her beliefs out of basic malice (or goodwill),
wanting her to get a false (or true) belief just for its own sake. The
behavior of Patience's that ministers to Agent's wants may be
negative - it may consist in her not interfereing, or scratching
him, or the like - but that is behavior too, and I shall speak of it
in the language of "doing." In all our cases, then, Agent does A,
Patience does P, which is advantageous to Agent, and we are
satisfied that this is not a mere lucky coincidence.
Two questions: (1) Did Agent do A intentionally, acting under
the guidance of some thought of what the upshot would be? If so,
then: (2) was Agent's intentionj'usf that Patience should do P, or
did he reckon on affecting her conduct by affecting her mental
state? We may be sure that the only route from his conduct to
hers is through her mental state, but the question is: Was he
relying on that route's being followed?
Let us start with question (1). When we say that Agent did A
intending to bring about result R, or because he thought that
doing A would bring about R, this diagnosis is always threatened
from below by the possibility that Agent did A as an instance of a
drill, a pattern of stimulus and response: Agent acts in circum-
stances of physical kind Kc, and A is of a physical kind KA, and
Agent has found that whenever he is in Kc circumstances if he
performs a KA action R happens. If that is the case, Agent may
have the thoughtlessly mechanical habit of performing a KA in
Kc circumstances whenever he wants R. How can this challenge
from below be fended off?
One might answer: "Well, if Agent's action A and circum-
stances C do not belong to any kinds K and C such that he has
found in the past that in C circumstances K actions lead to R, his
doing A on this occasion can't be something he does as a matter
of a drill that has been inculcated in him by his past experience."
A few decades ago, that answer was given by psychologists who
thought they had a viable concept of animal "insight" that could
be explained in terms of radically unprecedented behavior. But
that was all a muddle. If the connection between A and R is not
somehow attested to in Agent's past experience, his doing A in
order to get R on the present occasion becomes not insightful
but merely lucky or else miraculous. For a postmorten on the
"insight" muddle see Bennett (1964).
The right way to meet the challenge from below is not to find
behavior that doesn't instantiate a pattern, but rather to find
behavior that falls into a teleological pattern and into no one
stimulus-response pattern: that is, a kind of result that Agent
often brings about by movements of many different kinds, on
the basis of many physically different clues that the result is
achievable. This approach takes us away from "when Agent gets
sensory input from a Kc environment he makes movements of
physical kind KA" toward something more like "when Agent has
evidence that R can be achieved he does whatever will produce
R. " Of course it's much more complicated than that, but that
outlines what is chiefly needed.
So the conclusion that Agent is acting intentionally - that is,
behaving as he does because of what he thinks and wants - does
not conflict with the need for pattern, regularity, repetition, so
long as the patterns are not stimulus—response ones but rather
are teleological in the way I have explained.
Now, suppose we are satisfied that much of Agent's behavior
is intentional, including some in which he intends to modify the
behavior of Patience. We want to know whether his belief that
by doing A he will get Patience to do P is ever based on his belief
that by doing A he will affect her mental state in a certain way.
The evidence that Agent is a "psychologist," as Whiten &
Byrne (W&B) put it, goes like this: Agent believes something of
the form "If I do A, Patience will do P," and we want to know
why he connects his doing A with her doing P. If we can't explain
this better, that is, more economically, than by crediting him
with believing (1) that if he does A she will go into mental state
M, and (2) that if she goes into mental state M she will do P, then
we have a case for attributing those two beliefs to Agent and thus
crediting him with thoughts about Patience's mental state.
To be fully entitled to attribute beliefs (1) and (2), we would
need evidence that Agent has had opportunities to learn that
those two are true. That is a complex matter I don't fully
understand; to sort it out, we would need to understand how
Agent's experience of his own mind relates to his beliefs about
other minds. I shall restrict myself to the more immediate
question of challenges from below - that is, of what would
undermine the attribution to Agent of beliefs (1) and (2) even if
there were no problems about learning.
The immediate threat is that Agent can be understood to have
connected his doing A with Patience's doing P in some manner
that doesn't run through Patience's psyche. That will be the case
if A is of some physical kind KA, and P is of a physical kind Kp,
such that Agent's experience has accustomed him to its being
the case that when he does something of kind KA Patience does
something of kind Kp. If Kp really is a physical kind, and doesn't
have to be marked out in terms of psychological underlay
("movement that indicates her lack of interest," "movement
that she wouldn't make if she were afraid"), Patience's mind is
banished from Agent's scenario and the challenge from below
has succeeded.
From this I conclude that most of the anecdotes W&B have
collected are at best weak evidence that Agent is a psychologist.
The "hiding from view" cases are impressive only to the
extent that in them Agent undergoes some quite complex
maneuvering to keep something out of Patience's view. That is
indeed evidence of "intentionalness," acting toward a foreseen
outcome. However, it doesn't constitute evidence that Agent
has thoughts about Patience's mental state unless there is
pressure to suppose that the outcome, as represented in Agent's
mind, is some state of Patience's mind. That pressure is weak. It
seems possible, even plausible, to suppose that many animals at
various levels have a physicalistic notion of line of sight, based
246
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1988) 11:2

Commentary /Whiten & Byrne: Primate deception
on proximity and absence of intervening objects. Agent's grasp
of the advantages of keeping something out of Patience's line of
sight probably doesn't require him to operate as a psychologist
any more than does his operating to keep downwind of his prey.
Those auditory examples in which the deceptive behavior
consists in keeping quiet are even weaker as evidence of
thoughts about mental states. Agent needs only to connect his
silence with Patient's noninterference, and that he can presum-
ably do by simple induction. Keeping quiet is an intrinsic,
physical kind of behavior; it lacks the complexity of some of the
visual examples, and is therefore less good as evidence that
these cases involve intentionalness at all, let alone intentions to
produce false beliefs. Not interfering is not intrinsic, because it
means "not behaving in a manner that stops me from getting
what I want"; but that doesn't help much. It doesn't even seem
to involve Agent's thinking about Patience's thoughts, and it's
not especially impressive in any other way. Plenty of fairly low-
level nonhuman behavior can't be understood unless the animal
can recognize external events as threatening, unwelcome, inter-
fering, and the like. A sense of how external events relate -
whether as conducive or threatening - to one's own desires is
required for any kind of cognitive mentality.
In those cases, then, all Agent needs to have learned is that in
certain familiar kinds of situations his silence is a means to
Patience's noninterference; and there is really nothing left of the
case for thinking that Agent is a psychologist in these situations.
Similarly with distraction by looking away: Agent needs only
to know that he and his kind tend to look in directions in which
others look, and don't continue with attacks when they are
looking off in another direction. That challenge from below
presupposes that Agent has a grasp of "looking in direction D" as
a physical kind of behavior, marked off by posture, direction in
which eyes are pointing, eyes open, and so forth, and not in
terms of anything mentalistic. This - which could also be used to
amplify the line-of-sight notion mentioned above - seems to be
a modest assumption that is well supported by the data. (What it
may imply is: Agent knows that in his community when one
looks in a particular direction, so do others who see him do so;
this knowledge is a conjunction of two bits of information: one
about what happens when he looks in a given direction, and the
other about what happens when others do so. If his thought
about where others are looking is essentially a thought about
posture and such, then we mustn't assume that he can simply
generalize from the consequences of their looking in a given
direction to the consequences of his doing so. Whether that is so
depends on how Agent's experience of his own body relates to
his perceptions of the bodies of others.)
Those remarks apply, mutatis mutandis, to the "inhibition of
attending" cases as well. W&B themselves notice the structural
similarity between these two kinds of cases.
The reported cases of distraction by leading away don't create
any case for regarding Agent as a psychologist, so far as I can see.
Even if the leading away is deliberate, and is intended to get
Patience out of the way, it could be based on a grasp of "Where I
go [smacking my lips, etc.], she goes," with no thought about
Patience's state of mind. W&B point to the possibility that
Agent is sensitive to Patience's level of attention: If she is not
attending to him, she won't be drawn away by him; if she
continues attending to him, she will return when he does. There
could be (though I gather that there isn't yet) evidence that
Agent's behavior in this general category reflects a sensitivity to
those differences in Patience. That might add to the plausibility
of a "thought about thought" diagnosis, but it might not. It
would fail if the relevant notion of attending could be well
understood in physicalistic terms, along the lines of my sug-
gested account of "looking in direction D."
Similar remarks apply to the cases of distraction through
intimate behavior, and I think they can be extended to the
various kinds of deception W&B present in sections 2.5.3-
2.5.5.
Having described Whiten & Byrne's problem situation in my
own way, and expressed doubts about how far they have got with
it, I want to add that I admire their grasp of what their problems
are and of what would solve them. This is a useful and interest-
ing paper, and I am glad to have a chance to try to push it further
in its right direction.
Metaphor, cognitive belief, and science
Irwin S. Bernstein
Department of Psychology, University of Georgia, Athens, Ga. 30602
In 1880, W. Lauder Lindsay published Mind in the Lower
Animals. He had collected written reports about the behavior of
animals by people he considered reliable, from publications he
considered dedicated to accurate reporting. He did not com-
ment on single anecdotes but rather searched for repeated
patterns of behavior. Behavior was classified according to its
function or consequences and he carefully reported the behav-
ior and the consequence. He concluded that animals committed
suicide and engaged in criminal activities which could be inde-
pendently verified by the objections and outrage of their peers.
He assumed that the consequences of an animal's behavior were
as obvious to the animal at the time the behavior was performed
as they were to the observer, working from hindsight.
The next twenty years could be described as the era of
anecdotal evidence during which rich interpretation based on
anthropomorphizing dominated the literature. Lloyd Morgan's
canon and the "law of parsimony" prevailed in the early twen-
tieth century. Thorndike's cats, confined to a puzzle box, could
do little but thrash about until the escape treadle was accidently
stepped on. The "law of effect" was inevitable. Gestalt psychol-
ogists tried to return attention to context, the "umwelt," but
many extreme behaviorists resisted. A small number (often
referred to as "Skinnerians," but more extreme than Skinner)
persist today. A total denial of interest in cognitive processes is
no more constructive than the "good old days" of anthropo-
morphic mentalizing.
If some laboratory experiments fail and some natural observa-
tions are flights of fancy, we are not doomed to ignorance. It is
indeed disturbing to find Whiten & Byrne (W&B) dismissing
studies in which an independent variable is manipulated. To
suggest that deliberate manipulations make results suspect is to
dismiss most of science without examination; "artificial" seems
to be used in a pejorative sense. One cannot do science with
independent variables held constant or allowed to vary without
measurement. Astronomy did not progress by only observing
dependent variables. It was the measurement and correlation of
both that led to progress. Relying on anecdotes, no matter how
numerous, fails to specify any value of the independent variable,
or the intentional state of an animal. The plural of "anecdote" is
not "data." Premack and Woodruff (1978) and Menzel (1974)
have demonstrated that deception and deceit can be subjected
to controlled study. If only "natural" behavior is acceptable,
then even de Waal's (1982; 1986) work would have to be
rejected, since the chimpanzees at Arnheim were as captive as
Hediger's zoo animals (sect. 2.1). Rejecting available data and
dealing only with replies to a questionnaire abandons good data
in favor of a methodology fraught with peril.
If I send out a questionnaire asking people to report any
dream which was followed by an accident to the person in the
dream, I will receive many replies. Respondents will be self-
selected; doubters would probably respond only to scold me.
What is the null hypothesis? How often should I expect these
dreams to occur by chance? What are the appropriate controls?
Do the answers to these questions change if the questionnaire is
about animal deception?
Questionnaires are suitable instruments for studying beliefs,
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1988) 11:2
247

Commentary /Whiten & Byrne: Primate deception
values, and attitudes, but they are a poor way to collect objective
data on observable phenomena. Students of the history of
psychology remember the period of introspectionism. A person
has access to only one mind and may scrutinize its operations
carefully; questionnaires often only solicit information on such
operations.
In the absence of data many hypotheses are tenable. If my
definitions are based on function and if I claim that these ends
could be attained by animals intentionally working to achieve
them, then the existence of a consequence is no evidence for the
hypothesis. Logicians would call this the "error of affirming the
consequent." Many means may achieve the same ends.
Turning the ignition key starts millions of engines every day,
but proves nothing about people's knowledge of internal com-
bustion engines. I adjust the thermostat in my office correctly
but cannot tell you where the furnace is located or what fuel is
burned.
A male monkey killing an infant may improve his own re-
productive success, but no good sociobiologist claims that this
male "strategy" is anything more than metaphor, or that a male
monkey knows that infants also have fathers. Natural selection
acts on functional consequences. Individuals respond to prox-
imal stimuli. Intentions may be in the present but the burden of
proof is on the one who hypothesizes their existence. Behavioral
deception need be no more intentional than morphological
deception.
Ethologists describing fixed action patterns did describe func-
tional consequences. The broken wing display of a ground
nesting bird when a fox approaches certainly functions to dis-
tract the fox and protect the nest. The bird does not have to read
the fox's mind or intend to deceive the fox into thinking that she
is injured and therefore easy prey. Noting that the consequence
of behavior elegantly serves a function is not proof of planning or
intentionality. Any opportunistic behavior can be seen as con-
scious planning. Bad "psychologizing," like bad sociobiology,
hinders rather than furthers our understanding.
Why would a chimpanzee (sect. 3.2) hide behind a tree until a
subordinate reopened the banana box and then displace him,
rather than simply opening the banana box that he suspected
was available? Why call every example of redirection and dis-
placement evidence of intentional deception? An instrumental
act that works can be learned, or established by natural
selection.
Animals respond to stimuli. A failure to respond can mean
that the observer failed to identify correctly the stimuli respon-
sible for the act, or failed to specify the context in which the
stimuli must occur to be effective. At any moment, individuals
are not doing thousands of things. When your expectations are
not fulfilled, it does not mean that the response you expected
was deliberately suppressed. A "not response" is extremely
difficult to measure.
The use of terminology like "mind reading," "fall guy,"
"dupe," and "creating an image" brings to mind rich connota-
tions that far exceed what is necessary to deal with the phe-
nomena under consideration. Operational definitions will not
rid us of this excess baggage. I note that the second use of "mind
reading" in section 2.4 occurs without cautionary quotation
marks. Will we soon be writing of animal telepathy?
What kind of statistical testing would allow one to conclude
that nine reports for chimpanzees and two for gorillas, based on
an unspecified data set and unspecified hours of observation,
suggest a taxonomic difference? Intuition and subjective pro-
cesses seem to be assuming precedence as "evidence." Similar-
ly consensus is not "evidence" of a hypothesis.
What I find particularly distressing is that W&B acknowledge
many of the issues I have raised, but fail to address them. They
seem to feel that acknowledging potential criticisms defuses
them. Instead of calling for carefully designed and controlled
research they appear to reject such research in favor of
"observations."
It is just as wrong to say that all behavior is adaptive as to say
that all behavior is intentional or that all outcomes were deliber-
ately sought. Likewise it would be just as foolhardy to say that no
behavior is adaptive, or subject to natural selection, as it would
be to say that no behavior was due to intentionality and an
awareness of consequences. What we need are not "sug-
gestions," but tests of hypotheses with carefully defined terms
and clear measures of independent and dependent variables. A
little less inspired speculation and a little more scientific evi-
dence. It is amazing how data can restrict the range of specu-
lation.
Anecdotes and critical anthropomorphism
Gordon M. Burghardt
Departments of Psychology and Zoology, Graduate Program in Ethology,
University of Tennessee, Knoxville, Tenn. 37996
Whiten & Byrne (W&B) are courageous in their espousal of the
careful anecdote as an important, even essential, aspect of
research into animal behavior. They have carefully mined the
literature and arranged their gold in a complex typology across
more than a dozen deceptive tactics. Here I will call attention to
some relevant precedents. Are we in danger of reentering past
deadends?
W&B cite 56 references. Of these, 40 (71%) are from the 80's,
10 (18%) are from the 70's, 5 (9%) date from the 50's and 60's
while only one is older - Kohler's 1925 classic book on ape
mentality. Certainly W&B are aware of the importance placed
on anecdotes for hundreds of years; Romanes (1883) was more
careful than many of his predecessors. Lloyd Morgan (1894),
who with his "canon" supposedly brought down the anecdotal
method, actually called for more careful, critical use of anec-
dotes and his own books abound in them. Yet, as with the
present authors, he called for experimental data to decide
critical issues, as does Griffin (e.g., 1978) in his calls for more
open-minded consideration of mental awareness in animals
from bees to chimps.
C. O. Whitman (1899) was unrelenting in his criticism of
anecdotes per se and viewed them as shortcuts used to forego
careful painstaking research. Margaret F. Washburn (1908) was
more sympathetic and gave a most succinct analysis of anecdotes
in her mentalistic but clear-headed treatise. She listed five
major objections to the anecdotal method: "It is safe to say that
this method of collecting information always labors under at
least one, and frequently under several, of the following disad-
vantages" (1908, p. 5): Do these objections apply to the evidence
presented by W&B or have they been effectively superceded?
1. "The observer is not scientifically trained to distinguish
what he sees from what he infers." Comment — This problem
seems minimal in the reports here, although it is not clear that
respect for a clean distinction between description and in-
terpretation is always maintained.
2. "He is not intimately acquainted with the habits of the
species to which the animal belongs." Comment - Since the
anecdotes here are by contemporary leaders in the study of
primate behavior, let's dismiss this objection.
3. "He is not acquainted with the past experience of the
individual animal concerned." Comment - This may apply to
some but certainly not all of the present anecdotal evidence.
The question really is how much of the past experience is known
to the observer and how much is it necessary to know?
4. "He has a personal affection for the animal concerned, and
a desire to show its superior intelligence." Comment - Perhaps
"intelligence" is not the best word for the present cases but it is
rightfully noted that many ethologists, myself included, get
attached to individuals as well as species and often want to show
what they can do. Certainly this can lead to a lowering of critical
lenses, especially when a race is on to show who has uncovered
what mentalistic (read humanlike) trait in a nonhuman first.
248
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1988) 11:2

Commentary/Whiten & Byrne: Primate deception
5. "He has the desire, common to all humanity, to tell a good
story." Comment - All the submitters of anecdotes were human.
From this we can see that even when anecdotes are submitted
for our scrutiny by trained observers intimately knowledgeable
about a species and even the individuals involved, two of
Washburn's five disadvantages are still dangers, although not
necessarily applicable in every instance.
Washburn (1908, p. 8) also quotes Thorndike to address the
"reporter bias" problem that W&B do consider:
Dogs get lost hundreds of times and no one ever notices it or sends
an account of it to a scientific magazine. But let one find his way from
Brooklyn to Yonkers and the fact immediately becomes a circulating
anecdote. Thousands of cats on thousands of occasions sit helplessly
yowling, and no one takes thought of it or writes to his friend, the
professor; but let one cat claw at the knob of a door supposedly as a
signal to be let out, and straightway this cat becomes the representa-
tive of the cat-mind in all the books.
W&B similarly relied on anecdotes from farflung correspon-
dents simply because the phenomena are rare, both in captivity
and in nature, and not sufficiently repeatable or predictable for
careful study. Phenomena such as infanticide also went unre-
cognized for years because of their rarity in the life of an
individual, although infanticide turns out to have a profound
influence on social dynamics, genetic structure, and so on. As
Struhsaker and Leland (1985) have shown, infanticide is also
hard to observe and its occurrence may necessitate considerable
inference (e.g., circumstantial evidence), but it is at least in
principle an objective act.
W&B are aware of this problem and acknowledge that the
anecdotal method can only be a "jumping off point for more
systematic work." This is an attitude similar to that behind
"critical anthropomorphism" (Burghardt 1985) in the analysis of
mental processes in animals. But does W&B's call for multiple
records really counter the problems inherent in interpreting
any "single observation"? How much problematic data adds up
to one conclusive bit of evidence? Are we ultimately limited by
authority and subjective analogical inference? Discouragingly,
W&B end on' a plaintive note and do not suggest any way to
study the phenomena in a predictive or more publicly verifiable
manner. (Videotapes, even if gathered, do not solve the prob-
lem of selectivity.)
What can we do? Harvey Carr's (1927) suggestion that any
index of mind in animals be based on scientific knowledge of
comparable phenomena in humans still has not been tried
(Burghardt 1985). In this light, the complete absence of any
consideration by W&B of deception in humans, especially in
infants and toddlers, is remarkable. This is both a problem and a
sign of the parochialism of too much primatology today; in this
case human primates are ignored as well as nonprimates. My
twin daughters engaged in behavior readily classified in several
of W&B's subclasses in their second year, and I know much
more about them and their past than do the authors of the
subjects in the examples cited here. Should we encourage
psychologists to flood the literature with anecdotes about their
kids? Hardly. But to ignore the chance to join efforts with the
largest group of scientists studying any primate is, to be blunt,
foolish.
Classification of deceptive behavior
according to levels of cognitive complexity
Suzanne Chevalier-Skolnikoff*
Human Interaction Laboratory, Department of Psychiatry, University of
California at San Francisco, San Francisco, Calif. 94143
I would like to congratulate the authors on an unusually stim-
ulating and thought-provoking paper. Besides their careful
•Mailing Address: Suzanne Chevalier-Skolnikoff, 205 Edgewood,
San Francisco, Calif. 94117.
analysis of the material, Whiten & Byrne's (W&B's) inquiring
tone is refreshing and conducive to further inquiry. Their
collation of a large catalogue of deceptive behavioral incidents is
also a significant contribution; previous studies on deception
have been limited to very small samples, which has hampered
research on deception.
I will direct my commentary to W&B's question about
whether the causation and origin of deceptive behavior is worth
pursuing. My response is an emphatic "yes," although I admit
that researching this area will not be easy.
First I will attempt a tentative functional and causal classifica-
tion of the examples of deceptive behavior that W&B have
presented in their target article. Then I will suggest some
approaches for investigating this problem, and finally I will
propose a cognitive taxonomy of deception.
In the following classification I will try to formulate a taxon-
omy of deception that reflects mental complexity and distin-
guishes different psychological demands on the AGENT, who is the
most significant actor, since he is the deceiver. To do this I will
use a framework adapted from Piaget's (1952) model of human
sensorimotor development as a guideline for analysis. This
model consists of six stages that emerge sequentially during the
first two years of life in human infants. They make up a hierarchy
of qualitatively different developmental levels reflecting in-
creasingly complex cognitive functioning. The model provides a
multilevel framework of which the last four stages (stages 3-6)
seem to be applicable to analyzing the ontogenetic and evolu-
tionary development of deception. These four levels are:
Stage 3: Secondary circular reaction. Attempts to reproduce
environmental events first discovered by chance, using single
behaviors directed toward a single object or person (i.e.,
through operant conditioning).
Stage 4: Coordinations. Establishing relationships between
two objects or persons, showing intentionality, and attributing
cause of change to others.
Stage 5: Tertiary circular reaction. Repeating behavior with
variation to explore the potentials of objects and persons
through experimentation. Learning through experimentation to
use one object, or person, to effect a change in another, often to
solve a problem.
Stage 6: Insight. Solving problems correctly on the first try,
without experimentation, through mental representation, form-
ing mental combinations or innovations in which the intercon-
nections are based on the properties of the variables them-
selves, rather than the frequency with which they follow one
another or cooccur. This is the stage of truly "creative intelli-
gence."
I have categorized the deceptive incidents cited by W&B
according to the behavioral features evident from the contextual
information presented in the examples that are characteristic of
the different levels of this series (Parker 1977; and see Che-
valier-Skolnikoff 1982, p. 309; 1983, pp. 550-51, for categoriz-
ing narrative data into sensorimotor stages by means of behav-
ioral features). One cannot be certain that this classification of
anecdotal material is correct, however, since a specific func-
tional behavior can often be achieved ontogenetically and deter-
mined cognitively by different means (Riley & Trabasso 1974;
Steinberg & Powell 1983). For instance, a specific deceptive
maneuver could first be performed by chance and then incorpo-
rated into the AGENT'S behavioral repertoire through operant
conditioning (a stage 3 mechanism), or it could be learned
through deliberate trial-and-error experimentation aimed at
achieving the goal of deceiving (a stage 5 mechanism), or it
might be achieved through insightful (stage 6) problem solving.
Even though the behavior may be functionally and descriptively
the same in the three cases, in terms of causal determinants it
would be different in each case. Furthermore, the behavior may
represent different levels of understanding depending on its
conception. For instance, "deception" might only be under-
stood empirically in the first (stage 3) case, whereas only in the
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1988) 11:2
249

Commentary/Whiten & Byrne: Primate deception
Table 1 (Chevalier-Skolnikoff). A functional and cognitive classification of examples
of deceptive behavior cited in Whiten &• Byrne
Functional
categories
Al
A2
A3
Bl
B2
B3
B4
Cl
C2
Dl
D2
D3
E
Tentative assignment of cognitive
3/4
3
13, 20, 81
93, 89, 86,
7, 64, 6, 78
9
5
68a
17
5 
6
26*, 66*, 67*
91, 
69, 24a*, 24b*
, 80
74, 82a, 25 82b, 73, 22
27, 103, 88
87, 95, 96, 77
101
1 
65, 99, 98
68b, 102, 104
29
21
14, 15, 16
stages
ambiguous
2
63, 62, 61, 28,
10, 11
4
72, 70, 71
18, 19, 75, 76,
83
*These incidents also incorporate an understanding of object permanence.
Note: Incidents performed by monkeys are in boldface.
third (stage 6) case might the AGENT understand his actions in
terms of representation, and only in this case would the AGENT
truly understand what the TARCET thinks or understands. Only
in the third case would the AGENT be a "mind-reader" and a
"psychologist." For this reason the following classification is
provisional (see Table 1):
Al: Hiding from view. The examples in this category seem to
be determined by two different levels of cognitive functioning.
For instance, example No. 3, Altmann's yellow baboon keeping
food out of sight by turning its back, may merely represent
voluntarily avoiding an interaction - a stage 4 mechanism based
on intentionality. Does the baboon also understand through
mental representation that the TARGET cannot see the food?
There is little evidence to support or refute this possibility.
Examples No. 26, Kummer's hamadryas baboon carefully mov-
ing behind a rock, and No. 67, de Waal's male chimpanzee
turning his back to the alpha male as he monitored the condition
of his penis until it was no longer erect, are much more
convincingly determined by an insightful understanding of
another's view, as well as the concept of the hidden object (a
concept I will not be able to explore fully here).
A2: Acoustic concealment. Most of these examples seem to
include intentionality as animals inhibit behavior that is likely to
elicit undesirable results, a stage 4 mechanism. It cannot be
ruled out that the behavior is insightfully based, but there is no
clear evidence that it is. Furthermore, no "dishonest" messages
were sent in these incidents. Example No. 20 (Whiten & Byrne
1986), Whitehead's howlers not vocalizing as they move toward
another group, may not even incorporate inhibition - the
monkeys may merely have stopped vocalizing as they traveled.
A3: Inhibition of attending. Many of these examples may also
be based merely on stage 4 inhibition (e.g., Nos. 6, 80, 78, and
even 86, Lawick-Goodall's chimpanzee, Figan, moving away
from the bananas to the other side of the tent [Whiten & Byrne
1986]). Furthermore, some of these examples (e.g., No. 6,
Altmann's yellow baboon mothers ignoring their infants' wean-
ing tantrums) are not deceptive because no "dishonest" signals
were sent. Other examples, for instance No. 24a and b (Whiten
& Byrne 1986) in which Plooij's chimpanzee closed the banana
box and walked away when a second chimpanzee approached -
and the second, manifesting a counterdeceptive strategy, left
and hid behind a tree, watching the first return to the box to eat
the bananas - seem to include insightful (stage 6) problem
solving as well as an understanding of object permanence.
Bl: Distraction by looking away. Two of these examples (Nos.
74 and 25) involve "redirected aggression," an ethological con-
cept. In these incidents subordinates are being theatened by
more dominant animals and they turn aggressively on others.
Since redirected aggression involves the use of one individual to
effect a change in the behavior of another, these behaviors are
classified as stage 5. Other examples (Nos. 73 and 22) appear to
be based on insight, as animals in similarly awkward situations
seem to solve the problem insightfully by sending "dishonest"
messages about imaginary threats. However, we know little
about the neurophysiology or the evolution of redirected ag-
gression. To what extent might this behavior be canalized by
natural selection? (It is prominent in some species and not in
others.) Is it possible that the threats at "nothing at all" repre-
sent some kind of overflow activity? If this were the case, could
such a mechanism be an evolutionary precursor to voluntary
deception?
B2: Distraction by looking away with linked vocalization, and
B3: Distraction by leading away. These are both represented by
examples that do seem to involve stage 6 insight, as, for in-
stance, in incident No. 87, when Lawick-Goodall's chimpanzee
Figan led the other chimpanzees away from the banana supply
and then later returned by himself to eat more of them.
B4: Distraction with intimate behavior is represented by a
variety of incidents that apparently involve different levels of
cognitive functioning. Some of these examples are very difficult
to categorize cognitively according to the available information.
For instance, No. 62, Strum's female olive baboon who edged
up to the male possessor of an antelope carcass and groomed him
until he relaxed and lolled back, and then snatched the carcass
and ran: Was the female just getting as close to the meat as she
could and then did she suddenly see that she had a chance to
snatch the carcass, or was the whole event insightfully premed-
itated?
Cl and C2: Presenting neutral and affiliative images are also
comprised of incidents that incorporate diverse levels of cog-
nitive functioning.
Dl, D2, and D3: Manipulation of target using social tool is
250
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1988) 11:2

Commentary I'Whiten & Byrne: Primate deception
Table 2 (Chevalier-Skolnikofi). A cognitive classification of examples of deceptive
behavior cited by Whiten ir Byrne
Behavioral categories
3/4
Tentative assignment of cognitive stages
4 
5 
6 
ambiguous
Emotional
display
Inhibition
(conditioned
response)
Inhibition
(voluntary)
Displacement
activity
Redirected
agression
Solicited
threat
Social buffer
Inhibition
(insightful)
Sending false
messages to
attain goal
17
, 64, 9,
93, 89, 91
3, 13, 86,
7, 6, 78, 80,
5, 68a
82a, 1
74, 25
15,
29
21
, 14
16
19, 75, 76,
18, 83
75, 76, 18,
83
67, 69
26, 66, 24a
24b, 82b,
73,
103,
95,
101,
68b,
22, 27,
. 88, 87,
96, 77,
, 65, 99,
98, 102,
104
4,
63,
28,
11,
72,
62,
61,
10
71,
70
Note: Incidents performed by monkeys are in boldface.
especially interesting because, as W&B have pointed out, these
triadic interactions superficially appear to be cognitively the
most complex form of deception. However, they probably
incorporate only an intermediate, stage 5 level of cognitive
complexity as the AGENT uses another animal as a social "tool" to
effect a change in the behavior of another in order to solve a
problem - all behavioral features of the fifth stage. If these
tactics are learned through experimentation or by imitative
matching (there is not enough space to explore fully the role of
imitation in this commentary), they are determined by stage 5
mechanisms. If they are acquired through insightful problem
solving or through delayed imitation, they involve stage 6
functioning.
So, how is one to determine whether this tentative cognitive
classification is correct, and how the ambiguous incidents are to
be classified? I believe there are four ways to evaluate the
cognitive basis of deceptive behavior more clearly, in addition to
using some of the methods proposed by W&B in sections 3.3
and 3.3.1. The first way is to do ontogenetic studies on large
numbers of animals observed intensively, evaluating when and
during which sensorimotor stages the various types of deceptive
behavior appear. I have attempted to do this on a relatively
small sample of primates and found that true deception presum-
ably based on insight first appeared in apes after they had
entered the sixth sensorimotor stage. Consequently, the behav-
ior appeared to incorporate stage 6 behavioral features and also
emerged after subjects had demonstrated stage 6 functioning in
other domains (Chevalier-Skolnikoff 1986). A second way is
quantitative, to examine frequencies of different types of decep-
tive behavior manifested by subjects of various species at differ-
ent ages. In the absence of ontogenetic studies, frequency data
can help to establish which species show the behavior most often
and at what ages. This information is useful in making in-
terpretations, for an ambiguous behavior is most likely to be
determined by the cognitive mechanisms most often used by
the subject's species and age group. The third method is to
examine counter deception, as W&B have done. Counter-
deceptive tactics provide strong evidence that one has not
overinterpreted insightful deception in that population. The
fourth avenue is to perform experiments like those of Woodruff
and Premack (1979) on samples of appropriate ages, in order to
understand the ontogency of deception, and on different species
to study the evolutionary aspect.
Ontogenetic studies from a cognitive perspective might re-
veal a developmental sequence of deceptive behavior similar to
that presented in Table 2.
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1988) 11:2
251

Commentary /Whiten & Byrne: Primate deception
Deception and explanatory economy
Arthur C. Danto
Department of Philosophy, Columbia University, New York, N.Y. 10025
The subadult baboon, ME, can be supposed, by feint, to have
deceived the posse of adult male baboons, bent upon a disciplin-
ary intervention, only if ME himself was not deceived (sect.
2.5.2, No. 73). ForifME, believing that he detected interlopers
- whether alien baboons or baboon predators - stands on his
hind legs and peers into the threatening distance, then his
would-be disciplinarians are not duped but simply misled;
baboons are wired to respond to such signals by emulating his
posture and peering in the same general direction as he. That no
interlopers are revealed through the field observer's 10x40
binoculars leaves quite undecided whether ME was not de-
ceived by signs that in the event were false, but quite as insistent
as true ones would have been - or whether ME pretended such
a response, the effect on his elders and betters being the same.
Who knows what scents or rustles might not have signaled
alarums to baboon sensibility? How do we know in such a case
that we are not being deceived, pretense being as indiscrimina-
ble from false perception as true interloper signals are from false
ones? ME's human observers would not be deceiving us, but
instead simply leading us astray by interpreting as pretense
what might have been an epistemologically unfortunate episode
in the life of ME. The world of the field observer and of the
baboon is a perceptually treacherous place.
Our authors (Whiten & Bynre, W&B) seek to brake a slide
into mindless behaviorism by saying that a psychological repre-
sentation is more "economical" than a merely behavioral one.
But behavior underdetermines which of a pair of competing
psychological descriptions holds in the case of ME, as indeed in
most of the examples W&B have laid before us. ME behaves
"outwardly" the same whether he falsely believes there are
interlopers or merely pretends to believe that in order to
distract his menacing peers. The issue is not between psycho-
logical versus behavioral representations, but between psycho-
logical representations which behavior cannot discriminate. In
particular, behavior alone will not justify an explanation in terms
of deliberate ruse if the same behavior is compatible with the
ascription of a false belief. We are ascribing beliefs to the animal
either way, though beliefs of radically different orders. One
might regard a group of baboons as a system of signal-emitting
instruments in which the general welfare is a function of the
reliability of the individual instruments. The signal emitted by
ME is spontaneously responded to by them as a clear signal,
even if ME is responding to environmental signs he has no way
of knowing to be false. The striking question is whether he, or
any baboon, can play the part of an instrument, and nothing in
the scenario described would enable us to know this. In order to
pretend to be perceiving something untoward in the bush, ME's
posture would mimic what it would be if he were merely
responding to signs of danger, and his mimetic action would
have to be explained through a practical syllogism of some
complexity; namely, that his aggressors will read the signal as
clear, that they will give greater weight to the threat of invasion
than to a mere bit of misbehavior on the part of a junior, and that
their attention span is such that they will forget what brought
them in the first place to the hillcrest, emitting pantgrunt calls of
monitory ferociousness, thus leaving ME in peace. ME would
have to have internalized the signal system of his species, and
then, rising above it, used it manipulatively.
When, some decades back, philosophers of knowledge pon-
dered the relationship of sense-datum language to the language
of physical objects, there was a question of whether we can
translate such terms as "apple" into expressions using solely the
lexical resources of a sense-datum vocabulary. It was a standard
position among optimists to say that the translation could be
effected in principle, but that reasons of economy mandated
continued use of the philosophically less preferred idiom. I did
not believe that the sole difference between the two languages
turned on parsimony, nor do I believe that behaviorism would
yield the preferred idiom except for reasons of parsimony. The
issue is not economy but truth. The world of sense-data is a
world vastly different from the one of physical objects which
may cause us to have the sense-data that serve in turn as
evidence for physical objects and for the causal relationships
between ourselves and them. A baboon endowed with repre-
sentational powers is a creature vastly different from one that
merely behaves, and the world it inhabits is in several dimen-
sions richer than one that has no such creatures in it. Meth-
odological scruples are not metaphysically innocent if we allow
them to define reality for us.
Granting representational states on the part of baboons, we
have the problem of discriminating, on the basis of a piece of
behavior consistent with any of a large set of such states, each of
which is inconsistent with the other, which of them explains the
behavior. This is a field example of the "other minds problem," a
vexation which can arise at any point when we have recourse to
explanatory variables otherwise hidden from us, but in practice
there must be ways of discovering whether someone is having an
experience or only pretending to have one. Obviously, the
chimpanzees are capable of singling out a defective instrument
in their midst, as in the interesting case of Puist, who has proved
treacherous (sect. 2.5.3, No. 68). But when the system of
representations becomes as intricate as the one we are obliged
to ascribe to ME on the hypothesis that he is feigning, verifica-
tion becomes correspondingly intricate. We would have to
decide whether ME can have that system of representations,
and this is obviously difficult to do when our laboratory is the
world and contingencies leak in at every point.
Perhaps we can say this: If feigning occurs, it must occur
against a presumed background of honest conduct, in the expla-
nation of which honest beliefs must be ascribed to the agents.
We must represent the animals as representing one another's
conduct in the normal case more or less as follows, if the case is
an honest piece of alerting: A baboon stops, rises, and peers into
a distance rendered threatening to his peers by virtue of his
action. His peers read his behavior thus: He believes something
suspicious is approaching. This gives them a reason to look as
well. In the case of deception, the first peerer would have to
pervert the normal case: he would believe that they believe that
he believes something suspicious is approaching, and so on. He
can cause them to misrepresent only against an implied back-
ground of representations, which themselves are representa-
tions of his representations - beliefs about the beliefs of others.
Only if each member of the group has internalized the standard
representations of the other members can one member use his
knowledge of such representations as an instrument of du-
plicity. The mind of the individual would be, as it were, the state
writ small. Primates could be psychologists only if sociologists as
well.
What would force such an explanatory scheme upon us? We
have two alternatives: either the baboons compose a system of
signalers, which allows for false signals but not deliberate
deception, or they compose an interrepresentational communi-
ty that knows itself to be such, allowing members to appropriate
this knowledge to their own ends. One explanatory scheme may
be more economical than another, but we ought never to be
guided by this. The question is which is true - but we might
postpone having to deal with the question if ME were merely
deceived by appearances.
Consider the feints dogs make in playing at fighting, where
the trick is to get past an opponent's guard. This form of guile is
clearly adaptive, since the dogs are acquiring prowess that will
enhance their survival in Purina-free worlds. It is difficult to see
that deception among primates could be adaptive in this way, in
252
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1988) 11:2

Commentary /Whiten & Byrne: Primate deception
part because it seems sufficiently infrequent that we have to
solicit anecdotes to see whether it occurs at all. We observe
jousting in puppies all the time - we don't have to canvass dog
psychologists for data. Obviously, if it does occur among pri-
mates, it gives its users advantages; however, one would then
expect it to form a constant feature of common life, as primates
acquire the skills they need to transact a competitive social
reality. Yet this does not seem to fit the distribution of data;
much as I should celebrate the discovery that primates are
natural psychologists, I await a stronger case than I find here for
believing that these various, entertaining descriptions are not
but artifacts of the wish, on the part of the authors, that their
subjects be colleagues.
Why creative intelligence is hard to find
Daniel Dennett
Center lor Cognitive Studies, Tufts University, Medford, Mass. 02155
The concluding question and answer of Whiten & Byrne's
(W&B's) valuable survey is worth repeating, if only to save
W&B from a likely misreading: "But can anecdotes ever be
more than a jumping off point for more systematic work? We
propose that the answer must be 'no'. . . . ' I have been dis-
mayed to learn that my own limited defense (Dennett 1983) of
the tactic of provoking "anecdotes" - generating single in-
stances of otherwise highly improbable behaviors under con-
trolled circumstances - has been misinterpreted by some en-
thusiasts as giving them license to replace tedious
experimentation with the gathering of anecdotes. But as W&B
stress, anecdotes are a prelude, not a substitute, for systematic
observation and controlled experiments.
They describe in outline the further courses of experimental
work that would shed light on the phenomena of tactical decep-
tion, and suggest that the postponed question of whether these
behaviors arise as a result of "creative intelligence" may be
settled by the outcome of such research. This research should
certainly be pursued, and if properly conducted its results are
bound to shed light on these issues, but it is worth noting in
advance that no matter how clean the data are, and indeed no
matter how uniform they are, there is a systematic instability in
the phenomenon of creatively intelligent tactical deception (if it
exists!) that will tend to frustrate efforts of interpretation.
To see this, consider the range of possibilities available in the
generic case, stripped to its essentials. Suppose AGENT intelli-
gently creates a deceptive tactic that is devastatingly effective on
a first trial against TARCET. Will it tend to be repeated in similar
circumstances? Yes; ex hypothesi it was intelligently created
rather than a result of blind luck or sheer coincidence, so AGENT
can be supposed to recognize and appreciate the effect
achieved. But then there are two possible outcomes to such
repetition: Either it will provoke countermeasures from TARGET
(who is no dummy, and can be fooled once or twice, but will
eventually catch on), or it won't (TARGET is not so smart after all).
If it doesn't, then the exploitative behavior will become (and be
seen to be) stereotyped, and ipso facto will be interpretable not
as a sign of creative intelligence but as a useful habit whose very
cleverness is diminished by our lower regard for the creative
intelligence of the TARCET. If, on the other hand, TARGET
attempts countermeasures, then either they will work or they
won't. If they don't work, TARGET will be seen once again to be
an unworthy opponent, and the deceptive behavior a mere good
habit. If the countermeasures tend to work, then either ACENT
notices that they do, and thereupon revises his schemes, or not.
If not, then AGENT'S intelligence will be put into question,
whereas if AGENT does come up with a suitable revision then he
will tend not to repeat the behavior with which we began, but
rather some relatively novel successor behavior.
In other words, if both AGENT and TARGET are capable of
creative intelligence, then what must ensue is either an escalat-
ing arms race of ploy and counterploy or a semistable equi-
librium in which the frequency of deceptive tactics is close to
"chance" (a tactic will work against a wily TARGET only if
infrequently used, something a wily AGENT will understand).
Escalations, however, are bound to be short-lived phenomena,
punctuating relatively static periods. (If AGENTS and TARGETS
are so smart, one might ask, why haven't they already dis-
covered - and exhausted - the opportunities for escalation?) So
the conditions one would predict in any community in which
there is genuine creative intelligence are conditions systemat-
ically difficult to distinguish from "mere chance" fluctuations
from a norm of trustworthiness. Any regularly repeated exploi-
tative behaviors are in themselves grounds for diminishing our
esteem for the creative intelligence of either AGENT or TARGET
or both.
Our estimation of AGENT'S cleverness is in part a function of
our estimation of TARGET'S cleverness. The more stupid TARGET
appears, the less we will be impressed by AGENTS success. The
smarter TARGET is with countermeasures, the less success
AGENT will have. If AGENT persists in spite of failure, AGENT'S
intelligence is rendered suspect, while if AGENT largely aban-
dons the tactic, we will not have any clear way of determining
whether AGENT'S initial success was dumb luck, unrecognized
by AGENT, or a tactic wisely perceived by AGENT to have outlived
its usefulness.
This can be made to appear paradoxical - a proof that there
couldn't be any such thing as genuine creative intelligence.
Once or twice is dumb luck; many times is boring habit; in
between there is no stable rate that counts clearly and unequivo-
cally as creative intelligence. If we set the threshold in this
fashion we can guarantee that nothing could count as genuine
creative intelligence. Using just the same move, evolutionists
could prove that no history of natural selection could count as an
unproblematic instance of adaptation; the first innovation
counts as luck, while its mere preservation unenhanced counts
as uncreative.
Clearly, we must adjust our presuppositions if we want to
make use of such concepts as creative intelligence or adaptation.
The stripped-down paradigmatic case exposes the evidential
problem by leaving out all the idiosyncratic but telling details
that are apt to convince us (one way or the other) in particular
cases. If we see AGENT adjusting his ploys to the particularities of
TARGET'S counterploys, or even just reserving his ploys for those
occasions in which he can detect evidence that TARGET can be
caught off guard, our conviction that AGENT'S infrequent at-
tempts at deception are intelligently guided will be enhanced.
But this seeing is itself a product of interpretation, and can only
be supported by longitudinal observation of variegated, not
repeated, behavior. There could be no surefire signs of creative
intelligence observable in isolated, individual bits of behavior.
What we will always have to rely on to persuade us of the
intelligence of the members of a species is the continued varia-
tion, enhancement, and adjustment of ploys in the face of
counterploys. So it is not repeated behaviors but changing
behaviors that are the sign of creative intelligence, and this can
be observed only in the long term. Moreover, the long-term
history of any genuinely intelligent agent will show this pro-
clivity to make novel and appropriate advances mixed with a
smattering of false starts, unlucky breaks and "bad ideas." So we
should set aside the illusory hope of finding "conclusive" em-
pirical evidence of creative intelligence, evidence that can
withstand all skeptical attempts at a "demoting" reinterpreta-
tion. When we recognize that the concept of intelligence is not a
neutral or entirely objective one, but rather an evaluative one,
this should not surprise us.
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1988) 11:2
253

Commentary/Whiten & Byrne: Primate deception
Emotional control
Frans B. M. de Waal
Wisconsin Regional Primate Research Center, University of Wisconsin,
Madison, Wis. 53715-1299
Whiten & Byrne (W&B) wonder whether chimpanzees attract
scientists who are keen to find striking instances of intelligence,
or whether the species itself is exceptional. The literature on
cross-species communication, not treated in W&B's article,
appears to confirm the overrepresentation of pongids in anec-
dotes of deception. Many of these reports antedate the current
interest in cognitive explanations of behavior (e.g., Kellogg &
Kellogg 1933; Hebb 1946; Hediger 1955).
Are pongids really special? Perhaps I can shed some light on
this issue as I have extensively worked (and still do) with captive
members of both the genera Macaca and Pan. As my descrip-
tions of deception among chimpanzees attest, I have no problem
attributing intentions, even devious ones, to animals (de Waal
1982). Yet, the same observer with the same attitude, looking
hard for similar instances in macaques, has discovered very
little. Admittedly, macaques do engage in deceptive practices
such as ignoring threat signals, faking a scream normally given in
response to an attack, or hiding themselves from view. Their
deceptive behavior is infrequent and simple, however, com-
pared to the pervasive distortion of information among chim-
panzees. It would seem premature to decide whether this is a
difference in degree or in kind between "the" monkey and "the"
ape, but I am convinced that the difference cannot be entirely
attributed to observer bias.
When, after six years of exposure to chimpanzees, I took up
watching rhesus monkeys, my first impression was that they
hardly take the time to review a situation before responding.
Most of their reactions are immediate, with no room for second-
ary impulses. This does not mean that reflection is absent in this
species, but time is an important factor in the "formulation" of
intelligent responses, and chimpanzees definitely take more
time than macaques. So do sloths, one might counter, but one
can sometimes see a chimpanzee being pulled between conflict-
ing impulses until a solution is found. Hence, the delay in
response appears to be due to mental processing, not to a
temperamental or physical inability to act swiftly, which chim-
panzees can and will do when necessary.
Let me give an example of externally visible decision making.
Walnut, the dominant male of the chimpanzee colony at the
Fieldstation of the Yerkes Primate Center, was consorting with
an oestrus female. An adolescent male, Kipper, was following
both of them and would take any opportunity to approach the
female, who had shown sexual interest in him on several occa-
sions. Walnut's constant vigilance, maintained for days on end,
did not leave much time for feeding. At one point, with the
female asleep, he headed towards the food trough (at a distance
of approximately 20 m) only to turn around midway when he saw
Kipper sneaking towards her. This sequence was repeated
several times, Walnut being torn between hunger and sexual
possessiveness. Suddenly, the normally dignified alpha male
made a wild dash to the trough, crammed as many chow pellets
as he could in his mouth, hands, and feet, and hurried back just
in time to separate Kipper from the female.
If the external signs of a dilemma are suppressed, its solution
will come more as a surprise, and may be more effective. If
Walnut had remained calm, not showing any inclination to leave
till the last second, Kipper might not even have had the time to
decide what to do. Self-control is such a basic prerequisite for
successful social maneuvering that it needs to be part of cog-
nitive ethology if we wish to make real progress. That is, we
need to study the normal emotional life of animals to understand
the modification of its expression for the sake of social manipu-
lation.
Whereas animal awareness, mental processes, insightful
problem solving, and intentionality are now openly discussed,
references to feelings are conspicuously lacking in most of the
literature on cognition. The mind is usually compared to a
digital computer, that is, to a machine without fears, hopes, and
changing adrenaline levels. In reality, emotions color percep-
tion at every level, and it is virtually impossible to draw a line
between the rational and the emotional components of decision
making.
Here we are especially interested in the extent to which
animals withhold information about their intentions and emo-
tions. Such withholding would be easy if they were cold ma-
chines, but many animals - and chimpanzees foremost among
them - have dramatic displays of emotion that need to be
suppressed for effective deceit. We may speculate that the
capacity to do so evolved in a social environment in which
everyone's nerves were constantly tested by bluff and provoca-
tion, while reactions were closely monitored. The term "poker
face" refers to precisely such an environment. The hiding of
primary impulses allows players time to think before they act,
and confuses competitors to the point where they may dig their
own graves. The technique is also common in the political arena.
For example, the Russian veteran diplomat Andrei Gromyko
was nicknamed "old stone face" for his ability to conceal his
mood behind an impenetrable mask during negotiations. Simi-
larly, Freeman (1983, p. 217) discussed the value of displays of
"engaging affability" among Samoans under pressure: "when a
chief is being criticized by others [i.e. by other chiefs], however
severely, it is usual for him to respond, even when deeply
angered, by intoning at regular intervals the words Malie!
Malie! (How agreeable! How agreeable!)."
Perhaps self-possession is not the male handicap (i.e. in the
form of an inability to express feelings) that some contemporary
feminists consider it to be; there are probably good strategical
reasons for competitors, male or female, to hide emotions from
others, perhaps even from themselves (cf. Trivers 1985, on self-
deception). If displays of vulnerability have adverse effects, they
will be eliminated through a combination of learning and the
innate ability to control the musculature of the face and other
communicative body regions. The behavior of adult male chim-
panzees faced with intimidation displays of rivals is strikingly
similar to the above human examples. Signs of nervousness are
hidden, a good mood is projected, irrelevant objects are picked
up and inspected, and all this while tensions are mounting and
serious escalation is in the air (de Waal 1986a). Observations of
solitary games in which juvenile bonobos and gorillas make
strange facial expressions suggest that voluntary muscular con-
trol in this body region is not limited to our species (Chevalier-
Skolnikoff 1982; de Waal 1986b).
As this timely target article by Whiten & Byrne demon-
strates, we are still a long way from conclusive verification of
intelligent deception among nonhuman primates. The present
collection and classification of anecdotes encourages us to design
new experiments and carry out more systematic observations.
The point I am making is that the emotional life of animals, and
the extent to which it can be held in check, need to be an
integrated part of the research.
How to break moulds
R. I. M. Dunbar
Department of Anthropology, University College London, London WC1E
6BT, England
There are just three points I wish to make in response to Whiten
& Byrne's (W&B's) target article. All of them are, in a sense,
contextual rather than critical, since I feel that W&B have done
an excellent job, both in overcoming the natural reticence of
field ethologists by persuading them to come clean on their
254
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1988) 11:2

Commentary/Whiten & Byrne: Primate deception
observations of deceptive behaviour and in their analysis and
classification of these examples.
The first point I wish to emphasize is that we continue to have
some serious mould-breaking to do. Many of those who are
interested in behaviour, from ethologists and psychologists to
philosophers and social scientists, are still reluctant to abandon
the behaviourist framework in which we have worked for more
than half a century. They are not wrong to insist on applying
Lloyd Morgan's canon rigidly; the kinds of problems they
happen to be interested in often do not require a more sophisti-
cated level of analysis than that of behaviourism.
However, in ethology, there has been a shift of interest from
the simple interactions that occur between individual organisms
to the relationships that animals use those interactions to medi-
ate and serve. One of the problems faced by an animal when
trying to negotiate and organise its relationships with fellow
group members in a complex social system is that it cannot .
always do what it wants to do. Its ideal relationships are not
always attainable because of the conflicting interests of other
individuals. In such a situation, it is not enough for us simply to
describe what an animal does - we need to be able to go beyond
the world at face value to try to understand what the animal is
attempting to do. This inevitably means trying to see the world
from inside the animal's head.
Now, when behaviourists object to an anthropomorphic ap-
proach, what they generally have in mind is claims about how
animals feel (or what philosophers now tend to refer to as the
"raw feels' of experience). This is not what social ethologists are
interested in however; we need to be able to get at the animal's
interpretation of those raw feels - in other words, the "raw
thinks" that the animal interprets "raw feels" in terms of.
Behaviourists may continue to remain skeptical of these
demands, insisting that the behaviour we observe does not
require a cognitive (or mentalistic) interpretation. In this con-
text, the issue of deception seems to me to be a crucial test case,
because genuine deception surely rests on the cognitive manip-
ulation of abstract information about another individual's under-
standing of actions or events. Both sides can, I think, agree on
this, so the only issue of any consequence remains the purely
empirical one of whether or not any nonhuman organism actu-
ally shows deceptive behaviour in this strong sense. Even
though profound skeptics may still remain doubtful, the mate-
rial presented by W&B clearly goes a long way toward establish-
ing the basis of a case that might yet convince even B.F.
Skinner. [See special issue on the work of Skinner, BBS 7(4)
1983.]
The second point I wish to draw attention to arises out of this
apparent conflict between traditional behaviourism and cog-
nitive ethology. At several points in their discussion of specific
examples, W&B point out that simpler behaviouristic explana-
tions cannot be discounted on the basis of the evidence in hand.
Herein, it seems to me, lies the very root of the problem. An
interaction between two animals is not an isolated event - it is
part of a developing relationship that has a long history and takes
place within a much wider social context. Whereas one can often
give a simple mechanistic interpretation of a specific interac-
tion, it is less easy to sustain such a view once context and history
are taken into account. I would suggest that the way forward lies
less in trying to engineer tests that would satisfy experimental
psychologists than in trying to find ways of exploiting the
contextual nature of interactions. I suspect that the recent
advances in discourse analysis (e.g. Gumperz 1982) might be a
profitable avenue to explore.
My last point concerns the nature of hypothesis testing. Too
often, scientists assume that the scientific method is syn-
onymous with an experimental approach. It is not. The scientific
method demands only that hypotheses be formulated and tested
in a rigorous way. The difficulties of controlling for extraneous
variables have, by historical accident, necessitated a heavy
dependence on experimental manipulation. But times have
progressed and we can now handle these problem variables
statistically in ways that allow us to test hypotheses in a nonex-
perimental form. Although I do not wish to decry the value of
carefully structured experiments (and especially the kinds of
experiments carried out in the field by Cheney and Seyfarth
1985a), I think it is important to avoid the naive mistake of
assuming that an experimental test of hypothesis is necessarily
more rigorous than an observational one. There is no intrinsic
reason why this should be so, for the rigour of an experiment is
only as great as the experimenter's ability to identify and
exclude confounding variables. An experiment can often be less
rigorous than a well-constructed analysis of observational data
precisely because it disrupts the natural flow of interactions:
experimental manipulation by definition introduces new and
uncontrolled extraneous contextual variables into a social
situation.
Toward a taxonomy of mind in primates
Gordon G. Gallup, Jr.
Department of Psychology, State University of New York at Albany, Albany,
N.Y. 12222
Whiten & Byrne (W&B) have provided an interesting critique
and taxonomy of apparent instances of intentional deception in
primates. It is clear from their target article, however, that
deception is not the issue. The question posed by tactical
deception in primates is whether they are capable of functioning
as "natural psychologists."
W&B have chosen not to discuss my position on this topic
(e.g., Gallup 1982; 1983; 1985). In my view, deception is simply
one of a variety of introspectively based social strategies that can
be used to infer whether an organism can use its experience to
infer the experience of others. When it comes to mental pro-
cesses in species other than our own it is no longer so much a
question of making inferences, but one of making inferences
about inferences.
I have argued, as has Humphrey (1982), that the ability to
impute mental states to others presupposes self-awareness; that
is, you have to be capable of reflecting on your own experience
to be in a position to use it to model the probable experience of
others. Accordingly, in addition to the reasons given by W&B,
there is a further reason why gorillas may fail to show more
convincing evidence of tactical deception. Gorillas may be
incapable of becoming the object of their own attention. Indeed,
based on their inability to recognize themselves in mirrors, I
predicted the gorilla data years ago (Gallup 1982). To my mind,
the question is not so much one of trying to reconcile the
absence of deception in gorillas with its presence in chim-
panzees, but to account for the puzzling performance of ba-
boons. The absence of any evidence of deception in orangutans,
who, like chimpanzees, can also correctly decipher mirrored
information about themselves, is not surprsing in so much as
they lead a rather solitary existence in the first place. In fact, I
have even conjectured (Gallup 1983) that the reason orangutans
are so reclusive may be because they have learned that other
orangutans cannot be trusted!
A rather curious feature emerges from the data presented by
W&B in Table 1. The number of people queried about cer-
copithecinae exceeds the total for all other subclasses combined.
Since most of W&B's examples of deception given involve
chimpanzees and baboons, it would be interesting to know how
many people working with baboons were contacted. The reason
this may be important is that the data for all other categories in
Table 1 are not given in terms of frequencies, but only in terms
of whether there was any evidence of deception. Since apparent
instances of tactical deception may be merely coincidental, it
follows that the likelihood of finding a spurious instance would
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1988) 11:2
255

Commentary/Whiten & Byrne: Primate deception
increase with the number of observations made. For reasons
that have been detailed elsewhere (Gallup 1985) it would also be
helpful, if not essential, to document the existence of in-
terspecific as well as intraspecific instances of tactical deception.
There are a variety of other ways in which questions like these
can be answered using more rigorous and more readily replica-
ble laboratory procedures. For example, I have suggested
(Gallup 1985) that one way of dealing with an organism's capaci-
ty to function as a natural psychologist would be to give it
systematic experience with different visual observations (e.g.,
blindfolds, opaque goggles, etc.). Having done that, one could
assess its reaction to other organisms that have been comparably
obstructed; for instance, how would a subordinate male baboon
react to a limited quantity of highly prized food in the presence
of a familiar dominant male as a function of whether the domi-
nant animal was wearing a blindfold? This kind of strategy can be
adapted to a number of situations and modalities. W&B pose the
question "Is there any evidence for an AGENT acting more or less
quietly according to the likelihood that a TARGET can hear him?"
An obvious way to answer this question would be to teach a
baboon to vocalize to get an experimenter's attention and then
give it experience with auditory obstructions (e.g., ear plugs,
head phones, etc.). Would it as a consequence respond differen-
tially by adjusting the intensity of its vocal output as a function of
whether the experimenter's auditory capacity had been
obstructed or not? My guess is that it would not.
Whereas deception is an interesting topic in its own right,
when it comes to evidence of "mind reading' it alone will not
suffice. Evidence of mind requires convergent validation with
data that cut across a variety of other categories which presup-
pose the capacity to impute mental states to others, such as
attribution, empathy, sympathy, gratitude, grudging, and
sorrow.
Subjective reality
Donald R. Griffin
Rockefeller University, New York, N. Y. 10021-6399; Department of
Biology, Princeton University, Princeton, N. J. 08544
Whiten & Byrne's (W&B's) stimulating target article reviews
progress in the objective analysis of significant though limited
evidence for intentional deception in nonhuman primates. It
also goes on to present some helpful and realistic recommenda-
tion for gathering improved data in the future. The collection
and comparative analysis of what are often disparaged as anec-
dotes is a reasonable first step, and one that should lead to
collecting new and better data. To further the principal objec-
tive of establishing guidelines for future research, I suggest
more emphasis on open-minded readiness to recognize and
appreciate the unexpected. Most of the behavioral patterns
discussed in W&B's paper probably surprised the scientists who
first observed them. Since there is no reason to suppose that we
already know everything of interest about deceptive behavior,
there is a danger that unduly rigid guidelines might interfere
with new discoveries.
W&B have largely freed themselves from the behavioristic
inhibitions that impeded the investigation of animal minds for so
many decades; but a few vestiges of these constraints still imply
that it is scientifically unsound to speculate about possible
subjective thoughts or feelings in nonhuman animals. For exam-
ple, quotation marks still serve as a sort of security blanket when
the authors make wholly reasonable use of words such as
purpose, believe, intend, listen to, or unplanned. And the very
denial that they are guilty of "an anthropomorphic approach,"
reinforces by implication the belief that subjective mental expe-
riences are confined to our species. Since that belief is being
challenged, it seems counterproductive to continue such gen-
uflections when questioning the orthodoxy that they express.
Surely one of the most important questions about deceptive
behavior is whether nonhuman animals consciously intend to
deceive, but we feel more comfortable with general, noncom-
mital terms such as representation or psychological state when
we may actually be dealing with specific, conscious thoughts.
For example, the optical image of the outside world on a
monkey's retina is an internal representation; it is of minimal
interest, however, because the important question is whether
the animal experiences conscious, subjective imagery of pre-
sent, past, or probable future events. Reluctance to use mental
terms, or to consider their possible appropriateness, may well
be an obsolete vestige of mindless behaviorism. Of course it will
be a long time before we can hope for completely satisfactory
evidence for or against conscious thinking in other species; but
progress toward this distant objective will not be facilitated by
reluctance to acknowledge that it is one of the most important
objectives of research on tactical deception.
The distant blast of Lloyd Morgan's Canon
Cecilia Heyes
Department of Experimental Psychology, University of Cambridge,
Cambridge CB2 3EB, England
Why do we want to know whether certain animals are "natural
psychologists"; whether they have beliefs and desires, hunches
and hankerings or, indeed, beliefs about hunches and hanker-
ings for desires? I say "we" because, not only do I share Whiten
& Byrne's (W&B's) curiosity, but it unites us with a growing
number of psychologists, naturalists, and philosophers who are
willing to argue into the academic small hours over the condi-
tions for, and the significance of, the attribution of intentional
states to animals. Dennett is a prominent member of this group
[see multiple book review of Dennett's The Intentional Stance,
BBS 11:3 1988.], and W&B seem to have taken several of their
leads from him. Owing to the clarity of his thinking and the
permeability of his prose, Dennett is an obvious choice of
philosophical guide for any psychologist, as long as we are wary.
Dennett's ultimate destination - the reason he wants to know
whether animals are intentional systems - is rather different
from that of most other people. Consequently, if we take
advantage of the path Dennett has beaten through the concep-
tual undergrowth we may well end up, neat and clean after a
relatively easy journey, in a place we never wanted to be. On the
other hand, if we follow Dennett just so far, and then try to strike
out on our own, we may well find ourselves stranded in dense
jungle far from our chosen destination. I suspect that W&B are
approaching this impasse, and I would like both to outline the
grounds for my suspicion and to offer them a sketch map of what
I see as an escape route.
To appreciate what Dennett hopes will be gained by asking
whether animals are intentional systems it is necessary to survey
his principal contribution to this debate (Dennett 1983) in
conjunction with several others (Dennett 1978; 1984; 1987).
This broadsheet makes it clear that in a legitimate intentional
characterization of an animal's behavior Dennett sees not an
explanation of that behavior, nor any justification for the conclu-
sion that the animal has a conscious mental life something like
ours, but a manageable practice problem for AI modellers. At
once optimistic about the ultimate utility of AI, and depressed
by its recent retreat into toy worlds and the modelling of isolated
faculties, Dennett urges AI specialists to develop their skills by
modelling whole systems that are simpler than people, that is,
the competence of animals (Dennett 1978).
So much for Dennett's destination. How does he clear a path
to it? Although he may not have fully demonstrated the advan-
tage of intentional over functional descriptions of animal compe-
tences (Heyes 1986) he has avoided being ensnared by a couple
256
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1988) 11:2

Commentary/Whiten & Byrne: Primate deception
of major objections to the attribution of intentional states to
animals: that they are (1) not observable and (2) not explanatory.
Dennett secures the basic observability of intentional states by
regarding them as postulates of an empirical, "folk" theory of
mind, and he enhances their empirical discriminability using
the "rationality assumption" which transforms, by idealization,
folk psychology into the intentional stance (Stich 1981). The idea
that reference to mental states is not explanatory originates in
the long-standing claim that mental terms are irreducible to
mechanistic terms (i.e., some common denominator of scientific
explanation; Churchland 1979). Dennett deals with this objec-
tion by embracing it. He regards the attribution of mental states
as an instrument of investigation, not as an explanatory termi-
nus. Thus, Dennett beats a path to the legitimate attribution of
mental states to animals by idealizing and instrumentalizing our
everyday conception of mental states.
Despite expressing the wish to find out "just where it gets us
to consider primates as 'natural psychologists,'" W&B hardly
address this question. For several reasons, I take them to be
assuming that if a primate can properly be said to be a natural
psychologist, then its deceptive behaviour will have been ex-
plained, and we will have a better idea of what it is like to be a
baboon (say): First, it is usual for specialists in any given field of
science to expect their own activities to terminate in explana-
tion; they seldom regard themselves, as Dennett would have
them regarded, as data processors for another speciality (in this
case, AI). Second, in section 2.4.2, W&B seem to be arguing
that if animals behave in an intentionally describable fashion
then those animals are really representing mental states. Final-
ly, I take the what-is-it-like-to-be-an-X question (Nagel 1974) to
be so compelling that all those interested in animal behaviour
are guilty until proven innocent of being under its influence.
If W&B do expect intentional characterizations to explain
animals' behavior and to give us a glimpse of their phenomenal
worlds, then their destination is a long way from Dennett's, and
it is natural that they have rejected his instrumentalism. How-
ever, in so doing they have forfeited a means of counteracting
objections to the attribution of intentional states to animals from
the standpoint of the unity of science. What will they say when
someone asks: Why foist intentional states onto animals when it
is so difficult to find a place in science for those which obstinately
adhere to people?
Although they reject his instrumentalism, W&B make exten-
sive use of Dennett's other machete - the rationality assump-
tion. Although this does allow them to probe the content of
mental states empirically, the rationality assumption, as part of
an idealization of folk psychology, leads W&B down a path from
which the conclusion that certain primates have mental lives like
ours is thoroughly inaccessible. If the behavioral criteria for the
attribution of mental states are different, then why should the
phenomenal experience be the same?
Like most escape routes, the one I offer W&B would not take
them to their original destination, but it would allow them both
to take advantage of Dennett's insight, and to contribute as
explorers, rather than Sherpas, to the resolution of a pressing
issue. In my view, speculation and observation dedicated to
finding out whether animals are intentional systems is valuable
in so far as it has the potential to challenge the long-standing
assumption that human behavior with certain distinctive operat-
ing characteristics also has distinctive origins. "Folk" assume
that behavior which is distinguishable by its manifest flexibility
in relation to environmental change is also distinctive in terms of
its causes; that is, that it is mentally generated. Dennett has
highlighted the possibility of testing this assumption by first
identifying behaviours that have the manifest properties of
mentality and then investigating the mechanisms that generate
them. This way we can find out whether folk have cleverly and
unwittingly picked out a natural kind in contemporary be-
havioural science.
Attempts, like W&B's, to identify animal behaviour with the
manifest properties of mentality are an invaluable part of the
first stage of this enquiry. This is because when animals are
used, the second stage - investigation of the origins of behaviour
- is facilitated by both the relative simplicity of the behaviour,
and the range of invasive techniques that may be applied.
However, W&B's data set will be spoiled for the present
purpose if they allow the question of origins to interfere with the
intial assignment of behaviour to intentional and nonintentional
categories. For the most part, they succeed admirably in avoid-
ing such interference, but in section 3.3 the distant blast of
Lloyd Morgan's canon, the heavy artillery for obfuscating the
distinction between causes and operating characteristics, can be
heard. If we are to discover whether the behaviour that folk
would class as intentional, on the basis of its manifest charac-
teristics, has unique origins, then we sabotage the whole enter-
prise in allowing intentional status to hinge on the putative
origins of the behavior in "prolonged training histories," "cre-
ative intelligence, " instinct, or whatever.
A practical consequence of the recommended disregard for
origins is that W&B need not be reluctant to propose, or to
canvass the results of, laboratory studies. Like the behaviour of
laboratory animals, that of free-living animals may be the prod-
uct of "prolonged training histories" (just because the trials were
not imposed and documented by an experimenter, it doesn't
necessarily mean that they didn't happen); but if the behaviour
of either is found to be both a product of conditioning and
manifestly intentional we should be pleased, because it indi-
cates that studies like W&B's have the potential to challenge
received wisdom, and to extend, rather than reapply, our
understanding of the mental.
Lies, damned lies and anecdotal evidence
Nicholas Humphrey
Ducklake House, Ashwell, Hertfordshire SG7 5LL, England
George Eliot, in The Mill on the Floss, sets a trap for those of us
who smell deception everywhere. She represents Mr. Tulliver
seeking advice from Mr. Riley about where to send his son to
school. Riley knows of a particular establishment, and recom-
mends it so enthusiastically but so implausibly that it seems
obvious that he himself stands to gain from the boy's placement.
In comes the author with a put-down to her "too sagacious
readers":
There is nothing more widely misleading than sagacity if it happens to
get on a wrong scent, and sagacity persuaded that men usually act and
speak from distinct motives, with a consciously proposed end in view,
is certain to waste its energies on imaginary game. Plotting covet-
ousness and deliberate contrivance in order to compass a selfish end,
are nowhere abundant but in the world of the dramatist; they demand
too intense a mental action for many of our fellow-parishioners to be
guilty of them. (1860, chap. 3)
Whiten & Byrne (W&B) are surely aware of the dangers of
attributing too intense a mental action to an animal. Yet, in
discussing the remarkable evidence that they've amassed, they
continually favour the dramatic interpretation over the more
prosaic one. In the light of their own caveat about the human
capacity for manipulating evidence, I think they ought to be
more cautious.
I will focus on those cases where I happen to have some
knowledge both of the animal and of the observer in the field.
Dian Fossey was not, I believe, someone whose reports should
be taken entirely at face value. This passage, from Gorillas in the
Mist (Fossey 1983, p. 201), illustrates the problem: "On per-
ceiving the softness, tranquility, and trust conveyed by Macho's
eyes, I was overwhelmed by the extraordinary depth of our
rapport. The poignancy of her gift will never diminish." In
short, Fossey identified so closely with the animals (and was so
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1988) 11:2
257

Commentary /Whiten & Byrne: Primate deception
jealous of their reputation vis-a-vis that of other apes) that she
saw human qualities everywhere.
How then would she respond when asked to provide anec-
dotal evidence that gorillas are capable of showing a "higher
mental faculty" (at least as capable as chimpanzees!)? At the very
least she might have let imagination run away with her. Take the
first case W&B mention (A3-sect. 2.5.1), where a gorilla is
reported as dallying behind her companions after "she looks up
into Hypericum tree and spies a nearly obscured clump of
Loranthus vine" (my italics). It sounds like a neutral enough,
nonsubjective observation. But it is not. Did Fossey see the
gorilla "spying" the vine? How could she have recognised that
she had "spied" it, except on the basis of her subsequent
behaviour interpreted as an act of tactical deception. But if
there was no evidence that she had seen the vine before she
stopped and groomed, the deception-interpretation falls apart.
Or take the second case where a subordinate gorilla is re-
ported as approaching a baby by building a series of fake nests
(Cl-sect. 2.5.3). I happen to know that this tactic was one that
Fossey herself frequently adopted when she wanted to approach
the centre of a group. Having seen her building nests so that she
should deceive the gorillas, I cannot but be skeptical when she
offers an exactly parallel example as a case of deception of one
gorilla by another.
None the less, suppose the behavioural acts were as she
states. The fact remains that classical ethology could, in this
case, provide a perfectly adequate "lower-level" explanation,
namely, that the animal, being caught between approach and
avoidance, was in a "conflict situation" and responded with the
"displacement activity" of nest building. I admit I do not like
this kind of explanation any more than W&B do; but precisely
because the dramatist within me would prefer to think the
gorilla was showing deliberate cunning, the scientist needs
double convincing that the simpler explanation will not do.
Is that a tall order? It need not be - as my own observation of
Fossey's nest building confirms. Suppose someone were to
suggest that Fossey herself was simply showing displacement
behaviour. I would answer with considerations such as these:
(1.) I never saw her nest building in any other conflict situation,
(2.) I noticed that, while she built the nest, she also made fake
belch vocalisations, as if to reinforce the "neutral image," (3.) I
have independent evidence that Fossey herself understood the
nature of deception, and in particular (vide the above example)
that she could attribute deceptiveness to other creatures.
Beliefs about beliefs (e.g., belief that someone else is being
deceitful) are not easy to pin down. Yet isn't it possible that the
best evidence we could have for an animal being capable of
deception would be evidence that the animal could recognise
deception practiced by another? Admittedly, there are as yet no
established criteria for distinguishing, at a behavioural level, the
"moral outrage" that might be shown by an animal who recog-
nises he's been duped from the "mere rage" he might show at
losing out. But the ground has already been laid theoretically for
making such a distinction (e.g., by Trivers 1981), and it ought (if
it is real) to be observable in practice. Maybe the famous
observation by Tinklepaugh (1928) of the rage shown by
monkeys when they were cheated by a human experimenter
needs looking at again.
You can't hide your lying eyes (or can you?)
W. C. McGrew
Department of Psychology, University of Stirling, Stirling FK9 4LA, Scotland
Whiten & Byrne (W&B) are to be congratulated for coming to
grips with a slippery subject. The hands-on metaphor is apt.
They have provided a practically useful taxonomy, from the
down-to-earth definition of tactical deception, through the clear
setting out of the players, to the 13-category typology. At last we
can get down to gathering data which can be systematically
compared. If this scheme did no more than this, it would be
useful enough. In fact, by going on to tackle the "psychology" of
the phenomenon, especially in terms of what more we need to
know in most cases, W&B have made a uniquely helpful
advance.
W&B emphasize the "social" model for explaining the evolu-
tion of intelligence, but they make no mention of the alternative
"environmental" model, as proposed by Parker and Gibson
(1979), Milton (1981), and so on. For social creatures, such as
most primates, the former model is attractive; but it is less
convincing for other taxa. For example, are pack-living wolves
likely to be that much more intelligent than family-living
coyotes, or pride-living lions than solitary leopards, to give two
congeneric examples? In addition, how much empirical evi-
dence is there that being caught out at (say) "crying wolf
actually results in being denied help by one's associates?
In stressing the importance of manipulation W&B may be
exceeding reasonable evolutionary expectations. (See Hinde
1981 for another response to Dawkins and Krebs's 1978 thesis on
manipulative communication.) After all, there may be equally
good reasons to cooperate (that is, to engage in transactions in
which both parties accrue net gains) in communication as in any
other social interaction.
A traditional distinction not made explicitly by W&B con-
cerns deception by acts of omission (inhibition of existing behav-
ioral patterns) versus acts of commission (new use of behavioral
patterns which goes beyond mere disinhibition). Perhaps ignor-
ing another is the most simple example of the former, whereas
distracting another is a good example of the latter. Omission
seems to be less intellectually demanding than commission, but
the two may be hard to disentangle. Consider the pet pig-tailed
macaque described by Bertrand (1976) which was toilet-trained
successfully by her owners, but which used the acquired signal
of impending urination deceptively to extricate herself from
tiresome situations!
It may be, as W&B state, that morphological deception occurs
mostly between species, whereas behavioral deception occurs
chiefly between the sexes but within a species. However, one of
the most thorough empirical studies of behavioral deception
remains that of Byers and Byers (1983) on pronghorn mothers
concealing the location of their cached fawns from predatory
coyotes. Similarly, though tactical deception may occur within
groups (and the key variable is less likely to be species than
degree of association), some cases at least of strangers fooling
one another may qualify as tactical (Sargeant & Eberhardt 1975).
Mindless behaviorism, bodiless cognitivism,
or primatology?
E. W. Menzel, Jr.
Department of Psychology, State University of New York at Stony Brook,
Stony Brook, N.Y. 11794
Whiten & Byrne (W&B) present an interesting and useful
survey of deceptive behavior in nonhuman primates, but I have
several bones to pick.
1. Once W&B got me to worrying about whether the seem-
ingly special abilities of chimpanzees are all attributable to the
pecadillos of chimpanzee researchers, I didn't know where to
stop. Soon I was stewing about analogous problems in marmo-
sets and macaques. Next it was bats, chickens, sea slugs, and
dung beetles. And then Noah's ark opened. I was saved from the
deluge only by a cold beer and a dog-eared copy of the Journal of
Irreproducible Results.
2. The term "mindless behaviorist" is an even worse ad
hominem. It should be banned from print in scientific publica-
258
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1988) 11:2

Commentary/Whiten & Byrne: Primate deception
tions. Its direct alternative is, moreover, "bodiless cognitivist' -
and I would certainly not want to qualify for that label either.
3. 
Menzel's (1974 central problem was formulated as a
problem in "(zoological) geometry or mechanics," not cognitive
psychology. In other words: Given that group of young chim-
panzees in that big enclosure out there, how do they vary their
locations with respect to one another and the environment?
Where will the group go next; how do individuals scatter around
their common center; who or what controls the group's travels;
how is this control possible?
The deviousness and detouring in the movements of an
animal that is headed toward a hidden pile of food when it is
accompanied by a companion that characteristically takes all of
the food, as opposed to the straightforwardness and directness of
its movements when this companion is absent and it is accom-
panied by an animal that begs for a small share, is not a poetic
metaphor. Nor is the difference difficult to demonstrate in
chimpanzees, unless one chops the original problem down to fit
into a T-maze. If my 1974 description sounds anecdotal, I
recommend the procedures and "baseline" data that are re-
ported in the remainder of the same paper also be inspected.
The question is: How devious can a given animal get, what
sorts of detours can it negotiate, and to what degree do animals
act together or split according to the personal payoff for so
doing? But spatiotemporal deviousness and detouring are con-
tinua, not all-or-none categories. Cooperation and competition
are two sides of the same coin of coordination, regulation, and
control. How a normal living being moves from one moment to
the next is never (in my opinion) accidental, trivial, or "unin-
teresting." I do not hesitate to translate pictorial and graphical
representations into words if this will enhance communication;
the word "deception" seems as accurate as any, but to assume
that the "real problem" is deceit as a student of humans would
define it, and that spatiotemporal analyses are only a means for
getting at deceit, is putting the cart before the horse. Whether
or not a given verbal label is warranted rests more on an
understanding of human verbal habits than on an analysis of
animal movements, and no two people read between the lines in
the same way. Regardless of how many categories of deception
one comes up with, I am not confident that they will describe or
explain the total variance of animal movements any more effec-
tively than would a straightforward locational analysis.
As Hull (if not every behaviorist) said, "However striking the
analogy, it must never be forgotten that molar behavior theory is
not molar physics" (1952, p. 243). But it is not human linguistics
either. If cognitive ethology ever actually comes to treat animal
movements as a secondary or coincidental rather than intrin-
sically interesting subject matter it will, in my opinion, become
a contradiction in terms.
4. I doubt that the deception is rare or difficult to analyze in
feral nonhuman primates (see Menzel 1966). An equally plausi-
ble position is that: (a) until recently, nobody explicitly looked
for it; or (b) to see it, one must first of all identify the animals'
Archimedean fixed points.
The latter task can certainly be greatly facilitated by simple
experimental stratagems, such as introducing special "goal ob-
jects. " Experiments are, however, an extension or refinement of
common sense, not a substitute for it. (By the way, does anyone
have any experimental evidence for deceit in any human presi-
dent, king, or dictator? All I have ever seen here is anecdotes.)
Thus, for example, the ultimate "fixed point" for a neo-Darwin-
ian analysis would be animals' maximization of their inclusive
genetic fitness (e.g., Dawkins & Krebs 1978; Trivers 1985); and
whatever behavioral strategies and goals one can get at by means
of short-term experiments or observations must obviously be
viewed in that larger context. [See Maynard Smith: "Game
Theory and the Evolution of Behavior" BBS 7(1) 1984.]
5. According to my dictionary, "deception usually refers to
the act, and deceit, to the habit of mind" (Webster's New
Universal Unabridged Dictionary, 2d Edition). Deception may
or may not imply intent, and may be defined from the point of
view of any participant in an interaction, including an external
observer; deceit by definition implies intent on the part of the
actor. It seems to me that W&B might be mixing up the two
concepts. But in any event deception seems overcognitivized,
and many problems remain unsettled. Thus: Who shall be tried
for deceit? (If ants so qualify, what about a very deceptive
ethological model of an ant?) Is the accused to be presumed
innocent until proved guilty, or vice versa? (Compare and
contrast Dawkins and Krebs and Trivers with human linguists.)
Who qualifies as witnesses? How much circumstantial evidence
does it take to make an airtight case? Should witnesses be asked
for their on-the-spot judgments about guilt, or are all decisions
to be relegated to a judge and jury who are not personally
familiar with the accused (or, indeed, with the species to which
it belongs)? Or, in general, what is the "law of the land"?
6. To sum up: W&B offer us a choice between "animals as
mindless" or "animals as psychologists," but in so doing they
obscure a third alternative, which still sounds fine to me. It is, of
course, animals as animals - using Darwin's rather than Des-
cartes' understanding of the terms "animal," "human," "me-
chanical," and "mental."
A prime goal of taxonomy is, in Plato's words, to "carve
Nature at its joints." But where is the zoological joint between
behavior and cognition? In my opinion, it lies in an "illusion" of
human semantics, not in animal behavior. "If behavioral science
ever develops the tools for analyzing organismic 'events as a
whole' in a really adequate fashion, the old controversies be-
tween laboratory versus field, experimentation versus observa-
tion and various 'schools' of behavior theory will truly fade into
oblivion" (Menzel 1974, p. 149; see also Menzel 1987).
Ontogeny, biography, and evidence for
tactical deception
Robert W. Mitchell
Yerkes Regional Primate Research Center, Emory University, Atlanta, Ga.
30322
I am sympathetic to Whiten & Byrne's (W&B's) concerns and
believe their taxonomy is useful in stimulating and categorizing
observations of complex interactions. However, I fear that their
inferences from types of act-context co-occurrences to mental
causes are disturbingly reminiscent of, and lead to the same
problems as, those of Romanes (1883/1977; see Mitchell 1986).
Because an act based on mental representations about the mind
of another organism is often perceptually similar to an act based
on less complex representations, evidence other than the act
(and its associated contexts) must be used to differentiate types
of mentality (Mitchell 1986; 1987a). Adequate evidence of the
type of mental representation a deceiver has would include
knowledge of what the deceiver can know. Thus, the interpreta-
tion of deception must be based on our theory of the psychology
of members of the deceiver's species, and perhaps of that
individual (Mitchell 1986; de Waal 1986a). Such a theory re-
quires that one observe organisms ontogenetically (Mitchell
1986).
Ontogenetic observation was, in fact, Morgan's (1894) reme-
dy for Romanes's anecdotalism. Although W&B write that
"historical antecedents" of the deception must be known to
make inferences to mental representations, they attempt to
make these inferences without such ontogenetic information
(see, e.g., discussion about or following No. 26 under Al [hiding
from view]; No. 26 under A3 [inhibition of attending]: No. 16
under D3 [deceive TARGET about AGENT'S involvement with
TOOL]; and No. 83 under E [deflection of TARGET to FALL GUY].
Grounding observations of deception in knowledge of the spe-
cies-typical behavioral ontogeny and psychological develop-
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1988) 11:2
259

Commentary/Whiten & Byrne: Primate deception
ment of deceivers and deceived, and even in their individual
biographies, transforms anecdotes into psychologically mean-
ingful data (see chapters by Chevalier-Skolnikoff, Miles,
Morris, Vasek, and de Waal in Mitchell & Thompson 1986a).
W&B's definition requires a catalogue of all contexts associ-
ated with a particular "honest" act from the "normal repertoire"
of an individual before any example can be categorized as
tactical deception (cf. Thompson 1986). However, many of the
examples provided cannot fulfill this requirement, because the
act used in deception does not occur in the "normal repertoire,"
only in the deceptive context. Such is the case for the act of
concealing one's erect penis (Al, Nos. 66 and 67); the act of
keeping one's eye gaze away from food (Al, No. 3); suppressing
vocalization (A2, No. 13); and inhibiting one's attention (A3, No.
2). With these behaviors it is not, as the definition requires, that
the "honest" act occurs in a "different" context. Instead, the
honest act is different from the act used to deceive. Deception is
indicated either because of the absence of the normal act-
context co-occurrence (Nos. 2, 3, 13), or because of the addition
of another (deceptive) act which counteracts an already present
"normal" act (Nos. 66, 67).
W&B's definition is also based on the erroneous assumption
that the normal, highest-frequency act-context co-occurrence in
an organism's repertoire is the "honest" version of that orga-
nism's act. Contrary to this assumption, we know that an act may
be more frequently deceptive than "honest" when the victim's
failure to respond to it has serious consequences for the victim
(Mitchell & Thompson 1986b, p. 359). Also contrary to this
assumption, W&B include as tactical deception the false alarm
calling of Munn's birds, which call false alarms more frequently
than they do true ones (Munn 1986a, p. 171). Greater decep-
tiveness can occur here because the victims may lose their lives
by not responding.
The widespread assumption, apparently accepted by W&B,
that deception between familiar organisms is likely to be rare
requires empirical verification, because in numerous cases de-
ception is certainly continually repeated between the same two
individuals even after its discovery (see, e.g., Werth & Flaherty
1986). Anyone who has played a game of object-keepaway with a
dog or person knows that familiarity with a player's deception
need not make it rare; indeed, it may become more frequent
than its honest counterpart (see Mitchell 1987b).
The inherent problems with W&B's definition and their
inclusion of instances which clearly do not fulfill it yet seem to be
intuitively acceptable instances of deception suggests that W&B
had other criteria in mind when they accepted these instances as
tactical deceptions. Presumably they were interested in inten-
tional deception as characterized by Russow (1986, p. 48), in
which an agent's act is deceptive if the agent intends to produce
a false belief in another organism. W&B repeatedly imply that
the only other interpretation of an apparently deceptive act is
that it is random. Thus, they do not articulate an alternative (and
more likely) characterization: that the act is intended to produce
a response by the victim without the deceiver's having any ideas
about the victim's beliefs (see the distinction between planned
deception and learned deception in Mitchell [1986, p. 25-28]).
The idea quoted from Premack and Woodruff (1978) - that such
a "behavioristic" theory about the victim requires more intel-
ligence for a deceiver than does a mentalistic theory - is belied
by our knowledge that children are "behaviorists" before they
become mentalists (see Vasek 1986, p. 280). The behaviorist
alternative assumes less complex representations (and is thus
more economical) and seems likely to account for many of
W&B's examples (especially types D and E).
Finally, I disagree with, or do not understand, some of
W&B's ideas. (1) I do not understand the contrast between the
AGENT'S "adjusting his future behavior to the current state of the
TARGET'S evaluation of the AGENT'S behavior" and the AGENT'S
"usingasetofdiscreterules"ofthe"if. . ., then . . ."sort; the
latter seems necessary for the former. (2) I doubt that "only
those classes of deception that occur more than once will
ultimately be of interest," especially if one is interested in
creative intelligence; a truly creative deceiver might invent
novel deceptions to avoid being caught. (3) I do not understand
how anyone is deceived in types D and E, though I do see how
someone is manipulated. (4) I do not understand why the first
chimp's later act in No. 24 is novel (unless by "novel" is meant
"different from previous acts"), nor why the second chimp need
be predicting anything about the other's psychological pro-
cesses. Might not the second be thinking that something is odd
about the first's actions and be waiting to see what it does?
Which are more easily deceived, friends or
strangers?
Duane Quiatt
Department of Anthropology, University of Colorado at Denver, Denver,
Colo. 80202
A question I wish to raise concerns the extent to which tactical
deception depends on familiarity between deceiver and de-
ceived. There seem to be no reports of intergroup deception in
nature in Whiten & Byrne's (W&B's) corpus of anecdotes. Why?
Is this an artifact of the way we observe primates or does it have
more to do with the character of their behavior? Implicit in the
notion of tactical deception is behavioral flexibility, largely
though not entirely absent from interspecific mimicry or camou-
flage (the anglerfish at least does not change its bait). If effective
deployment of signals, whether for clarification or obfuscation,
is enhanced by feedback, as I assume it must be, then its seems
likely that the better an animal knows its intended victim the
better the feedback, the more accurate the cognitive represen-
tation of that individual's psychological state, and the more
effective the deception. It is also true, however, that increased
understanding of one another should entail advantages for
specific individuals, both in deception and in defense against
deception, assuming mutual familiarity and symmetry in com-
munication. Here one can get stuck in a kind of revolving door
and there is some danger of emerging with dizzy revelations
abouj the role of deception in the evolution of ethics and
language through selection for finer and finer discrimination
between cheating and fair play in a system of reciprocal al-
truism. That would seem to me to conflate concepts appropriate
to natural selection with those appropriate to learning in devel-
opment. My question is instead designed to direct attention to
what constitutes mutual understanding, how much of it may be
necessary, and perhaps how much is too much.
Putting oneself in the shoes of another human being is
something most of us have been encouraged to do - usually with
the idea that it will make a better person of us, increase our
understanding of the other fellow, and improve our disposition
toward cooperation and mutual support. By definition it in-
volves taking or sharing the perspective of some specific other
individual, an ability which George Herbert Mead associated
with competence in language (Mead 1934, cited by Vasek 1986).
Vasek goes a step further, arguing that "Perspective taking and
language skills are integral parts of lying successfully." For
intentional deception to be successful, the person framing the
deception "must . . . coordinate perspectives by taking the
other into account . . . [and], because other people do not
simply accept verbalizations without putting them in some
frame of reference, the deceiver must recognize that others
attempt to coordinate perspectives with him or her; that is, the
people to be deceived try to relate to or understand the apparent
truth, and if they cannot believe the message they may detect
the deception" (Vasek 1986, p. 284, emphasis added).
It is perspective taking, not language skills per se, that is the
sine qua non of lying. Deception at some level of definition (e.g.,
260
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1988) 11:2

Commentary/Whiten & Byrne: Primate deception
tact, diplomacy, commercial advertisement, putting a best foot
forward and a good face on the matter) is pretty thoroughly
embedded in ordinary discourse and interaction. At these levels
- and perhaps still more evidently in the conventions of chil-
dren's play or adult games and sport - nonverbal deception is at
least as important as and more acceptable than lying. Success in
gambling games such as bridge, poker, chess, or pocket billiards
requires knowledge of winning strategies including those that
involve deceiving other players as to experience, ability, pre-
sent playing condition, goals, and game strategies. More than
that, if a deceiver is to coordinate perspectives he must have
sufficient understanding of the specific game context and of
individual players to know what kinds and levels of deceptive
behavior will be not only tolerated if discovered but - no less
important and more to the point of the present discussion -
anticipated as a part of normal play.
This suggests to me that deception may require more than
perspective taking (necessary if one is to represent in one's own
mind the psychological perspective of a potential victim) and the
coordination of that perspective with a misrepresentation of
one's own. It may require something in the way of mutual
alignment of perspectives, a point well made by Mawby and
Mitchell (1986), who in a study of feints and ruses in athletic
games emphasize the significance of competition between indi-
viduals of comparable levels of athletic skill and, presumably,
experience at deceiving and being deceived. A professional
player may discover more difficulty, and greater risk of injuring
himself, in attempting to "fake out" a less-than-competent
opponent than a player at roughly his own level of ability
(Mawby & Mitchell 1986, p. 321).
All of this suggests a general conclusion, in two parts: that
deception is unlikely to occur where perspectives cannot be
brought into partial overlap and that deception is not possible
where overlap is total (Quiatt 1987). In Homo sapiens, language
and translation afford overlap of individual perspectives on a
broad basis - in most respects, given the rapidity of modern
translation and cultural transmission of behavior, species-wide.
At the same time, there are marked differences in environmen-
tal influences even within human families (Plomin & Daniels
1987). For human beings, environmental variance, insuring
against perfect overlap of individual perspectives, is mediated
by language. So is their capacity for self-deception; any language
competent human being is probably able to represent to himself
not one or two but any number of perspectives on the world. So,
as far as human deception is concerned, the conclusion just
noted seems trivial, but I wonder whether it does not have a
useful application to intraspecific deception in nonhuman
primates.
It is unlikely that two monkeys of the same species can see
things from exactly the same perspective, any more than two
human beings can; but the view from a laboratory cage is
nevertheless a narrow one. Animals that share close confine-
ment cannot distance themselves physically from one another,
and its seems reasonable to conclude (in the absence of any
information as to nonhuman primate fantasy life) that in such
straitened environmental circumstances there cannot be much
psychological distance either. At the other extreme are monkeys
in different groups in nature, though they meet occasionally in
contests for resources: One can only speculate as to how much
they might have in common or whether a member of one group
could coordinate perspectives with a target individual in an-
other in order to deceive him. Clearly, however, the situation is
different from that in human society, where language and
language-based human cultures provide far more comprehen-
sive frames for the coordination of individual perspectives.
Somewhere in the middle, 'between hard confinement and
the free habitats of primate groups in nature, are the relatively
open worlds of groups in which behavior is still constrained and
individual perspectives are coordinated to some degree by
human management - by restriction of range (through fencing
or other means, as in island colonies) and, usually, the imposi-
tion of provisioned diet. Relatively few of the data collected by
W&B derive from such groups, and again I wonder why. In any
event W&B are, it seems to me, on the right track. It is through
close examination of the circumstances of deception, including
spatial and social constraints, dependence on common re-
sources, and history of relations between deceiver and de-
ceived, that "evidence for the origins of the deceptive act"
(section 3.3.4) is likely to be obtained.
Only external representations are needed
Howard Rachlin
Psychology Department, State University of New York at Stony Brook,
Stony Brook, N.Y. 11794-2500
"Representation . . . a 
showing, 
exhibiting,
manifesting. . . . " 
(Webster's 
New 
Twentieth
Century 
Dictionary 
of the English 
Language).
Person A infers from the behavior of monkey B that monkey B
infers from the behavior of monkey C that monkey C believes X.
In principle, there is nothing wrong with this set of nested
inferences just as it stands. Whiten & Byrne (W&B) correctly
cite Wittgenstein (1953) and claim functional ("economical")
justification for such statements. But what is the point - where is
the economy - of adding to the chain of inferences the concept of
a representation of monkey C's belief in the head of monkey C
and a representation of monkey B's inference in the head of
monkey B? [See also multiple book review of Sperbes &
Wilson's Relevance: BBS 10(4) 1987.]
As you sit and watch a movie in which at a given instant, say,
an actor is laughing, you see, in some sense, patches of color on a
screen; in some other sense, a person; in some third sense, that
person's emotions and beliefs. The second and third perceptions
(and probably the first as well) involve inferences about events
taking place at times other than that instant. But just as it is not
necessary to suppose that an actor behind the screen underlies
your perception of a person, so it is not necessary to suppose that
a representation in the person's head underlies your perception
of that person's emotions and beliefs. Representations, in these
cases, are there on the screen, showing, exhibiting, manifesting
something. Correspondingly, monkey C's beliefs and what
monkey B infers about them are represented in monkey C's and
monkey B's behavior (now and in the past) - not in invisible,
inaccessible recesses of their heads.
There would be no harm in inventing unshown, unexhibited,
unmanifested representations as a sort of game - given that
anybody will actually bother to play it; where are the flow
diagrams, where are the computer programs that this concep-
tion demands? - except that it distracts psychologists from more
fruitful pursuits, more useful inferences, about how the animal
as a whole has interacted with its environment (including other
animals) in the past and how that relates to what is happening
now.
The most disappointing part of this article is W&B's quotation
from the philosopher Daniel Dennett (1983; sect. 3.3) to the
effect that carefully designed experiments will provide histories
of reinforcement by which behaviorists might explain what is
observed. Psychologists interested in the minds of animals are
therefore advised to abandon the experimental method (lest the
animal mind be explained by behaviorists). Of course if there
were any value in cognitive (as opposed to behavioral) explana-
tions of the mind, W&B would not need to worry about what a
behaviorist might say.
On anecdotal evidence, which W&B use to promote and
demote various species of animals on some vaguely specified
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1988) 11:2
261

Commentary/Whiten & Byrne: Primate deception
scale of intentionality, they might have quoted another observa-
tion of Wittgenstein (1953, sect. 199), that it is impossible to
obey a rule only once; and they might have asked Thorndike's
(1911/1965) question about all the dogs who don't find their way
home.
Tactical deception: A likely kind of primate
action
Vernon Reynolds
Department of Biological Anthropology, Oxford University, Oxford 0X2
60S, England
Whiten & Byrne (W&B) have done an excellent job of compiling
reports on tactical deception in primates. It is interesting to note
the lack of examples from prosimians and certain other primate
groups, and the heavy concentration among Cercopithecidae
and Pan. It seems likely that more work will reveal deception in
more species, but this must remain open until we have more
data. Perhaps what will eventually emerge is a scale of primate
social intelligence. Man will certainly be at the top as the most
deceptive primate of all, a point made by Colter Rule (1967),
who regarded speech as man's way into ever more devious
actions: "We have for so long thought of speech serving as a
communications vehicle that we have difficulty seeing that it
also served the function of furthering covert behavior' (p. 161).
It seems that tactical deception is most evident (so far) in those
species that we already know to have complex social systems.
Given what we know about the complexity of social interactions
within these systems, the existence of tactical deception is not in
itself surprising, though no doubt we shall be in for many
surprises as the various forms it can take are revealed. Baboons
that are capable of the complex mate acquisition strategies
described by Smuts (1985), for example, are indicating the
existence of qualities of mind that incorporate tactical deception
along the way.
There are problems of evidential support. W&B ask for
better, more detailed descriptions. Doubtless these will be
forthcoming. However, I doubt that they will falsify the hypoth-
esis that primates can mentally work out and then put into
practice deceptive actions. Better descriptions will, I expect,
render the current probability a certainty and give us a lot of
detail about the structure of primate social thinking and how it
differs from species to species.
This is a fascinating prospect. As Harre and Reynolds have
pointed out, there are two interlocked problems here: the
analysis of primate intentions and the analysis of primate inten-
sions (Harr6 & Reynolds 1984, p. 249-50). W&B have em-
barked on the systematic study of the former; the latter remains
to be attempted.
There remain many curious problems, of which I will mention
three. First, why is so much deception focussed around the
rather boring business of food getting? Would one not expect
much more around sex? In humans, this is surely the case. What
happens in circumstances where food is very plentiful?
Second, a priori one would expect less deception (or none)
between close kin, and more as genetic relatedness declines.
Can this be tested?
Third, are there any observable giveaways in deceiving pri-
mates? One thinks of the lie detector, which rests on increased
skin-surface moisture and/or increased heart rate during human
deception. Do monkeys show their two-facedness in ways that
can be detected? And do they get better at deception over time,
as we humans do?
There seems to be plenty of scope for future research, and we
are grateful to Whiten & Byrne for opening the door.
Deception: A need for theory and ethology
Carolyn A. Ristau
Rockefeller University, New York, N. Y. 10021
It is indeed an excellent idea to garner first hand reports of
deception from a large number of experienced field workers
studying a diverse array of primates. The monograph by Whiten
and Byrne (1986) is a still more useful reference, because it
preserves all the entries and full descriptions of each. Without
such a collection, the reports are often never published, being
passed orally along research grapevines, altered with each
retelling, or, at best, scattered widely in the literature as
footnotes or embedded in other information. Much potentially
important information is lost to the thinking and observational
processes of other scientists. Possible patterns among species
remain unseen; and an impetus to a different focus of observa-
tion and the design of fruitful new experiments is missing.
Since the days of Romanes (1883; 1884), one-time occur-
rences have been pejoratively termed "anecdotes"; they have
thereby, as noted, been lost from the scientific literature. Yet, as
Dennett (1983) and others have emphasized, the mark of intel-
ligence will most probably be found in the unique event; oft-
repeated acts by an organism demonstrate learning, an impor-
tant ability, but not necessarily as revealing of significant
intelligence.
One hopes the publication of Whiten & Byrne's (W&B's)
collection will foster a slowly growing trend to publish careful
reports from other species on a broad array of problems. Sensi-
ble statistical information to accompany such reports would
likewise be of value. Included could be observation time and
types of ecological and social situations encountered.
What are other reasonable next steps? A serious grappling
with theoretical issues is needed. A categorization (preferably
hierarchical) is needed of the various kinds of deceptions ulti-
mately organized along more fundamental dimensions than the
functional classification used by W&B. Others have begun this
difficult struggle; some are listed by the authors (e.g., Miles,
Mitchell, Russow, and de Waal in Mitchell & Thompson 1986a).
See also Ristau (1988; submitted). W&B state that it would be
"rash given only the data currently available" to attempt a more
complete taxonomy of deception, reflecting the psychological
demands on the AGENT, "the true mental complexity involved. "
Perhaps, but it's worth more attempts and is likely to help
delineate both the possible high level cognitive interpretations
and more rudimentary mechanisms. Researchers with exten-
sive direct laboratory or field knowledge of their subjects could
make useful contributions to this effort. Developmental psy-
chologists concerned with the ontogenetic development of de-
ceptive abilities in human children could also be helpful in
creating a psychological taxonomy. Also useful would be close,
detailed observation of the process whereby an organism be-
comes more proficient at a specific deception and the kinds of
errors made in the course of building the expertise.
Woodruff and Premack (1979) have done this in their well-
known experimental study of chimpanzee deception. Initially, a
chimpanzee knew the location of hidden food, but only the
human had access to it. The "good guy" human, after finding the
food, shared it with the apes, while the "bad guy" kept the food
to himself. Occasionally, roles were reversed and the human
knew the location of hidden food whereas the chimpanzees did
not. After repeated trials, the four chimpanzees grew more
proficient in deceiving and avoiding being deceived, but to
different extents. The point I wish to make is that through
careful attention to behavioral detail and the use of videotaped
records of the apes' behavior, Woodruff and Premack and their
assistants noted the following progression in the development of
deceptive skills:
1. Emotional responses occurred, specifically anxious behav-
iors which caused confusion as to the significance of other cues.
262
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1988) 11:2

Commentary/Whiten & Byrne: Primate deception
2. Inhibition of correct orientational cues occurred, first the
voluntary (e.g., approaching) and then the involuntary (e.g.,
eye movements).
3. Finally, redirection occurred via voluntary behavior such
as pointing, which emerged spontaneously during the experi-
ment. Possibly this order is a general one, applicable across
species, tasks, and even ontogeny.
Such careful attention to detail amounts to an ethological
approach. [See also Gardner & Gardner "An Ethological Alter-
native to the Law of Effect" BBS 11(3) 1988.] An ethological
perspective might also suggest that we reconsider the literature
on "displacement" activities - behaviors performed by orga-
nisms when thwarted or frightened, and so on. We may find that
the classes of displacement activities, such as preening or
feeding, are the very behaviors preferentially chosen by animals
engaged in some categories of deception - distraction, for
instance. This is not to deny the possibility of a high level
interpretation of the deception, but rather to look to existing
biases in behavioral repertoires as a path to the voluntary and
strategic use of those behaviors. The human smile provides an
example. First largely reflexive, a human gains considerable
voluntary control over its use. An ethological perspective will
also reveal that each species has its own set of attention-grabbing
behaviors; some are found across many species. Do they use
such behaviors selectively in deceptive acts? Direction of gaze is
a particularly potent behavior - certainly used extensively in the
primate deceptive acts and powerful in nondeceptive acts such
as the human traffic jams caused by "rubber necking."
W&B recognize a need for experimentation and offer sug-
gestions for some of the examples of deception. Experiments are
essential to help determine the extent and limitations of the
abilities described as deceptive. These needs become still
stronger as the study of deception is extended to other species.
Is the AGENT able to "take the role of the other," recognizing
that concealment entails more than burying one's head in the
sand (i.e., "TARCET-centered representation" [Al, sect. 2.5.1])?
A final word: The hopes expressed by W&B are rather grand -
to "sketch the features of other individuals' psychological states
that an individual with deceptive intent must be able to repre-
sent." Attempts to produce a categorization of deceptive acts
with ethological, psychological, and philosophical underpin-
nings - or all of the above - may well aid in the realization of that
hope.
Deception and adaptation: Multidisciplinary
perspectives on presenting a neutral image
Thomas R. Shultza and Peter J. LaFreniere0
•Department of Psychology, McGill University, Montreal, Quebec, Canada
H3A 1B1 and "Ecole de psycho-education, Universit6 de Montreal,
Montreal, Qu6bec, Canada H2C 1A6
Viewing animals other than humans as capable of thinking and
feeling about their social world has long been suppressed by
such pejorative labels as anthropomorphic, tnentalistic, and
unscientific. We applaud the efforts of Whiten & Byrne (W&B)
to break out of this constrictive Zeitgeist by collecting and
classifying anecdotal accounts of tactical deception in primates.
We will respond to W&B's question about whether they are
proceeding in the right way from our own perspective of devel-
opmental psychology.
It seems inevitable that studying deception will bring to-
gether scientists working in disciplines that have grown too
insular for healthy expansion and growth. For example, parallel-
ing the recent surge of interest in tactical deception in primates
is an emerging literature in developmental psychology on the
human child's knowledge about the appearance/reality distinc-
tion (Flavell 1986) and their developing theory of mind (As-
tington et al., in press). The historical contexts for these two
parallel strands are quite different. Ethologists are coming to
realize that behavior can be more effectively explained in
intentional (cognitive) terms. Developmental psychology has
long been cognitive, but has recently directed attention to the
child's cognitions about mental life. It is extremely likely that
cognitive ethologists and developmental psychologists have
much to learn from each other.
The ethologists could learn from the developmental literature
that the largely second-order intentional phenomena discussed
by W&B do not emerge full-blown in the human child, but
develop in apparently orderly fashion out of earlier precursors.
These abilities follow the appearance of representational capaci-
ty, which appears at about 18 months (Piaget 1962; Leslie, in
press), and the emergence of first-order intentional phe-
nomena, which appear at about 3-4 years (Shultz 1980; Well-
man & Johnson 1979). One sees in the ethological literature a
strong focus on phylogenetic comparisons, but little apprecia-
tion of ontogenetic development. Even if some primate species
fail to show second- or higher-order intentionality, or even if
they succeed, it would be interesting to identify the earlier
stages. Moreover, the techniques and concepts used in studying
second-order intentionality in children, involving false beliefs
(Wimmer & Perner 1983) as well as deception (LaFreniere
1988; Harris et al. 1986; Shultz & Cloghesy 1981), may provide
some inspiration to ethologists. It need not be assumed that
research techniques used with children are exclusively verbal,
and thus inappropriate for nonhuman species. Poulin-Dubois
and Shultz (in press), for example, demonstrate the appearance
of the concept of agency in infants by the end of the first year
using a measure of habituation of visual attention (agency being
a precursor of first-order awareness of intentional states).
From W&B, developmental psychologists studying early the-
ories of mind could learn about the feasibility of collecting
anecdotal material on second-order phenomena and classifying
it according to putative social functions. From other cognitive
ethologists (Dawkins & Krebs 1978; Humphrey 1976), they
could relearn the importance of studying cognitive skills in a
social context; that manipulation and deception may be among
the more adaptive aspects of higher intelligence. We find the
evolutionary arguments for considering social context consider-
ably more convincing than many of the less rational appeals that
are common in the developmental literature.
W&B and others (Dawkins & Krebs 1978) make the point that
deception must be rare to be effective. But if it is so rare, how
can it also confer adaptational advantage? The answer is presum-
ably that deception must occur in critical situations, for exam-
ple, mating. But the evidence and argumentation for this still
needs considerable work. The reason that deception must be
rare to be effective is presumably that animals learn to modify
their reaction after being duped several times. This point is
certainly open to empirical investigation - whether in the
laboratory, using variants of the paradigm designed by Wood-
ruff and Premack (1979), or other ingenious, and perhaps more
naturalistic, experiments.
On this and other issues it may be possible to implement
variants of the Sherlock Holmes method described by Dennett
(1983). This involves making assumptions about the animal's
intentional states and using these assumptions to create a situa-
tion that is likely to provoke a telltale response on the part of the
animal - a response that makes sense only if the animal actually
possesses the assumed intentional states. As Seidenberg (1983)
has correctly noted, such provocations are more than tech-
niques for collecting anecdotes; with appropriate controls, they
constitute experiments. They are considerably more natural and
potentially more telling than the laborious laboratory training
procedures criticized by Dennett (1983) and by W&B.
The challenge, of course, is to integrate laboratory and field
research, recognizing the unique value of each. While laborato-
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1988) 11:2
263

Commentary/Whiten 
& Byrne: Primate deception
ry research can inform us about the capacity of various animals
for learning, problem solving, and even tactical deception,
naturalistic observation and experiments embedded in the natu-
ral environment a la Tinbergen (1965) or more recently
Seyfarth, Cheney, and Marler (1980) can provide compelling
evidence about the adaptive function of behavior.
We hope that the study of adaptive deception will not be put
aside indefinitely. What evidence can be cited from primatology
for or against the hypothesis that creative intelligence evolved as
a response to selection pressures created and sustained by the
challenge and necessity of life in social groups? Although this
issue is alluded to in W&B's first paragraph, their discussion is
entirely too muted for an interdisciplinary, commentary-type
journal such as BBS. Their functional taxonomy allows one to
classify a deceptive act according to the immediate conse-
quences of the agent's behavior. However, these functions have
not been explicitly linked to inclusive fitness. In this respect, we
wonder whether Whiten & Byrne are guilty of presenting an
overly neutral image of an exciting and controversial position.
Family life and opportunities for deception
Peter K. Smith
Department of Psychology, University of Sheffield, Sheffield S10 277V,
England
Whiten & Byrne's (W&B's) target article makes an excellent
start in delineating the kinds of tactical deception which occur in
primate species. To the examples in their category B4 ("distract
with intimate behavior"), they could add the use of play as a
distractor. Breuggeman (1978) documented how adult play in
Macaca mulatto often involves some form of social manipula-
tion; a mother might play with an infant to distract it from
persistent suckling or with an older sibling to keep it away from
an infant. Also, a sibling might play with another sibling to keep
it from the mother, or from a third sibling. In addition there are
some indications from the primate literature that rough-and-
tumble play can be "used" to inflict hurt or damage, which is not
the normal outcome of such play bouts. Of course, it is always
difficult to make judgments of intent in individual instances, and
even in human children there is continuing debate on whether,
or how often, rough-and-tumble play bouts (and associated play
signals) are used in a deceptive way (Humphreys & Smith 1984;
Neill 1985).
The evolutionary speculations summarised in W&B's Table 1
are obviously very preliminary. The differences reported may
simply arise because some species have been observed much
more intensively. From Table 1, there is actually a close rank-
order correlation between the number of stars a species is
awarded, and the number of workers to whom the questionnaire
was circulated for that taxonomic group. W&B invoke the
nature of family groups as one explanation for supposed phy-
logenetic differences. They suggest that there may be less
tactical deception in gorillas because of "the stable intimacy of a
gorilla family group" and they invoke a similar argument for
typically monogamous callitrichids and hylobatids. This argu-
ment is suspect. Family groups can provide an excellent base for
tactical deception. Breuggeman's examples of deceptive play
occurred in this context, and Trivers's (1974) theory of parent-
offspring conflict (and associated sibling rivalry) gives a clear
adaptive rationale as to why deception might be selected for.
Of course, much parent-offspring conflict may not involve
tactical deception by W&B's definition. Suckling has been a
paradigm example of parent-offspring conflict. If an infant
simply whines or suckles more than the mother wishes, this is
conflict but not deception. However, if the infant whines or
suckles when its nutrient needs are apparently satisfied, this
would be deception and indeed tactical deception if the differ-
ent nutrient state is taken to define a different context for the
action. As a related example, Altmann (1980) describes "tan-
trum" behavior in infant baboons, often precipitaed by the
mother making the nipple inaccessible. The tantrum resembles
a "fear paralysis," but is usually ignored by the mother. It would
be interesting to consider whether such tantrums qualify as
tactical deception (they certainly appear to be deceptive and are
usually recognised as such by the mother).
So far as humans are concerned, deceitful signals from chil-
dren to parents, although poorly documented by child psychol-
ogists, do seem to emerge in the second year of life together with
other aspects of symbolic function such as symbolic play, lan-
guage, and humour (McGhee 1979). Dunn and Kendrick (1982)
have indicated that children can be very sophisticated in situa-
tions of sibling rivalry by 2 years of age; the authors argue that
very young children have a "fairly sophisticated model of others
and of themselves as psychological beings" (p. 186). A stable,
intimate family context does not, in itself, discourage deception;
rather the opposite. However, it may be that, since family
members know each other well, occurrences of deception tend
to be more subtle (except, perhaps, in infants) and therefore less
obvious to an external observer.
Social strategies and primate psychology
Shirley C. Strum
Department of Anthropology, University of California, San Diego, La Jolla,
Calif. 92093
So then Sheila says to Betty that Arnold told her
what Harry was up to but Betty told me she
already heard it from Blanche, don't you know. . .
I applaud both the rationale and the results of Whiten & Byrne's
(W&B's) endeavor. Restoring abilities (mental and other) to
actors is not an isolated reaction to "mindless" behaviorism
among some psychologists and ethologists but a convergence
with trends in anthropology, sociology and in interpretations of
what science is and how it is done (see references in Latour &
Strum 1986; Latour 1987; Strum & Latour, in press). The
authors' approach does what it claims to do: by classifying,
formalizing, and presenting the anecdotal data on tactical de-
ception in nonhuman primates W&B suggest heuristic patterns,
stimulate the categorization and analysis of further existing data,
and encourage the collection of more crucial data.
My real question concerns the focus on deception itself. As
W&B point out, deception is a form of "manipulation. " They are
right to look to a "flexibility of response" such as that shown in
"tactical deception" (Byrne & Whiten 1985) as a way to test the
hypothesis that primates are "natural psychologists." The ad-
missible evidence for this is doubly narrowed, however, be-
cause tactical deception is both a subclass of "social manipula-
tion" (Western & Strum 1983) and is self-limiting (the con-
straints imposed by the community of familiar individuals). If
the inquiry is extended to all types of "tactical" social manipula-
tion - what I have elsewhere called "social strategies of competi-
tion and defense" (Strum 1979; 1981a; 1982) - then we greatly
enlarge the data and perhaps resolve some dilemmas presented
by the tactical deception corpus.
It may be argued that deception involves a higher order of
intentionality, in representing the beliefs and desires of others
(see Dennett 1983 and multiple book review of Dennett's The
Intentional Stance, BBS 11(3) 1988), than "honest" acts do. Is
this really the case? Clever (in the sense of skillful, ingenious),
devious (in the sense of circuitous), tactically complex honest
264
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1988) 11:2

acts should provide evidence for the proposition that individuals
have representations of each others' psychological states. They
should also provide a way to evaluate whether deception is truly
an advance in psychologizing. The appeal of "deception" as a
topic may have a hidden agenda (see Latour & Strum 1986)
rather than being just an innocent scientific quest.
Nothing is lost and much is gained when we ask "did the
AGENT achieve" his goal (rather than whether he was engaging in
deception) "by tailoring his behavior to the social context in a
way that requires the AGENT to represent another individual's
psychological state" (sect. 3.3.3). The important questions,
particularly for phylogenetic concerns are: Who needs social
manipulation and why, under what conditions and with what
restrictions? The traditional answer is rather circumspect: Since
society is entered into - mindlessly - rather than created
actively, only a few areas are open to social manipulation. A
different answer (Strum & Latour 1987) suggests that actors (or
"agents" define what society is for themselves and for others.
Actors have much greater scope for manipulation when nego-
tiating and constructing, that is, "performing" a society; they
also need to know the same things that scientists do in investi-
gating such societies (including the difference between beliefs
and behavior). This scenario for the evolution of the "per-
formative" social bond highlights the different avenues that are
possible, contrasting tactical, social strategies - which require
cognitive assessment skills - with genetically encoded social
manipulation (see Figure 2 in Strum & Latour).
A limited set of factors may predict the occurrence and
evolution of tactical sophistication among primates. These in-
clude the size and heterogeneity of the group, its social stability,
the value and type of cooperation, and specific migratory pat-
terns of individuals. Under some conditions there may even be
significant sex differences in the necessity for and constraints on
social manipulation (Western & Strum 1983). If so, the growing
momentum for the "primate intelligence . . . as an adaptation
for handling the complexities of the social environment" posi-
tion (sect. 2.4.1) may be overstated. Few primate species live in
groups that satisfy the conditions implied by W&B's "complex-
ities of the social environment" in anything but a limited sense.
W&B examine the distribution of data in Table 1 and ask
whether it is fact or artefact. Let's consider the baboon, chimp,
and gorilla comparison more closely. (Baboons rather than
cercopithecines in general are considered because comparable
evidence is present from at least one population; see Strum 1987
and references therein.) I suggest that the differences are real
and significant within the performative framework just de-
scribed. The degree and type of social complexity and the
opportunity and necessity for specific kinds of social maneuvers
differ among the species. For chimpanzee groups, provisioning
or captivity create a baboon type of performative overlay on the
natural chimp system. The deception data is thus a hodgepodge
- some "natural" to the chimp, some facultative chimp-baboon
behavior. Yet because chimps are not evolutionarily baboons,
they lack some "natural" baboon types of behavior. It is unlikely
that chimps are too smart to be duped by W&B's classes D and E
of deception, since humans aren't!
I would also recommend a new methodology, one that might
provide the variety of crucial data highlighted by W&B (sect
3.3-3.3.4). The "extended case history" would follow one ani-
mal from a well studied population (or as many animals as
observers) all day, every day, for a minimum of three months (or
a year or even more). A decade ago I did a pilot one-month study
and was particularly struck by two things. First, interactions
build up not just over hours or days but over weeks (perhaps
even months or years). This is critical to our concern with
cognitive representations, tactics, and plans. Sampled data
allow us to make inferences, but piecing together the story
leaves a lot of room for accusations that we are "upgrading"
behavior, individual skills, and species characteristics. Second,
Commentary/Whiten & Byrne: Primate deception
the moment of learning and insight passes quickly and any
method not geared to the rare event easily misses it. Of course
we claim that learning has occurred by comparing past and
present behavior, but wouldn't it be nice to capture the mo-
ment, and more than once (see Strum 1975; 1981). Case histo-
ries make anecdotes into more rigorously convincing demon-
strations of cognitive achievements. Case histories of diverse
social strategies, not only tactical deception, should add signifi-
cantly to our understanding of primates as natural psychologists.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
Thanks to Gary Larson for suggesting the epigraph in his cartoon of
baboon society.
Misdescription and misuse of anecdotes and
mental state concepts
Roger K. Thomas
Department of Psychology, University of Georgia, Athens, Ga. 30602
"Deception" is a valid way to conceptualize some acts of human
behavior, and Whiten & Byrne (W&B) do appreciate the diffi-
culty of determining its validity for nonhuman primates. How-
ever, despite W&B's caveats, anecdotal data are not acceptable
in behavioral science.
Anecdotes have two major flaws. The first is inherent; one can
never be sure that sufficient relevant information has been
observed. The first example of deception in the target article can
be used to illustrate this. It was reported that a baboon being
"chased aggressively" adopted "the alert posture and horizon-
watching normally shown when an important entity like
a . . . predator has been spotted "and that the baboon doing the
chasing "stopped to look for the focus of interest." W&B as-
serted that "in this case no such entity existed " and concluded
that the baboon had deceptively distracted its chaser.
Despite the assertion that no entity existed for the "deceiver"
:o see, there is no way to be certain. The baboon may have seen
something the observer missed or it may have mistakenly
"seen" something (e.g., a rock formation mistaken for a preda-
tor). If the baboon saw or even imagined it had seen something,
then the act was not one of deception.
There is another possible explanation for the "deceived"
baboon's behavior. What if the baboons were playing "follow
the leader"? If so, then "chased aggressively" is an incorrect
inference and the following baboon's stopping "to look for the
focus of interest" was merely part of the game. The objection
may be raised that experienced observers can distinguish a
"chase" from a "follow." Perhaps so, but scientific evidence
must be justified by more than an observer's confidence, es-
pecially when isolated instances of behavior are involved.
A second flaw often seen in anecdotal and other observational
reports is the inclusion of biasing and unjustified inferences.
Consider two more examples. First, de Waal (No. 66; Al, sect.
2.5.1) reported that a couple of chimpanzees were "courting
each other surreptitiously" and "restlessly looking around to see
if any other males were watching." Having inferred these, how
could de Waal avoid "observing" that an ensuing act would be
one of deception! Second, Altmann reported (No. 4; C2, sect.
2.5.3; emphasis added):
Every day, one can see females approach mothers, pretend to be
primarily interested in grooming the mother when what they are
really after is an opportunity to sniff, touch, or hold her infant. . . .
"But is the mother really deceived?" asks Altmann: "Surely the
multiparous ones know exactly what's going on.'"
Eliminate the inferences from this alleged case of double decep-
tion, and the observation is "Female approaches and grooms
mother; female sniffs, touches, or holds infant." Surely such
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1988) 11:2
265

Commentary/Whiten & Byrne: Primate deception
anecdotes cannot be accepted as evidence in a behavioral 
Deception and descriptive
science.
The problem of including biasing and unjustified inferences
in one's observations is remediable. However, the elimination
of inferences from description would require considerable re-
orientation to proper descriptive language. For example, words
which may seem descriptive, such as "chase" or "groom," imply
the doer's intention.
Observers vary in the use of unfounded inferences, and many
are to be commended for the relative purity of their descrip-
tions. Nevertheless, even the most careful observers tend to use
mental state concepts inappropriately in their descriptions or
explanations.
For example, recurring as a causal agent among the cited
examples of deception is the concept of "aggression." Aggres-
sion, like deception, is a mental state concept. There is no such
thing as aggression in the sense of having an isomorphic physical
correspondent. Aggression is defined ultimately in terms of
some set (which, itself, must be defined) of behavioral hypo-
theticals. One such hypothetical might be, "If A runs behind B
and bites B, then A is aggressive." (Note the use of "runs
behind" instead of "chases," which begs the question of whether
the behavior is aggressive.) Assuming that an acceptable set of
behavioral hypotheticals to define aggression has been deter-
mined, a fundamental question is whether aggression or any
mental state can function as a causal agent.
Fodor (1981) and Churchland (1984) discussed several philo-
sophical positions pertaining to the roles of mental states. The
two extreme positions are represented, perhaps, by the "radical
behaviorists," who disavow completely the need to postulate
mental states, and by the "functionalists," who allow that mental
states may function in an explanatory account as causes of other
mental states. According to the functionalists, aggression could
be a cause of deception.
However, even if one accepts the functionalist position
(which, in principle, I do) two major problems remain. First,
there is the problem of determining an acceptable set of behav-
ioral hypotheticals to define each mental state. Second, there is
the problem of determining appropriate functional relationships
among mental states or among mental states and behavioral
outputs. Churchland chose "pain" (and Fodor "headache") as
exemplars of mental states. Churchland's account of "pain" can
be used to illustrate some unresolved issues pertaining to the
second problem.
According to Churchland (1984, p. 36), pain causes both
behavioral outputs ("wincing, blanching, and nursing of the
traumatized area") and other mental states ("distress, an-
noyance, and practical reasoning aimed at relief). But, as
Lorden and 1 noted (Thomas & Lorden, in preparation), the
relationship between pain and other mental states is unclear
("What is psychological well-being? Can we know if primates
have it?").
For example, (a) it is reasonable to think of "pain" directly
causing "distress," "annoyance," and "practical reasoning" but
not vice versa; and (b) it is reasonable to think of pain being
directly reducible and Iocalizable to physical substrates but not
the others. The point is that there may be fundamental dif-
ferences among mental states, and the significance of these
differences must be evaluated before mental state concepts can
be used defensibly in functional relationships.
I realize that adherence to the views expressed here would
postpone if not preclude the study of deception in primates or,
for that matter, the study or use of most mental state concepts in
field research. That might not be a bad thing, because I fear that
the current use of mental state concepts in such research is, in
many cases, delusional.
Nicholas S. Thompson
Departments of Psychology and Biology, Clark University, Worcester,
Mass. 01610
Between the extremes of "mindless behaviorism" as Whiten &
Byrne (W&B) so aptly describe it and causal mentalism (which
seems to lie at the core of their project) is a desirable middle
ground originally charted by E. C. Tolman (1951), Albert
Hofstadter (1941), and Gird Sommerhoff (1950). This middle
ground I have called descriptive mentalism (Thompson 1987b).
Those who occupy this middle ground can have the advantage of
causal mentalism and its economy of expression, but without its
worst disadvantage, namely, that it leads the unwary to make
vacuous explanations (Lipton & Thompson, in press). Mental
states, whether they are mental representations or drives or
thoughts or whatever, cannot cause behaviors because behav-
iors are constituents of mental states. To say that an animal eats
because it is hungry is like saying that an object is a table leg
because it is part of a table. The "causality" is semantic, not
physical. Just as tableness is in the relationship of the boards to
one another and to the activities of humans, so the essence of
particular mental states is in the activities of humans or animals
in relation to their environments. Mental states are instances of
natural design (Thompson 1986a; 1987a; 1987b). They are higher-
order patterns which require for their recognition intimate
knowledge of an organism's relations with its social and physical
environment.
If one grants that mental predicates refer to complex patterns
in the behavior of organisms, one can readily see why anec-
dotalism of the sort put forth in this article is a dubious endeav-
or. Deception is design to defeat design (Thompson 1986). To
establish a behavior as an instance of deception one must specify
thoroughly the background of behavioral order against which
the deceptive behavior is anomalous. Thus, operationally speak-
ing, the anecdote necessary to reveal deception has to be a much
longer one than any that are told here. In fact, nothing short of a
comprehensive, systematic, and standardized review of the
relevant parts of the species' ethograms will do.
Like many explanatory mentalists, W&B confuse mental
states with brain states, defining a mental representation as a
neurally coded counterpart of some aspect of the world. A
mental state is no more in the brain case then tableness is in the
boards that make the table. Surely no one really takes this sort of
definition seriously. Are the authors ever planning to look in the
brain to see whether their mental representation is there? How
would they recognize it if they found it? Wouldn't they first have
to identify the "aspect of the world" that is the brain state's
counterpart. And having done that difficult bit of behavioral
description, what would be the point of naming it after its origins
in the brain?
The identification of mental states with brain states seems to
be part of an attempt to sidestep the difficult task of giving a
comprehensive account of design in behavior. Like all instances
of natural design, a mental representation is impossible to
specify at the level of a particular behavior under a particular
circumstance, because it is a higher-order pattern of behaviors
and circumstances. W&B thus rightly look for mental represen-
tations at a different level from that of behavioral particulars.
Unfortunately, they go downward, to the biological level, rather
than upward, to the level of higher-order patterns. The locus for
a concept like mental representation (or any mental term, for
that matter) is in long-term, higher-order patterning in the
behavior.
In short, the comparative study of deception as proposed here
will not succeed until it has been preceded by a study of the
general patterns of behavioral design against which deceptions
are played out.
266
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1988) 11:2

Authors' Response
Toward the next generation in data quality: A
new survey of primate tactical deception
R. W. Byrne and A. Whiten
Psychological Laboratory, University of St. Andrews, St. Andrews, Fife
KY16 9JU, Scotland
We see a major function of the Open Peer Commentary
process as leading to a refinement of theoretical perspec-
tives and an enhancement of future data collection pro-
cedures. To this end, we use this response to work toward
a new questionnaire about primate tactical deception,
one that has benefited from the constructive criticisms of
many commentators.
1. Mindful behaviorism
When we suggested that those few scientists who have
until now published data on primate (chiefly chimpanzee)
tactical deception may have shared a lack of sympathy
with "mindless" behaviorism, we seem to have given the
wrong impression to some commentators. Baldwin and
Humphrey believe that we continually favor dramatic,
cognitive explanations over more prosaic ones; Menzel
wants the term mindless behaviorism banned altogether;
Mitchell urges us to attempt in every case to explain
tactical deception as first-order intentionality, and Bald-
win accuses us of dismissing the literature on condition-
ing (which we take to be the same point); Griffin, howev-
er, believes we do not go far enough in throwing off
behavioristic inhibitions, and Thompson agrees that our
term is an apt one.
"Behaviorism" has meant various things, so we should
make our position clear. If it means that comparative
psychology should rest firmly on the analysis of behavior,
we agree and are behaviorists. If it means the experimen-
tal analysis of learning, then again we support the enter-
prise as far as it goes, although we share Dunbar's
concern that behaviorism has not grappled (and perhaps
cannot) with the large portion of learning that occurs in a
social context. Throughout the target article we implicitly
assumed the presence of what seems dictated by conven-
tional wisdom, namely, first-order (or even zero-order)
intentionality, acquired by conditioning; only in a very
few cases did we claim there was second-order inten-
tionality. We have spelled out conditioning explanations
for some tactical deceptions elsewhere (Byrne & Whiten
1987), but BBS space limits did not allow these relatively
familiar arguments to be detailed in addition to providing
what we felt to be more useful, given the records col-
lected already: the implications of getting good evidence
for second-order intentionality. Whether tactical decep-
tion is the best place to look for such evidence is disputed
among the commentators: Gallup argues that it alone can
never be evidence of "mind reading," but Dunbar cites it
as a crucial test case. We discuss deception's relation to
other forms of manipulation below.
If behaviorism instead means that comparative psy-
chology is not allowed to talk about "mind" or "represen-
tations," we dub it "mindless" and we do indeed reject it
Response/Whiten & Byrne: Primate deception
- in favor of mindful behaviorism. Thus we would want to
go beyond the description of behavior that Menzel advo-
cates, to ask about the representational structures (and
we would not care if they were localized in the big toe, cf.
Thompson) which subserve behavior; we cannot under-
stand or sympathize with Rachlin's attack on the whole
idea of representation, when it is now so conventional and
fruitful in the neurosciences. Thomas's rejection of all
terms he calls "mentalistic," including most of the words
found useful by our informants, is likewise unhelpful. He
is unable to follow his own prescription, and suggests that
several baboons aggressively chasing another were "play-
ing follow the leader." Replacing the mentalistic terms,
"follow" with "run after" and "leader" with "animal in
front," does not help!
Rather than trying to enforce bans on particular terms
or types of explanation, we would commend Bennett's
clear dissection of how a putative "mind reading" expla-
nation can be challenged or supported. It is behavioral
evidence which can settle the matter.
2. Science and story-telling
The suspicion was voiced by Dennett that we would be
misread as having condemned experimentation in favor of
anecdotes: He was right! Thus Rachlin claims we advise
readers to abandon experiments, and Bernstein says we
dismiss experiments as worthless. Neither is so, as is
made clear by Dennett's preemptive defense. Perhaps
we can return the favor by pointing out that the "frustrat-
ing side effect" (Baldwin) of prolonged experimental
training schedules is that of making it difficult to dis-
tinguish between first- and second-order intentionality
and is thus frustrating for any experimenter. This point
was made originally by Dennett (1983), who suggests a
kind of experiment which would not provide such a
reinforcement history; this "Sherlock Holmes" approach
is advocated by Shultz & LaFreniere. Our own support
for intelligent experimentation has not varied since the
target article was written, and we appreciate Menzel's
notion that "experiments are an extension or refinement
of common sense, not a substitute for it." Several com-
mentators have suggested interesting ideas for future
experiments (e.g. Gallup's plans for blindfolded pri-
mates, and Shultz & LaFreniere's mention of some
techniques that have been successful with children).
Our belief that well-constructed analyses of observa-
tional data can be as rigorous as experiments receives
cogent support (Dunbar). Burghardt's balanced histor-
ical survey puts the whole debate in perspective - includ-
ing the nice point that Lloyd Morgan called for careful,
critical use of anecdotes and himself used them freely!
Burghardt considers the biggest dangers in such an
exercise to be (1) the observer's desire to tell a good story
and (2) personal affection for the animals, with a conse-
quent natural desire to view them as "superior." It is the
latter criticism that Humphrey makes of the late Dian
Fossey, urging that both her records (see target article)
can be discounted. Concerning one he argues that she can
have had no evidence that a "deliberately ignored " item
had indeed been seen; however, hanging around in its
vicinity and then unhesitatingly rushing toward the item
when the conditions change is surely such evidence. In
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1988) 11:2
267

Response/Whiten & Byrne: Primate deception
the other, he raises the possibility of nests being built as a
displacement activity; we too consider this explanation
(Byrne & Whiten 1987) and come to the same conclusions
as to how it should be tested. But the fact that Fossey
herself used nest-building to manipulate gorillas into a
sense of security is not relevant, unless we can know that
she did not learn this trick first from observing a gorilla!
We agree with Ristau that so-called displacement ac-
tivities should be given very careful scrutiny.
Many commentators either agreed with and supported
our view or urged independently from their own perspec-
tive that the background history and context (the "base-
line data" of Menzel) of an observational record are
crucial for its proper interpretation (Baldwin, Bernstein,
Menzel, Mitchell, Thompson). It must be remembered,
however, that all of our informants were highly familiar
with the repertoire of normal behavior (the "ethogram")
of the species they reported on; were this not the case,
much more explicit background data would have been
necessary even for the limited interpretations we our-
selves were prepared to make.
Several commentators reiterated our points about the
need for "control" data, null hypotheses and multiple
records of the same behavioral pattern from different
populations (e.g., Bernstein, Rachlin). Thomas's argu-
ment that one can never be sure that everything impor-
tant is noticed in an anecdote, so anecdotes should be
ignored, is really an attack on the whole of observational
science, especially ethology; it is equally true (and un-
helpful) to say that one can never be sure that there has
been a control for every important variable in an experi-
ment. "Good" experiments control the right variables,
and "good" observational records include the right data.
Menzel's thoughts on "who shall be tried for deceit" are
also worth considering carefully.
Commentators correctly suggested that a corpus of
records of deception can be used to test hypotheses other
than those directly concerned with mental representa-
tion. Reynolds points out that one should expect a de-
crease in the benefits of deceiving as the degree of kin
relatedness increases between actor and target (although
see Smith, for the likelihood of within-family deception).
And Quiatt suggests that neither very close proximity
(such as a cage) nor infrequent contact (such as another
group) permit tactical deception to be as useful as at
intermediate levels of familiarity.
We could not help noticing that nearly all commen-
tators who have worked with primates under natural or
seminatural conditions support the basic enterprise we
have begun (Altmann, de Waal, Dunbar, McGrew,
Reynolds, Strum), and their critiques aim at doing the job
better, not decrying it. (That the same is true of the
philosophers, Bennett and Dennett, suggests that this is
not due to the naivete of field primatologists!) Burghardt
reminds us that bias against using rare observations in
science led to primate infanticide going unrecognized for
years, and Menzel notes that we still await more than
"anecdotal" evidence for deceit in any king, dictator, or
president!
3. A lifetime of deceit
Would the (enormous) effort of a day-in, day-out case
history of a single individual primate (advocated by De-
nnett, Dunbar, Mitchell, and Strum, of whom the latter
has tried it for one month with a baboon) be worth it? We
believe the answer is an emphatic "yes," and we consider
the idea one of the most exciting to emerge from this BBS
Commentary.
Dennett provides a nice analysis of the problems of
discovering any true creativity, making the point that
repeated use of a tactic actually diminishes its claim to be
clever (a Catch 22 that we have also lamented: Whiten &
Byrne 1988a). It is the first use of a tactic that will tell us
whether it was conditioned, imitated (Baldwin), or cre-
ative, and to be sure of recording the first use there is no
substitute for a developmental case study. The same
applies to the development of, or failure to develop,
tactics of counterdeception: It is the ontogenetic route
that is of interest, not the end product, if we are in-
terested in mental capacities. Testing Altmann s interest-
ing speculations on the function of teasing in primate play
will also need longitudinal study.
We do not, however, underestimate the logistical costs
of this enterprise. Who will be the first to try this method
of studying tactical deception with a wild primate?
4. Children are primates, too
We have been rightly rebuked for not referring to the
existing literature on deception in child development
(Burghardt), although in fact this literature is not exten-
sive and "suffers" from a dependence on anecdotal obser-
vation, perhaps for the same reasons as does the study of
primate deceit. (Note: Menzel, and Webster's Diction-
ary, would have us use "deception" for the act and
reserve "deceit" for the habit of mind, but when the
Oxford English Dictionary defines deceit as "a piece of
deception" it seems too late to reform usage.)
LaFreniere (1988) has carried out an analysis of tactical
deception in children which directly parallels our own on
primates, and we refer readers to this. Schultz &
LaFrenidre report that second-order intentionality does
not simply emerge "full blown" in children's develop-
ment, but always follows the emergence both of repre-
sentational ability and of first-order intentionality. We
think that Heyes's injunction to distinguish firmly be-
tween origins and operating characteristics is suggesting
that a tactic which is learned by trial and error may
nevertheless (later) be deployed with the full insight that
its mechanism of action depends on affecting the mind of
another-i.e., it may show second-order intentionality. If
so, we heartily agree, and look to ontogenetic study of
children and primates to help us sort out such cases.
Bennett argues that to understand the relationship
between another individual's mental state and its conse-
quent action, it is first necessary to understand the
relationship in oneself. Gallup goes further in claiming
that any ability to model the experience of others relies on
reflection upon one's own experience. These points
amount to a strong and testable claim about the order of
developmental stages of understanding minds. Such be-
liefs, originating with Mill (1889), have also been used by
Humphrey (1983) to explain the evolution of con-
sciousness. It is not apparent to us, however, that these
inward-looking capacities are logically necessary founda-
tions for the development of second-order intentionality.
268
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1988) 11:2

Response/Whiten & Byrne: Primate deception
We also consider plausible what is almost the converse,
that some reflection on one's own mind occurs through
treating oneself as if one were any other person to be
observed and studied: In other words, it is a behavioristic
analysis.
Ristau notes our caution in avoiding classifying records
in a taxonomy based on level of mental complexity, but
she still urges that we need such an exercise, suggesting
that developmental psychologists may contribute to this
usefully. Indeed so, and we were delighted with Cheval-
ier-Skolnikoff s careful and thought-provoking analysis of
our corpus of records in terms of Piagetian Stage Theory.
Of course, any such attempt has to be tentative with the
current quality of data, but it is an excellent start and data
from the next questionnaire should allow it to be tested
and refined.
5. Do primates know they may have been fooled?
Any primate that has insight into how its tactical decep-
tion works (i.e. second-order intentionality) should be
logically capable of anticipating that it too may sometimes
be deceived; we thus expect counterdeception to be
associated with such insight (Byrne & Whiten 1987;
Chevalier-Skolnikoff). Strictly, of course, tactical coun-
terdeception may require third-order intentionality, and
we are here assuming that a system which can handle
second-order intentionality can produce a third-order by
recursion. Memory may limit this recursion, and cer-
tainly (as Dennett, 1983, notes) even humans can handle
only a few orders of nesting at best. The issues parallel
those of embedded relative clauses in transformational-
generative grammar (Chomsky 1965). We have few can-
didate examples of counterdeception so far (Whiten &
Byrne 1986), but it is one of the patterns to which detailed
ontogenetic studies must be alert (see section 3, above).
The one case of counterdeception we presented has
been questioned by Bernstein: Since the second chim-
panzee was evidently dominant over the first, why did he
not simply displace the other and so obtain the food? Why
should he need to resort to a counterdeceptive tactic? The
explanation (Plooij, personal communication) is that
provisioning at Gombe was strictly rationed at this time
by means of remotely controlled boxes, opened according
to a schedule. To avoid aggression, boxes were not
opened if two individuals were present. Thus the domi-
nant animal could not expect to obtain food by displacing
the other, or even driving him right away, only by using
him. And whether he could be used in this way would
depend on an assessment of whether he knew he was
about to be fed, and was concealing this fact. All records of
counterdeception that we have at present are, like this
one, from artificially provisioned or captive chimpanzees.
Humphrey suggests that a duped primate should show
some sign of "moral outrage" if and only if it later
understands that it has been intentionally deceived. Not
only do we agree with this, but we can provide a candi-
date record: When one informant (Plooij) deceived an
overly friendly young chimpanzee into walking away in
the direction in which he looked intently (sect. 2.5.2,
para. 3, target article), he added that she later returned,
hit him on the head, and ignored him for the rest of the
day!
Reynolds makes the fascinating and more general point
that there might be "give aways" in the behavior of a
deceptive agent that, though no doubt very subtle, might
still be observable: behavioral lie-detectors. Of course
this is the case in man, a fact which Bygott uses in his
delightful cartoon illustrations of intentional hypotheses
of tactical deception (Byrne & Whiten 1987). Why indeed
should it not be so in other primates?
6. Consciousness
Talk of a primate "knowing" and "anticipating" may seem
to imply that we are concerned with the animals' phe-
nomenal worlds: whether they can be said to be con-
scious. Griffin thinks we should be, and Heyes believes
we must be (as it is so interesting). Once more, however,
we deny such a preoccupation: Perhaps we may explain
with an example from artificial intelligence. Suppose a
digital machine were programmed to simulate second-
order intentionality in dialogues using its teletype and
video display unit: This would be a desirable step in the
development of accessible expert systems (Byrne, in
press). What we are interested in is whether this inten-
tionality, which users remark on, is achieved by means of
the machine computing the mental states (current knowl-
edge, beliefs, and desires) of the user. If so, then we
would happily claim that the program showed second-
order intentionality. If not, then the simulation would be
a mere trick, produced by means of a series of (if . . .
then) rules, but without the machine knowing anything
about the mind of the user (this is the distinction that
Mitchell finds unclear in section 2.5.3 of the target
article). Others may be interested in whether or not it
makes sense to talk of the program, or its machine
instantiation, as conscious; we are not.
Use of this example from the artificial intelligence of
the future will also make it clear that, to the extent that
Heyes is right and Dennett is "really" concerned to help
artificial intelligence model whole systems, we have
every sympathy with his enterprise.
Issues concerning the role of different types of learning
are not the same as issues concerning the presence or
absence of second-order intentionality. But since labora-
tory conditioning experiments operate by teaching
(if . . . then) rules, they are especially likely to generate
behavior which - though it looks complex and intelligent
- is in fact entirely first-order in its intentionality, with no
insight on the animal's side into why it works when it
does. This is why, despite Heyes's urging, we still intend
to concentrate our survey on natural or seminatural
contexts.
7. Phylogeny or ecology?
In the target article we pointed out a number of potential
reasons, other than a difference in intellect, for obtaining
species differences in occurrence or frequency of tactical
deception. Apart from bias in the number of observation
hours and quality of observation (cf. Menzel's worries),
these reasons are chiefly ecological, and we would sug-
gest ecology as the answer to Reynold's very reasonable
question as to why tactical deception occurs more often to
gain food than sex: Food acquisition occupies most of
many wild primates' lives. Strum extends our argument
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1988) 11:2
269

Response/Whiten & Byrne: Primate deception
in an interesting way. She notes that humans are not too
clever to be duped by tactics of types D and E, so our idea
that chimps are too smart for this isn't likely. Instead, she
treats the difference as real: Baboons are more deceptive,
and more cleverly deceptive, than chimpanzees; and
provisioned chimpanzees "benefit" from the artificial
conditions which put an overlay of baboon-like social
complexity on the natural chimpanzee system (see Whit-
en & Byrne, 1988a, for an examination of the relationship
between intelligence and societal complexity).
Strum's view is more or less the opposite of de Waal's;
based on his long knowledge of chimpanzees and more
recent experience with monkeys, he has no hesitation in
stating that chimpanzees are more intelligent in social
contexts. Could it be that the species one knows best
seems brighter because one is more attuned to the detail
of its communication system? De Waal, like Whiten &
Byrne (1988b), points in particular to the chimpanzee's
unusual ability to inhibit behavior, its self-control,
whereas McGrew argues there is evidence of greater
intelligence in crimes of commission than those of omis-
sion. Having sympathy with each of these conflicting
ideas, we wait in the hope that further observations will
settle the matter.
Despite our explicit unwillingness to make any claims
about a chimpanzee/gorilla difference in intellect, Bern-
stein alleges that we do, and on the basis of 9 versus 2
reports, whereas these figures refer to different types of
tactical deception and the figures for reports are 33 versus
2 (Whiten & Byrne 1986). We reiterate that this still
proves nothing, for the same reasons that we gave in the
target article. Gallup, however, considers the difference
(in favor of chimpanzees) to reflect reality, and relates it to
his failure to find a gorilla who can deal with his mirror
test. Any strong record of a gorilla (or a baboon) showing
second-order intentionality in its tactical deception
would falsify Gallup's theory, which is therefore a power-
ful one. As Bennett notes, most records in the current
corpus are only weak evidence for intentionality, but this
does not apply to all. We consider Gallup's theory highly
unlikely on the basis of several of the records (see Byrne &
Whiten 1987).
8. The scope of tactical deception
8.1. Machiavellian intelligence. Deception is just one
aspect of social manipulation (including cooperation), and
should not be viewed as an isolated capacity (McGrew,
Strum). We fully agree (Byrne & Whiten 1988). We also
share interest in the debate about whether human intel-
ligence was partly an adaptation to allow Machiavellian
manipulations and cooperative tactics, or to deal with
environmental complexity, or both (McGrew, Shultz &
LaFrentere). Yet we did not feel that the target article
was the place to air these issues (e.g., see chapters by
Milton, Wynn, and editorials in Byrne & Whiten 1988).
8.2. Changing the definition of tactical deception. Our
original attempt at a definition included the words "used
at low frequency," and this has been very reasonably
challenged (Menzel, Mitchell, Shultz & LaFreniere,
Smith). We stand by our original arguments (Byrne &
Whiten 1985) concerning why we would not be sur-
prised at the rarity of tactical deception, and thus cannot
agree with Dan to that if it is important it really should be
common (consider the case of infanticide). But we have
to agree with Mitchell's argument that when the penalty
for an incorrect response to a bluff-call is, say, death,
then tactical deception may well become rather fre-
quent. Another case where we might expect high fre-
quencies is one in which the TARGET cannot in principle
know whether the AGENT was deceitful (e.g. infant food-
calling). We suggest that the definition be modified
accordingly.
Similarly, we now feel that it is prejudging the issue to
insist, by definition, that the TARGET be a "familiar"
individual. We have already noted (above) Quiatt's hy-
pothesis that intermediate levels of familiarity may be the
ideal context for tactical deception; McGrew cites an
example of cross-species tactical deception; and Smith
makes a persuasive case for looking for tactical deception
within the family. The last does not conflict with our point
that (1) the pay-offs of deceit differ as both relatedness and
habitual need to cooperate vary with social system, and
(2) deception among intimates will be particularly subtle
and hence hard to detect. But it will be interesting to ask
empirically where tactical deception is commonest, and
thus "familiarity" should be removed from the definition.
Mitchell argues that, although we specified that acts of
tactical deception also occur as an "honest" version in the
species' ethogram, the examples we were sent and that
we use do not all meet this criterion. We agree that it is
unwieldy to say that not staring at something one hasn't
noticed, or casually resting a hand that conceals nothing
on one's knee, is "honest," and we now change the
definition. However, the sense in which we meant the
term was evidently understood by informants and com-
mentators alike, as Mitchell acknowledges.
8.3. Replication or duplication? It would be nice to be
able to compare the frequency of forms of tactical decep-
tion between different primate populations and species
(Chevalier-Skolnikoff). To this end, in our next question-
naire evaluation we will take steps to ensure greater
comparability between numbers of observers per taxon
(Smith notes a positive correlation between number of
informants and number of categories of tactical deception
submitted in the present corpus), and to measure the
approximate hours of species-experience which back the
submitted records. Nevertheless, the problems we de-
scribe in the target article will always impede easy
comparisons.
As noted especially by Dennett, a high frequency of
putative tactical deception is a two-edged sword: Multi-
ple records give confidence, but repeated use of a behav-
ior makes us question whether it is deceptive at all. We
remain convinced, therefore, of the value of a question-
naire approach in pooling independent data from differ-
ent observers and different primate agents to pick out
recurring patterns. Such patterns will not be exact dupli-
cates, but will be "the same" at a more abstract level of
goals and tactics: In Dennett's terms, "variegated replica-
tions," or in Bennett's, "teleological patterns."
9. The new questionnaire
Reading the peer commentaries encouraged us to believe
that there is extensive active interest in the study of
270
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1988) 11:2

primate tactical deception, and that, although both case-
history and experimental approaches should be pursued,
good science can be achieved by careful analysis of well-
recorded observations. Furthermore, the commentaries
have shown that such a questionnaire study can be formu-
lated better than in our first attempt.
To this end, we now request that readers with un-
published observational data on tactical deception send
them to us; as before, contributors will be acknowledged
in any ensuing publication, and will receive a copy of the
complete catalogue of records submitted.
The meaning of tactical deception will be well under-
stood by anyone reading the target article, but it will now
be defined as: "Acts from the normal repertoire of the
AGENT, deployed such that another individual is likely to
misinterpret what the acts signify, to the advantage of the
AGENT." Records can be made very much more useful if
they are augmented by good contextual background and
control data. In particular, please carefully consider the
following:
1. How did you know that an individual was
deceived?
2. Was the tactic used more than once? If so,
please give each record fully (if feasible; if it was used
many times, please give the first in full and summa-
rize the frequency and pattern of use thereafter).
3. Were tnere any indications in the behavior of
the TARGET (or any duped animal) that it was aware
that it had been manipulated or deceived?
4. In particular, was there any indication of tactics
of counterdeception being deployed?
5. Were there any signs in the AGENT'S behavior
to suggest that it was being deceptive? More gener-
ally, was the behavior when deployed tactically
different in any way from the normal version?
6. Was there any evidence of "mind reading" or
"second-order intentionality" (see Dennett 1983;
target article; Bennett) on the part of the primate
AGENT?
7. Is it possible, from your knowledge of the
animals, that the tactic was learned by trial and error
or by reinforcement from an original coincidence? If
so, please describe how this might have occurred.
8. Do you have any other evidence relevant to the
possible origin or ontogeny of the tactic? For in-
stance, were there opportunities for imitation or
observation, facilitating circumstances, precursors
to the full-blown tactical deception, and so forth?
Can any possibilities be ruled out?
9. Do you regard the behavior as fitting into one
of the thirteen categories we used in the target
article, and, if so, which one?
10. How many hours of detailed observation ex-
perience of the species did you possess at the time of
the observation? (Please estimate, even if only
approximately.)
We expect that the best quality data do not yet exist,
and that readers with these questions in mind will be the
ones to collect them.
References/Whiten & Byrne: Primate deception
References
Altmann, J. (1980) Baboon mothers and infants. Harvard University Press.
Anderson, J. R. (1983) The architecture of cognition. Harvard University
Press.
Astington, J. W., Harris, P. L. & Olson, D. R., eds. (in press) Developing
theories of mind. Cambridge University Press.
Baldwin, J. D. & Baldwin, J. 1. (1986) Beyond sociobiology. Elsevier.
Bandura, A. (1986) Social foundations of thought and action. Prentice-Hall.
Bateson, G. (1955) A theory of play and fantasy. Psychiatric Research Reports
2:39-51.
(1956) The message "This is play." In: Croup process: Transactions of the
Second Conference, ed. B. Schaffher. Josiah Macy, Jr. Foundation.
Bennett, J. (1964) Rationality. Routledge & Kegan Paul.
(1976) Linguistic behaviour. Cambridge University Press.
(1978) Commentary on "Cognition and consciousness in nonhuman
species." Behavioral and Brain Sciences 1:559.
Bertrand, M. (1976) Acquisition by a pigtail macaque of behavior patterns
beyond the natural repertoire of the species. Zeitschrift fur
Tierpsychologie 42:139-69.
Boden, M. (1977) Artificial intelligence and natural man. Basic Books.
Breuggeman, J. A. (1978) The function of adult play in free-ranging Macaco
mulatto. In: Social play in primates, ed. E. O. Smith. Academic Press.
Burghardt, G. M. (1985) Animal awareness: Current perceptions and historical
perspective. American Psychologist 40:905-19.
Byers, J. A. & Byers, K. Z. (1983) Do pronghom mothers reveal the location
of their hidden fawns? Behavioral Ecology and Sodobiology 13:147-56.
Byrne, R. W. (in press) Social expertise and verbal explanation: The diagnosis
of intelligence from behaviour. In: Expertise and explanation: The
knowledge-language interface, ed. C. Ellis. Ellis Horwood Cognitive
Science Series.
Byrne, R. W. & Whiten, A. (1985) Tactical deception of familiar individuals in
baboons (Papio ursinus). Animal Behaviour 33(2):669-73.
(1987) A thinking primate's guide to deception. New Scientist 116(I589):54-
57.
(1988) Machiavellian intelligence. Social expertise and the evolution of
intellect in monkeys, apes and humans. Oxford University Press.
Caldwell, R. L. (1986) The deceptive use of reputation by stomatopods. In:
Deception: Perspectives on human and nonhuman deceit, ed. R. W.
Mitchell & N. S. Thompson. SUNY Press.
Carr, H. (1927) The interpretation of the animal mind. Psychological Review
34:87-106.
Chamberlin, T. C. (1965) The method of multiple working hypotheses (1890).
Reprinted in Science 148:754-59.
Chance, M. R. A. & Mead, A. P. (1953) Social behaviour and primate
evolution. Symposia of the Society for Experimental Biology VII
fEuoJntionj.395-439.
Cheney, D. L. & Seyfarth, R. M. (1980) Vocal recognition in free-ranging
vervet monkeys. Animal Behaviour 28:362-67.
(1985a) Social and non-social knowledge in vervet monkeys. In: Animal
Intelligence, ed. L. Weiskrantz. Clarendon Press.
(1985b) Vervet monkey alarm calls: Manipulation through shared
information? Behaviour 94:150-65.
Cheney, D., Seyfarth, R. M. & Smuts, B. (1986) Social relationships and
social cognition in nonhuman primates. Science 234:1361-66.
Chevalier-Skolnikoff, S. (1982) A cognitive analysis of facial behavior in Old
World monkeys, apes, and human beings. In: Primate communication,
ed. C. T. Snowdon, C. H. Brown & M. R. Petersen. Cambridge
University Press.
(1983) Sensorimotor development in orang-utans and other primates.
Journal of Human Evolution 12:545-61.
(1986) An exploration of the ontogeny of deception in human beings and
nonhuman primates. In: Deception: Perspectives on human and
nonhuman deceit, ed. R. W. Mitchell & N. S. Thompson. SUNY Press.
Chomsky, N. (1965) Aspects of the theory of syntax. MIT Press.
Churchland, P. M. (1979) Scientific realism and the plasticity of the mind.
Cambridge University' Press.
(1984) Matter and consciousness. MIT Press.
Darwin, C. (1896) The expression of the emotions in man and animals.
Appleton.
Datta, S. B. (1983) Relative power and the maintenance of dominance. In:
Primate social relationships, ed. R. A. Hinde. Blackwell.
Dawkins, R. (1976) Hierarchical organisation: A candidate principle for
ethology. In: Crowing points in ethology, ed. P. P. G. Bateson & R. A.
Hinde. Cambridge University Press.
Dawkins, R. & Krebs, J. R. (1978) Animal signals: Information or
manipulation? In: Behavioural ecology: An evolutionary approach, ed. J.
R. Krebs & N. B. Davies. Blackwell.
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1988) 11:2
271

fle/erences/Whiten & Byrne: Primate deception
Dennett, D. C. (1978) Why not the whole iguana? Behavioral and Brain
Sciences 1:103-4.
(1983) Intentional systems in cognitive ethology: The "Panglossian
Paradigm" defended. Behavioral and Brain Sciences 6:343-90.
(1984) Cognitive wheels: The frame problem in Al. In: Minds, machines
and evolution, ed. C. Hookway. Cambridge University Press.
(1987) Cognitive ethology: Hunting for bargains or a wild goose chase? In:
The explanation of goal-seeking behaviour, ed. D. McFarland. Oxford
University Press.
De Waal, F. (1982) Chimpanzee politics. Jonathan Cape.
(1986a) Deception in the natural communication of chimpanzees. In:
Deception: Perspectives on human and nonhuman deceit, ed. R. W.
Mitchell & N. S. Thompson. SUNY Press.
(1986b) Imaginative bonobo games. Zoonooz 59:6-10.
Dickinson, A. (1980) Contemporary animal learning theory. Cambridge
University Press.
Dunn, J. & Kendrick, C. (1982) Siblings: Love, envy and understanding.
Grant Mclntyre.
Eliot, G. (1860) The mill on the floss.
Ettlinger, G. (1983) A comparative evaluation of the cognitive skills of the
chimpanzee and the monkey. International Journal of Neuroscience 22:7-
20.
Flavell, J. H. (1986) The development of children's knowledge about the
appearance-reality distinction. American Psychologist 41:418-25.
Fodor, J. A. (1981) The mind-body problem. Scientific American 250:132-40.
Fossey, D. (1983) Corillas in the mist. Hodder and Stoughton.
Freeman, D. (1983) Margaret Mead and Samoa. Harvard University Press.
Gallup, G. G., Jr. (1982) Self-awareness and the emergence of mind in
primates. American Journal of Primatology 2:237-48.
(1983) Toward a comparative psychology of mind. In: Animal cognition and
behavior, ed. R. L. Mellgren. North-Holland.
(1985) Do minds exist in species other than our own? Neuroscience and
Biobehavioral Reviews 9:631-41.
Goodall, J. (1986) The chimpanzees of Combe: Patterns of behavior. Belknap
Press.
Griffin, D. R. (1978) Prospects for a cognitive ethology. Behavioral and Brain
Sciences 1:527-38.
Gumperz, J. J. (1982) Discourse strategies. Cambridge University Press.
Harre\ R. & Reynolds, V. (1984) The meaning of primate signals. Cambridge
University Press.
Harris, P. L., Donnelly, K., Guz, G. R. & Pitt-Watson, R. (1986) Children's
understanding of the distinction between real and apparent emotion.
Child Development 57:895-909.
Hebb, D. (1946) Emotions in man and animal: An analysis of the intuitive
prdcesses of recognition. Psychological Review 53:88-106.
Hediger, H. (1950) Wild animals in captivity. Butterworths.
(1955) Studies in the psychology and behaviour of animals in zoos and
• circuses. Butterworths.
Heyes, C. M. (1986) Contrasting approaches to the legitimation of intentional
language in comparative psychology. Behaviorism 15:41-50.
Hofstadter, A. (1941) Objective teleology. Journal of Philosophy 38(2):29-56.
Hinde, R. A. (1981) Animal signals: Ethological and games-theory approaches
are not incompatible. Animal Behaviour 29:535-42.
Hull, C. L. (1952) A behavior system. Yale University Press.
Humphrey, N. K. (1976) The social function of intellect. In: Growing points
in ethology, ed. P. P. G. Bateson & R. A. Hinde. Cambridge University
Press.
(1982) Consciousness: A just-so story. New Scientist (19 Aug.):474-78.
(1983) Consciousness regained. Oxford University Press.
Humphreys, A. P. & Smith, P. K. (1984) Rough-and-tumble in preschool and
playground. In: Play in animals and humans, ed. P. K. Smith. Blackwell.
Jolly, A. (1966) Lemur social behaviour and primate intelligence. Science
153:501-6.
(1985) The evolution of primate behaviour (2nd ed.) Macmillan.
Kellogg, W. & Kellogg, L. A. (1933) The ape and the child. McGraw-Hill.
KShler, W. (1925) The mentality of apes. Harcourt, Brace.
Krebs, J. R. & Dawkins, R. (1984) Animal signals: Mind reading and
manipulation. In: Behavioral ecology: An evolutionary approach, ed. J.
R. Krebs & N. Davies. Blackwell.
Kummer, H. (1982) Social knowledge in free-ranging primates. In: Animal
mind - human mind, ed. D. R. Griffin. Springer-Verlag.
Kummer, H. & Goodall, J. (1985) Conditions of innovative behaviour in
primates. In: Animal intelligence, ed. L. Weiskranz. Clarendon Press.
LaFreniere, P. (1988) The ontogeny of tactical deception in humans. In:
Machiavellian intelligence. Social expertise and the evolution of intellect
in monkeys, apes and humans, ed. R. W. Byrne & A. Whiten. Oxford
University Press.
Latour, B. (1987) Science in action. Harvard University Press.
Latour, B. & Strum, S. C. (1986) Human social origins: Oh please, tell us
another story. Journal of Social and Biological Structures 9:169-87.
Leslie, A. M. (in press) Some implications of pretense for mechanisms
underlying the child's theory of mind. In: Developing theories of mind,
ed. J. W. Astington, P. L. Harris & D. R. Olson. Cambridge University
Press.
Lindsay, W. L. (1880) Mind in the lower animals. D. Appleton.
Lipton, P. & Thompson, N. S. (in press) Comparative psychology and the
recursive structure of filter explanations. International Journal of
Comparative Psychology.
Mawby, R. & Mitchell, R. W. (1986) Feints and ruses: An analysis of
deception in sports. In: Deception: Perspectives on human and nonhuman
deceit, ed. R. W. Mitchell & N. S. Thompson. SUNY Press.
McGhee, P. (1979) Humor: Its origin and development. Freeman.
Menzel, E. W. (1966) Responsiveness to objects in free-ranging Japanese
monkeys. Behaviour 26:130-50.
(1974) A group of young chimpanzees in a one-acre field. In: Behaviour of
nonhuman primates, vol. 5, ed. A. M. Schrier & F. Stollnitz. Academic
Press.
(1987) Behavior as a locationist views it. In: Cognitive processes and spatial
orientation in animal and man, vol. 1, ed. P. Ellen & C. Thinus-Blanc.
Martinus Nijhoff.
Miles, H. L. (1986) How can I tell a lie? Apes, language, and the problem of
deception. In: Deception: Perspectives on human and nonhuman deceit,
ed. R. W. Mitchell & N. S. Thompson. SUNY Press.
Mill, J. S. (1889) Examination of Sir William Hamilton's philosopphy.
Longmans Green.
Milton, K. (1981) Distribution patterns of tropical plant foods as an
evolutionary stimulus to primate mental development. American
Anthropologist 83:534-48.
Mitchell, R. W. (1986) A framework for discussing deception. In: Deception:
Perspectives on human and nonhuman deceit, ed. R. Mitchell & N. S.
Thompson. SUNY Press.
(1987a) A comparative-developmental approach to understanding imitation.
In: Perspectives in ethology. Vol. 7: Alternatives, ed. P. P. G. Bateson &
P. H. Klopfer. SUNY Press.
(1987b) Projects, routines, and enticements in interspecies play between
familiar and unfamiliar dogs and people. Ph.D. dissertation, Clark
University. University Microfilms.
Mitchell, R. W. & Thompson, N. S., eds. (1986a) Deception: Perspectives on
human and nonhuman deceit. SUNY Press.
Mitchell, R. W. 6r Thompson, N. S. (1986b) Epilogue. In: Deception:
Perspectives on human and nonhuman deceit, ed. R. W. Mitchell & N.
S. Thompson. SUNY Press.
Morgan, C. L. (1894) An introduction to comparative psychology. Walter
Scott.
Morris, M. D. (1986) Large scale deceit: Deception by captive elephants? In:
Deception: Perspectives on human and nonhuman deceit, ed. R. W.
Mitchell & N. S. Thompson. SUNY Press.
Moynihan, M. (1982) Why is lying about intentions rare during some kinds of
contests? Journal of Theoretical Biology 97:7-12.
Munn, C. A. (1986) Birds that "cry wolf." Nature 319:143-45.
(1986a) The deceptive use of alarm calls by sentinel species in mixed-
species flocks of neotropical birds. In: Deception: Perspectives on human
and nonhuman deceit, ed. R. W. Mitchell & N. S. Thompson. SUNY
Press.
Nagel, T. (1974) What is it like to be a bat? Philosophical Review 83:435-51.
Neill, S. R. St.J. (1985) Rough-and-tumble and aggression in schoolchildren:
Serious play? Animal Behaviour 33:1380-81.
Nishida, T. (1983) Alpha status and agonistic alliance in wild chimpanzees.
Primates 24(3):318-36.
Parker, S. T. (1977) Piaget's sensorimotor series in an infant macaque: A
model for comparing unstereotyped behavior and intelligence in human
and nonhuman primates. In: Primate bio-social development: Biological,
social, and ecological determinants, ed. S. Chevalier-Skolnikoff & F. E.
Poirier. Garland.
Parker, S. T. & Gibson, K. R. (1979) A developmental model for the
evolution of language and intelligence in early hominids. Behavioral and
Brain Sciences 2:367-408.
Piaget, J. (1952) The origins of intelligence in children (Translated by M.
Cook). International University Press.
(1962) Play, dreams, and imitation in childhood. Norton.
Plomin, R. & Daniels, D. (1987) Why are children in the same family so
different from one another? Behavioral and Brain Sciences 10:1-60.
Poulin-Dubois, D. & Shultz, T. R. (in press) The development of the
understanding of human behavior: From agency to intentionality. In:
Developing theories of mind, ed. J. W. Astington, P. L. Harris & D. R.
Olson. Cambridge University Press.
272
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1988) 11:2

ReferencesI'Whiten & Byrne: Primate deception
Pretnack, D. & Woodruff, G. (1978) Does the chimpanzee have a theory of
mind? Behavioral and Brain Sciences 1:515-26.
Pylyshyn, Z. (1984) Computation and cognition: Toward a theory for cognitive
science. MIT Press.
Quiatt, D. (1984) Devious intentions of monkeys and apes? In: The meaning
of priniate signals, ed. R. Harre & V. Reynolds. Cambridge University
Press.
(1987) Looking for meaning in sham behavior. American Journal of
Primatology 12:511-14.
Riley, C. A. & Trabasso, T. (1974) Comparatives, logical structures, and
encoding in a transitive inference task. Journal of Experimental
Psychology 17:187-203.
Ristau, C. A. (1988) Thinking, communicating, and deceiving: Means to
master the social environment. In: Evolution of social behavior and
integrative levels, ed. G. Greenberg & E. Tobach (T. C. Schneirla
Conference Series). Erlbaum.
(submitted) Intentional behavior by birds? The case of the "injury-feigning"
plovers.
Roitblat, H. L. (1982) The meaning of representation in animal memory.
Behavioral and Brain Sciences 5:353-406.
Romanes, G. ]. (1883) Mental evolution in animals. Kegan Paul, Tench,
Triiner.
(1883/1977) Animal intelligence. Reprint, University Publications of
America.
(1884/1969) Mental evolution in animals. Reprint, AMS Press.
Rule, C. (1967) A theory of human behavior based on studies of non-human
primates. Perspectives in Biology and Medicine 10:152-76.
Russnow, L.-M. (1986) Deception: A philosophical perspective. In: Deception:
Perspectives on human and nonhuman deceit, ed. R. W. Mitchell & N.
S. Thompson. SUNY Press.
Sargeant, A. B. & Eberhardt, L. E. (1975) Death feigning by ducks in
response to predation by red foxes (Vulpes fulva). American Midland
Naturalist 94:108-19.
Seidenberg, M. S. (1983) Steps toward an ethological science. Behavioral and
Brain Sciences 6:377.
Seyfarth, R. & Cheney, D. (1988) Do monkeys understand their relations: In:
Machiavellian intelligence. Social expertise and the evolution of intellect
in tnonkeys, apes and humans, ed. R. W. Byrne & A. Whiten. Oxford
University Press.
Seyfarth, R., Cheney, D. L. & Marler, P. (1980) Monkey responses to three
different alarm calls: Evidence of predator classification and semantic
communication. Science 210:801-3.
Shultz, T. R. (1980) Development of the concept of intention. In:
Development of cognition, affect, and social relations, vol. 13, ed. W. A.
Collins. The Minnesota Symposia on Child Psychology. Erlbaum.
Shultz, T. R. & Cloghesy, K. (1981) Development of recursive awareness of
intention. Developmental Psychology 17:465-71.
Silverman, P. H. (1983) Attributing mind to animals: The role of intuition.
Journal of Social and Biological Strticturcs 6:231-47.
(1986) Can a pigtail macaque learn to manipulate a thief? In: Deception:
Perspectives on human and nonhutnan deceit, ed. R. W. Mitchell & N.
S. Thompson. SUNY Press.
Smith, E. O. (1986) Deception in nonhuman primates. Primate Record
14:228.
Smith, P. K. (1982) Does play matter? Functional and evolutionary aspects of
animal and human play. Behavioral and Brain Sciences 5:139-84.
Smuts, B. B. (1985) Sex and friendship in baboons. Aldine.
Sommerhoff, G. (1950) Analytical biology. Oxford University Press.
Sternberg, R. J. & Powell, J. S. (1983) The development of intelligence. In:
Handbook of child psychology, vol. 3, ed. P. H. Mussen. Wiley.
Stieh, S. P. (1981) Dennett on intentional systems. Philosophical Topics
12:39-62.
Struhsaker, T. T. & Leland, L. (1985) Infanticide in a patrilineal society of
red colobus monkeys. Zeitschrift fi'ir Tierpsychologie 69:89-132.
Strum, S. C. (1975) Primate predation: Interim report on the development of
a tradition in a troop of olive baboons. Science 187:755-57.
(1979) Social strategies and the evolutionary significance of social
relationships. Circulated position paper.
(1981a) Baboon behavior. Swara 4:24-27.
(1981b) Processes and products of change: Baboon predatory behavior at
Gilgil, Kenya. In: Omnivorous primates, ed. G. Teleki & R. Harding.
Columbia University Press.
(1982) Agonistic dominance in male baboons: An alternative view.
International Journal of Primatology 3:175—202.
(1987) Almost human: A journey into the world of baboons. Random House.
Strum, S. C. & Latour, B. (1987) Redefining the social link: From baboons to
humans. Social Science Information.
Thomas, R. K. & Lorden, R. (in preparation) What is psychological
wellbeing? Can we know if primates have it? In: The psychological
wellbeing of captive primates, ed. E. F. Segal. Noyes.
Thompson, N. S. (1986) Deception and the concept of natural design. In:
Deception: Perspectives on human and nonhuman deceit, ed. R. W.
Mitchell & N. S. Thompson. SUNY Press.
(1986a) Ethology and the birth of comparative teleonomy. In: Relevance of
models and theories in ethology, ed. R. Campan & R. Zayan. Toulouse:
Privat.
(1987a) The misappropriation of teleonomy. In: Perspectives in ethology,
vol. 7, ed. P. P. G. Bateson & P. H. Klopfer. Plenum.
(1987b) Natural design and the future of comparative psychology. Journal of
Comparative Psychology 101(3):282-86.
Thorndike, E. (1911/1965) Animal intelligence. Hafner.
Thomhill, R. (1979) Adaptive female-mimicking behaviour in a scorpion fly.
Science 205:412-14.
Tinbergen, N. (1965) Behavior and natural selection. In: Ideas in modern
biology, ed. J. A. Moore. Natural History Press.
Tinklepaugh, O. L. (1928) An experimental study of representative factors in
monkeys. Journal of Comparative and Physiological Psychology 8:197-
236.
Tolman, E. C. (1951) Behaviorism and purpose [1925]. In: Collected papers in
psychology, ed. E. C. Tolman. University of California Press.
Trivers, R. (1974) Parent-offspring conflict. American Zoologist 14:249-64.
(1981) Sociobiology and politics. In: Sociobiology and human politics, ed. E.
White. Lexington Books.
(1985) Social evolution. Benjamin Cummings.
Van Lawick-Goodall, J. (1971) In the shadow of man. Collins, London,
van Rhijn, J. G. & Vodegel, R. (1980) Being honest about one's intentions: An
evolutionarily stable strategy for animal conflicts. Journal of Theoretical
Biology 85:623-41.
Vasek, M. E. (1986) Lying as a skill: The development of deception in
children. In: Deception: Perspectives on human and nonhuman deceit,
ed. R. W. Mitchell & N. S. Thompson. SUNY Press.
Washburn, M. F. (1908) The animal mind. Macmillan.
Weldon, P. J. & Burghardt, C. M. (1984) Deception divergence and sexual
selection. Zeitschrift fur Tierpsychologie 65:89-102.
Wellman, H. M. & Johnson, C. N. (1979) Understanding mental processes: A
developmental study of remember and forget. Child Development 50:79-
88.
Werth, L. F. & Flaherty, J. (1986) A phenomenological approach to human
deception. In: Deception: Perspectives on human and nonhuman deceit,
ed. R. W. Mitchell & N. S. Thompson. SUNY Press.
Western, J. D. & Strum, S. C. (1983) Sex, kinship and the evolution of social
manipulation. Ethology and Sociobiologu 4:19-28.
Whiten, A. & Byrne, R. W. (1986) The St. Andrews catalogue of tactical
deception in primates. St. Andrews Psychological Reports No. 10.
(1988a) Taking (Machiavellian) intelligence apart. Editorial in: Machiavellian
intelligence. Social expertise and the evolution of intellect in monkeys,
apes and humans, ed. R. W. Byrne & A. Whiten. Oxford University
Press.
(1988b) The manipulation of attention in primate tactical deception. In:
Machiavellian intelligence. Social expertise and the evolution of intellect
in monkeys, apes and humans, ed. R. W. Byrne & A. Whiten. Oxford
University Press.
Whitman, C. O. (1899) Myths in animal psychology. The Monist 9:524-37.
Wickler, W. (1968) Mimicry in plants and animals. McGraw-Hill.
Wimmer, H. & Perner, P. (1983) Beliefs about beliefs: Representation and
constraining function of wrong beliefs in young children's understanding
of deception. Cognition 13:103-28.
Wittgenstein, L. (1953) Philosophical investigations. Blackwell.
Woodruff, G. & Premack, D. (1979) Intentional communication in the
chimpanzee: The development of deception. Cognition 7:333-62.
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1988) 11:2
273

THE AFRICAN ^\ \?\/ ELE-FUND
PRACTICAL ELEPHANT CONSERVATION
The African Ele-Fund aims to improve the protection of elephants and their habitat wherever they are
threatened and to raise public awareness throughout the world of the plight of the largest land animal on
earth.
Elephant populations are declining in virtually all of Africa: every year East Africa loses 8.1%, Central
and West Africa lose 17.8% and parts of southern Africa are losing 8.2%; only in the southern African
countries where poaching is under control, is there a slight increase of 0.7% per annum, (figures from
data compiled by Dr. Iain Douglas-Hamilton for UNEP in Nairobi). Surveys show that elephant numbers
are declining more slowly in protected areas - National Parks, Reserves, etc. - than elsewhere, but that
protection MUST be improved if the downward trend is to be halted.
The major cause of the decline in elephant numbers is the illegal ivory trade. Poachers are often better
equipped, better armed and better paid than the park guard and rangers who try to enforce the law.
Anti-poacher work is frequently hampered by the lack of simple equipment - sometimes just a spare part
for a vehicle, or boots and waterproof clothing for foot patrols. The African Ele-Fund is appealing for
donations and bequests to help even up the odds in favor of the elephants. 
Every penny and every cent
given will be spent in the field; the Ele-Fund is organized by volunteers and administered at no cost by
the Wild in Britain and by the Eastern African Wildlife Society of Kenya. The Fauna and Flora
Preservation Society (UK and USA) has also agreed to accept donations earmarked for the Ele-Fund, as
has WWF-International in Switzerland.
ELE-FUND RAISING
Fund-raising is centered around a seriers of Park Profiles, drawn up by scientists and conservationists
working in the field. Problem areas are thus pinpointed and lists of urgent needs prepared and costed
for each park. Individuals, schools and societies will focus their fundraising on certain items of
equipment or sums needed to cover vital work. For example, the Mount Elgon National Park in Kenya
needs a minimum of £3400 (US $6,020) for vehicle repairs, and £15,000 (US $25,800) per year to
cover the costs of extra anti-poacher patrols. Without this help, the unique salt-mining elephants will be
wiped out by the current spate of ivory poaching.
Kindly send a SASE (self-addressed stamped envelope) along with your donation to an address below if
you wish to receive a list of Ele-Fund raising ideas:
IWCICare for the Wild, 26 North Street, Horsham, West Sussex, RH12 1BN, UK
IWC USA, 1807 H Street NW, Washington, DC 20006, USA
IWC Canada, 542 Mount Pleasant Road, Suite No. 104, Toronto, M4S 2M7, Canada
East African Wildlife Society, PO Box 20110, Nairobi, Kenya
Please make cheques, postal orders, or money orders payable to the African Ele-Fund.
Co-ordinators: 
Ian Redmond, 60 Seymour Avenue, Bristol BS7 9HN, England;
Telephone (0272) 46489
Hezy Shoshani, Dept of Biological Sciences, Wayne State University,
Detroit, MI 48202, USA; Telephone (313)577-2865

