 chapter 11 
WHO’S  STILL AFRAID OF 
DETERMINISM?  RETHINKING 
CAUSES AND POSSIBILITIES  
 christopher taylor and 
daniel dennett  
 Incompatibilism, the view that free will and determinism are incompatible, subsists 
on two widely accepted, but deeply confused, theses concerning possibility and cau-
sation: (1) in a deterministic universe, one can never truthfully utter the sentence 
“I could have done otherwise,” and (2) in such universes, one can never really receive 
credit or blame for having caused an event, because in fact all events have been pre-
determined by conditions during the universe’s birth.   1 Throughout the free-will lit-
erature one ﬁ nds variations on these two themes, often intermixed in various ways. 
When  Robert Nozick ( 1981 , 313) 2 describes our longing for “originative value” he 
apparently has thesis (2) in mind, and thesis (1) may underlie his assertion that “we 
want it to be true that in that very same situation we could have done (signiﬁ cantly) 
otherwise.”  John Austin ( 1961 ) , in a famous footnote, ﬂ irts with thesis (1):
 Consider the case where I miss a very short putt and kick myself because I could 
have holed it. It is not that I should have holed it if I had tried: I did try, and 
missed. It is not that I should have holed it if conditions had been different: that 
might of course be so, but I am talking about conditions as they precisely were, 
and asserting that I could have holed it. There is the rub. Nor does ‘I can hole it 
this time’ mean that I shall hole it this time if I try or if anything else; for I may 
try and miss, and yet not be convinced that I could not have done it; indeed, 
further experiments may conﬁ rm my belief that I could have done it that time, 
although I did not (166). 

222 
compatibilist perspectives on freedom and responsibility
 (In later sections we discuss at length the ways in which this particular quote can 
lead readers astray.) Meanwhile, Robert Kane, in  The Signiﬁ cance of Free Will , elo-
quently proclaims the importance of our presumed ability truly to cause events, the 
ability that thesis (2) addresses:
 Why do we want free will? We want it because we want ultimate responsibility. 
And why do we want that? For the reason that children and adults take delight in 
their accomplishment from the earliest moments of their awakening as persons, 
whether these accomplishments are making a ﬁ st or walking upright or 
composing a symphony  (Kane  1996 , 100) . 3
 Elsewhere in the free-will debate one often ﬁ nds authors advancing deﬁ nitions 
that conﬁ rm the relevance of possibilities and causes. For instance,  Kane ( 1996 , 4)
describes free will itself as “the power of agents to be the ultimate creators . . . and 
sustainers of their own ends and purposes.” The key words here are “power” and 
“creator.” Intuition suggests that the term “power” is intertwined with “possibility” 
roughly as follows: Agent A has the power to do X if and only if it is possible that A 
does (will do) X. And certainly to be a “creator” one must be the  cause of changes in 
the world; one must “make a difference” in how the world runs. 
 Carl Ginet ( 1990 , 90) , in a similar vein, proposes: “Two or more alternatives 
are  open to me at a given moment if which of them I do next is entirely up to my 
choice at that moment: Nothing that exists up to that moment stands in the way 
of my doing next any one of the alternatives.” 4 In short, the acceptance of theses 
(1) and (2) lies at the heart of incompatibilism.  To avoid the sort of impasse that 
incompatibilists have apparently reached, we propose to reexamine the founda-
tions of possibilities and causes, to understand why theses (1) and (2) look so 
compelling. We will tackle ﬁ rst possible worlds, then counterfactuals, and then 
causation, building each concept on its predecessors. We will then compare this 
account with the recent important work of Judea Pearl on causality, before turn-
ing to the implications of our approach for the two incompatibilist theses. We 
will discover that the desires incompatibilists describe, to have powers and to 
effect changes, can be satisﬁ ed without any recondite appeals to quantum inde-
terminacy. The suspicions to the contrary lose their force once we begin to 
untangle, with the aid of a little formalism, the complexities of the underlying 
concepts.  
 Possible Worlds  
 Although a complete account of possible worlds would require many extra pages, 
the following paragraphs outline an approach, compatible with modern scientiﬁ c 
methods, that avoids various modal pitfalls identiﬁ ed by Quine (e.g., talk of “prop-
ositions,” “analyticity,” and “essences”).   5    Ideally, science strives for a description of 
the universe that is as thorough and comprehensive as possible, composed in an 

who’s still afraid of determinism? 
223
orderly mathematical idiom. A simple example of such ideal state-descriptions are 
the “Democritean” universes introduced by  Quine ( 1969 , 147–55) . A Democritean 
universe is completely speciﬁ ed using a function  f , which assigns to each quadruple 
(x,y,z,t ) a value of either 0 or 1. If  f ( x,y,z,t ) = 1, then at time  t matter occupies loca-
tion ( x,y,z ); otherwise point ( x,y,z ) is devoid of matter at  t . Needless to say, modern 
physics has long since supplanted the tidy Democritean conception of reality, but 
even today the basic project of describing the world with (monstrously complex) 
functions remains intact. So despite its scientiﬁ c shortcomings, the following deﬁ -
nition provides a useful starting point as we struggle to discipline unruly pretheo-
retical intuitions:
 A  possible world is simply any function of the form described above (in 
mathematical notation, any function of the form  f: R4 ® {0,1}). 6
 The set of all possible worlds we will denote by Ω; a particularly noteworthy subset 
of Ω is Ф, which contains just the physically or nomologically possible worlds, in 
which no physical laws are violated. 7
 Given a possible world  f , we of course have many ways to describe and make 
assertions about it. Often it will be natural to postulate “entities” within  f: connected 
hypersolids in R4 that yield coherent life-histories for objects such as stars, planets, 
living creatures, and everyday paraphernalia. One will also want to set up a system 
of  informal predicates that apply to these entities, such as “has a length of 1 meter,” 
“is red,” “is human.” 8 We may then form sentences like
∃x ( x is human) 
 and determine whether they apply in various different possible worlds (while rec-
ognizing that often enough one will encounter borderline worlds where incon-
testible verdicts prove elusive). 
 Worthy of special note are “identiﬁ cation predicates” of the form “is Socrates.” 
“Is Socrates,” we shall suppose, applies to any entity in any possible world that shares 
so many features with the well-known denizen of the actual world that we are will-
ing to consider it “the same person.” In the actual world, of course, “is Socrates” 
applies to exactly one entity; in others, there may reside no such being, or one, or 
conceivably several to whom the predicate applies equally well. Like other informal 
predicates, identiﬁ cation predicates suffer from vagueness and subjectivity, but they 
do not cause unusual problems. 
 With this machinery in place we can now explicate such sentences as:
 Necessarily, Socrates is mortal. 
 (1)
 We would propose the translation:
 In every (physically?) possible world  f , the sentence “ ∀x ( x is 
Socrates Þ x is mortal)” obtains. 
 (2)

224 
compatibilist perspectives on freedom and responsibility
 Here “is Socrates” and “is mortal” are informal predicates of the sort just intro-
duced. Paraphrase (2) strikes us as both plausible and free of the logical confusions 
Quine decries. Of course, deciding whether (2) is true does present considerable 
challenges, stemming largely from the unavoidable blurriness of the predicates. 
Moreover, we are not specifying the set of possible worlds over which one should 
allow  f to range; perhaps some readers will advocate set Ω (all worlds), others Ф (the 
physically possible worlds), and yet others a still more restricted set X. Logic alone 
cannot resolve this issue, but logical language does help us to pinpoint such ques-
tions and recognize the sorts of vagueness we face. However we choose, we can 
employ the notation
x φ
 to indicate that sentence φ obtains for every world in set X. 
 As the dual of necessity, possibility yields to a similar analysis. Hence 
Possibly, Socrates might have had red hair. 
 (3)
 means
 There exists (within some set X) a possible world  f in which the 
sentence “ ∃x ( x  is Socrates Ù x has red hair)” obtains. 
 (4)
 Analogous to the notation “X φ” we introduce
à X φ, 
 meaning that φ holds for some world within X. The familiar sentence:
 Austin could have holed the putt 
 (5)
 now becomes
àX  ∃x ( x is Austin Ù x  holes the putt). 
 (6)
   Notice that in this case we need to restrict X to a narrow range of worlds, all 
similar to actuality, if we are to do justice to Austin’s meaning. For suppose that 
Austin is an utterly incompetent golfer, and that impartial observers are 
inclined to deny (5). If we let X range too widely, we may include worlds in 
which Austin, thanks to years of expensive lessons, winds up a championship 
player who holes the putt easily, thus validating (6) but distorting the pre-
sumed sense of (5). At the same time, as we shall see, there is no good reason to 
make X so small that only worlds  identical to reality in the moments before the 
putt are included.  

who’s still afraid of determinism? 
225
 Counterfactuals  
 Using possible worlds, one can also proﬁ tably interpret sentences of the form
 If you had tripped Arthur, he would have fallen, 
 (7)
 as  David Lewis ( 1973a ) has shown. 9 Roughly, (7) obtains if and only if in every world 
approximately similar to our own where the antecedent holds, so does the conse-
quent. In other words:
X φ Þ y, 
 (8)
 where  φ stands for “you tripped Arthur,”  ψ stands for “Arthur fell,” and X is a set of 
worlds similar to our own. As an alternative notation, let us also write:
φ ®X y. 
 (9)
 Choosing an optimal value for X in (8) and (9) is not always easy, but we suggest the 
following loose Guidelines:
 In sentences like (8) and (9), X ought to: 
 • contain worlds in which φ holds, ~φ holds, ψ holds, and ~ψ holds 
 • contain the worlds that are otherwise very similar to the actual world 
(insofar as the preceding clause permits). 
 (G) 
 So when analyzing (7), choose X to contain worlds in which you trip Arthur, worlds 
where you refrain from tripping him, worlds where he falls, and worlds where he 
remains upright. In the case of (10):
 If the sun had not risen this morning, I would have overslept, 
 (10)
 X will look quite different, because it includes strange worlds in which the sun fails 
to rise. 
 In  Counterfactuals , Lewis cleverly devises a single connective ® appropriate 
for all φ and P, but in this essay we settle for a family of connectives of type ®X . 
Doing so, we believe, forestalls various technical complications and accords equally 
well with intuition. Notice that for Lewis transitivity fails, and, worse, so does the 
equivalence
φ ® y ≡ ~y ® ~φ. 
 With each operator ®X , on the other hand, transitivity and contraposition suc-
ceed, provided we hold X ﬁ xed. 10

226 
compatibilist perspectives on freedom and responsibility
 Notice also that the Guidelines mitigate the difﬁ culties raised by  Kit Fine 
(1975 )  in his famous review of Lewis. Fine considered the sentence: “Had Nixon 
pressed the button, a nuclear war would have started.” He observed that a world 
in which an electrical malfunction prevented the button from unleashing the 
warheads was intuitively much closer to actuality than one containing a nuclear 
holocaust—such glitches happen frequently, whereas nuclear wars are both rare 
and exceedingly disruptive. Someone who evaluates Fine’s sentence using Lewis’s 
generalized notion of similarity appears forced to deny the truth of the sentence, 
but our guidelines, by requiring the inclusion of worlds in which nuclear wars 
occur (in which ψ occurs), permit us to disregard the magnitude of the difference 
a nuclear war makes, while at the same time discouraging the introduction of 
convenient dei ex machina such as broken wires. Admittedly, our notions of simi-
larity are vague, but we contend that this vagueness is an inherent feature of coun-
terfactual thinking, and as we shall see, even the most rigorous treatments 
apparently rely on it. 11  
 Causation  
 Fundamental as it appears, the language of causation has stirred up interminable 
debate and has (perhaps for that reason) been avoided by scientists. Many philoso-
phers apparently hope some day to unearth the one “true” account of causation, but 
given the informal, vague, and often self-contradictory nature of the term, we think 
a more realistic goal is simply to develop a formal analogue (or analogues) that 
helps us think more clearly about the world. Our preexisting hunches about causa-
tion will provide some guidance, but we should mistrust any informal arguments 
that masquerade as “proofs” validating or debunking particular causal doctrines 
(see, e.g.,  Tooley  1987 ) .
 When we make an assertion like 
 Betty’s tripping Arthur caused him to fall, 
 (16)
 a number of factors appear to be at work supporting the claim. In an approximate 
order of importance, we list the following:
 •  Causal necessity . At least since Hume, philosophers have suspected that 
counterfactuals play some role in our causal thinking, and this factor and 
the next fall within the same tradition. Our assent to sentence (16) depends 
on our conviction that in any world roughly similar to our own in which 
Arthur falls, Betty must have tripped him up. Using the notation of the 
previous section, we have y ®X φ, where φ stands for “Betty tripped 
Arthur,” ψ represents “Arthur fell,” and X is a set of worlds similar to our 

who’s still afraid of determinism? 
227
own containing instances in which (i) Betty trips Arthur, (ii) Betty does not 
trip him, (iii) Arthur falls, or (iv) he does not fall. As observed above, the 
sentence ~φ ®X ~y has the same logical force; in other words, had Betty 
not tripped Arthur, he would not have fallen. 
 •  Causal sufﬁ ciency . It may well be that whenever we afﬁ rm (16), we do so 
partly because we believe that (using the same notation as before) φ ®X
y. In other words, we believe that Arthur’s fall was an inevitable outcome of 
Betty’s tripping: In any world where Betty places the obstruction in his path, 
Arthur goes toppling. (Or equivalently, if Arthur had not fallen, then Betty 
must in that case have refrained.) This second condition is logically entirely 
distinct from the ﬁ rst, and yet the two seem to get badly muddled in every-
day thinking. Indeed, as we shall see, incompatibilist confusion often 
originates precisely here. Below we will discuss at greater length the relations 
between these two crucial conditions. 
 •  Truth of φ and y in the actual world . Although a relatively trivial require-
ment, it should be mentioned, if only for completeness. 
 •  Independence . We expect the two sentences φ and y to be logically indepen-
dent: there must exist worlds, however remote from reality, in which φ
obtains but not ψ, and vice versa. Hence “Mary’s singing and dancing caused 
her to dance and sing” has a decidedly odd ring. This condition also helps 
rule out “1+1=2 causes 2+2=4.” 
 •  Temporal priority . A reliable way to distinguish causes from effects is to note 
that causes occur earlier. 12
 •  Miscellaneous further criteria . Although less critical than the preceding 
points, a number of other conditions may increase our conﬁ dence when we 
make causal judgements. For instance, in textbook examples of causation, φ
often describes the actions of an agent, and ψ represents a change in the 
state of a passive object (as in “Mary causes the house to burn down”). 
Further, we often expect the two participants to come into physical contact 
during their transaction. 13
 In order to understand these conditions better, and in particular the distinction 
between necessity and sufﬁ ciency, let us try them out on a few test cases (some of 
which derive from  Lewis [ 2000 ] ). First consider the sharpshooter aiming at a distant 
victim. Scrutiny of the sharpshooter’s past record shows that the probability of a suc-
cessful hit in this case is 0.1; if it makes any difference, we might imagine that irreduc-
ibly random quantum events in the sharpshooter’s brain help determine the outcome. 
Let us suppose that in the current case the bullet actually hits and kills the victim. We 
unhesitatingly agree then that the sharpshooter’s actions caused the victim’s death, 
despite their causal insufﬁ ciency. Accordingly, it appears that in cases like these, peo-
ple rank necessity above sufﬁ ciency when making judgments about causes. 
 Still, sufﬁ ciency does retain some relevance. Suppose that the king and the 
mayor both have an interest in the fate of some young dissident; as it happens, both 
issue orders to exile him, so exiled he is. This is a classic case of “overdetermination.” 

228 
compatibilist perspectives on freedom and responsibility
Let φ1 stand for “the king issues an exile order,” φ2 stand for “the mayor issues an 
exile order,” and P, “the dissident goes into exile.” In the current scenario, neither φ1
nor φ2 alone is necessary for P: For instance, had the king failed to issue an order, the 
dissident would still have been exiled thanks to the mayor, and vice versa. In fact φ1
Ú φ2 satisﬁ es the necessity requirement, but we are (perhaps unreasonably) reluc-
tant to posit a disjunction as a cause. 14 Instead, sufﬁ ciency comes to the rescue and 
permits a choice between the two. After all, φ2 fails this test: It is easy to imagine a 
universe where the mayor issues his decree, yet the dissident gets off (just change the 
king’s order into a pardon). The king’s order, on the other hand, is truly effective: 
Whatever small changes we make to the universe (including changes in the mayor’s 
orders), the dissident’s exile follows from the king’s command. Accordingly, we may 
dub φ1 the “real cause” (if we feel the need to satisfy that yearning).  15
 Finally, consider the tale of Billy and Susie. Both children are throwing rocks at 
a glass bottle, and as it happens Susie’s rock, traveling slightly faster, reaches the 
bottle ﬁ rst and shatters it. Billy’s rock arrives a moment later at exactly the spot 
where the bottle used to stand, but of course encounters nothing but ﬂ ying shards. 
When choosing between φ1  (“Susie throws rock S”) and φ2 (“Billy throws rock B”), 
we vote for φ1 as the cause of ψ (“The bottle shatters”), despite the fact that neither 
sentence is necessary (had Susie not thrown her rock, the bottle would still have 
shattered thanks to Billy, and vice versa) and both are sufﬁ cient (Billy’s throw suf-
ﬁ ces to produce a broken bottle, whatever his playmate does, and likewise with 
Susie’s). Why? The general notion of temporal priority (introduced above in con-
nection with distinguishing cause from effect) strikes us as one critical consider-
ation. As with priority disputes in science, art, and sports, we seem to put a premium 
on being the ﬁ rst with an innovation, and because rock S arrived in the vicinity 
of the bottle earlier than rock B, we give credit to Susie. Further, it is clear that, 
although the bottle would still have shattered without Susie’s throw, the shattering 
event would have been signiﬁ cantly different, occurring at a later time with a differ-
ent rock sending fragments off in different directions. We can choose set X to reﬂ ect 
this fact (in keeping with guidelines [G]): Let it contain worlds in which either 
(1) the bottle does not shatter at all, or (2) it shatters in a way very similar to the way 
it shatters in reality. Then for every world in X,
y Þ φ1 
 obtains; wherever in X the bottle shatters, we ﬁ nd Susie throwing her rock ﬁ rst. On 
the other hand,
y Þ φ2 
 may well fail in X; X can certainly contain worlds where the bottle shatters but Billy 
refrains. In short, φ1 is “more necessary” than φ2 , provided that we choose X right. 
The vagueness of X, though sometimes irksome, can also break deadlocks. Not that 
deadlocks must always be breakable. We ought to look with equanimity on the 

who’s still afraid of determinism? 
229
prospect that sometimes circumstances will fail to pinpoint a single “real cause” of 
an event, no matter how hard we seek. 
 The way in which we draw the distinction between sufﬁ ciency and necessity par-
allels in many regards the approach in  (Pearl  2000 ) . Like us, Pearl thinks in terms of a 
continuum in the relative weight given to necessity and sufﬁ ciency in different causal 
claims, and seeks to ﬁ nd the right mix of the two for various circumstances. He also 
(309–11) notes the distinction between general or type-level causal claims (“car acci-
dents cause deaths”) and singular or token causal claims (“a car accident caused Joe’s 
death”) and observes that the sufﬁ ciency condition tends to be paramount in the for-
mer case, whereas necessity predominates in the latter. As a general rule, it seems that 
type-level claims (emphasizing sufﬁ ciency) are of particular use to epidemiologists, 
economists, and policy makers in general, whereas token-level claims are of interest to 
historians, crime investigators, and other creators of nonﬁ ctional narratives.  
 Pearl’s Causality  
 In the decade since the ﬁ rst version of this essay, Pearl’s  Causality (2000) has emerged 
as a particularly signiﬁ cant contribution to this subject. Pearl’s arsenal for attacking 
the topic contains three principal weapons:
Bayesian probability , in which “probabilities encode degrees of belief about 
events in the world and data are used to strengthen, update, or weaken 
those degrees of belief”  (Pearl  2000 , 2) . 
Causal Bayesian networks: Oversimplifying somewhat, these consist of “directed 
acyclic graphs” (DAGs) whose nodes can be used to represent variable 
conditions in the real world and whose links represent probabilistic and 
causal dependencies between them. Upon such graphs, Pearl sets up a 
formal operator  do (.) in which a particular node gets ﬁ xed at a speciﬁ c 
value, producing a modiﬁ ed probability distribution and an altered 
network of links; this operator represents “interventions”—manipulations 
of the real world that might be performed by real agents, at least in our 
imagination. 16
Functional causal models , which resemble causal Bayesian networks in various 
ways: They also begin with networks of variables (X), which are then 
augmented by a set of  unknown  variables (U) and a set of deterministic 
functions that connect each variable  xi with other “ancestral” variables in 
the network along with an accompanying unknown,  ui . An analogue of the 
do (.) operator can also be applied to these networks. 
 In general weapon (3) can accomplish almost everything weapon (2) can (a math-
ematically provable result), and so Pearl employs it most frequently in the later 
parts of the book. 

230 
compatibilist perspectives on freedom and responsibility
 Pearl’s formal results are impressive. They promise to bring clarity and algorith-
mic feasibility to many knotty problems in the analysis of complex phenomena 
studied by economists, epidemiologists, biologists, and others. Nonetheless, as a 
starting point for philosophical discussions of free will, we have certain reservations 
about his system. The ﬁ rst weapon, probability, has particularly wobbly credentials, 
as  Kyburg ( 2005 )  notes in a laudatory review, and as Pearl himself evidently con-
cedes as  Causality  progresses. At the outset, Pearl seems perfectly happy with a 
rather vague, epistemic view, where the probability of an event simply reﬂ ects a 
subjective measure of “our” conﬁ dence in its truth; his reply to  Kyburg ( 2005 ) main-
tains the same stance, with the additional assertion that such a view can be trans-
lated with minimal philosophical effort into a more objective view of probability in 
terms of event frequencies. And yet in due course  (Pearl  2000 , 104) , he admits to 
dissatisfaction with this attitude, when he speaks of functional causal models, with 
their deterministic functions, providing an exciting alternative to “those slippery 
epistemic probabilities . . . with which we had been working so long.” 17
 The difﬁ culty of assigning probabilities to individual events (or to events in the 
context of other bits of information) grows worse when we start trying to fashion 
fancier causal networks or functional causal models that represent a particular 
domain of study. Setting aside any questions about how to specify functions in a 
functional model and how to implement the  do (˙) operator, we see trouble both in 
the selection of nodes and in the connecting of them by links. First, Pearl has no 
ambitions to build an (impractically) massive network that depicts all of creation; on 
the contrary, he states explicitly that the average scientist must carve “a piece from 
the universe and proclaim that piece  in . . .  The rest of the universe is then considered 
out or  background . . . This choice of ins and  outs creates asymmetry in the way we look 
at things, and it is this asymmetry that permits us to talk about ‘outside intervention’ 
and hence about causality . . .”  (Pearl  2000 , 350, emphasis in original) . Fundamental 
though this carving process appears to be, Pearl provides few details on how it ought 
to work. Even if we overlook the difﬁ culties in selecting nodes for our causal net-
work, we immediately encounter the next problem: Which nodes need to be con-
nected by links? At ﬁ rst glance it may seem “obvious” that a node representing the 
price of rice in India and a node for the current length of the grass on the White 
House lawn would never require linking; but to justify this feeling would seem to 
demand an appeal to causal intuitions, which are, after all, the target of the current 
investigation. Pearl opens himself to charges of circularity when he writes:
 thus [links] should be assumed to exist, by default, between two nodes in the 
diagram. They should be deleted only by well-motivated justiﬁ cations, such as the 
unlikely existence of a common cause for the two variables. . . . Although we can 
never be cognizant of all the factors that may affect our variables, substantive 
knowledge sometimes permits us to state that the inﬂ uence of a possible common 
factor is not likely to be signiﬁ cant”  (Pearl  2000 , 163) . 
 Vague criteria, indeed. 
 Of course, vagueness comes with the territory in discussions of counterfactuals 
and causes, as our own account admits. But we feel that such vagueness must be 

who’s still afraid of determinism? 
231
addressed forthrightly, and that thinking in terms of varying families of similar pos-
sible worlds represents some noncircular progress. By contrast, when discussing 
Lewis’s work, Pearl ﬁ rst reiterates the challenges facing similarity metrics pointed 
out by Fine, then simply asserts that “such difﬁ culties do not enter the structural 
account . . . [its] counterfactuals are not based on an abstract notion of similar-
ity . . . instead they rest directly on the mechanisms . . . that produce those worlds” 
 (Pearl  2000 , 239; 2010) . Pearl’s conﬁ dence that appealing to “mechanisms” solves 
causality’s problems seems unwarranted. The dilemmas of the previous paragraph, 
encountered whenever we choose models to represent pieces of the universe, are 
simply being brushed under the rug. 
 We believe that Pearl’s mostly unacknowledged troubles in choosing his causal 
models are in fact isomorphic to the issues similarity metrics face. Wherever Lewis 
dismisses a proposed alteration to the universe as too far-out to be relevant when 
evaluating a particular counterfactual or causal claim, Pearl simply omits the cor-
responding variable from his model. To take a concrete example, when justifying 
the assertion that “Had Nixon pressed the button, there would have been a nuclear 
holocaust,” a similarity-based account must rule out alterations to the world that 
involve electrical malfunctions in the button; analogously, if Pearl wants to produce 
a determinate answer to the question “Did a holocaust occur?,” given a modiﬁ cation 
of Nixon’s button-pushing behavior, he will have to exclude models in which the 
electrical malfunction becomes an active variable in the network. 18
 In closing we mention one additional feature of Pearl’s exposition that may 
prove confusing to newcomers, and which concerns the order in which he develops 
his concepts. Whereas this essay tackles counterfactuals before causation, Pearl 
delays his main discussion of counterfactuals until  chapter  7 of  Causality , creating 
an impression that causes have logical precedence. And yet in a sense Pearl does 
recognize counterfactuals’ priority, because he introduces the  do (˙) operator 
almost immediately and thereby implicitly deﬁ nes a concept of what  would hap-
pen,  if  we were to change the universe’s actual conditions. 19 In a similar way, Pearl 
postpones his main treatment of causal necessity and sufﬁ ciency until  chapter  9 , 
where they suddenly receive thorough and insightful treatment. A reader who 
stopped at  chapter  8   might easily assume that only sufﬁ ciency matters to Pearl in 
causal analysis—that X causes Y  simply means that, whenever X occurs, Y follows—
perpetuating the confusions that this essay tries to unravel. Such quirks of exposi-
tory strategy do not invalidate Pearl’s methods, but they may create philosophical 
misunderstandings.  
 Determinism and Possibility (Thesis 1)  
 Now that we have some formal machinery in place, we can reconsider the spuri-
ously “obvious” fear that determinism reduces our possibilities. We can see why the 
claim seems to have merit: Let  φ be the sentence “Austin holes the putt,” let X be the 

232 
compatibilist perspectives on freedom and responsibility
set of physically possible worlds that are identical to the actual world at some time 
t0  prior to the putt, and assume both that Austin misses and that determinism holds. 
Then, in fact φ does not hold for any world in X (~◊X φ), because X contains only 
one world: the actual one. Of course, this method of choosing X (call it the “narrow 
method”) is only one among many. We should note that the moment we admit into 
X worlds that differ in a few imperceptibly microscopic ways from actuality at  t0 , we 
may well ﬁ nd that ◊X φ, even when determinism obtains. (This is, after all, what 
recent work on chaos has shown: Many phenomena of interest to us can change 
radically if one minutely alters the initial conditions.) So the question is: When 
people contend that events are possible, are they really thinking in terms of the nar-
row method? 
 Notice that Austin evidently endorses the narrow method of choosing X when 
he states that he is “talking about conditions as they precisely were” whenever he 
asserts he could have holed the putt. Yet in the next sentence he seemingly rescinds 
this endorsement, observing that “further experiments may conﬁ rm my belief that 
I could have done it that time, although I did not.” What “further experiments” 
might conﬁ rm Austin’s belief that he could have done it? Experiments on the put-
ting green? Would his belief be shored up by his setting up and sinking near- 
duplicates of that short putt ten times in a row? If so, then he is not as interested as 
he claims he is in conditions as they precisely were. He is content to consider “Austin 
holes the putt” possible if, in situations similar to the actual occasion in question, he 
holes the putt. 20
 We contend, then, that Austin equivocates when he discusses possibilities, and 
that in truth the narrow method of choosing X does not have the signiﬁ cance he 
imagines. From this it follows that the truth or falsity of determinism should not 
affect our belief that certain unrealized events were nevertheless “possible,” in an 
important everyday sense of the word. We can bolster this last claim by paying a 
visit to a restricted domain in which we know with certainty that determinism 
reigns: the realm of chess-playing computer programs. 
 Computers are marvels of determinism. Even their so-called random number 
generators only execute pseudo-random functions, which produce exactly the 
same sequence of “random” digits each time the computer reboots. That means 
that computer programs that avail themselves of randomness at various “choice” 
points will nevertheless spin out exactly the same sequence of states if run over 
and over again from a cold start.   21 Suppose, for instance, you install two different 
chess-playing programs on your computer, and yoke them together with a little 
supervisory program that pits them against each other, game after game, in a 
potentially endless series. Will they play the same game, over and over, until you 
turn off the computer? Perhaps—but if either chess program consults the ran-
dom number generator during its calculations (if, for instance, it periodically 
“ﬂ ips a coin” to escape from Buridan’s ass difﬁ culties in the course of its heuristic 
search), then in the following game the state of the random number generator 
will have changed. Accordingly different alternatives will be “chosen” and a vari-
ant game will blossom, resulting in a series in which the games, like snowﬂ akes, 

who’s still afraid of determinism? 
233
are no two alike.   22    Nevertheless, if you turned off the computer, and then restarted 
it running the same program, exactly the same variegated series of games would 
spin out. 
 This gives us a toy model of a deterministic Democritean universe, in which 
kazillions of bits get ﬂ ipped in sequence, governed by a ﬁ xed physics. Rewinding 
and replaying the tape of life is possible in such a toy world. Suppose we create such 
a chess universe involving two programs, A and B, and study the results of a lengthy 
run. We will ﬁ nd many highly reliable patterns. Suppose we ﬁ nd that A (almost) 
always beats B. That is a pattern that we will want to explain, and saying “Since the 
program is deterministic, A was caused always to beat B” would fail to address that 
curiosity. We will want to know what it is about the structure, methods, and disposi-
tions of A that accounts for its superiority at chess. A has a competence or power 
that B lacks, and we need to isolate this interesting factor. 23 When we set about 
exploring the issue, availing ourselves of the high-level perspective from which the 
visible “macroscopic” objects include representations of chess pieces and board 
positions, evaluations of possible moves, decisions about courses to pursue, and so 
forth, we will uncover a host of further patterns: some of them endemic to chess 
wherever it is played (e.g., the near certainty of B’s loss in any game where B falls a 
rook behind) and some of them peculiar to A and B as particular chess players (e.g., 
B’s penchant for getting its queen out early)  (Dennett  1978a , 107). In short, we will 
ﬁ nd a cornucopia of explanatory regularities, some exceptionless (in our volumi-
nous run) and others statistical. 
 These macroscopic patterns are salient moments in the unfolding of a deter-
ministic pageant that, looked at from the perspective of microcausation, is pretty 
much all the same. What from one vantage point appear to be two chess programs 
in suspenseful combat can be seen through the “microscope” (as we watch instruc-
tions and data streaming through the CPU) to be a single deterministic automaton 
unfolding in the only way it can, its jumps already predictable by examining the 
precise state of the pseudo-random number generator. There are no “real” forks or 
branches in its future; all the “choices” made by A and B are already determined. 
Nothing, it seems, is really possible in this world other than what actually happens. 
Suppose, for instance, that an ominous mating-net looms over B at time  t but col-
lapses when A runs out of time and terminates its search for the key move one pulse 
too soon; that mating net  was never going to happen . 24 (This is something we could 
prove, if we doubted it, by running the same tournament another day. At exactly the 
same moment in the series, A would run out of time again and terminate its search 
at exactly the same point.) 
 So what are we to say? Is our toy world really a world without prevention, with-
out offense and defense, without lost opportunities, without the thrust and parry of 
genuine agency, without genuine possibilities? Admittedly, our chess programs, like 
insects or ﬁ sh, are much too simple agents to be plausible candidates for morally 
signiﬁ cant free will, but we contend that the determinism of their world does not 
rob them of their different powers, their different abilities to avail themselves of the 
opportunities presented. If we want to understand what is happening in that world, 

234 
compatibilist perspectives on freedom and responsibility
we may, indeed must, talk about how their choices cause their circumstances to 
change, and about what they  can and  cannot do. 
 Suppose we ﬁ nd two games in the series in which the ﬁ rst twelve moves are the 
same, but with A playing White in the ﬁ rst game and B playing White in the second. 
At move 13 in the ﬁ rst game, B “blunders” and it’s all downhill from there. At move 
13 in the second game, A, in contrast, ﬁ nds the saving move, castling, and goes on to 
win. “B could have castled at that point in the ﬁ rst game,” says an onlooker, echoing 
Austin. True or false? The move, castling, was just as legal the ﬁ rst time, so in that 
sense, it was among the “options” available to B. Suppose we ﬁ nd, moreover, that 
castling was not only one of the represented candidate moves for B, but that B in 
fact undertook a perfunctory exploration of the consequences of castling, aban-
doned, alas, before its virtues were revealed. Could B have castled, then? Looking 
at precisely the same case, again and again, is utterly uninformative, but looking at 
similar cases is in fact diagnostic. If we ﬁ nd that in many similar circumstances in 
other games, B  does pursue the evaluation slightly farther, discovering the virtues of 
such moves and making them—if we ﬁ nd, in the minimal case, that ﬂ ipping a single 
bit in the random number generator would result in B’s castling—then we support 
(“with further experiments”) the observer’s conviction that B could have castled 
then. We would say, in fact, that B’s failure to castle was a ﬂ uke, bad luck with the 
random number generator. If, on the contrary, we ﬁ nd that discovering the reasons 
for castling requires far too much analysis for B to execute in the time available 
(although A, being a stronger player, is up to the task), then we will have grounds for 
concluding that no, B, unlike A, could not have castled. To imagine B castling would 
require too many alterations of reality; we would be committing an error alluded to 
earlier, making X too large. 
 In sum, using the narrow method to choose X is useless if we want to explain 
the patterns that are manifest in the unfolding data. It is only if we “wiggle the 
events” (as Lewis has said), looking not at “conditions as they precisely were” but at 
nearby neighboring worlds, that we achieve any understanding at all. 25 Once we 
expand X a little, we discover that B has additional options, in a sense both informa-
tive and morally relevant (when we address worlds beyond the chessboard). The 
burden rests with incompatibilists to explain why “real” possibility demands a nar-
row choice of X—or why we should be interested in such a concept of possibility, 
regardless of its “reality.” 
 As we have seen, possibilities of the broader, more interesting variety can exist 
comfortably in deterministic worlds. Indeed, introducing indeterminism adds 
nothing in the way of worthwhile possibilities, opportunities, or competences to 
a universe. If in our sample deterministic world program A always beats program 
B, then replacing the pseudo-random number generator with a genuinely inde-
terministic device will not help B at all: A will still win every time. Though pseu-
do-random generators may not produce genuinely random output, they come so 
close that no ordinary mortal can tell the difference. A superior algorithm such as 
A’s will hardly stumble when faced with so inconsequential a change. And analo-
gous conclusions could well apply in meatier universes like ours. To put it 

who’s still afraid of determinism? 
235
 graphically, the universe could be deterministic on even days of the month and 
indeterministic on odd days, and we would never notice a difference in human 
opportunities or powers; there would be just as many triumphs—and just as 
many lamentable lapses—on October 4 as on October 3 or October 5. (If your 
horoscope advised you to postpone any morally serious decision to an odd num-
bered day, you would have no more reason to follow this advice than if it told you 
to wait for a waning moon.)  
 Determinism and Causation (Thesis 2)  
 The hunch that determinism would eliminate some worthwhile type of causation 
from the universe has even less merit than the claim that it eliminates possibilities. 
We suspect this fear stems from the conﬂ ation of causal necessity with causal sufﬁ -
ciency—as we have seen, our language makes this confusion all too easy. Determinism 
is essentially a doctrine concerned with sufﬁ ciency: if σ0  is a (mind-bogglingly com-
plex) sentence that speciﬁ es in complete detail the state of the universe at  t0 and σ1
likewise speciﬁ es the universe at a later time  t1 , then determinism dictates that σ0 is 
sufﬁ cient for σ1 in all physically possible worlds. But determinism tells us nothing 
about what earlier conditions are  necessary to produce σ1 , or any other sentence ψ
for that matter. Hence, since causation generally presupposes necessity, the truth of 
determinism would have little bearing on the validity of our causal judgments. 26
 For example, according to determinism, the precise condition of the universe 
one second after the Big Bang (call the corresponding sentence σ0 ) causally sufﬁ ced 
to produce the assassination of John F. Kennedy in 1963 (sentence ψ). Yet there is no 
reason at all to claim that σ0 caused ψ. Though sufﬁ cient, σ0  is hardly necessary. For 
all we know, Kennedy might well have been assassinated anyway, even if some dif-
ferent conditions had obtained back during the universe’s birth.   27 More plausible 
causes of the event would include: “A bullet followed a course directed at Kennedy’s 
body”; “Lee Harvey Oswald pulled the trigger on his gun”; perhaps “Kennedy was 
born”; conceivably “Oswald was born.” 28 But conspicuously absent from this list are 
microscopically detailed descriptions of the universe billions of years prior to the 
incident. Incompatibilists who assert that under determinism σ0 “causes” or 
“explains” ψ miss the main point of causal inquiry. 
 In fact, determinism is perfectly compatible with the notion that some events 
have no cause at all. Consider the sentence “The devaluation of the  rupiah caused 
the Dow Jones average to fall.” We rightly treat such a declaration with suspicion; 
are we really so sure that among nearby universes the Dow Jones fell  only in those 
where the  rupiah fell ﬁ rst? Do we even imagine that every universe where the  rupiah
fell experienced a stock market sell-off? Might there not have been a conﬂ uence of 
dozens of factors which jointly sufﬁ ced to send the market tumbling but none of 
which by itself was essential? On some days, perhaps, Wall Street’s behavior has a 

236 
compatibilist perspectives on freedom and responsibility
ready explanation; yet at least as often we suspect that no particular cause is at work. 
And surely our opinions about the market’s activities would remain the same, 
whether we happened to adopt Newton’s physics or Schrödinger’s. In general, 
instances of apparent randomness (e.g., stock market ﬂ uctuations, coin ﬂ ips, dice 
throws) are described in our account as having no cause at all; even if determinism 
is true, they are determined by chaotic processes that cannot be reduced to tractable 
sets of necessary and sufﬁ cient conditions. 
 Of course, one might wonder why it is that causal necessity matters to us as 
much as it does. Let us return for a moment to chess programs A and B. Suppose 
our attention is drawn to a rare game in which B wins, and we want to know “the 
cause” of this striking victory. The trivial claim that B’s win was “caused” by the ini-
tial state of the computer is totally uninformative. Of course, the total state of the 
toy universe at prior moments was  sufﬁ cient for the occurrence of the win; we want 
to know which features were  necessary , and thereby understand what such rare 
events have in common. We want to discover those features, the absence of which 
would most directly be followed by B’s loss, the default outcome. Perhaps we will 
ﬁ nd a heretofore unsuspected ﬂ aw in A’s control structure, a bug that has only just 
now surfaced. Or perhaps the victory is a huge coincidence of conditions that 
require no repair, because the probability of their recurrence is effectively zero. Or 
we might ﬁ nd an idiosyncratic island of brilliance in B’s competence, which once 
diagnosed would enable us to say just what circumstances in the future might per-
mit another such victory for B. 
 In closing, let us return to the human desire pinpointed by Kane that motivates 
so much of this debate: the desire to be able to take full credit as the creators and 
causes of change in the world. Consider for instance the wish that we have to be 
acknowledged as the authors of this essay. Suppose that determinism turns out to 
be true. Would that in any way undercut our claim that our activity nevertheless 
played an essential role in this essay’s creation? Not in the least, even after we factor 
in the earlier deeds of our parents and teachers. Without our efforts, it is safe to say 
that no essay exactly like this (or even closely similar) would have been produced.   29
Hence we are entitled to claim some “originative value” for our unique accomplish-
ment. The thirst for originality and causal relevance is not to be quenched by 
abstruse quantum events: all that we require is the knowledge that without our 
presence, the universe would have turned out signiﬁ cantly different. 
 Appendix: Van Inwagen’s Consequence 
Argument  
 Peter van Inwagen ( 1975  )  hopes to bolster the incompatibilist sense of lost causal 
powers with the following basic argument:

who’s still afraid of determinism? 
237
  1. Let φ be some event that actually occurs in agent A’s life (e.g., missing a 
putt). Also let σ0 be a comprehensive description of the universe’s state at 
some time in the remote past, and let λ be a statement of the laws of nature. 
  2. Then, assuming determinism, λ Ù σ0 Þ φ applies in every possible world. 
Equivalently, ~φ Þ ~(λ Ù φ0 ). 
  3.  If A has the power to causẹ a and a Þ b obtains in every possible world, 
then A has the power to cause b.
  4. So if A has the power to cause ~φ, then A has the power to cause the falsity 
of either λ or σ0 , which is absurd.  
  5. Therefore A lacks the power to cause ~φ. 
 This argument illustrates nicely the confusion that causal necessity and sufﬁ ciency 
engender. As we have argued, counterfactual necessity is the single most crucial 
condition for causation, and accordingly we would recommend that Van Inwagen’s 
“power to causẹ” be rendered as follows:
 A has the  power to cause a iff for some sentence γ (describing an action of A) and 
a world  f close to actuality, γ Ù a holds in f and a Þ γ in every world similar to  f . 
 In other words, within some cluster of nearby worlds, there is a possible action of 
A (called γ) that is a necessary condition for a to occur. But under this deﬁ nition, 
line 3 above has no warrant whatever. Line 3 hypothesizes that a Þ γ in a cluster 
of nearby worlds, and that a Þ b in every world; if we could deduce that b Þ γ in 
this cluster, we would be home free. But of course in Logic 101 we learn that a Þ γ
and a Þ b do not entail b Þ γ, and so line 3 fails, and Van Inwagen’s argument 
with it. 30
 NOTES  
1. This essay incorporates almost all of “Who’s Afraid of Determinism: Rethinking 
Causes and Possibilities”  (Taylor and Dennett  2002  ) but includes signiﬁ cant additions and 
adjustments; hence it supersedes that article.  
2.  Nozick: “We want it to be true that in that very same situation we could have done 
(signiﬁ cantly) otherwise, so that our actions will have originative value” (313). 
3.  Kane  1998 : 100 . 
4.  Ginet  1990 : 90 . 
5. See  Quine ( 1980 )  for a discussion of these pitfalls. 
6. The average educated person’s casual working assumptions about the cosmos still 
resemble the Democritean account, and philosophers traditionally rely on nothing more 
sophisticated when exploring the implications of determinism and indeterminism, 
causation and possibility. 
 Our suggestion that possible worlds simply  are functions of the appropriate form 
may seem disturbingly reductive, particularly when one contemplates the particular 
function(s) that correspond to the actual world; accordingly Lewis takes pains to 

238 
compatibilist perspectives on freedom and responsibility
distinguish possible worlds from their mathematical “handles.” However one wishes to 
address these ontological scruples, nothing in the following discussion hinges on 
them. 
7.  Since we are restricting ourselves to the scientiﬁ cally old-fashioned Democritean 
worlds, we would have trouble specifying the contents of Ф precisely—and besides, of 
course, we do not yet  know all the laws of nature!—but we can pretend that we know, and 
hence we can pretend that in most cases one can judge whether or not a particular world  f
accords with natural law. 
 John Horton Conway’s Game of Life can be viewed as a particularly simple 
pseudo-Democritean universe, eliminating one spatial dimension and quantizing 
time. (See  Dennett  1991 , 27–51 or  Dennett  1995 , for an introduction to Life.) The set of 
all possible sequences of bitmaps is then Ω, and the single (deterministic) rule of Life 
“physics” applied to every “initial” state gives us the subset Ф of Ω. Every variation on 
Conway’s “physics” generates a different subset Ф.
8. Of course, these predicates unleash a horde of problems concerning vagueness, 
subjectivity, and (in such cases as “believes that snow is white”) intentionality, but 
difﬁ culties along these lines do not imperil the basic approach. 
9.  Lewis  1973  ,  passim . 
10. Of course, X can vary in practice, as already observed, so that we must treat 
assumptions of transitivity with care. But notice that the Guidelines (G) tend to yield the 
same set X for the two sentences φ Þ y and ~y Þ ~φ; hence the rule of contraposition is 
in general reliable. 
11. We are indebted to Gary Drescher (personal communication) for clarifying our 
thinking on this topic. 
12. A vast amount of ink his been spilled arguing that the direction of causation is 
either independent of or logically prior to the direction of time, and to address the matter 
here would require too lengthy a digression. So we merely note the issue, and tentatively 
take the direction of time as a given (originating ultimately in the Second Law of 
Thermodynamics) from which the direction of causation derives. 
 Gasking ( 1955 ) raises a number of interesting cases in which cause and effect 
appear to be simultaneous. For instance, if a piece of iron attains a temperature of, 
for example, 1000°C and thereupon starts to glow, we still distinguish the former as 
cause and the latter as effect. But this apparent exception to the rule has a ready 
explanation that Gasking himself hints at: When a speaker refers to the iron 
“reaching 1000°C,” she is envisioning this event as the endpoint in a lengthy heating 
process. The heating process  does precede the glowing, and so the latter is consid-
ered an effect. 
 Another category of “exceptions” includes diseases and their symptoms (e.g., a 
cold and sneezing), which might sometimes arise simultaneously. Yet often enough 
diseases do  precede their symptoms, whereas symptoms (by deﬁ nition) never appear 
before their diseases. Accordingly we grant diseases the status of “cause.” 
13. Notice that we do not, in the above clauses, make any provision to ensure the 
transitivity of causation.  Lewis ( 2000 , 191–95) , among others, feels it important to 
guarantee transitivity by making “causation” the ancestral of “causal dependence.” But 
Lewis himself provides many examples of transitivity’s counterintuitive consequences. For 
instance, suppose that agent A wants to travel to New York. Agent B, hoping to thwart A, 
lets the air out of the tires on A’s car. In consequence, A takes the train instead and reaches 
New York only slightly behind schedule. If causation is transitive, than B has “caused” A’s 
successful arrival, despite the fact that the two sentences “B lets the air out of A’s tires” and 

who’s still afraid of determinism? 
239
“A arrives in New York” satisfy none of our more crucial conditions. Lewis ﬁ nds the 
awkward implications of transitivity acceptable; we remain unpersuaded. 
 Hall ( 2000 )  goes to even greater lengths defending transitivity. His account would 
seemingly imply that a pebble on the train tracks south of Paris that minutely alters 
the course of the Orient Express is a “cause” of the train’s arrival in Istanbul several 
days later.  Paul’s ( 2000 ) “Aspect Causation” suggests a possible diagnosis for Hall’s 
willingness to countenance such bizarre conclusions, as stemming from an overeager 
acceptance of the premise that causation is a relation between “events” (however this 
problematic term may be deﬁ ned). At any rate, notice that on our account one can 
consistently consider false the sentence “Pebble  p ’s lying on the tracks south of Paris 
caused the train’s arrival in Istanbul,” while accepting “Pebble  p ’s lying on the tracks 
south of Paris caused the train’s arrival in Istanbul via a minutely altered course in 
France.” 
14.  Obviously, a sentence like “Drugs or aliens caused Elvis’s premature demise” 
abbreviates the cumbersome “Drugs caused Elvis’s premature demise or aliens caused 
Elvis’s premature demise”—a disjunction of two separate causes, not a single disjunctive 
cause. 
15. Invoking causal sufﬁ ciency in this way solves, to our satisfaction, all of the 
analogous problem cases raised by  Schaffer ( 2000 ) . Note that Schaffer rather misleadingly 
suggests that “counterfactual accounts of causation” (176) must always be formulated solely 
in terms of necessity. We, on the contrary, consider our account essentially “counterfactual” 
even though it allows for sufﬁ ciency along with necessity. 
 Lewis’s ( 2000 )  formulation of “Causation as Inﬂ uence” can be viewed as an indirect 
way of introducing sufﬁ ciency into an originally necessity-centered account. For present 
purposes we consider our approach more illuminating, but both strategies point in the 
same general direction. 
16.  Woodward ( 2003  , 106) also builds his “manipulationist” notion of causal 
explanation on interventions of this sort; interestingly, he is avowedly unperturbed by the 
threatened circularity of basing an account of causality on such an undeniably causal 
notion as intervention.  
17.  Notice that when he launches his ﬁ rst chapter with a discussion of probability 
theory Pearl is tacitly using a notion of what events and combinations of events—even 
combinations that have never occurred in reality—are  possible . His starting point therefore 
resembles ours. 
18.  Woodward ( 2003  , 110)  also points out that Pearl’s formalism is ideal for his 
purposes but that it is dependent on choosing “the  correct  causal graph for the system in 
which the intervention occurs.” See  Pearl ( 2010 )  for a more explicit discussion of 
counterfactuals, prompted in part by our discussion in an earlier draft of this essay. 
19. Pearl has acknowledged this point (personal communication). 
20. When Austin speaks of further experiments, could he be referring to experiments 
in the high-tech labs of physicists and microbiologists, experiments that would convince 
him that his brain ampliﬁ es indeterministic quantum events? Given the extreme 
impracticality of such experiments, and Austin’s overall skepticism about the relevance of 
science in these contexts (“[A modern belief in science] is not in line with the traditional 
beliefs enshrined in the word  can ,”  [Austin ( 1961 ), 166]) , this interpretation seems unlikely. 
But this is precisely the direction in which Kane and some other incompatibilists have 
headed. See also  Dennett ( 1984 , 133–37) . 
21. We are restricting our attention to programs that do not require or accept input 
from the external world, which could, of course, be random in any of several senses. The 

240 
compatibilist perspectives on freedom and responsibility
easiest way to ensure that there is variation in subsequent runs of a program is to have it 
call for inputs of these sorts: the time taken from the computer’s clock, the presence or 
absence of a pulse from a Geiger counter, the last digit in the latest Dow Jones Industrial 
Average as taken off the Internet, etc. 
22.  All this is independent of whether or not either chess program can “learn from its 
experience,” which is another way their internal state could change over time to guarantee 
that no two games were the same. 
23. Another case in which we could know  all  the deterministic micro-details but be 
bafﬂ ed about how to explain the causal regularities is Dennett’s example of the two black 
boxes (1995, 412–22). 
24.  Cf. the comet plunging towards earth that gets intercepted at the last minute by 
the other comet, unnoticed till then, that had been on its collision trajectory since its birth 
millions of years ago  (Dennett  1984 , 124) . 
25. If we exclude such variation, then trivially, castling in the second game was not 
“open to B,” to use Ginet’s terminology. Recall that Ginet requires that “nothing that exists 
up to that moment stands in the way of my doing next any one of the alternatives.” The 
narrow method has the effect of treating the precise state of B’s contemplation of the 
option of castling as something  external , as something that can itself “stand in the way” at 
the moment of choosing, guaranteeing that  nothing about B could  explain B’s choice, 
whatever it is. As  Dennett ( 1984 , 143) notes, “If you make yourself really small, you can 
externalize virtually everything.” 
26. See the Appendix for an additional example of the conﬂ ation of necessity and 
sufﬁ ciency (in Van Inwagen’s Consequence Argument). 
27. Imagine that we take a snapshot of the universe at the moment of Kennedy’s 
assassination, then alter the picture in some trivial way (by moving Kennedy 1 mm to the 
left, say). Then, following the (deterministic) laws of physics in reverse, we can generate a 
movie running all the way back to the Big Bang, obtaining a world in which σ0 subtly fails. 
28.  Of course, the last two options fail the sufﬁ ciency test so badly that we prefer not 
to countenance them as causes. As explained earlier, sufﬁ ciency does have  some relevance 
in assigning causes, just not the overwhelming importance that incompatibilists imply. 
29. Likewise, Deep Blue, in spite of its being a deterministic automaton, authored the 
games of chess that vanquished Kasparov. No one  else was their author; Murray Campbell 
and the IBM team that created Deep Blue cannot take credit for those games;  they did not 
see the moves. It was the vast exploratory activity of Deep Blue itself that was the 
originating cause of those magniﬁ cent games. 
30.  Fischer ( 2005a ) attempts to sidestep the argument in this Appendix by 
formulating a deﬁ nition of causation solely in terms of sufﬁ ciency, thus revitalizing 
premise (3). He admits that this deﬁ nition does not “capture some ordinary, commonsense 
idea” and that on this reading “I have it in my power to render it true that the sun 
continues to shine.” We concede to Fischer that this curious conception of causation would 
keep the Consequence Argument alive, but only barely. Fischer’s parting shot in his 
discussion is to formulate a new version of what he calls the Basic Argument based on “the 
extremely plausible and intuitively attractive Principle of the Fixity of the Past and Laws: 
an agent has it within his power to do A only if his doing A can be an extension of the 
actual past, holding the natural laws ﬁ xed” (32) This principle is simply an afﬁ rmation of 
the narrow method of interpreting possibility, repeating Austin’s mistake. Once this 
mistake is recognized, much of the literature of incompatibilism loses its foundation. As 
 Dennett ( 2005 ) observes, “We wouldn’t want to say farewell to something as much fun as 
the Basic Argument in an appendix would we? Well, yes.” 

 t h e  o x f o r d  h a n d b o o k  o f
FREE WILL  
 2 nd edition  
 Edited by
ROBERT KANE  
1

1
 Oxford University Press, Inc., publishes works that further 
 Oxford University’s objective of excellence 
 in research, scholarship, and education. 
 Oxford New York 
 Auckland Cape Town Dar es Salaam Hong Kong Karachi 
 Kuala Lumpur Madrid Melbourne Mexico City Nairobi 
 New Delhi Shanghai Taipei Toronto 
 With ofﬁ ces in 
 Argentina Austria Brazil Chile Czech Republic France Greece 
 Guatemala Hungary Italy Japan Poland Portugal Singapore 
 South Korea Switzerland Thailand Turkey Ukraine Vietnam  
 Copyright © 2011 by Oxford University Press, Inc.  
 Published by Oxford University Press, Inc. 
198 Madison Avenue, New York, New York 10016
 www.oup.com 
 Oxford is a registered trademark of Oxford University Press 
 All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced, 
 stored in a retrieval system, or transmitted, in any form or by any means,  
 electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording, or otherwise, 
 without the prior permission of Oxford University Press.  
 Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data 
 The Oxford handbook of free will / edited by Robert Kane. — 2nd ed. 
 p. cm. — (Oxford handbooks) 
 Includes bibliographical references and index. 
 ISBN 978–0–19–539969–1 (alk. paper) 
1. Free will and determinism. 2. Philosophy, Modern—20th century.
3. Ethics, Modern—20th century. I. Kane, Robert, 1938–
 BJ1461.F74 2011
123'.5—dc22
2010032533 
1 3 5 7 9 8 6 4 2
 Printed in the United States of America 
 on acid-free paper 

