0 Blackwell Publishers Ltd. 1996, 108 Cowley Road, Oxford, OX4 IJF, UK 
and 238 Main Street, Cambridge, MA 02142, USA. 
Mind b Language, ISSN: 0268-1 064 
Vol. 7 1. No. 3 September 1996, pp 263-269. 
Granny versus Mother Nature-No 
Contest 
DANIEL C. DENNETT 
Abstract: Fodor’s doubts about neo-Darwinism are driven by something other than 
familiarity with evolutionary biology, so they should be set aside. His claim that a 
theory of intentionality cannot be constructed on an evolutionary foundation because 
there is no representation in the process of natural selection reveals that he has been 
blind to the chief beauty of Darwin’s vision: its capacity to explain not just how the 
living can come, gradually, from the non-living, but also how meaning can come, by 
incremental steps, out of the meaningless. 
I’ve been looking forward to seeing Jerry Fodor’s reaction to my book, since 
his candidly avowed antipathy toward evolutionary arguments was one of 
the spurs for writing it. For instance, it was his abrupt comment to me in 
1985 to the effect that Searle was right about robots lacking original inten- 
tionality that set me to writing ’Evolution, Error and Intentionality’ (1987), 
and that contributed in turn to some of his recent outbursts against evol- 
utionary approaches to these issues. Nothing clears the air quite so briskly 
as one of Jerry’s jaunty tantrums. He is the master of blithe self-exposure, 
and on this occasion he is true to form: he reveals that his views are much 
more radical than I had realised; indeed, he reveals that they are much more 
radical than he himself has realised. Such huge disagreements cannot be 
resolved or even duly criticised in a few pages; the best course here is just 
to use Fodor’s declarations to sharpen the contrasts. Figuring out ’who wins’ 
can be saved for another occasion. 
Fodor ‘deconstructs‘ one of the main strands of argument in my book into 
three steps: (1) secure adaptationism against its critics; (2) show how it per- 
mits us to speak of biological functions (show how it grounds ‘natural tele- 
ology’, in his terms); and (3) use that concept of function as the basis for a 
functionalist theory of meaning or intentionality. So far, so good; that’s just 
what I take myself to have done. He has doubts about all three steps, but 
is willing to suspend judgment on the first two and dig in his heels on the 
third. This is a retreat worth noting. In the old days, Fodor used to say that 
any bio-functional theory of meaning such as mine or Millikan’s was hope- 
Address for correspondence: Center for Cognitive Studies, Miner Hall, Tufts University, 
Medford, MA 02155, USA. 
Email ddennett@diamond.tufts.edu. 

264 
Mind G. Language 
less because it was tantamount to adaptationism, which Gould and Lewontin 
had shown to be bankrupt. That myth about their essay on the spandrels of 
San Marco has now been exploded-and 
not just by me-so 
Fodor clasps a 
new authority to his bosom: Niles Eldredge. Not a good choice, since a close 
reading of the cited book (or even just page 48 of it) discloses that Eldredge, 
as a paleontologist, has almost nothing-aside 
from personal distaste-to 
contribute to the issue of the status of adaptationism, a message driven home 
in my book. Fodor still has his doubts about adaptationism, and about its 
underwriting of a notion of biological function, but he thinks that even if 
he’s wrong on those two scores, he has a knock-down argument against my 
evolutionary theory of intentionality. I will turn to that argument shortly, 
but first I want to point out just how strikingly naive and ill-informed his 
comments on adaptationism and natural teleology are. 
‘It could turn out’, he says, ‘that many genotypes converge on much the 
same phenotype; or that only slightly different genotypes get grossly differ- 
ent phenotypic expression; or that identical genotypes get different pheno- 
typic expressions in different contexts, etc.’ Not only could it; it has. This is 
all elementary textbook genetics (and is all discussed in passing in my book). 
Fodor’s remarks on the ambiguity of the notion of phenotypic expression, 
and his speculations about hidden constraints and genetic variation also 
bespeak a lack of familiarity with contemporary thinking in biology. Fodor 
does issue a disclaimer of expertise in this area, and says these are only his 
hunches. He may not know much about evolutionary theory, but he knows 
what he doesn’t like. 
He enlists Gould and Chomsky to float the suggestion that nothing we 
know yet rules out the possibility that gradual (or swift) change in brain 
size (or weight or whatever) could have as an adventitious consequence 
radical discontinuities in behavioural repertoire (hint: such as the sudden 
blossoming of a Language Acquisition Device). Right. And nothing we know 
yet rules out the hypothesis that given a few lucky mutations and a slight 
change in their diet, pigs may suddenly sprout wings or start spinning mag- 
nificent pigwebs for the first time in biological history. What continues to 
amaze me about this Chomskian theme is that having done so much to show 
that human language is not a simple noise-making behaviour but an intricate 
generative capacity that chimpanzees are not even close to being able to 
acquire, these very people can then turn around and ask, with straight faces, 
’What makes you think the complexities of language have been shaped by 
natural selection?’ 
’We’ll just have to wait and see how, and whether, our minds evolved. 
At the time of writing, the data aren’t in.’ He actually says this; I checked 
several times. In a way, of course, he‘s right: the data aren’t in on the specific 
mechanisms and the specific histories of the evolution of our minds-and 
the same verdict holds about our knowledge of the evolution of, say, codfish, 
redwood trees, and deer ticks. But no sane biologist doubts that these mar- 
vels of nature evolved. There is as much reason to suppose that the behav- 
iour-controlling capacities of the human brain evolved as there is to suppose 
0 
Blackwell Publishers Ltd. 1996 

Granny uersus Mother Nature-No 
Contest 
265 
that the blood-flow-controlling capacities of the human circulatory system 
evolved. 
But set section 1 aside, since Fodor grants that he may be wrong in his 
suspicions about adaptationism (which as we have just seen, are suspicions 
about evolution in general, not remotely related to the residual debates 
within evolutionary theory about the proper limits of adaptationism). In sec- 
tion 2, he turns to the question of whether Darwinism makes a safe place 
for teleological talk. Once again, I can hardly believe my eyes: 
What is not, however, available is the course that Dennett appears 
to be embarked upon: there was no designer, but the watch was 
designed all the same. That just makes no sense. 
He seems not to realize that it is not just Dennett who embarks on this 
course; this is the standard understanding of biologists: of course there is 
design in nature, and of course there is no foresighted, intelligent designer. 
It makes beautiful sense. It’s Darwin’s point, for goodness sake. Darwin 
doesn’t deny the existence of all the design Paley found in the biosphere, 
nor does he claim that it needs no explanation; he shows how the design 
can be there without there being a Designer. There are plenty of points in 
my book that I consider original, but on this score I did not take myself to 
be blazing a new trail at all; I was simply expounding textbook fare and 
drawing special attention to some of its well-recognized implications. Could 
Fodor be right and all those biologists wrong? The data aren’t yet in, as 
Fodor would say, and in defence of his bold iconoclasm, he offers a sketch 
of an argument, relying on the principle that ’Appeals to being F can explain 
nothing that isn’t equally well explained by appeals to being G in a world 
where it’s necessary that Gs are F.’ Fodor has a genius for composing First 
Principles that look great on the page until you try to fit them to received 
practice. This is one of his best. Since he sets it all aside for the sake of 
argument at the end of section 2, I am more or less enjoined not to bother 
mounting a detailed criticism of his argument here, so I will simply note in 
passing that since Fodor’s Principle is, as he insists, ’entirely general,‘ scien- 
tists who adopt it are going to have to give up a lot of their favourite expla- 
nations. For instance, because of a well-known ‘nomologically reliable’ corre- 
lation, there is no way to choose between the following two evolutionary 
hypotheses: 
(1) 
(2) 
Birds’ wings evolved for flying. 
Birds’ wings evolved for flapping. 
In the world in which the birds evolved, it is necessary or at least ’nomologi- 
cally reliable’ that cases of flapping (of type G) are also cases of flying. It is 
a mistake to say that some wings are better for flying than others, for one 
could equally well say they are better for flapping-in-fitness-enhancing ways 
in that world. (In his footnote 9, Fodor alludes obliquely to the passage in 
0 
BIackwdl Publishers Ltd. 1996 

266 
Mind 6 Language 
my book (pp. 407-8) in which I directly meet his challenge on this score. It’s 
a shame he hasn‘t seen fit to engage my response in any detail, since it was 
aimed explicitly at him.) 
Fodor goes on to say (echoing McGinn) that allegiance to his Principle 
allows you to deny that there is any difference, strictly speaking, between 
the ’evolution’ of mountains and oceans and shadows on the one hand and 
the evolution of living things on the other. This is quite some Principle: in 
one fell swoop it purports to overthrow a century or so of work by physicists 
and biologists who thought they had long ago showed how living things 
can be distinguished from merely relatively stable things in terms of their 
exploitation of information. Well, perhaps they were wrong. Perhaps a 
deeper analysis of the residual worries and controversies about functional 
explanation will bring the entire edifice crashing down, with no way of 
reforming and saving it. Now we know what is at stake. On another 
occasion, it might be fun to tally up the costs and benefits of the choice on 
offer between Fodor’s Principle and functional thinking in biology. Some- 
thing has to give, and such a tally could help us to decide on which side of 
the fence to look first for confusion. Enough said, for now. 
Now I turn to the piece de rksistance, in section 3. Fodor cleverly notes that 
there is a major difference between us and Mother Nature: ’Mother Nature 
is a blind watchmaker; . . . she never adopts (or rejects) a policy because of 
outcomes that she has foreseen. Whereas you and I do that sort of thing all 
the time.’ Sure enough, that’s the big difference, and Fodor doesn’t seem to 
realize that I myself stress it. As I say at several points in several ways, 
we foresightful, reason-representing agents are johnny-come-latelies in the 
history of designing agents. Fodor puts more emphasis than I have done on 
an important point: ’Merely possible competitions don’t enter into Mother 
Nature’s calculations.’ He is right, and I discuss this point only briefly, in 
the section called ’Playing with Constraints’ (pp. 251-61, and more directly 
in a footnote on p. 279). Fodor now lowers the boom: ’why doesn’t this differ- 
ence between her and us count as principled?’ Why not indeed? Consider it 
’principled, just as principled as the difference between the living and the 
non-living. What difference could be more principled than that? Now what? 
Fodor finds another handy principle to invoke: 
You can’t reduce intentionality to ‘selection for’ because selection for 
doesn‘t involve represen tation. 
Silly me, I had thought that the fact that there was no representation in 
the activities of Mother Nature was precisely the feature that made it possible 
to ’reduce’ our intentionality in an explanatory way to something mindless. 
If Mother Nature had a mind like ours, full of representations, she would 
be like the worst sort of homunculus, merely postponing any explanation 
of intentionality. It seems that Fodor is blind to the chief beauty of Darwin’s 
vision: its capacity to explain not just how the living can come, gradually, 
from the non-living, but also how meaning can come, by incremental steps, 
0 BIackwell Publishers Ltd. 1996 

Granny uersus Mother Nature-No 
Contest 
267 
out of the meaningless. Darwin’s metaphysical alchemy can build bridges 
between things that exhibit ’principled differences, but the price you must 
pay for this perspective is abandoning essentialism. You have to discard the 
idea that there has to be a First Living Thing, a Prime Mammal, a simplest 
case of Original Intentionality. Fodor says: 
You can, in short, suppose that the whole (neo-)Darwinian story is 
true; and you can suppose that ’selection for’ is intensional; you will 
not thereby have succeeded in supposing any representation into 
the world. 
I entirely agree. For several billion years on this planet there was neo- 
Darwinian selection for this and that feature of the organisms that evolved, 
and hardly anything in sight worth calling a representation. What about 
DNA? Fodor himself allows that genes might count as having represen- 
tational content, but rather than pouncing on this as a contradiction, I’ll use 
it to make the Darwinian point. It doesn’t matter really where we ’draw the 
line’ between non-representations and representations. We know there was 
a period (a billion years or so) during which ’naked genes’ evolved-geno- 
types that were their own phenotypes, genes that ’represented’ only them- 
selves, or if you prefer, molecules that didn’t represent anything at all-any 
more than a pebble represents itself. And if the clothed genes that succeeded 
them also don’t count in your book as having representational content, so 
be it. Some laxer folk might say these genes specify and even misspecify their 
intended phenotypes, but be as scrupulous as you like. Today there are lots 
of representations, by anybody‘s standards, and they evolved by a process 
that takes us from a world in which there is no representation, as Fodor 
says, to a world that is full of them. Representation itself had to evolve. 
Fodor does not demur on this point-not 
quite: ‘I hope you don‘t think 
that I think that the line of argument I’ve been pursuing shows that selection 
couldn’t have resulted in intentional processes. Of course it could; or, anyhow 
of course it could for all that I know.‘ But, he says, he is not interested in 
the historical question, but the metaphysical question: ’what makes inten- 
tional things intentional?’ He’s looking for an essence. 
My answer to Fodor‘s metaphysical question has two phases, as he has 
noted. I answer first by saying (to put it crudely for the moment): what 
makes an intentional thing intentional is its function. No mention of history 
yet. But if you go on to ask me how I know what its function is, if you ask 
me how I support my ’metaphysical’ answer, I have to tell one historical 
tale or another. If the thing is an artifact of human engineering, I cite the 
relevant details of its R and D history and the contemporary ’history’ of its 
current use; if a living thing, I cite its evolutionary history and current use. 
Nothing else is or could be relevant to its function. Which kind of history 
explains the birth of any particular instance of functionality is not the point 
(see Tolliver, 1995 and my reply, 1995, p. 552). The metaphysical point is 
that a functional thing is only identifiable as such within some such historical 
0 
Blackwell Publishers Ltd. 1996 

268 
Mind b Language 
context. To think otherwise is to indulge in the most obscurantist essen- 
tialism. Consider: suppose there was a universe that was empty (for all time) 
except for the existence of a single object, which just happened to be atom- 
for-atom indistinguishable from a lima bean. Would it be a lima bean? What 
do your essentialist intuitions tell you? (Mine are silent, or at any rate, I 
can’t stop giggling long enough to consult them.) Now replace the lima bean 
with a cardboard placard on which is printed ‘Cold Beer Sold Here.’ Would 
it be a (false?) representation? History without metaphysics is just one damn 
thing after another, but metaphysics without history is too silly for words. 
Fodor goes on: 
And, according to commonsense (and according to me) it’s rep- 
resentation that you need to explain intentionality. 
I agree, but recalling the tale of the chap who said the Earth rested on the 
back of a turtle, which rested on the back of yet another turtle, I would add: 
representation is what is needed to explain intentionality, but not represen- 
tation all the way down. My theory of intentionality explains the aboutness 
of representations, including their crucial capacity to be, on occasion, misrep- 
resentations, but it comes at a price Fodor is unwilling to pay. You have to 
give up original intentionality and see that all the late, robust, represen- 
tation-wielding varieties of intentionality, both the words on the shopping 
list and the mental images in your head, are artifacts, and hence have 
derived intentionality. As far as I can see, Fodor has no quarrels with my 
functionalistic theory of the derived intentionality of artifacts (maps, books, 
diagrams, computer programs, two-bitsers, . . .). So if human minds were 
artifacts, like robot control systems, he should have no trouble with my the- 
ory of intentionality. But he wants to hold out. 
When I quoted him in 1987 (p. 288) as saying that Searle was right about 
computers and robots not having any original intentionality, it seems that I 
was misunderstanding him (and Searle). They are both prepared, Fodor now 
says, to countenance the possibility that a robot might have real original 
intentionality in addition to the merely derived, functional intentionality that 
sufficed to explain all its adroitness in the world. It would be mighty hard 
to discover such a bonus, of course, since nothing about the apparent clever- 
ness of the robot wouId count in its favour: ‘If it did, intentionality would 
supervene on behaviour and behaviourism would be true. Which it’s cer- 
tainly not.’ I love it. One of Fodor’s favourite myths is the idea he expresses 
so succinctly here: cognitivism is ’thoroughly modern mentalism’-you 
know, the opposite of behaviourism. Hey, didn’t he and Chomsky round up 
Skinner and Quine and Ryle and Wittgenstein and all those pesky varmints 
and put them in a perfectly good corral way back when? Behaviourism is 
over! Haven’t you heard? 
Simple versions of behaviourism have been well and truly driven from 
the field, but once you see what non-behaviourism becomes in the hands of 
Searle (with his ’subjective ontology’) or Nagel (with his scientifically inac- 
0 
Blackurell Publishers Ltd. 1996 

Grnnny versus Mother Nature-No 
Contest 
269 
cessible first-person perspective), the conclusion that beckons is that some 
version of behaviourism might not be so bad after all, and might even be 
the backbone of cognitive science. This conclusion may not beckon Fodor, 
but he can’t keep it from beckoning others by just stamping his feet and 
saying that behaviourism is false. He can try, though. 
In the end, Fodor says I misspeak when I declare that the only alternatives 
to my artifactual theory of meaning posit one skyhook or another. There are 
in fact lots of alternatives, he says: ’Some are eliminative and some are 
reductive; some are naturalistic and some aren’t; some are emergentist and 
there are even one or two that are panpsychist.’ An embarrassment of riches, 
one gathers, but which do not involve skyhooks? Of those that Fodor lists 
here, some manifestly do posit skyhooks: non-naturalism, panpsychism, 
mysterian brands of emergentism. As far as I can see, the others either deny 
the existence of intentionality altogether-eliminativism-or 
assert some- 
thing that Fodor himself agrees to be hopeless-such 
as the various attempts 
at reductive views he has tried and then resolutely discarded in recent years. 
Fodor‘s Granny, that doughty champion of common sense, believes in two 
Principles: no intentionality without representation, and no design without 
a designer. As long as God was in his Heaven, representing the represen- 
tations in the creatures He had designed, these Principles looked pretty 
good, but while Granny has been dozing in her rocker, Darwin has come 
along with a better idea: Mother Nature, the non-representing designer of 
intentionality. Wake up, Granny. 
Center for Cognitive Studies 
Tufts University 
References 
Dennett, D.C. 1987: The Intentional Stance. Cambridge, MA.: MIT Press. 
Dennett, D.C. 1995: Get Real. Philosophical Topics, 22, 50568. 
Tolliver, J.T. 1995: Interior Colors. Philosophical Topics, 22, 41142. 
0 
Blackwell Publishers Ltd. 1996 

