Mind & Language, Vol. 23 No. 1 February 2008, pp. 25–31.
© 2008 The Author
Journal compilation © 2008 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
 Fun and Games in Fantasyland  
 DANIEL   DENNETT  
A 
 As often before, Jerry Fodor makes my life easier, this time by (1) ﬁ guring out a 
persuasive  reductio ad absurdum argument for my views, (2) absolving me of any 
suspicion that I ’ m creating a straw man by resolutely embracing the absurd 
conclusion, and (3) providing along the way some vivid lessons in How Not to Do 
Philosophy. The only work left for me to do is (a) draw attention to these useful 
pedagogical aids, (b) point out the absurdity of Jerry ’ s expressed position and (c) 
remind you that I told you so. 
 The  reductio , nicely indented and numbered, appears on p.11 and has the startling 
conclusion:  
 Contrary to Darwinism, the theory of natural selection can ’ t explain the 
distribution of phenotypic traits in biological populations.  
 Now this really is absurd. Silly absurd. Preposterous. It is conclusions like this, 
built upon such comically slender stilts, that give philosophy a bad name among 
many scientists. Fodor ’ s argument really does follow from his premises, though, so 
far as I can see, so I am prepared to treat it as a classic  reductio. A useful  reductio , as 
we all learned in our ﬁ rst logic course, has just one bad premise that eventually 
sticks out like a sore thumb, but in this case we have an embarrassment of riches: 
four premises, all of them false. I will leave as an exercise for the reader the task of 
seeing if any presentable variation of Fodor ’ s argument can be constructed in 
which some or all of these are replaced by truths. 
 Fodor has great fun putting his ducks in a row, airily helping himself to his 
assumptions without extended argument, ignoring the complications that I and 
others have raised for them, complications that can apparently be dismissed with a 
jocular ﬂ ourish, usually in a footnote. (Hey, no sense wasting valuable space in the 
body of the text on  these silly considerations!) Here they are: 
 (I)   ‘ metaphysical realism ’ (fn 2).  
 Just what is this doctrine? Fodor does not provide a gloss, but he apparently means 
it to dismiss my brand of realism — as defended in, e.g.  ‘ Real Patterns ’ , 1991 — as 
not worthy of discussion. 
Address for correspondence:  Department of Philosophy, Tufts University, Medford, Mass., 
02155, USA.
 Email :  Daniel.dennett@tufts.edu  

© 2008 The Author
Journal compilation © 2008 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
 26   D. Dennett 
 (II)  With regard to any intentional attribution, an animal/agent either has 
it, or doesn ’ t have it.  
 Isn ’ t this just the Law of the Excluded Middle? No. Fodor assumes that there is 
no middle ground, no room for any sort of gradualism, between, say, the considered 
goal of an adult philosopher and the utterly intentionless behavior of, say, a 
 paramecium . We are asked to assume that a  ‘ frog ’ s intention to catch a ﬂ y ’ is a full-
bore intention, with the speciﬁ c propositional component,  to catch a ﬂ y (which is 
distinct from the intention  to catch a dark moving-through-the-air-thing , etc., etc.) A 
frog may have such intentions, Fodor presumes, and if you don ’ t agree, he graciously 
invites you to go up a notch or two in the great chain of being and choose an 
animal that does have such speciﬁ c intentions by your lights. But does — could —
 the ﬂ y have the complementary intention  to avoid capture by that frog ? Maybe, and 
maybe not, but it ’ s got to be Yes or No in the end. For Fodor, an animal either 
has an intention with a proper propositional object or it doesn ’ t. This is an extra 
premise, and not strictly implied (I gather) by Fodor ’ s  ‘ metaphysical realism ’ , but 
the two views, bristling with absolutism, go together handsomely. This is just pre-
Darwinian essentialism brandished without defense. Thus an animal is either a 
mammal or it isn ’ t. Period. No iffy, hemi- semi- demi- cases for Fodor. To see the 
doctrine in another, but related, context, note its application to — sigh — Twin 
Earth: when Tom, an Earthian boy, is whisked to Twin Earth, his word  ‘ water ’ 
initially means H 2 O, and roughly everything he says using the word is false, but 
eventually, presumably, it comes to mean XYZ, and he is now speaking Twin-
English. When exactly? Aha. That is a deep metaphysical fact that we may never 
know (but don ’ t confuse metaphysics with epistemology). Does the cuckoo chick 
 intend to kill the unhatched nestmates that it so strenuously and guidedly rolls out 
of the nest? In other words, does  mens rea properly apply? Many would see this as 
a joke, but it has to be a serious issue for Fodor, with a deﬁ nite answer. I have 
called this combo of (I) and (II)  hysterical realism in the past. Now you know why. 
 And note that Fodor needs this  license to dichotomize for his argument. He loves 
to construct ﬁ sh-or-cut-bait dilemmas in his arguments — look at steps (iii) and 
(iv), the latest examples in a long line of such arguments going back at least to  The 
Language of Thought (1975). You simply can ’ t run such arguments without the hard 
edges of essentialism at your disposal, and when things look ominously fuzzy in the 
middle ground, threatening to mess up the nice forking path Fodor is preparing, 
his typical tactic is make a little joke and simply insist on it. (Packing this move off 
into a footnote discourages people from demanding a review.) 
 (III)  There is no such thing as design without a mindful, intentional designer 
(fn 12).  
 Here Fodor sounds like Christoph Schönborn, Catholic archbishop of Vienna, the 
chap duped by the Intelligent Design folks. He said, notoriously, in a  New York 
Times op/ed piece entitled  ‘ Finding Design in Nature ’ (July 7, 2005):  

© 2008 The Author
Journal compilation © 2008 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
 Fun and Games in Fantasyland   27 
 The Catholic Church, while leaving to science many details about the history 
of life on earth, proclaims that by the light of reason the human intellect can 
readily and clearly discern purpose and design in the natural world, including 
the world of living things.  
 Evolution in the sense of common ancestry might be true, but evolution in 
the neo-Darwinian sense — an unguided, unplanned process of random 
variation and natural selection — is not. Any system of thought that denies or 
seeks to explain away the overwhelming evidence for design in biology is 
ideology, not science.  
 Of course there is brilliant  ‘ design ’ to be found in every corner of the evolved 
world, at every scale — and if, with Fodor, you insist that this isn ’ t really  design at 
all (not being the handiwork of an agent with a (metaphysically real, non-
metaphorical, full-bore) mind, you risk turning a defnitional quibble (is it  ‘ design ’ 
or design?) into something that distracts your attention from the undeniable 
brilliance of the results of the evolutionary process. Fodor never comes to grips 
with the truth in Orgel ’ s Second Rule: Evolution is cleverer than you are. He 
simply dismisses it as silly metaphor or nonsense. And look at the result: Fodor 
ends up agreeing with the archbishop: evolution happens, but natural selection 
isn ’ t how it works its magic. 
 (IV)   All causal explanations are  ‘ covering law ’ explanations, involving 
 ‘ nomological generalizations ’ ) (fn 14).  
 This antique caricature of scientiﬁ c practice, harking back to Hempel, is insisted 
upon by Fodor, and it gives him another needed dichotomy:  ‘ From the viewpoint 
of the philosopher of science, perhaps the bottom line of all this is the importance 
of keeping clear the difference between historical explanations and covering law 
explanations ’ (p. 22). 
 I have said that all four of these premises are false. The details can be found in 
my work over the last thirty-ﬁ ve years.  1 I don ’ t intend to review all that here, but 
I do want to thank Fodor for providing some motivation to philosophers to check 
it out. My  ‘ radical ’ positions have always been a hard sell in some deeply 
conservative quarters of philosophy, and have been much caricatured. I ﬁ nd some 
 1  Undermining premise (1) see  Dennett, 1971 and, drawing together many earlier themes, 
1991 . Undermining premise (2) see  Dennett, 1978 (especially the Introduction), 1987 
(especially chapters 4, 5, 7, and 8), 1995, and 1996 . Undermining premise (3) see  Dennett, 
1995, and more recently 2006a, 2007 . Undermining premise (4) see  Dennett, 1995 , with its 
discussions,  passim , of how and why biological explanations are causal, and especially chapter 
14, sections 2 and 3 ( ‘ Two Black Boxes ’ ). There are numerous other passages in my work that 
bear on the untenability of Fodor ’ s assumptions here, but these are the key entries.  

© 2008 The Author
Journal compilation © 2008 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
 28   D. Dennett 
young philosophers have only second-hand acquaintance with the cases I make 
and I do hope they will be as persuaded — as I am! — by Fodor ’ s argument: either 
you go Dennett ’ s way, or you must conclude that evolutionary biology is one big 
mistake. I hope that ’ s an offer you can ’ t refuse. Try it. You ’ ll like it. 
 In place of a general review of the many places where Fodor goes wrong, I will 
take advantage of just one of Fodor ’ s paragraphs — about Jack and Jill — to illustrate 
where a main blindspot in his thinking lies:  
 But to suppose that the processes of evolution can see that the actual outcome 
of Jack ’ s action was incidental to its intentional object is precisely to beg the 
questions that are now at issue. We can understand what went wrong with 
Jack because we have the concept of ‘the maxim of an act ’ , and it ’ s clear to 
us that the maxim of Jack ’ s act was something like  ‘ when thirsty, fetch water ’ 
and nothing at all like  ‘ when thirsty, fall down, and break your crown ’ . But, 
recall that (putting aside the loose talk about what evolution can  ‘ see ’ ) the 
adaptationist ’ s aim was to explain how the ﬁ tness of an intentional state 
varies  as a function of its content. So, if he ’ s to avoid circularity, he can ’ t take 
for granted either that intentional states with distinct effects on ﬁ tness are 
 ipso facto distinct in content or that states that are distinct in content are  ipso 
facto distinct in their effects on ﬁ tness. Jack ’ s crown got broken and Jill ’ s 
didn ’ t. It remains  entirely possible that they both acted with the very same end 
in view (pp. 12)  
 Fodor insists on  ‘ putting aside the loose talk about what evolution can  “ see ” ’ , 
and this blinds him to the fact — really quite obvious and familiar to anyone 
looking at much work on evolution — that evolution has an uncanny capacity, 
 when given a large population of subtly varying cases , to winkle out the relevant 
difference and select for it. Natural selection can ’ t see the difference between 
Jack and Jill on one occasion, but given a thousand Jacks and a thousand Jills, 
fetching their water here and there, climbing hills for sundry reasons, natural 
selection  can  ‘ see ’ the differences that make a difference, and reward (mainly) 
those that make that good moves with more progeny, on average. Fodor ’ s quaint 
view of causation leads him to ignore the power of effects that depend on 
probability — he views such phenomena as not properly causal at all. Let it be, as 
Fodor says,  entirely possible in any particular case that Jack and Jill, with identical 
intentions, nevertheless have different fates. It is  not entirely possible that over 
the long run, in largish populations, those equipped with the apt intentions for 
the circumstances don ’ t rise like cream to the top. (Well, it is  logically possible, 
but that simply doesn ’ t matter, in spite of all the hufﬁ ng and pufﬁ ng about 
 ‘ truthmakers ’ .) The power of natural selection to distinguish and promote — is 
 that loose talk? — truly subtle differences in strategy, and hence  intention in one 
important sense, is awesome. 
 But not  all logically distinguishable strategies. Both in the descriptions of actual 
organisms ’ behavioral patterns and in the mathematical models, a certain amount 

© 2008 The Author
Journal compilation © 2008 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
 Fun and Games in Fantasyland   29 
of loose talk is licensed. Thus Dawkins notes, discussing evolutionarily stable 
strategies:  
 A  ‘ strategy ’ is a pre-programmed behavioural policy. An example of a strategy is: 
 ‘ Attack opponent; if he ﬂ ees pursue him; if he retaliates run away. ’ It is important 
to realize that we are not thinking of the strategy as being consciously worked 
out by the individual. Remember that we are picturing the animal as a robot 
survival machine with a pre-programmed computer controlling the muscles. To 
write the strategy out as a set of simple instructions in English is just a convenient 
way for us to think about it. By some unspeciﬁ ed mechanism, the animal behaves 
as if he were following these instructions ( Dawkins, 1989 , p. 69).  
 Compare the strategy articulated by Dawkins to the following:  ‘ Attack opponent 
 only if the temperature is between the freezing and boiling points of water ; if he ﬂ ees 
pursue him  no more than seven miles ; if he retaliates  without ﬁ rst sneezing run away. ’ 
Now this is manifestly a different strategy — it differs in  content , readily distinguishable 
by the clever philosopher but not, Fodor insists, by natural selection. So how dare 
the adaptationist play so fast and loose, attributing the simpler strategy to the 
organism? Because, of course, it works. It ’ s good science. And in fact we can 
 imagine an environment that would distinguish the second strategy from the ﬁ rst, 
and reward one of them and not the other. Such environments don ’ t occur on this 
Earth, but there is a Twin Earth somewhere that would be just ﬁ ne for extinguishing 
one and not the other. And how shall we decide, in a  ‘ principled ’ way, when one 
strategy leaves off and another one begins? Well, we could look for traces of extra 
machinery, or adjusted machinery, inside the organisms that would make sense 
under just such a hypothesis, but this wouldn ’ t  settle the issue — there will always 
be more strategies that can be conjured up consistent with the machinery — and in 
general, we won ’ t bother. Why, for instance, didn ’ t Dawkins couch his articulation 
of the strategy  ‘ Attack opponent; if he  seems to ﬂ ee, pursue him; if he  seems to 
retaliate, run away ’ ? This, too, is a discernibly different content from the content 
Dawkins listed, and we could add others by the score:  ‘ Attack opponent; if he 
ﬂ ees, make a display of pursuing him but call it off after  n steps; if he retaliates 
 or prepares to retaliate , run away. ’ Why didn ’ t Dawkins get more precise about the 
strategies in play? Because life is short. There is no need to declare, or attempt to 
discover, such facts of the matter, any more than we have to be able to identify the 
Prime Mammal ( Dennett, 2003 , pp. 127ff). Recall my discussion in  The Intentional 
Stance , pp. 301ff, about what the frog ’ s eye  really tells the frog ’ s brain. As 
circumstances change, the content changes, but not in a way that permits us to 
make all the ﬁ ne distinctions we can imagine. 
 It doesn ’ t matter. Content isn ’ t that kind of feature — even in us language users! 
I believe that E = mc 2 . Do you? Do we believe exactly the  same proposition ? Which 
proposition would that be? We both believe that the formula  ‘ E = mc 2 ’ expresses a 
truth, but beyond that, we may have wildly different abilities to use the formula. So 
even when we can tie content to a formula (in a public language or a language of 

© 2008 The Author
Journal compilation © 2008 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
 30   D. Dennett 
thought of some sort) the attachment is a long leash ( Dennett, 1969, … 2006 ). Since 
understanding comes in degrees, so does content. The myth of determinate content of 
belief that cleaves the set of all possible worlds neatly in two no more applies to us than 
to frogs. 
 I will close with two relatively minor points of criticism, and then a major one: 
 ‘ What wins and loses competitions are the  creatures that have the traits ’ (p. 10). 
No, this is one of the standard misconceptions found among people who think 
they understand evolutionary theory and don ’ t. (It is often remarked that in spite 
of the fact that the basic idea of natural selection is simple and readily conveyed, 
it is — perhaps for that very reason — often bizarrely  misunderstood by incautious 
extrapolators.) What determines the trends in gene pools is only partly a result of 
competitions between individual animals (e.g. the competition between A and B 
for the opportunity to mate with C, or the competition between A and B for 
that useful morsel of food over there) but is much better seen as competition 
between alleles for representation in the gene pool. To take a standard elementary 
example, the explanation of heterozygote superiority in the case of sickle cell 
anemia is not a matter of people competing with each other in a great malaria 
tournament. 
 ‘ The order of metaphysical dependence is that keys solve the problem of 
ﬁ nding something to open locks, not that locks solve the problem of ﬁ nding 
something to be opened by keys ’ (p. 13). Really? First there were locks, and 
then along came keys? Shades of  which came ﬁ rst, the chicken or the egg! Does Fodor 
really want to stick himself with the knotty problem of which came ﬁ rst, the key 
or the lock? Couldn ’ t the ideas of keys and locks have, um,  co-evolved (in the 
mind of the Prime Locksmith, presumably)? Once again, Fodor ’ s premise (II) 
comes back to haunt him: by his lights, you either have the concept of a key (or 
a lock) or you don ’ t. Period. In principle, one of them has to trigger the other, 
or something like that. In fact, according to Fodor, we are all born with both 
concepts,  lock and  key , their content ﬁ xed for all time in the language of thought 
in which we store them, awaiting arousal when circumstances provoke it. Sheer 
fantasy. 
 As I said at the outset, Fodor ’ s paper is a gold mine of Cautionary Tales with 
which to scare the very dickens out of the young. Look what happens, boys and 
girls, when you try to shoehorn all your arguments into the form of constructive 
dilemmas, as if you were doing proofs in geometry or number theory, where 
hard edges abound. Look what happens, boys and girls, when you can ’ t be 
bothered to look at the actual science and instead make up all your examples. 
You can have a jolly time making fun of the words you put in your imaginary 
explainers ’ mouths, but at the end of the day, you have to return to the real 
world, empty handed. 
 I cannot forebear noting, on a rather more serious note, that such ostentatiously 
unresearched ridicule as Fodor heaps on Darwinians here is both very rude and 
very risky to one ’ s reputation. (Remember Mary Midgley ’ s notoriously ignorant 
and arrogant review of  The Selﬁ sh Gene ? Fodor is vying to supplant her as World 

© 2008 The Author
Journal compilation © 2008 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
 Fun and Games in Fantasyland   31 
Champion in the Philosophers ’ Self-inﬂ icted Wound Competition.) Before other 
philosophers countenance it they might want to bear in mind that the reaction of 
most biologists to this sort of performance is apt to be — at best:  ‘ Well, we needn ’ t 
bother paying any attention to him. He ’ s just  one of those philosophers playing games 
with words ’ . It may be fun, but it contributes to the disrespect that many non-
philosophers have for our so-called discipline.  
 Department of Philosophy
 Tufts University  
 References 
 Dawkins  ,  R  .  1989  :  The Selﬁ sh Gene ,  2 nd edn  .   Oxford  :   Oxford University Press  . 
 Dennett  ,  D.C .  1969  :   Content and Consciousness .  London  :  Routledge & Kegan Paul  . 
 Dennett  ,  D.C .  1971  :   Intentional systems  .  Journal of Philosophy ,  68  :  87 – 106 . 
 Dennett  ,  D.C .  1978  :   Brainstorms .  Cambridge, MA  :  MIT Press/A Bradford Book  . 
 Dennett  ,  D.C .  1987 :   The Intentional Stance .   Cambridge, MA :  MIT Press/A Bradford 
Book  . 
 Dennett  ,  D.C .  1991  :   Real patterns  .  Journal of Philosophy ,  87  :  27  – 51  . 
 Dennett  ,  D.C .  1995  :   Darwin ’ s Dangerous Idea .  New York :  Simon & Schuster  . 
 Dennett  ,   D.C .  1996 :  Kinds of Minds: Towards an Understanding of Consciousness .   New 
York  :  Basic Books . 
 Dennett  ,  D.C .  2003  :   Freedom Evolves .  New York  :  Viking  . 
 Dennett  ,   D.C .  2006a  :   The evolution of  ‘ why? ’ an essay on Robert Brandom  .  In  
 B.  Weiss   and   J.   Wanderer  (  eds  ),   Reading Brandom: On Making it Explicit , 
 forthcoming Routledge 2008, currently available at   http://ase.tufts.edu/cogstud/
papers/Brandom.pdf  
 Dennett  ,  D.C .   2006b  :  Breaking the Spell: Religion as a Natural Phenomenon ,  New York  : 
 Viking Penguin  . 
 Dennett  ,  D.C .  2007 :   Atheism and evolution  .   In   M.  Martin  (  ed  .),   The Cambridge 
Companion to Atheism .  Cambridge  :  Cambridge University Press  ,  pp  .  135 – 48  . 
 Fodor  ,  J .  1975  :  The Language of Thought .  New York  :  Crowell  . 
 Schönborn  ,   C  .  2005  :  Finding design in nature  .  New York Times ,  July 7  . 

