256
256
Chapter 10
 Jonathan Bennett’s Rationality
DA N I EL DEN NETT
Rationality (1964), Jonathan Bennett’s first book, was published 
when he was thirty-​four years old, and it exhibits the intensity of 
a young philosopher who is quite sure he sees a way to cut through 
a forest of dubious, ideology-​ridden, squishy philosophy of mind 
and set a few things straight. Since the terrain he was scouting and 
clarifying was the same terrain that I was then embarking on, with 
similar ambitions, I read his book when it first came out through 
the dust and smoke of my own earliest efforts to conquer these 
topics. The result, I  confess, was that I  simultaneously misread, 
underestimated, and covertly absorbed much of what he was on 
about and then proceeded to reinvent some of his wheels in my own 
work without realizing it until years later. First let me lay out what 
Bennett took himself to have done in Rationality, say why that was 
such a good idea, and then go on to consider why, nevertheless, his 
book has not had the influence it might have had. I was not the only 
explorer of this territory who chose to find other paths to Bennett’s 
destination, but here we all are, and a review of his book may con­
solidate the gains.
 
 

J O N A T H A N  B E N N E T T ’ S  R A T I O N A L I T Y
257
    257
How many philosophers would tell their readers on page 1 that 
they were about to encounter the results of an “extremely ambitious 
conceptual inquiry”? Why does Bennett say that? For several rea­
sons, I think. First, he sees his analysis of rationality to be redoing 
a large part of Kant’s project in the Critique of Pure Reason—​but 
doing it right. Kant thought he was discovering synthetic a priori 
truths, whereas Bennett sees that he is doing conceptual analysis, an 
altogether different undertaking.
Second—​and I  can only surmise that this may have been a 
conscious intention on Bennett’s part—​he wanted to alert read­
ers to the possibility that his brand of conceptual analysis was not 
the then fashionable brand—​ordinary language philosophy—​but 
something much better, harder, more valuable. Bennett’s book 
appeared in Studies in Philosophical Psychology, an unduly pres­
tigious series of little red books with gray-​green dust jackets and 
red lettering that was edited by R.  F. Holland and published by 
Routledge and Kegan Paul. The series’ title was something of a mis­
nomer. Although all the monographs in it dealt with some aspect 
of the mind and, hence, at least tangentially with some aspect of 
psychology, only a few grappled seriously with any empirical theo­
ries or experiments drawn from the field or the lab, and most were 
explorations of the putative implications of interpretations of the 
meanings of ordinary language expressions about minds. Ordinary 
language philosophy—​aside from the handful of works of genius 
(by Wittgenstein, Ryle, and Austin) that launched the movement—​
was in general extremely unambitious, sometimes even comically 
modest, a lot of precious and informal fussbudgeting about the 
nuances of meaning that could be eked out of considerations of 
“what we would say” when confronted with one everyday psycho­
logical phenomenon or another. The series might better have been 
called Philosophical Studies in Folk Psychology, but that term was 

T e n  N e g l e c t e d  C l a s s i c s  o f  P h i l o s o p h y
258
258
not yet in use. A few of the volumes achieved a wider influence or 
at least notoriety—​Malcolm’s Dreaming and Winch’s The Idea of a 
Social Science, in particular—​but in general these essays were for 
ordinary language philosophers only, and with the dwindling of 
that school of thought already in the mid-​1960s, Bennett had to 
contend with a problem of misperception. Yes, his book was in that 
famous series, but no, it was not an informal collection of observa­
tions about whether we would say of one bit of human activity or 
another that it was rational.
Bennett begins by considering two widespread and plausible 
convictions: human beings are much more intelligent, more ratio­
nal, than other animals, and the key to their intellectual eminence 
is language. The first conviction is, he thinks, beyond dispute, and 
this permits him to define “rationality” as “whatever it is that humans 
possess which marks them off, in respect of intellectual capacity, 
sharply and importantly from all other known species” (5). The sec­
ond conviction is not just plausible; it is—​shall we say—​congenial 
to philosophers, indeed to all thoughtful human beings, but this 
actually hinders our understanding of it, encouraging oversimpli­
fied dogmas, such as
Only human beings can reason.
Reasoning without language is impossible.
Animals don’t even have beliefs (they, unlike us, are mere 
stimulus-​response organisms).
We need to know how and why “human talk” enables us to be 
so much smarter than the rest of the living world then, and here 
Bennett sees the task as constructing, bottom up, the path from mere 
animal intelligence to our kind of brilliance by a series of explicitly 
described and defended steps, starting with a conveniently humble 
example, the famously informative waggle dance of the honeybee. 

J O N A T H A N  B E N N E T T ’ S  R A T I O N A L I T Y
259
    259
He contrasts his strategy with the more familiar top-​down practice 
of philosophers:
One might set about answering this by supposing human talk 
to be other than it is in various ways, in order to see which 
suppositions did and which did not rob it of its right to be 
accounted rational. The course I shall adopt, however, is the 
reverse of this. I shall start with a kind of behavior which is not 
rational, and shall suppose it to be different in various ways in 
order to see which suppositions do and which do not confer on 
it a right to be accounted rational. (6)
This anticipates Valentino Braitenberg’s “law of uphill analysis and 
downhill synthesis” (in his brilliant little book Vehicles: Experiments 
in Synthetic Psychology [1984]), according to which it is easier to syn­
thesize well-​understood simple elements or mechanisms into a larger 
entity, and predict and explain its behavior than it is to try to reverse-​
engineer a complex entity to see how its parts contribute to its talents.
Bennett sees three advantages to this strategy, the first of which 
is pure Braitenberg:  “greater control over our material. It is just 
easier, confronted with indubitably non-​rational behavior, to know 
where to start adding” (6). Second, there is less risk of being dis­
tracted by features of human talk that are irrelevant but are socially 
or emotionally important to us. (Bennett is an acute critic of the 
amour propre that can distort philosophical analysis of such top­
ics.) Third, “we shall avoid the temptation to take the question ‘what 
is it for a being to be rational?’ in the form ‘in what does my ratio­
nality consist?’ and to try to answer it by ‘introspective thought 
experiment’ ” (7)—​which had been the philosophical tradition 
since Descartes (and including Locke, Hume, and Kant).
So although he doesn’t explicitly put it this way, he sees and 
endorses the virtue of conducting a resolutely third-​person, not 

T e n  N e g l e c t e d  C l a s s i c s  o f  P h i l o s o p h y
260
260
first-​person, analysis of rationality. These three advantages make for 
what he calls “antiseptic virtue” (7). Indeed they do. The emotional 
and social implications of discussions of rationality are particularly 
hard to keep in check—​witness the inflationary tendencies of the 
Pittsburgh school of “normativity”—​and it is best, as Bennett sees, 
to launder them out at the beginning, so that they can be let back 
in only when they are called for. These are hot-​button issues, and it 
is all too easy to be protective, when a more balanced inquisitive­
ness would be better. The strategy also minimizes the temptation to 
be taken in by the unavoidable practice of identification-​by-​content 
that is the hallmark of introspective methods. This is what I mean: if 
you want to talk about your own mental states, you must identify 
them by their content: “which idea? My idea of horse. Which sen­
sation? My sensation of white.” How else? There is no way you can 
identify your own mental states “from the inside” as, for instance, 
concept J47 or color-​sensation 294. By taking for granted the content 
of your own mental states, by picking them out by their content, you 
sweep under the rug all the problems of indeterminacy or vague­
ness of content. Reading your own mind is too easy; reading the 
mind of a honeybee puts all the problems front and center.
So he starts with Karl von Frisch’s famous work (winning a 
Nobel Prize in 1973) on honeybees—​a wise choice, since von Frisch 
pioneered the method of patient scientific analysis that most closely 
resembles Bennett’s method of philosophical analysis: cautiously 
taking on board the everyday language of mind, so that he can 
speak of what the bees know and learn, of what their dances mean, 
while scrupulously and systematically cashing out these façons de 
parler with good, hard evidence couched in terms of behavior and 
its observable effects. Bennett commends Frisch’s popular book 
Bees: Their Vision, Chemical Senses, and Language, first published 
in 1950 by Cornell University Press. Bennett makes no claims to 
be up on the technical literature, which he doesn’t need, since von 

J O N A T H A N  B E N N E T T ’ S  R A T I O N A L I T Y
261
    261
Frisch’s bees are just a convenient starting point, soon to be aban­
doned in favor of science-​fictional mutants that would, Bennett 
argues, gradually close the gap between the “language” of the bees 
and human talk; for example, “there could be rational bees … 
and I wish to know what we are saying when we deny that actual 
honey-​bees are of this kind” (11).
Philosophers get largely ignored by Bennett, aside from brief 
passing acknowledgments of Kant, Wittgenstein, Descartes, Locke, 
Hume, and Popper, but it is clear that he is deliberately avoiding tus­
sles with a host of contemporary philosophers, indirectly criticizing 
their positions, and occasionally exhibiting some lessons learned, 
from Ryle, for instance:
I take “This behavior manifests rationality” and cognate sen­
tences to express a non-​relational claim about the behavior 
itself, and not a relational claim about what causes the behav­
ior, or underlies it, or is projected from the secret soul into the 
public world by it. I do not deny that there are private men­
tal states, and philosophical problems about them. I  merely 
restrict my attention to the criteria which underlie our every­
day belief that human beings indulge in reasoning processes 
while honey-​bees and earthworms do not, or—​what may be 
the same belief—​that humans are rational while honey-​bees 
and earthworms are not. These criteria are plainly behavioural 
in nature, and involve no Cartesian speculations. (10)
Having constructed his base camp, he proceeds to look closely 
at the bees. Their waggle dances clearly have the function of trans­
mitting information about the location of food from scout bees 
to others, and von Frisch has worked out a well-​confirmed sketch 
of the system implemented. But do the bees understand the sys­
tem? Might the bee dances be more like shivering when cold or 

T e n  N e g l e c t e d  C l a s s i c s  o f  P h i l o s o p h y
262
262
frightened (which can be informative to any observer without 
being an act of communication)? The difference appears to be that 
the waggle dance is in some sense conventional, not a purely physi­
ological symptom of inner state. There are problems, however.
The trouble is that the idea of a conventional association essen­
tially involves the idea of intentions and reasons: to describe 
as “conventional” the correlations between food discover­
ies and subsequent dances is to say that the bees have certain 
reasons. (14)
Bennett goes on:
Now, I shall argue that bees do not in fact have reasons for their 
behaviour, and thus that their dances are not literally symbolic, 
and thus that the dances do not constitute language. (15)
Here I think the main strength of Bennett’s method is also its weak­
ness. As a piece of conceptual analysis it is hard to fault the claim 
that conventionality presupposes reasons had by reasoners, but this 
blinds him to the prospect of an intermediate position which is 
not readily articulated without a helping of initially counterintui­
tive innovation—​a “move” that I have only recently perfected (to 
my satisfaction): drawing a quite sharp distinction between doing 
things for reasons and having reasons for doing things. There are rea­
sons aplenty in nature (I call them free-​floating rationales): trees do 
things for reasons, fungi do things for reasons, bacteria do things for 
reasons, and we human beings do things—​sneeze, shiver, cough—​
for reasons, but they do not (usually) have reasons for doing these 
things. Only reasoners have reasons for doing (some of) the things 
they do. Bees aren’t reasoners, as Bennett demonstrates quite force­
fully, but that does not stop them from doing things (unwittingly) 

J O N A T H A N  B E N N E T T ’ S  R A T I O N A L I T Y
263
    263
for reasons. Reasons, in these cases, are not just causes; they are rai­
sons d’être, uncovered and endorsed by natural selection (Dennett, 
forthcoming a, b). Shivering when cold has both a complex physi­
ological cause and a reason: it helps maintain body temperature. 
The complex physiological causes controlling the bee dance are one 
thing; the rationale uncovered and promoted by natural selection 
for the bee dance is communication.
Consider a similar phenomenon, involving communication 
between members of different species. You have probably seen 
video of gazelles being chased across the plain by a predator and 
noticed that some of the gazelles are leaping high into the air dur­
ing their attempts to escape their pursuer. This is called stotting 
(or sometimes pronking). Why do gazelles stot? It is clearly ben­
eficial, because gazelles that stot seldom get caught and eaten. This 
is a regularity that can baffle. No account of the actions of all the 
proteins in all the cells of all the gazelles and predators chasing 
them could reveal why this regularity exists. For that we need the 
branch of evolutionary theory known as costly signaling theory 
(Zahavi 1987; Fitzgibbon and Fanshawe 1988). The strongest and 
fastest of the gazelles stot in order to advertise their fitness to the 
pursuer, signaling in effect “don’t bother chasing me; I’m too hard 
to catch; concentrate on one of my cousins who isn’t able to stot—​
a much easier meal!” and the pursuer takes this to be an honest, 
hard-​to-​fake signal and ignores the stotter. This is the free-​floating 
rationale and need not be appreciated by either gazelle or lion. That 
is, the gazelle may be entirely oblivious to why it is a good idea to 
stot if you can, and the lion may not understand why it finds stot­
ting gazelles relatively unattractive prey, but if the signaling wasn’t 
honest, costly signaling, it couldn’t persist in the evolutionary arms 
race between predator and prey. (If evolution tried using a “cheap” 
signal, like tail flicking, which every gazelle, no matter how frail 
or lame, could send, it wouldn’t pay for lions to pay attention to 

T e n  N e g l e c t e d  C l a s s i c s  o f  P h i l o s o p h y
264
264
it, so they wouldn’t.) These explanations in terms of free-​floating 
rationales are not reducible to explanations at lower levels, such as 
the molecular level, but it is also important to recognize that even 
though the explanation of why and how stotting works is from the 
intentional stance (in terms of what the lion is rational to conclude 
from the stotting of the gazelle), the individual lion or gazelle need 
not understand the meaning of stotting for it to work.
By not quite nailing the distinction between there being rea­
sons and an agent’s having reasons, Bennett misses the interme­
diate cases that naturalism requires, in order to account for the 
gradual emergence of function by the march of evolution and by the 
development of the individual. For note that Bennett’s hard line on 
conventionality would rob young children of the practice of com­
municating. Children perform thousands of speech acts (or proto-​
speech acts if you insist) before they show clear evidence of having 
reasons for what they say.
Still, Bennett’s all-​or-​nothing approach has its virtues, since it 
permits him to imagine a series of distinct steps in the direction 
of turning the bees’ behavior into properly rational behavior, and 
the first step comes within a whisker of making the missing distinc­
tion: “we can say of honey bees that their dancing behaviour is cov­
ered by rules, but not that honey-​bees have rules according to which 
they dance” (15). “Covered” by rules. He goes on to articulate the 
difference: “Apian dances are regular; human talk is rule-​guided.” 
He explicitly avoids the mistake of thinking that any behavior that 
has a complex explanation in terms of physical causes cannot also 
have “mental predicates” applied to it and sees the first step towards 
bees having rules (if not yet reasons): “For a creature to be correctly 
said to have a rule, it is necessary that it should be able to break the 
rule” (17).
How could this behavior be observed and confirmed? Long 
before Brandom and Haugeland and the Pittsburgh school of 

J O N A T H A N  B E N N E T T ’ S  R A T I O N A L I T Y
265
    265
normativity drew attention to the importance of the role of criti­
cism, Bennett sketched it out crisply:
A necessary condition for this is that there should be a recog­
nizable kind of performance which a bee goes through if and 
only if it has just observed a dance, or a post-​dance foraging 
flight, which it knows to be in breach of the rules. (18)
As his use of the verb “knows” demonstrates, Bennett is now mov­
ing firmly away from the puritanical strictures of behavioristic 
language and acknowledging that he is going for a “structural” 
account that is both objective and naturalistic, on the one hand, and 
mentalistic on the other. He calls the behavior denial behavior—​
acknowledging that it is not fully fledged denial of the sort a human 
being can engage in, but it is on that path, a ‘move from descriptions 
which are rules to descriptions which refer to rules.”
But there are more steps to come. In turn he introduces and 
justifies
1.	 past-​tense and future-​tense dance types
2.	 allowing the bees to talk of danger as well as food.
3.	 minimal compositionality (all the future talk shares a fea­
ture and all the food talk shares a feature, etc.), so that if you 
know the rules you can mix and match to compose dances 
that mean there was food at location x and there will be danger 
at location y and so forth.
These steps have the cumulative effect of getting the bees in touch 
with the reasons, making reasons themselves (via their “mental” 
representation) objects in the bees’ cognition in the same way that 
food locations, fellow bees, obstacles, and the like are objects of 
their cognition.

T e n  N e g l e c t e d  C l a s s i c s  o f  P h i l o s o p h y
266
266
Denial actions have some interesting properties. Occasions 
in which a dance provokes denials must be controversial, the deni­
als themselves subject to rebuttal or criticism! Why? Because oth­
erwise a particularly influential bee could single-​handedly destroy 
the whole communicative edifice by just issuing blanket denials, a 
weapon of mass destruction: “the entire community of bees could 
lose its whole stock of reasons for any claim as the result of a busy 
afternoon’s work by a single irresponsible bee” (68). The only way 
the criticism of a denial could have any punch would be if we endow 
the bees with something like the distinction between soundness and 
validity: “what we need is a kind of denial which is performed when 
and only when some bee ‘knows’ that a bad reason has been given 
for some claim” (58). And for this to be possible, that bee must have 
some appreciation of the fact that the valid form is universally valid; 
not just this one time but always. Now that would be one rational 
bee! The Sellarsian give-​and-​take in the space of reasons is given a 
derivational foundation in Bennett’s thought-​experimental exercise.
Eventually, having constructed this imaginary edifice of bee 
prowess, he reflects on what he has done:
Returning to the main thread of the argument, we must see 
where rationality fits into all this. All our prima facie cases of 
rationality or intelligence were based on the observation that 
some creature’s behaviour was in certain dependable ways suc­
cessful or appropriate or apt, relative to its presumed wants or 
needs… . With the introduction of universal and dated state­
ments, there are canons of appropriateness whereby we can ask 
whether an apian act is appropriate not to that which is particu­
lar and present to the bee but rather to that which is particular 
and past or to that which is not particular at all but universal. 
That is what generalising and talking about the past have in 
common. (85)

J O N A T H A N  B E N N E T T ’ S  R A T I O N A L I T Y
267
    267
Here, in 1964, Bennett has laid out most of the insights that I strug­
gled to expose to light in my various articles on the intentional 
stance beginning with “Intentional Systems” (Dennett 1971). He 
expanded on his ideas in Linguistic Behaviour (1976). My 1983 tar­
get article in Behavioral and Brain Sciences, “Intentional Systems 
in Cognitive Ethology:  the ‘Panglossian Paradigm’ Defended,” 
provoked a lengthy and sympathetic commentary by Bennett, the 
first time either of us attempted to assay this convergence. His com­
mentary, “Cognitive Ethology: Theory or Poetry?” (1983: 356ff.), 
chided me for abjuring the rigorous road to an explicitly articulated 
theory of the “conceptual structures” that must form the founda­
tions of cognitive ethology in favor of crowd-​pleasing (or scientist-​
pleasing) metaphors and analogies:
He [Dennett] encourages them to go on believing that the con­
ceptual foundations of cognitive ethology are rather easy to 
lay—​a few broad strokes of the brush, or slaps of the trowel, 
and there you are. Really, it is much harder and more laborious 
than that. I shall sketch the sort of thing that is needed, and 
point out some things in Dennett’s paper that suffer from the 
lack of any proper foundations. (356)
The foundations Bennett then described actually differed from 
my own view only in emphasis and in a continued blindness to 
the utility for science of explanations that allude to free-​floating 
rationales:
But what if every event can be explained mechanistically, that 
is, in terms of its subject’s intrinsic properties, with no men­
tion of any property of the form A/​G? [Actor/​Goal] I answer 
that it is all right to bring x under a teleological generalization 
if the latter captures a class of events that is not covered by 

T e n  N e g l e c t e d  C l a s s i c s  o f  P h i l o s o p h y
268
268
any one generalization of a mechanistic sort. Where there is a 
contest between one teleological and one mechanistic gener­
alization (or even, perhaps, two or three of the latter), mech­
anism wins because it is more basic, uses concepts of wider 
applicability, and so on (see Taylor 1964, 29). But if a teleo­
logical generalization does work for us—​giving us classifi­
cations, comparisons, contrasts, patterns of prediction that 
mechanism does not easily [my italics] provide—​then that 
justifies us in employing it. This, I submit, is the Grundgesetz 
of the whole theory of teleological explanation and thus of 
the intentional stance. (356)
Looking at the example of the vervet monkey’s leopard-​alarm call 
that I had discussed, he claims that if it turns out that there is a 
fairly narrow range of physically different stimulus patterns that 
provoke it,
In that case, the generalization “Whenever it is in (what it regis­
ters as being) a leopard-​threatening situation it does a leopard-​ 
avoiding thing” should be relinquished: The intentional stance 
has no honest work to do here, because all its work is equally 
done by something that is preferable to it because lower level. 
(Whether the S-​R pattern is hard-​wired or a result of learning 
is quite irrelevant, so far as I can see.) (356)
Using the same reasoning, Bennett would be obliged to banish the 
intentional stance for explaining the (existence and stability of) 
stotting, or so I interpret his claim here. My response to Bennett in 
the same issue of Behavioral and Brain Sciences is worth repeating 
almost in full, if only to provide the context for a few further admis­
sions and corrections on my part. Not mentioning Rationality, 
I began by acknowledging that Bennett’s 1976 book

J O N A T H A N  B E N N E T T ’ S  R A T I O N A L I T Y
269
    269
is indeed full of insights that should be of interest and value to 
ethologists; in fact it discusses, in greater detail, virtually every 
topic of the target article. (Embarrassing note: Bennett and I, 
working entirely [sic] independently, arrived at a slew of similar 
conclusions at about the same time; it took our students and 
colleagues to put us in touch with each other’s work a year or 
so ago. Now if there turns out to be someone named Cennett!)
Bennett grants that my “conclusions” are acceptable to 
him. Moreover, he is not claiming (so far as I can see) that his 
theory permits explanations, predictions, or verdicts that are 
inaccessible to me, given my way of doing business. Indeed, the 
accounts he provides in his commentary (e.g. of when and why 
to talk of the goal of leopard avoidance, what settles the issue 
of whether a high-​order attribution to Tom [the vervet] is cor­
rect) are very much what I would have said, and to some extent 
have said on other occasions. The difference is that he claims to 
derive his conclusions the hard (and proper) way—​from a rig­
orous, precise, articulated theory of conceptual structures—​
while I obtain the same results by what seems in contrast to be 
a slapdash, informal sort of thinking that I explicitly deny to be 
a theory in the strict sense of the term. Bertrand Russell (1919, 
71)  once excoriated a rival account by noting it had all the 
advantages of theft over honest toil; Bennett, I am grateful to 
say, finds a variation on this theme: I stand accused of poetry.
I plead nolo contendere, for it seems to me that, aside from 
differences in expository style and organization, Bennett and 
I are not just arriving at the same conclusions (for the most 
part); we are doing the same thing. If Bennett has a theory, 
it is not—​had better not be, for the reasons just reviewed—​a 
theory directly about internal processes. The sort of behavioral 
evidence he relies on to anchor his claims simply won’t carry 
theory that far. So his theory is, like my instrumentalism, a 

T e n  N e g l e c t e d  C l a s s i c s  o f  P h i l o s o p h y
270
270
theory of “conceptual structures,” as he says. The methodologi­
cal difference I see is strictly in the format of presentation, with 
Bennett’s theory being, like many other philosophical theories, 
“a system of definitions propounded and defended” (Shwayder 
1965). I  think the idea that there is a proper theory to be 
developed here is a philosophical fantasy. Getting clear about 
something does not always mean producing a clear theory 
of it—​unless we mean something quite strange by “theory.”  
(I stand in awe of the systematic knowledge about automobiles 
good mechanics and automotive engineers have, but I don’t 
think they have or need a theory of automobiles—​certainly 
not a theory that yields formal definitions of the main concepts 
of their trade.) (382)
I should not have said my work was developed “entirely” inde­
pendently of Bennett’s. I definitely (mis)read Rationality when it 
came out or soon thereafter, and just look how much of my think­
ing about the intentional stance is prefigured there. But I am not 
alone in having been scooped by Bennett. Sellars’s work on the 
space of reasons was roughly contemporaneous with Bennett’s, 
but so far as I  know Bennett’s ideas have not been featured as 
such in more recent work by the Pittsburgh school. To the sensi­
tized twenty-​first-​century eye, foreshadowings of late Quine and 
early Millikan can also be detected in Rationality, but I doubt if 
Quine ever paid much if any attention to the little red book from 
Routledge and Kegan Paul. Millikan, however, did, without mak­
ing all that much of it. There is a longish endnote in her Language, 
Thought, and Other Biological Categories (1984, 338) which says in 
part, “If performing inferences is tantamount to having reasons 
and having reasons marks off rational creatures from others, then 
I am agreeing with Bennett about why bees are not rational.” And 
in her White Queen Psychology and Other Essays for Alice (1993, 79), 

J O N A T H A N  B E N N E T T ’ S  R A T I O N A L I T Y
271
    271
she notes approvingly: “Bees, as Bennett (1964) has observed, are 
not rational.”
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Bennett, Jonathan (1964). Rationality. London: Routledge and Kegan Paul.
—​—​—​ (1976). Linguistic Behaviour. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
—​—​—​ (1983). Cognitive Ethology: Theory or Poetry? Commentary on Dennett 
1983, 356ff. Behavioral and Brain Sciences 6: 356–​358.
Braitenberg, Valentino (1984). Vehicles: Essays in Synthetic Psychology. Cambridge, 
MA: MIT Press.
Dennett, Daniel (1971). Intentional Systems. Journal of Philosophy 78 (February 
25): 87–​106.
—​—​—​ (1983). Intentional Systems in Cognitive Ethology:  The “Panglossian 
Paradigm” Defended (with commentaries). Behavioral and Brain Sciences 
6: 343–​390.
FitzGibbon, C. D. and Fanshawe, J. H. (1988). Stotting in Thomson’s Gazelles: An 
Honest Signal of Condition. Behavioral Ecology and Sociobiology 23(2) 
(August): 69–​74.
Frisch, Karl von (1950). Bees: Their Vision, Chemical Senses, and Language. Orig. 
pub., Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press.
Malcolm, Norman (1959). Dreaming. London: Routledge and Kegan Paul.
Millikan, Ruth (1984). Language, Thought, and Other Biological Categories. 
MIT Press.
—​—​—​ (1993). White Queen Psychology and Other Essays for Alice. Cambridge, 
MA: MIT Press.
Russell, 
Bertrand 
(1919). 
Introduction 
to 
Mathematical 
Philosophy. 
London: Routledge. Repr. 1993.
Shwayder, David (1965). The Stratification of Behaviour: A System of Definitions 
Propounded and Defended. London: Routledge and Kegan Paul.
Taylor, Charles (1964). The Explanation of Behaviour. London: Routledge and 
Kegan Paul.
Winch, Peter. The Idea of a Social Science and Its Relation to Philosophy. 
London: Routledge and Kegan Paul.
Zahavi, A. (1987). The Theory of Signal Selection and Some of Its Implications. In 
Delfino, V. P. (ed.), Bari, April 9–​14, 1985. Bari: Adriatici Editrici, 305–​327.
 

1
    iii
TEN NEGLECTED CLASSICS 
OF PHILOSOPHY
Edited by Eric Schliesser
 

1
iv
Oxford University Press is a department of the University of Oxford. It furthers
the University’s objective of excellence in research, scholarship, and education
by publishing worldwide. Oxford is a registered trade mark of Oxford University
Press in the UK and certain other countries.
Published in the United States of America by Oxford University Press
198 Madison Avenue, New York, NY 10016, United States of America.
© Oxford University Press 2017
All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in
a retrieval system, or transmitted, in any form or by any means, without the
prior permission in writing of Oxford University Press, or as expressly permitted
by law, by license, or under terms agreed with the appropriate reproduction
rights organization. Inquiries concerning reproduction outside the scope of the
above should be sent to the Rights Department, Oxford University Press, at the
address above.
You must not circulate this work in any other form
and you must impose this same condition on any acquirer.
CIP data is on file at the Library of Congress
ISBN 978–​0–​19–​992892–​7 (pbk);  
ISBN 978–0–19–992890–3 (hbk)
1  3  5  7  9  8  6  4  2
Paperback printed by WebCom, Inc., Canada
Hardback printed by Bridgeport National Bindery, Inc., United States of America
 

