Philosophical Review
 
Review
Authors(s): Daniel C. Dennett
Review by: Daniel C. Dennett
Source: The Philosophical Review, Vol. 118, No. 3 (JULY 2009), pp. 402-406
Published by: Duke University Press on behalf of Philosophical Review
Stable URL: http://www.jstor.org/stable/41441902
Accessed: 24-03-2016 12:27 UTC
 
Your use of the JSTOR archive indicates your acceptance of the Terms & Conditions of Use, available at
http://about.jstor.org/terms
 
JSTOR is a not-for-profit service that helps scholars, researchers, and students discover, use, and build upon a wide range of content in a trusted
digital archive. We use information technology and tools to increase productivity and facilitate new forms of scholarship. For more information about
JSTOR, please contact support@jstor.org.
Philosophical Review, Duke University Press are collaborating with JSTOR to digitize, preserve and
extend access to The Philosophical Review
http://www.jstor.org
This content downloaded from 128.252.67.66 on Thu, 24 Mar 2016 12:27:16 UTC
All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms

 BOOK REVIEWS
 Ross, J. 1967. "Constraints on Variables in Syntax." PhD diss., Massachusetts Institute of
 Technology.
 Peter Ludlow
 Northwestern University
 Philosophical Review, Vol. 118, No. 3, 2009
 DOI 10.1215/00318108-2009-009
 Owen Flanagan, The Really Hard Problem: Meaning in a Material World.
 Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2007. 288 pp.
 If, as the lazy and oversimplified philosophical tradition has it, you can't derive
 ought from is, what is a good naturalist to do about ethics? Does morality just
 have to hang there in the air, underivable and insupportable, at best the creature
 of some sort of "existential" choice that can only be justified internally, within
 one's chosen moral compass? Or can there be a sort of scientific investigation
 of what is the best way to live one's life all things considered ? Can meaning, in the
 grand sense of the meaning of life, not just the semantics of one language or
 another, be found - and confirmed - in the natural world, and if so, how? That
 is what Owen Flanagan thinks is the "Really Hard Problem," and he proposes to
 solve it, or at least to sketch out the best path to its solution, in an exercise of
 eudaimonics, "the attempt to say something interesting and systematic about what
 makes for human flourishing and that gives life meaning - that is, if anything
 does" (xii).
 This is well-trodden territory, of course, but mainly explored by ama-
 teur, not professional, philosophers: people who have thought hard - but not
 "rigorously" - about the issues, often from the perspective of some religious
 tradition. Perhaps for that very reason most professional philosophers have
 shunned the topic as too ambitious, too naively formulated, to be tractable. We
 should be grateful to Flanagan for bucking that trend, for he conducts his inquiry
 with erudition, calm open-mindedness, cautious optimism, and ingenuity. Flana-
 gan's choice of ' eudaimonia ' as his term for the most important form of human
 flourishing - allowing him to acknowledge that some people are quite happy in a
 familiar sense while not yet conceding that their lives are all they could or should
 be - signals his willingness to draw heavily on the philosophical tradition going
 back to Aristotle, but he is eclectic, drawing heavily on the thinking of the Bud-
 dha (primarily as interpreted by the Dalai Lama) and also on such contempo-
 rary moral thinkers as Amartya Sen, John Rawls, and Martha Nussbaum, and
 402
This content downloaded from 128.252.67.66 on Thu, 24 Mar 2016 12:27:16 UTC
All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms

 BOOK REVIEWS
 introducing philosophers to the important recent empirical literature in the
 social sciences on subjective well-being by Daniel Kahneman, Ed Diener, Joshua
 Green, andjonathan Haidt, among others. Eudaimonics is not "just philosophy,"
 or better: when philosophers address the questions of eudaimonics, they had
 better get out of their armchairs and consider a panoply of empirical findings
 about what people actually do, and think, and care about. The goal is nothing
 less than a theory of human nature, grounded not just in the social sciences but
 in the natural sciences, with special attention to evolutionary biology.
 A key feature of the theory are the "Spaces of Meaning" that structure
 our deepest values. People don't all have the same Space of Meaning, not surpris-
 ingly, but the task of coordinating or merging the different spaces is not forlorn.
 This project obliges Flanagan to breach the various defensive ramparts that have
 been erected to keep science out of philosophy in general and ethics in partic-
 ular, and this he does with no wasted motion and no rancor. Partisans on both
 sides have a lot to learn from him; he appreciates the strengths and weaknesses
 of both "sides" and does not resort to the varieties of insincere lip service that
 typically deflect the hard questions. First, he argues ( pace Clifford Geertz and
 other ideologues of Geisteswissenschaft) that there can indeed be a naturalistic,
 objective, scientific explanation of all human social and cultural phenomena.
 But this in itself cannot advance beyond is to ought. Before we can get to ought,
 we need to understand how there come to be valuers at all, and then how they
 evaluate their values. Then, wielding Wilfrid Sellars's useful distinction between
 the manifest image and the scientific image, we can identify the Space of Mean-
 ing within the manifest image of our species, and, finally, participate in its critique.
 "The scientific image, if conceived carefully, need not be reductive, eliminativist,
 or disenchanting" (36). Flanagan, who coined the term "mysterian" in earlier
 work, firmly sets mysterianism aside. (Noam Chomsky has notoriously divided all
 unanswered questions into puzzles and mysteries; puzzles are soluble, mysteries
 are not. According to Chomsky, both consciousness and free will, for instance,
 are mysteries. Flanagan will have none of it.) The path he follows is carefully bio-
 logical and evolutionary, avoiding the pitfalls of crass views and not asking for
 too much from genetic evolution: "our explanatory resources do not end with
 evolutionary biology" and we also have the "transformative work that culture can
 do" (48) . He can thus be agnostic about whether we are born selfish or altruis-
 tic; we are, he thinks, a "mixed bag." And at the same time he sets aside specif-
 ically religious paths to "transcendence" and spirituality. So Flanagan presents
 us with a suitably mundane and matter-of-fact set of raw materials out of which
 to construct morality, with no ingredients a scientist might shun, but also with
 all the categories and norms that culture can furnish. Basically, eudaimonics is
 troubleshooting the soul. What makes a good one tick, and what can go wrong?
 How can we optimize the potentials of these marvelous contraptions that evolu-
 tion, both genetic and cultural, has endowed us with? There are different schools
 of thought about eudaimonia, so our reverse engineering must allow for these
 403
This content downloaded from 128.252.67.66 on Thu, 24 Mar 2016 12:27:16 UTC
All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms

 BOOK REVIEWS
 differences - a Ferrari has different aspirations from a Ford, after all - while still
 seeking as universal a canon as possible.
 Eudaimonia is the state of goodness, flourishing, that goes beyond bio-
 logical fitness, but fitness is a precondition for it. We do not decide to maximize
 fitness; that has been elected for all living things; but though we are constitutively
 set up to care about fitness (no surprises there) , we - and we alone - have a per-
 spective that looks beyond fitness. Since fitness must come first, the sad fact is
 that "for many persons, realizing their complex talents and interests is not in the
 cards" (58). That's where political and economic preconditions come in. Now
 we can cast an engineer's or ecologist's eye over the totality of circumstances and
 see what is necessary or conducive to flourishing, to eudaimonia. Some social
 systems are systematically eudaimonia thwarting, and this is an objective fact
 that can be uncovered in the process of seeking wide reflective equilibrium for
 our evaluations. Here is where the chasm between is and ought is bridged, and
 Flanagan is alive to all the difficulties. In order to escape what he calls "the inter-
 nalist objection to eudaimonics" (118), he looks at an example of what he calls
 "local chauvinism" (137): the "many non-Jewish, middle-class women in Nazi
 Germany" who "were excellent wives, mothers, and so on. . . . Such women had
 to know about, and in some cases agree with, the views of many of their fellow
 German Catholics and Protestants, even if we suppose they knew nothing about
 the actual Holocaust. Did such women flourish? Were they eudaimon?" No, in
 spite of the fact that within their Space of Meaning, they satisfied all the norms.
 Can we find the leverage to support this cross-cultural verdict? Flanagan thinks
 we can and does a persuasive job of showing how, by describing and justifying a
 move from narrow reflective equilibrium to wide reflective equilibrium. An inter-
 esting comparison here is with J. M. Balkin's book, Cultural Software : A Theory of
 Ideology (New Haven: Yale University Press, 1998). Balkin, a professor of law at
 Yale, arrives at similar details in his account of the process that, he argues, can
 dispel what he calls Mannheim's Paradox of Ideology: "If all discourse is ideo-
 logical, how is it possible to have anything other than an ideological discourse
 on ideology?" ( Cultural Software, 1 23) . (I am surprised, by the way, that Flanagan,
 whose reading on these topics is admirably broad and deep, has somehow not
 come across this soul mate.) Whether or not either Flanagan or Balkin solves this
 problem, it is everybody's problem, as Flanagan makes plain: The alternative idea
 that we might appeal to being good "in God's eyes," for instance, "is not a tactic
 available to the naturalist. It is predictable perhaps, but it is immature, epistemi-
 cally and emotionally irresponsible" ( 1 38) .
 The whole book is an exercise in tightrope walking, avoiding self-defeating
 appeals to mysterianism (incommensurability, thick description, inelimin-
 able subjectivity, . . .) on one side and scientism (reductionism, oversimplifica-
 tion, . . .) on the other, and much of the value lies in the originality of the details
 in Flanagan's excursion. There is an insightful discussion of Rawls's retreat from
 universality, an interesting attempt at a dialogue between Buddhism and science,
 404
This content downloaded from 128.252.67.66 on Thu, 24 Mar 2016 12:27:16 UTC
All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms

 BOOK REVIEWS
 including a proposal to tame the concept of karma (more specifically what he
 calls karmic causation) , and a particularly sure-footed exploration of the pitfalls of
 subjective well-being research, distinguishing normative, methodological, and
 empirical problems. To those who would simply flee the project of measuring
 happiness (eudaimonia) objectively, this chapter is a gentle rebuke: try it - you'll
 like it. As so often in such matters, the task is difficult but not impossible, how-
 ever ideologically convenient it would be to assume the worst. I also recommend
 his skeptical measure of the famous 1988 paper "Illusion and Weil-Being," by
 Shelley Taylor and Jonathan Brown, ending with "a caution against buying into
 any hyperbolic or global assessment of what the research on 'positive illusions'
 reveals" (176). Flanagan knows his way around the experimental literature,
 the meta-analyses and other cautions, so he sets a good example of this philo-
 sophical role.
 His take on religion is particularly refreshing. He is a former altar
 boy, now a "cultural Catholic" who is very taken with Buddhist doctrines and
 meditation practices. (He tells us that he spent a week in silent retreat while
 writing the closing chapter, and he recommends this to all.) His gentle criti-
 cism of the Dalai Lama - who can't let go of rebirth, which is a deal-breaker for
 Flanagan - is balanced by not so gentle criticism of scientists whose own efforts
 at ecumenicism fail: "There are also, alas, many scientists who have simply not
 thought their science through and thus believe that it is epistemically responsi-
 ble for them to believe in a creator God. It isn't" (103). And, for good measure,
 he has some trenchant remarks for his fellow Catholics, cultural and otherwise:
 "Go to Mass, meditate and pray in a Catholic way if you wish, consult the right
 saints depending on your needs, have fun, etc. This is a reasonable way of affirm-
 ing your identity, you can find wise moral guidance in places, and you can drop all
 the hocus-pocus stuff. That stuff is silly, unbecoming to thoughtful souls, and can
 be dangerous" (105). And this: "Morals are not about what God thinks is good
 or even what God commands, nor are morals about serving God's purposes or
 doing God's will. These ideas are out there, but they are childish ideas that are
 epistemically unwarranted" ( 1 26) .
 One recommendation about religion left me unconvinced, however.
 Flanagan distinguishes between asserting, on the one hand, where truth and
 evidence must be the touchstone, and expressing/saying, on the other, where,
 he thinks, we can just let it rip since "we are .only talking about stories" (191).
 Is this stable, or is it subtly or not so subdy corrosive? Anybody who thinks the
 answer is obvious has not, I think, taken the question as seriously as it deserves.
 Consider: 'You can say 'a miracle occurred' you just can't responsibly assert it"
 (197) . What if those who hear you don't recognize the distinction? This is bound
 to be true if they are children, or just docile or gullible. Can you hold yourself
 blameless if you know in your heart that you are just saying/ expressing this? I
 don't think so, but again, the issue is complicated. I am currently engaged in a
 research project in which we are interviewing clergy who seem to fit Flanagan's
 405
This content downloaded from 128.252.67.66 on Thu, 24 Mar 2016 12:27:16 UTC
All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms

 BOOK REVIEWS
 model: basically naturalists (and hence atheists) who nevertheless express the
 myths to their congregations - without saying, of course, " these are myths , not
 assertions /" Will these interviews uncover defensible justifications for persevering
 in these practices? We are keeping an open mind.
 It would be a shame if this book were ignored or underestimated by
 philosophers because it is written for everyone, not just philosophers. There is
 an ill-recognized pressure in philosophy to be hyperskeptical if not hypercyni-
 cal and to deem various optimistic projects to be hopelessly naive. Flanagan is a
 refreshing antidote to that. Go ahead, show how naive he is if you can. I think
 you'll find he's covered the bases better than you imagined possible.
 Daniel C. Dennett
 Tufts University
 Philosophical Review, Vol. 118, No. 3, 2009
 DOI 10.1215/00318108-2009-010
 A. P. Martinich and Avrum Stroll, Much Ado about Nonexistence:
 Fiction and Reference.
 Lanham, MD: Rowman and Littlefield, 2007. viii + 147 pp.
 Martinich and Stroll take a robust, no-nonsense line on fiction. Can we refer to
 fictional characters? Of course! Can we speak truly and falsely about them? Of
 course! Is fiction distinct from history? Of course! - even granted some border-
 line cases. In fact the authors think that philosophers have got themselves into a
 completely unnecessary mess in agonizing about fiction. A lot of wasted effort has
 been put into the "nonexistent problem about the nonexistent" ( 1 07) . Thus they
 sweep aside metaphysical approaches, pretense theories, games of make-believe,
 and direct-reference theories. None of that is needed. Ordinary language and
 common sense will take the mystery (and misery) out of fiction. The final chapter
 is an all-out assault on Putnam's Twin Earth scenario, rejected both as an "empir-
 ically impossible" fiction and as philosophically impotent in generating insights
 'into natural kind terms. Their parting shot: if you want to learn from fiction, read
 Shakespeare not Putnam.
 This is invigorating stuff, fun to read, full of argument, punchy, direct.
 So what exactly is their view about fiction? It has two main pillars. First, the differ-
 ence between fiction and nonfiction is that in fiction the Maxim of Quality, "Do
 not say what is false," is suspended. Second, the Axiom of Existence, "Everything
 referred to must exist" is false and must be rejected. It turns out that it is the latter
 406
This content downloaded from 128.252.67.66 on Thu, 24 Mar 2016 12:27:16 UTC
All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms

