Foreword
Philosophy is a dirty job. Cleaning up the confusions and obstinate misunderstandings of 
less philosophically astute folks would be hard enough without having to contend with all 
the dust kicked up by the efforts of other philosophers, vying with each other to do the 
same job better. Then there is the relentless tug of received opinion, creating “fixed 
points” that are better ignored – if only you could persuade others of this. In this ­churning 
melee of would-be conceptual cleansers, Ruth Garrett Millikan stands out, quite literally, 
as a calm, resolute, resourceful defender and developer of a growing family of insights – 
the Millikan vision, you might call it – that puts a surprisingly large number of ­contentious 
and utterly central issues in a better light: How can our words have meanings? How can 
our brains represent the world? How can knowledge be acquired in perception and passed 
on in communication?
This volume reveals the range and power of her vision, while also highlighting just 
how difficult it is to keep the alluring misconceptions at bay. Millikan’s “take” on the 
issues is typically so orthogonal to the prevailing presumptions that she has had to devise 
a special vocabulary to keep her readers from falling back into the bad habits of thought 
she is exposing: Normal (with its capital N) and proper functions and the concept/conception 
distinction, to name some key examples. Some of these innovations have worked better 
than others, and she has revised Millikanese over the years to deal with the most ­persistent 
miscommunications. (We can expect more improvements in the future. Her much-­
misunderstood use of the term empirical concept may soon be replaced by a neologism: 
unicept. Stay tuned.)
There is nothing new about philosophers insisting on creating proprietary idiolects – 
think of Kant, Hegel, and Heidegger – but unlike some of the others, she takes on the 
burden of explaining why her innovations are good moves, instead of simply brandishing 
them, as philosophers often do, leaving the task of comprehension as an exercise for the 
uninitiated. This constructive spirit is well exhibited in the essays here and especially in 
Millikan’s responses, but one can hear a few echoes of the ferocious reactions her work 
triggered in the early days. I recall all too well the colossally rude dismissiveness she 
encountered in some quarters when she first presented her revolutionary arguments, so 
I particularly relish my role here in setting the stage for her vindication. On the strength of 

x	
F o r e w o r d
this volume I would say that she has finally succeeded in domesticating her critics, always 
setting a good example of how to conduct oneself in discussion.
I have often told the tale of how I came to learn of Ruth and her work, and I gather the tale 
has taken on a life of its own, as retold tales do, with mutations and embellishments – 
including some of my own, I now see – so this is a good place to try to set down the unvar-
nished truth, as I reconstruct it thanks to the fact that my correspondence over the years 
now resides, alphabetized in yearly cartons, in Tufts’ library. It was short work, recently, 
for an archivist to extract all my early correspondence with Ruth, from her very first letter 
of February 12, 1979:
Dear Professor Dennett:
Enclosed is a manuscript completed just before reading your … Brainstorms. Both my 
­colleagues here at Connecticut and I had considered this paper of mine to be hopelessly 
maverick.… But the orientation is strikingly like that of Brainstorms, certainly if you ­contrast 
it with current approaches in the philosophy of language.… My view of ­representations has 
a different slant from yours. I am not sure how different in the end, but would be immensely 
pleased to have your view of the matter….
Sincerely,
Ruth Garrett Millikan
Hopelessly maverick, but strikingly like my own orientation? I was not sure I wanted to 
give this unsolicited manuscript from an unknown author so much as a skim. It could well 
be an unintended reductio ad absurdum or parody – the line is sometimes hard to draw – of 
my work. The letter and manuscript had been forwarded to me in Oxford, where I was 
spending a sabbatical, so months had passed in those pre-email days, but skim it I eventu-
ally did, and wrote back in May, apologizing for not doing it justice because of deadlines 
I faced: “I could easily see the convergence in our work that prompted you to write, and 
my initial reaction is that your fundamental idea about the evolution of linguistic features 
is perfectly plausible and well worth pursuing.” Not much encouragement, I now see, but 
enough, thank goodness, to keep me on her mailing list. Her swift reply revealed that the 
“warm response” of Philip Pettit, who was visiting at UConn then, “has encouraged me 
that it may be of some value.” Good eye, Philip! Soon (October 25, 1979) she began to 
“inundate” me with drafts. Later, in March, 1980, she reciprocated my cautious blessing 
of her work by providing a much needed boost to me, after I had sent her a draft of 
“Beyond Belief,” which was tormenting me that year.
Dear Dan Dennett,
Thank you for the packet of ideas. The argument that de re and de dicto aren’t two kinds of 
belief seems to me to be right on and to cut through to what needs to be explained much 
better and more fully than has been done before….
Thank you, Ruth! I needed that. The letter went on for pages of insightful questions and 
criticisms that preview some of her more recent discussions of the relations between 
­representations and the world they mesh with. (“Those possible worlds. I sense that you 
have your doubts too? One trouble with them is that they offer no friction, no resistance, 

 
  F O R E W O R D  
xi
hence no foothold or ‘constraints’. Are worlds with phlogiston and witches in them  possible 
worlds?”) She ended the letter by urging me  not  to read the manuscript she had recently 
sent me, of which she was “ashamed,” and especially to ignore her definition of “proper 
function” therein. She was replacing it with a better version (“medium bulky” – uh-oh) 
that would soon be sent to me. 
 The next mailing, in November of 1980, included drafts of the first chapters of a book, 
“… now (provocatively) titled  Language, Thought and Other Biological Categories .” (The 
title was, of course, perfect. That ’ s exactly what the Millikan vision is about.) She added:
  I find that I have to rewrite and rewrite and, especially,  expand  before anything that I have to 
say becomes understandable. Exhausting work! And painful, since I have so much already 
thought out and drafted that I want to communicate about but that will undoubtedly have to 
go through a long long series of revisions first. 
The bulky chapters began arriving. I read them in the summer of 1981 and thought they 
were terrific, though in need of further editing. With Ruth ’ s permission, I sent them to 
my friend and publisher, Harry Stanton at Bradford Books, MIT Press, urging him to 
triangulate my enthusiasm with at least two other referees, since maybe I was hopelessly 
maverick myself, and shouldn ’ t be trusted. Fred Dretske and Hector-Neri Castañeda 
were the other philosophers Harry consulted – a wide tripod indeed – and they were 
equally enthusiastic, so Bradford Books became the home of her landmark book. I did 
some energetic editorial work on it with her and wrote the foreword. Ruth and I had still 
never met, or even, I think, talked on the phone. When she learned that we were finally 
going to meet at an APA division meeting cocktail party, she sent me a note warning me – 
in case I had been encouraging her over the years under the misapprehension that I was 
taking a sweet young thing under my arm! – that she was older than I was, a mother with 
grown children. I had already figured that out; nobody could have written LTOBC 
 without mastering –  overcoming  might be a better term – the literature, and spending 
years of hard thinking putting the pieces in the right places. 
 And ever since she built her wonderful Millikan machine, it has proved to be a 
 prodigious generator of further philosophical enlightenment, requiring some mainte-
nance and improvement to be sure, but as robust and extensible as any explanatory system 
in philosophy. The key to its power lies in its unwavering – and demanding – biological 
naturalism; she never lets you forget that minds aren ’ t magic, that they have to have 
evolved just the way hearts and livers had to evolve. Many would-be naturalists among 
philosophers of mind and language have underestimated the necessity of seeing these 
issues from the  reverse engineering  perspective of evolution by natural selection: What do 
these things have to do to earn their keep, and how could they possibly come to do it? 
 Just as important, what  needn ’ t they do? Much philosophical theorizing attributes 
 stupendous powers to mental events and dispositions that are strictly gratuitous, which is 
a good thing, since they are almost certainly impossible. I have come to recognize in recent 
years that perhaps the central revolutionary idea Darwin gave us, his “strange inversion 
of reasoning” (Dennett 2009), is the idea of  competence without comprehension . We tend to 
think – especially if we are philosophers – that competence must  flow from comprehension, 

xii	
F o r e w o r d
that first we need to comprehend in order to be competent. (“Meaning rationalism” was 
Millikan’s term for this ubiquitous conviction in LTOBC.) No, it’s the other way around, 
actually: our comprehension is the product of cascades of semi-comprehending, pseudo-
comprehending, uncomprehending competences that we are endowed with, first by natu-
ral selection and then by learning and cultural – especially linguistic – redesign.
Perhaps Millikan’s key insight is that our ability to identify and reidentify things and 
properties in the world, without which we could not acquire the knowledge and 
­comprehension we have, starts with an innate perceptual proclivity to (try to) identify 
distal things, a competence that we exercise without knowing – or having to know – how 
or why it works. Upon this evolved foundation the structure of the distal world shapes our 
empirical concepts, letting us learn what we ought to learn first about the world we live in. 
As she says, “… the ability to reidentify things that are objectively the same when we 
encounter them in perception is the most central cognitive ability that we possess” (OCCI, 
109), and this ability – having, in her sense, a concept of a thing – does not depend on any 
particular conception (definition, intension, mode of presentation, etc.) we may have of it.
As she has insisted, “Failure to account for our capacity to represent individuals in 
language and thought has been, perhaps, the most serious failing common to ­contemporary 
naturalist theories of content” (VOM, 43), and it has been her achievement to repair that 
failing. The result is not a minor difference in outlook among philosophers of language 
and mind: either you are with Millikan – you get it, and see that one way or another a 
brand of “teleofunctionalism” is the only way to make sense of meaning – or you are 
doomed to recycle the pre-Darwinian fantasies that have continued to beguile so many 
deep thinkers for more than a century after the Origin of Species. Millikan may be the 
maverick, but the hopelessness lies on the other side of the fence.
Daniel C. Dennett
Blue Hill, ME

Millikan
a n d  H e r  C r i t i c s
E d i t e d  b y
D a n  R y d e r ,  J u s t i n e  K i n g s b u r y, 
a n d  K e n n e t h  W i l l i f o r d
A John Wiley & Sons, Inc., Publication

This edition first published 2013
© 2013 John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
Wiley-Blackwell is an imprint of John Wiley & Sons, formed by the merger  
of Wiley’s global Scientific, Technical and Medical business with Blackwell Publishing.
Registered Office
John Wiley & Sons, Ltd., The Atrium, Southern Gate, Chichester, West Sussex, PO19 8SQ , UK
Editorial Offices
350 Main Street, Malden, MA 02148-5020, USA
9600 Garsington Road, Oxford, OX4 2DQ , UK
The Atrium, Southern Gate, Chichester, West Sussex, PO19 8SQ , UK
For details of our global editorial offices, for customer services, and for information about  
how to apply for permission to reuse the copyright material in this book please see our website at  
www.wiley.com/wiley-blackwell.
The right of Dan Ryder, Justine Kingsbury, and Kenneth Williford to be identified as  
the authors of the editorial material in this work has been asserted in accordance  
with the UK Copyright, Designs and Patents Act 1988.
All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system,  
or transmitted, in any form or by any means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording  
or otherwise, except as permitted by the UK Copyright, Designs and Patents Act 1988,  
without the prior permission of the publisher.
Wiley also publishes its books in a variety of electronic formats. Some content that appears  
in print may not be available in electronic books.
Designations used by companies to distinguish their products are often claimed as trademarks.  
All brand names and product names used in this book are trade names, service marks, trademarks  
or registered trademarks of their respective owners. The publisher is not associated with any product  
or vendor mentioned in this book. This publication is designed to provide accurate and authoritative 
information in regard to the subject matter covered. It is sold on the understanding that the publisher  
is not engaged in rendering professional services. If professional advice or other expert assistance  
is required, the services of a competent professional should be sought.
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Millikan and her critics / edited by Dan Ryder, Justine Kingsbury, and Kenneth Williford.
    p.  cm.
  Includes bibliographical references and index.
  ISBN 978-0-470-65684-6 (cloth) – ISBN 978-0-470-65685-3 (pbk.)   
1.  Millikan, Ruth Garrett.  I.  Ryder, Dan (Thomas Daniel)  II.  Kingsbury, Justine.   
III.  Williford, Kenneth. 
B945.M487M55 2013
191–dc23
	
2012032812
A catalogue record for this book is available from the British Library.
Cover image: Photo of Ruth Millikan © Steve Pyke.
Cover design by Richard Boxall Design Associates.
Set in 10/12.5pt Ehrhardt by SPi Publisher Services, Pondicherry, India
1  2013

