BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1987) 10, 337-405
Printed in the United States of America
Neuroethology of releasing
mechanisms: Prey-catching in
toads
Jorg-Peter Ewert
Neuroethology Department, University of Kassel, D-3500 Kassel, Federal
Republic of Germany
Abstract: "Sign stimuli" elicit specific patterns of behavior when an organism's motivation is appropriate. In the toad, visually
released prey-catching involves orienting toward the prey, approaching, fixating, and snapping. For these action patterns to be
selected and released, the prey must be recognized and localized in space. Toads discriminate prey from nonprey by certain
spatiotemporal stimulus features. The stimulus-response relations are mediated by innate releasing mechanisms (RMs) with
recognition properties partly modifiable by experience. Striato-pretecto-tectal connectivity determines the RMs recognition and
localization properties, whereas medialpallio-thalamo-tectal circuitry makes the system sensitive to changes in internal state and to
prior history of exposure to stimuli. RMs encode the diverse stimulus conditions referring to the same prey object through different
combinations of "specialized" tectal neurons, involving cells selectively tuned to prey features. The prey-selective neurons express
the outcome of information processing in functional units consisting of interconnected cells. Excitatory and inhibitory interactions
among feature-sensitive tectal and pretectal neurons specify the perceptual operations involved in distinguishing the prey from its
background, selecting its features, and discriminating it from predators. Other connections indicate stimulus location. The results of
these analyses are transmitted by specialized neurons projecting from the tectum to bulbar/spinal motor systems, providing a
sensorimotor interface. Specific combinations of such projective neurons - mediating feature- and space-related messages - form
"command releasing systems" that activate corresponding motor pattern generators for appropriate prey-catching action patterns.
Keywords: action patterns; command systems; connectionist networks; feature analysis; neuroethology; neuromodulation; prey
capture; releasing mechanisms; sensorimotor interface; sign stimuli; toad; vision
1. Introduction
1.1. Topic
Animals see things and can then respond on the basis of
what they see. What neural operations connect a particu-
lar visual stimulus to a corresponding action pattern? For
the past 20 years my coworkers and I have investigated
neuroethologically the visual cues and releasing mecha-
nisms involved in prey-catching by toads (for a review see
Ewert 1984a). The present target article integrates a body
of behavioral and neurobiological data in an attempt to
understand the neuronal basis of prey recognition. This
work has yielded some interesting insights into more
general questions concerning sign stimuli, feature detec-
tion, releasing mechanisms and command Sanctions, and
their dynamic properties.
In ethological terms, stimuli are referred to as "sign
stimuli" (see Appendix) if they consistently release specif-
ic patterns of behavioral responses whenever the moti-
vation of the animal is appropriate. These stimulus-
behavior relations are mediated by releasing mechanisms
(RMs) whose recognition properties are largely innate,
but can be partially modified by experience (Schleidt
1962). The concept of "innate releasing mechanism" was
introduced by Lorenz (1935; 1943) and Tinbergen (1948;
1951) to describe the input/output characteristics of a
"black box" that performs specific sensory analysis and
triggers a corresponding motor program as a function of
prior phylogenetic adaptation to predictable, behav-
iorally meaningful stimulus situations. Investigating the
neurophysiological bases of sensorimotor transformations
in such specialized systems has a variety of advantages
(e.g., Bullock 1983; Capranica & Moffat 1983; Ewert
1974; 1985; Heiligenberg 1983; Huber 1983; Suga 1984).
Amphibians are especially appropriate experimental ani-
mals for the following reasons: (1) Toads and frogs have a
limited behavioral repertory that includes fixed action
patterns; (2) in response to relatively simple sign stimuli,
toads and frogs consistently exhibit predictable behaviors
whenever their motivation is appropriate; (3) stimulus-
response relationships can be analyzed quantitatively by
changing certain stimulus parameters in simulated natu-
ral objects or dummies, thereby identifying effective
features; (4) toad and frog neuroanatomy are reasonably
well understood (e.g., Kicliter & Ebbesson 1976; Lazar
1984; Neary & Northcutt 1983; Wilczynski & Northcutt
1983a;1983b); this is a prerequisite for neurobiological
recording, labeling, stimulation, and lesion experiments.
The visually released prey-catching behavior of toads
(Eibl-Eibesfeldt 1951; Ewert 1968; 1984a; Ingle 1968;
1983a; Schneider 1954) is particularly suitable for a neu-
roethological analysis of sensorimotor function (see Ap-
1987 Cambridge University Press
0140-525X187 $5.00+.00
337

Ewert: Neuroethology in toads
73
"3
>
2"3
3
(/>
"3
•a
2
s p a 
£ § P
s
X M
c '•3
O..Q i/i
I 
I 
I
Figure 1. 
Upper, photo: Toad Bufo bufo spinosus in its natural environment fixating an earthworm (photo by H. Burghagen).
Lower, diagram: Releasing conditions for prey-catching action patterns; depending on prey and its location in visual space, the
various action patterns orienting (o), approaching (a), fixating (/), and snapping (s) are activated by appropriate releasing mechanisms
(RMs). (Simple flow chart according to a scheme by B. Hassenstein in Czihak et al. 1981.)
pendix). Toads respond to prey with distinct behavioral
patterns - orienting o, approaching a, fixating /, and
snapping s, - which often yield a sequence o,a,f,s (Figure
1). Prey-catching thus calls for certain perceptual opera-
tions by the RMs concerned with stimulus recognition,
stimulus localization, and sensorimotor transformations.
The investigation of such mechanisms touches on ques-
tions of general significance not only to neuroethologists
but also to scientists working in neighboring fields such as
ethology, psychology, neurophysiology, and systems
neuroscience.
Controversy surrounds terms such as feature detection
and command function. Apart from semantic problems
(arising because we lack clear definitions), discussion is
often too theoretical, sometimes philosophical and even
emotion-laden, not taking experimental findings suffi-
ciently into account. In the present article, I hope that
such problems will be minimized by the presentation of a
reasonable amount of experimental detail to support and
motivate the concepts (although this has unfortunately
made the paper somewhat long).
1.2. Questions
We note that behavioral sequences are often hier-
archically organized (Tinbergen 1951). We must accord-
ingly test whether during prey-catching one particular
action must first be accomplished before another can
begin. Is such an action necessary and/or sufficient to
trigger a subsequent response? Or does the release of
each action pattern depend on the ongoing stimulus
situation, drawing on operations related to both stimulus
338 
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1987) 10:3

Ewert: Neuroethology in toads
recognition and stimulus localization? The answers to
these questions are important for an understanding of the
prey recognition system.
Given that the visual environment of the toad is struc-
tured, the basic question arises as to how signals (prey)
are distinguished from noise (background). What are the
releasing (visual) features of prey? Is there in the visual
domain a unique prey sign stimulus, or do the features
that release prey-catching consist of a certain range with-
in a stimulus continuum?
We must ask whether the perceptual operations re-
quired for prey selection are performed by a "feature
detector" (Figure 2A), which has often been proposed as a
necessary component of innate RMs (for a discussion see
Capranica 1983; Scheich 1983), or by a "feature-analyzing
network" (Figure 2B). The feature-detector approach
(e.g., Hubel & Wiesel 1962; 1965; Konorski 1967) usually
postulates distinct "hierarchical" feature-extracting pro-
cesses: The higher the level of convergence on feature-
sensitive neurons (Figure 2A), the higher the degree of
feature selectivity. At one extreme, highly selective
gnostic neurons (say, a "grandmother cell" in man's brain)
would only respond if a complex signal occurred (say, a
specific set of individual facial features). In such a system,
information flow would be from a level of lesser selectivity
to one of greater selectivity. The network-analyzer hy-
pothesis, on the other hand, involves "parallel" informa-
tion processing in a neuronal network: Here, an ensem-
ble of different classes of interconnected feature-analyz-
ing neurons would be responsible for the recognition of a
visual object (Figure 2B). Unlike in a feature detection
system, the feature-selective properties of neurons in
such a network would be determined by mutual interac-
tions. In addition, a class of neurons, through intercon-
nections, could take part in different ensembles (Figure
2B), thus contributing to the recognition of different
objects. Here, the same basic network, but with distinct
spatiotemporal activity patterns, could take part in the
analysis of different visual objects (e.g., Creutzfeldt in
Szentigothai & Arbib 1974; Hebb 1949; 1959; John &
Schwartz 1978; Mountcastle 1957). Network analysis
raises the question of how the signal-related information
is read in the brain, transferred to the appropriate motor
A.
B.
Figure 2. Neuronal wiring principles underlying a "feature
detector" (A) and a "feature-analyzing network" (B). Smallest
black and white circles represent different types of synapses,
here arbitrarily chosen.
systems, and translated into a motor pattern. Finally, we
will have occasion to ask whether the "detector" and
"network-analyzer" concepts are mutually exclusive, or
whether the (toad's) brain might be taking advantage of
both parallel and hierarchical principles of information
processing to recognize visual objects.
The question arises as to how RM circuitry mediating
stimulus-response relations is influenced by modulatory
circuits signalling attentional variables, motivational
states, and learning (as defined by Kandel et al. 1979). In
this context it is important to ask whether both circuits
work independently (except at their point of conver-
gence), or whether there is substantial overlap, so that
certain neurons may be used for both mediation (coupling
an appropriate behavioral response with a given stimulus)
and modulation (influencing the mediation).
1.3. Approach
The research is multidisciplinary, from behavior to neu-
ron, involving: (1) behavioral studies on innate and
learned aspects of prey stimuli; (2) neurobiological inves-
tigations of brain structures and their interactions in prey-
catching; (3) the evaluation of feature-analyzing and
space-monitoring neurons as putative components of
RMs; (4) the study of sensorimotor links between visual
pattern analyzing and motor pattern generating systems;
(5) the investigation of neural loops in the modulation of
RMs as a function of attention, motivation, habituation,
and learning.
We begin with a global black box study in a behavioral
paradigm and then analyze functionally related brain
structures and interacting subsystems down to single cell
responses and underlying changes in membrane poten-
tial. We then propose a conceptual synthesis that leads to
integrative and interacting functional units (cell assem-
blies) as putative components of cooperative (releasing)
systems - the central core of the behavioral black box.
From a methodological point of view, the advantage of
this approach is that a variety of questions (pertaining Jo
feature analysis, sensorimotor access, modulatory func-
tion) are directed at the same subject (visually controlled
prey-catching behavior in toads and frogs), so a uniform
system can be described and understood without having
to "fill gaps" by borrowing data from other domains. The
multimethodological nature of the approach also eluci-
dates various ethological, neurophysiological, and neu-
roanatomical aspects of one coherent functional frame-
work and confirms that the same principles emerge with
different experimental paradigms and techniques.
2. Behavioral sequence: Conditions of release
The four components of prey-catching behavior, o,a,f,
and s, are activated by corresponding releasing mecha-
nisms (RMs) that recognize prey and monitor its location
in space.
2.1. Action patterns
Goal-directed behavior often consists of two components:
the target-oriented appetitive response(s) and the con-
summatory act (Manning 1979; Tinbergen 1951). The
former can vary in the shape and order of its constituents;
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1987) 10:3
339

Ewert: Neuroethology in toads
the latter is relatively rigid. Both depend on motivation.
The toad's visually guided prey-catching behavior fits this
description: orienting toward prey (o), approaching (a),
and fixating (/) are directed appetitive behaviors, whereas
snapping (s) is the consummatory act (Figure 1).
2.2. Releasing mechanisms
Postmetamorphic prey-naive common toads (the tad-
poles are vegetarian) raised in the laboratory from the egg
exhibit prey-catching patterns immediately after their
transition to terrestrial life, although precise acts are
subject to maturation (Ewert 1985; Traud 1983). The
"standard" prey-catching sequence o,a,f,s can be re-
garded as a series of stimulus-response cycles (Figure 1).
The components of prey-catching are activated by differ-
ent RMs which use comparable prey recognition pro-
cesses but are distinguishable by mechanisms that locate
the visual stimulus in space (Ewert et al. 1983).
The notion that visual perception of "what" and
"where" precedes prey-catching behavior in toads and
frogs (Ewert 1974) has to be evaluated with reference to
the ballistic, programmed character of the action patterns
emphasized by various authors. Once triggered by an
appropriate stimulus in the peripheral visual field, orient-
ing toward the prey proceeds to completion - in conjunc-
tion with proprioceptive inputs (Comer et al. 1985) -
without feedback from the target during the turning
movement (Grobstein et al. 1983). Toads also program
the route of the approach toward prey to some extent
before they start to move (Collett 1983). If the prey
disappears during a critical phase of fixation, toads snap
accurately at the empty stimulus site (Hinsche 1935). It is
noteworthy that the subsequent ingestive behavioral pat-
terns (gulping and mouth wiping) also occur, despite the
absence of the prey. This suggests that certain motor
programs are somehow connected in the brain (Ewert
1967b). In this context it is important to note that frogs
and toads also possess various "compound motor coordi-
nations," for example, jumping/snapping. These too are
ballistic, but may involve feedback-guided correctional
maneuvers (Gans 1961).
2.3. What are the conditions of sequential release?
Hierarchical influences among releasing mechanisms or
motor pattern generating structures (Baerends 1976; Tin-
bergen 1951) are not essential for the sequential activation
of prey-catching patterns (Ewert et al. 1983). It is not the
previous action, but the ongoing stimulus situation- "prey
sign stimulus and its locus in space" - that determines the
subsequent response. If the distance between prey and
toad is short, prey-catching consists of o,f,s; if the prey
suddenly appears close to the animal, only o,s, or/,5, or just
s is elicited; if the prey flees, the toad's appetitive pursuit
responses occur - depending on the prey's behavior - in
variable succession, such as o,o,o,a,o,a,f,a,f,o,f,s; if, in an
experimental paradigm (Ewert 1969a), a prey object is
moved around the toad at a constant distance from the
animal, then 0,0,0,0,0,0 . . .is the pattern. Studies in
which frogs readily snap toward prey even though their
orienting is blocked by selective transection of the tec-
tospinal pathways show that orienting is not a prerequisite
for eliciting snapping (Ingle 1983a; Kostyk & Grobstein
1982). All these experimental findings contradict Griisser-
Cornehls's (1984, p. 238) suggestion that the recognition of
prey is the result of central processing in which the motor
acts play an essential role.
The release of each action pattern o,a,f, or s requires
the analysis of prey features (Ewert et al. 1983); the choice
of action, that is, the capture "strategy," further requires
the localization of the stimulus in the x-y-z coordinates of
the visual field. This means that the RMs of prey-catching
use the same recognition processes, but their localization
mechanisms differ. Triggering a compound motor coordi-
nation also presupposes appropriate stimulus recognition
and localization before the animal can start to respond.
These results imply that in a motivated (hungry) toad,
orienting to and/or snapping at a visual object (during a
given time interval) correlate with the degree of re-
semblance of that object to prey.
3. Sign stimuli: Configural properties
The ethological analysis of prey recognition is concerned
with quantitative measurements of prey orienting (and/or
snapping) in response to moving two-dimensional stimuli
(dummies) with variable features. RMs distinguish prey
from nonprey based on configural stimulus properties.
"Configuration" is used to refer to a combination of
stimulus features having certain specific internal rela-
tions: In the present case these internal relations are the
spatial extents of a stimulus pattern parallel and perpen-
dicular to its direction of movement. This perceptual
ability is called "configural selectivity" (see Appendix).
3.1. Natural stimuli
Before we begin to analyze and describe features of visual
prey quantitatively, some remarks on natural prey are
necessary. Metamorphosed common toads are carnivor-
ous.
From investigations of stomach contents it is known
that anurans feed on earthworms, slugs, millipedes, bee-
tles, and other small invertebrates (Porter 1972). All
these have more or less elongated shapes and their longer
body axis is oriented parallel to the direction of move-
ment. Usually objects must be moving in order to be
categorized as prey; a nonmoving retinal image fails to
elicit a prey-catching response. In the analysis of prey
recognition we will accordingly focus on moving stimuli
that contrast with their background. We will ignore color,
since common toads are active during twilight and
nighttime.
3.2. Structured environment
The visual environment of the toad includes objects like
leaves, branches, and stones, some of which are the size
of prey. Why does the toad ignore any moving retinal
image as potential prey when the source is a stationary
structure in front of which he moves his head (which of
course makes the retinal image move), as shown in Figure
3A or 3'B? Two explanations come to mind: First, the
many moving retinal images may suppress the capture
response because of "surround inhibition" through inhib-
itory interactions among corresponding projection areas
in a central visual map. Second, the brain of the moving
340
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1987) 10:3

i 2mm
Figure 3. Visual environments: (A) ground in a forest; (B)
artificial structure; (C) homogeneous white surface surrounding
a small stationary black stimulus. Arrow indicates direction of
movement of retinal image; for explanations see text.
toad may anticipate information about corresponding
moving retinal images, which is cancelled by means of the
"reafference principle" (von Hoist & Mittelstaedt 1950)
[See also Berkinblit et al.: "Adaptability of Innate Motor
Patterns and Motor Control Mechanisms" BBS 9(4) 1986;
Gyr et al.: "Motor-Sensory Feedback and Geometry of
Visual Space" BBS 2(1) 1979; Roland: "Sensory Feedback
to the Cerebral Cortex During Voluntary Movement in
Man" BBS 1(1) 1978.] The observation that for a moving
toad the self-induced motion of the retinal image of a
single stationary stimulus against a contrasting homoge-
neous background (Figure 3C) readily elicits prey-catch-
ing (orienting and snapping) favors the inhibitory sur-
round hypothesis (Burghagen & Ewert 1983; Frost 1982).
The "swarm phenomenon" is an ethological example of
inhibitory surround effects; a toad's prey-catching is gen-
erally inhibited when many simultaneously moving visual
stimuli originate from the presence of multiple prey
(Schneider 1954). This phenomenon has been investigat-
ed quantitatively with simulated prey (Ewert & Harter
1968; 1969). The inhibition of the toad's attack under
these conditions is not necessarily caused by "interocular
(intertectal) competition" or "confusion" owing to too
many visual releasers. It has been demonstrated experi-
mentally that a double stimulus (presented in the animal's
monocular visual field) can be inhibitory even if one of the
two stimuli is subliminal for the release of prey capture.
Detailed quantitative experimental studies show that
these inhibitory effects depend on the spatial arrange-
Ewert: Neuroethology in toads
ment of images on the retina in relation to their direction
of movement (Ewert et al. 1970). This effect may arise
from certain properties of interacting central nervous
processes. This leads to our "interaction concept."
3.3. Innate correspondence between stimulus features
and releasing mechanism
3.3.1. The "interaction concept." Suppose a toad is sitting
in front of the stationary structure shown in Figure 3B.
How could a signal with the features of a prey object
emerge? It must be different from the rest of the structure
in certain spatiotemporal properties; if just one small
stimulus object (SI) is moving, while all others are sta-
tionary, the toad responds with prey-catching. The prob-
ability of responding increases - within limits - with the
number of such stimuli, provided they move at the same
speed and are aligned parallel to the direction of horizon-
tal movement at a short interstimulus distance: S1-S2-S3-
S4-S5. But if two stimuli move simultaneously and are
aligned perpendicular to the direction of movement (Sl-
S7), the toad's prey-catching activity level is lower than
with a singly moving stimulus; it decreases further the
greater the extent of the pattern perpendicular to. the
direction of movement: S1-S7-S8-S9. Ifa further stimulus
(S6) is added to the optimal prey stimulus pattern S1-S2-
S3-S4-S5 (Figure 3B), the entire configuration's capacity
to release prey-catching is markedly reduced and may
even become zero (for quantitative details, see Ewert et
al. 1970; 1982).
Thus, to distinguish prey from nonprey, RMs may take
advantage of certain interacting central processes: (1)
Many simultaneously moving, randomly distributed reti-
nal images of small visual objects have masking effects on
the perception of a single image because of inhibitory
interactions in the central visual system ("inhibitory sur-
round"); (2) several small moving images aligned at small
distances parallel to the direction of movement are in-
terpreted as prey because of excitatory interactions in the
visual system; (3) the arrangement of small images per-
pendicular to the direction of movement signals nonprey
because of inhibitory interactions in the visual system.
Property (1) allows toads to select prey from structured
backgrounds and to discriminate object motion from self-
induced motion. Properties (2) and (3), applying to pat-
terned as well as to continuous shapes, determine the
configural features of prey.
It is obviously the geometry of a visual pattern in
relation to its direction of movement that plays a critical
role in prey selection, as expressed by different levels of
prey-catching activity. Systematically varying the area of
a two-dimensional rectangular object in different trans-
formation groups of a stimulus continuum (cf. Figures 4
and 5Aa-c) shows that the relationship between the edge
lengths parallel [xl(l)] and perpendicular to [xl(2)] the
direction of movement is critical (Ewert 1968; 1969a):
Successively extending xl(l) (for xl(l): xl(2) > 1 and xl(2) =
constant) increases the releasing value of prey (Figure
5Aa), whereas extending xl(2) (for xl(l): xl(2) < 1 and xl(l)
= constant) progressively decreases this value (Figure
5Ab). In fact, the configural properties of a stimulus
(expressed by the ratio of xl(l): xl(2)) are more important
than the area (expressed by xl(l)-xl(2)) within a relatively
wide range (Ewert 1968); for example, a 2 X 20 mm2 and
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1987) 10:3
341

Ewert: Neuroethology in toads
A.
R.
16
1(1)
Figure 4. Experimental analysis of prey sign stimulus in the
common toad Bufo bufo. Bottom: Range of a stimulus con-
tinuum of two-dimensional rectangular black objects (5 by 5),
each moving against a white background at constant velocity of v
= 107sec; xl(l) is the length of the edge oriented parallel to the
direction of movement and xl(2) that of the edge oriented
perpendicularly; 1(1) = 1(2) = 2.5mm; magnification factors x =
1,2,4,8, and 16; arrow indicates movement direction (see also
Appendix Figure 27). Above: Corresponding grid consisting of a
5 by 5 array serving as a coordinate frame; the range of the
stimulus continuum that contains the 25 objects shown below is
surrounded by thick lines. (A) Orienting activity Ro in response
to single stimulus objects as shown below; computer-processed
data of Figure 5A; intermediate values are approximated. (B)
Snapping activity Rs. Scales on the ordinate refer to 5 responses
per 60 sec (Ro) or 30 sec (Rs). The distance between the stimulus
and the toad's eyes was 70mm in (A) and 20mm in (B).
>
2
O
2.5 5 10 20 40 
2.5 5 10 20 40
Stimulus edge length, xl Imm)
1.0
0.5
0.0
7
adult
1 2 4 8
Stimulus edge magnification factor, x
Figure 5. Prey-catching orienting activity of common toads in
response to a black two-dimensional stimulus moving horizon-
tally (see arrow) against a white background. During the experi-
ment the toad sat in a cylindrical glass vessel; the stimulus object
was moved mechanically around the vessel at a constant angular
velocity (v) and constant distance (d). The toad's orienting
activity (number of successive turning movements per time
interval) correlates with the degree of resemblance of that object
to prey (for details see Ewert 1969a; in this procedure, the
subsequent action patterns of prey-catching usually failed to
occur because of the lack of appropriate stimulus conditions
according to Figure 1, provided that the distance, d, was
relatively long). Stimulus objects with different configural fea-
tures were investigated: (a) Wormlike stripes of 2.5mm width
whose longer axis xl(l) is oriented parallel to the direction of
movement and (b) antiwormlike stripes of 2.5mm width whose
longer axis xl(2) is oriented perpendicular to the direction of
movement; the length xl(l) and xl(2) was variable, respectively;
(c) squares of comparable edge length xl(l,2); 1(1) = 1(2) =
2.5mm; x = 1,2,4,8, and 16; v = 10°/sec; d = 70mm. Average
prey-catching orienting (turning) responses per time interval
measured (A) in normal toads (from Ewert et al. 1983 according
to corresponding results for v = 237sec after Ewert 1969a, see
Appendix Figure 27) and (B) in toads following a pretectal lesion
(from Ewert & von Wietersheim 1974b). (C) Maturation of
worm(W)/antiworm(A) discrimination calculated by the dis-
criminate values D(W,A) in young postmetamorphic common
toads during the first (1) and the seventh (7) day of their
terrestrial life. Thick lines: animals were caught in a pond as
they approached land; thin lines: control animals raised in the
laboratory singly from eggs in a homogeneous white environ-
ment. These were not fed after metamorphosis. Test stimuli:
stripes of 0.7 mm width and variable length xl for 1(1) = 1(2) =
0.7mm; x = 1,2,4, and 8; d = 20mm (from Traud 1983).
342
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1987) 10:3

Ewert: Neuroethology in toads
an 8 x 80 mm2 black stripe have about the same releasing
value for prey-catching, provided each one moves along
its longer axis at a given speed.
However, if stimuli are "configuration neutral" in the
present respect (xl(l): xl(2) = 1), as with squares (Figure
5Ac) or disc-shaped objects of different sizes, prey-catch-
ing exhibits a nonlinear interaction between the influ-
ences of both configural features xl(l) and xl(2). The area
then becomes important for discriminating prey from
nonprey, which requires estimating absolute size (Ewert
& Gebauer 1973; Ingle 1968). When the area of such a
moving object exceeds a critical range, it is categorized as
a predator (Ewert & Rehn 1969).
3.3.2. The Gestalt approach. A simple way of fundamen-
tally altering the "Gestalt" (configuration) of a visual
stimulus (while preserving its shape and area) is to move a
small 2.5 X 30 mm2 stripe either parallel or perpen-
dicular to its longer axis (Ewert 1968). The two configura-
tions have different releasing values. Whereas the former
(called the "worm configuration") is an optimal prey
signal, the latter (the "antiworm configuration") is treated
as nonprey and may even be regarded as a threat, since
toads sometimes freeze in their postures or avoid such a
stimulus. The selective response to a stripe moving in a
worm (W) or an antiworm (A) configuration can be quan-
tified by the expression D(W,A) = (Rw - RA) (Rw +
RA)" 1, in which Rw and RA are the prey-catching ac-
tivities in response to worm and antiworm, respectively
(Figure 5C, adult). The discrimination value is positive
and increases (within limits) with stripe length magnifica-
tion x: D(W,A) = fix) (Ewert 1968; Ewert et al. 1978).
That is, for positive values of D(W,A), wormlike stripes
are preferred to the same stripes presented in antiworm
configuration. The important point here is that two iden-
tical stripes (i.e., of the same shape and size) are discrimi-
nated by the toad depending on the orientation of their
longer axes relative to the direction of movement (deter-
mining their configuration).
Since the efficacy of a stimulus as a prey signal depends
on its intensity (e.g., velocity and contrast), the question
of invariance in worm/antiworm preference has to be
investigated. If the speed of movement (Figure 6B)
(Burghagen 1979; Burghagen & Ewert 1983; Ewert et al.
1983), movement pattern (Borchers et al. 1978), direction
of movement (Figure 6A) (Beck & Ewert 1979; Ewert,
Arend, Becker & Borchers 1979), or contrast between
stimulus and background (Ewert et al. 1979) are changed
equally in both W- and A- configurations, the D(W,A)
values remain positive, although their magnitudes may
vary; that is, the "basic pattern" of the stimulus-response
relationships shown in Figure 5A is not altered. If, how-
ever, such a stimulus parameter is changed differently in
W- and A-configurations (e.g., the contrast direction with
the background "white/black" vs. "black/white"), the
D(W,A) value can be positive and significantly different
from zero only up to a certain ratio xl(l): xl(2). Invariance
in configuration preference thus requires a "minimal
ratio" of the configural features.
Moderate changes in prey-catching motivation (e.g.,
those related to hunger or to the season) are expressed by
the general level of prey-catching activity; the basic
stimulus-response relationships are maintained (Ewert
I
l/x
10 
20 
40 
(0
Stimulus angular velocity
(degrees per sec)
Figure 6. (A) Directional invariance of common toad's worm
(W) versus antiworm (A) preference: (+), prey-catching; (—), no
response. The direction of movement of the 2.5 X 30 mm2 black
stripe is indicated by arrows; movement velocity was 25mm/sec
(from Ewert, Arend, Becker & Borchers 1979). (B) Velocity
invariance of toad's worm versus antiworm preference for a 2.5
X 40 mm2 black stripe; response per min/2 (from Burghagen
1979; Burghagen & Ewert 1983).
1984a). The D(W,A) values, for example, decrease with
increasing prey-catching motivation, but remain posi-
tive.
3.3.3. Ontogenetic and phylogenetic considerations. The
worm/antiworm preference is innate in common toads.
At the completion of metamorphosis (immediately after
the transition to terrestrial life) the RMs of the prey-naive
toads are already functional, although the acuity of config-
ural stimulus discrimination (Figure 5C), distance es-
timation, and snapping performance improve with matu-
ration (Ewert & Burghagen 1979a: Traud 1983; for results
in salamanders see Himstedt et al. 1976). It has been
further shown that the D(W,A) values are positive irre-
spective of whether an animal was raised from the egg in a
homogeneous white environment or in differently struc-
tured environments consisting of stationary or moving
wormlike stripes or moving antiwormlike ones (Traud
1983). In the course of the first postmetamorphic year
both sensory and motor performances improve (Ewert &
Burghagen 1979a) in parallel with special neural differ-
entiations in the central visual system (Clairambault
1976; Ewert 1984b). Configural discrimination in adult
toads is rather robust; the stimulus-response rela-
tionships in test animals freshly caught in the forest
display the same basic pattern (illustrated in Figure 5A) as
in those kept for several months (or years) in the laborato-
ry and fed exclusively on mealworms (Herbst & Ewert,
unpublished data).
In the subspecies Bufo bufo bufo there are no obvious
interindividual differences in configural prey discrimina-
tion (even if the responses of the small males and the large
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1987) 10:3
343

Ewert: Neuroethology in toads
females are compared). Other subspecies (B.b.spinosus),
species (B.asper, B.viridis), or genera (Hyla arborea,
Rana temporaria) show some variations with respect to
optimal sizes of worm and square-shaped objects, but the
basic response patterns according to Figure 5A are com-
parable (Burghagen 1979; Ewert & Burghagen 1979b; see
also Finkenstadt & Ewert 1983a and Himstedt 1982 for
results in urodeles).
3.4. Learned correspondence between stimulus
features and releasing mechanism
Various visual features of natural prey objects allow toads
to link these with individual experience and to store this
information in order to recall it when faced with the
corresponding stimulus (e.g., Birukow & Meng 1955;
Brower et al. I960; Cott 1936; Eibl-Eibesfeldt 1951;
Eikmanns 1955; Freisling 1948). Depending on stimulus
events, these experiences may be concerned with stim-
ulus-specific habituation or associative conditioning.
3.4.1. Successive stimulus events. With the repeated
release of the prey-catching orienting response (o) by the
same prey object during a long-term series of presenta-
tions, the toad habituates specifically to certain visual
cues varied within wormlike dimensions (Birukow &
Meng 1955; Ewert & Kehl 1978). For example, after the
habituation of prey orienting in response to a small
rectangular triangle with the small cathetus (vertex) lead-
ing in the direction of movement, the toad immediately
responds to the mirror image of the triangle (i.e., when
the object is moved with its sharp tip leading in the same
direction). Since the releasing values of both stimulus
objects (measured separately in terms of the initial re-
sponse rates per minute) are almost the same, it can be
concluded that a stimulus-specific property of habituation
keeps the prey-catching RMs responsive to "novel" prey
stimuli. Motor components of prey-catching are not re-
sponsible for habituation.
3.4.2. Concurrent stimulus events. Associative condition-
ing in toads may involve different processes that (1) add
new stimulus selecting properties or (2) permanently
modify the innate ones. As an example of addition (1),
toads for whom the smell of mealworms has been associ-
ated with prey respond either to the prey stimulus or to
the combination "prey odor" and "any visual moving
stimulus" (Ewert 1968; Shinn & Dole 1978). In the
presence of known prey odor, the D(W, A) values become
smaller. Furthermore, surround inhibition is decreased.
For example, toads may respond with prey-catching to
components of the kind of moving structured background
shown in Figure 3B. In the absence of a known prey odor,
surround inhibition is effective and visual stimuli are
sharply classified according to the RM's original proper-
ties. Other studies in which toads associated negative
experience with particular cues of specific prey animals
have been reported elsewhere (e.g., "bee avoidance,"
Cott 1936).
As an example of modification (2), toads that have been
fed several times on mealworms presented by hand
finally respond to the hand alone, suggesting an associa-
tion between food and hand (Brzoska & Schneider 1978).
This phenomenon is not "hand specific," since Burg-
hagen (1979) has shown that it involves the extension of
the entire spectrum of potential prey to include even
large black square objects which normally elicit escape.
The D(W,A) values are decreased but positive, and sur-
round inhibition is attenuated. This modification in prey
recognition often persists for several months. If in a
comparable experiment the mealworm is presented sev-
eral times together with an antiwormlike moving holder
(Paselt & Ewert, unpublished data), toads become less
cautious with the A-stimulus and finally respond to it
alone with prey-catching. Here too, the D(W,A) values
are significantly less than in unconditioned controls, but
they remain positive, which means the preference is not
inverted in favor of the A-configuration.
Recalling the "interaction concept" in configural selec-
tion, we conclude that the underlying neural mechanisms
can be modulated by special inputs related to motivation
and learning.
3.5. How are objects sorted into categories?
3.5.1. What do we measure? We must take into account
the fact that the frog's or toad's "peripheral" visual system
displays a variety of peculiarities: They have no retinal
foveal pit (Gordon & Hood 1976), no mammalian-type
involuntary saccadic eye movements (Autrum 1959), nor
any voluntary scanning or overt eye movements. This
does not mean that the anuran eye is completely mo-
tionless; however, they have only optokinetic (and ves-
tibular-coupled) nystagmus, and movements concerned
with binocular adjustments or monitoring the stationary
environment (e.g., for such things as obstacles; see
Griisser & Grusser-Cornehls 1976 and Dieringer 1986 for
reviews). The toad's prey-catching behavior (or escape) is
usually released by moving visual objects; prey recogni-
tion is feasible in any part of the large visual field, and
perceptual decisions related to prey or nonprey precede
the corresponding ballistic behavior patterns (Ewert et
al. 1983). If a visual stimulus has none of the features of
prey, the goal-oriented turning in a prey-motivated toad
fails to occur or, rather, the probability of its occurrence is
extremely low. Hence, the frequency of orienting and/or
snapping in response to a visual stimulus can be taken as a
measure of its resemblance to prey. When an experimen-
tally simulated prey object circles around the toad at a
constant distance and angular velocity, the path 8 in the
visual field through which the stimulus is displaced to
elicit a prey-oriented turning movement decreases as the
resemblance of the dummy to prey increases (Ewert
1969a). Thus, in this procedure smaller values of 8 are
concerned with greater orienting activity (responses per
time interval) and vice versa. More specifically, the
effective displacement 8 depends on the response laten-
cy, which is inversely correlated with prey features. That
is, the less the stimulus fits the prey category, the longer
the animal takes to decide to turn toward a prey object
(which follows the "all-or-none principle"). Since the
stimulus-response relationships measured for orienting
to prey (Figure 5A) are maintained for approaching,
fixating, and snapping at it (e.g., Figures 4A and B; Ewert
et al. 1983), we conclude that prey recognition processes
are basically the same in the corresponding RMs (Figure
1).
344
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1987) 10:3

Ewert: Neuroethology in toads
3.5.2. What is prey in visual configural terms? Before we
can discuss visual features, some remarks on the termi-
nology of form perception are necessary. According to
Zusne (1970), the term "recognition" refers to an ability
to decide whether forms are different from those pre-
viously seen, whereas "identification" is concerned with
the identity of a known form labeled by a name. In the
present study, the term recognition (comparison with
stored image) will refer to a genetically determined "in-
formation store"; consider a prey-naive toad raised in a
homogeneous visual environment. At the completion of
metamorphosis, such an animal responds preferentially
to particular visual stimuli with motor patterns related to
prey-catching; we hence infer that this is based on com-
paring the incoming signal with a "prey image" that has
emerged and been established in the toad's visual system
during its evolutionary history (Ewert 1985; Traud 1983).
More generally, visual pattern recognition is defined
here as the assignment of space time-dependent contrast
distributions (features) from the visual environment to
innate or learned categories that have behavioral signifi-
cance ("invariants" or "universals"). The origins of cate-
gories can also be both phylogenetic and ontogenetic.
How organisms sort objects in their environment into
different categories according to invariant features is one
of the most basic questions of cognitive science: "The
problem is very general, for an 'object' can be any
recurring class of experience . . . and 'sorting' can be any
differential response to the object category. . . . Catego-
rization hence plays a critical role in perception, thinking,
and language" (Hamad 1987a, p. 1).
What defines categories? In toads, the stimulus param-
eters of contrast and movement are prerequisites for
categorizing the retinal image of a visual object as prey or
predator. Within wide ranges of variation of these param-
eters, prey is distinguished from nonprey by size and
configural features (see Appendix). An impressive exam-
ple of configural properties is the fact that an optimal
wormlike stripe loses its efficacy as prey if a small spot
(itself subliminal for prey-catching) is placed just above
the stripe (Ewert et al. 1970). The fact that a stripe is
differently categorized by the toad depending on the
orientation of its longer axis relative to the direction of
movement is another convincing example of configural
selection (see also Appendix Figures 26Ca and Cb). A
stimulus object, however, has to be evaluated not only by
itself but in comparison with the set of stimuli it is
assigned to, by variation of its features along a physical
continuum (see also Garner 1966; Gibson 1950; 1951).
Studying the effect on prey-catching (Figure 4 top) of
variations in configural features, xl(l) and xl(2), through
their continuous transformation (Figure 4 bottom) allows
us to describe the range of the prey category in the
stimulus continuum (see also Appendix Figure 27A).
More specifically, it is the proportion xl(l) : xl(2) of an
object - also taking into account its area xl(l)*xl(2) - that
determines the degree of resemblance between that
object and prey. This implies that prey categorization is
approximate and that it involves a schema in which prey
objects are represented in terms of "characteristic" spa-
tiotemporal features, rather than being precisely copied.
The boundaries of the prey category within the stimulus
continuum (as well as the acuity of stimulus discrimina-
tion and the accuracy of recognition) are influenced by
motivation and learning.
There is consequently no such thing as a unique "prey
feature." The worm and antiworm Gestalts tested experi-
mentally can be interpreted as invariant configurations
reflecting the extremes of two transformation groups of a
two-dimensional stimulus continuum (Figure 4 and Ap-
pendix Figure 27A). Hence, neither the worm nor the
antiworm really appears to exist in the toad's visual world;
that is, they may not be explicitly represented in the brain
by specific detectors. But worm and antiworm are behav-
iorally significant features of moving objects. (There are
also other possible features not considered here.) In the
terminology of Suga (1984), xl(l) and xl(2) are "informa-
tion-bearing parameters" essential for determining the
range in a stimulus continuum which carries the visual
information that is important for a species in the service of
category formation. Worm and antiworm resemble ab-
stract symbols sufficiently generalized to "describe" dif-
ferent categories of significant forms without being too
specific. Worm selectivity is thus not limited to worms,
but includes a variety of other invertebrates, such as
beetles, millipedes, and slugs. The antiworm configura-
tion accentuates an object's surface extension perpen-
dicular to the direction of movement, which, to the toad,
obviously means "be cautious." This feature, in combina-
tion with an appropriate size for the side of the stimulus
parallel to the direction of movement, fits the category
"predator" (e.g., moving shadows simulating airborne
predators such as owls, or large looming objects simulat-
ing ground predators such as hedgehogs; Ewert & Traud
1979). The image of a snake - the "archenemy" of toads -
includes many such antiwormlike features (e.g., coils of
the body); in addition, the raised head and "neck" often
assume a position perpendicular to the movement of the
body (Ewert & Traud 1979). The notion that anti-
wormlike features in "threat postures" may serve as vital
signals for intra- and interspecific communication in the
animal kingdom (e.g., Eibl-Eibesfeldt 1979; Tinbergen
1951) suggests that there might be comparable configura-
tion-analyzing systems in different perceptual tasks. [See
also Eibl-Eibesfeldt: "Human Ethology" BBS 2(1) 1979.]
The observation that sign stimuli are defined by charac-
teristic relationships between different features (configu-
rations) accords with many other examples reported in
the ethological literature. For gaping blackbird nestlings,
the feeding parent is characterized by a 1:3 ratio of a head-
rump schema (Figure 26A) (Tinbergen 1951). For a
female treefrog (to mention an example in the auditory
domain), the calling male is characterized by certain low-
and high-frequency tone components of its mating call
which, in order to be optimal, must occur in a particular
ratio (Capranica & Moffat 1983; Gerhardt 1981).
3.5.3. General conclusions. From a teleological point of
view, I think that a highly specific representation of a
behaviorally meaningful object by a specialized innate
recognition system would have an adverse effect on an
animal's survival. Representation by a "schema" allows
the recognition of a variety of objects belonging to a
category by their shared defining features. With a "prey
schema" (flexible within a limited range) the probability
of correct decisions in anurans is high enough to guaran-
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1987) 10:3
345

Ewert: Neuroethology in toads
tee behavioral success, and there is also room for adapta-
tions based on individual experience. In songbirds it has
been suggested that an innate "song template" only
crudely defines the species song, leaving considerable
freedom for imitation, improvisation, and invention
(Konishi 1985). [See also Baker & Cunningham: "The
Biology of Bird Song Dialects" BBS 8(1) 1986.] In human
speech, correctness of categorization also turns out to be
an approximate rather than an exact matter, which is
regarded as an advantage rather than a handicap; approx-
imateness gives the verbal labeling system the potential
for the universal expressive power of natural language
and guarantees that meaning revision will always con-
verge (see Harnad 1987b).
A few remarks about "innateness" are also in order at
this point. The controversy surrounding this term is
enormous; currently at least four meanings are associated
with it: (1) something that is present at birth, (2) some-
thing that is unlearned, (3) something that is phy-
logenetically adapted, and (4) something arising from
genetic differences. In the case of the toad's configural
prey recognition, meaning (3) seems the appropriate one,
although many authorities in developmental ethology
would disagree as to whether that means "genetically
determined," since genes alone may not be sufficient for
the expression of a property. In my view, the prey
configuration selecting behavior of an adult toad has been
established as a result of genetic dispositions (designed
neural network properties) involving maturational pro-
cesses (the programmed development of neural connec-
tivity) and behavioral practice (perceptual sharpening).
The term "established" may be preferable to "innate" in
this context as it leaves open a variety of factors and
substrates that might be involved in RMs.
visual field
temporal 
nasal
Figure 7. Schematic diagram of central visual maps in
anurans, illustrating central projections from the contralateral
eye and ipsilateral interactions among the projection fields in
the visual system. These relationships are not precisely "point-
to-point" as regards convergence and divergence (e.g., see
Figure IOC). R: retina; AT: anterior thalamus; OT: optic tectum;
Lpd/P: pretectal nuclei; "nasal" and "temporal" refers to visual
field positions (according to Ewert et al. 1974; Fite & Scalia
1976; Gaze 1958; Lazar 1971; Neary & Northcutt 1983; Scalia
1976; Weerasuriya & Ewert 1983; Wilczynski & Northcutt
1977).
4. Interactions and integrative functions of
central visual maps: An approach to behavior-
correlated brain structures
The x-y coordinates of visual space are topographically
represented by a multiplicity of maps in different laminae
of the optic tectum and in various structures of the
thalamus (Figure 7). Hence there are different "visual
channels," but these are not isolated. Central visual maps
may be mutually connected so that they can communicate
with and influence one another. Intrinsic tectal excitatory
processes, together with thalamic (pretectal) inhibitory
input, determine the functional properties required for
visual information processing in (1) surround inhibition,
(2) prey/background extraction, (3) configural prey selec-
tion, and (4) prey/predator discrimination. The integra-
tion of prosencephalic inputs makes this putative innate
system adaptive (within limits) to internal states and
external stimuli.
The neuroethological analysis of behaviorally relevant
brain areas is pursued using two experimental methods:
(1) the study of regional glucose utilization in the brain of
the behaving toad by applying the (14C)-2-deoxy-D-
glucose (2DG) method; (2) functional evaluation of ana-
tomically defined structures through brain stimulation
and lesioning.
4.1. Regional distribution of brain activity
The question of whether central visual maps (Figure 7)
and related structures are involved in various kinds of
visual behavior can be investigated by the 2DG method.
Figure 8 shows that prey-catching in response to a worm-
like moving stripe (W), predator avoidance in response to
a moving large square (S), and no motor response to an
antiwormlike moving stripe (A) are associated with differ-
ent patterns of increase and decrease in 2DG uptake in
various brain structures (Finkenstadt et al. 1985; 1986;
see also Ewert 1985). In view of the distinct releasing
properties of the W-, S-, and A-stimuli, the following
suggestions can be made: If the uptake of 14C-labeled
2DG in a given brain area is different in S- and W-
experiments (14CS ¥= 14CW), a correlation with prey-
catching or predator avoidance, respectively, can be
inferred (e.g., see thalamic pretectal lateral postero-
ventral [Lpv] nucleus); if, in addition, 14CA ¥• l4Cw, the
structure under investigation may also be involved in
stimulus-feature analysis (e.g., see optic tectum [OT],
thalamic pretectal lateral posterodorsal [Lpd] nucleus).
Cases in which 14CS = 14CW indicate a correlation with
prey-catching and avoidance behavior; for example, stri-
atum (STR), cerebellum (CB) (for details see Finkenstadt
et al. 1985; 1986).
346
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1987) 10:3

Ewert: Neuroethology in toads
w 
s 
A
prey-capture I escape 
I no response
2DG-uptake
increase
decrease
Figure 8. 
Regional patterns of brain activity measured with
the 2DC autoradiographic technique in common toads which
were repetitively orienting toward a moving prey object (worm-
like 4 X 28 mm2 black stripe, W), avoiding a moving predator
object (square 84 x 84 mm2 black object, S), or sitting mo-
tionless before a moving nonprey object (antiwormlike 4 X 28
mm2 black stripe, A). The patches indicate relative uptake of
2DG in various brain structures in comparison with reference
structures and controls. AT: anterior thalamus; CB: cerebellum;
HN: hypoglossal nucleus; La: lateral anterior thalamic nucleus;
Lpd: lateral posterodorsal thalamic nucleus; Lpv: lateral post-
eroventral thalamic nucleus; LP: lateral pallium (posterior part);
MP: medial pallium (posteroventral division); MR: medial re-
ticular formation of the medulla oblongata; OT: optic tectum; P:
posterior thalamic nucleus (lateral part); STR: striatum (ventral
division). Lpd, Lpv, and P are pretectal nuclei; nomenclature of
diencephalic structures according to Neary & Northcutt 1983
(for details see Finkenstadt et al. 1985; 1986; Finkenstadt &
Ewert, submitted).
4.2. Functional relevance of visual maps and related
structures
4.2.1. Behaviorally effective brain areas. Results from
brain stimulation experiments with chronically im-
planted electrodes in freely moving toads indicate that (1)
central programs for prey-catching and avoidance behav-
iors exist; (2) the former can be triggered by tectal
stimulation and the latter mainly by posterior thalamic
(pretectal) stimulation. The optic tectum is responsible
particularly for "visual grasping," to use the general term
of Akert (1949), whereas posterior thalamic nuclei partici-
pate in different types of "avoidance" related to a visual
predator (escape), a stationary obstacle (detour), or ves-
tibular input from body tilt (maintenance of posture).
There are topographic relationships between brain
stimulation sites and behavioral patterns. Depending on
the position of the electrode in the tectal visual map,
approximate orienting responses are directed toward
appropriate loci of the visual field of the contralateral eye
(Ewert 1967b; 1967c; 1974). The tectal area from which
snapping can be elicited is smaller (Figure 9 A,B; cf. also
C) and represents the animal's visual snapping region as
determined in behavioral studies (Ingle 1976). Electrical
stimulation of the posterior thalamus elicits avoidance
behaviors such as ducking, ipsiversive turning, moving
backward, jumping, running, "freezing" in body posture,
puffing up and assuming a stiff-legged avoidance posture
accompanied by secretion of the skin glands, sidestep-
ping, or tilting the body along its sagittal or transverse
axes (Rehn 1977; cf. also Ewert 1984a; for comparable
results in the fire salamander see Finkenstadt & Ewert
1983b). In the posterior thalamus, stimulation sites for
changes in body posture and detourlike movements are
distributed in median regions; those for directed escape
are found more laterally.
4.2.2. Thalamic/tectal interactions. Based on the effects of
various tectal lesions, it is likely that the optic tectum
participates in both prey-catching and predator avoid-
ance behaviors (Bechterev 1884; Rehn 1977). The coordi-
nated control of both types of behavior requires thala-
mic/tectal interactions.
„ "~~—^
I
A. , '—^
7i
B.
Figure 9. 
Areas relevant to snapping behavior in the common
toad's midbrain shown in transverse section. (A) Reconstruction
of sites which, when electrically stimulated, elicited snapping
(B) and/or orienting (A) (from Ewert 1967b). (C) "Snap evoking
area" labeled by means of the 2DG method during repetitive
release of snapping with a wormlike object moving to and fro
close to the toad in the frontal visual field. Note the "spatial
convergence" of 2DG uptake from superficial to central tectal
layers in the computer-processed autoradiographic image; CB:
cerebellum; DC: diencephalon; MC: mesencephalon; TC:
telencephalon; 3rd: third ventricle (from Finkenstadt et al.
1985).
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1987) 10:3
347

Ewert: Neuroethology in toads
Hints of functional thalamotectal connections are pro-
vided by electrical stimulation experiments; prolonged
repetitive stimulation with trains of impulses in an area
between the optic tectum and the ipsilateral pretectal
neuropil close to the rostral tectum initially elicits escape,
then with an increase of the escape threshold it leads to
nonresponsiveness and may finally release orienting and
snapping (Ewert 1968). It is interesting that after re-
petitive pretectal electrical stimulation toads often re-
spond to large moving visual stimuli with prey-catching
behavior as well. Tetanization of posterior thalamic (pre-
tectal) neurons has presumably reduced their excit-
ability, thus facilitating the visual responses of tectal
neurons in the ipsilateral hemisphere. Rehn (1977) has
supported this hypothesis with experiments using two
stimulation electrodes; the threshold for electrically elic-
ited prey-catching in the tectum decreased when tectal
stimulation was preceded by long-term repetitive stim-
ulation of the ipsilateral posterior dorsal thalamus.
Evidence regarding the behavioral significance of
thalamotectal interactions is provided by lesion studies
(Ewert 1968; Ewert et al. 1974). After unilateral lesions in
the posterior dorsal thalamus, toads respond to any stim-
ulus moving in the visual field of their contralateral eye
with prey-catching; the effect resembles a sort of "ag-
nosia"; retinotectal pathways are intact but visual pattern
recognition is disturbed. This "disinhibition syndrome"
is characterized by: (1) impairment of configural prey
discrimination (Figure 5B); e.g., D(W,A) = 0); (2) failure
of prey/predator discrimination (Figure 5Bc; e.g., an
increase of prey-catching activity in response to suc-
cessive elongation of the edge of a moving square stim-
ulus); (3) strong attenuation of surround inhibition (e.g.,
prey-catching response to moving background struc-
tures); (4) loss of discrimination between object motion
and self-induced motion in a structured environment; (5)
eventual occurrence of sustained poststimulus activities
in orienting behavior (Ewert 1967a; 1968; 1969b; Ewert
et al. 1970; Ewert & von Wietersheim 1974b; for com-
parable results in the fire salamander see Finkenstadt
1981; Finkenstadt & Ewert 1983b).
These effects must be related to disorders in the central
visual system, since the threshold for tactually elicited
turning or snapping (Grobstein et al. 1983) is not reduced
in thalamic-lesioned toads with subsequent bilateral optic
nerve transection (Weerasuriya, unpublished data). The
sources of the putative inhibitory thalamotectal influ-
ences (Figure 10B) are the anterior dorsal thalamus (AT),
the pretectal (PT) lateral posterodorsal thalamic nucleus
(Lpd), and the lateral portion of the posterior thalamic
nucleus (P), respectively, but not the median part of P.
This has been studied with various lesion techniques
using either sagittal microknife cuts, electrocoagulation,
or the axon-sparing neurotoxins kainic acid or ibotenic
acid (Ewert 1984a; Ewert et al. 1983; Finkenstadt &
Ewert 1983b; Schiirg-Pfeiffer et al., submitted). Median
transections of the posterior or tectal commissures are not
effective in this context. Since it has not yet been possible
to distinguish between effects of lateral P and Lpd, in the
following I will be referring to "pretectal" (Lpd/P)
lesions.
It is important to note that the above-mentioned "ag-
nostic" phenomena produced by unilateral anterior
thalamic lesions are always restricted to the frontal visual
CB
p(r>2)
t(n+2)
Figure 10. Central interactions in the control of prey-catching
and predator avoidance behavior in common toads. (A) Glucose
utilization in the brain of a toad with unilateral pretectal lesions
measured with the 2DG method during repetitive release of
"disinhibited" prey-catching orienting in response to an anti-
wormlike stripe moving in the horizontal visual field of either
eye. The 2DG uptake shown in the autoradiographic image of a
horizontal brain section was much stronger in the left medio-
caudal tectal lobe ipsilateral to the pretectal lesion (see "x") than
in the tectal lobe of the right hemisphere in which the pretectal
region (PT) displayed considerable 2DG uptake. Note that the
anterior thalamus (AT), which is thought to inhibit the rostral
tectum, was strongly labeled bilaterally (T. Finkenstadt in
Ewert 1985). (B) Integrative and interactive aspects of informa-
tion processing related to visually guided prey-catching and
predator avoidance, derived from brain stimulation and lesion
studies (Ewert 1967a; 1967b; Ewert etal. 1983). Arrows indicate
putative excitatory influences, and lines with cross bars indicate
inhibitory influences. AT: anterior thalamus; OT: optic tectum;
PT: pretectal Lpd/P nuclei; TC: telencephalon (striatum). (C)
Proposed principle of central lateral inhibition; p: pretectal
neurons; t: tectal neurons; lines with cross bars: putative inhib-
itory connections; retinal inputs to p and t are not shown (from
Ewert 1981 according to Ewert & Harter 1968).
field, whereas those after pretectal lesions can pertain to
any portion of the entire visual field of the contralateral
eye, with an emphasis on extrafrontal regions (Ewert et
al. 1983). The effects produced by a small unilateral
Lpd/P lesion correspond to a small circumscribed region
in the visual field resembling the reverse properties of a
scotoma (Ewert et al. 1974). Evidence of ipsilateral inhib-
itory pretectotectal influences is provided by 2DG stud-
ies showing strong glucose utilization in the tectum ip-
silateral to a unilateral pretectal lesion (Figure 10A).
Here, the size and position of the "agnostic visual field"
coincides with increased 2DG uptake in a topographically
corresponding area of the tectum (Finkenstadt & Ewert,
in preparation). Anatomical connections between ante-
rior thalamus, pretectum, and tectum (Figure 10B) have
been described in frogs (Lazar 1984; Neary & Northcutt
1983; Trachtenberg & Ingle 1974; Wilczynski & North-
cutt 1977) and toads (Weerasuriya & Ewert 1983), sug-
gesting that structures of the rostral thalamus project to
the rostral third of the tectum whereas the pretectal
projections include the mediocaudal tectal regions.
Telencephalic influences on the release of prey-catch-
ing are inferred from brain stimulation, lesion, and 2DG
348
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1987) 10:3

studies (cf. Diebschlag 1935; Ewert 1967a; Finkenstadt et
al. 1986; Finkenstadt & Ewert, submitted). The results
suggest that striatal and medial pallia! structures, via
thalamic/pretectal nuclei, determine and modulate tec-
tobulbar/spinal output (Figure 10B) (see also sect. 6.4.5).
After removal of both telencephalic hemispheres, the
putative inhibitory pretectotectal influences appear to
override the tectal prey-catching system, leading to visu-
al neglect of prey and a decrease in the visual threshold
for escape. After a further large bilateral pretectal lesion,
visual prey-catching is hyperexcited ("disinhibited"),
whereas predator avoidance fails to occur (Ewert 1967a).
4.3. What Is the neural basis for visually guided
behavior?
It must first be emphasized that the release of a relatively
simple, mainly visually oriented behavior (prey-catching)
in the toad involves various structures throughout the
brain. This implies that different visually guided behav-
iors are regulated by the same "macronetwork" with
different spatiotemporal patterns of excitation and inhibi-
tion (Figures 8 and 10B); I therefore hasten to suggest that
it would be dangerous to investigate the release of behav-
ior in terms of the sensory properties related to just one
structure. Although various (sub)systems appear to be
important in the control of certain visually guided behav-
iors, these "visual channels" do not all operate privately,
to the exclusion of others: (1) Prey-catching is controlled
by the optic tectum, depending on inhibitory influences
from thalamic-pretectal nuclei (Figure 10B; Ewert 1968;
1974; 1984a); (2) predator avoidance is controlled by
thalamic-pretectal nuclei in conjunction with excitatory
influences from the optic tectum (Figure 10B; Ewert
1968; Ewert & von Wietersheim 1974a); (3) a startle
response may be triggered mainly by the optic tectum
(Ewert et al. 1983; Ingle 1983; (4) barrier avoidance
appears to be mediated mainly by median pretectal
nuclei (Ewert 1971; Ingle 1971; 1977; 1980; 1983; and (5)
optokinetic nystagmus is guided by the basal optic nu-
cleus and portions of the large-celled pretectal gray (Fite
et al. 1983; Katte & Hoffmann 1980; LazaY 1973).
Recalling the "interaction concept" of visual pattern
recognition, I suggest that the toad's configural stimulus
discrimination can be traced back to a property inherent
in interacting pretectal/tectal networks (Ewert 1967a;
Ewert etal. 1970). In this context, inhibitory pretectotec-
tal connections play a prominent role and probably act
according to the principle of lateral inhibition (see also
sect. 5.3.4). There is indirect evidence to show that
pretectal inhibition not only is related topographically to
tectal cells but also spreads with decreasing strength over
large tectal areas (Figure IOC; Ewert 1968; 1981; Ewert &
Harter 1968; 1969; Ewert et al. 1970). I further suggest
that pretectotectal inhibition interferes with intrinsic
reverberatory processes of lateral excitation in the tectum
(Ewert et al. 1970; Ewert & von Seelen 1974; Ingle 1975;
Szekely 1973) and that both pretectal and tectal activity
relate configural features of prey to a certain range in a
stimulus continuum, as shown in Figure 4.
According to the "interaction hypothesis," a moving
retinal image of a small object weakly activates pretectal
structures, thus producing less inhibition to correspond-
ing tectal structures than several randomly distributed
Ewert: Neuroethology in toads
images which would strongly activate the pretectum. If
small retinal images are narrowed (or a corresponding
compact image is extended) parallel to the direction of
movement, the putative excitatory reverberating mecha-
nisms of the tectum are maximally activated; if the same
images are aligned (or an appropriate compact image is
extended) perpendicular to the direction of movement,
pretectal activation increases and pretectotectal inhibi-
tion overrides the relatively weak tectal excitatory pro-
cesses. In response to overall extended images, the tectal
and pretectal effects interact appropriately. Such percep-
tual operations take the size of the stimulus area into
consideration in relation to the direction of movement;
the processing principle, however, is invariant under
changes of the direction in which the stimulus moves.
Superposition of corresponding anterior thalamic input
on the pretectotectal inhibitory processes presumably
influences visual discrimination with special reference to
the frontal visual field, thus providing a sort of "central
fovea." Modulatory inputs to thalamic/pretectal struc-
tures arriving from the telencephalon (e.g., medial pal-
lium) may determine dynamic properties of their interac-
tion. These influences could, for example, attenuate
anterior thalamic and pretectal effects, thus allowing
surround inhibition to decrease and discriminatory pro-
cesses to adapt to appropriate internal or external signals
(Figure 10B) in relation to motivational states and
learning.
5. Feature-analyzing neurons and integrative
functional units: A cellular approach
The cellular approach to the analysis of configural features
is guided by neuroanatomical studies of the cytoarchitec-
ture of retinal, pretectal, and tectal structures in conjunc-
tion with extracellular microelectrode recordings from
single neurons (combined partly with electrical stimula-
tion and electrolytic lesioning) in paralyzed or freely
moving animals. Intracellular recording and iontophore-
tic staining allows the identification of neurons and the
evaluation of their responses in terms of changes in
membrane potential. It can be shown that selectivity for
configural stimulus properties is accomplished by fea-
ture-analyzing neurons in interacting pretectal/tectal
networks which receive specific combinations of retinal
input.
5.7. Information processing in the retina
The question of what the frog's retina tells its central
projection fields - given Cajal's (1894) cytological treatise
on the retina and the groundwork by Hartline (1940) and
Barlow (1953) - was systematically examined by Lettvin
et al. (1959) and quantitatively investigated by Griisser
and Griisser-Cornehls (1968; 1976; for comparative stud-
ies in toads see Ewert & Hock 1972).
In the frog's and toad's retina there are at least four
different classes of ganglion cells (R1-R4) that mediate
the output of functionally connected retinal neurons.
Ganglion cells send their axons to the superficial layers of
the optic tectum (classes R1-R4) (Gaze 1958; Griisser &
Griisser-Cornehls 1976), to the pretectal neuropil (proba-
bly classes Rl, R3, R4) (Ewert 1971; Ewert et al. 1974),
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1987) 10:3
349

Ewert: Neuroethology in toads
a 
b e
x l t l ) 
~
» 30
20
>• 10
>
a
« 30
c
20
class H2
3
U
c
o
M
IB
a><
10
D
^
' ' " * - b
class TII3
8 16
class R3
class R4
class T5U)
class T512) "*•«
2
8 16
8 
16
Stimulus edge length,xl (deg)
Figure 11. Activity of retinal ganglion cells (A—C) and central
visual neurons (D-F), recorded extracellularly in paralyzed
common toads in response to black wormlike (a), antiwormlike
(b), and square (c) stimuli each traversing the centers of the
excitatory receptive fields of single neurons at v = 7.6°/sec
against a white background; 1(1) = 1(2) = 2°; x = 1,2,4,8 and 10
(from Ewert & Hock 1972; Ewert & von Wietersheim 1974a).
+ 1.0
0.5
0.0
1-1
1 2 4 8 1 0
Edge magnification factor, x
Figure 12. Discrimination values D(W,A) for stripes moving
in W- or A-configuration as a function of x for retinal (R2, R3,
R4), pretectal (TH3), and tectal (T5(l), T5(2)) neuron classes in
common toads; 1(1) = 1(2) = 2° (from Ewert et al. 1978).
and to other diencephalic targets (LazaY 1971). The vari-
ous ganglion cell classes exhibit different sensitivities to
the stimulus parameters of movement and contrast. Fur-
thermore, as a result of the different angular sizes of their
excitatory visual receptive fields (ERF) and the strength
of the adjoining inhibitory receptive fields (IRF), these
neurons display various preferences for the area of a
moving stimulus: Class Rl and R2 neurons (ERF = 4°
diam.) are activated maximally by relatively small com-
pact moving objects of about 4° diameter, class R3 neu-
rons (ERF « 8°) by such objects about double in size, and
class R4 neurons (ERF = 12-16°) by large dark objects
against a bright background (Figure 11A-C,c). With a
moving background structure, class R2 neurons are less
activated than class R3 and R4 neurons (Tsai & Ewert, in
press).
In the analysis of retinal ganglion cell responses of
common toads we have taken advantage of testing config-
ural stimuli known from behavioral studies (Ewert et al.
1978; Ewert & Hock 1972). The results of these (Figures
HA-Cand 12, R2-R4) and other investigations, together
with the arguments presented by Griisser and Griisser-
Cornehls (1970) and Hood and Gordon (1981), invalidate
a retinal "prey detector" concept (Barlow 1953; Lettvin et
al. 1959) according to which a particular class of retinal
ganglion cells should exert the function of a prey detector:
(1) The behavioral (Figure 5A) and neuronal stimulus-
response relationships do not accord well for any class of
retinal ganglion cell (Figure 11A-C); (2) the D(W,A)
values are negative for stripes with an edge length of xl =
ERF(diameter), both in R2 and R3 neurons (cf. Figures
12 and 5C adult), the "prey detectors" proposed by
Lettvin et al. (1959) and Barlow (1953), respectively; (3) if
during chronic recording from an R2 or R3 neuron in the
freely moving prey-motivated toad a small black stripe of
xl = ERF(diameter) traverses the receptive field center
in A-configuration, the neuron will be optimally acti-
vated, while the probability of prey-catching is zero. The
same stripe in W-configuration slightly reduces the neu-
ronal discharge frequency (cf. also Figure llAa.b for xl =
4° and HBa.b for xl = 8°), whereas the toad responds
readily with prey-catching (Borchers & Ewert, un-
published observations); (4) the behavioral phenomenon
of surround inhibition cannot be explained solely by
inhibitory receptive fields in retinal (class R2) ganglion
cells, because behavioral inhibition is strongly reduced in
toads stimulated with the odor of prey and is almost
abolished in toads with pretectal lesions (Ewert 1968;
Ewert et al. 1970; cf. sect. 4.2.2), although retinal IRF
properties are unaffected (Ewert & von Wietersheim
1974b).
What is the function of the various retinal ganglion cell
classes? They obviously transmit to the optic tectum and
to other central visual structures information regarding
different stimulus parameters (e.g., contrast, movement,
area), with each cell class emphasizing various aspects of
these. Prey-feature analysis, however, is carried out
together with tectal and pretectal structures.
5.2. Feature-analyzing tectal and pretectal neurons
Single cell recordings from retinal projection fields in the
optic tectum and pretectum allow us to describe classes of
neurons that exhibit different kinds and degrees of sen-
sitivity to variation in the configural features xl(l) and
l()
5.2.1. Morphological and physiological survey. The optic
tectum consists of a laminated structure (Figure 13Aa).
Based on Golgi studies, Szekely and Lazar (1976) have
350
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1987) 10:3

Ewert: Neuroethology in toads
Figure 13. (A) Cytoarchitecture of the anuran optic tectum
(cut-out), (a) Kliiver-Barrera stain from a transverse section of
the tectum showing the laminar structure, layers 1-9 (Ewert et
al. 1983); (b) neuronal morphologies from Golgi studies; a,b:
pear-shaped neurons; c: pyramidal neuron; d: large ganglionic
neuron; e: stellate neuron (drawing after Sz6kely & Ldz&r 1976).
(B) cytoarchitecture of the anuran pretectal region, (a) Nissl
stain from a transverse section (Ewert et al. 1983); (b) some
morphological types from Golgi studies (drawing after LSzdr
1979); dm, vl: dorsomedial and ventrolateral optic tract, respec-
tively; PTN: posterior thalamic (pretectal) neuropil; for other
abbreviations see Figure 8.
described morphologically distinct types of tectal neu-
rons which are suitable for collecting retinal inputs,
processing these by intrinsic links, and mediating the
output of the tectum to bulbar/spinal structures (Figure
13Ab). In the pretectal Lpd/P region (Figure 13Bb),
neurons pick up retinal input from the adjacent posterior
thalamic (pretectal) neuropil and others provide connec-
tions between Lpd and P nuclei (La^zdr 1979). Investiga-
tions of thalamic/tectal connections have shown that cells
from Lpd/P nuclei project to the tectum (Neary & North-
cutt 1983; Weerasuriya & Ewert 1983; Wilczynski &
Northcutt 1977), whereas some tectal cells of layer 6 (top)
and layer 8 send axons to pretectal and rostral thalamic
nuclei (Antal et al. 1986; Bieger & Neuman 1984; LizaV et
al. 1983).
Applying various physiological criteria, extracellular
microelectrode recording studies in awake paralyzed
toads and frogs have led to a classification of posterior
thalamic pretectal (TH1-TH10) neurons (by Ewert 1971)
and tectal (T1-T9) neurons. (The classification Tl toT7 by
Griisser and Grusser-Cornehls, 1970, considered shape,
size, and location of the ERF of a neuron, and the
presence of monocular or binocular inputs; Ewert s classi-
fication of T5-type "small field" neurons, T5(l) to T5(4),
takes notice of their different selectivities in response to
changes of configural features of moving visual stimuli
For reviews see Griisser & Grusser-Cornehls 1976;
Ewert et al. 1983; Ewert 1984a.)
Among pretectal neurons (Figure 14A-C), many types
are optimally activated in visual stimulus situations suit-
able for releasing avoidance behaviors: turning away from
a large moving object (e.g., class TH3) or a looming
A.
Class TH6
al 
• ;!'"!';i;;tHi
"J 
"I IIITIIHIIP
Class TH3
off 
on
Figure 14. Response properties of extracellularly recorded
pretectal neurons in the toad Bufo americanus. (A) Selective
sensitivity of a TH6 neuron (ERF = 180°) to a large object
approaching the toad's eye from the dorsal (a) or lateral (b) visual
field; the neuron was weakly activated (c) if the object moved
around the toad in the horizontal plane at constant distance. (B)
Selective sensitivity of a TH3 neuron (ERF = 45°) to different
configural moving stimuli (a-c). (C) Sensitivity of THIO-type
neurons (ERF = 30-90°) to a stationary obstacle (so); (a,b)
records of TH10(l) neurons with spontaneous activity and (c)
without; the response to the obstacle ceased after the room
lights were turned offand was regained when they were turned
on; (d) a TH10(2) neuron responding to a stationary obstacle (so)
or to offset of the room lights (from Ewert 1971).
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1987) 10:3
351

Ewert: Neuroethology in toads
Class T4
Class T512)
c.
Class TH3)
D.
Class T3
Figure 15. 
Receptive fields of tectal neurons in frogs and
toads, suitable for discovering (A) and localizing (B-D) visual
objects such as prey. (A) class T4, wide-field neuron (ERF =
180°); (B) class T5(2), small-field neurons (ERF = 27°); (C) class
Tl(3), binocular neuron (ERF = 25°); (D) class T3, approach-
sensitive neurons (ERF = 25°) (according to Ewert 1974; Ewert
& Borchers 1971; Grusser & Grusser-Cornehls 1970; Lettvin et
al. 1961). Note that the release of each prey-catching action
pattern requires cooperation (combination) of different classes
of tectal neurons in which prey-feature selective T5(2) cells are
involved (see sec. 6.3. and Figure 22).
approaching object (class TH6), or detouring around a
stationary obstacle (e.g., classes TH10(l) and TH10(2)).
The responses of other pretectal neurons display wide
fields (e.g., class TH4), they are flexible (e.g. class
TH5(2)), and some cells even seem to have memory (class
TH9). The receptive field properties of certain tectal
neurons (Figure 15A-D) might be utilized to obtain
information from large sections of the visual field (classes
T2 and T4) or to localize moving objects of different sizes
in the x-y coordinates (T5-type neurons) or on the z-axis
(classes Tl and T3).
5.2.2. Responses to moving configural stimuli. Since
monocular input is sufficient for prey recognition, we
have focused our quantitative investigations on monocu-
larly driven tectal and pretectal "small field" neurons.
The relationship between recording sites and the approx-
imately circular excitatory receptive fields (ERF) of these
neurons corresponds roughly with retinotopy in the tec-
turn and pretectum, respectively (Ewert et al. 1974).
Regarding the sensitivity to configural features of moving
visual stimuli, five principal response types can be dis-
tinguished: T5(l), T5(2), T5(3), T5(4), and TH3 neurons
(for results in toads see: Ewert 1971; 1974; Ewert,
Borchers & von Wietersheim 1979; Ewert & von
Wietersheim 1974a; Satou & Ewert 1985; von Wieters-
heim & Ewert 1978; for comparable data in frogs see
Schurg-Pfeiffer & Ewert 1981).
Briefly, class TH3 neurons (ERF ~ 45°), recorded from
Lpd and lateral P, are best activated by large moving
square (S) objects. When responses to configural features
are tested with stripes of 2° width and varying length, the
discharge frequency (R) to the W-configuration averages
less than that to the A-configuration; for corresponding
edge lengths the following relation is found: Rs > RA >
Rw (Figures 11D and 16A). These neurons are weakly
activated by a small 2° square object but respond well to
several randomly distributed, simultaneously moving
stimuli that fill a large portion of the visual field, such as a
moving background structure (Tsai & Ewert, in press).
The response properties of tectal class T5(3) neurons,
recorded mainly from layer 8, are similar to TH3 neurons,
as far as configural stimuli are concerned. Class T5(l)
neurons (ERF « 27°), recorded frequently from layer 8
and sometimes at the border of 6/7, respond strongly to
square stimuli in a limited size range; configurationally,
however, they are more responsive to the W- than to the
A- configuration: Rs > Rw > RA (Figures HE and 16B).
These neurons cannot be activated by a moving struc-
tured background. Tectal class T5(2) neurons (ERF =
27°), recorded at the border of layers 6/7, exhibit selec-
tivity with respect to the W- and A-configuration of a
moving stripe in that Rw > Rs > RA (Figures 11F and
16C), and they fail to respond to moving background
structures (Tsai & Ewert, in press). Class T5(4) neurons
are selective for large, compact moving objects such as
squares or circular shapes bigger than 4°; they are unre-
sponsive to small wormlike or antiwormlike stripes: Rs >
Rw ~ RA = zero.
If the correlation coefficients (rA;rW) for comparison
between neuronal discharge frequency and prey-catch-
ing activity in response to wormlike (W) and antiwormlike
(A) stripes of varying length are calculated (Borchers &
Ewert 1979), class T5(2) neurons show a better correla-
tion (rA;rW = +0.9;+0.7) than class T5(l) neurons
(rA;rW = 0.0;+0.8) or class TH3 neurons (rA;rW =
—0.9;+0.9). These evaluations agree with comparisons of
the discrimination values for D(W,A) = fix) (Figure 12)
and support the conclusion that the activity of class T5(2)
neurons in response to moving configural stimuli is
positively correlated with the probability that a stimulus
fits the prey category. In a manner comparable to prey-
catching behavior, the D(W,A) values of these neurons
are always positive, independent of the direction of
movement (Figure 17A) (Ewert, Borchers & von Wieter-
sheim 1979) and angular velocity (Ewert et al. 1978). The
latter result has been investigated in detail by Roth and
Jordan (1982), who demonstrated that the configural
preferences of neurons corresponding to classes T5(l),
T5(2), and T5(3) were velocity-invariant in the range
tested 2 S v s 207sec. Of the entire sample of tectal
352
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1987) 10:3

R*
Class TH3
Ewert: Neuroethology in toads
A. 
class T512) 
C. 
class T5(l)
Figure 16. Tuning ranges of common toad's central visual
neurons (A— D) across a 5 X 5 array of the stimulus continuum
related to configuration shown in Figure 4 (bottom): class TH3,
T5(l), T5(2) neurons, and T5 neurons after ipsilateral pretectal
(—PT) lesions; computer-processed data from Ewert & von
Wietersheim 1974a;1974b; intermediate values approximated.
Ordinate: Average neuronal discharge frequency to stimuli (as
shown in Figure 4) minus the response to a 2° X 2° square
stimulus serving as reference.
"small-field" neurons examined, only 4% displayed a
velocity-dependent preference inversion with worm- and
antiwormlike stimuli, and 14% showed a velocity depen-
dence with worm and square stimuli of corresponding
edge lengths.
To summarize, among feature-analyzing tectal and
pretectal neurons (Figure 16A-C) there are (1) feature-
sensitive neurons (classes T5(l), T5(3), TH3) which are
optimally tuned to sets of configural features xl(l);xl(2)
assigned to different, partly overlapping ranges in a
continuum, and (2) feature-selective neurons which dis-
play selective sensitivity to feature combinations, in ei-
Figure 17. Discrimination values D(W,A) plotted in polar
coordinates for wormlike (W) and antiwormlike (A) 2° x 8°
stripes that traversed the centers of the approximately radially
symmetrical receptive fields of tectal T5-type neurons in differ-
ent directions of the visual field x-y coordinates at 7.6°/sec.
Values inside the "zero circle" are negative, indicating anti-
worm preference, and those outside are positive, indicating
worm preference. D and D* correspond to different data pro-
cessing of extracellular records in common toads (from Ewert,
Borchers & von Wietersheim 1979).
ther lumping together xl(l) and xl(2) (class T5(4)), or
differentiating between xl(l) and xl(2) (class T5(2)).
5.3. Toward determining the circuitry
Experimental results concerning the interaction and be-
havioral relevance of the tectum and pretectum (Figure
10B,C) in conjunction with the presence of tectal and
pretectal feature-sensitive/selective neurons in mutually
connected laminated structures (Figures 7 and 13) raise
the question of circuitry. There are various specific hints
about neuronal connectivity patterns.
5.3.1. Functional considerations. Recent data from intra-
cellular recording and iontophoretic labeling of the grass
frog's tectal neurons (Figure 18A) with potassium-cit-
rate/Co3+-lysine-filled micropipettes confirm the prop-
erties of T5-type neurons and further characterize their
postsynaptic activities in response to (1) electrical stim-
ulation of the optic tract, (2) moving configural stimuli,
and (3) brisk changes of diffuse illumination of the entire
visual field (Ewert et al. 1985; Matsumoto et al. 1986).
Four main points are of interest here:
First, the responses of T5(l) and T5(2) cells to (l)-(3)
are characterized by the occurrence of excitatory and
inhibitory potentials (EPSPs, spikes, IPSPs) (Figure
18B), whereas T5(3) cells produce mainly EPSPs and
spikes. A further interesting outcome of this approach is
the finding that neurons with T5(l) properties are not
homogeneous (see also Figure 18Aa,b and sect. 5.3.3),
which accords with data from previous extracellular re-
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1987) 10:3
353

Ewert: Neuroethology in toads
A.
Tectal surface
5 MV
0.5 s
CLASS T5(2) NEURON O ) 
CLASS T5(2> NEURON (5)
Figure 18. Morphological identification of physiologically
classified tectal neurons by intracellular recording and ion-
tophoretic staining with potassium-citrate/Co3+ -lysine filled
micropipettes in the grass frog Rana temporaria. (A) Camera-
lucida reconstructions of aT5(l) pear-shaped neuron (a), aT5(l)
large ganglionic neuron (b), and aT5(2) pyramidal neuron (c). (B)
EPSP-IPSP responses to a short electrical stimulus (see dot)
applied to the optic tract, typical for T5(2) and most T5(l)
neurons. (C) Records of two class T5(2) neurons (a and b) in
response to the antiworm (A) and worm (W) configuration of a
moving 2° X 16° stripe (from Ewert et al. 1985; see also
Matsumoto et al. 1986).
cording studies (Ewert, Borchers & von Wietersheim
1979).
Second, the various combinations in the occurrence of
excitatory (E) and inhibitory (I) postsynaptic potentials in
response to brisk changes of diffuse light at onset and
offset in tectal T5-type neurons
T5(l): lon-loff, Eon-Eoff, Elon-Eloff, or IEon-IEq#"
T5(2): lEon-lEoff
T5(3): Eon-Eoff
in comparison with the on/off spike activities of retinal R-
type neurons make it possible to estimate the combina-
tion and proportion of direct retinal input and indirect
visual input from tectal and pretectal cells (see Mat-
sumoto et al. 1986). For example, the lon-loff response
recorded in some T5(l) neurons can be explained by
direct excitatory input from retinal R2 neurons and inhib-
itory input from tectal T5(3) and/or pretectal TH3 neu-
rons driven mainly by class R3. (Retinal class R3 fibers
discharge short bursts of spikes at onset and offset, where-
as class Rl and R2 show no spike responses to brisk
changes in diffuse light. Class R4 fibers are characterized
by a pronounced off response; see Griisser & Griisser-
Cornehls 1976; Schiirg-Pfeiffer 1979.) An assumption of
direct inhibitory inputs from retinal R3 fibers to tectal
neurons in the present example would be in conflict with
other data, such as those showing that, after optic tract
stimulation, in no tectal cell of the 314 tested was an
EPSP preceded by an IPSP. (Note that the conduction
velocity in R2 fibers is less than in R3.)
Third, postsynaptic reverberatory activities in some
T5(l) cells indicate mutual excitatory intratectal connec-
tions.
Fourth, the fact that altering the configuration of a
moving stripe from W to A is responded to by a T5(2) cell
with a change from EPSPs to IPSPs (Figure 18Ca), or a
strong decrease of any PSPs (Figure 18Cb), provides
evidence of "configuration selective" excitatory and in-
hibitory inputs to this neuron. The inhibitory inputs to
this cell may come from neurons (TH3 and/or T5(3)) that
respond well to the A-configuration.
5.3.2. Pharmacological considerations. The lack of "flat
vesicles" in retinotectal axon terminals (L&Zcir, personal
communication to N. Matsumoto; see Matsumoto et al.
1986) in conjunction with the notion that retinotectal
transmission in anurans is mainly nicotinic cholinergic
(Freeman & Norden 1984) suggests that the IPSPs re-
corded from tectal neurons arise primarily from intrinsic
tectal and/or extrinsic (e.g., pretectal) connections.
Milson and Mitchell (1977) have reported that GABA in
the frog's tectum exerts a widespread inhibitory influence
on field potentials which is antagonized by picrotoxin. We
have observed that topical application of picrotoxin to the
tectal surface of toads leads to visual disinhibition of prey-
catching, which resembles the "agnostic" phenomena
observed with pretectal thalamic lesions (Schiirg-Pfeiffer
& Ewert, unpublished data). Similar results have been
reported for the application of strychnine to the toad's
tectum (Ewert et al. 1974).
Pretectal inhibitory influences on the tectum might be
concerned with at least two types of action: One depends
on visual input and exerts brief influences by "conven-
tional" transmission in determining the configural re-
sponse properties of certain tectal neurons, and the other
depends on motivational states and induces long-term
adjustments by peptidergic neuroregulators. The latter
idea arises from results of immunocytological investiga-
tions (Reiner, personal communication; see also Reiner et
al. 1983; Kuljis & Karten 1982).
5.3.3. Cytological considerations. Intracellular recording
and iontophoretic labeling techniques (Ewert et al. 1985;
Matsumoto et al. 1986) have identified tectal cells with
T5(l) properties as pear-shaped (Figure 18Aa) and large
ganglionic neurons (Figure 18Ab) whose somata are lo-
cated in layer 8 or near the border of layers 6/7. As so far
investigated, class T5(2) are pyramidal cells at the border
of 6/7 (Figure 18Ac; see also Antal et al. 1986; Matsumoto
& Antal 1984). Class T5(3) can be attributed to large
ganglionic neurons whose somata are found in layer 8. If
we consider both the site of the somata and the extent of
the dendritic trees, the pear-shaped T5(l) neurons in
354
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1987) 10:3

Ewert: Neuroethology in toads
layer 8 (Figure 18Aa) appear to be suitable for integrating
retinal input, whereas large ganglionic T5(l) and T5(3)
neurons of the same layer may be particularly appropriate
for mediating local interactions. Pyramidal T5(2) cells,
whose long axon could be followed up in one case to the
rostral medulla oblongata (Figure 18Ac), are projective
neurons. T5(l) pear-shaped and large ganglionic cells at
the border of 6/7 may be tectobulbar/spinal projective
neurons (Satou & Ewert 1985) and/or tectothalamic con-
necting neurons (Antal et al. 1986).
5.3.4. The proposed circuitry. Given the strong inhibitory
pretectotectal influences (sect. 4.3.), I suggest that the
prey selectivity of T5(2) neurons is determined both by
excitatory input from T5(l) neurons (sensitive to exten-
sion xl(l) and area) and by direct and/or indirect inhibito-
ry input from TH3 neurons (sensitive to xl(2) and area)
which in turn receive different combinations of retinal
input (Figure 19Aa and B). By its firing rate a class T5(2)
neuron would thus encode the outcome of information
processing that takes place in a "functional unit" (assem-
bly) of connected cells (Figure 19Aa) inherent in a net-
work (Figure 19Ab). Since a prey stimulus activates
several adjacent assemblies of the same type, it is reason-
able to suggest that prey-related information is transmit-
ted to bulbar/spinal systems by a small population of T5(2)
neurons (Figure 19Ac). The proposed network (Figure
19A,B) is characterized mainly by: (1) combinations of
certain retinal inputs to pear-shaped T5(l) cells in layer 8
and to TH3 cells; (2) lateral excitation presumably via large
ganglionic T5(l) cells of layer 8; and (3) lateral inhibition
probably mediated by TH3 and T5(3) neurons (Ewert
1974; 1981; Ewert & von Seelen 1974; Matsumoto et al.
1986).
This feature-analyzing system forms the neuronal basis
of the "interaction hypothesis" introduced earlier: If
small retinal images are aligned (or a corresponding
compact image is extended) parallel to the direction of
movement (xl(l) > xl(2)), the T5(l) neurons are strongly
activated due to mutual excitatory connections, whereas
TH3 cells respond only weakly, so that T5(2) neurons
convey prey-related activity to the motor systems. If the
same images are aligned (or an appropriate compact
image is extended) perpendicular to the direction of
movement (xl(2) > xl(l)), the TH3 neurons will fire more
strongly than T5(l), so thatT5(2) neurons are inhibited; in
response to overall extended images (xl(l) = xl(2)) the
respective excitatory T5(l) inputs and inhibitory TH3
. inputs to T5(2) neurons will interact accordingly.
The basic properties of this recognition system can be
tested. If the responses of the same T5(2) neuron are
recorded extracellularly before (Figure 20A) and after a
direct-current- (Figure 20Ba) or kainic-acid-induced
(Figure 20Bb) ipsilateral pretectal lesion in a paralyzed
animal, a dramatic change in the response characteristics
of the T5(2) neuron occurs, comparable to the "disin-
hibited prey-catching behavior" (sect. 4.2.2.): (1) impair-
ment of configural selectivity, yielding D(W,A) =» 0; (2)
increase in discharge rate with the elongation of the edge
of a moving square stimulus yielding no optimal size; (3)
strong decrease of surround inhibition (i.e., responses to
a moving structured background); (4) enlargement of the
functional excitatory receptive field; (5) lack of neuronal
adaptation in response to repetitive visual stimulation; (6)
Figure 19. Neuronal correlates of the "interaction concept"
for configural prey-selection in anurans. The network pieces
shown in (A) and (B) are hypothesized to be parts of an inte-
grated whole, (a) A functional unit of neurons (an assembly) as
proposed by Ewert (1974) that broadly corresponds to the
"column concept" described anatomically by Sze'kely and Lazdr
(1976) and analyzed mathematically by Lara et al. (1982); (b)
neuronal network; (c) neuronal population. Arrows indicate
excitatory inputs and lines with cross bars inhibitory inputs; the
lateral excitatory and inhibitory connections are not restricted to
immediately adjacent neurons (see also Figure IOC). (C) Con-
cept of "goal-related assemblies" (a1; a^j. (For explanations see
text.)
increased probability of excessive self-sustained activities
and after-discharges (Ewert 1985; Laming & Ewert 1983;
Schiirg-Pfeiffer et al., submitted). Comparable deficits in
stimulus discrimination (Ewert & von Wietersheim
1974b) and habituation (Ingle 1973) of T5 neurons have
been obtained in toads and frogs whose lesion-induced
"disinhibited" prey-catching behaviors were determined
before recording (see also Figure 16D). The finding that
pretectal lesion-induced changes - particularly with re-
spect to (2) and (6) - also occur in T5(l) neurons supports
the idea that inhibitory pretectal influences arrive at
different tectal layers (Figure 19A.B) to attenuate mutu-
ally excitatory intratectal processes. Thus, the "original"
properties of T5(l) neurons - arising from retinal input
and intrinsic tectal connectivity - may actually emerge
after pretectal lesions (see Figure 16D).
Complementary studies in different amphibians, Rana
temporaria, Salamandra salamandra, and Hydromantes
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1987) 10:3
355

Ewert: Neuroethology in toads
tec
ni
Figure 20. Evidence of pretectotectal inhibitory connections.
(A) Examples of extracellular records from single class T5(2)
neurons in a paralyzed common toad (a) and a grass frog (b) in
response to a 2° X 16° stripe traversing the center of the
excitatory receptive field in a wormlike (W) or an antiwormlike
(A) fashion at 7.6°/sec. (B) Changes of the response of the same
T5(2) neuron following an ipsilateral pretectal lesion induced by
direct current delivered by means of an electrode (a), or by a
kainic acid (KA) solution applied through a micropipette (b);
ON, optic nerve; OT: optic tectum; PT: pretectal Lpd/P region;
rec: recording electrode (from Schiirg-Pfeiffer et al., submit-
ted).
italicus, show that the behavioral preferences for moving
configural prey stimuli are reflected in the response
properties of prey-selective tectal neurons basically com-
parable to the toad's T5(2) (cf. Finkenstadt 1981; Him-
stedt 1982; Roth 1982; Schurg-Pfeiffer 1979). The spe-
cies-specific differences can be explained by weightings
for tectal and pretectal filter operations. After anterior
thalamic or pretectal lesions in the fire salamander,
changes in the configural prey selectivity of tectal neu-
rons and prey-catching behavior were comparable to
those seen in pretectally lesioned toads and frogs (Fink-
enstadt & Ewert 1983b).
5.4. How are perceptual categories represented in the
anuran's visual system?
From a historical point of view, there have been two
extreme positions: The "retina concept' and the "motor
concept." The retina concept, initiated by Barlow (1953)
and put forward by Lettvin et al. (1959), restricted the
filter functions essential for categorization (e.g., detec-
tion of prey) to a class of retinal ganglion cells. Thus,
Barlow (1953) favored the frog's R3 neurons when he said:
"In fact, 'on-off units [class R3] seem to possess the whole
of the discriminatory mechanism needed to account for
this rather simple behaviour [prey capture], . . . and it is
difficult to avoid the conclusion that the 'on-off units are
matched to this stimulus (image of a fly at 2 in. distance)
and act as 'fly detectors'" (p. 86). Lettvin et al. (1959)
preferred R2 neurons: "We have been tempted, for
example, to call the convexity detectors [class R2] 'bug
perceiver' . . . Could one better describe a system for
detecting an accessible bug? . . . The operations found in
the frog [retina] make unlikely later processes in his
system . . ." (pp. 1950-51).
Such processes were not excluded in the discussion by
Maturana et al. (1960):
The [retinal] ganglion cells can be considered as emit-
ting parcels of information about particular useful as-
pects of the visual image, which aspects depend on the
class to which the cell belongs. . . . In a system like
this, a unique combination of the four qualitative con-
texts [provided by the operations mediated by four
retinal ganglion cell classes] in a certain spatial relation
may define a class of objects. . . . We do not yet know
how the recognition of such unique combinations of
contexts is made at the tectum, but this can be studied
experimentally, (pp. 161, 164)
Although there is no specific retinal prey detector like the
one originally suggested, the classes of retinal ganglion
cells continue to have the fascinating property that they
do say something perceptually important to the central
visual system (see also Barlow 1985a).
The motor concept was developed by Griisser and
Grvisser-Cornehls (1970; 1976; see also Griisser-Cornehls
1984). Both authors claimed that the motor acts (i.e., the
accomplishments of the prey-catching action patterns)
are essential for prey recognition, emphasizing that: "The
construction of the invariants for predators, prey, hiding
places, etc. apparently does not precede the motor re-
sponse; instead, the entire neuronal reaction chain that
leads to the observable behavioral sequence in toto con-
stitutes the invariant" (Griisser & Griisser-Cornehls
1970, p. 215, translated).1
This hypothesis, deriving from the problem of how one
can know what one sees before one responds, was both
attractive and wrong. The argument that prey recognition
does not precede a prey-catching response - that the frog
or toad must instead run through the behavioral sequence
starting with orienting and terminating with snapping in
order to recognize prey - was invalidated by the animal's
behavior; orienting toward prey presupposes prey recog-
nition (Figures 4A,B and 5A; see also sect. 2.3). To
evaluate the "motor concept" it is important to know that
in their own investigations Griisser and Griisser-Corn-
ehls (1970; 1976) did not distinguish neurons with T5(l),
T5(2), T5(3), and T5(4) configural response charac-
teristics. Both authors even disputed the existence and
significance of tectal neurons displaying prey-selective
T5(2) properties (Ewert et al. 1978; von Wietersheim &
Ewert 1978) that were discovered by Ewert (1974) as
"small field Type II neuron" responses, quantitatively
described by Ewert and von Wietersheim (1974a), and
confirmed by Roth and Jordan (1982).
Our neuroethological investigations have led to the
356
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1987) 10:3

"interaction hypothesis" of configural stimulus selection
introduced earlier (Ewert 1968; 1974; Ewert et al. 1970;
for systems theoretical analyses and computer simula-
tions see Arbib 1982; Ewert & von Seelen 1974; Lara et
al. 1982). The underlying neural interaction principles
correspond in some respect to the idea of a "multiple-
input, metastable feedback loop" (Bullock 1961). The
main components of our hypothesis are the following:
1. The analysis of configural features of a moving visual
stimulus (xl(l), xl(2)) is carried out by functional units
(assemblies) (Figure 19Aa) of connected feature-analyz-
ing neurons (T5(l), T5(2), T5(3), TH3) inherent in pretec-
tal/tectal networks (Figure 19A.B) related to retinal pro-
jection fields (Figure 7). The idea is that an extensive
continuous network (Figure 19Ab) is subdivided into
"integrative interacting units" (Szentdgothai 1967) of
minimal size (Figure 19Aa) capable of the same basic
information processing as the corresponding network
(consisting of these units). The retinal input to such an
assembly is mediated by particular combinations of gang-
lion cells (e.g., R2, R3, R4). Feature-analyzing tectal and
pretectal neurons are distinguished by their degree and
quality of integration and interaction. Neurons of adja-
cent assemblies are partially coupled through mutual
excitation and lateral inhibition. Outputs of these assem-
blies are mediated by T5(2) prey-selective tecto-bul-
bar/spinal projective neurons (Figure 19Ac).
2. Configural stimulus selection is determined by the
properties of feature-sensitive neurons (e.g., T5(l), T5(3),
TH3), which are tuned to various sets of configural fea-
tures assigned to particular, partly overlapping ranges in
a stimulus continuum (Figure 16A,B). Moving visual
objects that are different in their configural charac-
teristics thus elicit corresponding patterns of activity in
these neurons. Specific neuronal interactions determine
the range in the stimulus continuum that defines the prey
category. In other words, this connectivity provides the
"prey schema" with which visual input is compared:
Configural cues are extracted by T5(2) prey-selective cells
through specific excitatory and inhibitory synaptic con-
tacts with feature-sensitive neurons. Class T5(2) neurons
are hence optimally tuned to the sets of configural fea-
tures that characterize prey (cf. Figures 16C and 4). The
result of this analysis in adjacent assemblies, expressed in
the spike frequency of adjacent T5(2) neurons, is trans-
mitted to the appropriate bulbar/spinal motor systems.
Spatial and temporal summation of their output in the
corresponding motor pattern generating network, upon
reaching threshold, determines the latency of an action
pattern such as orienting to or snapping at prey.
3. Feature-sensitive neurons of classes T5(l), T5(3),
T5(4), and TH3 are probably not monopolized for a
specific behavioral goal. Certain classes of neurons of cell
assemblies related to prey-feature analysis (Figure
WC.aj) may take part in other goal-related assemblies
(Figure 19C,a2), contributing in that case to the analysis
of other objects coded by different tectobulbar/spinal
projective neurons. The extension of the idea described
in (1) is that different types of functional units (goal-
related assemblies) inherent in the same network are
defined by the specific integrative properties of particular
bulbar/spinal projective neurons (e.g., see T5(2) and
T5(l)" in Figure 19C).
Ewert: Neuroethology in toads
4. The feature-analyzing system is relatively stable,
given constant inputs from the internal state of the orga-
nism related to circadian determinants, nutrition, hor-
monal balance, and so on.
5. The established feature-analyzing system is to some
extent modifiable through modulatory prosencephalic
influences depending on internal and external signals that
may change the properties of either the whole network or
parts of it (see sect. 6.4.).
Finally, some remarks are in order concerning the
function of T5(2) neurons. These can be judged from
different points of view. (1) If one focuses on the selec-
tivity of T5(2) neurons in worm/antiworm discrimination
arising from convergent excitatory and inhibitory inputs
by neurons that are sensitive to worm- and antiwormlike
stimuli, respectively, one can refer to a "worm detector,"
in accordance with the wiring principle illustrated in
Figure 2A. (2) If we consider that the prey category is
determined by sets of configural stimulus features as-
signed to a range in a stimulus continuum (Figure 4), we
can regard (small) populations of T5(2) neurons whose
activities are positively correlated with changes in these
features (Figure 16C) as feature detectors operating as
"prey filters." Such a filter compares information related
to configural (spatiotemporal) features of visual stimuli
with stored information provided by specific neuronal
connectivity. The filter picks out the invariant informa-
tion that is sufficient to categorize prey. (3) Since feature
analysis is concerned with certain neuronal activity pat-
terns in a network of feature-analyzing neurons, we can
speak of a "feature-analyzing network," in accordance
with the principle illustrated in Figure 2B. The mutually
interacting feature-analyzing neurons are distinguished
by the degree and quality of converging inputs and
diverging outputs. Goal-related information (e.g., re-
garding prey category) is "read" (weighted) through the
specific integrative contacts of feature-selective projec-
tion neurons (e.g., class T5(2)). A difference from (2) here
would be that excitatory properties of T5(2) neurons are
not only derived by input from T5(l) but also result from
intrinsic processes in response to direct retinal input.
Information related to other behaviorally relevant objects
(e.g., predator or mate), or to the location of a stimulus in
the visual field, is expressed by distinct types of spe-
cialized projective neurons in (partly) the same network.
Pattern recognition in the toad's visual system is thus
not a question of either "hierarchical" or "parallel" infor-
mation processing. Visual recognition systems obviously
take advantage of both convergent and divergent organi-
zation. A corresponding concept of "parallel-hierarchical
information processing" has been put forward for the bat's
auditory system by Suga (1984).
6. Sensorimotor interfacing: The command
system approach
The prey-catching action patterns o,a,f, and s are acti-
vated by different RMs which use comparable feature-
analyzing processes but are distinguishable by mecha-
nisms that locate the visual stimulus in space. The various
stimulus situations can be monitored by particular com-
binations of "specialized" feature- and space-selective
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1987) 10:3
357

Ewert: Neuroethology in toads
neurons that are connected to the corresponding motor
systems, thus representing a "sensorimotor interface"
(see Appendix). Modulatory inputs - related to atten-
tional factors, motivation, and learning - make such
releasing systems adaptive to changes in internal and
external conditions.
The experimental approach involves neuronal record-
ing from and electrical stimulation of behaving and para-
lyzed toads as well as retrograde filling and antidromic
firing of tectal cells via axons travelling to bulbar/ spinal
systems.
6.7. Specialized neurons
Compared to other tectal neurons, class T5(2) neurons
display a kind of specialization for extracting configural
features characteristic of prey (Ewert 1974; von Wieter-
sheim & Ewert 1978). When in the following description
of neurons the adjective "specialized" is used, this refers
to a specific selectional property (not necessarily exclud-
ing other properties).
Class T2, T4, and TH4 neurons are specialized to
obtain visual information from large distinctly organized
receptive fields (Figure 15A) suitable for arousing or
selectively sensitizing an RM (Brown & Ingle 1973;
Ewert 1971; Ewert & Borchers 1971; Gaillard & Galand
1979; Grusser & Griisser-Cornehls 1970; Lettvin et al.
1961). The locus of a stimulus in the x-y coordinates of the
visual field can be determined by information from a
number of T5(2) or T5(l) neurons with relatively small,
partly overlapping, receptive fields (Figure 15B). Depth
estimation along the z-axis may involve binocular class
Tl(3) neurons specialized to receive inputs from relevant
("disparate") areas of both retinae simultaneously (Figure
15C) (e.g., see Grusser & Griisser-Cornehls 1976), a
property resulting from special neuronal circuitry (e.g.,
see Gruberg & Lettvin 1980; Gruberg & Udin 1978; cf.
also Collett & Udin 1983). The monocular class T3 neu-
rons (Figure 15D) are specialized in that the approach of a
small object along the z-axis is required to drive the cell
maximally, a characteristic that can be used in judging
object distance (Grusser & Griisser-Cornehls 1976).
6.2. Tectobulbar I spinal output
6.2.1. Physiological and anatomical evidence. Questions
related to the access of these "specialized neurons" to
motor systems have been investigated in paralyzed toads
by extracellularly recording their antidromic activation in
response to an electrical stimulus applied to the tec-
tospinal/bulbar tracts in the medulla oblongata (Satou &
Ewert 1985). We have recorded class Tl(3), T2(l), T3, T4,
T5(l), T5(2), and T5(4) neurons that were activated anti-
dromically by contralateral bulbar stimulation (e.g., see
Figure 21A). Among type T2(l), T4, and T5(l), however,
not all recorded neurons could be backfired, suggesting
that there is a distinction within a class (response type)
between "locally interacting" (processing) and tec-
tobulbar/spinal projecting (processing and transmitting)
neurons. In this context, it is important to note that all
investigated T5(2) neurons from frontal and extrafrontal
sites of the tectal visual map could be backfired (Satou &
Ewert 1985; Buxbaum-Conradi & Ewert, unpublished
data). This indicates that the results of prey feature
Figure 21. Neurophysiological and anatomical specification of
tectobulbar/spinal output in paralyzed toads. (A) Antidromic
activation ("backfiring") of a physiologically identified tectal
class T5(2) projective neuron in response to a 0.1 ms electrical
stimulus applied to the contralateral caudal medulla oblongata
through bipolar electrodes; (a) constant latency response (sever-
al superimposed traces); the onset of electrical stimulation is
marked by a small spot (followed by the stimulus artifact) and the
antidromic spike is indicated by an arrow; (b) following ability
with electrical double stimuli at intervals down to less than 4 ms;
(c) collision between a visual spike (indicated by a cross) and an
electrically evoked antidromic spike at a critical spike-stimulus
delay of 5.1 ms (ct); no collision (see arrow) at 5.9 ms (c2).
Extracellular records (Satou & Ewert 1985). (B) Retrograde
labeling ("backfilling") of tectobulbar/spinal projective cells
following application of horseradish peroxidase (HRP) rostral to
the hypoglossal nucleus in the contralateral medulla oblongata.
The backfilled cells in tectal layers 6/7 correspond to pear-
shaped (a), large ganglionic (d), and pyramidal neurons (c); see
also Figure 13Ab (from Weerasuriya & Ewert 1981).
analysis in various parts of the visual field are transmitted
by T5(2) neurons to bulbar/spinal motor systems.
The morphological types of tectobulbar/spinal projec-
tive neurons have been investigated by injecting horse-
radish peroxidase (HRP) unilaterally into the medulla
oblongata (Weerasuriya & Ewert 1981; for results in frogs
see Ingle 1983). In toads, retrogradely filled cells (gang-
lionic, pyramidal, and pear-shaped neurons) are found on
top of layer 6 or at the border of layers 6/7 in both tecta
(Figure 21B) - particularly dense in the contralateral
tectal hemisphere and especially in the lateral corner -
from which neurons with prey-selective and localization
properties can be recorded (for complementary investiga-
tions in frogs using cobalt labeling, see L£za> et al. 1983;
Toth et al. 1985). Furthermore, retrograde tracing stud-
ies with HRP and cobalt techniques have provided evi-
dence of pretectobulbar/spinal projective neurons (Ingle
1983; Toth et al. 1985; Weerasuriya & Ewert 1981).
6.2.2. Brain stimulation and recording in behaving toads.
Telemetric single cell recordings, electrical stimulation,
358
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1987) 10:3

and marking via the same microelectrode in freely mov-
ing preparations show that orienting and snapping are
elicited from appropriate retinal central projection fields
in the tectum (Pinkwart & Borchers, unpublished data;
see also Ewert 1967b; 1967c; and Figure 9A,B). For
example, telestimulation close to a previously recorded
T5(2) neuron elicits orienting movements approximately
in register with the position of the center of the neuron's
receptive field as measured before the animal starts to
turn. Stimulation at sites representing the lateral visual
field triggers successive turning responses of about the
same amplitude; increasing the current or the impulse
frequency leads to a decrease in response latency and an
increase in turning frequency.
Correlations between visual stimulation, T5(2) neuron
firing, and prey-catching activity have been obtained
during chronic extracellular recordings in the freely mov-
ing toad before and after a DC-induced ipsilateral pretec-
tal lesion applied with a separate electrode. Strong ac-
tivity of a T5(2) neuron in response to prey precedes the
orienting and the snapping response, respectively
(Borchers et al. 1983; Megela et al. 1983; Schiirg-Pfeiffer
& Ewert, submitted). Pretectal lesion-induced "disin-
hibition" of the same T5(2) neuron was reflected in the
toad's disinhibited prey-catching behavior.
6.3. The "command releasing system" concept
It must be borne in mind that (1) the release of each prey-
catching action pattern (o,a,f,s) requires basically the
same prey feature analyzing processes but different lo-
calization mechanisms, that (2) specialized neurons with
feature-analyzing and space-monitoring properties pro-
ject directly to bulbar/spinal motor systems, and that (3)
electrical stimulation in the close vicinity of these neu-
rons elicits prey-catching. It is reasonable to suggest that
the activation of the corresponding motor pattern gener-
ators - in a manner similar to an AND-gate - requires
simultaneous activation of appropriate combinations of
specialized neurons. Generalizing Kupfermann and
Weiss's (1978) definition of "command systems," we call
such a combination a "command releasing system" (Fig-
ure 22). Its components (specialized neurons), the "com-
mand elements, " operate between sensory and motor
systems and are thus part of a sensorimotor interface (see
Appendix). Their simultaneous activation represents
"prey" and its "location in space," and this produces the
command to activate the related behavioral response.
The idea is that different stimulus situations related to an
object can be monitored by activity in certain combina-
tions of different types of neurons specialized for feature
analysis (class T5(2)) and localization (e.g., Tl(3), and
probably for arousal (e.g., T4), and that T5(2) neurons
with feature-selecting properties are shared in each com-
bination (Ewert 1980), for example:
{(T5 • 2)(T4)} {(T5 • 2')(T2 • 1)(T1 • 1)}
ORIENT 
APPROACH
{(T5 • 2')(T1 • 2)} {(T5 • 2")(T1 • 3)(T3)}
FIXATE 
SNAP
( ) command element
{ } command releasing system (CRS)
Ewert: Neuroethology in toads
CE
Figure 22. Command releasing systems. Triggering a motor
pattern generating circuit (MPG) for an action pattern requires
inputs of a certain combination of specialized neurons function-
ing as command elements (CE). Such a combination is called a
command releasing system (CRS). Modulatory influences
(MOD) may enter a CRS at the level of particular command
elements. Upon activation by the CRS, a specific "routine" is
called into play in the appropriate MPG to produce a spatiotem-
poral pattern of excitation and inhibition to coordinate the
activities in the corresponding motoneuronal pools (MN).
Among the various CRSs, and MPGs, respectively, certain
neurons may be shared. A circle stands for a set of neurons
belonging to the same class; an oval symbol stands for a circuit;
small circles indicate excitatory or inhibitory inputs (after Ewert
1980; 1985).
According to this hypothesis, CRSs provide "sen-
sorimotor codes" and are neuronal correlates of RMs.
Command elements may be compared to a key-board (to
use an analogy of Hoyle's, 1984) on which certain com-
binations elicit specific responses (see also Figure 1):
"stimulus moving somewhere in the visual field (class
T4)" and "stimulus recognized as prey, n degrees outside
the fixation area (class T5-2)" yield the command to orient
(o); "stimulus moving in the frontal visual field (class
T2-1)" and "stimulus recognized as prey" (class T5-2')"
and "stimulus far afield (class TT1)" yield the command
to approach (a); "stimulus recognized as prey near the
fixation area (class T5-2')" and "stimulus close to the toad
(class Tl-2)" yield the command to fixate (/); "stimulus
recognized as prey inside the fixation area (class T5-2")"
and "both retinae adequately stimulated (class Tl-3)" and
"stimulus within snapping distance (class T3)" yield the
command to snap («).
In these systems, prey-selective neurons of the type
T5(2) are essential and decisive for prey-catching. If they
are not appropriately activated, no prey-catching com-
mand by any CRS can be executed; if these neurons lose
their prey-selective properties (after pretectal lesions),
any moving visual stimulus sufficiently activates the prey-
catching CRSs (for modulatory processes see sect. 6.4.4).
Additional or alternative elements of CRSs remain to
be discovered. As an example of additional command
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1987) 10:3
359

Ewert: Neuroethology in toads
elements, the CRS for orienting toward prey may include
prey-selective T5(2) and "minifield" T7 neurons whose
tiny ERFs of 4 to 6° in diameter would, according to Ingle
(1983a), be particularly suitable for accurate stimulus lo-
calization in x-y coordinates. In such a case, Schneider's
(1969) "two visual system concept" for functions related
to stimulus recognition and localization might be traced
back to two classes of neurons (functional units) operating
in a CRS. Unfortunately, it has not yet been possible to
backfire any of these minifield neurons by bulbar or spinal
electrical stimulation (Satou & Ewert 1985) - which of
course does not definitively exclude the possibility of T7-
mediated tectobulbar/spinal projections. We are cur-
rently inclined to interpret T7 responses as dendritic
spikes (e.g., from T5 neurons) after a suggestion by
Griisser and Griisser-Cornehls (1976). As an example of
alternative (or substitute) command elements, it is sug-
gested by Grobstein et al. (1983) that following bilateral
tectal ablation, neurons of the lateral torus semicircularis
mediate snapping in response to tactile stimulation.
I conjecture that other types of behavior require differ-
ent sensorimotor codes and are thus released by distinct
combinations of command elements, in which certain
elements of prey-catching CRSs may be shared. For
example, a predator traversing the visual field might yield
the command {(TH3)(T5-1)(TH4)} to avoid; a startle re-
sponse to a looming large object could be triggered by
{(T5-4)(TH4)} or {(T5-4) (T4)}. Whereas orienting to-
ward "prey" may be released by {(T5-2)(T4)}, the orient-
ing command for a different goal - for example, to-
ward "mate" during springtime - could be issued by
{(T5- 1)(T4)}, which involves modulatory inputs from mo-
tivational systems.
6.4. Modulatory influences
Prey-catching behavior in toads is influenced by (1) moti-
vation (changes attributable to an alteration in the inter-
nal homeostatic state of the animal), (2) attention (changes
attributable to processes responsible for alertness,
arousal, and selective attention), and (3) learning (chan-
ges attributable to the history of previous exposure to
stimuli). Modulation of stimulus-response relationships
in prey-catching could be brought about through modu-
latory circuits acting on the stimulus-response mediating
CRS. [See alsoToates: "Homeostasis and Drinking" BBS
2(1) 1979; Johnston: "Contrasting Approaches to a Theory
of Learning" BBS 4(1) 1981; Vanderwolf & Robinson:
"Reticulocortical Activity and Behavior" BBS 4(3) 1981]
6.4.1. Motivation. Prey-catching commands cannot be
executed if the toad's motivation is not appropriate.
Modulatory inputs may be acting on the CRS by influenc-
ing the T5(2) prey-selective command elements (Figure
22). In summer, during the hunting season, responses of
T5(2) neurons to prey cues are very weak in satiated
animals, suggesting inputs related to the nutritional state.
In winter, during the hibernation period, both prey-
catching motivation and the activity of class T5(2) neurons
are extremely low in laboratory animals (Ewert 1984a),
suggesting hypothalamo-hypophysial influences (Dier-
icky 1969; Hanke 1976) known to project to deep tectal
layers (Wilczynski & Northcutt 1977). In spring, during
the mating season, the threshold for visually released
escape is high and prey-catching appears to be turned off,
whereas visually guided appetitive orientation and ap-
proach behavior by the mating-motivated male toward
the female are turned on (Heusser 1959; Kondrashev
1976). Presumably, the T5(2) prey-selective command
elements in the CRSs for prey-related orienting and
approaching are functionally replaced by T5(l) projective
neurons of layer 6/7, specialized in this context for part-
ner detection. It has not yet been possible to identify
responses of class T5(2) neurons in male or female toads
during the mating period (Ewert 1984a), which suggests
that there is inhibitory input to these neurons from
changes in the balance of sex hormones (Guha et al. 1980;
Heusser 1959).
6.4.2. Attention. Whereas the above-mentioned modu-
latory effects refer to long-term adjustments, prey-catch-
ing is also subject to short-term attentional shifts. Chronic
extracellular recordings from T5(2) prey-selective neu-
rons in freely moving preparations within an experimen-
tal observation period of about 20 minutes show that at
the times when toads are not behaviorally responsive to
prey, the discharge frequency elicited by an optimal prey
object averages markedly less than at the times when the
animal is prepared to attack (Schiirg-Pfeiffer & Ewert,
submitted).
The toad's readiness to respond seems to be reflected,
or monitored, by spontaneously active class T8 neurons
frequently recorded from deep tectal and from tegmental
areas (Borchers 1982; Borchers & Pinkwart 1983; Ewert
1980). The mildly fluctuating discharge frequency of
these neurons averages around 6 impulses/sec when the
toad is sitting still; and increase in the frequency to a
certain level (about 40 impulses/sec) - comparable to a
kind of "warming-up" (Hinde 1954) - then literally pre-
dicts a subsequent spontaneous movement of its head or
legs. Such a T8 "movement cell" cannot be activated
directly by sensory stimuli, but during periods of spon-
taneously increasing spike frequency a visually driven
behavioral response is elicited more frequently. Each
action pattern in response to prey, for example, is intro-
duced by a short strong burst of the "movement cell." A
mechanism accounting for this modulation might be ex-
citatory input from T8 "movement cells" of deep tectal
layers to T5(l) feature-sensitive cells of layer 8, so that the
response of T5(2) prey-selective command elements of
the output layer 6/7 would be enhanced if activity in T8
overlapped in time with the response to the visual stim-
ulus. A similar explanation has been suggested by Wurtz
(1979) for enhancement effects in collicularly controlled
eye movements in monkeys.
6.4.3. Visual habituation. Long-term repetitive presenta-
tion of the same visual prey object leads to stimulus-
specific aftereffects (Ewert 1967a; Finkenstadt & Ewert,
submitted). These are presumably associated with a
"negative value" by telencephalic "habituating neurons"
and translated into a buildup of inhibition on tectal T5(2)
command elements, which is mediated via thalamic relay
neurons. Computer simulations of model networks sug-
gest that in the course of such a hypothesized process, an
"image" of stimulus cues may be stored in prosencephalic
structures that is then compared with the present stim-
ulus (Lara & Arbib 1985). Mapping of cerebral glucose
utilization has shown that visual habituation in response
360
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1987) 10:3

Ewert: Neuroethology in toads
to prey is accompanied by strong 2DG-uptake in the
posteroventral medial pallium (vMP), whereas central
and ventral layers in the optic tectum display a dramatic
decrease of 2DG-uptake. Bilateral lesions to the vMP
impair habituation or "wipe out" the aftereffects in pre-
viously habituated toads (for details see Finkenstadt &
Ewert, submitted).
6.4.4. Associative conditioning. Prey-selective properties
can be modified or extended through learning (cf. sect.
3.4.2.). There are different ways of explaining these
behavioral changes in terms of circuit modulations: (1) As
a result of "visual/visual" (worm/hand) conditioning dur-
ing hand feeding (Figure 23A) there could be long-term
modifications of the properties of T5(2) prey-selective
command elements if hypothetical "associative As neu-
rons," receiving repeated concurrent inputs from T5(2)
and TH3, developed a sensitivity to TH3 input and then,
by recurrent inhibition, attenuated the inhibitory influ-
ence of TH3 on T5(2). This could explain why D(W,A)
values are decreased and why large nonprey stimuli elicit
prey-catching. It is interesting to note that in the posteri-
or vMP there is a learning-dependent 2DG uptake and
that bilateral lesions to this structure in conditioned toads
abolish the effects of hand feeding, whereas in naive
animals comparable lesions prevent this sort of asso-
ciative conditioning (see Finkenstadt & Ewert, submit-
ted). (2) The properties of T5(2) neurons might be
changed temporarily by hypothetical "associative As'
neurons" (e.g., receiving excitatory visual T5(2) and olfac-
tory input) if, and only if, the conditioned stimulus (prey
odor) were present (Figure 23B). This would explain why
configural prey discrimination is impaired in the pres-
ence of a familiar prey odor. (3) The existing prey recogni-
tion properties could be extended by an "associative
Figure 23. Speculative approach to the dynamic aspects of
feature-selective properties in CRSs. Modulation by associative
conditioning might act on a CRS either by influencing the
property of T5(2) command elements in changing the network
characteristics of the corresponding prey feature analyzing neu-
ronal assembly (A,B) (cf. Figures 19Aa and 22) or by functionally
replacing T5(2) in activating substitute modulatory command
elements mT5 (C). As and As': hypothetical associative neurons;
01: olfactory input; mT5: hypothetical command element medi-
ating "associative" messages; arrows: excitatory inputs; small
open circles: excitatory inputs to an AND-gate; small solid circles:
associative concurrent excitatory inputs; lines with cross bars:
inhibitory inputs. (For explanations see text.)
As7mT5 unit," whose hypothetical modulatory mT5
command elements would be activated only in the pres-
ence of the associated (e.g., olfactory) stimulus and, while
inhibiting T5(2) neurons, mT5 might take over T5(2)
function (Figure 23C).
6.4.5. Internal loop operations. What are the potential
routes through which modulatory signals could reach the
tectum? Various diencephalic structures are involved in
circuits (Figure 24A) by which striatal and pallial telen-
cephalic influences could determine or modulate feature-
selective properties of tectal CRSs (Ewert 1967a; 1980;
1987; Kicliter & Ebbesson 1976; Neary & Northcutt 1983;
Northcutt & Kicliter 1980; Reiner et al. 1984; Wilczynski
& Northcutt 1977; 1983a; 1983b). One such internal loop
(1) is concerned with the striatum ("paleostriatum") and
involves the lateral forebrain bundles; the retina projects
via the optic tectum (OT) to the lateral anterior thalamic
nucleus (La) and from there to the striatum (STR), which
La 
Lpd/P 
| 
|
\ 
/ 
\ s
OT 
OT
HY
Figure 24. Concept of "internal loops" by which prosen-
cephalic structures might determine the properties of tectal
neurons and modulate their respective activities. (A) Anatom-
ical substrates (according to data by Neary & Northcutt 1983;
Wilczynski & Northcutt 1977; 1983a; 1983b). HY: hypo-
thalamus; PO: preoptic area; for other abbreviations see Figure
8. Arrows indicate projecting pathways. (B) Simple diagrams
illustrating several possible loop operations in hypothetic neural
structures A,B,C,D exerting effects on A: (a) integration ("prim-
ing"), (b) buildup of inhibition ("screening"), (c) polysynaptic
disinhibition ("arousing"), (d) disynaptic disinhibition ("gat-
ing"), (e) associative disinhibition ("modifying"), or (f) asso-
ciative inhibition ("replacing/extending"). Arrows: excitatory
influences; small solid circles: associative concurrent excitatory
influences; lines with cross bars: inhibitory influences. A stands
here for tectal T5(2) command elements and A* for a substitute
command element; C refers to telencephalic, B and D to
diencephalic, and E to tegmental reticular structures; retinal
inputs are not shown.
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1987) 10:3
361

Ewert: Neuroethology in toads
in turn feeds back to the optic tectum via the pretectal
Lpd/P nuclei or tegmental cell groups. Another loop (2) is
concerned with the medial pallium ("primordium hippo-
campi" of Herrick 1933) involving the medial forebrain
bundles; the retina projects directly (or via the optic
tectum and the pretectal P nucleus) to the anterior
thalamus (AT) and from there to the medial pallium (MP),
which in turn feeds back to the tectum, either in the same
way (loop 2a), or via the preoptic area (PO) and the
hypothalamus (HY), sending axons to deep tectal layers
(loop 2b).
Loop operations might be concerned with: (1) the
integration of external and internal excitatory inputs
(e.g., "priming" or "warming up" a CRS, Figure 24Ba),
(2) the buildup of stimulus-specific inhibition (e.g.,
"screening" a CRS, Figure 24Bb), (3) polysynaptic disin-
hibition (e.g., "arousing" a CRS, Figure 24Bc), (4) disy-
naptic disinhibition (e.g., "gating" a CRS, Figure 24Bd),
(5) associative disinhibition (e.g., "modifying" a CRS,
Figure 24Be), and (6) associative inhibition (e.g., "ex-
tending" a CRS by replacing an innate feature-selective
command element, Figure 24Bf). I suggest that the
innate prey-selective properties are mediated by loop 1
(as illustrated in the wiring shown in Figure 24Bd),
whereas the modulating influences are integrated
through loops 2a and b (e.g., according to Figure
24Bb,c,e, or f). Needless to say, the diagrams shown in
Figure 24B are rather simplistic representations of com-
plex processes, but I think they are nevertheless useful
conceptual guides for experimental approaches (e.g., see
Ewert 1987; Finkenstadt et al. 1986; Finkenstadt &
Ewert 1985).
6.5. Premotor networks
There is to date no evidence that tectobulbar/spinal
output mediated by command elements impinges di-
rectly on tongue, neck- or limb-muscle motoneurons
(Grobstein et al. 1983; Satou et al. 1984; Szekely & Czeh
1976; Weerasuriya & Ewert 1981). A motor pattern
generating internuncial network with the following prop-
erties thus appears to exist (see also Doty 1976): (1) The
integration of sensory input provided by command ele-
ments of the corresponding CRS activates the network if,
and only if, a specific (combination of) input occurs; (2) an
intrinsic pattern of neuronal connectivity between tectal
output and motoneurons assures the generation of a
consistent spatiotemporal distribution of excitation and
inhibition; (3) the output of the network, mediated by
premotor neurons, has privileged access to the requisite
motoneuronal pools; (4) particular command elements,
through positive feedback from the network they excite,
can take part in the temporal program of a motor pattern;
(5) motoneuronal and proprioceptive feedback can play a
role in the coordination and maintenance of a motor
pattern.
General assessments of motor pattern generation and
its comparative aspects have been discussed elsewhere
(e.g., by Massion et al. 1983; Roberts & Roberts 1983;
Russel & Hartline 1978; Selverston 1980; Sjolund &
Bjorklund 1982; Szekely & Czeh 1976). Little is known
about related functional processes in visually guided
behaviors of amphibians. In the present context I will
focus on two issues.
6.5.1. Behavior-related efferent channels. The backfiring
studies (sect. 6.2.1) in conjunction with the data present-
ed in Figures 4A,B and 16C show that the results of prey-
feature analysis for different parts of the visual field are
transmitted by T5(2) neurons to bulbar/spinal motor
systems (see also Figure 18Ac). So far, it has been possible
to "backfire" all recorded T5(2) neurons by contralateral
bulbar stimulation electrode positions (except for one
case in which an ipsilateral stimulation site was effective).
None of these results support Ingle's (1983a) suggestion
that T5(2) efferents project exclusively ipsilaterally and
are "monopolized" for snapping:
As J.-P. Ewert proposes, T5-2 neurons are of critical
importance in initiating feeding responses, and they
may be the source of ipsilateral projections which
control the lunge-and-snap response. But, I propose
that T5-2 neurons are not the source of efferents
[contralateral projections] which activate the motor
mechanism for turning. However, T5-cells might pro-
vide facilitatory input necessary to activate the turn-
generating system. (Ingle 1983a, p. 210)
Putting aside the question of whether we can really
distinguish as yet between T5(2)-mediated efferents that
on the one hand "activate" a motor pattern generating
system and on the other hand "provide facilitative input
necessary to activate," I suggest that both turning and
snapping motor systems receive prey feature-related
command signals from T5(2) neurons of the correspond-
ing tectal map in layers 6/7 via crossed and uncrossed
descending axons. It seems likely that fibers running in
the crossed tectospinal pathway are essential for turning,
whereas those in the uncrossed tectobulbar tract are
critically involved in snapping. Ingle (1983a) has shown
that selective transection of the crossing tectospinal pro-
jecting fibers impairs turning toward prey but not snap-
ping for appropriate stimulus positions.
6.5.2. Search for the sites of sensorimotor integration.
The tongue in amphibians is an effector specific to feed-
ing. The motoneurons controlling the toad's tongue flip
are situated in the hypoglossal nucleus of the caudal
medulla oblongata. Their topography has been investi-
gated 
by 
retrograde 
cell 
labeling 
using 
HRP
(Weerasuriya & Ewert 1981). Results from intracellular
recordings of these motoneurons in response to unilateral
or bilateral electrical stimulation of tectal output fibers
near the "snap evoking area" (Figure 9B,C) provide
evidence of di- or polysynaptic tectohypoglossal connec-
tivity and bilateral convergence (Satou et al. 1984). Re-
garding the search for interneurons it is interesting to
note from previous neuroanatomical degeneration stud-
ies that there are tectofugal projections to the medial
reticular formation of the medulla (LizaY 1969; Rubinson
1968). This accords with results from antidromic stimula-
tion (Buxbaum-Conradi & Ewert, unpublished data; see
also Satou & Ewert 1985) and retrograde labeling studies
using HRP (Figure 21B) (Weerasuriya & Ewert 1981).
The medial-ventral part of the central gray of the
medial reticular formation has long been proposed to be
involved in motor pattern generation for various action
patterns (see Ebbesson 1976 and Nieuwenhuys & Opdam
1976 for reviews). Functional explorations of this region
by extracellular single cell recording (Ewert et al. 1984;
Ewert et al., submitted) and intracellular recording and
362
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1987) 10:3

labeling (Schwippert & Ewert, submitted) in lightly para-
lyzed toads have revealed various types of neurons dis-
playing the following properties: (1) configural stimulus
sensitivity or selectivity similar to that of T5(l), T5(2),
T5(4) and TH3 neurons; (2) selectivity for direction of
movement in visual neurons with wide receptive fields;
(3) binocularity similar to that of Tl(3) neurons; (4) wide
receptive fields like those of T2, T4, and TH4 neurons; (5)
integration of visual and cutaneous input by wide-field
neurons; (6) spontaneous activity; (7) "warming up" and
reverberation; (8) cyclic activities consisting of several
short equidistant spike bursts occurring either spon-
taneously or, sometimes, after visual or tactile stimula-
tion; (9) premotor characteristics, since some of these
cells could be "backfired" by electrical stimulation in the
hypoglossal or spinal motor areas, suggesting ipsi- and
contralateral descending axons. The recording sites of
these neurons overlap with the location of cells that were
"backfilled" after iontophoretic injection of HRP into the
caudal medulla oblongata (Weerasuriya & Ewert,
submitted).
Tonic discharges, cyclic bursting, and reverberatory
activities, in conjunction with the integration of sensory
input, appear to be characteristic general features of
motor pattern generating circuits responsible for fixed
action patterns (e.g., snapping, gulping, yawning, call-
ing), optokinetic movements (e.g., eye and head nystag-
mus), and autonomic functions (e.g., respiratory move-
ments). At present, however, nothing can be said with
confidence about correlations between the responses of
the recorded medial reticular neurons and prey-catching
behavior. It seems probable that certain neurons are
components of different pattern generating circuits. For
example, the program for the snapping swallowing action
involving rhythmic eyeball retractions accompanied by
buccal cavity movements for gulping prey could take
advantage of the properties of cyclic bursting neurons
which may also be involved in respiratory and calling
movements. Multiple single cell recordings in the behav-
ing toad are presently being carried out in our laboratory
to examine coincidence properties, phase-locked ac-
tivities, and premotor functions.
6.6. What are the general properties of command
releasing systems (CRSs)?
Command releasing systems (CRSs) are the neurophysio-
logical equivalents of releasing mechanisms (RMs). They
are the means by which animals categorize and localize
objects (when attention and motivation are appropriate).
In a broad sense, they link sensory processes and motor
functions and can be described as a sensorimotor inter-
face in that (1) they combine stimulus feature analysis and
localization; (2) they link sensory analysis and command
functions by activating the motor pattern generating
system in response to specific sensory input; (3) they may
participate in the temporal sequence of certain motor
patterns through feedback of the motor pattern generat-
ing network; and (4) they integrate the input of modulato-
ry circuits. Properties (2) (4) in particular have been
analyzed in great detail for command functions related to
motor pattern generation in invertebrates (e.g., see
Davis & Gillette 1978; Davis & Kovac 1981; Gillette et al.
1978).
Ewert: Neuroethology in toads
The concept of "command neuron," originally devel-
oped in invertebrate neuroethology (Wiersma & Ikeda
1964), has received its main support from experiments
showing that intracellular electrical stimulation of a single
physiologically characterized and morphologically identi-
fied cell triggers the motor program of a fixed action
pattern (Davis & Kovac 1981; Eaton 1983; Hoyle 1977).
Kupfermann and Weiss (1978) proposed the concept of a
"command system" for the release of those action pat-
terns in which it was not the activity of a single command
neuron but the concurrent activation of several neurons
of the same type (command elements) that was necessary
and sufficient to activate the motor pattern generating
circuit. There are problems with the experimental
usefulness of this concept because it is not yet technically
possible to depolarize, hyperpolarize, or eliminate all the
appropriate cells of a command system simultaneously in
order to check its conformity with the "necessity/suffi-
ciency" criteria. The present concept of "command re-
leasing system" (Ewert 1980) involves "sensorimotor
codes" and is thus a system comprised of differently
specified command elements each corresponding to a
small population of neurons. The CRS concept does not
rely rigorously on the necessity/sufficiency definition in
that it includes the possibility of alternatives (co-existing
circuits) and modifications (plastic mechanisms). CRSs
have several important features:
1. CRSs are economical, since certain command ele-
ments can be shared by different systems (Figure 22).
Feature-selective command elements (such as T5(2) neu-
rons) participate in the different CRSs of goal-related
(e.g., prey-catching) action patterns and are thus essen-
tial and decisive for a behavioral sequence. State-depen-
dent inputs to these neurons would be powerful tools to
switch a behavior (e.g., prey-catching) on or off, whereas
orienting toward and approaching other goals (e.g., a
sexual partner) can be released by the same space-
monitoring neurons in combination with other appropri-
ate feature-selecting command elements.
2. A command element does not necessarily corre-
spond to a single neuron; it can be a small population of
adjacent neurons of the same class which have similar
thresholds and whose receptive fields partly overlap. This
assumption has two desirable features: First, it is ex-
tremely unlikely that a prey object activates just one T5(2)
neuron; second, stimulus localization by a T5-type neu-
ron with an ERF of 20-30° would be inaccurate compared
with the information provided by cooperating adjacent
T5-type neurons whose receptive fields included a small
common area.
3. Command elements may have disproportionate dis-
tributions in visual maps. The frontal visual field requires
more discrete perceptual operations than the extrafrontal
field. This may explain why the frontal visual field in
central tectal layers displays a greater density and variety
of tectobulbar/spinal projective neurons (Satou & Ewert
1985; Weerasuriya & Ewert 1981); this would also agree
with the idea of a "central fovea" (sect. 4.3).
4. The outputs of a distinct combination of command
elements "converging" to meet the criterion for a CRS
need not impinge on one cell, but may do so on different
cells of the motor pattern generating network. Concur-
rence of appropriate activities in a CRS is required to
bring the central pattern generator into action.
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1987) 10:3
363

Ewert: Neuroethology in toads
5. Estimating absolute object size is an important
function of the CRS, involving different depth cues in the
visual field. This information comes from the lens accom-
modation mechanism (for orienting, as shown by Collett
1977) and/or binocular cues (for snapping, as discussed by
Collett & Udin 1983). The latter assumption agrees with
the evidence that, in snapping, one-eyed toads judge
objects on the basis of visual angular size and prefer
square or disc-shaped objects of 8° diameter indepen-
dently of the distance between stimulus and eyes within a
range of 15 to 170 mm (Ewert & Gebauer 1973). This
could account for an involvement of Tl(3) neurons in the
CRS for snapping. (For models of depth perception in
anurans see House 1984.) The situation becomes complex
if toads have to reach the prey by making detours around
stationary obstacles, a problem that has been investigated
in detail by Ingle (1971; 1977; 1980; 1983) and Collett
(1983).
6. CRSs are to some extent plastic. Alternative or
substitute command elements - mediating the output of
coexisting circuits (functional units) - will make a system
resistant to disturbances.
7. CRSs are dynamic. Influences from modulatory
circuits involving diencephalic and telencephalic struc-
tures make a CRS, which mediates between stimulus and
response, adaptive to internal and external signals. Mod-
ulatory inputs, for example, may act directly on feature-
selective command elements or on certain neurons of the
circuitry of the corresponding functional units that deter-
mine the feature-selective property. It is likely that
certain modulatory influences (e.g., those related to cir-
cadian rhythms) also act on the premotor network and/or
the motor neurons themselves (e.g., see Parent 1973).
Finally, some remarks on the link between "sensory
space" and "motor space" and the corresponding "motor
routines": The networks responsible for motor pattern
generation are situated in the medial reticular formation
of the medulla and the central gray of the spinal cord,
both operating in connection with rostral brainstem
structures (Comer et al. 1985; Masino & Grobstein 1985;
Nieuwenhuys & Opdam 1976; Szekely & Czeh 1976;
Weerasuriya 1983). The different programs for appropri-
ate spatiotemporal coordination of the motoneurons are
partly built into these networks (Szekely & Czeh 1976). If
adequate signals from a CRS concurrently hit certain
elements of the corresponding circuitry, a specific motor
routine is called into play. Problems arise with the ques-
tion of how sensory space (e.g., the x-y positions of a prey
object) is translated into appropriate motor space (the
turning amplitude of the orienting movements). A plausi-
ble mechanism would take advantage of topographical
correspondence between retinal x-y positions and "turn-
ing routines," mediated by the tectal visual map as an
interface. This concept has been critically discussed by
Grobstein et al. (1983). Other problems are concerned
with the question of how object distance is translated into
appropriate "locomotion routines" (e.g., approaching,
stalking, leaping), or how "snapping subroutines"
(tongue flipping or jaw grasping) are triggered in conjunc-
tion with successful or unsuccessful trials depending on
the size of the prey object. There are still many open
questions about "coordinating principles" (von Hoist
1939) in premotor networks that can serve (1) to link
different motor pattern generating circuits (MPG) by
mutually influencing each other's response thresholds
(e.g., activating the orienting MPG or reducing the
threshold of the MPG for snapping), or (2) to establish and
to time the complex motor routines required for orient-
ing/jumping, or jumping/snapping (see Weerasuriya
1983 for a discussion).
7. Concluding remarks
Reflecting on the lessons to be gained from the analysis of
RMs, I would like to stress three points:
1. Feature extraction. The experimental analysis of
innate releasing mechanisms has the advantage of explor-
ing the problems of pattern recognition and sensorimotor
coordination in "dedicated" systems whose basic proper-
ties emerged during evolution. In the toad's environment
an object usually has to move before it can be visually
classified as "edible" (prey) or "threatening" (predator).
Moving objects can be evaluated by a neuronal network
that examines their spatial dimensions (the size of their
area) in relation to their direction of movement (Figure
4A,R) - a property that is invariant under changes of
direction of movement. The neuroanatomical substrates
are mutually connected central visual maps (Figure 7) and
related structures (Figure 13A,B). The neurophysiologi-
cal correlate is inherent in specific neuronal integrative
functions and interactions (Figure 19) which allow fea-
ture-analyzing cells (T5(l), T5(2), T5(3), T5(4), TH3) to
extract different spatiotemporal features of moving visual
objects (e.g., see Figure 16). These neurons are not
"feature detectors" - if we take that term to mean that
each neuron or class of neurons is unequivocally respon-
sive to one (and only one) specific feature of a moving
stimulus object (in the sense of "one neuron for one
feature"). Each type of neuron is tuned to a feature range
within a stimulus continuum and displays certain prefer-
ences (Figure 16A-C). Distinct neuronal interactions
determine space-monitoring properties of T1-, T3-, and
T5-type neurons.
Agonistic behaviors such as approach and avoidance
are "separated" by sensory filters. The T5(2) prey-filters
compare information about spatiotemporal aspects of
visual stimuli with stored information provided by specif-
ic neuronal circuitry (Figure 19). Their response is hence
positively correlated with the probability that sets of
configural features fit the prey category. The selective
filtering property of T5(2) neurons results from inhibitory
thalamic/pretectotectal connectivity, using what Barlow
(1985b) would call "veto logic"; the pretectal TH3 neu-
rons (and possibly T5(3)) are likely candidates for exercis-
ing a "veto" over the activity of T5(2) cells in response to
T5(l) input when the spatial dimensions of a visual object
perpendicular to its direction of movement (and/or its
overall area) exceed a certain range. The inhibitory
thalamic/pretectotectal connectivity determines (1) con-
figural prey recognition, (2) prey/predator discrimina-
tion, (3) discrimination of prey from background struc-
tures, and (4) discrimination of object motion from self-
induced motion.
Prey categorization is approximate, which implies that
the category boundaries can be influenced by motivation
and learning. Modulatory influences acting either on
TH3 or on the T5(2) prey-selective neurons could make
364
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1987) 10:3

RM's recognition adaptive to internal and external signals
so that, under extreme conditions, a toad might even snap
at a swarm of prey, a predator, or a moving background
structure, if its motivation is sufficient (e.g., see "asso-
ciative disinhibiton," Figures 23A and 24Be). With the
thalamic/pretectal region ablated, T5(2) neurons lose
their selective function while displaying excessive excit-
atory reverberatory activity in response to visual input
(Figure 16D), a phenomenon which resembles the "le-
sion-induced disinhibition" of prey-catching behavior
(Figure 5B). Recovery of function, which occurs at a
variable rate depending on the site and extent of the
ablated area, could take advantage of "self-organizing"
intrinsic inhibitory mechanisms in the tectum (Ewert et
al. 1983).
2. Comparative aspects. Comparable principles of fea-
ture extraction, sharpening of tuning through neuronal
interaction, and integration of modulatory inputs have
emerged in different sensory systems, ranging from fish
to monkey. For example: (1) local interactions of higher-
order electrosensory neurons for sign selection of jam-
ming-related signals in electric fish (Heiligenberg 1983;
Rose et al. 1986); (2) AND-gate properties of neurons that
detect mating calls in the tree frog (Capranica & Moffat
1983); (3) parallel-hierarchical processing of biosonar
information in determining the properties of specialized
neurons tuned to particular information-bearing param-
eters or parameter combinations in the mustached bat
(Suga 1984); (4) template-matching processes in song
learning involving song-specific neurons in the white-
crowned sparrow (Konishi 1985); and (5) tuning of face-
sensitive and selective neurons in monkey to specific
feature combinations (Perrett & Rolls 1983).
Visual RMs discussed in this article involve functions of
prosencephalotectal circuits in which "striatal" basal
ganglionic and "limbic" medial pallia] structures, to-
gether with associated thalamic nuclei, are responsible
for "innate properties" (striato-pretecto-tectal pathway)
and "modifications" (medialpallio-preoptic/hypothala-
motectal pathways). In all vertebrates so far investigated,
the optic tectum (or superior colliculus, respectively),
includes a substrate for sensory integration. This, like the
ancient image of Janus's head looking in two directions,
constitutes a correlational system for afferent messages
and efferent commands in that it links sensory processing
and motor functions related to orientational behavior.
This system processes information by intrinsic circuitry
and is subject to extrinsic shaping, gating, and modulato-
ry influences which arrive from striatal (basal ganglionic)
and limbic (medial pallia], hippocampal) structures oper-
ating via di- or polysynaptic pathways.
Experimental results from different methodological
approaches in anurans and mammals imply that certain
structures of the basal ganglia are involved in property-
shaping and response-gating effects on tectobulbar/spinal
output neurons in the determination of whether or not a
behaviorally meaningful stimulus can be taken as a target
for an orienting movement (e.g., see Chevalier et al.
1984; Ewert 1967a; 1984a; 1987; Finkenstadt et al. 1986).
In anurans, the putative anatomic substrate is provided
by a "striato-pretecto-tectal" and a small "striato-tegmen-
to-tectal" pathway (Neary & Northcutt 1983; Wilczynski
& Northcutt 1983a; 1983b). In reptiles and birds, the
former pathway (striato/pallido-pretecto-tectal) is promi-
Ewert: Neuroethology in toads
nent, whereas another takes the form of a small "striato-
nigro-tectal" route (Reiner et al. 1984). According to
Wilczynski and Northcutt (1983a), such a "dual-route"
system is the ancestral tetrapod condition (see also Reiner
et al. 1984). In mammals, the comparable pathway medi-
ated by the substantia nigra is a prominent circuit in this
context (besides the main basalganglio-ventrothalamo-
motocortical pathway), whereas the one via the pretec-
tum may have been "lost" (Wilczynski & Northcutt
1983a). Despite the absence of homology between the
anuran "striato-pretecto-tectal" pathway and the mam-
malian "striato-nigro-tectal" pathway, the disinhibitory
properties of both (as illustrated in the wiring shown in
Figure 24Bd) exhibit some interesting similarities which
suggest comparable operational principles in subserving
the animal's specific behavioral requirements (see Ewert
1987 for a review).
The mammalian hippocampus, together with its limbic
connections, obviously influences (modifies) stimulus-
response mediation at the collicular level, suggesting that
the
hippocampus is not concerned with the initial stages of
involuntary orienting to particular spatial locations, but
rather with more subtle aspects of stimulus selection
and scanning involving much preprocessed informa-
tion . . . probably relating to subtle stimulus charac-
teristics - stimulus ambiguity, reward significance,
and perhaps spatial position. . . . [The hippocampus
also functions] to detect novelty and, as appropriate, to
"block" or "deblock" the arousal system and so to alter
motor behaviour. (Foreman & Stevens 1987, p. 108-9)
The amphibian ventral medial pallium too is significantly
involved in arousal, stimulus-specific habituation, and
associative conditioning (e.g., see sect. 6.4.3., 6.4.4., and
Figure 24Bb,e; cf. also Ewert & Finkenstadt 1987;
Finkenstadt et al. 1986; Finkenstadt & Ewert 1983b;
1985; submitted). Thus Herrick's (1933) term "primor-
dium hippocampi" for this brain structure is justified not
only from anatomical homology but also with respect to
functional properties.
3. Sensorimotor codes. The fact that many of the tectal
neurons analyzing feature- and space-related cues project
to the motor systems supports the hypothesis that partic-
ular combinations of their outputs determine the proper-
ties of goal-oriented command releasing systems (CRSs)
(Figures 22 and 25) - the neurophysiological equivalent
of releasing mechanisms RMs (Figure 1). These systems
are responsive to a complex of necessary conditions,
including alternatives and modifications. CRSs encode
the diverse stimulus situations through distinct combina-
tions of specialized neurons involving those with recogni-
tion properties - hence providing specific "sensorimotor
codes." An action pattern is released according to such a
code.
This picture is of course incomplete, given the indirect
nature of much of the evidence, the speculativeness of
conclusions, probable oversights concerning not yet
identified neurons, and the omission of certain stimulus
parameters. Relative completeness, however, is not the
primary objective here, but the crystallization of princi-
ples whereby a brain can derive universals from the visual
environment to activate goal-directed behavior. The op-
erations between sensory analysis and motor response -
represented by sensorimotor codes - are of general
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1987) 10:3
365

Ewert: Neuroethology in toads
Figure 25. Upper, photo: Toad snapping at prey (photo by
H.-G. Meyer). Lower, diagram: Neuronal correlate of the RM
for prey-snapping (see thick "labeled lines") inherent in a
neuronal network that subserves different feature-analyzing and
stimulus-localizing tasks. Each circle symbolizes a set of neu-
rons which belong to the same class; oval symbols stand for
neuronal circuits.
importance, since these are in a broad sense related to
what we call cognition. The sensorimotor codes of innate
RMs can be interpreted as "species-specific cognition,"
in terms of predetermined categories. "Individual cogni-
tion" requires the situation- and context-dependent for-
mation, modification, and recombination of such codes
and is in its highest performance manifestations (in pri-
mates) not necessarily related to motor behavior. There
may not be a fundamental difference between innate and
acquired properties in the principles of the neuronal
interactions that determine perceptual categories and the
formation of sensorimotor codes. One of the critical
questions still to be answered concerns how "associative"
feature-selective processes become tuned; that is, how
novel recognition lines in a feature-analyzing network are
"labeled" and acquire access to evaluating and executing
systems - connections which have emerged in innate
releasing mechanisms (Figure 25) under selection pres-
sure during evolution.
APPENDIX
The following definitions and explanations are formulated for
the purposes of this BBS target article and do not necessarily lay
claim to being lapidary. They are presented for the sake of
communicative clarity across specialities and to prevent misun-
derstandings in this peer interaction.
Sign stimulus (synonymous with "key stimulus") refers to a
stimulus that represents a behaviorally relevant object by a few
characteristic features adequate to elicit a fixed action pattern
through the activation of an (innate) releasing mechanism (RM).
Sign stimuli often have configural properties (Tinbergen 1951).
Configuration (in the sense of the German word Gestalt)
refers to the arrangement (or combination) of the characteristic
parts (or features) of an object, whereas "shape" refers more to
the form of the object's contour. (Two distinct configurations
could, in principle, have identical shapes.) According to Tin-
bergen (1951), configural properties of a visual sign stimulus are
determined by particular inherent relationships (e.g., spatial or
spatiotemporal ones) between specific features. The recognition
of such a holistic stimulus configuration (a "configural stimulus")
is invariant under changes of certain stimulus parameters.
Depending on the way features are related to each other, we can
distinguish between a "static configuration" (disregarding mo-
tion) and a "dynamic configuration" (including motion).
Static configuration; an example is shown in Figure 26A: The
sign stimulus for the gaping response of blackbird nestlings can
be represented by a simple head(/i)-rump(r) model of the parent
bird, consisting of two adjacent solid discs of different diameters
(Tinbergen & Kuenen 1939). Here r and h are features; their
combination (spatial arrangement) yields the configuration. A
characteristic property of a configuration is the nonadditive
nature of its parts (features): The algebraic sum of the nestling's
responses (R) to either feature alone (Rh + Rr) is much less than
the response to the combination of both features: R(h r) > (Rh +
Rr) = zero. R(h r) is maximal if the relationship between the
diameters of h and r is 1 : 3 (Figure 26A, left); this can be best
demonstrated by a rump/two-head model (Figure 26A, right).
The recognition is invariant under changes of other stimulus
parameters such as size (within limits) provided the 1: 3 ratio is
maintained.
Dynamic configurations involve movement and therefore
take into account the spatiotemporal relationships between
features. An impressive example is provided by the "goose/
hawk" phenomenon (Tinbergen 1951) (see Figure 26B): The
shape of the model of an airborne bird will be recognized by
domestic fowls (or ducks) as a harmless goose if the long neck,
oriented parallel to the direction of movement, is in front; but
the same model will be recognized as a predatory hawk if the
wings, oriented perpendicular to the direction of movement,
are in front. A comparable example of dynamic configural
properties is provided by the "worm/antiworm" phenomenon
(Ewert 1968) (see Figure 26Ca): In toads, the sign stimulus for
prey is determined by the spatiotemporal relationships between
two features, namely, the area of extension of an object parallel
to (xl(l)) and perpendicular to (xl(2)) the direction of movement.
Thus, a stripe will be recognized as prey if its longer axis is in a
wormlike orientation (W), parallel to the direction of movement
(xl(l) > xl(2)), but the same stripe will be disregarded as prey or
associated with threat if the longer axis is oriented in an "anti-
wormlike" (A) way, perpendicular to the direction of movement
(xl(2) > xl(l)). The W- and A- configurations are defined by the
ratio xl(l):xl(2). The W versus A preference in prey-catching is
invariant under changes of other stimulus parameters, such as
speed and direction of movement in the x-y coordinates of the
visual field. The nonadditive character of the various features of
a configural stimulus can be shown by another example (see
Figure 26Cb), in which a very small black square (S) - itself
subliminal for the prey-catching response (R) - presented in a
certain spatiotemporal relation to a wormlike moving stripe (W)
yields a configuration associated with nonprey or threat (Ewert
et al. 1970; see also Ewert & Traud 1979): Rw > R(w s) = Rs «
zero.
Stimulus continuum denotes a spectrum of stimuli resulting
366
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1987) 10:3

Ewert: Neuroethology in toads
Figure 26. Examples of "static" (A) and "dynamic" (B,C)
configural properties of sign stimuli. (A) The head (/i)-rump(r)
model of a parent bird elicits gaping responses (+) in blackbird
nestlings if the ratio of head to rump length is 1:3, but the model
fails to elicit a response (—) if the difference in size between h
and r is less (cf. "rump/two-head" model) (Tinbergen & Kuenen
1939). (B) The "goose(G)/hawk(r/)" phenomenon in domestic
fowls (see Tinbergen 1951): With fowls the model of an airborne
bird elicits no escape (—) if the long neck leads in the direction of
movement (indicated by an arrow), but the same model releases
escape (+) if the perpendicularly oriented wings lead. (Ca) The
"worm(W)/antiworm(A)" phenomenon in common toads (see
Ewert 1968): A stripe moving in the direction of its longer axis
elicits prey-catching (+); but the same stripe remains unres-
ponded to or is associated with threat (-) if its longer axis is
oriented perpendicular to the direction of movement; xl(l) is the
stimulus side oriented parallel to the direction of movement and
xl(2) the side perpendicular to the direction of movement (see
arrow). (Cb) Illustration of the nonadditive nature of features in
a configural stimulus: Optimal wormlike prey stimulus (W);
small square stimulus subliminal for prey-catching (S); stimulus
configuration (W,S) associated with threat (Ewert et al. 1970;
Ewert & Traud 1979).
from a continuous variation in feature relationships as shown in
Figure 27A and B. Various stimulus configurations with differ-
ent meanings (e.g., W- and A-configuration, Figure 27A) often
pertain to particular points (e.g., the "extremes") of such a
stimulus continuum. A certain range within this continuum sets
the boundaries of a category; this is a class of behaviorally
significant objects that share a set of defining invariant features
(see Harnad 1987a;1987b).
Figure 27. Stimulus continua: Variation of moving stimulus
objects in their configural (spatiotemporal) properties. (A) Stim-
ulus continuum corresponding to changes in black two-dimen-
sional forms in the side parallel (xl(l)) and/or perpendicular to
(xl(2)) the direction of movement for v = 237sec (see arrow):
wormlike (W), antiwormlike (A), and square (S) objects. In this
continuum the prey category for toads is described by the
corresponding prey-catching orienting activity (R) in response
to a single object (according to data from Ewert 1969a). (B)
Stimulus continuum corresponding to changes of configural
features in models of airborne birds that release escape (+) or
remain unresponded to (—) by domestic fowls; arrow indicates
the direction of movement of a single object (according to data
from Tinbergen 1951; for a discussion see also Schleidt 1961).
Sensorimotor functions involve neural mechanisms that link
afferent sensory processes to motor pattern generation: Sen-
sorimotor transformation (or coordination) refers to the opera-
tions that translate a specific pattern of sensory input into an
appropriate spatiotemporal pattern of excitation and inhibition
in motoneurons (the motor pattern), necessary to activate and
coordinate the muscle contractions for the corresponding action
pattern. (The term sensorimotor coordination has a broader
applicability in that it also encompasses motosensory coordinat-
ing feedback loops.) The "specialized" neurons which encode
the outcome of feature/space-related sensory information pro-
cessing and transmit the resulting information to the "motor
pattern generating circuits" (MPGs) are part of the sensorimotor
interface (see also Scheich 1983). Sensorimotor integration
refers to the modes by which processed sensory information -
mediated by specialized (projective) neurons - is transferred to
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1987) 10:3
367

Commentary/Ewert: Neuroethology in toads
and integrated by neurons of the MPG (e.g., AND-gate, OR-gate
properties). An MPG is triggered (in much the way a safe is
unlocked) according to a sensorimotor code, requiring concur-
rent activities of specialized neurons in a specific combination.
With respect to their efferent effects, the specialized neurons of
such a combination are acting as "command elements" and
together form a "command releasing system" (CRS), the central
core of the "releasing mechanism" (RM). The prefix "command"
points to the initiating, primarily ballistic function of the system
and "releasing" refers to its coded property (see "sensorimotor
code").
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This paper is dedicated to Professor Hansjochem Autrum on the
occasion of his 80th birthday. I thank my coworkers for their
critical suggestions. The valuable comments of the editor of BBS
and the BBS referees have contributed to the organization of
this article. I am grateful to Mrs. Ursula Reichert for text
processing, and Mrs. Gisela Burggraf, Mrs. Gudrun Friihauf,
and Mrs. Gerda Kruk for technical assistance. The author's
research was supported by grants of the Deutsche For-
schungsgemeinschaft (Ew 7/1-7/9; SFB 45; Fgr. Az. 741.29-
Ew), the Fritz Thyssen-Stiftung (Az. 2.12), the Foundations'
Fund for Research in Psychiatry (No. 669-461-Ew), and the
University of Kassel (GhK 1990-Ew).
NOTE
1. German text of Griisser and Griisser-Cornehls, 1970, p.
215: "die Invariantenbildung Feind, Beute, Versteck usw. vor
der motorischen Reaktion nicht erfolgt, sondern die gesamte
neuronale Reaktionsfolge, die zu der beobachtbaren Ver-
haltensfolge fiihrt, in toto die Invariantenbildung darstellt."
Open Peer Commentary
Commentaries submitted by the qualified professional readership of
this journal will be considered for publication in a later issue as
Continuing Commentary on this article. Integrative overviews and
syntheses are especially encouraged.
Advantages of experimentation in
neuroscience
Michael A. Arbib
Program in Neural, Informational, and Behavioral Sciences, Univeristy of
Southern California, Los Angeles, Calif. 90089
More than 10 years ago, at a conference in Portland, Oregon,
Curt Boylis presented his model of how the cerebellum might
adjust parameters of locomotor synergies (see Szenthagothai &
Arbib 1974, Chapter 5, for an exposition). Although the devel-
opment of the model had involved an exhaustive analysis of the
pertinent experimental literature, one neurophysiologist imme-
diately objected to the model: "Your model is based on the data
of so-and-so which we have demonstrated in our lab to be
mistaken. This just confirms my opinion that modelling is
premature." Whereupon I replied, "If anything, your evidence
suggests that experimentation is premature!" My point was, of
course, simply to emphasize that both modelling and experi-
mentation are incomplete without the other.
Professor Ewert has long analyzed the interactions between
retina, tectum, and pretectum in prey recognition in toads;
moreover, he has from the first been concerned with another
level of interaction - that between theory and experiment. In
particular, he has been a generous critic of models developed by
Rolando Lara, myself, and our students (some of which are
reviewed in my accompanying target article). In his present
target article, Ewert not only presents his classical pattern-
recognition studies but also introduces new data vital for the
further development of models of visuomotor coordination.
However, there are many data needed for modelling that are not
yet available. Let me, then, focus on several such issues to
develop the theme of the fruitfulness of interaction between
theory and experiment in neuroscience.
Reexpressing Ewert's concepts in the language of perceptual
and motor schemas (see my accompanying target article), we
may say that, in Figure 1, Ewert introduces four motor schemas:
orient, approach, fixate, and snap. In Sections 2.2 and 2.3, he
shows that these need not occur in this generic order - rather,
each proceeds to completion (but this appears to be completion
of the control program rather than of the motor activity it
normally elicits) to be followed by the execution of perceptual
schemas that will determine which motor schema is to be
executed next. However, motor schemas may take the form of
"compound motor coordinations" (such as the programmed
route to its prey observed by Collett 1983, or the snap-gulp-
mouthwipe sequence) which comprise a set that will proceed to
completion without intervening perceptual tests. This seems to
accord some measure of reality to perceptual and motor sche-
mas, but it also raises quite crucially the experimental question:
Having determined the patterns of neural activity which em-
body two schemas, determine what it is about such ensembles
that corresponds to the statements (a) schema A proceeds to
completion; (b) completion of schema A triggers initiation of
schema B; or (c) schema A passes parameter x to schema B.
To use the language of Ewert's Figure 22, we may pose the
related question: What is the pattern of neural activity in a CRS
(command releasing system) which serves to trigger an MPG
(motor pattern generator)? In the toad studies, a schema and its
instantiation usually appear to be coextensive - instantiation of a
schema appears to be identifiable with "appropriate" activity in
fixed portions of the toad's brain. However, as Figure 22 empha-
sizes, each schema may involve several cell types/brain regions,
while a given cell type/brain region may be involved in several
schemas. An intriguing question for future experiments is: How
could one detect that schema A had been instantiated in net-
work N when schema A can have multiple instantiations? How-
ever, a CRS embodies a perceptual schema that exists for only
one purpose - to determine the conditions for the activation of a
specific MPG (embodying a motor schema) — but the story is
more complex than Figure 22 suggests, because the CRS must
not only trigger the MPG, but must ensure that, in this case, the
resultant movement is directed toward the prey. Each cell of
Figure 22 corresponds to an array of cells in the toad's brain.
Since cells in each array have overlapping receptive fields, we
mav pose the experimental question: Can a weak distributed
pattern of activity prove as effective a trigger as a stronger
localized pulse? What are the necessary conditions for a spa-
tiotemporal pattern of activity (and note from Figure 22 that it
may be distributed over several cell types) to serve as trigger?
This leads to the technical question: What is the smallest
microelectrode array (in terms of both density and number of
electrodes) that can let us adequately estimate such spatiotem-
poral questions?
Until recendy, the modelling of amphibian tectal-pretectal
interactions was done by informed conflation of data from
anatomy and physiology - when the augmented tectal column
model of Figure 16(b) of my target article was formulated, no
data were available as to the anatomical correlates of such
physiologically defined units as the T5(2) cells. Encouraging
368
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1987) 10:3

Commentary/Ewert: Neuroethology in toads
progress has been made with the data of Ewert et al. (1985) and
Matsumoto et al. (1986) reported in Ewert's Section 5.3.1.
However, we are challenged to further research by the gaps that
remain between the augmented tectal column model and the
circuits shown in Ewert's Figure 19. The model leads the data in
that it postulates connections which have not yet been verified
experimentally; moreover, it posits synaptic weights which
enable the circuit (or an array of such circuits) to subserve
observed behaviors. The important point is that the same
anatomical circuit can be shown to exhibit qualitatively different
behaviors depending on these weights. Thus the experimenter
is challenged to better estimate what these weight might be. But
in fact the matter is more delicate: In our model and in Ewert's
Figure 19 we show a typical cell of each class, with a small set of
well-defined synapses whose weights are entered into the
model equations. However, a glance at the morphology of the
cells in Ewert's Figure 18 makes it clear that each synapse of the
model must "lump" a complex aggregate of synaptic interactions
in the toad's brain. This calls for intense collaboration between
theorist and experimenter to determine what it is that must be
measured in the real brain and how it must be transformed to
provide testable parameters for the model.
To close this commentary, I want to address a conceptual
problem that recurs in Ewert's target article. In Section 3.5.2
we read that "[a naive] animal responds preferentially to partic-
ular visual stimuli with motor patterns related to prey-catching;
we hence [sic] infer that this is based on comparing the incoming
signal with a 'prey image' . . . established . . . during its evo-
lutionary history. . . . More generally, visual pattern recogni-
tion is defined here as the assignment of space time-dependent
contrast distributions (features) from the visual environment to
innate or learned categories that have behavioral significance
('invariants' or 'universals')." Section 5.4 tells us that "Specific
neuronal interactions determine the range in the stimulus
continuum that defines the prey category. In other words, this
connectivity provides the "prey schema with which visual input
is compared." What is to be noted is that "comparison with a
template-image" is a very special case of "the assignment of
space time-dependent contrast distributions (features) from the
visual environment to innate or learned categories." In the
theory of pattern recognition (e.g., Sklansky & Wassel 1981),
one definition ofa classifier for a set of patterns {pj, p2,. . • , p,J
as against a set of nonexamples {qj, q2, . . . , qm} within some
universe X of patterns is any function g: X—> R such that g(ps) >
g(q^ for each i and j . There is nothing that requires that g be
based on comparison with a template p0 so that, for example,
g(x) = k(|x-po|) for some monotone decreasing function k. What-
ever the form of g, we can categorize all patterns by choosing any
P such that g(pj) > 0 > g(qj for all i and j - and then set h(x) = 1 if
g(x) a 9 and h(x) = 0 if g(x) < 6. However, we must note that
there are many g's for which g(ps) S 6 > g(qj) for all i and j , and
thus many dichotomies compatible with the original training
sets {p,, p2, . . . , pn} and {qj, qg, . . . , qm}. In particular, it is
not clear that there exists a universal "prey." The experimenter
can chart the relative efficacy of different patterns in releasing
prey-catching behavior, but even for a given animal this can vary
under the influence of many factors; there is no guarantee that
the releaser of such a behavior meets other criteria for being
prey, such as being something the animal can eat to gain
nourishment.
It should also be noted that Ewert's own experimental meth-
odology goes beyond assignment to categories. In his Figures 4
and 16, for example, we see that differing patterns yield differ-
ent response rates, rather than being assigned a 0 or 1 as they do
or do not match the concept "prey." We have, as it were, a g but
no h. Figure 27 exhibits not an invariant dichotomy but rather a
structure of relationships, whose shape can be modulated by
many factors, including motivation. In coming to understand
the networks that undergird such structures of relationships -
and these are certainly far from template comparison - we may
do well to consider (whether on the time scale of evolution,
development, or learning) the Markov chain training models for
nonseparable classes of patterns given in Chapter 6 of Sklansky
and Wassel.
In summary, with its data on behavioral sequences and
releasing mechanisms, its morphological and physiological anal-
ysis of neurons, its contributions to the study of sensorimotor
interfacing, its review of experimental techniques, and its analy-
sis of major conceptual issues in neuroethology, Ewert's target
article provides a major stimulus to the interaction of theory and
experiment in neuroscience.
Ethology and physiology: A happy marriage
Gerard P. Baerends
Department of Behavioral Biology, University of Groningen, 9750 AA
Haren, Netherlands
I have read this survey of the work carried out by Ewert and his
group with great admiration, enjoying the design as well as the
ingenious experimental techniques. As an ethologist, I was
pleased to see how the physiological penetration into the hard-
ware subserving the snapping response was built upon an
ethological analysis of its innate releasing mechanism (IRM), a
type of work now in danger of being considered outdated.
The IRM concept resulted from one of the first questions
raised when ethology began its development as a separate
discipline among the behavioral sciences. It concerns the prob-
lem of how animals are able to recognize those stimulus situa-
tions in their environment that are of functional importance for
survival and reproduction. This issue particularly crops up when
an animal is observed to respond fully adequately to situations it
has never before experienced. It is much less obvious with
respect to human behavior, where learning and teaching are
likely to be involved. Early experiments on the nature of this
responsiveness suggested that the perception of a set of only a
few (but very characteristic) elements of the adequate situation
(the key- or sign- stimuli) were effective for the triggering of
each innate response.
Lorenz proposed that this stimulus selection would be medi-
ated by IRMs in the responding animal, one for each activity.
The perceptual processes detected in these experiments were
originally thought to be essentially different from recognition
processes in humans. This inspired further experiments to
explore the IRM, investigating different responses of various
kinds of animals. In a black box approach the responses of intact
animals to different stimulus situations (dummies) were studied,
often in the field. The experiments substantiated the IRM
construct and produced further interesting information on the
software underlying response release. They showed that sign
stimuli can have a configurational character, and that different
sign stimuli of the same situation interact according to the
principle of heterogeneous summation. At least two different
types of internal factors were found to influence the sensitivity of
the IRM: the motivational state of the animal and the time
elapsed since the previous exposure to the same stimulus
(habituation, sensory adaptation, response waning).
Although the results obtained warranted the extension of this
software analysis - not in the least to prevent a premature
generalization of findings from particular cases - the interest in
this work died down in the seventies. One reason was that for its
further development greater sophistication of experimental eth-
ological techniques was required; in particular, a rigorous stan-
dardization of the test situations. That demand was difficult to
fulfill in the field, and in the laboratory it could often only be
reached at the cost of the subject's responsiveness. Another
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1987) 10:3
369

Commentary/Ewert: Neuroethology in toads
reason was that ethological studies on function, especially those
along sociobiological lines, had become fashionable and at-
tracted most of the field workers. As a result, students of animal
behavior nowadays tend either to take the classic IRM concept
and its derivatives for granted, or reject them as amateurish
physiology. Both attitudes are unfortunate since they impede
further research. The concepts were never meant to have an
explanatory value in themselves and suggestions concerning the
underlying physiological mechanisms were only intended to
stimulate their investigation and, it was hoped, to guide it. It is
therefore gratifying to see that the monumental work of Ewert
and his collaborators has indeed developed along this line.
Ethological analysis, amounting to an unravelling of the soft-
ware principles of the programming involved, preceded the
meticulous neurophysiological study of the hardware. This
demonstrates how the marriage between ethological (software)
and physiological (hardware) analysis leads to an increase of our
insight into the processes involved. (The advantages of this
liaison have become even easier to explain now that we can use
the terminology borrowed from the computer!)
Although ethological analysis of the software will serve a
further analysis of the hardware best when it proceeds indepen-
dently of physiological assumptions, in a more advanced stage of
the study a careful use of the evidence produced on the hard-
ware can back up the software analysis or help to set priorities
among alternative hypotheses to be tested. Correspondingly,
the work of the Ewert team can be said to justify the ethological
black box approach. For most of the phenomena attributed to
IRMs by ethologists, it has indeed turned out to be possible to
trace the hardware structures involved. This is true, for exam-
ple, of the sensitivity to "Gestalts" (sect. 5.2.2). Furthermore,
Ewert's work has opened the possibility of understanding on the
physiological level how the motivational state of the animal
could influence the effectiveness of sign stimuli and how re-
sponse-decrements may be brought about (sect. 6.4). In the case
of the snapping toad, concrete suggestions can be made for
circuit modulations inducing changes in the effectiveness of
stimuli through learning, which correspond well with modern
views in ethology about the interaction of innate and learned
information. Although Lorenz never denied that an IRM could
become extended by learning processes, his statements strongly
suggested that recognition by means of an IRM and by means of
knowledge acquired through experience with the adequate
situation would proceed through separate channels. Work on
egg recognition in herring gulls, however, indicated that het-
erogeneous summation between learned and unlearned fea-
tures of the egg does take place; the relative impact of each
category is determined by the modulating effect of the moti-
vational state present at the time of response performance. The
impact of learned egg features was found to increase when the
strength of an escape tendency in the bird rose relative to that of
the tendency to incubate. These findings led to the design of a
model for the releasing mechanism in which combination of
innate with learned knowledge is proposed and the two-channel
hypothesis abandoned (Baerends & Drent 1982). I have even
suggested that when time and the capacity for learning are
available to an animal it is in general not likely to react to
unlearned cues only, but to an IRM extended through condi-
tioning (Baerends 1985). The IRM would primarily function to
guide this learning process.
Since the snapping response is a relatively simple activity, the
software analysis on which the neurophysiological research is
based could be carried out under highly controlled laboratory
conditions, mostly already in combination with physiological
measurements. However, extension of this work to more com-
plicated behaviors is highly desirable. It will accordingly often
be necessary to allow the experimental subject a more varied
environment. This will make the demands on the ethological
analysis heavier and it is therefore to be hoped that the interest
in the black box analysis and in improving and extending the
methods to be used will revive. As demonstrated in the present
target article, the study of the software forms an essential part of
the causal analysis of behavior and should not be forsaken as out
of date.
After the sensory analysers: Problems with
concepts and terminology
D. M. Broom
Department of Clinical Veterinary Medicine, University of Cambridge,
Cambridge CB3 OES, England
The mechanisms involved in visual pattern recognition have
been investigated in a comprehensive way by Ewert and his
collaborators. I regard their studies of feature analysis in toads as
being of sufficient importance to form the central example of
sensory analysis mechanisms for students of behaviour (Broom
1981, pp. 42-48). The work summarised in the target article
provides additional information about the link between sensory
analysers and motor responses; but there would seem to be
much still to be discovered about this link, and Ewert's explana-
tions and terminology are sometimes confusing.
So long as the results are explained in a descriptive way, they
are interesting and uncontroversial; as soon as terms like innate,
fixed action pattern, and command releasing system are used,
however, there will be differences in the meanings ascribed to
each by readers. Ewert (1980) stated that the word innate "does
not mean that the environment is totally irrelevant in the
development of fixed action patterns and releasing mechanisms
as well"(p. 58). Many readers, however, will interpret innate as
meaning genetically determined and independent of environ-
mental effects. In the target article (sect. 3.5.3) Ewert chooses
"something that is phylogenetically adapted' as a meaning of
innateness and he mentions that "genes alone may not be
sufficient for the expression of a property." These explanations
devalue the word innate to the point of being largely useless,
since embryological and other developmental studies indicate
that the expression of all genes involves interactions with en-
vironmental factors and that every characteristic of an organism
is, to some extent, phylogenetically adapted. Hence it would
make explanation clearer if the word innate were not used at all.
A more descriptive statement is always possible; for example, in
Section 3.3.3. it would be better to state that the worm/anti-
worm preference is present even after a wide variety of early
rearing conditions (Traud 1983). Work like that of Burghagen
(1979) has shown that, given appropriate previous experience,
prey-catching behaviour may be directed at large black square
objects, so Ewert does not call the avoidance response innate.
There is little value in calling the worm/antiworm preference
innate.
The persistence of some confusion about terminology con-
cerning sensory analysis and motor output is exemplified by
Ewert's explanation of sign stimulus (Appendix). There is no
necessity to refer to fixed action patterns when explaining the
term sign stimulus. Ewert (1980) uses fixed to mean genetically
determined when he speaks of fixed action patterns. This usage
is uncommon now, and indeed the word fixed seems quite
redundant. It is better to refer only to "action patterns," for only
very brief sequences of movements (generally < 1 second) are
immutable once initiated (Broom 1981, p. 62 ff.).
The factors affecting prey-catching behaviour in toads are
discussed by Ewert in Section 6.4. Motivation is not, as Ewert
states, solely concerned with homeostasis, but prey-catching is
clearly influenced by motivational state, attentional mecha-
nisms, and learning. Having said this, it is difficult to see why
Ewert is willing to present a rather simple diagram of his
command releasing system in Figure 22. There is an implication
that the output circuits, such as "orient prey," are merely
370
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1987) 10:3

Commentary/Ewert: Neuroethology in toads
released, but much more is in fact involved than just triggering.
The data presented do go some way toward explaining how the
sensory-motor links are made in the toad's brain, but the models
are, as yet, too simple and there are still many unknowns in the
process.
How is a toad not like a bug?
Jeffrey M. Camhi
Department of Zoology, Hebrew University, Jerusalem, Israel
Ewert"s work, carried out over 20 years' time, has provided us
with one of the most completely analyzed behaviors in the
vertebrate world. As a good neuroethologist, Ewert selected for
study an animal having a limited repertoire of rather fixed
behavioral responses to sign stimuli. Following a detailed eth-
ological analysis of the releasing value of differently shaped
moving stimuli, he has been searching out, from retina through
motor circuits, the neural elements responsible for the
behavior.
This strategy of selecting a simple, fixed behavior and then
examining from input through output the underlying neural
circuit is a tradition well established among invertebrate neu-
roethologists. Vertebrate workers more rarely focus on the full
circuit for a single behavior. It may be instructive, then, to
compare the toad's prey-catching system to some invertebrate
systems studied by a similar sensory-to-motor approach. The list
would include, among others, the gill withdrawal response of
Aplysia (Kandel 1979) escape behaviors of crayfish and cock-
roach (Camhi 1984, Ritzmann & Pollack 1986; Wine & Krasne
1982), and swimming in the leech (Brodfueher & Friesen 1986).
It seems immediately clear that prey-catching by toads is a
more complex behavior than any of the invertebrate examples
mentioned above. The toad's sensory discrimination of worm
versus antiworm, the invariance, and the gestalt perception are
not even approached in any of the invertebrate systems men-
tioned. True, there are invertebrate behaviors even far richer
than the toad's prey-capture, a case in point being honeybee
orientation (Gould & Marler 1987). But an input-output circuit
for, say, a bee's navigation by celestial polarization maps is
currently far beyond technical feasibility. Of those systems for
which partial circuits are known, perhaps cricket phonotaxis
(Huber & Thorson 1985) more closely approaches the intricacy
of toad prey-capture. Indeed, anyone who has seen these two
behaviors is struck by their general similarity.
The neural complexity of the toad's prey-capture system also
seems well beyond that of most invertebrate circuits so far
known. The toad circuit, though by no means fully worked out as
yet, contains at least 8 to 10 sequential neuronal types from
receptor cell to motorneuron. This is two to three times as many
processing stations as in most known invertebrate circuits. (The
count for cricket phonotaxis is not yet available.) Moreover,
there seems to be a great difference in the number of cells at
each station, perhaps up to tens for the invertebrate circuits
mentioned, and thousands for the toad. It is as yet difficult to
compare the degree of lateral interaction, or either internal or
proprioceptive feedback in these systems, for want of sufficient
information. Nevertheless, it already seems clear that much
more neuronal processing is going on when a toad strikes at a
cockroach than when the cockroach executes its escape.
Even when comparing the toad to the seemingly similar
cricket phonotaxis, however, striking differences appear. In the
cricket, there is an apparently limited number of neurons that
are excellent candidates for song recognition cells (Huber &
Thorson 1985; Schildberger 1984) - far fewer than the number
of T5(2) worm-recognizing cells in the toad. Moreover, the
destruction of single interneurons in the cricket phonotaxis
system produces substantial errors in orientation direction
(Aikin et al. 1984). Although I doubt it's been tried, it seems
unlikely that killing one cell in a toad would produce any
behavioral deficit at all.
It thus appears that there are very major differences between
the known invertebrate circuits, even including cricket pho-
notaxis, and toad prey-capture. It is not at all clear why this
should be. That is, why does the toad need all those cells to catch
its prey? Here are some possible reasons: (1) Perhaps the
invertebrate systems are all dedicated to single behaviors
whereas the toad circuit is multifunctional; (2) perhaps, al-
though the toad's circuitry is more intricate, its individual
neurons are more simple than in invertebrates; (3) perhaps
vertebrates feature redundancy as a failsafe, providing a backup
in case of damage or death to some cells; (4) perhaps the toad's
prey-capture behavior only appears to be simple but is really
complicated; and (5) perhaps a radical step occurred in the
evolution of vertebrate nervous systems, whereby neural pro-
cessing is carried out according to different, more complicated,
principles.
None of these explanations is fully satisfying. The first sug-
gestion, differences in neural dedication, appears simply to be
wrong, since several invertebrates share this property. For
example, neurons of the command system for leech swimming
are also involved in producing other behaviors (W. Kristan,
personal communication). Likewise, circuit elements with mul-
tifunctional properties are found among the giant interneurons
of the cockroach escape circuit (Ritzmann et al. 1980) and the
cells of the Tritonia escape system (Getting & Dekin 1985).
As regards the second idea (simpler cells in the toad), there is
insufficient direct information for comparison, in spite of on-
going intracellular studies on amphibian tectal neurons (Mat-
sumoto et al. 1986). However, it is worth noting that some of the
physiologically most complicated neurons known come from the
vertebrate world (Llinas & Yarom 1986).
Concerning the third, failsafe idea, this often-mentioned
notion has always seemed to me nonsensical. The likelihood of
an individual animal's suffering a loss of part of its brain and
surviving seems so remote as to provide no evolutionary pres-
sure for multiplying the number of its brain cells as a failsafe.
As for the fourth idea - that toad prey-capture is really
substantially more complex than even cricket phonotaxis - well,
it just doesn't look that way. True, as Ewert points out, the
toad's behavior includes several sequential acts, from the initial
orientation to the final swallowing and wiping; and there are
powerful motivational factors controlling sensitivity. Moreover,
barrier avoidance can be incorporated into prey orientation
(Ingle 1973b), and there is the problem of translating sensory
space into motor space in spite of head-to-body movements.
However, crickets in the field must also circumvent barriers,
presumably using antennal and other inputs, and the problem of
compensating for the toad's head-to-body angle does not seem
any greater than compensating for the movement of the cricket's
ears, located on its legs. Finally, a great many invertebrate
behaviors, presumably including cricket phonotaxis, are under
strong modulatory and motivational control.
The fifth and final suggestion, that vertebrate and inverte-
brate behaviors operate by different organizational principles,
makes many people uncomfortable, especially us invertebrate
neuroethologists whose bread and butter is the idea that inver-
tebrates are good model systems for studying vertebrates.
Nevertheless, it is important to be open to the possibility of
radical differences. So let us examine this possibility briefly. On
the one hand, evidence against this idea is not hard to find. For
example, the escape circuitry of fish, admittedly low on the
vertebrate evolutionary scale, looks more like the crayfish es-
cape circuitry than like any other known vertebrate circuit
(Eaton & Hacket 1984), and though honeybee navigational
circuits are not yet known, one must imagine that they would be
quite complex, perhaps rivalling many vertebrate circuits. On
the other hand, a fish is only a fish, and maybe the Mauthner
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1987) 10:3
371

Commentary/Ewert: Neuroethology in toads
circuit is the last evolutionary vestige of the simple life. Inverte-
brate ganglia probably just don't have sufficient numbers of cells
to approach the complexity of the toad tectum.
There seems to be no firm explanation as yet for the much
greater apparent complexity of the toad prey-capture circuit
when compared to invertebrate circuits such as that for cricket
phonotaxis. I will close with the suggestion that perhaps the
behavior by which toads capture prey is just slightly more
intricate, and perhaps this slightly increased complexity, to-
gether with newly evolving vertebrate ways of organizing cir-
cuits, led to the development of a higher order of neuronal
complexity. If so, there are two lessons. First, behavior itself
must be examined very carefully, to reveal subtle differences.
Second, one must search for commonalities between possibly
simpler invertebrate, and more complex vertebrate, forms of
organization, in order to discern the general laws of neu-
robehavioral organization.
Sensorimotor functions: What is a
command, that a code may yield it?
Christopher M. Comer
Department of Biological Sciences and Committee on Neuroscience,
University of Illinois at Chicago, Chicago, III. 60680
The optic tectum of the vertebrate brain is often described as a
site of sensorimotor integration or sensorimotor translation.
This presumably means that sensory signals enter the tectum,
and then tectal cells issue motor commands for appropriate
behavioral responses. These commands would produce orient-
ing movements toward visual targets or, if one is mindful of the
polysensory nature of the optic tectum in most vertebrates, they
may also direct movements with respect to acoustic, tactile, or
other sensory stimuli in the environment (see Grobstein et al.
1983 for an alternative view).
Research by Professor Ewert and his colleagues has had much
to say about the organization of tectal cells in the toad and their
possible role in orienting responses to prey items. This research
is now progressing to the cellular analysis of some of the "post-
tectal" circuitry (Ewert et al. 1984; Satou & Ewert 1984), and it
appears to me that the findings challenge a simple sensory-to-
motor model of tectal function as sketched out briefly above.
This might not be apparent, however, given the terminology
used to describe tectal efferents in the toad.
The target article indicates that "many of the tectal neurons
analyzing feature- and space-related cues project to the motor
systems." The hypothesis is that action patterns are released
according to "sensorimotor codes" carried by distinct combina-
tions of tectal efferent neurons. I find this an appealing notion.
The terminology of command systems, however, is used to
describe the tectal efferents and their relation to brainstem
circuitry. This forces tectal integration into a framework that just
doesn't fit. The elements of a command system were envisioned
as a group of "homogeneous neurons" (see Kupfermann &
Weiss 1978), whereas the tectal efferents represent a diverse
population of feature-analyzing neurons. Perhaps most impor-
tant, the concept of a command neuron or unit is compelling in
those few instances where it describes a funneling of information
through one or a few cells which control the occurrence of a
coordinated motor act. Thus at the heart of the concept is a sense
of what Roeder referred to as "neural parsimony" (e.g., Roeder
1959). That the toad's tectomotor processing may not fit under
such a rubric is actually what makes Ewert's model interesting:
It gives a possible cellular explanation for a not-so-simple
system.
If tectal efferents are referred to as "command elements,"
then by applying the logic of the command neuron (or command
system) concept, we might assume that the firing of a given type
of neural element signifies a decision to produce a specific action
pattern (see Eaton 1983; Kupfermann & Weiss 1978). However,
many different efferents, and even classes of efferents, would
apparently be activated by a visual stimulus, and the resulting
action pattern (approach, snap, etc.) is assumed to depend upon
the particular combination of efferents activated in a given
stimulus situation. No one class of efferents appears to uniquely
specify a given type of action pattern. This would seem to be a
rather elegant example of ensemble coding. If the combinatorial
code emanating from the tectum "yields" a command for a
particular act, then presumably the command is more a proper-
ty of brainstem circuitry which decodes tectal efferent activity
than of tectal circuitry itself.
The challenge of understanding sensorimotor functions is at
the heart of the neurobiological analysis of behavior. Research
by Ewert and his colleagues on the neuroethology of the toad's
visual system has produced an amazing volume of information
by any standards. The problem of "sensorimotor interfacing" is
the particular area of Ewert's work which I think is producing,
and will continue to produce, the most significant new informa-
tion of general relevance to neuroscience. It is also, I would
suggest, an area where the language describing neural organiza-
tion needs to be most carefully considered.
Eliminate the middletoad!
Daniel Dennett
Center for Cognitive Studies, Tufts University, Medford, Mass. 02155
Philosophical controversy about the mind has flourished in the
thin air of our ignorance about the brain. The humble toad, it
now seems, may provide our first instance of a creature whose
whole brain is within the reach of our scientific understanding.
What will happen to the traditional philosophical issues as our
theoretical and factual ignorance recedes? Discussion of the
issues explored in the target article is, as Ewert says, "often too
theoretical, sometimes philosophical and even [as if that weren't
bad enough?] emotion-laden." The research reported by Ewert
has interesting philosophical implications, as he probably recog-
nizes, but he wisely leaves the philosophy to the philosophers.
Being one, I would like to draw some of the conclusions he
eschews.
First, just to keep enthusiasm in check, we should remind
ourselves that although toads are "smart" enough, or "psycho-
logical" enough - unlike Aplysia, for instance - to raise (at least
for discussion, prior to dismissal) the fascinating questions, they
are still remarkably stupid, and the research program depends
critically on their stupidity. Insofar as the experimental results
are unequivocal, it is thanks to the limits of plasticity and
discrimination that have been uncovered. Toads, we learn, are
born with hard-wired prey-capture routines with only modest
degrees of plasticity. They will go on striking at dummy targets
indefinitely, and their standards for prey recognition, though
serviceable in their niches, are gratifyingly crude. Imagine how
we would react to the discovery that some human beings were so
oblivious that we could substitute cardboard silhouettes on
wheels for real people in their environment without seriously
disrupting their behavior. "Social" psychology would be a lot
easier using these people as subjects, but we would no doubt
have the same feeling with regard to them that we now have -
thanks to the researches of Ewert and his colleagues - with
regard to toads: When you look closely, you find that there's
nobody home.
I take it that most readers, after digesting the details of the
target article, are ready to relinquish whatever remaining con-
victions they may have had that residing behind the toad's
372
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1987) 10:3

Commentary/Ewert: Neuroethology in toads
bulging eyes, watching and waiting and deciding when to strike,
was a middletoad, a conscious self, the something that must be
there if it is to be like something to be a toad (Nagel 1974). Why?
What is it about Ewert's model, and (more important) its
supporting research, that promotes this opinion of the toad as a
"mere" automaton, a zombie in spite of its biological com-
monality with us?
Dualists may be tempted to say that the mere fact that Ewert
can explain the toad's behavior without ever adverting to any
transactions between the toad's brain and some nonphysical
mind would be sufficient (if confirmed) to establish that toads are
mere automata, however "clever" they appear to the uniniti-
ated. The objections to this view do not need rehearsing here.
Modern-day materialists, who have no doubt that in principle
there can be a purely physical, mechanistic account of even a
self-conscious, human mind, may still feel that if Ewert's ac-
count is right in outline, toads lack something crucial for con-
sciousness. I would like to draw attention to a confusion that may
affect even subtle materialists in their attempts to say what is
missing in Ewert's toads.
Ewert does not claim that his model is complete. Note that he
attempts to account for only one of the four F's, feeding, alluding
only in passing to the interfaces still to be described with the
others: fleeing, fighting, and reproduction. What is important is
that within one quarter of the toad's control agenda, the model
claims to show us how the corner is turned at what Ewert calls
the "sensorimotor interface": how afferents are eventually "in-
terpreted" to the point where (normally) appropriate efferents
are generated.
Tradition would interpose the Mind or the Self at that sen-
sorimotor interface, contemplating and comprehending the
input, and figuring out the wisest output, given that input. But
that particularly wise homunculus - or bufunculus - has been
brusquely dismissed in Ewert's model, replaced by nothing but
a few generally hard-wired AND-gates. Even though there are
neural messages with meanings passing through the sen-
sorimotor interface - Ewert speaks somewhat misleadingly of a
"sensorimotor code " — they are not decoded by any salient
intervening entity; they have their apposite effects by being
already wired up by Mother Nature to trigger the appropriate
"commands."
For instance, the convergence of a T5(2) firing, meaning
"stimulus recognized as prey, n degrees outside the fixation
area," with activity in T4, meaning "stimulus moving some-
where in the visual field," yields the command to orient; T5(2'),
meaning "stimulus recognized as prey," firing concurrently
with Tl(2), meaning "stimulus close to toad," yields the com-
mand to fixate, and so forth.
Consider the grounds offered for these renderings of the
meanings of types of neuronal firing. The particular form of
words chosen by Ewert is dictated not by any isolation of
"syntactic' features of some neuronal "language of thought" as
candidates for word-for-word translation into English, but
rather by an appreciation of the "semantic" contribution of those
events to the ongoing control problem of the toad, expressed
(roughly) from the toad's narcissistic point of view (Akins 1986).
As Ewert notes, "prey categorization is approximate" and more-
over, his decision to elevate the semantics of an event type such
as T5(2') to "stimulus recognized as prey" (italics added) is
governed by pragmatic considerations (Dennett 1987). As op-
posed to what? As opposed to presumably objective, informa-
tion-theoretic criteria of the sort envisaged by Dretske (1981)
[see also multiple book review, BBS 6(1) 1983], Fodor (1980),
and others. The objective informational parameters (e.g., reli-
able covariation with shape and motion properties of the sort
distinguished in Ewert's Figure 4) set outside limits, at best, of
the potential narcissistic-information-bearing properties Ewert
is prepared to assign to the events. The support he offers for
going beyond the (Dretskean) information given when fixing his
renderings of meaning includes his recognition of the appropri-
ateness (under normal conditions) of the normal continuations of
those events, as modulated by "goal-related information . . . .
resulting] from intrinsic processes." But these continuations
are normal precisely because that's the way toads are wired, not
because something in the toad "recognizes" or "analyzes" the
meaning of those neuronal events as the result of some sort of
perception-and-parsing process.
In other words, the "decision-making" relating those mes-
sages to those commands does not occur in real time in the toad,
but occurred eons ago in the course of the design process that
created the wiring diagram that now implements those policies.
Their rough wisdom is endorsed, probabilistically, by the very
existence of the toad as a surviving descendant, but, it seems,
the toad itself has no intelligent contribution to make to its own
survival. (Here is where the mistaken line of thought begins.)
The toad, one gathers, is none the wiser for having messages
with these meanings zapping around in its brain. It doesn't
appreciate or comprehend or figure out what the observing
neuroethologist does. It can get through life reasonably well
without benefit of comprehension, thanks to its felicitously
arranged inner wiring - and that, it seems, is what makes toads
zombies.
It is this line of thought that makes the idea of a language of
thought (Fodor 1975) so treacherous. There is a strong tempta-
tion to suppose that in a truly intelligent, intentional, conscious
creature (unlike the poor toad), the meaning-bearing events
streaming in from the sense organs would have to be couched in
some parsable, comprehensible language, so that the mid-
dletoad (or middleman or self-module) would have some way of
recognizing and appreciating their meanings. But this just
postpones the problem of meaning, and makes it even more
mysterious by setting an impossible task of comprehension and
inference for the inner module (Dennett 1978). The mistake lies
in confusing the toad itself (the whole toad, from whose self-
centered perspective all content-ascription must proceed) with
some imagined inner middletoad, which, indeed, as a proper
part of the toad's nervous system, would be none the wiser for
having events coursing through it with various meanings. But
the whole toad is the wiser; its capacity to pick its way through its
world with some adroitness is explained by the presence of
events in its brain having the sort of significance Ewert assigns to
them.
This conclusion is hard to accept if one is still enthralled with
the common vision of meaning being present in items (in the
mind or in the brain) as if it were candy in a box, to be sent from
A to B, there to be unpacked and enjoyed (comprehended) by
the (intelligent) receiver. The mistake is to concentrate all the
intelligence in the imagined middletoad, instead of spreading it
through the whole system. This involves offloading inexpressi-
ble portions of meaning into the appropriate hard-wiring, and
into the acquired interactive effects entrained by experience, in
the manner Ewert's model illustrates very well. Once the
intelligence is seen as distributed, no inner thing remains to be a
candidate for the Mind or Self, but this does not in itself rule out
consciousness.
The real reason, finally, why we may be inclined to give up on
the toad's inner life is not because when we look closely at the
inside, we find nothing but wise wiring - that's all we are ever
going to find in us, too - but because of what we find on the
outside, in the ethology: Toads don't catch on to very much. If
toads were much harder to fool, and learned more, and in
particular if they could learn that they were being manipulated,
and come to take evasive or counteractive steps of some kind, we
would find that our sense that "somebody was home" would
survive. Such cognitive prowess as this would take much more
internal machinery than the toad has, but other creatures have
it, and we can know in advance that when we look closely at its
details (if we can master them at all), we will find no concentra-
tion of insight in an inner module, but just much more wise
wiring.
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1987) 10:3
373

Commentary/Ewert: Neuroethology in toads
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
I am indebted to Kathleen Akins for some of the ideas in this commen-
tary, and for guidance in interpreting the target article.
Toward a reformulation of the command
concept
Randolf DiDomenico and Robert C. Eaton
Behavioral Biology Group, Department of Biology, University of Colorado,
Boulder, Colo. 80309
In his engaging review, Professor Ewert expresses concern that
his conceptual treatment of command might be controversial.
However, the lively debate surrounding command has not
prevented its use. In a computer search for the years 1981-
1986, we found well over 200 papers related to various neu-
robehavioral usages of the command concept. This activity
reflects the importance of command as an explanation linking
neural action to behavioral effects, and therefore justifies its
discussion and analysis.
A reigning concept of command has been what we call the
"command neuron experiment," the CNE, of Kupfermann and
Weiss (1978). The CNE idea of "command system" has been
found to be experimentally untestable, and the "command
neuron" concept is theoretically oversimplified, resulting in
contradictions depending on how experiments are performed
(Eaton & DiDomenico 1985). In one test case using the
Mauthner neuron, results from the CNE concluded that this
cell was a command neuron (Hackett & Greenfield 1986); in
other experiments, the CNE concluded it was not (Eaton et al.
1986).
In addition, the CNE and other command concepts are
ultimately inadequate to explain the neural mechanisms under-
lying the behavioral complexities that many neurobehaviorists
find important. Even a "simple" escape response of a fish
involves decision and localization processes, and also mecha-
nisms permitting one system to temporarily take over and
coordinate the entire activity of the animal. These processes
activate the subsystems mediating the response and inhibit
expression of conflicting actions and input signals (DiDomenico
& Eaton, in press; Nissanov & Eaton, in press). Thus, we agree
with Ewert that previous notions of command have been the-
oretically inapplicable to the numerous experimental results
revealing the complexity of neural networks and behavioral
processes. Because of these difficulties, we have recently pro-
posed a restructuring of the concept of command (DiDomenico
& Eaton, in press).
Our approach consists of an ensemble of principles in which
command is a dynamic neural process reflecting the selection
and direction of specific sequences of behavioral action (Di-
Domenico & Eaton, in press). As outlined below, we define
command by using neuroethological, systems theory precepts
that are independent of any single structure, causal paradigm,
or method.
1. The neuroethology of command. In many usages, "com-
mand" is a name for the neural events (of some type) leading to a
temporary change of behavior, from one activity or state to the
next. Thus, command, like learning, is a larger-scale concept
than the neurophysiological events leading to its expression. In
the context of natural behavioral conditions for which animals
have evolved, command becomes a neuroethological concept
requiring explicit behavioral definition and quantification. This
contrasts with the previous idea that command can be defined
only in neurophysiological terms, regardless of the behavioral
conception (Eaton & DiDomenico 1985).
A behavioral shaping of command is consistent with many
other successful neurobehavioral approaches. For example, the
behavioral description of habituation by Thompson and Spencer
(1966) helped to determine the design of experiments leading to
the discovery of its neurophysiological basis (Kupfermann et al.
1970). The same applies to studies on learning (Carew et al.
1981; McCormick & Thompson 1984). In these examples, neu-
rophysiology is guided by behavioral concepts rather than the
reverse, because arbitrary behavioral definitions are not as-
cribable to the types of concise neural mechanisms that neu-
robiology seeks to discover.
2. The causal basis of command. We have defined command
independently of any single causal paradigm, such as the pre-
vious "necessity and sufficiency" definitions. This separation is
essential (Eaton & DiDomenico 1985). Ewert argues the same
point on experimental grounds; ours is based on both empirical
and general scientific grounds.
There is no scientific reason to tie command to preconceived
and explicit causal schemes - various scientific fields acknowl-
edge that no one causal explanation has precedence in all
experimental contexts. Many scientific laws, principles and
theories are not derived from preconceived causal paradigms;
rather, the mechanistic explanations are the causal explanations
(Eaton & DiDomenico 1985). Likewise, the purpose of neu-
robehavioral explanation is to discover the causal neural mecha-
nisms of behavior. This alternative to explicit causal schemes
enables the discovery of new causal explanations which will
become the basis of neurobehavioral theories.
3. Methodology for command. The liberation of command
from preconceived causation opens the concept to enrichment
by diverse methodological approaches. This is in concert with
Ewert and in contrast to previous ideas that the meaning of
command was exhausted by tests for "necessity and suffi-
ciency. "
Tests for "necessity and sufficiency" can seem unequivocal
while at the same time hiding extant alternative mechanisms
which are revealed only through different methods (Eaton &
DiDomenico 1985). Like Ewert, we call for a multidisciplinary
approach that directs a variety of questions at the same subject,
thereby verifying that the emerging principles are consistent
with different experimental paradigms and techniques. This
concept acknowledges the very real complexity of neural
networks.
One of the complexities, as pointed out by Ewert, is func-
tional plasticity. Here, we do not mean compensatory regrowth,
but extant mechanisms that automatically regulate the output of
the network (Eaton et al. 1984). One candidate mechanism
utilizes central feedback loops (Nissanov & Eaton, in press).
Because of compensatory feedback, a behavioral effect may
continue to be expressed following a lesion or other inactivation
procedure. The attempt to confine the definition of command to
tests for "necessity and sufficiency" therefore, overlooks impor-
tant underlying neural mechanisms.
4. Command as a function. In our view, command is a
functional process resulting in the expression of a behavioral act.
Command describes what a neural network does, and is not
limited to any particular part of the nervous system. As a
behavioral concept, command is analogous to learning. Both
command and learning are processes resulting in a change in
behavior. Ewert's presentation is consistent with this functional
approach since he considers command releasing systems (CRSs)
to be neurophysiological equivalents of behavioral releasing
mechanisms: They're shared between different systems and are
not restricted to single cells or particular structures.
Many others have assumed that command is confined to
specific structures - individually identifiable command neu-
rons, or elements. There are several problems with this type of
assumption. First, to literally explain the behavioral inference of
command by saying that the command process is mediated by
command neurons is equivalent to explaining motion by saying
that the moving body is made up of moving particles. Second,
the assumption that command is necessarily embedded in a
particular structure contradicts recent experimental findings.
374
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1987) 10:3

Commentaryi'Ewert: 
Neuroethology in toads
Cells from sensory to motor seem to serve commandlike func-
tions. For example, in the cricket, a sensory cell Int-1 has
commandlike properties in triggering turning flight movement
(Nolen & Hoy 1984).
Separating command from an anatomical specification is con-
sistent with how complex processes of various types are usually
defined. For example, writing is not defined by the instrument
but by the recording of words or other coded information in
some medium (unspecified) by some instrument (unspecified).
It is not that processes cannot be specified by various media, but
the meaning of the process cannot be exhausted by a particular
medium.
5. Command as a dynamic process. If command is to account
for temporal properties of behavior, then it must incorporate
dynamic processes of the neural tissue. Both Ewert and our-
selves have described command systems as dynamic. Ewert
emphasizes the dynamic potential of neuromodulatory effects.
In addition, we refer to the dynamic neural changes that are
inferred to be occurring as animals switch from one behavior
pattern to another.
In this context, we envision a command system as being
created from a seminal decision that may arise in one or a few
prominent trigger cells and that grows to include various neural
circuits for its execution. In this way the command system
changes in time as it recruits its appropriate subsystems and
then abandons them when a new behavior pattern is executed.
In conclusion, command is both attractive and elusive be-
cause it is a conceptual bridge between neural activities and
behavior. Because of its intermediate position, command can-
not be completely incorporated by existing neurophysiological
or behavioral concepts, and this has contributed to the ongoing
confusion and debate. We are encouraged by the similarity
between Ewert's conception of command and our own: They are
based on complementary theoretical views and are strength-
ened by their emergence from different experimental prepara-
tions.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We thank Ann Topple for her comments. Our research described in this
paper was supported by National Institutes of Health grant NS22621.
Has the greedy toad lost its soul; and if so,
what was it?
Robert W. Doty
Center for Brain Research, University of Rochester, Rochester, N.Y. 14642
This is the 350th anniversary of the publication of Descartes's
Discours de la M6thode (Gilson 1962). Furthermore, with his
Meditations (Haldane & Ross 1967), Descartes provided the
earliest and perhaps most famous example of the style now
followed by BBS: an extensive exposition by one author which is
then subjected to commentaries by other authorities in the
field, with ensuing response thereto by the author. It is thus
doubly fitting that Ewert's target article, which with such
elegant and convincing thoroughness delineates the mechanism
of a Cartesian machine, the toad, should also be treated in the
Cartesian style of "objections" and "response."
Descartes's most critical commentator was Gassendi, who
vigorously attacked the principle that the human mind/soul is
uniquely different from the neural processes of animals:
You [Descartes] say that in the brutes everything takes place
through blind impulsion of the (animal) spirits and the other organs,
just in the same way as motion is achieved in a clock or any other
machine. But however true is the case of the other functions, like
nutrition, the pulsation of the arteries, and so forth, which functions
take place in man in precisely the same way as in brutes, can it be said
that either the operations of sense, or what are called the emotions
[passiones] of the soul are affected in brutes by means of blind
impulses, and not in our case also? A morsel of food discharges a
semblance of itself into the eye of a dog, and this being transferred to
the brain, attaches itself to the soul, as it were, by means of hooks; and
the soul itself thenceforth and the whole body, which coheres with it,
is haled to that food, as it were, by chains of the most delicate
contriving. (Haldane & Ross 1967, p. 145)
The nature of those "chains" is now largely revealed by
Ewert's work! Yet in the subtlety of their operation these
neuronal chains are more closely allied to the vagaries of human
mentation than to the ineluctability of clocks. For the intact toad
the decision to attack is conditioned not only by the machinelike
evaluation of appropriate size, shape, and distance of the mov-
ing object, but also by attentive state, satiety, or even past
experience with bees. It is only following loss or perturbation of
pretectal circuitry that the toad displays an unbridled greed,
and attacks all moving objects with the consistency expected of a
true Cartesian machine.
What, then, is the neuronal nature of this soul which in
normal circumstance instructs the toad's decision to attack?
Ewert's data clearly define the processes whereby the retinal
messages are decoded; but they are far from satisfactory regard-
ing the manner in which the system is restrained by satiety, past
experience, or simple inattention. True, the T8 neurons in their
rate of discharge, much like the omnipause neurons of cats and
monkeys (Fuchs et al. 1985), reflect the attentive state of the
animal, and may thus provide a facilitatory background. Yet the
gross facilitation achieved by prectal lesions does not seem to be
accompanied by any increase in background discharge of the
tectal T5(2) neurons (Figure 20). Of course, the latter fact might
be explained by a loss of feedback inhibition from the pretectal
area; but what of satiety? How are its enduring effects pro-
duced? One might hypothesize the quieting of arousing input
from the gut, once the gut is full, and thereby lessening of the
facilitation from the T8 neurons, and so on.
Two observations, however, suggest that there may be a more
subtle, but as yet mysterious, means of obtaining long-term
suppression of "erroneous" or unnecessary responses, without
the cost of continuous inhibitory discharge. The first is with
learned suppression, for example avoidance of bees, where it
seems most unlikely that a specific and continuing pattern of
inhibitory discharge persists continuously following the acquisi-
tion of the learned suppression. The other instance is the
lifelong suppression of brainstem reflex patterns achieved by
adult mammals, including man. Such suppression is not
achieved by loss of the brainstem organization, for it can subse-
quently be "released" by loss of relevant forebrain systems
(e.g., Doty 1976; Pilleri 1984); yet it is difficult to imagine the
forebrain as sending a steady stream of suppressive messages to
the brainstem, decade after decade. Rather, it would seem that
in both these instances, of learning and of developed organiza-
tion, the suppression must be achieved by some enduring
alteration of the capability of the relevant synapses. One might
perhaps distinguish between the two possibilities - constant
and continuing availability of inhibitory impulses versus long-
term down regulation of synaptic excitability - by the time
course of the "release" achieved by destruction of the putative
controlling system.
Prey-catching in toads: An exceptional
neuroethological model
Sven O. E. Ebbesson
Department of Medical Science and Institute of Marine Science, University
of Alaska, Fairbanks, Alaska 99775
Prey-catching in toads is one of the best vertebrate models for
correlating neuronal circuitry and related functions because the
behaviors and associated neural structures are exceptionally
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1987) 10:3
375

Commentary/Ewert: Neuroethology in toads
well differentiated in this species. It is to Ewert's everlasting
credit that he recognized early the importance and potential of
the model and that he has devoted his life to it. No other
vertebrate model system that involves the entire sensory-to-
motor continuum has been so well described. It is clear that the
monumental work of Ewert and his collaborators represents the
foundation for the detailed, exciting work that lies ahead.
The future will no doubt include defining the detailed synap-
tic relationships and functions of all neuronal types involved in
prey-catching as well as the ontogenetic development of struc-
tures and behavior. Comparative studies on other species will
provide further important clues about structure-function rela-
tionships. In order to better understand Ewert's work, it is
perhaps meaningful to identify some specific aspects in the
future development of Ewert's prey-catching model.
There is a tendency to associate specific neuronal aggregates
with specific functions because of the behaviors elicited by
electrical stimulation or the deficits observed after selective
lesions. Ewert has provided us with clues about the roles of
various brain structures on that basis, but he has also shown that
given aggregates are involved in many functions through their
interaction. Thus, prolonged electrical stimulation of the pre-
tectum (posterior thalamus) [close to the rostral tectum] results
in a broad range of behavioral responses, ranging from escape
behavior to orienting and snapping. The potential variables
responsible for such responses are too complex to be dealt with
here; suffice it to say that the circuitry of the region stimulated is
very complex indeed. In fact, the details of bypassing and
afferent and efferent connections are essentially unknown. A
detailed Golgi-EM study of the region would provide some of
the requisite information about how synapses from various
sources are related to one another on a given neuron, and which
effects are caused by unrelated responses from the inadvertent
modulation of bypassing fibers.
Ewert's interesting finding that pretectal lesions result in
indiscriminate (often inappropriate) responses to visual stimuli
suggests to him that the toad with such a lesion suffers from a
visual agnosia. This is in line with the interpretation that the
pretectum in toads serves an associative function and has an
integral part in the analysis of visual images. The region contains
essential elements for certain "discrimination filters." In fact,
the high degree of differentiation of the region in toads is
thought to be related to the functions of the T5(l) and T5(2) cells
in the optic tectum (Ewert 1984b). The answer to the question of
how the associations are accomplished eludes us; clearly the
next generation of experiments should include a precise analysis
of excitatory-inhibitory interactions of inputs to the relevant
neurons with a concomitant structural analysis of the circuitry of
any given neuron so that the interactions of all circuits in the
function can be understood. This analysis would include: (1)
identification, at the ultrastructural level, of the sources of all
inputs on a given neuron; (2) identification of the neurotransmit-
ters of the various inputs; and (3) the precise localization of the
projections of the pretectal neuron. This is a tall order indeed,
but because of the relatively high degree of parcellation of cell
groups in the toad pretectum, the task should be much easier in
this species than in others.
It is important to understand that in the target article Ewert
deals primarily with prey-catching in adult toads and only
secondarily with the apparent similarities in other vertebrates.
Space obviously will not permit further description of the
ontogenetic development or the interspecific variability of the
components of prey-catching. It should be stressed that the
pertinent neural mechanisms do change in both the ontogenetic
and evolutionary time domain. Ewert (1984b) has himself pro-
vided evidence for the parcellation theory (Ebbesson 1980;
1981; 1984; in press). This theory predicts that parcellation of
brain nuclei and specialization of neurons is accomplished by
restricting the types of afferents to given neurons in evolution
and ontogeny. This results in finer tuning of a given function and
explains, for example, how "discrimination filters" are added
between sensory input and motor output and how more and
better quality filters would result in a more appropriate behav-
ior in response to a given stimulus.
A comparison of the thalamotectal circuitry in anurans and
urodeles reveals distinct differences in which the urodele con-
figuration appears as the less parcellated one with only a single
identifiable cell group (lateral posterocentral nucleus, PC) in the
caudal dorsal thalamus. It is interesting that only T5(l)-type
neurons have been recorded from the fire salamander's optic
tectum (Finkenstadt & Ewert 1983a). In contrast, this cell group
is represented in adult anurans by two parcellated nuclei (post-
erolateral nucleus, PL, and lateral posterocentral nucleus, LPC)
which in turn determine the property of configurationally sen-
sitive tectal T5(l) neurons and configurationally selective T5(2)
neurons by selective inhibition. Class T5(l) and T5(2) cells may,
in conjunction with inputs from other cell classes (Tx), activate
motor pattern generators for different types of behavior. It is
especially noteworthy that the ontogenetic parcellation of LPC
and PL from a single nucleus is completed 6-12 months follow-
ing metamorphosis. This parcellation may be related to the
remarkable improvement in configurational prey-selection after
metamorphosis, the final acuity of which is not reached until one
year after metamorphosis (Ewert, Capranica & Ingle 1983).
Thus, during ontogeny the thalamic-pretectal region of frogs
and toads transiently exhibits a functional organization similar to
the one primitive amphibians such as urodeles show as adults.
Surely a research program to study the ontogeny of prey-
catching behavior in relation to changes in its structural and
physiological substrates will be very important not only in
studying how T5(2) cells develop, but in trying to understand
neuronal plasticity in general.
Although Ewert's analysis of prey-catching is thorough, it is
wonderful to realize that much remains to be done. I venture to
say that many more types of neurons and interactions are
responsible for a given behavior than Ewert's circuit diagrams
suggest. As Ewert has pointed out, determinants of behavior are
not only the direct visual circuitry, but also the neuronal activity
of superimposing systems such as those relating to nutrition,
hormone levels, circadian rhythms, and so on.
Because of my belief in the great value of a detailed and
comprehensive characterization of synapses and circuits, I was
delighted to see the beautiful cobalt-stained tectal neurons from
which Ewert et al. (1985) and Matsumoto et al. (1986) have
recorded (Figure 18). Such studies reveal aspects of the com-
plexity of neuronal circuits. For example, when one considers
the location and dendritic spread of the stained tectal neurons in
relation to (1) the physiological properties and location of retinal
afferents (Ebbesson 1970; Lettvin et al. 1959), (2) the variety and
distribution of terminal types on the given neurons (Ito et al.
1980; Lazar 1984), and (3) the origin and distribution of the
terminals on a given neuron (Ito et al. 1980), it is clear that
Ewert and his collaborators have many wonderful years ahead
for refining their knowledge and insights. Considering that
ultrastructural studies are needed for each type of neuron
involved in the circuitry, one realizes the enormity of the task
that lies ahead. The value of Ewert's contribution is in the
soundness of the foundation he has laid and in his ability to stir
the imagination of others to continue the building and refining of
a truly worthwhile model.
Networks with evolutionary potential
Giinter Ehret
Fakult&t fur Biologie, UniversitSt Konstanz, D 7750-Konstanz, Federal
Republic of Germany
It is fascinating to see a state-of-the-art neuroethological analysis
of an instinct (an innately goal-directed behavior) that describes
376
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1987) 10:3

the encoding of a hierarchical chain of fixed action patterns in a
nonhierarchical way in overlapping neuronal circuits and loop-
controlled networks in the toad's brain. The release of pertinent
adaptive behavior by key stimuli depends on the spatiotemporal
activity patterns in neuronal networks that share many ele-
ments. There is obviously no single class of neurons that could
be related to "making a decision" about which behavior to
display or which stimulus to recognize because the behavior to
be produced - which is interpreted as "recognition" by a human
observer - is the result of the probability distribution of activity
in several neuronal elements of differing specificity. The con-
cept of "grandmother neurons" has been abandoned. Thus, the
demonstration of network function in prey-catching of toads is of
general significance and may reflect principles of economy and
safety of information processing and response release in the
vertebrate brain. But to what extent can prey-catching in toads
and the proposed neural circuits serve as a general model for the
release of instinctive behavior in vertebrates?
1. It is well known that instinctive behavior occurs in decere-
brated cats if the diencephalon and lower centers of the brain are
left intact (e.g., Gallistel 1980). This corresponds favorably with
the present data on toads, which do not indicate contributions of
cerebral telencephalic structures to prey-catching.
2. The superior colliculus, which is the mammalian homolo-
gue of the optic tectum, is regarded as a sensorimotor interface
which translates sensory information into motor commands that
compensate mainly for space-related errors in the motor system
relative to the goals to be achieved by the action (e.g., Sparks
1986). The same idea is reflected in Ewert's "command releas-
ing systems" with T5(2) neurons as links to motor nuclei. The
superior colliculus, however, is known as a substrate for multi-
modal sensory integration (e.g., Meredity & Stein 1986), which
does not seem to be true for the optic tectum in toads. The
question arises whether auditory and somatosensory aspects of
visual stimuli representing prey, predators, or mates converge
on circuits shown in Figures 22-25; or could multimodality of
the tectum (superior colliculus) be an evolutionarily new
achievement common to mammals yet absent in amphibians?
[See also Foreman & Stevens: "Relationships Between the
Superior Colliculus and Hippocampus" BBS 10(1) 1987.]
3. It is especially interesting that arousal, attention moti-
vation, and associative learning are suggested to influence prey-
catching networks in the toad's tectum, and how they do so.
Attention and arousal have been shown to alter neural activities
in the auditory midbrain of rats (e.g., Disterhoft & Stuart 1977;
Gonzalez-Lima & Scheich 1984). These mammalian data corre-
spond well with attentional effects on tectal T5(2) neurons so
that prey detection is enhanced by a higher level of activity in
prey-selective neurons due to attentional factors. The introduc-
tion of attention into tectal circuits may be described by a
network model proposed by Fukushima (1986) who suggests
that attention has facilitating effects on the afferent visual path-
way and that visual afferents gate the attentional influence at the
same time.
Motivation and associative learning are a different subject,
however. Sensory-motivational integration as well as associative
learning in mammals are assigned to neural networks and
functions of the forebrain (e.g., Thompson et al. 1978;
Thompson 1980). While tecto-prosencephalic loops are in-
cluded as sources of modulatory effects on prey-catching in
Ewert's analysis (Figure 24), sensory-motivational interfacing
and associative learning seem to take place in the tectum itself-
at least they are introduced to the prey-catching circuits via
T5(2) neurons. Thus these neurons function as sensory-moti-
vational and associative interfaces. It is surprising to find neu-
rons with such highly integrative properties in the tectum and
not in the forebrain. Could it be that the prey selectivity of T5(2)
neurons does not arise in the tectum itself but through forebrain
loops indicated in Figure 24? And could it hence be that T5(2)
neurons become tectal relays of a descending command releas-
Commentary/Ewert: 
Neuroethology in toads
ing system for prey-catching whose major components, howev-
er, the ones that generate prey selectivity, are located in the
forebrain? The function of T5(2) neurons as output cells of a
forebrain-tectal loop would be to contribute to the occurrence of
taxis components of the instinctive prey-catching pattern (orien-
tation, approach, fixation as in Ewert's original schema). The
association of spatial attributes in the optic tectum to key-
stimulus information descending from the forebrain would be in
formal agreement with the initiation of saccadic eye movements
for fixation of an interesting stimulus by mammals (e.g., Sparks
1986). If integration of sensory, motor, motivational, and asso-
ciative aspects of instinctive behavior should actually take place
in the optic tectum of amphibians, however, this would point to
an important evolutionary perspective. It might indicate that
during the evolution from amphibians to mammals object recog-
nition and spatial localization have separated from a common
tectal origin in amphibians to forebrain (motivational and learn-
ing-related aspects) and midbrain (spatial localization) mecha-
nisms in mammals.
Ethological invariants: Boxes, rubber bands,
and biological processes
John C. Fentress
Departments of Psychology and Biology, Dalhousie University, Halifax,
Nova Scotia, Canada B3H 4J1
The search for invariants that account for the processes of
behavioral change represents one of the most fundamental
conceptual problems in the behavioral and brain sciences.
Classically, ethologists have approached this problem through
the construction of basically static conceptual boxes that were in
turn connected with fixed arrows. "Fixed action patterns,"
"innate releasing mechanisms," central versus peripheral
mechanisms, and genes versus experience are obvious exam-
ples. Connecting boxes with arrows can be very useful as an
initial heuristic, but the tradition can also get in the way of more
refined analyses. Boxes become things, things become centers,
centers become inherited, and so on.
The difficult issue to come to grips with is that when these
"boxes" are interconnected they may change one another's
properties. Actions can become coarticulated, mechanisms can
be modulated, central processes can influence peripheral pro-
cesses (as well as the reverse), and gene products depend upon
developmental contexts. The buffers that define our distinctions
are often relative rather than all-or-none, and they can change
over time when placed in different contexts, and so on. This
gives the investigator a framework rather like interconnected
rubber bands that pull on one another, thereby distorting each
other's properties. Rubber band models are difficult to work
with!
But they may give a hint. The hint is in the invariance of
relations as opposed to individual properties. One can add a
dynamic to this without destroying the idea of invariance simply
by studying invariances in rules of change (in relations) over
time, and so on (Bohm 1969). Stabilities become relative,
relational, dynamic, and multileveled (Fentress 1986).
There is something frustrating about such notions, for the
closer we look for invariances, the more slippery they often
appear. So we go back to boxes. I recall that when my late friend,
Graham Hoyle, was preparing his BBS article on neuroethology
with an invertebrate focus, plus his subsequent response to
commentators (Hoyle 1984), he and I were at odds about this
form of boxology. The result was that I became transformed
from an ethologist in his target article to a psychologist in his
response to critics; this was not, I believe, intended as a
compliment! Yet Hoyle himself had many years before provided
one of my favorite examples of the point I wish to make. When
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1987) 10:3
377

Commentary/Ewert: Neuroethology in toads
cockroaches walk, their perceived "fixed" action patterns in-
volve different combinations of flexor and extensor activity. The
actions remain reasonably stereotyped due to invariances in the
product of individually variable flexor and extensor activation
(Hoyle 1964). Flexor and extensor action "boxes" may be indi-
vidually variable while still producing coherent coproduction,
in a reasonably "invariant total form."
Another problem with boxes is that they are often generalized
beyond their appropriate contexts. Thus, Pearson (1985) has
recently shown that "central motor program" concepts (boxes)
derived from analyses of partial systems may be misleading
when applied to behavior in intact organisms. There are many
cases of this type of contextual sensitivity. Berridge and
Fentress (1986), for example, recently found that the affects of
trigeminal deafferentation on the form of ingestive and groom-
ing movements in laboratory rats changed systematically with
the motivational and sequential contexts in which these move-
ments were embedded. There were, in a sense, invariances, but
these were dynamic and context dependent.
Even at a descriptive level invariance is often relative and
relational. Baby mice may often show increased invariance
(precision) in contact pathways between their forepaws and face
during grooming development, while at the same time they
show more flexibility in the kinematic details and individual
limb segment trajectories that in combination make these paw
to face contacts possible (Golani & Fentress 1985). Are their
actions becoming more or less fixed? Similar issues have been
addressed in the recent target article by Berkinblit et al. (1986).
When descriptions are generalized across criteria and in
absolute terms many problems can arise. These problems can be
extended beyond reach when mechanisms are inferred. Thus,
in early ethology, "fixed," as a descriptor of action, was taken to
imply "centrally programmed," which was in turn taken to
imply "innate."
In the present target article Professor Ewert has not only
provided an elegant survey of much present day neuroethology,
but he has also argued convincingly for a position that relates
individual properties to "dynamic properties of their interac-
tion." In addition, he has shown how such dynamic and dis-
tributed approaches can yield precise data in the integration of
previously established activities. The work of Ewert and his
colleagues is exemplary in this regard. It serves as a liberating
guide to potential future connections between neuroethology
and the growing interest in "parallel distributed process" mod-
els of human cognitive neuroscience (Rumelhart et al. 1986).
Finally, I applaud Ewert's awareness of the pervasive problems
of categorization that affect our own search for invariances in
nature (e.g., in reference to Harnad 1987a). It is this combina-
tion of breadth in perspective with detailed focus in experiment
that will bring present-day neuroethology into its potential for
mature contribution.
It is important that problems of categorization that we study
in animals remind us of our own too frequent categorical (box-
like) conceptual predispositions. Thus, although Ewert does
express some uneasiness with terms such as "innate," and
"release" and unitary "mechanism" (the three foundations of
IRMs in ethology!), "innate releasing mechanisms" do invade
his manuscript (e.g., sect. 7, para. 1), along with "commands"
and other traditional box trappings. Perhaps these terms are
used as a convenient shorthand, but they can imply clarity
where there is at present mystery (cf. previous target article by
Berkinblit et al. 1986).
There is, for example, no doubt that Ewert's toads reared in
educational deprivation still do remarkable things. But these
critters continue to have a complex developmental history in
which experiential events and phylogenetic predispositions are
intimately entangled. Removing one source of experience does
not in itself clarify the processes underlying behavioral differ-
entiation. This point has been emphasized recently for inverte-
brates by Murphey (1986), who reviews compelling evidence
that changes in afferent activity can have important effects on
the detailed construction of neural networks. The extent to
which particular behavioral products are changed or buffered
under particular expressive contexts (Berridge & Fentress 1986)
is of course a matter for detailed study (Fentress & McLeod
1986).
We do not yet have an appropriate framework for evaluating
the diverse effects of experience during behavioral develop-
ment, nor the effects of the contextual factors that may exist
external to the organism (or, at least, "external" to the particular
system under investigation). A number of related questions
remain. Here I am restricted to a few of the most obvious ones.
What are the rules over which the consequences of a given
experiential manipulation generalize, for example? These rules
may or may not be modality-specific, may or may not be
constrained by actions similar in form, may or may not follow
more broadly defined principles of integrated function. Reason-
able distortions of experience might facilitate normal behavior
in comparison to omissions of experience, whereas more severe
distortions may be more likely to respecify developmental
trajectories (Fentress, in press; Horn 1985).
Full evaluation will necessitate a very careful documentation
of qualitative, quantitative, and temporal variables, separately
and together. The very concept of differentiation implies pre-
dispositions operating within the context of developmental
experience, and it is my guess that one of the most potent areas
for future neuroethology will involve the painstaking dissection
of these interlocking events during development.
This dissection will almost certainly spell the end of the very
boxes on which classical ethology was based. Developmental
"invariants" are as relative, relational, and dynamic as are the
integrative "invariants" that occupy the core of this impressive
survey. Indeed, one might speculate that a framework similar to
the dynamic center-surround and distributed processes ap-
proach Ewert has applied successfully to integrative systems
will have direct and important developmental analogues (e.g.,
in the changing balances among interactive and self-organizing
networks of ontogenetic processes; Fentress 1986). I look for-
ward to Ewert's next review, as he and his colleagues are forced
to abandon the last vestiges of the very (box + arrow [e.g.,
innate "versus" learned]) framework that has, to date, served
them so well!
More than meets the eye
Russell D. Fernald
Institute of Neuroscience, University of Oregon, Eugene, Oreg.
Neuroethologists know that the systems most likely to be un-
derstood at a neuronal level will be those responsible for eat-
ing, reproducing, or fleeing, because natural selection sees to
it that these behavioral patterns suit the animal particularly
well. For the past several years, most experimental effort has
been focused on invertebrate or "lower" vertebrate systems
where the prospects for experimental manipulations are partic-
ularly good. The target article by Ewert provides elegant experi-
mental evidence of how the toad manages to detect worms and
reject "antiworms" using a reasonably tractable experimental
system. I would like to comment on two details of the experi-
mental analysis and then on the generality of the results for
visual pattern recognition per se.
1. The orienting response of the toad appears to be impor-
tant in most of the naturally occuring cases observed. It is
likely that the animal brings the prey into the frontal visual
field because more optimal optics or a more advantageous pho-
toreceptor distribution may be utilized from that perspective.
Although Ewert reports the failure to find a foveal pit or other
378
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1987) 10:3

obvious retinal specialization, there is a clear predominance of
cones in the temporal retina in other toads (Bufo marinus,
personal observation). This suggests that there could be spe-
cialization of the feature perception pathways in localized ana-
tomical structures. If there are such differences in specialized
processing networks within a single animal, it could prove
useful to compare processing strategies. Ewert discusses the
possibility that there might be a computational "central fovea"
achieved dynamically which would enhance any directly
"wired" differences.
2. In describing the velocity invariance of the worm versus
antiworm preference (Figure 6), Ewert's figure suggests that
the toad could be easily confounded by a fast moving worm! It
seems curious that there is no threshold of stimulus angular
velocity. Since the other data suggest that the toad is making
most of its decisions based on the size of the stimulus, the
velocity data suggest that such decisions can be quick indeed
for the optimal "worm" stimulus. Could it be that with less
optimal stimuli there would be an optimal velocity, leading to
an estimate of processing time?
One of the most important questions is whether the toad's
methods for sorting its visual world will turn up in other ani-
mals. Put another way, are there general principles to be had
from the analysis of this system? First, it seems certain that the
dependence of prey-catching commands on motivation will be
general. One might postulate very strong circadian rhythms
influencing the motivational states of the toads. It is particu-
larly interesting that toads in the mating period suppress re-
sponses to worm stimuli. I suspect that the cellular basis of this
inhibition will provide some powerful insights into the neural
basis of decision making in the animal, particularly when the
choice is between sex and something else.
Second, the modification of prey selection through learning
offers an opportunity to understand generally the circuitry of
such phenomena but no quick access to its neuronal basis. The
number of possible sites and the coordination of processes in-
volved make it unlikely that this will be easily solved.
Third, the discovery that such a highly specific detection
process is based on symmetrically organized "nonfeature de-
tecting" neurons is extremely interesting. Retinal ganglion cells
do have higher firing rates for particular stimulus edge lengths
(Ewert's Figure 11), but these can be understood from general
principles of the receptive field construction. Whereas these
cells deliver information used directly in the detection process,
feature-analyzing neurons first appear in the pretectum and
tectum. Although it is not entirely surprising that this is so, the
axes along which the toad sorts information are different from
what one might first imagine. Rather than continued refinement
of the required parameters, the toad constructs a truth table
from reported properties of the stimulus.
Fourth, Ewert's conceptualization of the "command releas-
ing system" offers a solution to the difficulties in finding a one-
to-one correspondence between behavioral patterns and ele-
ments of the CNS. I would be interested in a comparison
between young and old toads to see whether the postulated
dynamic and plastic features persist as the animal gains in age
and experience. It seems likely that much older toads would no
longer exhibit the dynamic changes found in younger ones, and
that such a command system would be the site of change dur-
ing a critical period in the animal's development.
Finally, it seems clear that the analysis of the toad prey-
catching neuroethology demands the development of a new
collection of terms which will allow less restrictive metaphors
for the description of the central phenomena. To some extent,
we constrict our imagination by the terms we use to describe
how things work. Useful concepts like the "command neuron"
dominate how we describe and even think about problems in
neuroethology. The distributed, modulated, dynamic, plastic
control centers also need descriptions which help in thinking
about them.
Commentary /Ewert: Neuroethology in toads
The compleat visual system: From input to
output
M. A. Goodale
Department of Psychology, University of Western Ontario, London, Ontario,
Canada N6A 5C2
Ewert's beautifully detailed exposition of the neural circuitry
subserving visually guided behavior in the toad is an object
lesson on how to study the relationship between brain and
behavior. Workers in the field of mammalian visual systems
would do well to follow his example.
Ewert begins with a natural category of behavior - visually
guided prey-catching - and attempts to work out the neu-
robiology of the different components of that behavior. This
approach, though not an unfamiliar one in neuroethology, is
radically different from that used by most investigators in
physiological psychology. Rather than testing animals in the
familiar discrimination paradigms of the psychological laborato-
ry, Ewert instead looks directly at the visually guided move-
ments made by the toad as it catches its prey, avoids obstacles,
and escapes from predators. Thus, in addition to working out the
way in which particular features of prey and predator are
extracted from the retinal array, Ewert pays close attention to
the interface between particular combinations of stimulus fea-
tures and particular motor outputs. Indeed, the approach is
explicitly visuomotor rather than visual. As such, it concentrates
on both the selectivity of the sensory inputs to the different
visuomotor networks and the characteristics of the different
motor outputs they elicit or control.
In sharp contrast to this explicitly visuomotor approach, most
workers in the field of mammalian vision treat the visual system
as a piece of perceptual machinery, in which the different visual
channels are seen as contributing to a rich and complex, but
largely monolithic, representation of the external world. Thus,
great emphasis is put on the way in which different features of
the visual world are extracted and analyzed, but almost no
attention is paid to the way in which visual information is used to
produce different kinds of visual behavior. Indeed, it is this
theoretical commitment to vision qua perception that has
shaped the methodology used in most laboratories that study
the functional architecture of the visual system in mammals. By
using paradigms such as the visual discrimination task, the
investigator studying mammalian vision hopes to discover how
normal animals (and perhaps animals with specific brain lesions)
extract information from the stimulus array and how they code
and store that information. From their point of view then, it
makes little sense to look at the large range of different visually
guided movements or responses that animals make, since,
except for a few visual reflexes, the behavior the animal gener-
ates is always in relation to the perceptual representation the
visual system provides. Thus, the argument appears to go, the
organization of the visual system can be studied quite indepen-
dently of motor output. It does not matter what the actual motor
behavior is that the animal produces in a visual discrimination
task. The animal could be pressing a lever, jumping from one
platform to another, running down an alleyway, pulling a string,
knocking aside the cover of a foodwell, or picking up an object.
What matters is that the animal discriminates (or does not). It is
the decision, not the motor act, that interests most of these
investigators. The organization of the different motor outputs,
when considered at all, is seen as being largely independent of
the organization of the sensory inputs and as being the province
of motor physiology or of the psychology of motor skills. In fact,
with the notable exception of eye movements, the visual system
of mammals has been studied almost entirely on the input side,
with no attention being paid to the way the control of different
motor acts might influence either the specificity or the organiza-
tion of those inputs.
It is true that there have been attempts within the mammalian
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1987) 10:3
379

Commentary/Ewert: Neuroethology in toads
literature to fractionate the monolithic visual system into sepa-
rate functional entities. The "two-visual systems hypothesis" of
Gerald Schneider (1969) was one of these. But, as I have argued
elsewhere (Goodale 1983 a; 1983b; Goodale & Milner 1982), the
functional categories put forward by Schneider and his many
followers were never well-defined in terms of actual behavior.
The emphasis was always on psychological abstractions such as
"recognition" and "localization" rather than on observable be-
haviors such as reaching, jumping, walking, or grasping.
Whereas I would not deny that visual input can influence the
cognitive functions of mammals quite independently of its
contribution to particular motor outputs, I believe that the
visual system will never be fully understood unless we are
prepared to study the motor outputs controlled by that system
with the same rigor and attention to detail that we apply to the
inputs. To do this properly means that we have to study the
spatial and temporal organization of behavior in relation to the
spatial and temporal characteristics of the visual stimuli control-
ling that behavior. The power of such an approach has been
demonstrated time and time again in the study of eye move-
ments and is demonstrated here by the work of Ewert and his
colleagues who have provided for us what must be the best-
understood visual system in the whole vertebrate line.
Ewert has also made a brave attempt to deal with the funda-
mental difficulty encountered by any account of the neural
substrates of vision that invokes independent visuomotor chan-
nels — the problem of integrating the different outputs into a
well-organized sequence of behavior. I found that his "com-
mand system approach," although highly speculative in many
respects, was a very useful way of grappling with the problem.
As one might guess, any discussion of this problem is seldom
encountered in the mammalian visual literature (outside of the
study of eye movements). Again, it is the emphasis on the input
side that obviates the necessity of dealing with this issue. It is
nevertheless an issue that must eventually be faced in the
monkey (and in the human for that matter) as much as in the
toad. Indeed, until we are prepared to study the outputs of the
mammalian visual system as carefully as we study its inputs our
understanding of its underlying neural architecture and organi-
zation will remain quite incomplete.
The nervous system/behavior interface:
Levels of organization and levels of
approach
Paul Grobstein
Department of Biology, Bryn Mawr College, Bryn Mawr, Pa. 19010
For decades, the neuron has been the centerpiece of neuro-
science, with efforts to account for neuronal properties in terms
of subcellular and molecular phenomena on one side and efforts
to account for behavior in terms of interconnected nets of
neurons on the other. In recent years, there has come to be
some doubt as to whether the center can hold. The explosion of
information in cellular and molecular neuroscience has dis-
tracted many investigators from any interest in behavior, and
left others with an uncomfortable feeling that with so much to
learn about neurons the immediate prospects of relating them to
behavior are limited at best. Over the same period, the so-called
cognitive revolution has provided a perspective and meth-
odology for exploring at least some aspects of behavior which
would seem to make direct studies of the nervous system at least
unnecessary, and perhaps irrelevant. In this context, a retro-
spective review by one of the small number of senior investiga-
tors who has maintained a persistent focus on the nervous
system/behavior interface is a welcome reminder that there
continues to be an interface discipline. Ewert's target article
should serve to assure younger investigators not only that one
can have a foot in both camps without severe bodily damage but
that one can work productively in this posture. Having myself
wrestled with both orienting amphibians and disoriented col-
leagues skeptical of the value of interface research, I cannot but
be pleased to have Ewert's article available. At the same time
and for the same reasons, I want to be sure that readers do not
take from the article inaccurate impressions about the nature of
the circuitry underlying orienting, or about the character of
interface research itself. Both are more complex and rich than
the article makes clear.
Ewert's work reflects a particular approach to the nervous
system/behavior interface, one which begins with a set of
descriptors for behavior and presumes the task to be to find
neurons and neuronal networks which correspond to them.
Though demonstrably productive, this is not the only approach
available, and it has some noteworthy limitations. The most
obvious is that the behavioral descriptors one begins with tend
to constrain what one looks for in the nervous system and to
influence whether one regards particular observations as in-
terpretable. How serious this is depends on the richness of the
descriptors with which one begins, and on the investigator's
ability to be both skeptical of observations that "fit" and alert for
relevant observations that don't. Ewert's behavioral base is in
ethology, and his research took its origins from the appealing
parallel between the ethological concept of an innate releasing
mechanism and the neurophysiological concept of a trigger
feature. That he has looked beyond ethology for behavioral
descriptors, and allowed his observations to challenge a straight-
forward interpretation of the relation between behavior and the
nervous system is a mark of good interface science. These
advances are, however, not inevitable given the starting condi-
tions. It is not in practice possible to establish that there does not
exist somewhere a neuron having a particular set of trigger
features. It is only possible, having observed a large number of
relevant neurons, to begin to doubt that looking for such a
neuron is a useful approach to characterizing the nervous
system.
A more fundamental limitation of the approach Ewert ex-
emplifies reflects the assumption that, whatever behavioral
descriptors prove appropriate, there must exist neurons or
neuronal networks whose properties bear a close relation to
them. This assumption is by no means unique to Ewert; it has
become so embedded in modern neuroscience that most forget
it is not actually an essential starting point but rather a hypoth-
esis to be explored (Lashley 1951). Regularities in behavior
represent properties of a complex organized system, whereas
regularities in circuitry or neuronal response characteristics are
properties of elements of the more complex system. The two
sets of regularities need not in principle be isomorphic, and
there are an increasing number of reasons to doubt that they are
so in practice (Grobstein, in press a). Ewert has proven himself
mindful of this problem as well. His discussion of feature-
analyzing networks, of interaction, and of command systems
clearly reflects a recognition that what appears simple in behav-
ior may be complex in the nervous system. Again, however, it is
worth noting that it's not actually logically possible to get here
from there. Given a starting assumption of a simple relation
between behavioral and neural properties, persistent failure to
find certain properties might ultimately persuade one that they
don't exist, but it's a long and never definitive path.
My final concern is that Ewert's target article may leave an
impression that the business of research at the nervous sys-
tem/behavior interface is necessarily reductionist, that its sole
mission is to find the neural correlates of previously established
behavioral realities. This characterization of interface research
is a common one, which seems to endow the enterprise with a
logical justification as well as a certain pride of place as a
particularly rigorous form of behavioral science. My own sense
is that the characterization is not only misleading, for reasons
described above, but also impoverishing, and on both counts
380
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1987) 10:3

Commentary/Ewert: 
Neuroethology in toads
enhances rather than reduces the risk that the center will fall
apart. Neither behavioral scientists nor neuroscientists will
really be convinced of the worth of interface research unless it is
established that "there can be a much more dynamic and two-
way interaction between the two fields than is suggested by
thinking of one as exploring what the other will ultimately
explain mechanistically" (Grobstein 1983, p. 622).
That interface science can contribute simultaneously to un-
derstanding the nervous system and to understanding behavior
is obvious. Such fundamental neurobiological concepts as map-
ping, central pattern generation, and corollary discharge were
established by studies of normal behavior and behavior after
nervous system lesions. The latter have also produced funda-
mental changes in the way one thinks about behavior. Split-
brain phenomena provide a recent dramatic example, but many
others could be mentioned (see Jeannerod 1985 and a review of
it by Grobstein 1986). The advantage of such studies is not only
that they can contribute simultaneously to neural and behav-
ioral sciences but also that they avoid some of the disadvantages
of the more cellular approach exemplified by Ewert's work. One
need not begin with particular behavioral descriptors and wait
to be disabused of their relevance for studying the nervous
system; the behavioral abnormalities resulting from brain le-
sions suggest natural descriptors relevant to both. Similarly, the
issue of whether there are simple correspondences between
behavioral and neural descriptors can be directly and quickly
approached by lesion studies (Comer & Grobstein 1981; Grobs-
tein, in press a; in press b; Kostyk & Grobstein, in press b;
Lashley 1951).
These matters are relevant in a specific as well as in a general
context. Whereas Ewert's characterization of the sensory side of
the circuitry underlying orienting has clearly moved beyond
limitations inherent in the initial approach, this is less obviously
so for his characterization of subsequent circuitry. Our recent
lesion studies (Grobstein, in press b; Grobstein et al. 1983;
Grobstein & Masino 1986; Kostyk & Grobstein, in press a,b,c)
strongly suggest that between the tectum and the motor pattern
generating circuits underlying orienting there are more neural
structures and information-processing steps than is obvious, or
likely to become so, from single unit observations. Among these
is one in which a critical behavioral variable, stimulus location in
space, is synthesized and coded in a rather complex and unex-
pected way. The lesion findings make it highly unlikely that the
entire sensorimotor interface consists of a set of tectal neurons
which simultaneously categorize, localize, and activate pattern
generating circuitry in an appropriate fashion. Ewert's hypoth-
esis of a straightforward neural correlate for the behavioral
concept of a releasing mechanism is appealing but almost cer-
tainly an oversimplification.
In short, the sensorimotor interface and the nervous sys-
tem/behavior interface are both broader than they might appear
in Ewert's article. The latter is at least large enough to usefully
accommodate a variety of approaches, with the more cellular,
exemplified by the target article, toward one end of the spec-
trum and the more molar, briefly outlined here, toward the
other. Significantly, what is common to productive studies of
the behavior/nervous system interface is an interest in the
relation not between neurons and behavior but between ner-
vous system organization and behavior. I have argued else-
where that for these sorts of studies it is often not the neuron and
its connections that is the appropriate level of analysis but larger
information-processing blocks, consisting of meaningful neu-
ronal ensembles such as maps and pattern generators, and the
interactions among such blocks (Grobstein, in press b). The
notion of the neuron as the centerpiece of neuroscience has
served the field well for an extended period, but the time may
have come when it is necessary to acknowledge openly that the
complexity of the nervous system in general precludes linking
neuron and behavior without new attention to intermediate
level concepts and methods. The latter, rather than the neuron,
may be the most stable center for the behavior/nervous system
interface. [See also Anderson: "Methodologies for Studying
Human Knowledge" BBS 10 (3) 1987.]
Sampling and information processing
Edward Gruberg
Biology Department, Temple University, Philadelphia, Pa. 19122
Dr. Ewert presents a large and impressive body of work which
has illuminated the field. I would like to comment on a few
issues that are thorny and difficult for me.
Sampling. One component of the neurophysiological work
under discussion is an attempt to relate single unit activity in the
thalamus and tectum to toad prey-catching. Implicit in such an
approach is the assumption that one has a representative sample
of the neural elements involved. The deeper layers of the
tectum (layer 6 and below) contain the bulk of tectal cells. From
Golgi-stained material it is known that most cells in the deeper
layers have dendritic processes that extend into the superficial
layers. For many of these neurons, the axon originates not at the
cell body but at a dendrite (an example is cell c of Ewert's Figure
13Ac). My colleagues and I have found, much to our dismay,
that in recording extracellularly in the deeper layers of the frog
tectum there are relatively few cell bodies that are electrically
responsive. In addition, where cell bodies are electrically active
there is uncertainty whether that activity is an accurate rendi-
tion of what passes down the axon. We have argued elsewhere
that axonal output of at least some tectal cells may be different
from what is seen from monitoring their cell bodies (Gruberg &
Lettvin 1980).
Nonetheless, Ewert finds good correlation, between the
response of a certain type of tectal neuron, the T5(2) and prey-
catching. Under conditions when these cells fire selectively to
prey, the animal is in turn selective in prey-catching. When
these cells do not selectively fire for prey the animal is less
selective in its snapping. Ewert describes the cells as "essential
and decisive for prey-catching. " Are they? How compelling is
the suggestion if there are inherent limits in knowing what other
cells are doing? If in the future we were technically advanced
enough to ablate just T5(2) cells, how probable is it that visually
guided prey-catching would be eliminated? Even if visually
guided prey-catching were eliminated after such an ablation,
does that make T5(2) cells essential and decisive? The Sprague
Effect is a reminder of the limits of such claims (Sprague 1966).
Another part of the system? Ewert has focused primarily on
thalamic and tectal interactions. However, a related area that
appears to contribute to tectal function is the midbrain struc-
ture, the nucleus isthmi. In frogs, the n. isthmi receives a
topographic visual input from the ipsilateral tectum and the
nucleus projects topographically and bilaterally back to the
tectum. In addition, n. isthmi and retinal fibers terminate in the
same superficial layers of the tectum; they are intimately relat-
ed. Other extrinsic inputs (including from posterior thalamic
areas) project primarily to deeper layers. Unilateral ablation of
the n. isthmi leads to a scotoma to visually presented prey in the
contralateral monocular field (Caine & Gruberg 1985). We have
found that up to 11 months after ablation the scotoma remains.
These results are surprising if the tectum and thalamic areas are
the principal areas that one concentrates on and other areas are
presumed to have modulatory effects. Can the results obtained
from n. isthmi ablation be integrated with what Ewert has
discovered about cells of the tectum and thalamus?
Information and energetics. What is the relationship between
spike activity and stimulus? Ewert goes to some lengths to
demonstrate that discharges of T5(2) neurons are well correlated
with prey-catching activity and better correlated than other
types of units (particularly T5(l) and TH3). In his computation
the underlying assumption is that the cells that read the output
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1987) 10:3
381

Commentary/ Ewert: Neuroethology in toads
of tectal and thalamic cells are responding to the rate of dis-
charge alone. Is that necessarily true? Can we rule out that the
target neurons are sensitive to other changes in firing patterns?
Average neuronal discharge can be much the same and yet the
interspike interval patterns can be very different. This is not just
a theoretical issue. It was shown in frog optic nerve fibers that an
observer viewing the axons' interspike interval patterns could
make a good assessment of a variety of conditions simul-
taneously prevailing in the visual field (Chung et al. 1970). If one
had access to just the average discharge rate of these fibers,
information would be lost. Presumably some of those types of
optic nerve fibers project to the rectum. Do the tectal cells
discard the information embedded in the patterns of interspike
intervals? Do the neurons that read the output of tectal cells in
turn only measure average rate or are they more sophisticated
readers? A whispered sentence and a shouted sentence gener-
ally require different power outputs, but they can transmit the
same amount of information. T5(2) cells may be at the heart of
the matter, but that presumes we know what is signal, what is
noise, and what is to be filtered out.
Presumptions based on keyhole peeping
G. A. Horridge
Centre for Visual Sciences, Australian National University, Canberra City,
ACT 2601, Australia
One bewildering feature of this work is the great volume of
words said about the neural explanation of the toad's response to
preylike objects in comparison to the relatively small number of
recording sites that have yielded interesting neurons. From the
toad's point of view a lot of papers have resulted from the
exposure of relatively few neurons. The electrode, in fact,
behaves like a keyhole, but the resulting gossip is enormous.
What is the general relation between neuronal properties,
models, and behavior? To date, most workers have assumed that
either models or neuronal features explain behavior. The op-
posite turns out to be a more faithful approximation to the truth.
Neurons are the only components we know. When we uncover
their previously unknown features, we explain neurons by
reference to the known behavior. Model building with known or
imagined features of neurons is a quantitative confirmation. This
conclusion is the fundamental driving force behind the mecha-
nistic analysis based on recording.
Ewert's target article will interest me in 20 years' time as a
historical document that shows clearly the limitations of our
present concepts, which are in turn determined by the limits of
our techniques and revealed by the limited range of technical
terms we have available. Whether the animal is a toad, an
insect, or a leech is largely irrelevant to the methodological
problems of analyzing behavior in terms of parallel neurons
recorded in the nervous system. The basic problem is that a
complex story of detection has to be inferred from a few peeps
through a keyhole (the electrode), but there are many other
problems.
First, dozens of sentences in Ewert's review are circular in
the sense that they postulate a cause in terms of the effect, not in
terms of the mechanism, because the mechanism is unknown.
Even the type of mechanism is unknown. The first sentence of
the abstract begins: "' Sign stimuli' elicit specific patterns of
behavior. . . . " Of course they do, because in this sentence the
object and the subject define each other, in that a sign stimulus
is that which generates specific behavior. There are many such
imaginary bridges of fancy over the swamps of ignorance.
Second, quite a separate matter, the terms describing and
attempting to explain the behavior are derived from observa-
tions of the behavior. Most of the keywords - such as "action
patterns, releasing mechanisms, sign stimuli, command sys-
tems, neuromodulation, feature analysis" - are hypothetical
components of a verbal model that has not progressed beyond
the level of the simple observations of behavior that inspired
them. That is, they have not yet been revised into the language
of even the imagined mechanistic explanations, let alone the
vast as yet unknown real neuronal interactions.
Third, neurons are discussed as if they were known. The
question, "whether the perceptual operations . . . are per-
formed by a 'feature detector' [neuron] . . . or by a 'feature-
analyzing network," as outlined in Figure 2, is treated as if the
neuronal networks were real. But we already know that this
question cannot be answered unless exactly the right combina-
tions of identified neurons are simultaneously recorded. That
itself would be an improbable feat in recording. Unfortunately,
the toad's neurons are not identifiable, so no experiment can be
duplicated; and in any case we know from the anatomy that the
mechanism is both parallel and hierarchical. Also, having said
that, we have said very little, because the whole circuit - even
its components - have yet to be discovered. Numerous exam-
ples illustrate this naive idea of causality. For example, "several
small moving images aligned at small distances parallel to the
direction of movement are interpreted as prey because of
excitatory interactions" (italics mine); but in fact no such interac-
tions have been observed inside the toad. All we have is the
primary observed fact.
Also, the data that could be used to build up a neuronal model
are so limited that no satisfactory model is possible, or alter-
natively, any satisfactory model is possible. The problem is
compounded by the fact that neurons can be distinguished only
into classes, and the definition of the boundaries of the classes is
circular (being based on the occurrence of distributions that look
like classes).
Now look at this quotation: "Human beings, facing complex
phenomena, exhibit an almost obsessive urge to conceptually
mold these phenomena into structures of cause-and-effect rela-
tionships. This tendency is, in fact, so compulsive that it some-
times comes at the expense of precision and often requires the
invention of hypothetical, unobservable entities . . . to make
theories fit the mold of a causal scheme" (Pearl & Tarsi 1986).
The first danger of this method of explaining behavior is to fall
into the error of a spurious correlation; but a greater danger is to
be so aware of the uncertainties of this method of analysis by
neuronal recording, or by analysis of behavior, that the springs
of action dry up. The third danger is Whitehead's "misplaced
concreteness" - that we or others actually believe in the reality
of the postulated model, or even in the reality of the nouns
invented as parts of explanations. But we are perpetually in a
dilemma, because scientific knowledge can increase only as the
postulated causes are tested, and replaced by better approxima-
tions. It is not sufficient to discard them (in Popper's sense) if
nothing else is put in their place. Refining the models by
building into them the data from real neurons is the only way
that the analysis of behavior will approximate more and more
the analysis of neuronal activity.
Of course, the model is frequently not tested but is simply
presented. For example, toads learn to approach and snap at
visual stimuli that are not innately effective, but the neurons on
the visual pathway have not been examined in these educated
toads.
Twenty years ago I published a book (Horridge 1968) which
rapidly went out of print, and which has been stolen from many
libraries. In it I pointed out some of the difficulties in the study
of interneurons because (1) they operate in parallel, (2) the
nervous system is open-ended and (3) yet-to-be-discovered
interneurons operate in clusters but are recorded singly, and (4)
the message in the nervous system is that recorded by the
cluster of next neurons down the line, not the signal recorded by
the electrode. Given these difficulties, and numerous others in
continuations of the same theme (Horridge 1983), it is amazing
that neurons exist with properties that match any aspect of
382
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1987) 10:3

Commentary/Ewert: Neuroethology in toads
behavior at all. Almost all vertebrate neurons operate in clus-
ters. Have we been misled by a few fortunate discoveries into
believing that all neurons will turn out to have clearly self-
revealing functions?
My own view is that we know so little about primitive or
stripped down nervous systems of moderate complexity that
there are many more simple neurons to be found with proper-
ties that fit into models of the behavior. Already, however,
researchers are wondering about the next stage, how the mes-
sage can be identified in the neuron cluster. The answers will
come only by recording simultaneously downstream, to track
the information flow, and upstream to find the source. Perhaps
the toad is a good animal through which to track that flow. The
importance of these very general questions is realized as soon as
a new look at the primary data and especially a new discovery or
a better technique overturn a nicely constructed model.
The progressive introduction of new techniques introduces a
new question. Each technique new to science (e.g., de-oxy-
glucose, lucifer yellow, kainic acid, lesions, or immunofluores-
cence) gives us access to a new range of observations on old
preparations such as the toad. The real advances in science,
however, come from ideas, discoveries of new principles, and
new techniques. It is a serious question whether this analysis of
toad visual behavior has yielded anything really new to science.
Ewert's model: Some discoveries and some
difficulties
David Ingle
Dept. of Physiology, University of Connecticut, Storrs, Conn. 06268
There are (in my opinion) two main achievements of Ewert and
his collaborators. First, they have provided a large variety of
data to document the specificity of the prey schema (favoring
"wormlike" stimuli) in various species and at different ages,
further localizing key elements of the so-called IRM (innate
releasing mechanism) in the optic tectum (T5(2) cells) and lateral
medulla near the final motor output to the tongue (snapping)
muscles. Second, they have shown that the pretectum plays a
major role in the IRM (in addition to retinal afferents) by
supplying inhibition to the T5(2) cells. This mechanism, which
achieves specificity by a "subtractive" interaction between two
afferents to a visual neuron, should be considered by students of
mammalian vision, who mainly consider additive mechanisms
in the hierarchical arrangement of feature detectors. Ewert's
model does resemble that postulated for wide-field motion
detectors in cortex, where ERFs and IRFs (excitatory/ inhibito-
ry receptive fields) have opposite directional selectivities (Al-
lman et al. 1985).
Conflguratlonal perception by toads. Unfortunately, Ewert
appears to misconstrue the idea of "perceptual invariance" in
shape recognition as derived from studies of human and mam-
malian vision. In one paper, he begins by quoting the standard
example that the letter "A" can be recognized despite changes
in size, location, orientation, or script. But his so-called worm
configuration is dependent upon the object's moving along its
major axis. Properly speaking, it is not the configuration (rec-
tangle) that is identified with prey, but a particular relationship
between shape and motion. The concept of invariance as applied
to higher mammals (and perhaps birds as well) specifies that
stimulus motion (compatible with useful acuity) is irrelevant to
shape recognition! Furthermore, Ewert's own experiments
(Ewert 1968) indicate that the preference for a worm over a
square is not shown by toads when somewhat larger stimuli are
used (stimuli fitting within the ERFs of T5(2) cells). The salience
of an 8° square is equal to that of an 8 x 16° or a 8 x 32° "worm."
The striking data for "worm preference" are obtained (in several
articles) with long 2° high worms as compared to 2° squares.
Ewert does not always make it clear that his strong statements
concerning invariance of "worm sensitivity" involve worm/anti-
worm comparisons. This is a somewhat trivial observation, since
this discrimination simply reflects the well-known function of
IRFs in providing some size selectivity. Indeed, it is well known
that many tectal cells in the cat respond best to moving objects
much smaller than the ERF size and that these would also show
a worm/antiworm discrimination for a wide range of object
sizes, although one would not venture the suggestion that
worms are of much interest to a hungry cat. What is of greater
interest (but little studied by Ewert) is the summation mecha-
nism in the tectum which makes the T5(2) cell more sensitive to
worms than to squares of equal height. That discrimination is
not made by retinal cells, whereas the worm/antiworm discrimi-
nation is seen at that level. Surprisingly, Ewert does not men-
tion the nice demonstration by Roth (1986) that frogs (unlike
toads) fail to show preference for worms over squares. This fact
fits nicely with the experiments of Schiirg-Pfeiffer and Ewert
(1981) in which the frog tectum harbors few T5(2) cells compared
with their plentitude in toad tectum, and it supports his conten-
tion that T5(2) cells are a major component of the filter for
"prey." This facet of the prey schema has been of particular
interest to me, since we have observed a distinctive difference
between frogs & toads in the dendritic morphology of those
tectal "ganglionic" cells which project to the lateral medulla
(Ingle & Arango 1986).
Ewert several times implies that toads are sensitive to "con-
figuration" per se in their worm-preference behavior. Not only
would I disagree with use of the term "configuration" (as argued
above), but it would seem that Ewert has ignored his own
arguments (Burghagen & Ewert 1982) against my earlier at-
tempt to demonstrate configurational recognition in toads (Ingle
1968). In that initial study, pilot film records indicated that Bufo
americanus turned to snap at the head (rather than the tail end)
of actual mealworms or of either black or white dummy worms.
We have confirmed this with large amounts of film data from
both American and marine toads; I will rely however, upon a
published account of worm preference in B. marinus (Ingle &
McKinley 1977), to make my point. In that paper we measured
the locus of tongue strikes toward double stimuli, made from
two cylindrical yellow stimuli (mounted on a black wire like a
shishkabob) moved along a dark floor. When stimuli were only
7° apart, 85% of the strikes were aimed at the "head" stimulus,
but when the separation was increased to 15°, toads struck
equally at head and tail. Burghagen and Ewert (1982) criticized
our claim on the basis of his observation that toads would strike
at the tail end of a long white "worm" (a 2° X 32° stripe) but at
the head end of a black worm: an anticonfigurational result.
However, he ignored our earlier finding that the "configura-
tional" mechanism breaks down for such long stimuli. It seems
likely that most prey taken by toads (insect larvae) are not nearly
so long as Ewert's experimental stripes and would better match
stimulus configurations used in our experiments.
Efferent outputs of the tectum. A second point of disagreement
concerns Ewert's hypothesis that T5(2) cells are the chief ele-
ments of command systems for both orienting and snapping at
prey. I have shown (Ingle 1983a) that severing the crossed tectal
projections at the level of the ansulate commissure of the
tegmentum abolished turning toward prey (but not snapping)
while cuts of the ipsilateral tectal projections to the medulla
produced a loss of snapping at prey in the opposite monocular
field, with retention of accurate orientation in the same direc-
tions. Backfilling of tectal cells via the ansulate commissure by
horse-radish peroxidase implants in the medial medulla (the so-
called tectospinal tract) labels a homogeneous population of
neurons with dendrites ramifying only in the uppermost tectum
(Ingle 1983a; Lazdr et al. 1983) where the class-2 retinal fibers
terminate. Because the studies of Ewert and von Wietersheim
(1974b) show that T5(2) cells have a major input from class-3
fibers, I proposed (but did not demonstrate) that T5(2) cells do
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1987) 10:3
383

Commentary/Ewert: Neuroethology in toads
not provide input to the tectospinal projection (Ingle 1983a).
Ewert misquotes my hypothesis as denying that some con-
tralateral projections of T5(2) cells can be found (Sect. 6.5.1,
para. 1). In my chapter (Ingle 1983a) in the volume Ewert
edited, I explicitly stated that the ipsilateral tectobulbar tract
has a strong commissural component at the medulla level by
which the initially ipsilateral tectal efferents can cross over to
influence the contralateral medulla (p. 203). The issue as I have
stated it is whether the tectospinal tract contains T5(2) cells as
part of a "localization" mechanism (which I doubt) or whether
T5(2) cells, some of which are known to project ipsilaterally,
contribute via the medullary decussation to "priming" the
orientation mechanism (as I suggest).
In this same chapter (Ingle 1983a) I did suggest that small field
tectal cells would be more appropriate than T5(2) cells for a fine-
grained localization role. However, Mcllwain (1975) has pre-
sented a telling argument in favor of the efficiency of population
encoding by wide-field cells in the mammalian tectum directing
eye and head movements. Now converted to the "population
encoding" model, I can offer a better alternative to Ewert's
supposition regarding tectospinal cell identity. There is a class of
cells in the frog tectum recorded in my lab, but scarcely
mentioned since the pioneering observations of Lettvin et al.
(1961), which fits my expectations for a tectospinal cell: very
large spikes, selectivity for small stimuli (implying dependence
on class-2 input), and fields of 40-90° in diameter. These cells
escalate their response to successive movements of a 1° or 2°
spot, much as Lettvin described for his so-called sameness cells.
The fact that these wide-field cells do not respond immediately
to the first "prey" incursion (as do T5(2) cells) makes them
candidates for efferent cells that require priming from intratec-
tal circuitry (see discussion in the accompanying target article by
Arbib, this issue). Important future experiments with these
prey-sensitive cells include attempts to produce antidromic
stimulation from the ipsilateral and contralateral medulla (are
they tectospinal cells?) and possible changes in size-selectivity
following pretectal lesions. If these cells do not change their
size-selectivity (as I would hypothesize) they cannot depend on
major input from T5(2) cells, which become "large object detec-
tors" after a pretectal lesion.
Roles of tectum and pretectum In visually elicited avoidance
behaviors. In the same review chapter (Ingle 1983a) I argued
that the tectum, not the pretectum, is critical for eliciting and
directing avoidance jumps in the frog (e.g., Rana pipiens). This
contradicts Ewert's original suggestion that the pretectum me-
diates avoidance behavior by a mechanism parallel to the food-
pursuit role of the tectum. First, Ewert's finding that electrical
stimulation of the pretectum elicits crouching or side-stepping
is not conclusive evidence, since these responses are also com-
ponents of barrier-avoidance behavior (crawling under or step-
ping around) which I have demonstrated to depend upon the
pretectum (Ingle 1980) and not the optic tectum (Ingle 1977).
Second, I agree with Ewert's observation that pretectal lesions
impair or abolish the avoidance of visual threat within a few days
of surgery, but I have reported (Ingle 1980) that normal avoid-
ance jump directions are recovered within 1-2 weeks by frogs
with complete ablation of the pretectum. On the other hand,
rewiring of retinal inputs to the (wrong) ipsilateral tectum
results in avoidance jumps toward an approaching black disk
instead of fleeing into the opposite field, as occurs with normal
frogs (Ingle 1976). Despite these findings, Ewert has preferred
to characterize this behavior as a mere "startle response" (sec-
tion 4.3, para. 1).
One way to resolve our differences as to pretectal/tectal
control of avoidance behavior may be to change the termi-
nology. I do not regard the main responses of toads elicited by
overhead disks as avoidance maneuvers - rather, ducking,
backing, crouching, or sidestepping are better called "protec-
tive" responses. On the other hand, leaping many inches into
space to avoid a potential collision is clearly a successful avoid-
ance of capture. It may be that the first class of responses does
depend upon pretectal function, whereas the second class does
not. The circumstances biasing toads to one or the other alter-
native response should be studied in conjunction with new
lesion experiments.
Tecta/ modulation. Finally, I wish to reinforce and add to
Ewert's list of experiments indicating that the tectum is under
strong control of tegmental or diencephalic modulatory influ-
ences, since this "contextual" discussion of avoidance or feeding
behaviors has been largely omitted by students of the mam-
malian tectum who frequently lack familiarity with the eth-
ological literature. Ewert has made a notable discovery in
showing that familiar prey odor is a powerful facilitator of
feeding behavior in toads: That is, it compells them to pursue
even large objects that they would normally avoid. Ewert has
made a significant step toward understanding the link between
olfaction and visuomotor circuitry by finding that medial pallial
lesions disrupt this association. However, he is on shaky ground
in comparing this aspect of learning to functions of the mam-
malian hippocampus. Although there is good evidence that the
hippocampus participates in spatial memory among rodents,
one must recall that the integrity of simple associative memory
is a standard control observation in rats or monkeys with hippo-
campal damage. [See also Foreman & Stevens: "Relationships
Between the Superior Colliculus and Hippocampus" 10 (1)
1987.]
Under the rubric of "attention" Ewert describes tectal cells
whose discharge frequency correlates with "response read-
iness." I have noted that frogs with consistently short response
latencies prefer larger prey than frogs with longer latencies
(Ingle 1973a). Because size preference is itself presumably
under the control of the pretectal-tectal afferents, it seems
possible that the activity of deep tectal cells is reciprocally
related to the activity of modulatory cells of the pretectum.
Ewert (1971) has described in toads an interesting class of
pretectal cell that gives a long discharge (typically 15-20 sec.)
following brief incursion of a visual stimulus. Such cells also exist
in the frog's pretectum (my unpublished studies) and may be
linked to my behavioral observation that following 5 sec. of
"intimidating" a frog with a large black object, there is a 15 sec.
interval during which the frog is inhibited from attacking prey
on the same side of the midline (Ingle 1983b).
A class of modulation not mentioned by Ewert concerns my
demonstration that pretectal lesions abolish the ability of frogs
to make detours around obstacles to approach prey seen through
a semitransparent barrier. I have shown (Ingle 1983a) that the
overshooting of the barrier depends upon the integrity of the
isthmus level decussations, but these split-isthmus frogs are still
inhibited from snapping at occluded prey, whereas the pretec-
tal-lesioned animals jump into the barrier in a feeding attempt.
These data suggest that pretectal projections to the tectum
modulate the decision whether to snap at or merely to fixate
prey. This decision, in the absence of a barrier, is guided by prey
distance (Ingle 1976), which in turn is a determinant of the
optimal angular size of prey (the size-distance constancy effect,
described in the target article). Since animals with pretectal
damage lose this constancy behavior, it seems that the pretec-
tum is associated with the discrimination of object distance as
one factor controlling the size preference. Thus, the snap/fixate
decision may come under pretectal control in two different
ways: influenced both by the presence of barriers and by the
perception of distance. Our unpublished finding is that ante-
rograde horse-radish peroxidase (HRP) transport from medial
pretectum is mainly to deep laminae, and from lateral pretec-
tum it is mainly to superficial layers; this may be relevant to the
functional dichotomy in question.
In summary, a good deal of the complexity of tectal functions
in frogs and toads may reflect the multiplicity of modulating
inputs. Unravelling the details of these systems will be critical
for understanding the variability and subtlety of natural behav-
384
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1987) 10:3

Commentary/Ewert: Neuroethology in toads
ior and will have considerable significance for studies of homolo-
gous systems in the mammal. Ewert's suggestion that pretectal-
to-tectal connections have dropped out in mammals is incorrect:
Each of the three major pretectal nuclei in various mammals
projects to the tectum, although we remain ignorant of their
functions. It is to be hoped that Ewert's pioneering approach to
toad pretectal functions will prove heuristic for mammalian
studies as well.
Neuroethology and color vision in
amphibians
S. L. Kondrashev
Institute of Marine Biology, Far East Branch of the Academy of Sciences of
the U.S.S.R., Vladivostok 690022, U.S.S.R.
About 10 years ago we conducted experiments on common frogs
with lesions of the dorsal thalamus (Kondrashev & Dimentman
1978) and succeeded in reproducing many effects described by
Dr. Ewert. Our evidence, which was obtained both in the
breeding season and in the winter hibernation period when no
prey-catching reactions can normally be seen, convinced us that
visually guided behavior of amphibians really results from com-
plex interactions of different brain centers. The role of central
mechanisms was also confirmed in our control electrophysio-
logical experiments by the fact that the characteristics of retinal
detectors (ganglion cells) remained unchanged even in the
breeding season.
The results of Ewert's data and our own (Gnyubkin &
Kondrashev 1978) have suggested that the caudal dorsal
thalamus may determine some sort of hierarchy in the toad's
motivation, and consequently its choice of behavior on the basis
of analysis of external and internal stimuli. Ewert's target article
justly attributes a special significance to the motivation that
modulates the prey-catching activity in toads (sect. 6.4.1); the
role of motivation, however, has been poorly studied and needs
further research.
It seems to me that applying a broad neurobiological approach
to the study of other types of visually guided behavior could help
us understand the role of motivational factors. Mating behavior
of anuran amphibians, which has been found to be controlled to
a great extent by visual stimuli (Kondrashev et al. 1976) is of
particular interest. Most noteworthy is the similarity of many
parameters of visual stimuli eliciting approach and clasping
responses in mating behavior and some elements of prey-
catching behavior in toads (similar to avoidance behavior in both
cases; Gnyubkin & Kondrashev 1978). Moreover, as the moti-
vation to mate fades, the same "prey "-sized visual stimulus (a
ball of 1 cm in diameter) can alternatively elicit prey-catching
and sexual responses in the same male individual of Rana
temporaria. This evidence seems to corroborate Ewert's sug-
gestion that there is a functional similarity between command
elements of these different types of behavior.
There is one visual stimulus parameter, however, that Ewert
excludes from his discussion (sect. 3.1): the color of the object.
Color plays a key role in the breeding behavior of frogs and
toads: Male common frogs prefer red objects and male common
toads prefer blue objects (Kondrashev et al. 1976). This turns
out to be a "true" case of color discrimination, including the
property of perceptual constancy (Gnyubkin et al. 1975); the
discrimination is pronounced even at very low illumination
(about 0.01 lux, Kondrashev 1985). Blue color attracts the
animals so strongly that male common toads even preferred
motionless flat discs presented together with living female toads
(Gnyubkin & Kondrashev 1978).
If we adhere to the hypothesis of "interaction" (sect. 5.4) we
should suggest the existence of command elements of a "color
type." But how is the color information transmitted through
neural circuits? I believe we have here an interaction of neural
information from a tectal projection and from a projection into
the rostral dorsal thalamus (the neuropil of Bellonci). It has been
convincingly shown that these two projections differ signifi-
cantly in color-coding properties (Maximov et al. 1985; Orlov &
Kondrashev 1978) and that only the thalamic projection contain-
ing blue-sensitive "on"-elements of an opponent color type
provides a reliable signal about the color of an object. It is
interesting that some color preference was also observed in the
prey-catching behavior of Bufo bufo and Bufo viridis (Orlov &
Maximov 1982). However, the question of the site of con-
vergence of different information on a colored prey-stimulus
object remains open in this case as well, as tectal type-2 units are
completely devoid of the ability to discriminate color, whereas
the elements from the neuropil of Bellonci, which discriminate
colors perfectly well, respond very feebly to objects of prey size.
A study of the color stimulus as a key parameter in some types
of behavior can also be very useful in elucidating onto- and
phylogenetic aspects of the problem under discussion (sect.
3.3.3). In fact, the difference in organization of the command
neurons in male toads preferring blue objects and in male frogs
preferring red ones is quite obscure. Another problem: What is
the difference between these mechanisms in male and female
individuals of the same species, as active visual search for and
sexual approach toward "mates" in the breeding period is
observed in males only?
Worm detector replaced by network model -
but still a bit worm-infested
Gerhard Rotha and Kiisa Nishikawab
•Department of Biology, University of Bremen, 2800 Bremen, Federal
Republic of Germany and "Museum of Vertebrate Zoology, University of
California, Berkeley, Calif. 94720
J.-P. Ewert was among the very first to bring together quan-
titative work on unrestrained behavior and studies of the prop-
erties of neuronal networks. Ewert's multidisciplinary ap-
proach, using ethological, neurophysiological, neuroanatomi-
cal, and theoretical methods, has served as a paradigm for the
whole field of neuroethology. This is his most important contri-
bution to biology, which stands above any of the details of his
work. Furthermore, through his own experiments, as well as
the suggestions of others, he has transcended the concept of
feature detectors that has dominated the field of neuroethology
for some time. This concept has been replaced by the insight
that object recognition is a function of a network consisting of
several types of neurons with overlapping preferences for cer-
tain features, rather than discrete prey dectectors.
A few observations are in order, however.
1. Despite much modification relative to earlier versions,
Ewert's model remains too restricted in the sense that it applies
almost exclusively to the prey-catching behavior of one species
(the common toad, Bufo bufo) under laboratory conditions. The
key stimuli that most strongly release a particular behavior
pattern are regularly observed to be highly abnormal. For
example, the stimulus that is the strongest releaser of the
snapping response in Salamandra salamandra is a square that is
far too large to be eaten (Roth in press). Thus, there is no
necessary association between the strength of a releasing stim-
ulus and its relevance to natural behavior. Furthermore, gener-
al statements by Ewert concerning prey preferences in anurans
are inaccurate. By far the most common dietary specialization
found among anurans in general, and bufonids in particular, is a
preference for small compact prey such as ants, not for wormlike
objects (Emerson 1985). Considering only Bufo bufo, the pref-
erence for wormlike objects over compact prey is not as strong as
it would appear from Ewert's arguments. In the range of edible
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1987) 10:3
385

Commentary/Ewert: Neuroethology in toads
prey sizes, there is no significant preference for wormlike over
compact prey. Only well above the range of edible sizes of the
square, which represents compact prey, is the wormlike stim-
ulus preferred.
2. In Ewert's network model, although based on the idea of
interaction between different types of tectal and pretectal neu-
rons, the role of the T5(2) type, which responds preferentially to
wormlike objects as a second order processing neuron, is exag-
gerated. It has been shown by several investigators, including
Ewert and coworkers, that in other anurans (e.g., ranids) char-
acteristics of T5(2) tectal cells are not as clearly expressed as they
are in toads. The same is true for most species of salamanders,
which prefer very small, compact prey (Roth 1982; in press).
Ewert's network model should be formulated in more general
terms, in the sense that the minimal prey recognition network is
composed of a number of response types, some of which are
universal (e.g., T5(l), T5(3), Tl, T3 etc.) and some of which are
characteristic of only certain species with preferences for certain
types of prey (e.g., T5(2)). It has been shown in a network model
by an der Heiden and Roth (1983) that small changes in inhibito-
ry coupling among tectal/pretectal neurons may change re-
sponse characteristics dramatically.
Related to this point is the question of tectal output elements.
Ewert assumes that T5(2) cells are the main output elements
with regard to prey recognition from the tectum to brainstem
premotor centers. However, as we argue above, the relative
importance of cell types as output elements should vary among
species with different prey preferences. Furthermore, the data
of Ewert and coworkers, as well as others, show that more than
one type of tectal cell sends efferent fibers to the premotor
centers. There is insufficient experimental evidence and no
conceptual necessity for assuming that the tectum is the final
stage in the prey recognition process, the result of which is
summed up by one output element. It could well be that the
activity of different cell types involved in prey recognition is
only summated at premotor levels.
3. Precise distance estimation and recognition of absolute size
are necessary prerequisites not only for prey localization but
also for prey recognition, especially for distinguishing between
predator and prey. However, all tectal cell types studied so far
respond only to the angular, rather than the absolute, size of
prey objects. This means that they cannot distinguish reliably
between large but distant objects (e.g., enemy) and small
nearby objects (e.g., prey). To date there is no known mecha-
nism in the tectum by which size constancy can be explained on
the basis of tectal response types. Ewert does not give enough
consideration to this very important problem. It appears that
those tectal cell types usually regarded as being involved in prey
recognition only provide information about shape, relative size,
and relative velocity; distance information (most probably based
on disparity cues; Collett 1977) is processed separately by tectal
and/or pretectal/thalamic networks. Only together do these
pieces of information form the percept "prey" or "predator." If
these independent pieces of data are not summated in the
tectum, but converge on motor centers separately, then there is
no true prey recognition center in the tectum and, in a strict
sense, there may not be such a center in the brain at all.
We emphasize that these comments are suggestions for en-
largement of Ewert's model, and not alternative views.
Sensorimotor maps in the tectum
A. Roucoux and M. Crommelinck
Laboratory of Neurophysiology, University of Louvain, B-1200 Brussels,
Belgium
Ewert stresses the tight linkage that may exist between sensory
input and motor output in prey-catching and, more particularly,
the orienting behavior of toads. He postulates that the transla-
tion between sensory and motor space, that is, the transforma-
tion of the spatial coordinates of the target into the appropriate
motor coordinates of the different segments involved, is realized
thanks to a fixed correspondence between the sensory map, in
retinal coordinates, and the motor map, which is in turn con-
nected with circuits controlling "fixed action patterns." In our
opinion, this hypothesis of a relatively rigid sensorimotor inter-
face raises important problems of adaptability that the author
leaves open. We would like to argue that a strict topographical
sensorimotor correspondence at the tectal level is unable to
explain how the movements of all the segments involved in
orienting behavior are individually programmed. Indeed, if the
sensory transducer (the eye in this case) is mobile with respect to
the segment to be oriented, the sensory (retinal) and motor
(head or trunk) coordinate systems may differ. This misalign-
ment of the two sets of coordinates is proportional to the rotation
of the eye in the orbit or the head on the trunk.
What is the mobility of these different segments in anurans?
According to Dieringer and Precht (1982), the head-immo-
bilized frog has vestibular and optokinetic reflexes of the eye,
composed mainly of slow compensatory drifts, the amplitude of
which is typically more or less 4 deg. There are no data, to our
knowledge, about the presence of these reflexes during spon-
taneous or visually triggered head rotations in the free animal.
Moreover, spontaneous eye saccades seem to be absent when
the head does not move. The head movements, on the other
hand, are of quite a large amplitude. Toads do make exploratory
movements of the head in a stationary visual environment
(Ewert 1984a). Dieringer et al. (1982) have measured frog
optokinetic and vestibular head movements extending about 45
deg. As a consequence, the anuran eye, despite its small intrin-
sic mobility, may be oriented, with the help of the head,
through quite a large range with respect to the body axis. It
could thus happen that a toad detects a prey object when its
head is not aligned on the trunk. In this case, a rigid visuomotor
connection would perhaps yield a good head movement but
certainly not an adequate trunk rotation: A correct alignment of
head and trunk on the target would not be possible. The
orienting behavior must be modulated not only by selective
attention, motivation, and so on, but it must also be guided by
positional information about the mobile segments.
In man, fixating a visual target usually requires a coordinated
eye and head movement. The amplitude of the head rotation
depends on the initial eye position: It is encoded in a cranio-
centric set of coordinates (Roucoux & Crommelinck, un-
published observations). We have explored this problem more
extensively in alert cats by microstimulation of the superior
colliculus (SC) (Guitton et al. 1980; Roucoux et al. 1980). From
this study, it appears that the SC of the cat is directly involved in
visual orientation of eye, head, and trunk. It can be divided
functionally into three regions. The central visual field (25 to 30
deg. around the area centralis) projects in topographical order
onto the superficial layers of approximately the rostral half of the
structure (zone 1). Microstimulation of the deep layers in this
area yields eye saccades, the amplitude and direction of which
are independent of initial eye position (retinocentric coding). In
this zone, the visual and motor maps seem to be rigidly con-
nected, something that would be expected in a structure impli-
cated in eye orientation only. The visual field extending from 30
to 60 deg. is projected onto the medial region of the SC (zone 2).
Microstimulation in this zone evokes a combination of eye and
head movements such that gaze is displaced according to the
overlaying visual map. Here, when initial eye position changes,
the amplitude and direction of the ocular saccade varies; the
head saccade, on the contrary, remains constant. This suggests
that zone 2 output layers encode eye as well as head movements
in the frame of reference of the head (craniocentrically) and that
a coordinate transformation occurs somewhere in the functional
path between collicular input and output. It is as if the sensory
386
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1987) 10:3

Commentary/Ewert: Neuroethology in toads
map could "move" as a function of eye position, with respect to
the motor map. There is still a third zone in cat's SC which is
caudally situated. This zone receives projections from the pe-
riphery of the visual field. Stimulation there produces head
saccades that, are not constant for a given site. They change in
amplitude and direction with initial head position and tend to
bring the head to a given position on the trunk. The deep layers
of this zone thus appear to be coded in the frame of reference of
the trunk (somatocentrically). This observation suggests that in
this zone the sensory map "moves" with respect to the motor
map as the head turns on the trunk.
In a large part of the SC of the cat, there is thus no rigid
topographic link between input and output. The existence of
zone 1 seems to be tied to the ability of the cat to execute an
ocular saccade without simultaneously turning the head or
trunk. This ability is characteristic of all foveate animals and is
particularly well developed in man and monkey. In the latter
species, the whole SC appears to be devoted exclusively to
controlling eye movements; in parallel, these saccades attain 45
to 50 deg. from the primary position, twice the oculomotor
range of the cat. One might speculate that collicular zone 1
develops progressively along the phylogenetic scale in parallel
with the fovea and the foveate type of eye saccade to the point of
completely "invading" the SC. Zone 1 could be considered a
"neo-colliculus." The cat's zones 2 and 3 might represent the
state of evolution of the SC at the anuran level; a structure
mainly devoted to orienting the oral pole and the visual recep-
tors toward prey by rotation of the neck and the rest of the body,
as well as to triggering the motor sequence necessary to consum-
mate. As a consequence, it is highly improbable that there is a
fixed topographic correspondence between input and output in
the anuran's SC. A head position signal must be integrated in
the orienting sequence.
Implicit versus explicit computation
Kent A. Stevens
Department of Computer Science, University of Oregon, Eugene, Oreg.
97403
Suppose you were asked to design a detector that is selective for
moving elongated shapes traveling in the orientation in which
they are elongated (W configuration). To make things challeng-
ing, could you construct such a detector using only radially
symmetric operators, and could you devise a scheme that would
not require the intermediate computation of either the orienta-
tion of elongation or the motion? Since the detection task for W
configuration is formulated in terms of elongation and orienta-
tion, and yet the restrictions placed on the solution prohibit the
use of oriented, elongated, motion-selective receptive fields,
some "trick," or at least some elegant method seems necessary.
Just such a method was adopted by the toad, it seems.
Here is approximately the scheme, as I infer it. The basic
operator is a spatiotemporal differentiator, a receptive field that
resembles a difference of Gaussians, which delivers a signal
approximately proportional to the time rate of change of the
spatial convolution, roughly comparable to a transient "Y-cell."
There are three such operators of increasing size: R2, R3, and R4
(ERF diameters of 4°, 8°, and 12-15°). The optimal stimulus is a
moving spot that just fills the ERF - referring to Figure 11 of the
target article, note where the peak response occurs in a-c. The
substantial independence of the response of these operators
with respect to bar length when the bar is moving in W-
configuration can be understood largely in terms of spatial
integration of the balanced center-surround organization. One
can construct a remarkably clever detector, or filter, specific to
W configuration just by combining their relative responses.
Before continuing, I hasten to add that my characterization of
the functional organization is necessarily a simplification, but
not an oversimplification, I believe. For example, the substan-
tial sustained response exhibited by R2 neurons and the relative
latencies and timing of the interneurons all provide important
(but not, I suspect, critical) contributions to the overall W-
configuration detection scheme.
As a first approximation, consider the algebraic combination
(R2 - R3). The optimal stimulus for (R2 - R3) would be a
moving circle that just fills the ERF of R2, since it would be
optimal for R2 but suboptimal for R3. Any larger stimulus would
produce a net negative - that is, R3 acts as inhibitory evidence.
The computation (R3 — R4) would operate similarly over corre-
spondingly larger stimuli (optimal for 8°). Computing ((R2 + R3)
— (R3 + R4)) extends over the entire range of scales from R2 to
R4, and would "pass" bars moving in W-configuration and
squares, with optimal response for widths that fill the R3 ERF.
To perform this computation, first compute the inhibitory
sum (R3 + R4) by the interneuron TH3. Then, at T5(l), add R2
+ R3 and subtract TH3. The function computed by T5(l) is far
too dependent on stimulus area (Figure 11). Better specificity
for elongation is achieved at the level of T5(2) by sharpening the
inhibition from TH3. Thus far we have a purely feed-forward,
hierarchical computation, on the order of the "feature detector'
in Figure 2. Mutual facilitation across neighboring T5(l) cells
and mutual inhibition of TH3 neurons on adjacent T5(2) cells
(Figure 19) would allow correlation of the W and A evidence
across space and time as the target moves across the visual field.
One can thus view the repeating elements of the network in
Figure 19 as encoding, by analogical circuitry, a truth table,
whereupon only those signals that would arise from a stimulus
moving in W-configuration are passed through to T5(2). One
finds that the combinations of responses of R2, R3, and R4 in
Figure 11 to different stimuli are highly predictive of the TH3
and T5(l) intermediate results and of T5(2) responses.
Reflecting on this computation, I was quite struck by how the
toad has so completely sidestepped the need for explicit process-
ing of orientation and of elongation (the defining spatial proper-
ties of the W-configuration). Evolution discovered an alter-
native spatiotemporal relationship that permits the T5(2)
neuron to be tuned to the W-configuration "directly." I take
from this the lesson not to trust intuitions as to what would
constitute the most natural or direct technique for implement-
ing some function neurally.
Note that if the functional components resembled Hubel and
Wiesel's (1962) simple cells, as might have been expected, it
would have taken considerable redundancy to achieve isotropic
behavior. With the toad's scheme, one starts with and ends with
circularly symmetric operators.
Ewert proposes that prey is represented in terms of schemas
defined by shared spatiotemporal features. The toad has
evolved a schema/antischema pair that seems both elegant and
economical. The worm/antiworm distinction permits one neu-
ral substrate to compute a quantity that subserves both prey
pursuit and predator avoidance, all within one bounded con-
tinuum of spatiotemporal features. But is the notion of paired
antagonistic schemata a principle that is extensible? Or is it
serendipitous that the defining features of prey and predator
happen to lie at opposite ends of the same continuum? I suspect
the latter.
At various points (e.g., sect. 3.5.2, para. 3) Ewert remarks
that the explicit assertion "worm" does not appear to exist in the
toad's visual world. The worm-antiworm schema is intimately
tied to the motor processes. But if toads had a larger repertoire
of behavior regarding worms than merely eating them, wouldn't
one expect to find neurons that more obviously asserted the
existence of a worm? Even then it would probably be difficult to
argue that any given neuron or cluster of neurons served the sole
purpose of representing "worm." Another lesson from the toad,
I suggest, is to lead us to expect functional assemblies rather
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1987) 10:3
387

Commentary/Ewert: Neuroethology in toads
than representational maps. That is, the cytoarchitecture will
give evidence for the functional architecture of the processors,
and only very indirect evidence for the internal representations
operated upon by those processors. In that regard, the notion of
a releasing mechanism (RM) might well carry over to higher
organisms - but it will be hard to demonstrate. Rather than an
RM leading to an external response, it would result in an
assertion within an internal representation, which would then
constitute a potential stimulus for a subsequent level of RMs.
Studying such internal processes is of course much more diffi-
cult than studying those that give rise to external behavior.
Are the toad's basic strategies for representing and manipulat-
ing stimulus features extensible much beyond the task domain
of the toad? In human vision there would seem to be a need for
substantially different methods for describing visual events and
for constructing higher-order descriptions of the visual world
which might or might not yield overt behavior. The central
difference, perhaps, concerns the richness of the intermediate
representations, and the flexibility required of these represen-
tations to support the astronomically complex mapping between
the set of stimulus features and potential behavioral responses
one might make.
Intelligent neurons
G. Sz6kely
Department of Anatomy, University Medical School, H-4012 Debrecen,
Hungary
I do not think that anyone else would know better what the frog's
brain understands of the story the eye tells than Jorg-Peter
Ewert. His target article indeed provides enjoyable reading in
which he explains to us the complex series of neural events that
occur between prey recognition and snapping. The article and
the large body of fascinating work by the author are all the more
interesting because the problem of neural control mechanisms
he so effectively tackles in connection with the visual system has
a more general applicability to the behavior of a living creature.
The basic idea is that there are a few types of key neurons which
are selectively sensitive to certain sign stimuli and decide on the
release of the appropriate motor behavior. This suggestion
touches one of the fundamental questions about neural control
mechanisms, namely, whether they process information serially
or in parallel. This question has a strong bearing on the main
topic of the target article and is also raised in the introduction.
The serial processing mechanism requires as a prerequisite - I
would say creates - intelligent neurons capable of making
decisions somewhere along the line in a neural net of well-
defined connectivity blueprints. Parallel processing is much
more difficult to define; it involves networks of dynamic struc-
tural organization and the decision-making property is a dis-
tributed, I would say, an emergent, property of the network.
The question is a great deal more difficult than it may seem at
first sight, because the end result of processing, either serial or
parallel, is almost always a regular sequence of events appearing
serially at the output channel. The simplest way to circumvent
this problem is to pose the question of whether the two process-
ing mechanisms are mutually exclusive, or the brain can make
use of both principles. Unfortunately, this cannot be demon-
strated or disproved, in our present state of knowledge about
central mechanisms. I will therefore make a brief conjecture
about this problem and then propose that we investigate, by
making comparisons with other neural mechanisms, the model
featuring the T5(2) neuron as the neural mechanism underlying
visually guided behavior.
Let us consider, for the moment, the various patterns of
tetrapod locomotion over land. The salamander is only capable
of performing a single pattern: the diagonal coordination of the
four limbs, in phase with the sinusoidal undulating movement of
the whole body. (Concavity is associated with protraction,
convexity with retraction, of the limb.) Several lines of evidence
(Szekely 1963; Szekely & Cz6h 1971; 1976; Brandle & Sz6kely
1973) suggest that a predetermined structure in the medullospi-
nal neuraxis controls this movement pattern. If the spinal cord is
transsected at the midthoracic level, the diagonal coordination
of the four limbs is destroyed, while the alternating coordination
of the forelimbs and hind limbs is maintained. If the transsection
is made at die rostral border of die hind limb moving spinal cord
segments, the alternating coordination is destroyed and the
limbs paddle synchronously on the two sides. The same happens
to the forelimb pair if the spinal cord is separated from the
medulla. However, thoracic spinal cord segments and the
medulla are interchangeable in this respect, since thoracic
segments grafted in front of forelimb moving segments, and the
medulla in front of the hind limb segments, are able to control
the alternating coordination of limb pairs. The limbs receive
their innervation from three spinal cord segments; if one of them
is removed, the paddling coordination is destroyed while the
limb-like coordination in the movement of the single limb is
maintained.
As we have surveyed the different levels of coordination, it
seems that they are associated with the different lengths of the
neuraxis involved in the control rather than with the presence of
hypothetical intelligent neurons that command the timing of
different motor activities. In other words, the capacity to control
the different levels of coordination is very probably distributed
in the medullo-spinal neuraxis. We may also ask whether the
capacity of the frog spinal cord to control walking or jumping is a
distributed property, or else associated with the action of intel-
ligent neurons that can gauge the situation and command the
appropriate motor pattern. I do not think that anyone would
vote for the second alternative.
What have all these to do with vision? We have learned that
prey-catching is composed of a series of sequentially released
acts: orienting, approaching, fixating, and snapping. Although it
is emphasized in Ewert's article that these actions may occur in
variable order, Ewert still suggests that prey-catching behavior
is controlled by serial information processing. The toad is a very
sluggish creature; this makes possible the clear distinction of
these sequences. A salamander larva, which is a predator, snaps
at the moment it sees a moving object in its visual field without
any distinguishable sequences. The same applies to the tree
frog, which may jump even if the prey is not in the frontal visual
field. Sequences, therefore, appear at the output channel, like
the regular sequence of muscle contractions in the act of walk-
ing; they do not necessarily refer to corresponding serial pro-
cessing in the center. If the forebrain is removed, the animal
loses its spontaneity in feeding, but I would question the notion
that this inertia is the consequence of the removal of an inhibito-
ry effect of the forebrain on the pretectum which inhibits
catching, as suggested in the target article. The effect suggests
that prey recognition, localization, and snapping may be con-
trolled by wide areas of the brain in which parallel processing
looks more plausible. At this point I would like to introduce into
the picture some elements of the concepts of the Griissers (1976)
that the ever-moving, orienting, approaching animal receives
important feedback signals whose contribution to the establish-
ment of the visual universal cannot be overlooked.
Throughout Ewert's article a special emphasis is placed on the
T5(2) neuron, which plays a key role in visual behavior. I cannot
help noticing a similarity between this and the classical concept
of somatosensation in which, after the discovery of modality-
specific sensory spots in the skin by von Frey (1910), mor-
phologically defined receptors are assigned to each modality
388
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1987) 10:3

despite almost a century of futile effort to correlate receptor
types with specific sensory areas. Just as the free nerve endings
in the epidermis complain of pain when irritated, the TH3 cells
tell the T5(2) cells that they must not snap, whereas the T5(l)
cells encourage them to do so. The complicated visual behavior
is drastically reduced to a switchboard in which the decision is
made by the intercommunication of three or four types of
intelligent neurons in a process of unidirectional information
flow.
The T5(2) master cell is supposedly an efferent neuron, but its
identification is apparently not an easy task. In their recent
intracellular recording experiments Ewert and his colleagues
(see target article) injected cobalt into a physiologically identi-
fied T5(2) neuron and described it as a pyramidal cell. In Figure
18A this neuron resembles a partially labelled ganglion cell
more than a pyramidal neuron and the presumed axon takes a
rather unusual pathway for an efferent neuron. I can well
imagine that difficulties in physiological and morphological
identification are enormous with 10 classes of pretectal neurons
and 9 classes of tectal ones. These large numbers (supplemented
by subclasses) suggest that the cell-types may represent a
continuum rather than discrete classes, and transition from one
class into another may not always be obvious. I wonder whether
it ever happens that a neuron in a certain class changes its
physiological properties under changing experimental condi-
tions (e.g., varying background illumination). Toward the end of
the article Ewert makes a compromise and composes a "feature-
analyzing network" of "feature-analyzing neurons." This does
not alter the principle of information processing, since instead of
just one or a few, a group of intelligent neurons play the leading
role in the same cast.
It only remains to show how I envisage a "feature-analyzing
network" with the eye of a neuroanatomist. As mentioned
above, it is very difficult to define a structure without subtle
knowledge about its component elements and its dynamic
functional properties. One physiological parameter is known,
namely, there are neurons which display distinct sensitivity to
some well-defined stimuli. One histological parameter is also
known: There are a variety of neurons arranged in a number of
layers in the optic tectum. Looking at this structure one cannot
fail to realize that single neurons cannot perform an operation
independently of each other; but ought to form - as Ewert also
proposes - some kind of functional unit. This may assume a
columnar form or any other form. If the microelectrode picked
out a neuron from one of these assemblies its response proper-
ties would depend on direct and indirect retinal input, non-
visual input, and on intra- and interassembly interactions within
the excited area. I would think it a plausible supposition that the
response properties of a neuron are determined by the actual
excitatory state of that assembly rather than by a series of
predetermined interconnections among intelligent neurons
within the structure. An apparent "commanding" neuron in one
state of excitation may change to a "subordinate" neuron in
another state. Prey perception, recognition, and all the other
computation that occurs until the worm is caught require the
operation of a number of interacting assemblies. There is there-
fore a large gap between the specific sensitivity of a neuron and
prey recognition. The latter is a distributed property of the
visual system, and the mesencephalic and diencephalic (proba-
bly also prosencephalic) centers may be equally involved in
feature detection, analysis, recognition, and so forth - activities
not of the single cell, but of the frog.
Response /Ewert: Neuroethology in toads
Author's Response
Toad's prey-catching: A complex system
with heuristic value
Jorg-Peter Ewert
Neuroethology Department, University of Kassel, D-3500 Kassel, Federal
Republic of Germany
First I should like to thank all twenty-two commentators
for preparing such an exciting array of commentaries
which tackle the subject in depth from so many points of
view (see Table 1). The following main topics turned out
to be of particular interest.
Table 1. Outline of author's response
Topic
Commentators
1. The usefulness of etholog-
ical concepts in neuroeth-
ology
2. Problems with conceptual
boxes
3. The analysis of behavior-
ally relevant stimulus fea-
tures
4. The principle of feature
extraction
5. The modes of neuronal
coding
6. The question of serial and
parallel processing
7. The evaluation of behav-
ior-specific efferents
8. The concept of command
releasing systems
9. The idea of interacting
neural assemblies
10. The linkage between sen-
sori- and motor-spaces
11. The modulation of neural
function
12. The onto- and phy-
logenetic aspects
13. The question of a "self-
module"
14. The heuristic value of the
analysis of toad's visual
behavior
15. The limitations of our
view
Baerends; DiDomenico &
Eaton; Fentress
Broom; Fentress
Fernald; Ingle; Kondra-
shev; Roth & Nishi-
kawa
Arbib; Fernald; Stevens
Gruberg
Fentress; Sz6kely
Ingle
Comer; DiDomenico &
Eaton; Kondrashev
Arbib; Szekely
Comer; Goodale; Grob-
stein; Roucoux & Crom-
melinck
Baerends; Doty; DiDo-
menico & Eaton; Eb-
besson; Ehret; Fentress;
Fernald; Ingle; Kon-
drashev
Baerends; Camhi; Eb-
besson; Ehret; Fernald;
Fentress; Goodale;
Roucoux & Crom-
melinck; Stevens
Dennett; Doty
DiDomenico & Eaton;
Doty; Ebbesson; Ehret;
Fentress; Fernald;
Goodale; Ingle; Stevens
Grobstein; Horridge
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1987) 10:3
389

ResponseVEwert: Neuroethology in toads
Concepts and terms. On the occasion of a neuroethology
workshop at Airlie House (Maryland) in 1985 there was a
discussion of why we lack concepts original to neu-
roethology, comparable to the ones that stimulated ad-
vances in ethology (e.g., sign stimulus, heterogeneous
summation, innate releasing mechanisms (IRMs), fixed
action patterns (FAP), command function). Do we really
need new concepts in advancing neuroethology, which
receives its impulses from ethology? According to
Baerends, the IRM concept and its derivatives "were
never meant to have an explanatory value in themselves
and suggestions concerning the underlying physiological
mechanisms were only intended to stimulate their inves-
tigation and, it was hoped, to guide it" (see also Tinbergen
1951). Through an interdisciplinary approach, neu-
roethology allows us to elucidate these historical concepts
in terms of evolving concepts (e.g., see Eaton 1983).
DiDomenico & Eaton point out that in many instances
neurophysiology is guided by behavioral concepts rather
than the reverse. Hoyle (1984) was one of the first to
explicitly stress this aspect, although perhaps in too
restrictive a manner.
As Fernald suggests, in certain cases neuroethology
may call for a new collection of terms. I believe, however,
that we can, proceed with the three classic terms innate
(Baerends), command release (Comer, DiDomenico &
Eaton), and mechanism (Doty), if these are appropriately
redefined and if we are aware of the problems of concep-
tual boxes and their reciprocal actions, to which Fentress
draws attention. For example, I see in the dynamic
parallel-hierarchical processing of feature combination-
related information expressed by an ensemble of spe-
cialized neurons, an "evolving detector concept of the
sign stimulus" (see commentaries by Fentress, Fernald,
and Stevens). The "evolving concept of command func-
tions" allows us to envision a command releasing system
(CRS) created from a critical decision that arises in an
ensemble of several types of trigger cells, and that grows
to include various neural circuits for its execution (see
DiDomenico & Eaton). The concept of the releasing
mechanism is not obsolete, since it offers neuroethology
the advantage of studying softwired operations in connec-
tion with hardwired processes, so that an analysis of IRMs
may actually guide the functional approach to learning
(see Baerends and Fernald). As suggested by Fentress, an
"evolving concept of IRM" refers to the predispositions
operating in the context of developmental experience. In
this approach, we take the advice of Fentress and Fernald
as a challenge to test CRSs as the putative sites of the
changing balances among interactive and self-organizing
networks of ontogenetic processes (Fentress 1986).
I cannot share Broom's view that the notion of the
interaction of genes with other factors (for the sake of
perceptual sharpening) would devalue the term innate.
Gene products depend upon developmental contexts (see
Fentress) and are subject to modification which may have
effects on sensorimotor codes of the respective CRSs (see
Broom's question concerning learning). The problem of a
fixed action pattern has been extensively debated ever
since Lorenz and Tinbergen (see Fentress's commen-
tary). Despite the redefinitions by Barlow (1977) and
Schleidt (1974), the uncertainty of the adjective fixed is
still manifest in vague descriptions; "indeed the word
fixed seems quite redundant" (see Brooms commentary)
or "the term 'fixed action pattern' does not seem very
relevant or useful" (see Broom 1981, p. 63). Hoyle (1984,
p. 376) in his BBS article defines the primary target in
neuroethology as "the study of the cellular events under-
lying fixed action patterns" and recommends against
giving a different name to the numerous examples of
behaviors that in part resemble FAP.
I agree with Broom and Fernald that motivation is not
just a matter of homeostasis, although the latter as the
dominant concept in regulatory biology has loomed large
in theoretical concepts of animal motivation (e.g., see
Stellar 1954; Zucker 1983). Following Fentress and
Kondrashev in an operationally guided analysis of behav-
ioral networks, motivation (1) allows animals to link phys-
ically different classes of actions into functionally co-
herent ensembles, (2) integrates the same class of actions
into different functional contexts, and thus (3) frees ani-
mals from the enslavements of simple stimulus responses
(Fentress 1983).
Control of the "Cartesian machine." It is argued by Doty
that the toad's visuomotor system operates in the manner
of a "Cartesian machine" if it is released from inhibitory
control: The "greedy toad" has then "lost its soul." Here I
am reminded of an analogy of Jung's (1953), who said that
without inhibition, excitation in response to any external
stimulus accumulates in the brain like an avalanche, thus,
so to speak, driving the synaptic engine-powder maga-
zine to explosion. Our intracellular recordings from 330
neurons of the grass frog's tectum have shown that 74%
receive postsynaptic inhibitory inputs (Schwippert, Mat-
sumoto & Ewert, unpublished). Hence Doty's question
about the sources and time courses of inhibitory influ-
ences is particularly important. There are at least four
main extratectal structures involved: (1) Certain pretectal
neurons responsible for the visual RM's prey recognition
exert their inhibitory influence on tectal neurons in
response to visual stimulation. (2) The posterior ventral
medial pallium (vMP) via an inhibitory preoptic-hypo-
thalamic relay probably adapts the retino-pretectal/tectal
circuit to past experience with a stimulus, for example,
decisions about novelty (Finkenstadt & Ewert 1987).
There is indirect evidence that inhibition of tectal output
does not persist continuously upon habituation (Ewert
1984a; Finkenstadt 1987). (3) Preoptic-hypothalamic in-
fluences related to homeostasis and circadian rhythms
may inhibit tectal neurons by long-term down-regulation
of synaptic excitability. Additional targets of modulation
are bulbar/spinal premotor and motor neurons (Parent
1973; Szekely et al. 1983.). Prey-catching may also be
influenced by modulatory inputs to pretectal neurons
(see Kondrashev). (4) Reticular tegmental structures -
probably modulated in an inhibitory manner by hypothal-
amic input - may be involved in short-term sensitization
of tectal neurons depending on attentional state (Finken-
stadt & Ewert 1985; 1987).
The question of whether toads have a "self-module,"
providing the animal with a conscious self, is discussed by
Dennett. If we take consciousness as the "recognition of
cognition," our experimental data yield no evidence for
this property in toads. However, this is no reason to call
toads "automata" (see Doty). Although their behaviors
are partially mediated by a preprogrammed repertoire of
sensorimotor codes designed for predictable stimulus
390
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1987) 10:3

Response/Ewert: Neuroethology in toads
situations, these are also to some extent adaptable to
unpredictable situations (see also Ewert's commentary on
Anderson's target article, this issue). I see a general
difficulty in treating the question of "conscious self in
different domains of inquiry - philosophy and physiology
- with a concept from the former domain being investi-
gated in the latter. This produces problems because the
algorithms underlying logical thinking are probably dif-
ferent from the algorithms applied by neuronal networks
for information processing (for a discussion see Creutz-
feldt 1983, pp. 422-26).
Stimulus features and tectal efferents. As indicated by
Tinbergen (1951), the dynamic configural properties of a
moving visual object are determined by the spatiotem-
poral relationships between certain features. In the pre-
sent analysis of prey features (Ewert 1968; 1969a) these
are the areas of extension in (xl(l)) and perpendicular to
(xl(2)) the direction of an object's movement - within
certain behaviorally relevant limits of the total area -
which explains Ingle's question about why elongating of
xl(l) for xl(2) = 16mm (A8°) leads to no further increase of
its efficacy as prey (see Figure 4). Ingle obviously uses
different definitions for "configuration" (vs. "shape") and
does not seem to distinguish between static and dynamic
configuration (see Appendix to target article). I disagree
with Ingle's general statement that stimulus motion is
irrelevant to object recognition. (For example, see the
relevance of the direction of movement in the goose/
hawk phenomenon in domestic fowls, Figure 26B, or the
relevance of motion in the recognition of a configural
stimulus if this is masked by noise, e.g., Figure 3B.)
There is a point in Ingle's as well as in Roth & Nishi-
kawa's comments which needs clarification. It is not
sufficient to investigate some releasing features of a stim-
ulus; rather, it is also important to consider parameters
that extinguish releasing values. We can correctly evalu-
ate configural features by their variation along a stimulus
continuum (Figure 4, bottom). Studying the effects of
their changes on prey-catching allows us to describe the
boundary of the prey category within this stimulus con-
tinuum (cf. Figure 4 and Figure 27A) and to understand
the algorithm of configural pattern discrimination. In this
context, as emphasized in the target article, the universal
is not represented by a specific feature but by an invariant
structure of feature relationships. The configural contrast
is greatest between W- and A-stimuli at the opposite ends
of this continuum. Ingle is wrong in concluding that "this
discrimination simply reflects the well-known function of
IRFs" if he compares D(W,A) in the range of 2 S X g 10
for retinal ERF/IRF-neurons (Figure 12, R2 and R3) and
for tectal prey-selective neurons (Figure 12, T5(2)) (cf.
Fernald and Stevens).
Velocity invariance in dynamic configural discrimina-
tion refers to the fact that D(W,A) values never become
negative for changes of the direction or the speed of
stimulus movement and that these values remain con-
stant if the configuration-defining features are sufficient,
which - contrary to Ingle's assumption - is not a trivial
result (see Ewert's commentary on Arbib's target article,
this issue). In response to Fernald, we have found that
with very small, black worm- and antiwormlike 2.5 mm X
5.0 mm stripes of a weak configural contrast the acuity of
discrimination in prey-catching is best (D(W.A) = 0.7)
around an optimal speed, whereas for 2.5 mm X 10.0 mm
stripes constant values of D(W,A) = 0.9 were obtained
with variable speed (Ewert et al. 1983).
The above data call Roth & Nishikawa's arguments
about supernormal releasers into question (see also Fig-
ure 5Aa for xl = 5 or 10 mm). Many small invertebrates -
such as ants or wood lice - have elongated shapes in the
aforementioned size range moving wormlike in the direc-
tion of their longer axes. I am also puzzled by Roth's new
observations suggesting that fire salamanders presented
with square dummy objects prefer those that are far too
large to be eaten. If we take this mismatch as a general
rule, it would be in contradiction to Roth's findings with
square prey dummies in cave-dwelling salamanders, em-
phasizing that "the size interval from 1 to 5 mm2, which is
the optimum, corresponds fairly well to the sizes of
Drosophila and Musca domestica which in captivity are
the preferred prey animals" (Roth 1976, p. 52). Bur-
ghagen (1979) has measured in seven investigated anuran
species (Bufo bufo, Rana temporaria, R. esculenta, Hyla
arhorea, H. cinerea, Alytes obstetricans, Bombina var-
iegata) a positive correlation between the width (j) of an
animal's jaw and the edge length (xl) of the preferred
square prey dummy, yielding xl = 0.43j.
For the evaluation of species differences, it is again
necessary to compare discriminative features between
objects across the stimulus continuum (Figure 4, bot-
tom). Our comparative results in T5(2) neurons of com-
mon toads (Ewert & von Wietersheim 1974a) and grass
frogs (Schurg-Pfeiffer & Ewert 1981) have shown that (1) a
fundamental algorithm for configural discrimination is
implemented by both species; (2) species differences in
configural selection refer to different ranges of the stim-
ulus continuum. These results (Figure 28A and B) suggest
that Ingle's general statement that "frogs (unlike toads)
fail to show preference for worms over squares" is not
correct.
Ingle reviews our data on the toad's preference toward
the leading (head) or trailing (tail) edge of a wormlike
moving stripe (of 2.5 X 40 mm2 or 2.5 X 80 mm2 size),
depending on the contrast direction between stripe and
background, that is, black versus white or vice versa
(Burghagen & Ewert 1982). These results are not in
conflict with the concept of configuration (Gestalt) that
refers to the visual analysis of the figure in relation to its
background (see also Figure 3B). Our comparative neu-
rophysiological recording studies (Tsai & Ewert, 1987)
have shown that the behavioral head/tail phenomenon is
resembled by retinal oj^-dominated R3 neurons (but not
by R2) and by tectal T7 and T5(2) neurons in response to a
stripe's oj(f-producing moving edge. What can we learn
from these data? First, the toad's prey-catching system is
most sensitive to off-effects, hence allowing sharp config-
ural discrimination for dark objects against a bright back-
ground; for objects with reversed contrast, however, this
leads to some confusion between figure and ground
resulting in a less sharp discrimination (e.g., expressed by
smaller D(W,A) values; see also Burghagen & Ewert
1983). Second, since the contrast-direction-dependent
head or tail preference is implemented in both orienting
and snapping, it can be concluded that the respective
tectal efferents involved in triggering these action pat-
terns take advantage of tectal information processing
which receives substantial inputs from retinal R3 (class-3)
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1987) 10:3
391

Response/Ewert: Neuroethology in toads
w 
s 
«
_ • I
sec
a
is *>,
imp
u
requen
8
CD 
i s
as
u 
•»
0)
s "
1)
CO
xlll) 
xlll)
>
R[(,RS,R, 
VR S>R B 
RS.RU»R, 
I ^ H j X ,
/ 
\
A 
- 
\
/ 
^ \ \
I
' 
\ v
\ \ \
/
. 
/
^
* 
1/
\ 
*
•
'
\ s
\
«
s
A
A
f^ 
Bufo bufo 
[J Rana temporaria
2 
4 
8 
16 
32 
2 
4 
8 
16 
32
stimulus edge length xl Idegrees)
Figure 28. 
Species differences in prey-selective T5(2) neu-
rons. Comparisons between toad (A) and frog (B) class T5(2)
neuron responses across three segments of a stimulus con-
tinuum: Extracellularly recorded spike activity (R) in response
to W-, S-, and A-stimuli of varying edge length (xl) moving at
7.67sec. Note that in toad T5(2) neurons the relation R w > Rs >
RA is valid for 2° < xl S 32°; in frog T5(2) neurons the relation Rs
> R w > RA is valid for 2° < xl g 8° and Rw > Rs > RA for 8° < xl
g 32°. (From Ewert & von Wietersheim 1974a (A); Schiirg-
Pfeiffer & Ewert 1981 (B).)
neurons, besides inputs from R2 (class-2) (see also Mat-
sumoto et al. 1986).
The above result does not support Ingle's hypothesis
that tectal efferent neurons responsible for prey-orient-
ing, and descending in the tractus tectospinalis cruciatus
(tr.ts.c), should be driven almost exclusively by retinal
R2 ganglion cells whose weights Ingle determines from
the extent of dendritic arborizations labeled after backfill-
ing with HRP (horseradish peroxidase) implants to the
tr.ts.c: "most (if not all) of the retinal input to cells
projecting into the tectospinal tract receive input from
class-2 fiber terminals" (Ingle 1983a, p.207); "efferent
cells which participate in orienting to prey have heavy (if
not exclusive) inputs from the class-2 ('bug detecting')
retinal fibers' (Ingle & Quinn 1982, p. 406). There are
various other problems with Ingle's hypothesis: (1) We
have found that of a total of 103 intracellularly recorded
neurons in the grass frog's tectum 94% showed off- and
on-responses to changes of diffuse light, indicating a
strong contribution of R3 input (Matsumoto et al. 1986).
(2) If the tectal efferents projecting in the tr.ts.c. were
responsible for prey-catching orientation and were acti-
vated (almost) only by retinal R2 (so-called bug-detecting)
input, it is difficult to explain that, disconnected from
pretectal influences, these efferents mediate prey-catch-
ing orientation toward very large objects. (3) If the tec-
tospinal efferents projecting in the tr.ts.c. were monopo-
lized for prey-orienting, then we must ask for the tectal
efferents that activate orienting movements toward other
goals, such as a sexual partner, hardly attractive to "bug
detectors." (For a comprehensive treatment of tectofugal
pathways involved in frog's prey-orienting, see Kostyk &
Grobstein, in press a,b,c).
Feature extraction. A specification of the terms category
(class) and comparison (classification) is called for by
Arbib. According to von Seelen (1970; 1973), pattern
recognition is defined as the assignment of two-dimen-
sional, space-time dependent contrast distributions from
the environment to classes with functional significance.
This operation proceeds in two steps: First, the extraction
of significant features vxs from the patterns to be per-
ceived; second, the separation of the feature vectors x by
means of a discriminating function UD in such a way that
upon presentation of a pattern of the vth class of signifi-
cance: UD(vx) > UD(^x)forv,|x = 1,2, . . . M and v ^ ji,
where M is the number of possible classes to be discrimi-
nated (in the present study M = 2, referring to prey or
nonprey). This separation procedure involving weighted
neuronal threshold-value operations is called classifica-
tion. The strength of the output depends on the number
of times the threshold is crossed with a latency depending
on the neuronal impulse frequency. If y(r,s,t) is the
space(r,s)- and time(t)-dependent input signal, H(r,s,t)
the coupling function of neurons involving lateral inhibi-
tion and lateral excitation, and z(r,s,t) the system's out-
put, then
With the aid of Fourier-transformations the convolution
integral according to the above equation becomes
F[z(r,s,t)] = F[H(r,s,t)]{F[y(r,s,t)]}, F = Fr s,
Given that the operations of feature extraction are imple-
mented by a retinotectal filter described by Hx and a
retinopretectal filter described by H2, the space-depen-
dent course of their subtractive interaction, {H/; H2*},
reproduces the function of UD (Ewert & von Seelen 1974)
and
F[Z(r,s,t)] = F[y(r,s,t)]{F[H1 (r,s,
-F[H2(r,s,t)] F[H2*(r,s,t)]}
According to this model, the configural prey schema
refers to stored information provided by neuronal circuit-
ry (interacting functional units) whose output is mediated
by prey-selective neurons acting as filters. Prey recogni-
tion is implemented in such a way that these filters
compare - cross-correlate - the incoming visual informa-
tion with their filter property (for details see Ewert & von
Seelen 1974; for a different model see Arbib's target
article, this issue). I certainly agree with Arbib and with
Ebbesson that Figures 18 and 19 challenge the experi-
menter to verify the postulated neuronal connections and
synaptic weights for which we have as yet mainly indirect
evidence (e.g., from intracellular recordings and extra-
cellular tectal recording before and after pretectal lesion).
Fentress and Stevens stress the proposed parallel-
hierarchical organization in the feature-analyzing circuit.
Furthermore, Stevens draws our attention to the princi-
ple of implicit processing that (unlike the principle ap-
392
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1987) 10:3

Response/Ewert: Neuroethology in toads
plied by so-called simple cells of mammalian visual cor-
tex) allows radially symmetrical processors to discrimi-
nate moving configural stimuli, a method which an en-
gineer might not have thought of by intuition; that is,
according to Fernald, the axes along which toads sort
information are different from those one might first imag-
ine (see also Ewert's commentary on Arbib's target arti-
cle, this issue). An engineer's solution of the problem
would have taken considerable redundancy to achieve
this behavior. As indicated by Stevens, the toad's visual
system carries out this analysis by means of economically
working functional assemblies (in contrast to feature rep-
resentational maps) which are integrated in a macronet-
work with dynamic properties (see also commentaries by
DiDomenico & Eaton, Ehret, Fentress, Fernald and
Kondrashev).
Roth & Nishikawa confirm our model, suggesting that
species-specific differences in configural prey selection
(Figure 28A,B) can be explained by variations in coupling
functions Hx and H2 of retinotectal and retinopretectal
circuits, respectively, and by the weights of their interac-
tion {Hj*; H2*} as mentioned in Section 5.3.4. In this
context, however, I cannot follow Roth & Nishikawa's
arguments that the role of T5(2) neurons is "exagge-
rated." The size-constancy effect may be achieved by
appropriate tuning of {Hj*; H2*} according to depth
information (Collett 1977) provided by the lens accom-
modation mechanism (see also Ingle). The presence of
different classes of tectobulbar/spinal projective neurons
(Figure 22) can be explained with their participation in
different goal-related sensorimotor codes involving fea-
ture- and space-related messages.
The important data reported by Kondrashev on differ-
ent color sensitivities of mating male frogs and toads raise
the question of where this information is encoded and
whether sex and species differences exist. I learn from his
commentary that color cues may provide us with new
landmarks in the investigation of feature-coding neurons,
which also should not be overlooked in the context of a
central fovea (see also Fernald).
Referring to the Sprague effect, Gruberg correctly
criticizes the notion of "essential" and "decisive" neu-
rons. However, I am using these adjectives with respect
to a given functional structure F. If an integral component
fj of this structure were eliminated, we would not neces-
sarily be dealing with (F - fj), but rather with some
different self-organizing structure. Given the multicon-
nectivity in the pretectal/tectal network - of which in
Figure 19A.B only the putative main connections are
emphasized in connection with the function under inves-
tigation - I would not be surprised if the role of T5(2)
neurons (after their selective elimination) were executed
by other cells, for example, modified T5(l) projective
neurons. Long-term "functional recovery" of prey selec-
tion after pretectal lesions is an example of compensation
in the inhibitory framework (Figure IOC; see also Ewert
et al. 1983).
In response to Gruberg's question about sampling,
there is a correlation between state-dependent behav-
ioral visual responsiveness and electrical activity of tectal
neurons. The fickle frogs were therefore particularly
problematical under laboratory conditions. In non-
responsive toads or frogs, spikes were extracelluraly re-
corded frequently in the optic tectum only from retinal
fiber terminals and from somatosensory afferents in sub-
tectal structures; however, we found almost no visual
activity in tectal neurons. Intracellular recordings
showed inhibitory and/or excitatory slow postsynaptic
potentials also from pear-shaped cells in deep tectal
layers, probably electrically coupled with more super-
ficial neurons, as suggested from multiple labeling (Mat-
sumoto et al. 1986). Taking all our information together, I
doubt that recordings with one method, in one species, at
a given period of time will allow us to obtain a representa-
tive spectrum of neuronal classes (see also Ewert 1980).
Gruberg's discussion of coding by spike patterns is
welcome, since I see here important evaluational criteria
for future investigations. We have compared neuronal
output determined by the average spike frequency i/t and
by i2/t (taking into account the total numbers of spikes i)
and have found that neuronal selective properties emerge
sharper by the latter method (Schiirg-Pfeiffer & Ewert
1981; von Wietersheim & Ewert 1978). I was confronted
with the question of temporal discharge patterns while
recording from thalamic TH9 memory neurons (Ewert
1971, unpublished) whose bursting afterdischarges were
correlated with the configuration of a moving object.
Here I was reminded of Chung et al.'s (1970) demonstra-
tion that the frog's retinal R4 dimming fibers transmit
messages about various stimulus characteristics through
their spike temporal patterns, which can be resolved by
the axonal trees into a spatial pattern arising from differ-
ent probabilities of invasion for spikes into the various
axonal arborizations. Transferred to our problem, the
physicogeometry of a neuron might be used to select,
store, and compare finer-tuned differences of features
within the broad prey schema in the context of previous
experience. Although I doubt that tectobulbar/spinal
projective neurons use temporal discharge patterns for
stimulus-specific codes, the involvement of short bursts
may be interpreted in terms of their trigger properties. In
a recent computer analysis of tectal visual neurons re-
corded from the freely moving toad, my coworker Dr.
Schiirg-Pfeiffer has discovered in spike interval histo-
grams consistently intermingled double-spikes whose oc-
currence was correlated with the stimulus efficacy, the
toad's motivation, the neuron's average discharge fre-
quency, and the probability of prey-catching (Schiirg-
Pfeiffer & Ewert, submitted). Schiirg-Pfeiffer could show
that electrical stimulation of the optic tectum with pulse
patterns derived from T5(2) spike patterns (in contrast to
regular pulse trains) were more effective triggers of prey-
catching in that they released finer-tuned action patterns.
"Parallel" and "hierarchical" processing. Szekely seems
to be gently pushing our concepts of configural discrimi-
nation and sensorimotor function toward an extreme
position through qualifying notions such as "the intel-
ligent neuron," "a switchboard," and "the commanding
neuron," in order to invalidate such a version and to
replace it by a concept basically not much different from
our original one. By using the term "intelligent neuron,"
Szekely shifts the weight toward serial processing as the
underlying mechanism of prey-catching behavior and
entirely away from parallel processing, which is not
justified by the model presented in the target article (see
Dennett, DiDomenico & Eaton, Fentress, and Fer-
nald). The network piece shown in Figure 19A, with its
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1987) 10:3
393

Response/Ewert: Neuroethology in toads
prosencephalic modulatory inputs (Figures 23,24), does
not apply to a simple "switchboard" (see also Doty,
Ehret, and Fernald). In our concept of CRS there is no
room for a single "command neuron" (see Comer and
DiDomenico& Eaton). Nevertheless, I acknowledge the
strategy of the criticism since this allows us to make our
position more clear.
First of all, we must accept the guidance from quan-
titative behavioral data showing that configural stimulus
selection precedes the toad's ballistic orientational turn-
ing movement toward the prey (see Figures 4A.5A).
There is no experimental evidence that the common toad
receives from subsequent action patterns (orienting, ap-
proaching, snapping) "important feedback signals whose
contribution to the establishment of the visual universal
cannot be overlooked' as claimed by Sze"kely. For exam-
ple, in a special double-choice procedure (Ewert & In-
stitut fur den Wissenschaftlichen Film 1982) toads always
orient toward the stripe presented in W-configuration
rather than the one in A-configuration (see also Goodale's
commentary, which mentions that visual information
processing in mammals influences cognitive functions in
terms of recognition independent of motor output). Since
Szekely's assumption is not valid, the attractive example
introducing his commentary is not adequate in our con-
text. The study of the neuronal basis of the toad's prey
recognition can be focused on the analysis of processes
that translate visual input into target-oriented motor
output, the orienting response toward prey. Keeping this
in mind, I should like to reply to Szekely with some
indirect questions and some comments:
1. Given the presence of T5(2) tectobulbar/spinal pro-
jective neurons, whose responses are correlated with the
probability that the dynamic configuration of a stimulus
resembles prey, how can their property be explained by
strict parallel processing? The fact that T5(2) neurons are
activated antidromically (criterion: the collision test; see
Figure 21A; clt c2) is evidence of their tectobulbar/spinal
projective character. The T5(2) neuron of Figure 18Ac is
indeed a pyramidal neuron of the morphological type
shown in Figure 21Bc, identified according to the mor-
phological criteria by Szekely and Laza> (1976, p. 411):
"The axon arises from the shaft dendrite, ascends to layer
7 where it turns laterally . . . and leaves the tectum."
The axon - whose pathway is distorted in the pictorial
representation of Figure 18Ac - could be followed in
sequential brain sections down to the rostral medulla
oblongata. We do not generally claim that prey-selective
neurons are pyramidal cells (Matsumoto et al. 1986).
2. Is the network of interacting assemblies for the
release of orienting toward prey that Szekely would
envisage essentially different from the one we are sug-
gesting? Even if the monocular T2(l), T2(2), T3, T4,
T5(l), T5(2), T5(3), T5(4) neurons (and others) might -
according to Szekely - represent a continuum (whatever
this means with regard to distribution over tectal layers)
we cannot deny that neurons with distinctive response
characteristics exist, that these mediate the outputs of
interacting assemblies (functional units), that they project
to bulbar/spinal motor systems, and that the message
they convey (probably as assembly codes, Bullock &
Perkel 1968) must be read by respective premotor net-
works (see Comer). For example, if the motor pattern
generating circuit (MPG) for snapping would also receive
input from T5(4) neurons, we must then explain why
strong activity of T5(4) in response to a predator does not
activate this MPG; for example, because adequate releas-
ing conditions (size, configuration, localization, state,
etc.) to which the snapping-MPG is adapted are not
fulfilled (see the concept of sensorimotor codes), and
because the escape-MPG tuned to T5(4) input inhibits
snapping-MPG (see the concept of interacting MPGs).
3. Is Sze'kely's view of "distributed property" different
from our concept of parallel/hierarchical processing in a
macronetwork emphasized in various places in the target
article? Parallel, distributed processing allows a different
evaluation of visual information in terms of (1) configural
features (involving optic tectum and pretectum, respec-
tively; Ewert 1974), (2) novelty (e.g., involving the medi-
al pallium; Ewert & Finkenstadt 1987), (3) past experi-
ence (e.g., involving lateral amygdala and medial
pallium; Finkenstadt & Ewert 1987), (4) attention (e.g.,
involving tegmental reticular structures; Finkenstadt &
Ewert 1985), and (5) motivation (e.g., involving preoptic-
hypothalamic structures; Dierickx 1969); the results of
this information processing partly converge in the optic
tectum and in the bulbar/spinal premotor and motor
structures, respectively. (See also the commentaries of
DiDomenico & Eaton, Doty, Ehret, Fentress, Fernald,
and Kondrashev.)
Coded commands. Our concept of coded commands is
stressed by Comer: Firing of various classes of efferent
neurons (command elements) in certain combination
characterizes objects in space and selects the appropriate
goal-directed motor pattern. Comer focuses on the ad-
vantage of the combinatorial nature of codes, which
provides a relatively high potential of information content
with "neural parsimony.' I agree with Kondrashev that
the proper description of sensorimotor codes will become
an important issue for future neuroethological research.
His experimental data call for color-coding command
elements in CRSs of clasping-oriented behaviors in frogs
and toads. Following Comer and Grobstein, we suggest
that in the performance of goal-oriented action patterns
further structures are undoubtedly involved (e.g., see
Grobstein & Masino 1986; Masino & Grobstein 1985).
Arbib's concept of schemas extends the usage from
classic ethology (Lorenz 1943; von Uexkiill 1909) in that it
allows us to study the interpretation of the environment
in terms of the interaction of perceptual schemas (in-
teracting functional units) yielding appropriate coordi-
nated control programs (sensorimotor codes) for motor
and compound motor schemas (see Ewert's commentary
on Arbib's target article, this issue). Regarding "multiple
instantiations" of perceptual schemas, "interacting motor
schemas," and "target orientation," Arbib addresses a
variety of significant questions which require further
experiments and can ultimately only be answered in a
dialogue between experimentation and modeling.
Roucoux & Crommelinck draw our attention to the
problem that the retinotectal map alone does not explain
the programming of the various body segments involved
in orienting. Here we may also have to distinguish be-
tween Bufo bufo and Rana esculenta, the latter having a
stiff neck so that head and trunk are always aligned on
target before and after the ballistic orientational turn of
the body. Electric microstimulation of the frog's and
394
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1987) 10:3

Response/Ewert: Neuroethology in toad
C)
I 
I
H
i
l 
III 
II 
I 
III
i 
' I f f 
H I 
1 
I? 
j 
I I
•t
Figure 29. Putative premotor neurons of the common toad's rostral medulla oblongata. (A) Extracellular records from a bursting
neuron of the branchiomotor column bmc. The neuron was silent in response to electric stimulation with a negative square wave pulse
e of 0.1 msec duration and 50JAA applied to the medial reticular formation mrf (a); the neuron discharged one spike of varying latency
in response to an electric double stimulus ee (b), and upon electric stimulation et with a short train of double pulses responded with a
sequence of cyclic spike bursts as a poststimulus event. (From Ewert et al., submitted.) (B) Identification of a neuron in the mrf after
intracellular labeling with Co3 + -lysine (a); note that most dendrites extend ventrally to the tractus tectospinalis cruciatus t.ts.c,
some reach bmc and mrf, and some cross the midline. Intracellular records from this neuron show poststimulus burst activity in
response to a large looming visual stimulus vis (b), or to electric stimulation e, of the optic tectum with a short train of spikes (c). (From
Schwippert & Ewert, submitted.)
toad's optic tectum may allow us to study the integration
of head position signals.
Comer is right when he admits that "commanding
according to a code" must also be a property of the
decoding premotor circuitry. Crobstein and Comer were
among the first to show that the one-to-one correspon-
dence between eye and optic tectum is not precisely
correlated with the required target-oriented movement,
suggesting that the retinal local sign is combined with the
additional information necessary to specify the appropri-
ate motor output according to a population code (Grob-
stein et al. 1983; Grobstein, in press b). Since small
partial lesions to the respective tectal output pathways in
frogs caused inaccuracy in orienting rather than in pro-
ducing a seotoma, Grobstein and coworkers concluded
that these lesions had not disturbed motor commands but
had modified their interpretation in terms of spatial
localization. These results suggest distributed popula-
tion-coded motor command signals that are read by a
decoding premotor network. Our recent intracellular
recording and labeling studies from bulbar putative pre-
motor neurons (Schwippert & Ewert submitted) show
bewildering dendritic trees (Figure 29B), suggesting a
highly integrative capability for various inputs (e.g., from
tectal, pretectal, solitary, raphe, reticular, and con-
tralateral bulbar structures). All this accords with Di-
Domenico & Eaton's view of a command system as a
"multibody system" with dynamic properties.
DiDomenico & Eaton emphasize that describing re-
leasing mechanisms as CRSs operating in terms of sen-
sorimotor codes acknowledges "the very real complexity
of neural networks." We thus realize important common
features in our thinking about the release of behavior (cf.
Eaton & DiDomenico 1985; Ewert et al. 1983). Di-
Domenico & Eaton (in press) define "command function"
as the process by which the operation of the nervous
system is channeled to select and direct specific patterns
of behavioral action, and they discuss various principles
for its approach. Their command concept is formulated in
functional rather than structural terms, which implies
that a command is not necessarily signified by particular
cell types or structures. This is in agreement with our
CRS concept according to which the release of action
patterns can result from the activity of cells located in
various structures (see also Kondrashev). Here the same
class of command elements in different combinations
with other command elements may take part in CRSs for
different action patterns; the same action pattern can be
triggered by CRSs distinguished by the combination of
their command elements (see also Arbib's commentary
referring to "multiple instantiations of perceptual sche-
mas"). Associative, compensatory, alternative, and other
dynamic properties in command functions may involve
recombinations of sensorimotor codes (see also response
to Gruberg's commentary on this subject). DiDomenico
& Eaton emphasize that their concept
does not eliminate the search for specific functional
roles, but realizes that the command neurons, or other
cell types, may interact in different manners: some will
be highly coupled and act as a group, others are capable
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1987) 10:3
395

Response/Ewert: Neuroethology in toads
of acting individually, and some will form aggrega-
tions. . . . Arrays of different neurons are activated by
different combinations of inputs and consequently turn
on appropriate portions of related motor response.
Some command neurons might be responsible for only
a single part of a complex sequence that defines a
behavioral act. A constellation of command neurons
would be required for some if not most complex acts.
(DiDomenico & Eaton, in press)
Evolutionary perspectives. A fundamental question is
introduced by Camhi: Why do toads "need" a relatively
complex brain involving so many neurons for relatively
easy sensorimotor tasks? This touches on differences in
the organization of vertebrate and invertebrate nervous
systems (Bullock 1977, p. 435). Although, for example,
the visual system of a fly cannot be called simple (e.g.,
Kirschfeld 1973; Wehner 1973), we must consider that
articulata and vertebrata have a Bauplan (archetype), that
has evolved differently.
When comparing insects with vertebrates the most
dramatic difference seems to be the shift from a rather
invariant to a highly flexible behavior including an
apparently much more complex 'drive or motivational
background.' . . . Insects exhibit barely features com-
parable to the organization of cortical columns; there is
no clear evidence of overrepresentation of neurons and
fields solving specific behavioral tasks, nor do we find
comparable geometrical arrangements and topological
features, which evolved to handle specific analytical
tasks on the sensory and motor side. . . . This en-
hanced capacity of the vertebrate nervous system un-
doubtedly depends on the increased number of neu-
rons and connections. (Huber 1983, p. 127)
Ebbesson's parcellation theory of vertebrate brain evo-
lution shows a possibility of differentiation of neural
circuits involving an inherent capacity for overproduction
of neurons out of which specialized subcircuits with finer
tuning properties (selectivity filters) are formed through
an increase of connections and selective loss (Ebbesson
1984, p.321). The prediction is that a larger number of
higher-quality filters would result in a better adaptation
of behavior. It is unknown how selective pressures ulti-
mately affect the changes that result in a genetically
programmed parcellation, so that, in a species, primor-
dial structures may also be installed whose potential is not
entirely used. As indicated by Camhi, this means that
slightly increased complexity in behavior might be con-
cerned with the development of a higher order of neu-
ronal complexity, including the possibility of newly
evolved vertebrate ways of organizing circuits. Hence,
although the toad's brain is designed to control and
regulate behavioral functions in an environment that
challenges the animal to survive as a toad, its brain is
interesting over and above what it can tell us about the
brain of higher vertebrates (see also Ewert's commentary
on Anderson's target article, this issue).
Ebbesson brings into focus the fact that an annuran's
visual discrimination based on pretectal/tectal interac-
tion can be improved through pretectal parcellation in
the course of ontogeny and phylogeny, yielding "better
quality filters." He accordingly recommends ontogenetic
studies related to (1) pretectal/tectal synaptic organiza-
tion, (2) the identification of pretectal/tectal connecting
neurons, and (3) the identification of neurotransmitters -
investigations which are now in progress. From a phy-
logenetic point of view the comparative immunocytoche-
mical studies of pretectal nuclei by Reiner (personal
communication, 1984; see also Reiner et al. 1980; 1982;
Karten et al. 1982) are also promising since they show that
the bird's lateral spiriform nucleus SpL and the reptile's
dorsal nucleus of the posterior commissure nDCP (equiv-
alent to the anuran's pretectal P nucleus, also called PC)
harbor enkephalin (£A?K)-containing neurons terminat-
ing in deep tectal layers close to the tectobulbar/spinal
projective neurons. The bird's nucleus pretectalis PT and
the reptile's dorsal pretectal nucleus NPd (equivalent to
the anuran's pretectal Lpd nucleus, also called PL), on
the other hand, harbor neurons that produce an avian
pancreatic polypeptide (AAP)-like substance giving rise
to scattered APPergic terminals in more superficial reti-
norecipient tectal layers. Presumably the frog's pretectal
Lpd is the source of APPergic terminals which have been
identified by Kuljis and Karten (1982) in the frog's super-
ficial tectal layers, whereas pretectal P is the source of the
EJVKergic terminals found in the frog's deep tectal layers.
Ingle correctly mentions that pretectal nuclei and their
tectal projections are also present in mammals, so that a
comparative approach to pretectal functions is challeng-
ing. Reiner et al. (1984), however, hypothesize that the
pretectal SpL/nDCP system was greatly de-emphasized
in the line of evolution leading to modern mammals. As
pointed out in the target article, mammals - in contrast to
anurans and sauropsides - seem to lack basal ganglionic
input to pretectal nuclei: "Reptiles and birds possess two
disynaptic pathways from the basal ganglia to the tectum
[a striato-pretecto-tectal and a striato-nigro-tectal cir-
cuit]. . . . The pretectal leg of this system may have been
lost in mammals or may not yet have been found"
(Wilczynski & Northcutt 1983b, p. 342).
Ehret adds depth to the discussion of the evolutionary
potential of the anuran's macronetwork in terms of a
sensory/motivational/associative interface mediated by
tecto-prosencephalo-tectal circuits (Ewert 1987; Finken-
stadt & Ewert, submitted), one that is to some extent
comparable to mammal's cortico-limbo-cortical circuits
(Perrett & Rolls 1983; see also Rolls in Changeux &
Konishi 1986; Feigenbaum et al. 1986; Rolls 1987). From
this point of view Ehret's question regarding a telen-
cephalic origin of the toad's T5(2) properties is reason-
able. It must be answered negatively, however: (1) Le-
sions to the posterior medial pallium ("primordium
hippocampi' of Herrick 1933) impair stimulus-specific
habituation and associative conditioning but leave config-
ural prey selection unchanged (Finkenstadt & Ewert,
submitted); (2) no prey-selective properties have been
obtained in neurons of the striatum that project via
pretectal Lpd/P nuclei to the optic tectum, suggesting
that tectal T5(2) prey-selectivity does not arise from but is
determined by strial/pretectal inputs. Ehret's notion that
cerebral structures do "not contribute" to prey-catching
obviously refers to the observation that the action pat-
terns can be released in telencephalon-ablated, pretec-
tally-lesioned toads (Ewert 1984a; for modulatory telen-
cephalic influences see Ewert 1967a; 1987; Patton &
Grobstein 1986; Finkenstadt 1987). Wilczynski and
Northcutt (1983b) speculate that a portion of the striatum
may also be involved in the organization of multimodal
396
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1987) 10:3

Response/Ewert: Neuroethology in toads
sensory information into meaningful attentional behav-
ior, in which tectal/subtectal structures play a prominent
role through all vertebrate species.
Ehret recognizes another important similarity be-
tween anurans and mammals in circuits mediating mes-
sages related to arousal. We have found that arousing
electrical stimulation of the tegmental reticular formation
in toads leads to enhanced metabolic activity (measured
by 2DG uptake) in structures of the visual pathway,
especially the optic rectum and the anterior thalamic
nucleus (Finkenstadt & Ewert 1985; Finkenstadt 1987),
comparable to what has been reported by Gonzalez-Lima
and Scheich (1984) for the acoustic pathway. Based on
studies using 2DG, electrostimulation, extracellular re-
cording, and lesion techniques in toads, Finkenstadt
(1987) proposes a circuit involving the medial pallium,
the preoptic-hypothalamic area, and the tegmental re-
ticular formation that affects the retino-pretectal/tectal
stimulus-response pathway due to attentional states and
past experience.
Recent lesion studies reported by Gruberg indicate
that the mesencephalic nucleus isthmi, as part of a system
of centrally projecting cholinergic neurons (Caine & Gru-
berg 1985; Desan et al. 1986), provides internal sensory
feedback in tectal processes (see also Grobstein & Comer
1983). This has not yet been sufficiently considered in the
discussion of visual behavioral (e.g., attentional) func-
tions. The corresponding parabigeminal nucleus of mam-
mals is regarded as a "satellite system" of the superior
colliculus (e.g., see Graybiel 1978; Mufson et al. 1985).
The results reported by Roucoux & Crommelinck
suggest that a conservative phylogenetic structure for the
mediation of target-oriented responses such as the optic
tectum "progressively includes" functions that fulfill the
appropriate species-specific requirements. Some of these
can be studied in the cat's superior colliculus where a
"zone 1" displays properties of foveate animals with
movable heads and eyes (particularly well developed in
primates), whereas "zones 2 and 3" correspond to afove-
ate animals (such as amphibians) in which "zone 2" might
exhibit the features of toads with movable heads and
"zone 3" those of frogs with stiff necks.
Goodale stresses the value of the present approach
"from input - to output" for students of the mammalian
visual system, in which the concept of CRSs provides a
useful tool for grappling with the problem of integrating
various inputs for the activation of behavior patterns.
Although in the analysis of mammalian vision the empha-
sis was always on "psychological abstractions" (recogni-
tion, localization), Goodale (1983a) himself has shown in
his work that functional categories of the "monolithic
visual system" of mammals can be separately investigated
through the requisite observable behaviors.
Fernald summarizes the heuristic value of the analysis
of the toad's visual RMs as follows: (1) A new principle of
feature extraction can be studied (see also Stevens), (2) a
circuitry underlying sensory decision making can be
investigated under the influence of motivational inputs
(see also Doty and Kondrashev), (3) a circuitry underlying
the modification of pattern recognition can be ap-
proached (see also Baerends, Ebbesson, Fentress,
Ehret, and Ingle), and (4) the concept of CRSs offers an
advantage in describing the release of behavior in terms
of distributed information processing and cooperative
functions (see also Arbib, Comer, DiDomenico & Eaton,
Fentress, and Kondrashev).
Limitations of our view. A famous neuroethologist -
whose research I admire - once told me that he some-
times has the same bad dream: His experimental subject,
a cricket, sits in front of his bed telling him that the
several decades of his life the neuroethologist has dedi-
cated to the analysis of the cricket's behavior have been in
vain, since the actual story is entirely different than he
believes. The cricket then smiles and disappears. I some-
times have similar dreams involving toads. Permanent
skepticism and external constructive criticism help us
remain aware of problems.
To illustrate the limitations of our view of the world,
Mao Tse Tung (1935) used the analogy of a frog sitting in a
well. The frog says that the sky does not extend beyond
the brim of the well. The frog's conclusion is wrong;
however, the animal has the chance to extend its view by
climbing up to a higher level inside the well. To suggest
the limitations of our view arising from our technical
instruments in neuroethological research Horridge uses
the analogy of "keyhole peeping," the peephole being
represented by the recording electrode. He does not,
however, stress the advantage of "multiple hole peeping"
by means of different experimental techniques that allow
the experimenter to describe a subject from various
points of view (e.g., morphological, distributed func-
tional, cellular, connectional, synaptic, dynamic, meta-
bolic), techniques that acknowledge the complexity of the
neuronal network under investigation (e.g., see Eb-
besson, Fentress, and DiDomenico & Eaton).
Whereas Horridge argues that "neurons are the only
components we know" and "when we uncover their
previously unknown features, we explain neurons by
reference to the known behavior," I appreciate Grob-
stein's commentary, which points out that single-cell
analysis is not the only approach available and that it has
noteworthy limitations. It constrains what one looks for in
the nervous system, which leads to the impression of
reductionism and oversimplification. I agree with Grob-
stein that it is often not only "the neuron and its connec-
tions that is the appropriate level of analysis but larger
information-processing blocks, consisting of meaningful
neuronal ensembles such as maps and pattern generators,
and the interactions among such blocks. " Yet how are we
to determine the morphological and physiological prop-
erties of these conceptual boxes (see Fentress) if not by a
multimethodological neurobiological approach involving
the analysis of cellular properties? The more we learn
about the distributed, interactive, and dynamic natures
of these interwoven "blocks" and the bewildering mor-
phological (dendritic and axonal) features of the neuronal
elements (including their neuropharmacological poten-
tial), the more I hesitate to guess functions on the basis of
lesion studies alone. I know that Grobstein shares this
opinion.
Horridge's criticism of the subject matter of the target
article does not seem constructive because it does not
take all the data, strategies, and concepts sufficiently into
account. Picking out just the initial seven words of the
target article's abstract, he sees "imaginary bridges of
fancy over the swamps of ignorance"; still sampling the
abstract, he finds that key words such as "releasing
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1987) 10:3
397

References I Ev/ert. Neuroethology in toads
mechanisms" and "command systems" have "not pro-
gressed beyond the level of the simple observations of
behavior that inspired them" and that there is no refer-
ence to neurons and their interactions. Referring to
Figures 2A and B of the target article's introduction, he
suggests that I am discussing recognition concepts as if
the neurons were known. These cells are of course not
known, but various types of retinal, tectal, and pretectal
neurons in toads are known in terms of (1) certain re-
sponse characteristics to critical features of test stimuli
(e.g., Figure 16), (2) their stratification, (3) their mor-
phological geometry (e.g., Figure 18), or (4) their interac-
tions with other brain structures (e.g., Figures 20, 21)
from which parallel recordings of studies in progress in
our laboratory are yielding further information. The
structure of the networks in which these neurons are
undoubtedly integrated is not known. However, various
experimental approaches allow us to suggest and discuss
certain modes of wiring. In this context, the presence of
specialized neurons addresses a variety of conceptual
questions (see Section 5.4). Figure 19A illustrates not the
wiring of a part of the brain but a putative wiring underly-
ing the function under investigation, involving this part of
the brain: "This picture is of course incomplete" (see
Section 7).
With Horridge's criticism in mind we might ask how
one should proceed in the neurobiological analysis of
behavior:
To find out what goes on . . . you have to use the
inspired guess where to look [target article; Figure 7],
then the hunt [Figures 8-10], the tedious trial and
error, the right stimulus as bait [Figures 4-6], and the
critical recording of the evidence at the moment of the
crucial activity in a simplified situation where an in-
terpretation can be made [Figures 14-17]. . . In ana-
lysing nervous systems, we find ourselves opening up
ways of observing the neurons in action so that we can
then guess further what is happening in that part of the
system. We rarely have excluded all possible in-
terpretations [Section 5.4]. The resulting theories
[Figures 19,25] always have a little extrapolation be-
yond the direct evidence and a little generalization to
make a more attractive picture. (Horridge 1983, p. 379)
As we connect neurons in a manner similar to the way an
engineer works with components having known specifica-
tions, we are aware that these neurons
. . . are in fact connected in as yet undiscovered
ways: their individual properties such as fields [Figures
14,15], responsiveness and temporal characters
[Figures 16,17], are the very details that we must
necessarily uncover by exploration. We are still at the
stage of listing the components, finding how they are
connected together [Figures 10,20,21] and how they
interact dynamically. We use every bit of information
from anatomy and behaviour [Figures 6-10] to try to
interpret the responses of the individual neurons that
we find [Figures 16-18,20]. So we slowly elucidate.
Then we make a tentative picture of how parts of the
nervous system actually work [Figure 19A]. Naturally,
if we use a part of the behaviour [Figures 4A,5A] to find
the function of a neuron, the properties of the neuron
that we discover [Figures 11F,16C] are going to ex-
plain partially that bit of behaviour. [This behavior] is
part of the evidence relating to the elucidation of how
the neurons interact. (Horridge 1983, pp. 380-381)
Needless to say, we are far from a complete picture of
the neuronal circuitry underlying a behavior. However, I
think that the present multidisciplinary approach to the
toad's prey-catching in concert with this peer interchange
offer a conceptual framework providing us with ideas and
guides for neuroethological research in which principles
of distributed properties and interaction in neural func-
tion (Ewert 1974) - as general themes - will be of
fundamental interest.
References
Akert, K. (1949) Der visuelle Greifreflex. Helvetica Physiologica
Pharmacologica Ada 7:112-34. 
[aJ-PE]
Akins, K. (1986) On piranhas, narcissim, and mental representation.
CCM-86-2, Center for Cognitive Studies, Tufts University. 
[DD]
Allman, J. Miezin, F. & McGuinnes, E. (1985) Stimulus specific responses
from beyond the classical receptive field: Neurophysiological mechanisms
for local-global comparisons in visual neurons. Annual Review of
Neuroscience 8:407-30. 
[Dl]
an der Heiden, VJ. & Roth, G. (1983) Cooperative neural processes in
amphibian visual prey recognition. In: Synergetics of the brain, ed. E.
Basar, H. Flohr, H. Haken & A. J. Mandell. Springer. 
[GR]
Antal, M., Matsumoto, N. & Szekely, G. (1986) Tectal neurons of the frog:
Intracellular recording and labeling with cobalt electrodes. Journal of
Comparative Neurology 246:238-53. 
[aJ-PE]
Arbib, M. A. (1982) Modelling neural mechanisms of visuomotor coordination
in frog and toad. In: Competition and cooperation in neural nets, ed. S.
Amari & M. A. Arbib. Springer-Verlag. 
faJ-PE]
Atkins, G., Ligman, S., Burghardt, F. & Stout, J. (1984) Changes in
phonotaxis by the female cricket Acheta domesticus L. after killing
identified acoustic interneurons. Journal of Comparative Physiology
154:795-804. 
[JMC]
Autrum, H. (1959) Das Fehlen unwillkurlicher Augenbewegungen beim
Frosch. Die Naturwissenschaften 46:436. 
[aJ-PE]
Baerends, G. P. (1976) The functional organization of behaviour. Animal
Behaviour 24:726-38. 
[aJ-PE]
(1985) Do the dummy experiments with sticklebacks support the IRM-
concept? Behaviour 93:258-77. 
[GPB]
Baerends, G. P. & Drent, R. H., eds. (1982) The herring gull and its egg.
Part 2: The responsiveness to egg-features. Behaviour 82: 1-416. 
[GPB]
Barlow, G. W. (1977) Modal action patterns. In: How animals communicate,
ed. T. A. Sebeok. University of Indiana Press. 
[rJ-PE]
Barlow, H. B. (1953) Summation and inhibition in the frog's retina. Journal of
Physiology (Condon) 119:69-88. 
[aJ-PE]
(1985a) The twelfth Bartlett Memorial Lecture: The role of single neurons
in the psychology of perception. Quarterly Journal of Experimental
Biology 37(A): 121-45. 
[aJ-PE]
(1985b) The role of nature, nurture, and intelligence in pattern recognition.
Pontificiae Academiae Scientiarum Scripta Varia 54. Ex Aedibus
Academicis in Civitate Vaticana Roma 1985. 
[aJ-PE]
Bechterev, W. (1884) Ober die Funktion der Vierhiigel. Pfliigers Archiv der
gesamten Physiologie des Menschen und der Tiere 73:501/34. 
[aJ-PE]
Beck, A. & Ewert, J.-P. (1979) Prey selection by toads (Bufo bufo L.) in
response to configurational stimuli moved in the visual field z,y-
coordinates. Journal of Comparative Physiology 129:207-9. 
[aJ-PE]
Berkinblit, M. B., Feldman, A. G. & Fukson, O. I. (1986) Adaptability of
innate motor patterns and motor control mechanisms. Behavioral and
Brain Sciences 9:585-38. 
[JCF]
Berridge, K. C. & Fentress, J. C. (1986) Contextual control of trigeminal
sensorimotor function. Journal of Neuroscience 6:325-30. 
[JCF]
Bieger, D. & Neuman, R. S. (1984) Selective accumulation of
hydroxytryptamines by frogs tectal neurons. Neuroscience 12:1167-
77. 
[aJ-PE]
Birukow, G. & Meng, M. (1955) Eine neue Methode zur Prufung des
Gesichtssinnes bei Amphibien. Naturwissenschaften 42:652-53. 
[aJ-PE]
Bohm, D. (1969) Some remarks on the notion of order. Further remarks on
order. In: Towards a theoretical biology, vol. 2, ed. C. H. Waddington.
Aldine. 
[JCF]
398
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1987) 10:3

References/Ewert: Neuroethology in toads
Borchers, H.-W. (1982) Correlation between behavior patterns and single unit
responses from the optic tectum in the freely moving toad (Bufo bufo).
In: Progress in biocybernetics and systems research, vol. 9, ed. R.
Trappl, L. Ricciardi & G. Pask. McGraw-Hill. 
[aJ-PE]
Borchers, H.-W., Burghagen, H. & Ewert, J.-P. (1978) Key stimuli of prey
for toads (Bufo bufo L.): Configuration and movement patterns. Journal
of Comparative Physiology 128:189-92. 
[aJ-PE]
Borchers, H.-W. & Ewert, J.-P. (1979) Correlation between behavioral and
neuronal activities of toads Bufo bufo (L.) in response to moving
configurational prey stimuli. Behavioural Processes 4:99-106. 
[aJ-PE]
Borchers, H.-W. & Pinkwart, C. (1983) A telemetry system for single unit
recording in the freely moving toad (Bufo bufo L). In: Advances in
vertebrate neuroethology, ed. J.-P. Ewert, R. R. Capranica fir D. J.
Ingle. Plenum. [aJ-PE]
Borchers, H.-W., Schiirg-Pfeiffer, E., Megela, A. L. & Ewert, J.-P. (1983)
Single neuron activity in the optic tectum of intact and thalamic-pretectal
(TP)-lesioned behaving toads. Neuroscience Letters Supplement
14:36. 
[aJ-PE]
Brandle, K. & Szekely, G. (1973) The control of alternating coordination of
limb pairs in the newt (Triturus vulgaris). Brain, Behavior and Evolution
8:366-85. 
[CS]
Brodfueher, P. D. & Friesen, W. 0. (1986) From stimulation to undulation:
A neuronal pathway for the control of swimming in the leech. Science
234: 1002-4. 
[JMC]
Broom, D. M. (1981) Biology of behaviour; Mechanisms, functions and
applications. Cambridge University Press. 
[rJ-PE, DMB]
Brower, L. P., Brower, J. V. Z. fir Westcott, P. W. (1960) Experimental
studies of mimicry. 5: The reaction of toads (Bufo terrestris) to
bumblebees (Bombus americanorum) and their robberfly mimics
(Mallophora bomboides), with a discussion of aggressive mimicry.
American Naturalist 94:343-56. 
[aJ-PE]
Brown, W. T. & Ingle, D. (1973) Receptive field changes produced in frog
thalamic units by lesions of the optic tectum. Brain Research 59:405-
9. 
[aJ-PE]
Brzoska, J. & Schneider, H. (1978) Modification of prey-catching behavior by
learning in the common toad (Bufo b. bufo L., Anura, Amphibia):
Changes in response to visual objects and effects of auditory stimuli.
Behavioural Processes 3:125-36. 
[aJ-PE]
Bullock, T. H. (1961) The problem of recognition in an analyzer made of
neurons. In: Sensory communication, ed. W. A. Rosenblith. MIT Press.
[aJ-PE]
(1977) Introduction to nervous systems. W. H. Freeman. 
[rJ-PE]
(1983) Implications for neuroethology from comparative neurophysiology.
In: Advances in vertebrate neuroethology, ed. J.-P. Ewert, R. R.
Capranica fit D. J. Ingle. Plenum 
[aJ-PE]
Bullock, T. H. & Perkel, D. H. (1968) Neural coding. Neuroscienee Research
Program Bulletin (vol. 6/3). MIT Press. 
[rJ-PE]
Burghagen, H. (1979) Der Einfluss von figuralen, visuellen Mustern auf das
Bcutefangverhalten cerschiedener Anuren. Ph.D. Dissertation,
University of Kassel. 
[arJPE, DMB]
Burghagen, H. & Ewert, J.-P. (1982) Question of "head preference" in
response to worm-like dummies during prey-capture of toads Bufo bufo.
Behavioral Processes 7:295-306. 
[rJ-PE, DI]
(1983) Influence of the background for discriminating object motion from
self-induced motion in toads Bufo bufo (L.). Journal of Comparative
Physiology 152:241-49. 
[arJ-PE]
Caine, H. S. & Gruberg, E. R. (1985) Ablation of nucleus isthmi leads to loss
of specific visually elicited behaviors ir the frog Rana pipiens.
Neuroscience Letters 54:307-12. 
[rJ-PE, EG]
Camhi, J. M. (1984) Neuroethology: Nerve cells and the natural behavior of
animals. Sinauer. 
[JMC]
Capranica, R. R. (1983) Sensory processing of key stimuli. In: Advances in
vertebrate neuroethology, ed. J.-P. Ewert, R. R. Capranica & D. J.
Ingle. Plenum. 
[aJ-PE]
Capranica, R. R. & Moffat, A. J. M. (1983) Neurobiological correlates of
sound communication in anurans. In: Advances in vertebrate
neuroethology, ed. J.-P. Ewert, R. R. Capranica & D. J. Ingle.
Plenum. 
[aJ-PE]
Carew, T. J., Walters, E. T. fit Kandel, E. R. (1981) Associative learning in
Aplysia: Cellular correlates supporting a conditioned fear hypothesis.
Science 211:501-4. 
]RD]
Changeux, J.-P. & Konishi, M., eds. (1986) Neural and molecular mechanisms
of learning. Springer-Verlag. 
[rJ-PE]
Chevalier, C , Vacher, S. & Deniau, J. M. (1984) Inhibitory nigral influence
on tectospinal neurons, a possible implication of basal ganglia in orienting
behavior. Experimental Brain Research 53:320-26. 
[aJ-PE]
Chung, S.-H., Raymond, S. A. & Lettvin, J. Y. (1970) Multiple meaning in
single visual units. Brain, Behavior and Evolution 3:72-101. 
[rJ-PE,
EC]
Clairambault, P. (1976) Development of the prosencephalon. In: Frog
neurobiology, ed. R. Llinas & W. Precht. Springer-Verlag. 
[aJ-PE]
Creutzfeldt, O. (1983) Cortex cerebri. Springer-Verlag. 
[rJ-PE]
Collett, T. S. (1977) Stereopsis in toads. Nature 267:349-51. (arJ-PE, GR]
(1983) Picking a route: Do toads follow rules or make plans? In: Advances
in vertebrate neuroethology, ed. J.-P. Ewert, R. R. Capranica fit D. J.
Ingle. Plenum. [aJ-PE, MAA]
Collett, T. S. & Udin, S. B. (1983) The role of the toad's nucleus isthmi in
prey-catching behavior. In: Proceedings of the 2nd workshop on
visuomotor coordination in frog and toad: Models and experiments, ed.
R. Lara fir M. A. Arbib. COINS-Technical Report 83-19, University of
Massachusetts. 
[aJ-PE]
Comer, C. fir Grobstein, P. (1981) Involvement of midbrain structures in
tactually and visually elicited prey acquisition behavior in the frog, Rana
pipiens. Journal of Comparative Physiology 142:151-60. 
[PG]
Comer, C , Schotland, J. fir Grobstein, P. (1985) Short and longterm effects of
unilateral vestibular lesions on posture and orienting movements in the
frog. Society for Neuroscience Abstracts 11:289. 
[aJ-PE]
Cott, H. B. (1936) The effectiveness of protective adaptations in the hive-bee,
illustrated by experiments on the feeding reactions, habit formation and
memory of the common toad (Bufo bufo bufo). Proceedings of the
Zoological Society (London) 1:113-33. 
[aJ-PE]
Czihak, G., Langer, H. fie Ziegler, H. (1981) Biologic. Springer-Verlag. 
[aj-
PE]
Davis, W. J. fit Gillette, R. (1978) Neural correlate of behavioral plasticity in
command neurons of Pleurobranchaea. Science 199:801-3. 
[aJ-PE]
Davis, W. J. fit Kovac, M. P. (1981) The command neuron and the
organization of movement. Trends in Neurosciences 4:73-76. 
[aJ-PE]
Dennett, D. (1978) Current issues in the philosophy of mind. American
Philosophical Quarterly 15: 249-61. 
[DD]
(1987) The intentional stance. MIT Press/Bradford Books. 
[DD]
Desan, P. H., Grewell, K. M. fit Gruberg, E. R. (1986) Distribution of
cholinergic and catecholaminergic neurons in turtle and frog brainstem.
Society for Neuroscience Abstracts 12:109. 
[rJ-PE]
DiDomenico, R. fit Eaton, R. C. (in press) Seven principles for command and
the neural causation of behavior. Brain, Behavior and Evolution. [rJ-PE,
RD]
Diebschlag, E. (1935) Zur Kenntnis der GroBhirnfunktionen einiger Urodelen
und Anuren. Zeitschrift fur vergleichende Physiologie 21:343-94. 
[aJ-PE]
Diericlot, K. (1969) Hypothalamo-hypophysial regulation of food intake in Rana
temporaria. General Comparative Endocrinology 13:361-66. 
[arJ-PE]
Dieringer, N. (1986) Image fading - a problem for frogs? Naturwissenschaften
73:330. 
[aJ-PE]
Dieringer, N. & Precht, W. (1982) Compensatory head and eye movements
in the frog and their contribution to stabilization of gaze. Experimental
Brain Research 47:394-406. 
[AR]
Dieringer, N., Precht, W. fir Blight, A. R. (1982) Resetting fast phases of
head and eye and their linkage in the frog. Experimental Brain Research
47: 407-16. 
[AR]
Disterhoft, J. F. fir Stuart, D. K. (1977) Differentiated short latency response
increases after conditioning in inferior colliculus neurons of alert rat.
Brain Research 130:315-33. 
[GE]
Doty, R. W. (1976) The concept of neural centers. In: Simpler networks and
behavior, ed. J. C. Fentress. Sinauer. 
[aJ-PE, RWD]
Dretske, F. (1981) Knowledge and the flow of information. MIT
Press/Bradford Books. 
[DD]
Eaton, R. C. (1983) Is the Mauthner cell a vertebrate command neuron? A
neuroethological perspective on an evolving concept. In: Advances in
vertebrate neuroethology, ed. J.-P. Ewert, R. R. Capranica fir D. J.
Ingle. Plenum. 
[arJ-PE, CMC]
Eaton, R. C. fir DiDomenico, R. (1985) Command and the neural causation of
behavior: A theoretical analysis of the necessity and sufficiency paradigm.
Brain, Behavior and Evolution 27:132-64. 
[rJ-PE, RD]
Eaton, R. C. fit Hacket, J. T. (1984) The role of the Mauthner cell in fast
starts involving escape in teleost fish. In: Neural mechanisms of startle
•behavior, ed. R. C. Eaton. Plenum. 
[JMC]
Eaton, R. C , Nissanov, J. fit Wieland, C. M. (1984) Differential activation of
Mauthner and non-Mauthner startle circuits in the zebrafish: Implications
for functional substitution. Journal of Comparative Physiology A 155:813-
20. 
[RD]
Eaton, R. C., Wieland, C. M. or DiDomenico, R. (1986) Is the Mauthner cell
a Kupfermann fit Weiss command neuron? Behavioral and Brain Sciences
9:725-27. 
[RD]
Ebbesson, S. O. E. (1970) Selective silver impregnation of degenerating
axoplasm in poikilothermic vertebrates. In: Contemporary research
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1987) 10:3
399

References/ Ewert: Neuroethology in toads
methods in neuroanatomy, ed. J. H. W. Nauta & S. 0. E. Ebbesson.
Springer-Verlag. 
[SOEE]
(1976) Morphology of the spinal cord. In: Frog neurobiology, ed. R. Llinas
& W. Precht. Springer-Verlag. 
[aJ-PE]
(1980) The parcellation theory and its relation to interspecific variability in
brain organization, evolutionary and ontogenetic development, and
neuronal plasticity. Cell and Tissue Research 213:179-212. 
[SOEE]
(1981) Interspecific variability in brain organization and its possible relation
to evolutionary mechanisms. In: Brain mechanisms of behavior in lower
vertebrates, ed. P. Laming. Cambridge University Press. 
[SOEE]
(1984) Evolution and ontogeny of neural circuits. Behavioral and Brain
Sciences 7:321-66. 
[rJ-PE, SOEE]
(in press) The parcellation theory and alterations in brain circuitry after
injury. In: Theoretical and controversial issues in recovery after brain
damage, ed. S. Finger, T. Levere, C. R. Almli & D. G. Stein.
Plenum. 
[SOEE]
Eibl-Eibesfeldt, I. (1951) Nahrungserwerb und Beuteschema der Erdkrote
(Bufo bufo U). Behaviour 4:1-35. 
[aJ-PE]
(1979)£(/io/ogi/, the biology of behavior. Holt, Rinehart and Winston 
[aj-
PE]
Eikmanns, K.-H. (1955) Verhaltensphysiologische Untersuchungen uber den
Beutefang und das Bewegungssehen der Erdkrote (Bufo bufo L.).
Zeitschrift fur Tierpsychologie 12:229-53. 
[aJ-PE]
Emerson, S. E. (1985) Skull shape in frogs — correlations with diet.
Herpetologica 41:177-88. 
[GR]
Ewert, J.-P. (1967a) Untersuchungen iiber die Anteile zentralnervoser
Aktionen an der taxisspezifischen Ermiidung beim Beutefang der
Erdkrote (Bufo bufo L.). Zeitschrift fur vergleichende Physiologie 57:263-
98. 
[arJ-PE]
(1967b) Aktivierung der Verhaltensfolge beim Beutefang der Erdkrote (Bufo
bufo L.) durch elektrische Mittelhirnreizung. Zeitschrift fur
vergleichende Physiologie 54:455-81. 
[aJ-PE]
(1967c) Elektrische Reizung des retinalen Projektionsfeldes im Mittelhirn
der Erdkrote (Bufo bufo L.). Pfliigers Archiv 295:90-98. 
[aJ-PE]
(1968) Der Einflufi von Zwischenhimdefekten auf die Visuomotorik im
Beute- und Fluchtverhalten der Erdkrote (Bufo bufo L.). Zeitschrift fur
vergleichende Physiologie 61:41-70. 
[arJ-PE, DI]
(1969a) Quantitative Analyse von Reiz-Reaktions-Beziehungen bei visuellem
Auslosen der Beutefang-Wendereaktion der Erdkrote (Bufo bufo L.).
Pfliigers Archiv 308:225-43. 
[arJ-PE]
(1969b) Das Beutefangverhalten zwischenhirndefekter Erdkroten (Bufo bufo
L.) gegenuber bewegten und ruhenden visuellen Mustern. Pfliigers
Archiv 306:210-18. 
[aJ-PE]
(1971) Single unit response of the toad (Bufo americanus) caudal thalamus
to visual objects. Zeitschrift fur vergleichende Physiologie 74:81-
102. 
[aJ-PE, DI]
(1974) The neural basis of visually guided behavior. Scientific American
230:34-42. 
[arJ-PE]
(1980) Neuroethology. An introduction to the neurophysiological
fundamentals of behavior. Springer-Verlag. 
[arJ-PE, DMB]
(1981) Neural coding of "worms" and "antiworms" in the brain of toads: The
question of hardwired and softwired systems. In: Brain mechanisms of
behaviour in lower vertebrates, ed. P. R. Laming. Cambridge University
Press. 
[aJ-PE]
(1984a) Tectal mechanisms that underlie prey-catching and avoidance
behaviors in toads. In: Comparative neurology of the optic tectum, ed.
H. Vanegas. Plenum. 
[arJ-PE, AR]
(1984b) Behavioral selectivity based on thalamotectal interactions:
Ontogenetic and phylogenetic aspects in amphibians. Behavioral and
Brain Sciences 7:337-38. 
[aJ-PE, SOEE]
(1985) The Niko Tinbergen Lecture 1983: Concepts in vertebrate
neuroethology. Animal Behaviour 33:1-29. 
[aJ-PE]
(1987) Neuroethology: Toward a functional analysis of stimulus-response
mediating and modulating neural circuitries. In: Cognitive processes and
spatial orientation in animal and man. Part 1, ed. P. Ellen or C. Thinus-
Blanc. Martinus Nijhoff. 
[arJ-PE]
Ewert, J.-P., Arend, B., Becker, V. & Borchers, H.-W. (1979) Invariants in
configurational prey selection by Bufo bufo (L.). Brain, Behavior and
Evolution 16:38-51. 
[aJ-PE]
Ewert, J.-P. & Borchers, H.-W. (1971) Reaktionscharakteristik von Neuronen
aus dem Tectum opticum und Subtectum der Erdkrote Bufo bufo (L.).
Zeitschrift fur vergleichende Physiologie 71:165-89. 
[aJ-PE]
Ewert, J.-P., Borchers, H.-W. & von Wietersheim, A. (1978) Question of prey
feature detectors in the toad's Bufo bufo (L.) visual system; A correlation
analysis. Journal of Comparative Physiology 126:43-47. 
[aJ-PE]
(1979) Directional sensitivity, invariance, and variability of tectal T5
neurons in response to moving configurational stimuli in the toad Bufo
bufo (L.). Journal of Comparative Physiology 132:191-201. 
[aJ-PE]
Ewert, J.-P. & Burghagen, H. (1979a) Ontogenetic aspects on visual "size-
constancy" phenomena in the midwife toad Alytes obstetricans (Laur.).
Brain, Behavior and Evolution 16:99-112. 
[aJ-PE]
(1979b) Configurational prey selection by Bufo, Alytes, Bombina, and Hyla.
Brain, Behavior and Evolution 16:157-75. 
[aJ-PE]
Ewert, J.-P., Burghagen, H., Albrecht, L. & Kepper, J. (1982) Effects of
background structure on the discrimination of configurational moving
prey dummies by toads Bufo bufo (L.). Journal of Comparative
Physiology 147:179-87. 
[aJ-PE]
Ewert, J.-P., Burghagen, H. & Schurg-Pfeiffer, E. (1983) Neuroethological
analysis of the innate releasing mechanism for prey-catching behavior in
toads. In: Advances in vertebrate neuroethology, ed. J.-P. Ewert, R. R.
Capranica & D. J. Ingle. Plenum. 
[arJ-PE]
Ewert, J.-P., Buxbaum-Conradi, H. Framing, E. M., Schurg-Pfeiffer, E. &
Weerasuriya, A. (submitted) Single neuron activity in the toad's medulla
oblongata in response to visual and tactile stimuli. 
[arJ-PE]
Ewert, J.-P., Capranica, R. R. & Ingle, D. J. eds. (1983) Advances in
vertebrate neuroethology. Plenum. 
[SOEE]
Ewert, J.-P. & Finkenstadt, T. (1987) Modulation of tectal functions by
prosencephalic loops in amphibians. Behavioral and Brain Sciences
10:122-23. 
[arJ-PE]
Ewert, J.-P. & Gebauer, L. (1973) GroBenkonstanzphanomene im
Beutefangverhalten der Erdkrote (Bufo bufo L-). Journal of Comparative
Physiology 85:303-15. 
[aJ-PE]
Ewert, J.-P. 6r Harter, H.-A. (1968) Inhibitionsphanomene im visuellen
System der Erdkrote. Naturwissenschaften 55:237. 
[aJ-PE]
(1969) Der hemmende EinfluB gleichzeitig bewegter Beuteattrappen auf das
Beutefangverhalten der Erdkrote. Zeitschrift fur vergleichende
Physiologie 64:135-53. 
[aJ-PE]
Ewert, J.-P. & Hock, F. J. (1972) Movement sensitive neurones in the toad's
retina. Experimental Brain Research 16:41-59. 
[aJ-PE]
Ewert, J.-P., Hock, F. J. & von Wietersheim, A. (1974)
Thalamus/Praetectum/Tectum: Retinale Topographie und physiologische
Interaktionen bei der Krote (Bufo bufo L.). Journal of Comparative
Physiology 92:343-56. 
[aJ-PE]
Ewert, J.-P. & Inst. Wiss. Film (1982) Gestalt perception in the common
toad, I: Innate prey recognition. Film No. C 1430, Institut fur den
Wissenschaftlichen Film, Gottingen. 
[rJ-PE]
Ewert, J.-P. & Kehl, W. (1978) Configurational prey-selection by individual
experience in the toad Bufo bufo. Journal of Comparative Physiology
126:105-14. 
[aJ-PE]
Ewert, J.-P., Matsumoto, N. & Schwippert, W. W. (1985) Morphological
identification of prey-selective neurons in the grass frog's optic tectum.
Naturwissenschaften 72:661-62. 
[aJ-PE, MAA, SOEE]
Ewert, J.-P. & Rehn, B. (1969) Quantitative Analyse der Reiz-
Reaktionsbeziehungen bei visuellem Auslosen des Fluchtverhaltens der
Wechselkrote (Bufo viridis Laur.). Behaviour 35:212-34. 
[aJ-PE]
Ewert, J.-P., Schurg-Pfeiffer, E. & Weerasuriya, A. (1984) Neurophysiological
data regarding motor pattern generation in the medulla oblongata of
toads. Naturwissenschaften 71:590-91. [aJ-PE, CMC]
Ewert, J.-P., Speckhardt, I. & Amelang, W. (1970) Visuelle Inhibition und
Exzitation im Beutefangverhalten der Erdkrote (Bufo bufo L.). Zeitschrift
fur vergleichende Physiologie 68:84-110. 
[aJ-PE]
Ewert, J.-P. & Traud, R. (1979) Releasing stimuli for antipredator behaviour
in the common toad Bufo bufo (L.). Behaviour 68:170-80. 
[aJ-PE]
Ewert, J.-P. & von Seelen, W. (1974) Neurobiologie und System-Theorie
eines visuellen Muster-Erkennungsmechanismus bei Kroten. Kybernetik
14:167-83. 
[arJ-PE]
Ewert, J.-P. & von Wietersheim, A. (1974a) Musterauswertung durch tectale
und thalamus/praetectal Nervennetze im visuellen System der Krote
(Bufo bufo L.). Journal of Comparative Physiology 92:131-48. 
[arJ-PE]
(1974b) Der EinfluB von Thalamus/Praetectum-Defekten auf die Antwort
von Tectum-Neuronen gegenuber bewegten visuellen Mustern bei der
Krote (Bufo bufo L.). Journal of Comparative Physiology 92:149-
60. 
[aJ-PE, DI]
Feigenbaum, J., Cahusac, P., Rolls, E. T., Miyashita, Y. & Niki, H. (1986)
Neuronal activity in the parahippocampal gyrus of the behaving primate.
International Congress of Neuroethology Abstracts 1:83. 
[rJ-PE]
Fentress, J. C. (1983) The analysis of behavioral networks. In: Advances in
vertebrate neuroethology, ed. J.-P. Ewert, R. R. Capranica, 6t D. J.
Ingle. Plenum. 
[rJ-PE]
(1986) Development of coordinated movement: Dynamic, relational and
multileveled perspectives. In: Motor development in children: Aspects of
coordination and control, ed. H. T. A. Whiting & M. C. Wade.
Martinus Nijhoff. 
[rJ-PE, JCF]
(in press) Expressive contexts, fine structure, and central mediation of
rodent grooming. Annals of the New York Academy of Sciences. 
[JCF]
Fentress, J. C. & McLeod, P. (1986) Motor patterns in development. In:
400
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1987) 10:3

References/Ewert: 
Neuroethology in toads
Handbook of neurvbiology: Developmental processes in psychobiology
and neurobiology, ed. E. M. Blass. Plenum. 
[JCF]
FinkenstSdt, T. (1981) Der Einflufi des Tectum opticum und Vorderhirns auf
die Steuerung des Beutefang- und Fluchtverhaltens beim Salamander
Salamandra salamandra (L): Eine quantitative Untersuchung mit Hilfe
von Ableitungs-, Lasions- und Hirnreizungstechniken. Ph.D.
Dissertation, University of Kassel. 
[aJ-PE]
(1987) Verschaltung, Interaktion und Funktion visuell beeinflufiborer
Hirngebiete bci Amphihien. Habitation Thesis, University of
Kassel. 
[rJ-PE]
FinkenstSdt, T, Adler, N. T., Allen, T. O., Ebbesson, S. O. E. & Ewert, J.-
P. (1985) Mapping of brain activity in mesencephalic and diencephalic
structures of toads during presentation of visual key stimuli: A computer
assisted analysis of 14C-2DC autoradiographs. Journal of Comparative
Physiology 156:433-45. 
[aJ-PE]
FinkenstSdt, T., Adler, N. T., Allen, T. O. or Ewert, J-P. (1986) Regional
distribution of glucose utilization in the telencephalon of toads in
response to configurational visual stimuli: A 14C-2DC study. Journal of
Comparative Physiology 158:457-67. 
[aJ-PE]
FinkenstSdt, T. & Ewert, J.-P. (1983a) Processing of area dimensions of visual
key stimuli by tectal neurons in Salamandra salamandra. Journal of
Comparative Physiology 153:85-98. 
[aJ-PE, SOEE]
(1983b) Visual pattern discrimination through interactions of neural
networks: A combined electrical brain stimulation, brain lesion, and
extracellular recording study in Salamandra salamandra. Journal of
Comparative Physiology 153:99-110. 
[aJ-PE]
(1985) Glucose utilization in the toad's brain during anesthesia and
stimulation of the ascending reticular arousal system: A 14C-2-
deoxyglueose study. Saturwissenschaften 72:161-62. 
[arJ-PE]
(submitted) Cerebral metabolic effects related to stimulus-specific long-term
habituation of visually guided orienting behavior toward prey in toads: A
14C-2DG study 
[arJ-PE]
FinkenstSdt, T. & Ewert, J.-P. (1987) Visual associative conditioning in the
toad: A 2-deoxyglucose study. In: New frontiers in brain research, ed. N.
Eisner & O. Creutzfeldt. G. Thieme. 
[rJ-PE]
Fite, K. V., Hayden, D., Montgomery, N. & Bengston, L. (1983) Visual
orienting responses following selective reduction of optic input to AOS
and/or optic tectum in frog. Society for Neuroscience Abstracts
9:818. 
[aJ-PE]
Fite, K. V. & Scalia, F. (1976) Central visual pathways in the frog. In: The
amphibian visual system: A multidisciplinary approach, ed. K. V. Fite.
Academic Press. 
[aJ-PE]
Fodor, J. (1975) The language of thought. Crowell. 
[DD]
(1980) Methodological solipsism considered as a research strategy in
cognitive psychology. Behavioral and Brain Sciences 3:63-109. 
[DD]
Foreman, N. & Stevens, R. (1987) Relationships between the superior
colliculus and hippocampus: Neural and behavioral considerations.
Behavioral and Brain Sciences 10:101-51. 
[aJ-PE]
Freeman, J. A. & Norden, J. J. (1984) Neurotransmitters in the optic tectum
of non mammalians. In: Comparative neurology of the optic tectum, ed.
H. Vanegas. Plenum. 
[aJ-PE]
Freisling, J. (1948) Studien zur Biologie und Psychologie der Wechselkrote
(Bufo viridis (Laur.). Osterreichische Zoologische Zeitschrift (Wien)
1:383-440. 
[aJ-PE]
Frost, B. J. (1982) Mechanisms for discriminating object motion from self-
induced motion in the pigeon. In: Analysis of visual behavior, ed. D. J.
Ingle, M. A. Goodale & R. J. W. Mansfield. MIT Press. 
[aJ-PE]
Fuchs, A. F., Kaneko, C. R. S. & Scudder, C. A. (1985) Brainstem control of
saccadic eye movements. Annual Review of Neuroscience 8:307-
37. 
[RWD]
Fukushima, K. (1986) A neural network model for selective attention in visual
pattern recognition. Biological Cybernetics 55:5-15. 
[GE]
Gaillard, F. & Galand, G. (1979) Diencephalic binocular wide field neurons in
the frog. Experimental Brain Research 34:511-20. 
[aJ-PE]
Callistel, C. R. (1980) The organization of action: A new synthesis.
Erlbaum. 
[GE]
Cans, C. (1961) A bullfrog and its prey. Natural History 70:26-37. 
[aJ-PE]
Garner, W. R. (1966) To perceive is to know. American Psychologist 21:11-
19. 
[aJ-PE]
Gaze, R. M. (1958) The representation of the retina on the optic lobe of the
frog. Quarterly Journal of Experimental Physiology 43:209-14.
[aJ-PE]
Gerhardt, H. C. (1981) Mating call recognition in the green tree frog (Hyla
cinerea): Importance of two frequency bands as a function of sound
pressure level. Journal of Comparative Physiology 144:9-16. 
[aJ-PE]
Getting, P. A. 6r Dekin, M. S. (1985) Tritonia swimming: A model system for
integration within rhythmic motor systems. In: Model neural networks
and behavior, ed. A. I. Selverston. Plenum.
Gibson, J. J. (1950) The perception of the visual world. Houghton. 
[aJ-PE]
(1951) What is form? Psychological Review 58:403-12. 
[aJ-PE]
Gillette, R., Kovac, M. P. & Davis, W. J. (1978) Command neurons in
Pleurobranchaea receive synaptic feedback from the motor network they
excite. Science 199:798-801. 
[aJ-PE]
Gilson, E., ed. (1962) Rent Descartes discours de la mithode: Texte et
commentaire. Vrin. 
[RWD]
Gnyubkin, V. F. & Kondrashev, S. L. (1978) Breeding pair formation in the
common toad Bufo bufo L. In: Mechanisms of vision of animals, ed. O.
Yu. Orlov. Moscow: Nauka. 
[SLK]
Gnyubkin, V. F., Kondrashev, S. L. & Orlov, O. Yu. (1975) On constant
color perception of common toad. Biofizika 20:725-30. 
[SLK]
Golani, I. & Fentress, J. C. (1985) Early ontogeny of face grooming in mice.
Developmental Psychobiology 18:529-44. 
[JCF]
Gonzalez-Lima, F. & Scheich, H. (1984) Functional activation in the auditory
system of the rat produced by arousing reticular stimulation: A 2-
Deoxyglucose study. Brain Research 299:201-14. 
[rJ-PE, GE]
Goodale, M. A. (1983a) Vision as a sensorimotor system. In: Behavioral
approaches to brain research, ed. T. E. Robinson. Oxford University
Press. 
[rJ-PE, MAG]
(1983b) Neural mechanisms of visual orientation in rodents: Targets versus
places. In: Spatially oriented behavior, ed. A. Hein & M. Jeannerod.
Springer-Verlag. 
[MAG]
Goodale, M. A. & Milner, A. D. (1982) Fractionating orientation behavior in
rodents. In: Analysis of visual behavior, ed. D. J. Ingle, M. A. Goodale
& R. J. W. Mansfield. MIT Press. 
[MAG]
Gordon, J. & Hood, D. C. (1976) Anatomy and physiology of the frog retina.
In: The amphibian visual system: A multidisciplinary approach, ed. K. V.
Fite. Plenum. 
[aJ-PE]
Gould, J. L. & Marler, P. (1987) Learning by instinct. Scientific American
256(l):62-73. 
[JMC]
Graybiel, A. M. (1978) Satellite system of the superior colliculus: The
parabigeminal nucleus and its projections to the superficial collicular
layers. Brain Research 145:365-75. 
[rJ-PE]
Grobstein, P. (1983) Review of Analysis of visual behavior. Animal Behaviour
31:621-22. 
[PC]
(1986) Review of The brain machine. Journal of the American Medical
Association 255:2677-78. 
[PG]
(in press a) On beyond neuronal specificity: Progress and prospects in
understanding the genesis of specific response relations in the nervous
system and behavior. In: Advances in neural and behavioral
development, vol. 3, ed. P. Shinkman & R. N. Aslin. Ablex Press. 
[PG]
(in press b) Between the retinotectal projection and directed movement:
Topography of a sensorimotor interface. Brain, Behavior and
Evolution. 
[rJ-PE, PG]
Grobstein, P. & Comer, C. (1983) The nucleus isthmi as an intertectal relay
for the ipsilateral oculotectal projection in the frog, Rana pipiens. Journal
of Comparative Neurology 217:54-74. 
[rJ-PE]
Grobstein, P., Comer, C. & Kostyk, S. K. (1983) Frog prey capture behavior:
Between sensory maps and directed motor output. In: Advances in
vertebrate neuroethology, ed. J.-P. Ewert, R. R. Capranica & D. J.
Ingle. Plenum. 
[arJ-PE, CMC, PG]
Grobstein, P. & Masino, T. (1986) Sensorimotor circuitry underlying directed
movement in the frog: Evidence for an intermediate representation of
space in the tectofugal pathways. Society for Neuroscience Abstracts
12:684. 
[rJ-PE, PG]
Gruberg, E. R. & Lettvin, J. Y. (1980) Anatomy and physiology of a binocular
system in the frog Rana pipiens. Brain Research 192:313-25. 
[aJ-PE,
EG]
Gruberg, E. R. & Udin, S. B. (1978) Topographic projections between the
nucleus isthmi and the tectum of the frog Rana pipens. Journal of
Comparative Neurology 179:487-500. 
[aJ-PE]
Grflsser, O.-J. & Grusser-Cornehls, U. (1968) Neurophysiologische
Grundlagen visueller angeborener Auslosemechanismen beim Frosch.
Zeitschrift fur vergleichende Physiologie 59:1-24. 
[aJ-PE]
(1970) Die Neurophysiologie visuell gesteuerter Verhaltensweisen bei
Anuren. Verhandlungen der Deutschen Zoologischen Gesellschaft in Kb'ln
64:201-18. 
[aJ-PE]
(1976) Neurophysiology of the anuran visual system. In: Frog neurobiology,
ed. R. Llinas & W. Precht. Springer-Verlag. 
[aJ-PE, GS]
Grusser-Cornehls, U. (1984) The neurophysiology of the amphibian optic
tectum. In: Comparative neurology of the optic tectum, ed. H. Vanegas.
Plenum. 
[aJ-PE]
Guha, K., J0rgensen, C. B. & Larsen, L. O. (1980) Relationship between
nutritional state and testes function, together with observations on
patterns of feeding in the toad, Bufo bufo bufo. Journal of Zoology
(London) 192:147-55. 
[aJ-PE]
Guitton, D., Crommelinck, M. & Roucoux, A. (1980) Stimulation of the
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1987) 10:3
401

References/Ewert: Neuroethology in toads
superior colliculus in the alert cat. 1. Eye movements and neck EMG
activity evoked when the head is restrained. Experimental Brain
Research 39:63-73. 
[AR]
Hackett, J. T. & Greenfield, J. L. (1986) The behavioral role of the Mauthner
neuron impulse. Behavioral and Brain Sciences 9:729-30. 
[RD]
Haldane, E. S. & Ross, G. R. T. (1967) The philosophical works of Descartes,
vol. 2. Cambridge University Press. 
[RWD]
Hanke, W. (1976) Neuroendocrinology. In: Frog neurobiology, ed. R. LlinSs
& W. Precht. Springer-Verlag. 
[aJ-PE]
Hamad, S. (1987a) Psychophysical and cognitive aspects of categorical
perception: A critical overview. In: Categorical perception: The
groundwork of cognition, ed. S. Harnad. Cambridge University
Press. 
[aJ-PE, JCF]
(1987b) Category induction and representation. In: Categorical perception:
The groundwork of cognition, ed. S. Harnad. Cambridge University
Press. 
[aJ-PE]
Hartline, H. K. (1940) The receptive fields of optic nerve fibers. American
Journal of Physiology 130:690-99. 
[aJ-PE]
Hebb, D. O. (1949) The organization of behavior. Wiley. 
[aJ-PE]
(1959) A neuropsychological theory. In: Psychology: A study of a science,
vol. 1, ed. S. Koch. McGraw-Hill. 
[aJ-PE]
Heiligenberg, W. (1983) The jamming avoidance response in an electric fish:
Algorithms in sensory information processing and their neuronal
realization. In: Advances in vertebrate neuroethology, ed. J.-P. Ewert, R.
R. Capranica & D. J. Ingle. Plenum. 
[aJ-PE]
Herrick, C. J. (1933) The amphibian forebrain. 8: Cerebral hemispheres and
pallial primordia. Journal of Comparative Neurology 58:737-59. 
[arJ-PE]
Heusser, H. (1959) Die Lebensweise der Erdkrote, Bufo bufo (L.):
Nahrungsaufnahme und Pigmentierung der Daumenschwielen im
Jahresverlauf. Biologisches Zentralblatt 88:457-67. 
[aJ-PE]
Himstedt, W. (1982) Prey selection in salamanders. In: Analysis of visual
behavior, ed. D. J. Ingle, M. A. Goodale & R. J. W. Mansfield. MIT
Press. 
[aJ-PE]
Himstedt, W., Freidank, U. & Singer, E. (1976) Die Veranderung eines
Auslosemechanismus im Beutefangverhalten wiihrend der Entwicklung
von Salamandra salamandra (L.). Zeitschrift fur Tierpsychologie 41:235—
43. 
[aJ-PE]
Hinde, R. A. (1954) Changes in responsiveness to a constant stimulus.
Behaviour 2:41-54. 
[aJ-PE]
Hinsche, G. (1935) Ein Schnappreflex nach "Nichts" bei Anuren. Zoologischer
Anzeiger 111:113-22. 
[aJ-PE]
Hood, D. C. & Gordon, J. (1981) The frog ganglion cell: Not a feature
detector and not a monkey cortical cell. Perception 10:421-22. 
[aJ-PE]
Horn, G. (1985) Memory, imprinting and the brain: An inquiry into
mechanisms. Clarendon Press. 
[JCF]
Horridge, G. A. (1968) Interneurons. Freeman. 
[GAH]
(1983) Neuron function and behaviour: Which explains which? Fortschritte
der Zoologie 28:369-83. 
[rJ-PE, GAH]
House, D. (1984) Neural models of depth perception in frog and toad. Ph. D.
Dissertation, University of Massachusetts, Amherst. 
[aJ-PE]
Hoyle, G. (1964) Exploration of neuronal mechanisms underlying behavior in
insects. In: Neural theory and modeling, ed. R. F. Reiss. Stanford
University Press. 
[JCF]
Hoyle, G., ed. (1977) Identified neurons and behavior of arthropods.
Plenum. 
[aJ-PE]
(1984) The scope of neuroethology. Behavioral and Brain Sciences 7:367-
412. 
[arJ-PE, JCF]
Hubel, D. H. & Wiesel, T. N. (1962) Receptive fields, binocular interaction
and functional architecture in the cat's visual cortex. Journal of
Physiology 160:106-54. 
[aJ-PE, KAS]
(1965) Receptive fields and functional architecture in two non-striate visual
areas (18 and 19) of the cat. Journal of Neurophysiology 28:229-89. 
[aj-
PE]
Huber, F. (1983) Implications of insect neuroethology for studies on
vertebrates. In: Advances in vertebrate neuroethology, ed. J.-P. Ewert,
R. R. Capranica & D. J. Ingle. Plenum. 
[arJ-PE]
Huber, F. & Thorson, J. (1985) Cricket auditory communication. Scientific
American 253(6):46-54. 
[JMC]
Ingle, D. (1968) Visual releasers of prey-catching behavior in frogs and toads.
Brain, Behavior and Evolution 1:500-518. 
[aJ-PE, DI]
(1971) Prey-catching behavior of anurans toward moving and stationary
objects. Vision Research Supplement 3:447-56. 
[aJ-PE]
(1973) Disinhibition of tectal neurons by preteetal lesions in the frog.
Science 180:422-24. 
[aJ-PE, DI]
(1973a) Size preference for prey catching in frogs: Relationship to
motivational state. Behavioral Biology 9:485-91. 
[DI]
(1973b) Two visual systems in the frog. Science 181:1053-55. 
[JMC]
(1975) Selective visual attention in frogs. Science 188:1033-35. 
[aJ-PE]
(1976) Spatial vision in anurans. In: The amphibian visual system: A
multidisciplinary approach, ed. K. V. Fite. Academic Press. 
[aJ-PE,
DI]
(1977) Detection of stationary objects by frogs (Rana pipiens) after ablation
of optic tectum. Journal of Comparative Physiology and Psychology
91:1359-64. 
[aJ-PE, DI]
(1980) Some effects of pretectum lesions on the frog's detection of stationary
objects. Behavioral Brain Research 1:139-63. 
[aJ-PE, DI]
(1983a) Brain mechanisms of visual localization by frogs and toads. In:
Advances in vertebrate neuroethology, ed. J.-P. Ewert, R. R. Capranica
& D. J. Ingle. Plenum. 
[arJ-PE, DI]
(1983b) Prey selection in frogs and toads: A neuroethological model. In:
Handbook of behavioral neurobiology, vol. 6: Motivation, ed. E. Satinoff
& P. Teitelbaum. Plenum. 
[DI]
Ingle, D. & Arango, V. (1986) Morphology of tectal efferent neurons: A frog
vs. toad comparison. Paper presented to the J. B. Johnstone Club,
Society for Neuroscience Annual Meetings, Washington, D.C. 
[DI]
Ingle, D. & McKinley, D. (1977) Some effects of stimulus configuration on
prey-catching behavior by the toad, Bufo marinus. Animal Behaviour
26:885-91. 
[DI]
Ingle, D. J. & Quinn, S. (1982) Retrograde labelling of neurons of known
behavioral function in frog tectum. Society for Neuroscience Abstracts
8:406. 
[rJ-PE]
Ho, H., Butler, A. B. & Ebbesson S. O. E. (1980) An ultrastructural study of
the normal synaptic organization of the optic tectum and the contralateral
tectum in a teleost, Holocentrus rufus. Journal of Comparative
Neurology 191:639-60. 
[SOEE]
Jeannerod, M. (1985) The brain machine. Harvard University Press. 
[PG]
John, E. R. & Schwartz, E. L. (1978) The neurophysiology of information
processing and cognition. Annual Review of Psychology 29:1-29. 
[aJ-PE]
Jung, R. (1953) Allgemeine Neurophysiologie. Die Tatigkeit des
Nervensystems. In: Handbuch der inneren Medizin, Vol Vll Neurologic 1,
ed. G. von Bergmann, W. Frey, H. Schwiegk. Springer-Verlag. 
[rJ-PE]
Kandel, E. (1979) Small systems of neurons. In: The brain, ed. Scientific
American. W. H. Freeman. 
[JMC]
Kandel, E. R., Krasne, F. B., Strumwasser, F. & Truman, J. W., eds. (1979)
Neurosdences research program bulletin 17: Cellular mechanisms in the
selection and modulation of behavior. MIT Press. 
[aJ-PE]
Karten, H. J., Reiner, A. & Brecha, N. (1982) Laminar organization and
origins of neuropeptides in the avian retina and optic tectum. In:
Cytological methods in neuroanatomy. A. R. Liss. 
[rJ-PE]
Katte, O. & Hoffmann, K.-P. (1980) Direction specific neurons in the
pretectum of the frog {Rana esculenta). Journal of Comparative
Physiology 140:53-57. 
[aJ-PE]
Kicliter, E. & Ebbesson, S. O. E. (1976) Organization of the "non olfactory"
telencephalon. In: Frog neurobiology, ed. R. Llinas & W. Precht.
Springer-Verlag. 
[aJ-PE]
Kirschfeldt, K. (1973) Das neuronale Superpositionsauge. Fortschritte der
Zoologie 21:229-57. 
[rJ-PE]
Kondrashev, S. L. (1976) Influence of the visual stimulus size on the breeding
behavior of anuran males. Akademija Nank, Zoologisheskij Zhurnal
55:1576-79. 
[aJ-PE]
(1985) Retinal photoreeeptors and color discrimination in the toad Bufo bufo
L. In: Problems of herpetology. Proceedings of the 6th All-Union
Herpetological Conference, ed. I. S. Darevskii. Leningrad:
Nauka. 
[SLK]
Kondrashev, S. L. & Dimentman, A. M. (1978) Role of dorsal thalamus in the
organization of visually-mediated behavior in amphibians. In: Mechanisms
of vision of animals, ed. O. Yu. Orlov. Moscow: Nauka. 
[SLK]
Kondrashev, S. L., Gnyubkin, V. F., Dimentman, A. M. & Orlov, O. Yu.
(1976) Role of visual stimuli in the breeding behavior of Rana temporaria,
Bufo bufo and Bufo viridis. Zoologicheskij Zhurnal 55:1027-37. 
[SLK]
Konishi, M. (1985) Birdsong: From behavior to neuron. Annual Review of
Neuroscience 8:125-70. 
[aJ-PE]
Konorski, J. (1967) /niegrafice activity of the brain. University of Chicago
Press. 
[aJ-PE]
Kostyk, S. K. & Grobstein, P. (1982) Visual orienting deficits in frogs with
various unilateral lesions. Behavioral Brain Research 6:379-88. 
[aJ-PE]
Kostyk, S. K. & Grobstein, P. (in press a) Neuronal organization underlying
visually elicited prey orienting in the frog. 1. Effects of various unilateral
lesions. Neuroscience. 
[rJ-PE, PG]
Kostyk, S. K. and Grobstein, P. (in press b) Neuronal organization underlying
visually elicited prey orienting in the frog. 2. Anatomical studies on the
laterality of central projections. iVeurosciencc. [rJ-PE, PG]
Kostyk, S. K. & Grobstein, P. (in press c) Neuronal organization underlying
visually elicited prey orienting in the frog. 3. Evidence for the existence
of an uncrossed descending tectofugal projection. Neuroscience. 
[rJ-PE,
PG]
402
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1987) 10:3

References! Ewert: Neuroethology in toads
Kuljis, R. O. & Karten, H. J. (1982) Laminar organization of peptide-like
immunoreactivity in the anuran optic tectum. Journal of Comparative
Neurology 212: 188-201. 
[ar-JPE]
Kupfermann, I., Castellucci, V., Pinsker, H. & Kandel, E. R. (1970)
Neuronal correlates of habituation and dishabituation of the gill-
withdrawal reflex in Aplysia. Science 167:1743-45. 
[RD]
Kupfermann, I. & Weiss, K. R. (1978) The command neuron concept.
Behavioral and Brain Sciences 1:3-39. 
[aJ-PE, CMC, RD]
Laming, P. R. & Ewert, J.-P. (1983) The effects of pretectal lesions on
neuronal, sustained potential shift and electroencephalographic responses
of the toad tectum to presentation of a visual stimulus. Comparative
Biochemistry and Physiology 76:247-52. 
[aJ-PE]
Lara, R. & Arbib, M. A. (1985) A model of the neural mechanisms
responsible for pattern recognition and stimulus specific habituation in
toads. Biological Cybernetics 51:223-37. 
[aJ-PE]
Lara, R., Cervantes, F. & Arbib, M. A. (1982) Two-dimensional model of
retinal-tectal-pretectal interactions for the control of prey-predator
recognition and size preference in amphibia. In: Competition and
cooperation in neural nets, ed. S. Amari & M. A. Arbib. Springer-
Verlag. 
[aJ-PE]
Lashley, K. S. (1951) The problem of serial order in behavior. In: Cerebral
mechanisms in behavior, ed. L. A. Jeffries. Wiley. 
[PG]
Lazar, G. (1969) Efferent pathways of the optic tectum in the frog. Acta
Biologica Academiae Scientiarum Hungaricae 20:171-83. 
[aJ-PE]
(1971) The projection of the retinal quadrants on the optic centers in the
frog: A terminal degeneration study. Acta Morphologica Academiae
Scientiarum Hungaricae 19:325-34. 
[aJ-PE]
(1973) Role of accessory optic system in the optokinetic nystagmus of the
frog. Brain, Behavior and Evolution 5:443-60. 
[aJ-PE]
(1979) Organization of the frog visual system. In: Recent development of
biology in Hungary, vol. 8, ed. R. Lissak. Budapest: Akademiai
Kiado. 
[aJ-PE]
(1984) Structure and connections of the frog optic tectum. In: Comparative
neurology of the optic tectum, ed. H. Vanegas. Plenum. 
[aJ-PE,
SOEE]
Lazar, G., T6th, P., Csank, G. & Kicliter, E. (1983) Morphology and location
of tectal projection neurons in frogs. A study with HRP and cobalt-filling.
Journal of Comparative Neurology 215:108-20. 
[aJ-PE, DI]
Lettvin, J. Y., Maturana, H. R., McCulloch, W. S. & Pitts, W. H. (1959)
What the frog's eye tells the frog's brain. Proceedings of the Institute of
Radio Engineers 47:1940-51. 
[aJ-PE, SOEE]
(1961) Two remarks on the visual system of the frog. In: Sensory
communication, ed. W. A. Rosenblith. MIT Press. 
[aJ-PE, DI]
Llinas, R. & Yarom, Y. (1986) Oscillatory properties of guinea-pig inferior
olivary neurones and their pharmacological modulation: An in vitro study.
Journal of Physiology-London 376:163-82. 
[JMC]
Lorenz, K. (1935) Der Kumpan in der Umwelt des Vogels. Der Artgenosse
als auslfisendes Moment sozialer Verhaltensweisen. Journal fur
Ornithologie 83:137-213, 289-413. 
[aJPE]
(1943) Die angeborenen Formen Moglicher Erfahrung. Zeitschrift fur
Tierpsychologie 5:235-409. 
[arJ-PE]
Manning, A. (1979) An introduction to animal behaviour, 3rd edition.
Springer-Verlag. 
[aJ-PE]
Mao Tse Tung (1935) Worte des Vorsitzenden. Verlag fur fremdsprachige
Literatur (German translation, Peking 1971). 
[rJ-PE]
Masino, T. & Grobstein, P. (1985) The organization of tectal projections to the
ventral midbrain in Rana pipiens. Society for Neuroscience Abstracts
11:289. 
[arJ-PE]
(1986) Sensorimotor circuitry underlying directed movement in the frog:
Organization of tectofugal pathways and likely involvement of the nMLF.
Society for Neuroscience Abstracts 12:684. 
[rJ-PE]
Massion, J., Paillard, J., Schultz, W. & Wiesendanger, M., eds. (1983) Neural
coding of motor performance. Springer-Verlag. 
[aJ-PE]
Matsumoto, N. & Antal, M. (1984) Physiological and morphological study of
prey and predator detecting neurons in the frog tectum. Proceedings of
the 6th Annual Meeting of the Japanese Society for General Comparative
Physiology Abstract 6:169. 
[aJ-PE]
Matsumoto, N., Schwippert, W. W. & Ewert, J.-P. (1986) Intracellular
activity of morphologically identified neurons of the grass frog's optic
tectum in response to moving configurational visual stimuli. Journal of
Comparative Physiology 159:721-39. 
[arJ-PE, MAA, JMC, SOEE]
Maturana, H. R., Lettvin, J. Y., McCulloch, W. S. & Pitts, W. H. (1960)
Anatomy and physiology of vision in the frog (Rana pipiens). Journal of
General Physiology 43:129-76. 
[aJ-PE]
Maximov, V. V., Orlov, O. Yu. & Reuter, T. (1985) Chromatic properties of
the retinal afferents in the thalamus and the tectum of the frog (Rana
temporaria). Vision Research 25:1037-49. 
[SLK]
McCormick, D. A. & Thompson, R. F. (1984) Cerebellum: Essential
involvement in the classically conditioned eyelid reflex. Science 223:296—
99. 
[RD]
Mcllwain, J. T. (1975) Visual receptive fields and their images in superior
colliculus of cat. Journal of Neurophysiology 38:219-30. 
[DI]
Megela, A. L., Borchers, H.-W. & Ewert, J.-P. (1983) Relation between
activity of tectal neurons and prey-catching behavior in toads Bufo bufo.
Naturwissenschaften 70:100-101. 
[aJ-PE]
Meredith, M. A. & Stein, B. E. (1986) Visual, auditory, and somatosensory
convergence on cells in superior colliculus results in multisensory
integration. Journal of Neurophysiology 56:640-62. 
[GE]
Milson, J. A. & Mitchell, J. F. (1977) The action of amino acids on evoked
responses in the frog optic tectum. British Journal of Pharmacology
59:484P. 
[aJ-PE]
Mountcastle, V. B. (1957) Modality and topographic properties of single
neurons of cat's somatic sensory cortex. Journal of Neurophysiology
20:403-434. 
[aJ-PE]
Mufson, E. J., Martin, T. L., Mash, D. C , Wainer, B. H. & Mesulam, M.
M. (1985) Cholinergic projection from the parabigeminal nucleus (Ch8) to
the superior colliculus in the mouse. Society for Neuroscience Abstracts
11:1238. 
[rJ-PE]
Murphey, R. K. (1986) The myth of the inflexible invertebrate: Competition
and synaptic remodelling in the development of invertebrate nervous
systems. Journal of Comparative Physiology A 158:585-91. 
[JCF]
Nagel, T. (1974) What is it like to be a bat? Philosophical Review 83:435-
50. 
[DD]
Neary, T. J. & Northcutt, R. G. (1983) Nuclear organization of the bullfrog
diencephalon. Journal of Comparative Neurology 213:262-78. 
[aJ-PE]
Nieuwenhuys, R. & Opdam, P. (1976) Structure of the brain stem. In: Frog
neurobiology, ed. R. Llinas & W. Precht. Springer-Verlag. 
[aJ-PE]
Nissanov, J. & Eaton, R. C. (in press) Reticulospinal control of rapid escape
turning in fishes. American Zoologist. 
[RD]
Nolen, T. G. & Hoy, R. R. (1984) Initiation of behavior by single neurons:
The role of behavioral context. Science 226:992-94. 
[RD]
Northcutt, R. G. & Kicliter, E. (1980) Organization of the amphibian
telencephalon. In: Comparative neurology of the telencephalon, ed. S. O.
E. Ebbesson. Plenum. 
[aJ-PE]
Orlov, O. Yu. & Kondrashev, S. L. (1978) Color-discrimination functions of
visual projections in frog. In: Mechanisms of vision of animals, ed. O. Yu.
Orlov. Moscow: Nauka. 
[SLK]
Orlov, O. Yu. & Maximov, V. V. (1982) Color vision and behavior in
amphibians. In: Sensory systems, ed. G. V. Cershuni. Leningrad:
Nauka. 
[SLK]
Parent, A. (1973) Distribution of monoamine-containing neurons in the
brainstem of the frog. Rana temporaria. Journal for Morphology 139:67-
78. 
[arJ-PE]
Patton, P. & Grobstein, P. (1986) Forebrain modulation of orienting circuitry
in the frog: Involvement of the striatum. Society for Neuroscience
Abstracts 12:106. 
[rJ-PE]
Pearl, J. & Tarsi, M. (1986) Structuring causal trees. Journal of Complexity
2:60-77. 
[GAH]
Pearson, K. G. (1985) Are there central pattern generators for walking and
flight in insects? In: Feedback and motor control in invertebrates and
vertebrates, ed. W. J. P. Barnes & M. Gladden. Croom Helm. 
[JCF]
Perrett, D. I. & Rolls, E. T. (1983) Neural mechanisms underlying the visual
analysis of faces. In: Advances in vertebrate neuroethology, ed. J.-P.
Ewert, R. R. Capranica & D. J. Ingle. Plenum. 
[arJ-PE]
Pilleri, G. (1984) Movements related to the preservation of the species and
social instincts appearing as neurological symptoms in degenerative
dementias. In: Brain pathology, vol. 1, ed. G. Pilleri & F. Tagliavini.
Brain Anatomy Institute, Switzerland. 
[RWD]
Porter, K. R. (1972) Herpetology. W. B. Saunders. 
[aJ-PE]
Ramon y Cajal, S. (1894) Die Retina der Wirbeltiere (transl. by R. Greef). J.
F. Bergmann. 
[aJ-PE]
Rehn, B. (1977) Cerebrate Representation des Fluchtverhaltens der Erdkrote
(Bufo bufo L.). Ph.D. Dissertation, Technical University of
Darmstadt. 
[aJ-PE]
Reiner, A., Brauth, S. E. & Karten, H. J. (1984) Evolution of the amniote
basal ganglia. Trends in Neurosdences 7:320-25. 
[arJ-PE]
Reiner, A., Brauth, S. E., Kitt, C. A. & Karten, H. J. (1980) Basal ganglionic
pathways to the tectum: Studies in reptiles. Journal of Comparative
Neurology 193:565-89. 
[rJ-PE]
Reiner, A., Karten, H. J. & Brecha, N. C. (1982) Enkephalin-mediated basal
ganglia influences over the optic tectum: Immunohistochemistry of the
tectum and the lateral spiriform nucleus in pigeon. Journal of
Comparative Neurology 208:37-53. 
[arJ-PE]
Ritzmann, R. E. & Pollack, A. J. (1986) Identification of thoracic interneurons
that mediate giant interneuron-to-motor pathways in the cockroach.
Journal of Comparative Physiology 159:639-54. 
[JMC]
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1987) 10:3
403

Referencesi'Ewert: Neuroethology in toads
Ritzmann, R. E., Tobias, M. L. & Fourtner, C. R. (1980) Flight activity
initiated via giant intemeurons of the cockroach: Evidence for
bifunctional trigger intemeurons. Science 210:443-45. 
[JMC]
Roberts, A. & Roberts, B. L., eds. (1983) Neural origin of rhythmic
movements. Cambridge University Press. 
[aJ-PE]
Roeder, K. D. (1959) A physiological approach to the relation between prey
and predator. Smithsonian Miscellaneous Collections 137:287-
306. 
[CMC]
Rolls, E. T. (1987) Neuronal activity underlying perception and learning in
the primate. In: New frontiers in brain research, ed. N. Eisner & O.
Creutzfeldt. G. Thieme. 
UJ-PE]
Rose, G. ]., Keller, C. H. & Heiligenberg, W. (1986) Stemopygus offers
insight into the functional role of "sign-selective" neurons in the torus
semicircularis. Society for Neuroscience Abstracts 12:200. 
[aJ-PE]
Roth, G. (1976) Experimental analysis of the prey catching behavior of
Hydromantes italicus Dunn (Amphibia, Plethodontidae). Journal of
Comparative Physiology 109:47-58. 
[rJ-PE]
(1982) Responses in the optic tectum of the salamander Hydromantes
italicus to moving prey stimuli. Experimental Brain Research 45:386—
92. 
[aJ-PE, GR]
(1986) Neural mechanisms of prey-recognition: Examples in amphibians. In:
Predator-prey relationships, ed. M. E. Feder & G. V. Lauder.
University of Chicago Press. 
(Dl]
(in press) Visual behavior in salamanders. Springer. 
[GR]
Roth, G. & Jordan, M. (1982) Response characteristics and stratification of
tectal neurons in the toad Bufo bufo (L.). Experimental Brain Research
45:393-98. 
[aJ-PE]
Roucoux, A., Guitton, D. 6c Crommelinck, M. (1980) Stimulation of the
superior colliculus in the alert cat. 2. Eye and head movements evoked
when the head is unrestrained. Experimental Brain Research 39:75—
85. 
[AR]
Rubinson, E. (1968) Projections of the tectum opticum of the frog. Brain,
Behavior and Evolution 1:529-61. 
[aJ-PE]
Rumelhart, D. E., McClelland, J. L. & the PDP Research Group (1986)
Parallel distributed processing. Explorations in the microstructures of
cognition. MIT Press. 
[JCF]
Russel, D. F. & Hartline, D. K. (1978) Bursting neural networks: A
reexamination. Science 200:453-55. 
[aJ-PE]
Satou, M. & Ewert, J.-P. (1984) Specification of tecto-motor outflow in toads
by antidromic stimulation of tecto-bulbar/spinal pathways.
Naturwissenschaften 71:52. 
[CMC]
(1985) The antidromic activation of tectal neurons by electrical stimuli
applied to the caudal medulla oblongata in the toad, Bufo bufo (L.
Journal of Comparative Physiology 157:739-48. 
[aJ-PE]
Satou, M., Matsushima, T. & Ueda, K. (1984) Neuronal pathways from the
tectal "snapping-evoking area" to the tongue muscle controlling
motoneurons in the Japanese toad: Evidence of the intervention of
excitatory intemeurons. Zoological Science 1:829-32. 
[aJ-PE]
Scalia, F. (1976) The optic pathway of the frog: Nuclear organization and
connections. In: Frog neurobiology, ed. R. Llinas or W. Precht.
Springer-Verlag. 
[aJ-PE]
Scheich, H. (1983) Sensorimotor interfacing. In: Advances in vertebrate
neuroethology, ed. J.-P. Ewert, R. R. Capranica & D. J. Ingle. Plenum
Press. 
[aJ-PE]
Schildberger, K. (1984) Temporal selectivity of identified auditory neurons in
the cricket brain. Journal of Comparative Physiology 155:171-
85. 
[JMC]
Schleidt, W. M. (1961) Reaktionen von Truthuhnem auf fliegende Raubvogel
und Versuche zur Analyse ihrer AAMs. Zeitschrift fur Tierpsychologie
18:534-60. 
[aJ-PE]
(1962) Die historische Entwicklung der Begriffe "Angeborenes auslosendes
Schema" und "Angeborener Auslosemechanismus" in der Ethologie.
Zeitschrift fur Tierpsychologie 19:697-722. 
[aJ-PE]
(1974) How "fixed" is the fixed action pattern? Zeitschrift fur
Tierpsychologie 36:184-211. 
[rJ-PE]
Schneider, D. (1954) Beitrag zu einer Analyse des Beute- und
Fluchtverhaltens einheimischer Anuren. Biologisches Zentralblatt
73:225-82. 
[aJ-PE]
Schneider, G. E. (1969) Two visual systems. Science 163:895-902. 
[aJ-PE,
MAG]
Schiirg-Pfeiffer, E. (1979) Quantitative neurophysiologische 
Untersuchungen
zur Frage nach Cestaltdctektorcn im visuellen System des Frosches Rana
temporaria. Ph.D. Dissertation, University of Kassel. 
[aJ-PE]
Schiirg-Pfeiffer, E. or Ewert, J.-P. (1981) Investigation of neurons involved in
the analysis of Gestalt prey features in the frog fiana temporaria. Journal
of Comparative Physiology 141:139-52. 
[arJ-PE, DI]
(submitted) Correlation between responses of prey-selective T5(2) neurons
and prey-catching in freely moving toads. 
[arJ-PE]
Schurg-Pfeiffer, E., Finkenstadt, T., Cromarty, A. & Ewert, J.-P. (submitted)
Change of response properties of a T5(2) neuron in the course of pretectal
lesions in the toad. 
[aJ-PE]
Schwippert, W. W. & Ewert, J.-P. (1987) Visual neurons in the medulla
oblongata of common toads: Intracellular recording and labeling. In: New
frontiers in brain research, ed. N. Eisner or O. Creutzfeldt. G.
Thieme. 
[rJ-PE]
Schwippert, W. W. & Ewert, J.-P. (submitted) Identification of neurons in the
toad's medulla oblongata by intracellular recording and labeling. 
[arJ-PE]
Selverston, A. I. (1980) Are central pattern generators understandable?
Behavioral and Brain Sciences 3:535-71. 
[aJ-PE]
Shinn, E. A. & Dole, J. W. (1978) Evidence for a role for olfactory cues in
the feeding response of leopard frogs. Rana pipiens. Herpetologia 34:167-
72. 
[aJ-PE]
Sjolund, B. & Bjorglund, A., eds. (1982) Brain stem control of spinal
mechanisms. Elsevier. 
[aJ-PE]
Sklansky, J. & Wassel, G. N. (1981) Pattern classifiers and trainable
machines. Springer-Verlag. 
[MAA]
Sparks, D. L. (1986) Translation of sensory signals into commands for control
of saccadic eye movements: Role of primate superior colliculus.
Physiological Reviews 66:118-71. 
[GE]
Sprague, J. (1966) Interaction of cortex and superior colliculus in mediation of
visually guided behavior in the cat. Science 153:1544-47. 
[EG]
Stellar, E. (1954) The physiology of motivation. Psychological Reviews 61:5—
22. 
[rJ-PE]
Suga, N. (1984) The extent to which biosonar information is represented in
the bat auditory cortex. In: Dynamic aspects of neocortical function, ed.
G. M. Edelman, W. E. Gall & W. M. Cowan. Wiley. 
[aJ-PE]
Szekely, G. (1963) Functional specificity of spinal cord segments in the control
of limb movements. Journal of Embryology and Experimental
Morphology 11:431-44. 
[GS]
(1973) Anatomy and synaptology of the optic tectum. In: Handbook of
sensory physiology, vol. 7, ed. R. Jung. Springer-Verlag. 
[aJ-PE]
Szekely, G. or Czeh, G. (1971) Activity of spinal cord fragments and limbs
deplanted in the dorsal fin of Urodele larvae. Ada Physiologica
Academiae Sdentiarum Hungaricae 40:303-12. 
[GS]
(1976) Organization of locomotion. In: Frog neurobiology, ed. R. Llinas &
W. Precht. Springer-Verlag. 
[aJ-PE, GS]
Szekely, G. & Lazar, G. (1976) Cellular and synaptic architecture of the optic
tectum. In: Frog neurobiology, ed. R. Llinas & W. Precht. Springer-
Verlag. 
[arJ-PE]
Szekely, G., Levai, G. & Matesz, K. (1983) Primary afferent terminals in the
nucleus of the solitary tract of the frog: An electron microscopic study.
Experimental Brain Research 53:109-17. 
[rJ-PE]
Szentagothai, J. (1967) The anatomy of complex integration units in the nervous
system. In: Recent developments of neurobiology in Hungary, vol. 1:
Results in neuroanatomy, neurochemistry, neuropharmacology and
neurophysiology, ed. K. Lissak. Budapest: Akademiai Kiado. 
[aJ-PE]
Szentagothai, J. & Arbib, M. A. (1974) Neurosdences research program
bulletin 12: Conceptual models of neural organization. MIT Press, 
[aj-
PE, MAA]
Thompson, R. F. (1980) The search for the engram, II. In: Neural
mechanisms in behavior, ed. D. McFadden. Springer. 
[GE]
Thompson, R. F., Patterson, M. M. & Berger, T. (1978) Associative learning
in the mammalian nervous system. In: Brain and learning, ed. T. Teyler.
Dordrecht: Reidel. 
[GE]
Thompson, R. F. & Spencer, W. A. (1966) Habituation: A model
phenomenon for the study of neuronal substrates of behavior.
Psychological Reviews 73:16-42. 
[RD]
Tinbergen, W. (1948) Social releasers and the experimental method required
for their study. Wilson Bulletin 60:6-52. 
[aJ-PE]
(1951) The study of instinct. Clarendon. 
[arJ-PE]
Tinbergen, N. & Kuenen, D. J. (1939) Uber die auslosenden und
richtungsgebenden Reizsituationen der Sperrbewegung von jungen
Drosseln (Turdus m. merula L.) und T.e.ericetorum Turdon). Zeitschrift
fur Tierpsychologie 3:37-60. 
[aJ-PE]
Tfith, P., Csank, G. & Lazar, G. (1985) Morphology of the cells of origin of
descending pathways to the spinal cord in Rana esculenta. A tracing
study using cobalt-lysine complex. Journal fur Hirnforschung 26:365-
83. 
[aJ-PE]
Trachtenberg, M. C. & Ingle, D. (1974) Thalamo-tectal projections in the
frog. Brain Research 79:419-30. 
[aJ-PE]
Traud, R. (1983) Einfluss von visuellen Reizmustern auf die juvenile Erdkrote
(Bufo bufo L.). Ph.D. Dissertation, University of Kassel. 
(aJ-PE, DMB]
Tsai, H.-J. & Ewert, J.-P. (in press) Influence of stationary and moving
background structures on the response of visual neurons in toads (Bufo
bufo). Brain, Behavior and Evolution. 
[aJ-PE]
(1987) Edge preference of retinal and tectal neurons in common toads (Bufo
404
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1987) 10:3

References/Ewert: Neuroethology in toads
blifo) in response to worm-like moving stripes: The question of
behaviorally relevant "position indicators." Journal of Comparative
Physiology 161:295-304. 
[rJ-PE]
von Frey, M. (1910) Physiologie der Sinnesorgane der mesenchlichen Haut.
Ergebnisse der Physiologie 9:351-68. [GS]
von Hoist, E. (1939) Die relative {Coordination als Phanomen und als
Methode zentralnervoser Funktionsanalyse. Ergebnisse der Physiologie
13:228-306. 
[aJ-PE]
von Hoist, E. & Mittelstaedt, H. (1950) Das Reafferenzprinzip.
Naturwissenschaften 37:464-76. 
[aJ-PE)
von Seelen, W. (1970) Zur Informationsverarbeitung im visuellen System der
Wirbeltiere I/II. Kybernetik 7:43-60; 89-106. 
[rJ-PE]
von Seelen, W. (1973) Systemtheoretische Beschreibung der
Mustererkennung bei der Krote. Biokybernetik V, ed. H. Drischel, P.
Dettmar. Jena: VEG C. Fischer Verlag. 
[rJ-PE]
von Uexkiill, J. (1909) Umtvelt und Innenwelt der Tiere. Springer-
Verlag. 
[rJ-PE]
von Wietersheim, A. & Ewert, J.-P. (1978) Neurons of the toad's (Bufo bufo
L.) visual system sensitive to moving configurational stimuli: A statistical
analysis. Journal of Comparative Physiology 126:35-42. 
[arJ-PE]
Weerasuriya, A. (1983) Snapping in toads: Some aspects of sensorimotor
interfacing and motor pattern generation. In: Advances in vertebrate
neuroethology, ed. J.-P. Ewert, R. R. Capranica & D. J. Ingle.
Plenum. 
[aJ-PE]
Weerasuriya, A. & Ewert, J.-P. (1981) Prey-selective neurons in the toad's
optic tectum and sensori-motor interfacing: HRP studies and recording
experiments. Journal of Comparative Physiology 144:429-34.
[aJ-PE]
(1983) Afferents of some dorsal retino-recipient areas of the brain of Bufo
bufo. Society for Neuroscience Abstracts 9:536. 
[aJ-PE]
(submitted) Afferents of the hypoglossal nucleus in the toad, Bufo bufo.
Brain, Behavior and Evolution 
[aJ-PE]
Wehner, R. (1973) Das Koordinationssystem des Sehfeldes bei Arthropoden.
Fortschritte der Zoologie 21:258-93. 
[rJ-PE]
Wiersma, C. A. G. & Ikeda, K. (1964) Intemeurons commanding swimmeret
movements in the crayfish, Procambarus clarkii (Girard). Comparative
Biochemistry and Physiology 12:509-525. 
[aJ-PE]
Wilczynski, W. & Northcutt, R. G. (1977) Afferents to the optic tectum of the
leopard frog: An HRP study. Journal of Comparative Neurology 173:219-
29. 
[aJ-PE]
(1983a) Connections of the bullfrog striatum: Efferent projections. Journal
of Comparative Neurology 214:333-43. 
[aJ-PE]
(1983b) Connections of the bullfrog striatum: Afferent organization. Journal
of Comparative Neurology 214:321-32. 
[arJ-PE]
Wine, J. J. & Krasne, F. B. (1982) The cellular organization of crayfish escape
behavior. In: The biology of Crustacea, vol. 4, Neural integrarion, ed. D.
E. Bliss, H. Atwood & D. Sandeman. Academic Press. 
[JMC]
Wurtz, R. H. (1979) Modulation of the primate visual system by attention and
readiness to respond. In: Neurosdences research program bulletin vol.
17: Cellular mechanisms in the selection and modulation of behavior, ed.
E. R. Kandel, F. B. Krasne, F. Strumwasser & J. W. Truman. MIT
Press. 
[aJ-PEJ
Zucker, I. (1983) Motivation, biological clocks, and temporal organization of
behavior. In: Handbook of behavioral neurobiology, vol. 6: Motivation,
ed. E. Satinoff, P. Teitelbaum. Plenum. 
[rJ-PE]
Zusne, L. (1970) Visual perception of form. Academic Press. 
[aJ-PE]
BEHAVIORISM
A Forum for Critical Discussion
Editors: George Graham (Philosophy), Peter Killeen (Psychology)
Behaviorism is devoted to conceptual and philosophical issues in behavioral psychology,
understood to include the experimental analysis of behavior as well as recent developments
in philosophy of mind. Submissionsfromanyarea of philosophyorpsychologyare welcome
provided they impact on behavioral psychology. The journal is published by the Cambridge
Center for Behavioral Studies in spring and fall.
SELECTED RECENT ARTICLES
William Bechtel. Contemporary connectionism: Are the new parallel distributed
processing models cognitive or associationist?
Hugh Lacey and Howard Rachlin. Behavior, cognition, and theories of choice.
Gareth Matthews. The idea of a psychological organism.
U.T. Place. How to improve Skinner's Verbal Behavior.
Alexander Rosenberg. Intentional psychology and evolutionary biology.
B.F. Skinner. Why I am not a cognitive psychologist.
Institutions: $26.00 (U.S.) 
$31.00 (Canada and Mexico)
Individuals: $15.00 (U.S.) 
$20.00 (Canada and Mexico)
Students: $10.00 (U.S.) 
$15.00 (Canada and Mexico)
Single volumes are available; please write for prices.
Orders to: Publications Office, Cambridge Center for Behavioral Studies,
II Waterhouse Street, Cambridge, MA, 02138, USA.
$33.50 (other foreign)
$22.50 (other foreign)
$17.50 (other foreign)
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1987) 10:3
405

