 
Chapter 2
Making Tools for Thinking
Daniel C. Dennett
Representations are themselves objects in the world, and
therefore potential objects of (second-order or meta-) represen-
tations. However, humans seem to be nearly unique in their
ability to represent representations.
—Dan Sperber, 1996, in setting the topic for this conference
Just as you cannot do very much carpentry with your bare
hands, there is not much thinking you can do with your bare
brain.
—Bo Dahlbom and Lars-Erik Janlert (unpublished)
We use intelligence to structure our environment so that we can
succeed with less intelligence. Our brains make the world smart
so we can be dumb in peace!
—Andy Clark, 1997, p.180
If it be maintained that certain powers, such as self-conscious-
ness, abstraction, etc. ... are particular to man, it may well be
that these are the incidental results of other highly advanced
intellectual faculties; and these again are mainly the result of
the continued use of a highly developed language.
—Charles Darwin, 1871, p. 101
Reflection on the issues raised by these observations has driven me to a
tentative conclusion: in spite of what may well have been a surfeit of at-
tention to definitional issues, we still do not know what we (all) mean
when we talk about representation, and hence what we mean by
metarepresentation. I am far from ready to offer a cure for this confusion,
but I do have a few suggestions to offer about what the problems are and
why they persist. My thinking has been much influenced recently by
several new books that deal at least indirectly with these topics: Steven
Mithen's The Prehistory of the Mind (1996), and Andy Clark's Being There
(1997), but at this point I am still an asker, not answerer, of questions.
17

 
18 
Daniel C. Dennett
1. Florid and Pastel (Meta)representation
I must sneak up on the topic, not having figured out how to mount any
frontal assault. The ethologists Robert Seyfarth and Dorothy Cheney
once told me an unforgettable anecdote about some lions hunting in
their neighborhood in Amboseli Park in Kenya. Robert and Dorothy had
parked their Land Rover on high ground to show their guest, Don Grif-
fin, the panorama, and below them nearby they spotted three lions
crouching behind cover on some medium-high ground, overlooking a
small herd of wildebeests. While the three ethologists watched in fasci-
nation, the lions put into execution a remarkable hunting ploy. One lion
stepped forward into full view of the wildebeests, which all turned, with
some nervousness, to eye her cautiously, ready to bolt the moment she
made her move. While lion A held the herd's rapt attention in this fash-
ion, lion B crept off to the left, circling around into position in a shallow
ditch, unseen by the herd. Meanwhile lion C crept around to the right,
more or less on the opposite side of the small herd from lion B. Once in
place, lion C leapt out and gave chase. The herd bolted away, of course,
and stampeded right over the ditch where lion B lay in wait. Lion B
merely had to leap up to catch and bring down one animal, providing
supper for all.
A delectable scenario; it leaves one wondering how much planning,
how much coordination or even communication may have gone into the
control and timing of that episode. It might be, of course, that appear-
ances were deceptive - the lions' meal might have been more dumb luck
than design. But probably not, and we can dimly imagine the sorts of
cognitive mechanisms and practices that could account for their hunting
success's not being an accident. Now let me add an embellishment that
nobody would or should believe. Before the lions crept into their attack
positions, lion A was observed to move a small bunch of twigs with her
nose into a little group in the dust in front of the three lions; then she
pushed three stones, one at a time, into another group, on a little bump
in the dust. Then, checking for shared attention in lions B and C, she
pushed two of the stones to left and right of the group of twigs, and then
dashed the rightmost stone across the bunch of twigs, sending it over
the stone on the left. And so forth.
Much too good to be true, of course. We have no grounds at all for
believing that that sort of representing is within the talents or cognitive
horizons of lions. Let us call this florid representing. What makes it florid,
one sees dimly, is that it is deliberate representing, knowing represent-
ing, even self-conscious representing. It seems you cannot engage in
florid representing without knowing and appreciating that you are en-
gaging in florid representing. Or at least that will do for the moment as
a mark of the florid. Now it is just a short and inviting step from this

 
Making Tools for Thinking 
19
observation to the suggestion that such florid representing involves
metarepresentation, since knowing that you are representing involves
having a mental state that is itself about the representing you are doing
and, moreover, about that representing qua representing. And this
invites a further step, or slogan: No florid representation without
metarepresentation.
This may be the right way to think about florid representation, but
I want to move more cautiously. If that is florid representing, what is pas-
tel representing? Is just seeing one's prey pastel representing? Is it rep-
resenting at all? One has a mental or perceptual state that is surely about
the prey (qua prey, one might add), and if that perceptual state plays an
apposite role in guiding one to the prey, this state should count as a rep-
resentation in use, or a representation that exists/or the predator in ques-
tion. That is enough, according to a familiar theme of mutual agreement,
for us to speak of representation. Alan Leslie, according to his abstract
for this volume, begins at this starting point. Rodney Brooks (e.g., 1991),
however, uses the term "representation" in a way that would permit him
to deny that such straightforward perceptual states count as represen-
tations. For Brooks, representations are the sorts of data structures
GOFAI trafficked in - the manipulable items of "physical symbol sys-
tems" - and he thinks (with many others) we can get intelligent behavior
without them.
Suppose, for the time being at least, we follow Brooks in denying
the label of "representation" to such perceptual states. What, then, of the
various sorts of phenomena that seem to be intermediate between such
a perceptual state and a token playing its role in an instance of florid rep-
resentation? What, for instance, of somebody - a young child, say - yell-
ing "snake!" when a snake slithers into view? Is the child's utterance not
a representation in a stronger sense than her visual state that provoked
and guided her utterance?
Note that the child's utterance may very well not pass our makeshift
test of floridity. It seems right to say that young children speak before
they realize they are speaking, use language without noticing that they
are doing so, respond appositely to all manner of linguistic moves, their
own and those of others, without any self-conscious or deliberate
metarepresentational machinery invoked at all. What young children do
with language is, it seems, more like the leopard cries of vervet monkeys
than the imaginary token-manipulations of our lions. And yet it clearly
goes way beyond what the vervets do as well, being famously amenable
to combinatorial authorship and elaboration, for one thing.
In any case, children soon enough come to be self-conscious about
their use of words, and when that happens, if not before, they are capable
of florid representation. What are the sure signs of this advance? I do not
have a settled view on this yet, but I can offer an example. When my son

 
20 
Daniel C. Dennett
was about five years old, he was captivated by what may have been the
first joke he "got." "There's an old dead skunk lying in the middle of the
road. I one it," I said. Now you say, "I two it." "I two it." "I three it" quoth
I. "I four it!" he continued. "I five it." When it was his turn to say "I eight
it," I looked at him with an expression of shock and disgust, and his eyes
grew wide with delight. For several hours, we had to play this simple
game, over and over, taking turns with the odd and even numbers. Such
are the first faltering steps towards wit (and I have recently replicated
this micro-experiment with my 5-year-old grandson). What shall we say
about such moments? Then, if not before (and I am not at all sure about
that), a child demonstrates a clear recognition of the existence of words
as sounds, with roles to play, that might be combined in rule-bound
ways - though of course the child would typically be incapable of put-
ting it in such terms at the time.
But if this is an instance of unmistakable metarepresentational
prowess, what are we to make, then, of a child's really quite adult and
accomplished use of language preceding such an epiphany? (One is re-
minded, of course, of Moliere's gentleman who was delighted to learn
he'd been speaking prose all his life.) Was it somehow accompanied by,
guided or informed by, metarepresentational states but just not ivittingly
so guided?1
2. Thinking about Thinking
I do not know how to answer that question yet, so I will turn to a related
question which has recently been bothering me: Is there perhaps a big
difference between having beliefs about beliefs and thinking about thinking?2
For some years now, I have been urging the importance of looking
for evidence of "higher-order intentional states" - beliefs about beliefs,
desires about beliefs, beliefs about desires about beliefs, and so forth -
and all of this might very well be characterized as urging the importance
of looking for evidence of metarepresentation. I do not at all mean to re-
cant anything I have said on this score - not yet, at any rate - but I have
begun to wonder whether it might not distract our attention from a
neighboring source of insights, which might get us closer to an exami-
nation of the real powers of metarepresentation, properly so called.
Paying attention to beliefs about beliefs has certainly borne some good
fruit. The theory-of-mind literature, the various paradigms of false-
belief tests of children and animals, and all that surrounds this growth
industry in investigation, has been more than routinely productive of in-
sight in several fields, I think, but I have come to wonder if we are not
missing some better questions in the immediate vicinity. A chimpanzee
may be a natural psychologist, as Nicholas Humphrey has said, or may

 
Making Tools for Thinking 
21
have a theory of mind, as David Premack (Premack & Woodruff 1978)
and Alan Leslie (this volume) and Simon Baron-Cohen (1995) and many
others have said, but - as I have recently been urging (e.g., in Kinds of
Minds, 1996, pp. 130 ff.) - chimpanzees never have opportunities to com-
pare notes with other psychologists, never get to ask for the reasons that
ground the particular attributions of mentality to others, never get to
communicate to others or to themselves about these mental states of oth-
ers. I am tempted to say that even if they do have beliefs about beliefs,
they may well be incapable of thinking about thinking. They may, indeed,
not really be capable of thinking at all (in some florid but important sense
of "thinking").
Our imaginary lions plotting their next moves were certainly think-
ing, using props as representations of the things in the world they were
thinking about. But they were imaginary. When children playing touch
football crouch down in the huddle and one says "Jimmy goes deep, Joey
slants left, and I'll block for Tom who looks for the open man" (with or
without a diagram traced with a finger on the ground or on an extended
palm), this is an unmistakable instance of florid representation, and
communal thinking. It is not necessarily thinking about thinking, but we
can readily turn it into thinking about thinking, by letting their plans
hinge on deception of some particular sort ("Jimmy will pretend to slip
and fall, and then, as soon as they ignore him ...")
What strikes me as clear enough is that there is one pathway to such
florid thinking about thinking that moves from the outside in. It begins
with the overt, public use of symbols and tokens of one sort or another
(spoken words will do, perhaps, but only if they are used self-
consciously), and creates practices that later can be internalized and
rendered private. Since chimpanzees, for instance, lacking language,
cannot play these external games any more than lions can, they cannot
use this path as a route to private or covert thinking about thinking. This
line of thought fits handsomely with the recent emphasis by Andy
Clark, and indeed by me (in Kinds of Minds), on the claim that minds are
composed of tools for thinking that we not only obtain from the wider (so-
cial) world, but largely leave in the world, instead of cluttering up our
brains with them.
Might there, however, be other routes? Might there be pastel ver-
sions of metarepresentation that can arise by some process other than
by the fading (or sophistication) of originally florid practices? It has com-
monly been supposed that there might indeed be such developments.
The child's acquisition of a theory of mind, for instance, might seem to
be a developmental story that does not at any point depend on the child's
prior mastery of public, communal, florid practices of representation of
the minds of others. After all, it has seemed quite clear that there is at
least a strong genetic predisposition in our species - in normal, non-

 
22 
Daniel C. Dennett
autistic children - to develop this way of "thinking about" other people,
and indeed about animals and almost anything that moves.3
But if so, and if this penchant for unwittingly adopting the inten-
tional stance is something we share with at least some of our cousin spe-
cies, how do we, and we alone, come to metarepresent in the more florid,
witting ways? How could such metarepresentational abilities arise in
the first place? I do not think we philosophers have been sufficiently
puzzled by these questions - indeed, we have hardly noticed them. We
tend to take for granted the categories we find in folk psychology, which
encourage us to impose a sorting in terms of these categories on all the
intermediate cases. We ask: Is this one an instance of higher-order belief
or not? Is this one an echt case of meta-representation, or should we put
it in the "other" pigeonhole? These questions mask the developmental
or evolutionary processes that must lead from the simple to the complex
by a sequence of iffy or marginal candidates.
Sometimes I am struck by the weird complacency with which we
are inclined to accept these categories at face value. How on earth could
any agent, any organism, come to develop the knowing competence to
use representations? It might be "only" a matter of practical - not logical
- necessity that one acquire this special ability via the external, social
route, but that fact - if it is one - might still be the key to understanding
how it is possible at all. It might, for instance, be the key to understand-
ing the general distinction I have drawn (1969) between the personal and
subpersonal levels. A reminder may be in order: parsing sentences is not
a personal-level activity for many of us; it is something few of us ever
do except on those rare occasions when we discuss niceties and perplex-
ities of grammar in an academic setting; at the subpersonal level, in con-
trast, parsing sentences is a phenomenon that occurs within us whenever
we follow a conversation or read with comprehension. We must be care-
ful not to confuse the two phenomena, and in particular not to assume
that a good model of the former, rare phenomenon is also a good model
of the latter, ubiquitous phenomenon. In the present context we may ask
when, if ever, animals engage in personal-level activities at all, let alone
personal projects of metarepresentation.
Let me propose a case in which we can see the philosophical sleight-
of-hand happening right in front of our eyes: a puzzle is masked by our
accepting an invitation to treat a curious phenomenon as unproblemat-
ically falling into our standard, human, folk-psychological categories.
Many years ago. Bertrand Russell made a wry observation: "Animals
studied by Americans rush about frantically, with an incredible display
of hustle and pep, and at last achieve the desired result by chance. An-
imals observed by Germans sit still and think, and at last evolve the sit-
uation out of their inner consciousness" (Russell, 1927, pp. 32-33). Wolf-
gang Kohler's (1925) early experiments with chimpanzees were the

 
Making Tools for Thinking 
23
inspiration for Russell's witticism, which helps to perpetuate a common
misunderstanding. Kohler's apes did not just sit and think up the solu-
tions. They had to have many hours of exposure to the relevant props -
the boxes and sticks, for instance - and they engaged in much manipu-
lation of these items. Those apes that discovered the solutions - some
never did - accomplished it with the aid of many hours of trial-and-error
manipulating.
Now were they thinking when they were fussing about in their
cages? What were they manipulating? Boxes and sticks. It is all too
tempting to suppose that their external, visible manipulations were ac-
companied by, and driven by, internal, covert manipulations - of
thoughts about or representations of these objects, but succumbing to
this temptation is losing the main chance. What they were attending to,
manipulating and turning over and rearranging, were boxes and sticks,
not thoughts.
They werefamiliarizing themselves with objects in their environments.
What does that mean? It means that they were building up some sort of
perceptuo-locomotor structures tuned to the specific objects, discovering
the affordances of those objects, getting used to them, making them sa-
lient, and so forth. So their behavior was not all that different from the
incessant trial-and-error scrambling of the behaviorists' cats, rats and pi-
geons. They were acting in the world, rearranging things in the world -
without any apparent plan or insight or goal, at least at the outset.
Animals at all levels are designed to tidy up their immediate envi-
ronments, which are initially messy, confusing, intractable, dangerous,
inscrutable, hard to move around in. They build nests, caches, escape
tunnels, ambush sites, scent trails, territorial boundaries. They familiar-
ize themselves with landmarks. They do all this to help them keep better
track of the things that matter - predators and prey, mates, and so forth.
These are done by "instinct": automatized routines for improving the
environment of action, making a better fit between agent and world.
This wise husbandry of one's own behavioral territory is econom-
ically focussed on the most important and ubiquitous features. Pre-em-
inent among these portions of the environment is the agent's own body,
of course, always present, its condition always intensely relevant. Ani-
mals instinctively groom themselves and engage in behaviors that are
apparently designed (although they need not realize this) to repair flaws
and maintain and improve their coordination, muscle tone, and, in ef-
fect, to familiarize themselves with their own bodies. A part of the body
that must not be overlooked in this maintenance and improvement
schedule is the brain. It, too, can become messy, confusing, inscrutable,
an overwhelmingly complex arena of action. So we should expect ani-
mals to be instinctually equipped to engage in mindless, automatic rou-
tines that tidy up their own brains.

 
24 
Daniel C. Dennett
We should especially expect it in Homo sapiens, whose huge brains
are so plastic, so inundatable, so at the mercy of invading memes and
memories. Resource management for a young human brain is, I think,
a major task, and we should expect it to be accomplished by activities
that are rooted, at the outset, in our biology, in our "instincts," but which
also get enhanced in major ways by techniques that are themselves part
of the influx of new resources.
3. Machines Made from Found Objects
Noam Chomsky has often said that birds do not have to learn their feath-
ers and babies do not have to learn their language. I think there is a better
parallel between birds and language: a child acquiring language is like
a bird building a nest; it is a matter of "instinctual" or "automatic" re-
source-enhancement, taking found objects and constructing something
of great biological value - part of what Dawkins (1982) calls the extended
phenotype - which blurs the boundary between an organism (or agent)
and the environment in which it must act.
The primary found objects, of course, are words, which, like the
blacksmith's legendary tools, are tools for making more tools. As Andy
Clark puts it, "The linguistic constructions, thus viewed, are a new class
of objects which invite us to develop new (non-language-based) skills
of use, recognition, and manipulation. Sentential and nonsentential
modes of thought thus coevolve so as to complement, but not replicate,
each other's special cognitive virtues" (1997, p. 211). It is because the li-
ons cannot talk to each other that they also cannot come to use tokens
of other sorts to represent, non-linguistically. And it is by that indirect
route, I think, that we come to construct our minds. Here is a little fantasy
about the Planet of the Baboons. The baboons that inhabit this planet are
approached one day by an alien technocracy and offered an amazing
prosthesis: an artifact that will permit a sort of time travel, far into the
past and even into the future, and a sort of time compression: tasks that
normally took days or weeks could be accomplished in a split second.
What a boon these baboons were being offered! - but of course they
could not even understand the offer, being baboons. We human beings
can understand the offer, however, because we have already accepted
it. We have already received the prosthetic extension of our brains that
permits us to play such glorious tricks with time: we call it language.
First consider time "travel": Unlike the baboons, who cannot even
conceive of 10 years ago, and who may not even becapableof recollecting
the specific events of their own past experience that have shaped their
current dispositions,4 we can conceive of the distant past, and use accu-
rate information about events that happened centuries ago to guide our

 
Making Tools for Thinking 
25
current projects. We can also see accurately into the future, predicting
not just regular patterns such as nightfall and daybreak, and the coming
winter (a trick that is in some regards within the competence of many
animals and even plants), but such one-off events as the much antici-
pated millennial celebrations around the world, and, somewhat farther
in the future, thank goodness, the extinguishing of the sun some billions
of years hence. No non-human creature has a clue about any of that.
Their time horizons may stretch for some limited purposes from seconds
to hours to a year or two (think of the faithful biennial return of the al-
batross to its mate), but aside from that they have no conception. There
is some remarkable evidence to suggest that elephants have some in-
kling of their own mortality, but it is equivocal. Our time horizons, un-
equivocally, extend to the point of evaporation; we can even think about
- if not yet think about very well - the question of whether time itself
has a beginning or end.
Second, consider time compression: We can teach a child, in a few
seconds, lessons that animal parents have to drill into their offspring.
Even in the highly specialized cases of learning what foods to eat and
not to eat, where the Garcia effect and similar special-purpose varieties
of one-shot learning have been found, animal parents have scant control
over which lesson they can teach.
Consider, as a thought-experiment, the problem of a mother dog
needing to warn her puppies not to attempt to eat the bright orange
toads, which are poisonous. Not being able to raise the subject in con-
versation, she must wait till such a toad is in the offing, or perhaps seek
one out for purposes of instruction, and then whenever the puppies ap-
proach it, she must bark or otherwise ward them off. It would be a form
of operant conditioning, evolutionarily tuned, no doubt, so that the be-
havior shaping might be much swifter than what can be accomplished
by "ecologically invalid" scientists in laboratories, but still vulnerable to
the same ambiguities and indeterminacies.5
To dramatize the problem we might imagine the puppies asking
themselves "Is it just this orange toad, or orange toads that hop like this
one, or small brightly colored moving things, or orange things that
smell like this, or ... ?" There are only two ways of answering these
questions for the puppies: letting evolution answer them (by relying on
whatever generalization-proclivities are built in), or varying the cir-
cumstances in further laborious training to clarify the boundaries of the
classes of positive and negative stimuli. Can a mother dog learn, and
teach to her young, that the food shaped and colored like hearts and
spades, but not clubs and diamonds, is to be avoided? I do not know
what empirical studies may have shown about the limits on such in-
struction -1 think it is an interesting question worth pursuing, if it has
not already been answered.

 
26 
Daniel C. Dennett
But we must not loose sight of the obvious fact that the puppies can-
not literally (floridly) ask themselves these questions, lacking language.
It is far from clear, in fact, that the mother, also lacking language, can
even frame for herself the project of teaching anything so specific to her
young. Her project, we may suppose, is to replicate in her young the dis-
position vis-a-vis orange toads that she acquired from her mother, but
we must not impose our language-borne distinctions on the character-
ization of that disposition. For instance, in all likelihood, she has no way
- and no need for a way - of distinguishing between passing along the
generalization in sensu composite:
Believe, my young, the following universal quantification: For all
x, if x is an orange toad, ingesting x is to be avoided.
and passing along the general lesson in sensu diviso:
If you ever encounter an orange toad, my young, believe at that mo-
ment: ingesting this is to be avoided.
The latter is the general disposition to have particular, perception-an-
chored beliefs about particular encountered toads; the former is the
more intellectual state of mind of deeming true a universally quantified
proposition about orange toads in general. In the normal course of ca-
nine affairs, the difference is not apt to loom large enough to make a dif-
ference, but in human affairs, it can be readily discerned in special cir-
cumstances. Small-town Tom, knowing everybody in town, believes all
the town's Republicans are mean-spirited in sensu diviso (thus would he
sort them, seriatim, if asked to list the mean-spirited). However, not
knowing the political affiliations of all his fellow citizens - or not know-
ing whether or not he knew all the people in town - he would sincerely
express agnosticism when given the generalization in sensu composite for
assent or dissent. The latter expresses a proposition that is news to him
even though his sorting behavior would reliably conform to the gener-
alization. There are things you can do with the proposition - such as pass
it along, verbally, or use it as a premise in a formal argument - that you
cannot do with the sorting disposition alone. You can reflect upon it, for
instance, and ask yourself what are the true boundaries of the class of
the universally quantified predicate (the sort of questions the puppies
cannot ask, even if their experience partially answers them de facto). It
has often seemed innocuous to attribute general beliefs to animals on the
basis of their "sorting" behavior without noting the possibility that a gi-
ant step may be concealed in this usage, the step from implicit to explicit
generalization. That step may require the special thinking tools that only
a natural language can provide.

 
Making Tools for Thinking 
27
What sort of mind do you need in order to acquire language in the
first place? (Why will not a baboon's or chimp's mind be enough?) That
is one question to which we still do not have a good answer, though the
ground is littered with clues. A different question: What are the special
talents of the sort of mind you acquire once you have language installed?
Ray Jackendoff has recently expressed to me a striking way of answering
it: we human beings can transform ourselves on a moment's notice into
a somewhat different "machine," taking on new projects, following new
rules, adopting new policies (personal communication, 1997). When
psychologists devise a new experimental setup or paradigm in which to
test such non-human subjects as rats or cats or monkeys or dolphins,
they often have to devote dozens or even hundreds of hours to training
each subject on the new tasks. Human subjects, however, can usually just
be told what is desired of them. After a brief question-and-answer ses-
sion and a few minutes of practice, we human subjects will typically be
as competent in the new environment as any agent ever could be. Of
course, we do have to understand the representations presented to us in
these briefings
We are transformers - that is what a mind is, as contrasted with a
mere brain. A chameleonic transformer. A virtual machine for making
more virtual machines. And where are they, these virtual machines?
Centered on a brain, to be sure, but not explicable without looking out-
side the brain into the world. Obviously some brains might be more
amenable to being turned into powerful minds than others - differences
in the operating system, you might say. The role that these differences
might play is highly malleable, however, and may be largely eliminable.
We let the myopic wear glasses; we may let the forgetful take their books
along with them - why not? If we allow paper and pencil, why not a slide
rule, why not a calculator, why not a colleague or a brains trust, when
you get right down to it? Give me a choice between a not-too-swift Sen-
ator who has the wit and good taste to surround himself with high-
powered advisors, and a brilliant do-it-myselfer who probably does not
know his own limits, and I may well vote for the former. It is this distri-
bution of the tasks of intelligence that makes our minds so much more
powerful than all other animal minds.
Notes
1 Andy Clark proposed (at a Santa Fe Institute workshop in May, 1996) some
more stringent requirements for "robust" representation, requiring "surro-
gates" that are specifically "manipulated" (for instance, in "forward models"
of the sort one can find in both engineering and animal motor-control systems).
This can be seen to be a proposal to split the difference, in effect, requiring

 
28 
Daniel C. Dennett
manipulanda of sorts, but not requiring the manipulation to be a personal-
level, accessible, activity. This is a very tempting suggestion, I think, but I do
not yet see how to follow it up.
2 Clark discusses "thinking about thinking" as a "good candidate for a distinc-
tively human capacity" (1997, pp. 208-209).
3 The scare-quotes are to remind us that maybe this is not robust, or florid, think-
ing at all, the sort that involves manipulation of surrogates. Some participants
at the Vancouver conference took me to be claiming that there was no evidence
for metarepresentation of any sort without the prior establishment of natural
language, but my point was rather to warn against the assumption that this va-
riety of apparently higher-order cognition is all there is to meta-representation.
4 I have been challenging ethologists for several years to provide clear and per-
suasive evidence of episodic memory in non-human animals. The ethological
and psychological literature, inspired by Tulving's (1983) work, treats episodic
memory as a well-recognized category, but so far as I can see, there is a crucial
equivocation in the discussions. True episodic memory is a tricky and sophis-
ticated phenomenon. The dog that buries the bone and returns to it the next
day does not show episodic memory; it merely shows that it has an expecta-
tion, engendered by a single episode of burying, that there will be something
good to be found there. It may or may not be able to accompany its digging
with an actual episode of recollection. Learning from a single episode - one-
shot learning - is importantly unlike learning via lengthy conditioning (what
I call ABC learning in Kinds of Minds and "Labeling and Learning") but it is
not the same as episodic memory. We must not endow animals with a capacity
for recollection just because they exhibit one-shot learning.
5 Dan Sperber has suggested a natural ramp up which learning of this sort could
proceed, beginning with what might be call impromptu observation of an-
other (by an animal that has rich metapyschological powers to begin with),
and leading by gradual steps to directed teaching, all without benefit of lan-
guage. I wonder if this can be successfully modeled in a computer simulation
- a nice new toy problem for artificial life.
References
Baron-Cohen, Simon (1995). Mindblindness: An essay on autism and theory of mind.
Cambridge:, MA: MIT Press.
Brooks, Rodney (1991). Intelligence without representation. Artificial Intelligence
Journal 47,139-159.
Clark, Andy (1997). Being there. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Dahlbom, Bo, & Janlert, Lars-Erik (1996). Computer future. Unpublished book
manuscript.
Darwin, Charles (1871). The descent of man. New York: Appleton.
Dawkins, Richard (1982). The extended phenotype. Oxford and San Francisco:
Freeman.
Dennett, Daniel (1969). Content and consciousness. London: Routledge & Kegan
Paul.

 
Making Tools for Thinking 
29
Dennett, Daniel (1993). Labeling and learning. Mind and Language 8, 540-548.
Dennett, Daniel (1996). Kinds of minds. New York: Basic Books.
Humphrey, Nicholas (1986). The inner eye. London: Faber and Faber.
Kohler, Wolfgang (1925). The mentality of apes. New York: Harcourt Brace and
World.
Mithen, Steven (1996). The prehistory of the mind. London: Thames and Hudson.
Premack, D., & Woodruff, G. (1978). Does the chimpanzee have a theory of mind?
Behavioral and Brain Sciences 1: 515-526.
Russell, Bertrand (1927). An outline of philosophy, London: Allen & Unwin.
Sperber, Dan (1996). Personal communication, in setting the topic for the 10th
conference of Vancouver Studies in Cognitive Science, at which the papers
in this volume were presented.
Tulving, Endel (1983). Elements of episodic memory. Oxford: Clarendon Press.

 
Metarepresentations
A Multidisciplinary Perspective
edited by Dan Sperber
OXPORD
UNIVERSITY PRESS
2000

 
Oxford University Press
Oxford 
New York
Athens 
Auckland Bangkok 
Bogota 
Buenos Aires Calcutta
Cape Town Chennai Dares Salaam Delhi 
Florence 
Hong Kong Istanbul
Karachi 
Kuala Lumpur Madrid Melbourne 
Mexico City 
Mumbai
Nairobi 
Paris 
Sao Paulo Singapore Taipei 
Tokyo 
Toronto Warsaw
and associated companies in
Berlin 
Ibadan
Copyright © 2000 by Oxford University Press
Published by Oxford University Press, Inc.
198 Madison Avenue, New York, New York 10016
Oxford is a registered trademark of Oxford University Press
All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced,
stored in a retrieval system, or transmitted, in any form or by any means,
electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording, or otherwise,
without the prior permission of Oxford University Press.
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Metarepresentations: a multidisciplinary perspective / [edited ] by Dan Sperber.
p. cm. — (Vancouver studies in cognitive science ; v. 10)
Includes bibliographical references and index.
ISBN 0-19-514114-8; ISBN 0-19-514115-6 (pbk.)
1. Mental representation—Congresses.
2. Thought and thinking —Congresses.
3. Cognitive science—Congresses. 
I. Sperber, Dan. II. Series.
BF316.6.M48 2000
121—dc21 
00-035687
1 3 5 7 9 8 6 4 2
Printed in the United States of America
on acid-free paper

