BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1995) 18, 227-287
Printed in the United States of America
On a confusion about a function
of consciousness
Ned Block
Department of Linguistics and Philosophy, Massachusetts Institute
of Technology, Cambridge, MA 02139
Electronic mail: block@psyche.mit.edu
Abstract: Consciousness is a mongrel concept: there are a number of very different "consciousnesses." Phenomenal consciousness is
experience; the phenomenally conscious aspect of a state is what it is like to be in that state. The mark of access-consciousness, by
contrast, is availability for use in reasoning and rationally guiding speech and action. These concepts are often partly or totally
conflated, with bad results. This target article uses as an example a form of reasoning about a function of "consciousness" based on the
phenomenon of blindsight. Some information about stimuli in the blind field is represented in the brains of blindsight patients, as
shown by their correct "guesses." They cannot harness this information in the service of action, however, and this is said to show that a
function of phenomenal consciousness is somehow to enable information represented in the brain to guide action. But stimuli in the
blind field are both access-unconscious and phenomenally unconscious. The fallacy is: an obvious function of the machinery of access-
consciousness is illicitly transferred to phenomenal consciousness.
Keywords: access; attention; awareness; blindsight; consciousness; function; retrieval
1. Introduction
The concept of consciousness is a hybrid, or better, a
mongrel concept: the word "consciousness" connotes a
number of different concepts and denotes a number of
different phenomena. We reason about "consciousness"
using some premises that apply to one of the phenomena
that fall under "consciousness," other premises that apply
to other "consciousnesses," and we end up with trouble.
There are many parallels in the history of science. Aris-
totle used "velocity" sometimes to mean average velocity
and sometimes to mean instantaneous velocity; his failure
to see the distinction caused confusion (Kuhn 1964). The
Florentine Experimenters of the seventeenth century
used a single word (roughly translatable as "degree of
heat") for temperature and for heat, generating para-
doxes. For example, when they measured "degree of
heat" by whether various heat sources could melt paraffin,
heat source A came out hotter than B, but when they
measured "degree of heat" by how much ice a heat source
could melt in a given time, B was hotter than A (Wiser &
Carey 1983). These are very different cases, but there is a
similarity, one that they share with the case of "conscious-
ness. " The similarity is: very different concepts are treated
as a single concept. I think we all have some tendency to
make this mistake in the case of "consciousness."
Though the problem I am concerned with appears in
many lines of thought about consciousness, it will be
convenient to focus on one of them. My main illustration
of the kind of confusion I am talking about concerns
reasoning about the function of consciousness. The issue
of the function of consciousness is, in fact, more the
platform of this article than its topic. Because the article
attempts to expose a confusion, it is primarily concerned
with reasoning, not with data. Long stretches of text
without data may make some readers uncomfortable, as
will my fanciful thought-experiments. But if you are
interested in consciousness, then if I am right you can't
afford to lose patience. A stylistic matter: because this
paper will have audiences with different concerns, I have
adopted the practice of putting in footnotes items that will
mainly be of technical interest to part of the audience.
Footnotes can be skipped without losing the thread. I now
turn to blindsight and its role in reasoning about a func-
tion of consciousness.
Patients with damage in primary visual cortex typically
have "blind" areas in their visual fields. If the experimen-
ter flashes a stimulus in one of these blind areas and asks
the patient what he saw, the patient answers "nothing."
The striking phenomenon is that some (but not all) of
these patients are able to "guess" reliably about certain
features of the stimulus, features having to do with mo-
tion, location, direction (e.g., whether a grid is horizontal
or vertical). In "guessing," they are able to discriminate
some simple forms. If they are asked to grasp an object in
the blind field (which they say they cannot see), they can
shape their hands in a way appropriate to grasping it, and
there are some signs of color discrimination. It is interest-
ing that visual acuity (as measured, e.g., by how fine a
grating can be detected) increases further from where the
patient is looking in blindsight, the opposite of normal
sight. (Blindsight was first noticed by Poppel et al., 1973;
there is now a huge body of literature on this and related
phenomena. See Bornstein & Pittman 1992; Milner &
Rugg 1992.) [See also Campion et al.: "Is Blindsight an
Effect of Scattered Light, Spared Cortex, and Near-
threshold Vision?" BBS 6(3) 1983.]
Consciousness in some sense is apparently missing
© 1995 Cambridge University Press
0140-525X195 $9.00+. 10
227

Block: Confusion about consciousness
(though see McGinn, 1991, p. 112, for an argument to the
contrary), and with it the ability to deploy information in
reasoning and rational control of action. For example,
Marcel (1986) observed that a thirsty blindsight patient
would not reach for a glass of water in his blind field (one
must grant Marcel some "poetic license" in this influential
example; blindsight patients appear to have insufficient
form perception in their blind fields to pick out a glass of
water). It is tempting to argue (Barrs 1988; Flanagan 1991;
1992; Marcel 1986; 1988; van Gulick 1989) that because
consciousness is missing in blindsight, consciousness
must have a function of somehow enabling information
represented in the brain to be used in reasoning, report-
ing, and rationally guiding action. I mean the "rationally"
to exclude the "guessing" kind of guidance of action that
blindsight patients are capable of in the case of stimuli
presented to the blind field. The idea is that when a
content is not conscious - as in the blindsight patient's
blind field perceptual contents, it can influence behavior
in various ways, but only when the content is conscious
does it play a rational role; and so consciousness must be
involved in promoting this rational role.
A related argument is also tempting: van Gulick (1989)
and Searle (1992) discuss Penfield's (1975) observations of
epileptics who have a seizure while walking, driving, or
playing the piano. The epileptics continue their activities
in a routinized, mechanical way despite, it is said, a total
lack of consciousness. Searle says that because conscious-
ness as well as flexibility and creativity of behavior are
missing, we can conclude that a function of consciousness
is somehow to promote flexibility and creativity. These
two arguments are the springboard for this target article.
Although some variants of this sort of reasoning have some
merit, they are often given more weight than they de-
serve, because of a persistent fallacy involving a conflation
of two very different concepts of consciousness.
The plan of the paper is as follows: in the following
section I will briefly discuss some other syndromes much
like blindsight, sketching one model that has been offered
for explaining them. Then, in the longest part of the
paper, I will distinguish the two concepts of consciousness
whose conflation is the root of the fallacious arguments.
Once that is done, I will sketch what is wrong with the
target reasoning and also what is right about it, concluding
with some remarks on how it is possible to investigate the
function of consciousness empirically without having
much of an idea about the scientific nature of con-
sciousness.
2. Other syndromes and Schacter's model
To introduce a second blindsight-like syndrome, I want
first to explain a syndrome that is not like blindsight:
prosopagnosia (prosop — face, agnosia = neurological
deficit in recognizing). Prosopagnosics are unable to rec-
ognize visually their closest relatives - even pictures of
themselves, though usually they have no trouble recog-
nizing their friends by their voices or, according to anec-
dotal reports, visually recognizing people by recognizing
characteristic motions of their bodies. Although there is
wide variation from case to case, prosopagnosia is compat-
ible with a high degree of visual ability, even in tasks
involving faces.
One patient who has been studied by my colleagues in
the Boston area is LH, a Harvard undergraduate who
emerged from a car accident with very localized brain
damage that left him unable to recognize even his mother.
His girl friend began to wear a special ribbon so that he
would know who she was. Now, years later, he still cannot
identify his mother or his wife and children from photo-
graphs (Etcoff et al. 1991). Still, if shown a photo and
asked to choose another photo of the same person from a
set of, say, five photos presented simultaneously with the
original, LH can do almost as well as normal people
despite differences between the target and matching
photos in lighting, angle, and expression.
Now we are ready for the analog of blindsight. The
phenomenon is exhibited in many experimental para-
digms, but I will mention only this: it has recently been
discovered (by Sergent & Poncet 1990) that some pro-
sopagnosics are very good at "guessing" between two
names in the same occupational category ("Reagan" and
"Bush") for a person whose face they claim is unfamiliar
(see Young 1994a; 1994b; Young & de Haan 1993, for a
description of these phenomenon). Interestingly, LH
does not appear to have "covert knowledge" of the people
whose faces he sees, but he does appear to have "covert
knowledge" of their facial expressions (Etcoff et al. 1992).
Many such phenomena in brain-damaged patients have
now been explored using the techniques of cognitive and
physiological psychology. Further, there are a variety of
phenomena that occur in normal people like you and me.
For example, suppose that you are given a string of words
and asked to count the vowels. This can be done so that
you will have no conscious recollection or even recogni-
tion of the words, and you will be unable to "guess" at a
level above chance which words you have seen. However,
if I give you a series of word steins to complete according
to your whim, the likelihood of your completing "rea-" as
"reason" is greater if "reason" is one of the words that you
saw, even if you do not recall or recognize it as one of the
words you saw (see Bowers & Schacter 1990; Reingold &
Merikle 1993).l
Recall that the target reasoning (the reasoning I will be
saying is substantially confused but also substantially
right) is that when consciousness is missing subjects
cannot report or reason about nonconscious contents or
use them to guide action; we can conclude that a function
of consciousness is to facilitate reasoning, reporting, and
guiding action. This reasoning is partially captured in a
model suggested by Schacter (1989, see also Schacter et
al. 1988) in a paper reviewing phenomena such as the
ones described above. Figure 1 is derived from Schacter's
model.
The model is only partial (that is, it models some
aspects of the mind but not others), and so may be a bit
hard to grasp for those who are used to seeing inputs and
outputs. Think of the hands and feet as connected to the
Response Systems box, and the eyes and ears as con-
nected to the specialized modules. (See Schacter, 1989,
for some indication of how these suggestions are oversim-
plified.) The key feature of the model is that it contains a
box for something called "phenomenal consciousness."
I'll address this in more detail later, but for now let me just
say that phenomenal consciousness is experience; what
makes a state phenomenally conscious is that there is
something "it is like" (Nagel 1974) to be in that state. The
228
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1995) 18:2

Block: Confusion about consciousness
Specialized
Modules
i
1 1
Response Systems
i 
t
Z1CZ
V
i
intz.
i i
> 
i
II i I
11
« *
4 
1
II
i i
\ F
V
Phenomenal Consciousness
i i
Executive System
i
Procedural/Habit System
Declarative/
Episodic
Memory
Figure 1. Schacter's Model
model dictates that the phenomenal consciousness mod-
ule has a function: it is the gateway between the special
purpose "knowledge" modules and the central Executive
System that is in charge of direct control of reasoning,
reporting, and guiding action. So, a function of conscious-
ness according to this model includes integrating the
outputs of the specialized modules and transmitting the
integrated contents to mechanisms of reasoning and con-
trol of action and reporting.
I will be using this model as a focus of discussion, but I
hope that my using it for this purpose will not be taken as
an endorsement of the model itself. I have no commit-
ment to a single executive system or even to a phenome-
nal consciousness module. One can accept the idea of
phenomenal consciousness as distinct from any cognitive
or functional or intentional notion while frowning on a
modular treatment of it. Perhaps, for example, phenome-
nal consciousness is a feature of the whole brain.
Many thinkers will hate any model that treats phenom-
enal consciousness as something that could be accom-
plished by a distinct system.21 call that feature "Cartesian
modularism,' by analogy with the "Cartesian material-
ism" of Dennett and Kinsbourne (1992a), the view that
consciousness occupies a literal place in the brain. Mod-
ules are individuated by their function, so the point of the
box's place between the specialized modules and the
Executive System is to indicate that there is a single
system that has the function of talking to the specialized
modules and integrating their outputs, and talking to the
Executive System, passing on information from the spe-
cialized modules. There is an additional point in calling
that system the phenomenal consciousness system, how-
ever, namely to say that phenomenal consciousness is
somehow involved in performing that function. The idea
is that phenomenal consciousness really does some-
thing, that it is involved somehow in powering the wheels
and pulleys of access to the Executive System. This
is a substantive claim, one that is distinct from the claims
that phenomenal consciousness is correlated with that
information-processing function, or that phenomenal
consciousness should be identified with that information-
processing function. The idea is that phenomenal con-
sciousness is distinct (at least conceptually) from that
information-processing function but is part of its imple-
mentation.
Farah (1994) criticizes this model on the ground that we
don't observe patients whose blindsight-like performance
is up to the standard of normal vision. Blindsight and its
analogs are always degraded in discriminatory capacity.
Her assumption seems to be that if there is a phenomenal
consciousness module, it could simply be bypassed with-
out decrement in performance; and the fact that this is not
observed is taken as reason to reject the phenomenal
consciousness module. This assumption would have to
stem from a belief that phenomenal consciousness doesn't
do any information processing (except, I guess, for deter-
mining reports of phenomenal consciousness). But why
assume that? For example, phenomenal consciousness
might be like the water in a hydraulic computer. You don't
expect the computer to work normally without the water.
Even if there could be an electrical computer that is
isomorphic to the hydraulic computer but works without
water, one should not conclude that the water in the
hydraulic system does nothing. I will return to this issue
later.
One reason that many philosophers would hate Carte-
sian modularist models is that they may be regarded as
licensing the possibility of "zombies," creatures that have
information processing that is the same as ours but no
phenomenal consciousness. If the phenomenal con-
sciousness module could be replaced by a device that had
the same information-processing effects on the rest of the
system, but without phenomenal consciousness, the re-
sult would be a zombie. My view is that we presently
know so little about the scientific nature of phenomenal
consciousness and its function that we cannot judge
whether the same function could be performed by an
ersatz phenomenal consciousness module - that is, whether
such a module could inject its representations with ersatz
conscious content that would affect information process-
ing the same way as real conscious content.
The information-processing function of phenomenal
consciousness in Schacter's model is the ground of the
concept of consciousness that I will mainly be contrasting
with phenomenal consciousness, what I call "access-
consciousness. " A perceptual state is access-conscious,
roughly speaking, if its content - what is represented by
the perceptual state - is processed via that information-
processing function, that is, if its content gets to the
Executive System, whereby it can be used to control
reasoning and behavior.
Schacter's model is useful for my purposes both be-
cause it can be used to illustrate the contrast between
phenomenal and access-consciousness, and because it
allows us to see one possible explanation of the "covert
knowledge" syndromes just described. This explanation
(and also Schacter's model) are certainly incomplete and
no doubt oversimplified at best, but it is nonetheless
useful to see the outlines of how an account might go.
In addition, there is an association between Schacter's
model and the target reasoning - though as we shall see
there is another processing model that perhaps better
embodies the target reasoning.
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1995) 18:2
229

Block: Confusion about consciousness
Consider a blindsight patient who has just had a vertical
line displayed in his blind field. "What did you see?"
"Nothing," says the patient. "Take a guess between a
vertical and a horizontal line," says the experimenter.
"Vertical," says the patient, correctly. Here's a possible
explanation of what happened. One of the modules is
specialized for spatial information; it has some informa-
tion about the verticality of the stimulus. The pathways
between this specialized module and the phenomenal
consciousness system have been damaged, creating the
"blind field," so the patient has no phenomenally con-
scious experience of the line, and hence his Executive
System has no information about whether the line is
vertical or horizontal. The specialized module has a direct
connection to the response system, however, so when the
subject is given a binary choice, the specialized module
can somehow directly affect the response. Similarly, there
is a specialized module for face information, which can
have some information about the face that has been
presented to a prosopagnosic. If the prosopagnosia is
caused by damage in the link between the face module
and the phenomenal consciousness system, that prevents
the face information from being phenomenally conscious,
and without phenomenal consciousness the Executive
System does not get the information about the face. When
the prosopagnosic makes a guess between "Reagan" and
"Bush," the face module somehow directly controls the
response. (It is assumed that the face module has informa-
tion about people - for example, their names - linked to
representations of their faces.) It is interesting that the
patients who do best in these experiments are the ones
judged to be the most "passive" (Marcel 1983, pp. 197-
237; Weiskrantz 1988). One can speculate that in a laid-
back subject, the Executive System does not try out a
guessing strategy, so peripheral systems are more likely to
affect the response.
Alexia is a neurological syndrome whose victims can no
longer read a word "at a glance," but can only puzzle out
what word they have seen at a rate of, say, one second per
letter. Nonetheless, these subjects often show various
kinds of understanding of the meanings of words that have
been flashed far too briefly for them to read in their
laborious way. The idea again is that one of the modules is
specialized for lexical information and has information
about words the subject cannot consciously read. This
information in some way affects responses. Landis et al.
(1980) report that one such patient actually became worse
at "guesses" having to do with the meanings of "unread"
words as his explicit reading ability improved (Young & de
Haan 1993). Again, perhaps once the Executive System
has more information it "takes over," preventing periph-
eral systems from controlling responses. Coslett and
Saffran (1994) report that alexics did worse at "guessing"
words when given longer exposure to them. An exposure
of 250 msec, was better than an exposure of 2 sec. Again,
longer exposures may give the Executive System a chance
to try to read letter by letter. Schacter's model and the
explanations I have just sketched are highly speculative;
my purposes in appealing to them are heuristic.
3. Two concepts of consciousness
First, consider phenomenal consciousness, or P-con-
sciousness, as I will call it. Let me acknowledge at the
outset that I cannot define P-consciousness in any re-
motely noncircular way. I don't consider this an embar-
rassment. The history of reductive definitions in philoso-
phy should lead one not to expect a reductive definition of
anything. The best one can do for P-consciousness is in
some respects worse than for many other concepts,
though, because really all one can do is point to the
phenomenon (cf. Goldman 1993a). Nonetheless, it is
important to point properly. Searle, acknowledging that
consciousness cannot be defined noncircularly, defines it
as follows:
By consciousness I simply mean those subjective states of
awareness or sentience that begin when one wakes in the
morning and continue throughout the period that one is
awake until one falls into a dreamless sleep, into a coma, or
dies or is otherwise, as they say, unconscious. (Searle 1990;
there is a much longer attempt along the same lines in Searle
1992,.p. 83ff.)
I will argue that this sort of pointing is flawed, because
it points to too many things, too many different con-
sciousnesses.
So how should we point to P-consciousness? One way is
with rough synonyms. As I said, P-consciousness is ex-
perience. P-consciousness properties are experiential
ones. P-conscious states are experiential, that is, a state is
P-conscious if it has experiential properties. The totality
of the experiential properties of a state are "what it is like"
to have it. Moving from synonyms to examples, we have
P-conscious states when we see, hear, smell, taste, and
have pains. P-conscious properties include the experien-
tial properties of sensations, feelings, and perceptions,
but I would also include thoughts, desires, and emo-
tions.3 A feature of P-consciousness that is often missed is
that differences in intentional content often make a P-
conscious difference. What it is like to hear a sound as
coming from the left differs from what it is like to hear a
sound as coming from the right. P-consciousness is often
representational (see Flanagan 1992, Chap. 4; Goldman
1993b; Jackendoff 1987; McGinn 1991, Chap. 2; van
Gulick 1989.) So far, I don't take myself to have said
anything terribly controversial. The controversial part is
that I take P-conscious properties to be distinct from any
cognitive, intentional, or functional property. (Cognitive
= essentially involving thought; intentional properties =
properties in virtue of which a representation or state is
about something; functional properties = properties de-
finable (for example) in terms of a computer program. See
Searle 1983, on intentionality; see Block 1980; 1994, for
better characterizations of a functional property.) Still, I
am trying hard to limit the controversiality of my assump-
tions. Although I will be assuming that functionalism
about P-consciousness is false, I will be pointing out that
limited versions of many of the points I make can be
acceptable to the functionalist.4
It is of course P-consciousness rather than access-
consciousness or self-consciousness that has seemed such
a scientific mystery. The magazine Discover (November
1992) devoted an issue to the ten great unanswered
questions of science, such as What is Consciousness?;
Does Chaos Rule the Cosmos?; and How Big is the
Universe? - The topic was P-consciousness, not, for
example, self-consciousness.
By way of homing in on P-consciousness, it is useful to
appeal to what may be a contingent property of it, namely,
230
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1995) 18:2

Block: Confusion about consciousness
the famous "explanatory gap." To quote T. H. Huxley
(1866), "How it is that anything so remarkable as a state of
consciousness comes about as a result of irritating nervous
tissue, is just as unaccountable as the appearance of Djin
when Aladdin rubbed his lamp." Consider a famous
neurophysiological theory of P-consciousness offered by
Crick and Koch (1990), namely, that a synchronized 35-75
hertz neural oscillation in the sensory areas of the cortex is
at the heart of P-consciousness. No one has produced the
concepts that would allow us to explain why such oscilla-
tions might be the physiological basis of P-consciousness.
However, Crick and Koch have offered an account of
how the 35-75 hertz oscillation might contribute to a
solution to the "binding problem." Suppose one simul-
taneously sees a red square moving to the right and a blue
circle moving to the left. Different areas of the visual
cortex are differentially sensitive to color, shape, motion,
and so on - so what binds together redness, squareness,
and rightward motion? That is, why don't you see redness
and blueness without seeing them as belonging with
particular shapes and particular motions? And why aren't
the colors normally seen as bound to the wrong shapes
and motions? Representations of colors, shapes, and mo-
tions of a single object are supposed to involve oscillations
that are in phase with one another but not with represen-
tations of other objects. But even if the oscillation hypoth-
esis deals with the informational aspect of the binding
problem (and there is some evidence against it), how does
it explain what it is like to see something as red in the first
place — or, for that matter, as square or as moving to the
right? Why couldn't there be brains functionally or physi-
ologically just like ours, including oscillation patterns,
whose owners' experience was different from ours or who
had no experience at all? (Note that I don't say that there
could be such brains. I just want to know why not.) And
why should it be a 35-75 hertz oscillation - as opposed to
some other frequency - that underlies experience? If the
synchronized neural oscillation idea pans out as a solution
to the binding problem, no doubt there will be some
answer to the question of why those frequencies - as
opposed to say, 110 hertz - are involved. But will that
explain why 110 hertz oscillations do not underlie experi-
ence? No one has a clue as to how to answer these
questions.5
The explanatory gap in the case of P-consciousness
contrasts with our relatively good understanding of cogni-
tion. We have two serious research programs into the
nature of cognition, the classical "language of thought"
paradigm, and the connectionist research program.
Though no doubt there are many ideas missing in our
understanding of cognition, we have no difficulty seeing
how pursuing one or both of these research programs could
lead to an adequate theoretical perspective on cognition.
It is not easy, however, to see how current approaches to
P-consciousness could yield an account of it. Indeed, what
passes for research programs on consciousness just is a
combination of cognitive psychology and explorations of
neuropsychological syndromes that contain no theoretical
perspective on what P-consciousness actually is.
I mentioned the explanatory gap partly by way of
pointing at P-consciousness: that is the entity to which the
mentioned explanatory gap applies. Perhaps this identi-
fication is contingent; at some time in the future, when we
have the concepts to conceive of much more about the
explanation of P-consciousness, there may be no explana-
tory gap to use in picking out P-consciousness (see
McGinn, 1991, for a more pessimistic view).
What I have been saying about P-consciousness is of
course controversial in a variety of ways, both for some
advocates and some opponents of some notion of P-
consciousness. I have tried to steer clear of certain contro-
versies, for example, over inverted and absent qualia;
over Jackson's (1986) Mary (the woman raised in a black
and white room, learning all the physiological and func-
tional facts about the brain and color vision, but nonethe-
less discovers a new fact when she goes outside the room
for the first time and learns what it is like to see red); and
even over Nagel's (1974) view that we cannot know what it
is like to be a bat.6 Even if you think that P-consciousness
as I have described it is an incoherent notion, you may be
able to agree with the main point of this article, that a
great deal of misunderstanding arises as a result of confus-
ing P-consciousness with something else. Not even the
concept of what time it is now on the sun is so confused
that it cannot itself be mistaken for something else.
4. Access-consciousness,
I now turn to the nonphenomenal notion of conscious-
ness that is most easily and dangerously conflated with
P-consciousness: access-consciousness. A state is access-
conscious (A-conscious) if, in virtue of one's having the
state, a representation of its content is (1) inferentially
promiscuous (Stich 1978), that is, poised for use as a
premise in reasoning, (2) poised for rational control of
action, and (3) poised for rational control of speech. (I will
speak of both states and their contents as A-conscious.)
These three conditions are together sufficient, but not all
necessary. I regard (3) as not necessary (and not indepen-
dent of the others), because I want to allow that non-
linguistic animals, for example chimps, have A-conscious
states. I see A-consciousness as a cluster concept, in
which (3) - roughly, reportability - is the element of the
cluster with the smallest weight, though (3) is often the
best practical guide to A-consciousness.7
Although I make a firm distinction between A-con-
sciousness and P-consciousness, I also want to insist that
they interact. What perceptual information is being ac-
cessed can change figure to ground and vice versa, and a
figure-ground switch can affect one's phenomenal state.
For example, attending to the feel of the shirt on your
neck - accessing those perceptual contents - switches
what was in the background to the foreground, thereby
changing one's phenomenal state (see Hill 1991, pp. 118-
126; Searle 1992).
I will argue that A-consciousness plays a deep role in
our ordinary "consciousness" talk and thought. I must
admit at the outset, however, that this role allows for
substantial indeterminacy in the concept itself. In addi-
tion, there are some loose ends in the characterization of
the concept that cannot be tied up without deciding about
certain controversial issues.8 My purpose in making pre-
cise the A-consciousness/P-consciousness distinction is to
reveal the fallacy in the target reasoning, which (in one
form) says that because the blindsight patient lacks con-
sciousness of stimuli in the blind field, he does not use
information he actually has about these stimuli, so the
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1995) 18:2
231

Block: Confusion about consciousness
function of consciousness must be to harness information
for use in guiding action. (Perhaps blindsight patients do
not lack P-consciousness of these stimuli, but the target
reasoning supposes they do, and it is independently
plausible. Cowie & Stoerig 1992 point out that the re-
moval of primary visual cortex in blindsight patients
disrupts the Crick & Koch, 1990, 35-75 hertz oscillations.
This suggests that the blindsight patient may lack P-
consciousness of the stimuli.) Something else that is prob-
lematic in blindsight can be equally blamed for the pa-
tient's failure, namely, the machinery of A-consciousness.
Of course, the missing P-consciousness may be respon-
sible for the missing A-consciousness; no fallacy is in-
volved in this hypothesis. Rather, the fallacy is in sliding
from an obvious function of A-consciousness to a non-
obvious function of P-consciousness. For that reason, I
choose to adopt a notion of access according to which the
blindsight patient's guesses don't count as access. There is
no right or wrong here. Access conies in various degrees
and kinds, and my choice here is mainly determined by
the needs of the argument. (I also happen to think that the
notion I characterize is more or less the one that plays a
big role in our thought, but that will not be a factor in my
argument.)
There are three main differences between P-conscious-
ness and A-consciousness. The first point, put crudely,
is that P-conscious content is phenomenal, whereas A-
conscious content is representational. It is of the essence
of A-conscious content to play a role in reasoning, and
only representational content can figure in reasoning.
Many phenomenal contents are also representational,
however, so it would be better to say that it is in virtue of
its phenomenal content or the phenomenal aspect of its
content that a state is P-conscious, whereas it is in virtue
of its representational content, or the representational
aspect of its content, that a state is A-conscious.9
The last paragraph referred to P-conscious content. The
P-conscious content of a state is the totality of the state's
experiential properties, what it is like to be in that state.
One can think of the P-conscious content of a state as the
state's experiential "value" by analogy with the represen-
tational content as the state's representational "value."
In my view, the content of an experience can be both
P-conscious and A-conscious, the former in virtue of its
phenomenal feel and the latter in virtue of its representa-
tional properties. A closely related point: A-conscious
states are necessarily transitive: A-conscious states must
always be states of consciousness of. P-conscious states,
by contrast, sometimes are and sometimes are not transi-
tive. P-consciousness, as such, is not consciousness of.
A second difference is that A-consciousness is a func-
tional notion, so A-conscious content is system-relative:
what makes a state A-conscious is what a representation of
its content does in a system. P-consciousness is not a
functional notion.10 In terms of Schacter's model, content
gets to be P-conscious because of what happens inside
the P-consciousness module. But what makes content A-
conscious is not something that could go on inside a
module, but rather informational relations among mod-
ules. Content is A-conscious in virtue of (a representation
with that content) reaching the Executive System, the
system in charge of rational control of action and speech;
to this extent we could regard the Executive System as the
A-consciousness module; but to regard anything as an
A-consciousness module is misleading, because what
makes content A-conscious depends on what the Execu-
tive System is disposed to do with the representation.
A third difference is that there is such a thing as a
P-conscious type or kind of state. For example, the feel of
pain is a P-conscious type - every pain must have that
feel. But any particular thought that is A-conscious at a
given time could fail to be accessible at some other time,
just as my car is accessible now but will not be so later
when my wife has it. A state whose content is informa-
tionally promiscuous now may not be so later.
The paradigm P-conscious states are sensations, whereas
the paradigm A-conscious states are "propositional atti-
tude" states such as thoughts, beliefs, and desires, states
with representational content expressed by "that" clauses
(e.g., the thought that grass is green.) As noted, however,
thoughts are often P-conscious and perceptual experi-
ences often have representational content. For example, a
perceptual experience may have the representational
content that there is a red square in front of me. Even
pain typically has some kind of representational con-
tent. Pains often represent something (the cause of the
pain? the pain itself?) as somewhere (in the leg). A
number of philosophers have taken the view that the
content of pain is entirely representational (see Dretske
1993; Shoemaker 1944; Tye, in press b). I don't agree with
this view, so I certainly don't want to rely on it here, but I
also don't want to suggest that the existence of cases of
P-consciousness without A-consciousness is a trivial con-
sequence of an idiosyncratic set of definitions. To the
extent that representationalism of the sort just mentioned
is plausible, one can regard a pain as A-conscious if its
representational content is inferentially promiscuous,
and so on. Alternatively, we could take the A-conscious
content of pain to consist in the content that one has a
pain or that one has a state with a certain phenomenal
content.11
There is a familiar distinction, alluded to above, be-
tween "consciousness" in the sense in which we speak of a
conscious state (intransitive consciousness) and con-
sciousness of something (transitive consciousness; see,
e.g., Rosenthal 1986. Humphrey [1992] mentions that
the intransitive usage is much more recent, only 200 years
old). It is easy to fall into an identification of P-conscious-
ness with intransitive consciousness and a corresponding
identification of access-consciousness with transitive con-
sciousness. Such an identification is oversimplified. As
mentioned earlier, P-conscious contents can be represen-
tational. Consider a perceptual state of seeing a square.
This state has a P-conscious content that represents some-
thing, a square, and thus it is a state of P-consciousness
of the square. It is a state of P-consciousness of the
square even if it doesn't represent the square as a
square, as would be the case if the perceptual state is a
state of an animal that doesn't have the concept of a
square. Since there can be P-consciousness o/something,
P-consciousness is not to be identified with intransitive
consciousness.
Here is a second reason why the transitive/intransitive
distinction cannot be identified with the P-consciousness/
A-consciousness distinction: The o/-ness required for
transitivity does not guarantee that a content will be
utilizable by a consuming system at the level required
for A-consciousness. For example, a perceptual state
232
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1995) 18:2

Block: Confusion about consciousness
of a brain-damaged creature might be a state of P-
consciousness of, say, motion, even though connections to
reasoning and rational control of action are damaged so
that the state is not A-conscious. In sum, P-consciousness
can be consciousness of, and consciousness of need not be
A-consciousness.I2
Those who are uncomfortable about P-consciousness
should pay close attention to A-consciousness, because it
is a good candidate for a reductionist identification with
P-consciousness.13
4.1. A-consclousness without P-consciousness
The main point of this target article is that these two
concepts of consciousness are easily confused, so it will
pay us to consider conceptually possible cases of one
without the other. Actual cases will be more contro-
versial.
As an example of A-consciousness without P-conscious-
ness, imagine a full-fledged phenomenal zombie, say, a
robot computationally identical to a person, but one
whose silicon brain does not support P-consciousness. I
think such cases are conceptually possible, but this is very
controversial, and I am trying to avoid controversy (see
Shoemaker 1975; 1981a).
There is a less controversial kind of case, however - that
is a very limited sort of partial zombie. Consider the
blindsight patient who "guesses" that there is an X rather
than an O in his blind field. Temporarily taking his word for
it, I am assuming that he has no P-consciousness of the X.
As mentioned, I am following the target reasoning here,
but my own argument does not depend on this assumption.
I am certainly not assuming that lack of A-consciousness
guarantees lack of P-consciousness — that is, I am not
assuming that if you don't say it you haven't got it.
The blindsight patient also has no X representing
A-consciousness content, because although the informa-
tion that there is an X affects his "guess," it is not available
as a premise in reasoning (until he has the quite distinct
state of hearing and believing his own guess), or for
rational control of action or speech. Recall Marcel's (1986)
point that the thirsty blindsight patient would not reach
for a glass of water in the blind field. So the blindsight
patient's perceptual or quasi-perceptual state is uncon-
scious in the phenomenal and access senses (and in the
monitoring senses to be discussed later).
Now imagine something that may not exist, what we
might call superblindsight. A real blindsight patient can
only guess when given a choice from a small set of
alternatives (X/O; horizontal/vertical, etc.). But suppose
— contrary to fact apparently - that a blindsight patient
could be trained to prompt himself at will, guessing what
is in the blind field without being told to guess. The
superblindsighter spontaneously says, "Now I know there
is a horizontal line in my blind field even though I don't
actually see it." Visual information from his blind field
simply pops into his thoughts in the way that solutions to
problems we've been worrying about pop into our
thoughts, or in the way some people just know the time or
which way is North without having any perceptual experi-
ence of it. The superblindsighter himself contrasts what it
is like to know visually about an X in his blind field and an
X in his sighted field. There is something it is like to
experience the latter, but not the former, he says. It is the
difference between just knowing and knowing via a visual
experience. Let us take his word for it; here is the point:
the content that there is an X in his visual field is
A-conscious but not P-conscious. The superblindsight
case is a very limited partial zombie.14
Of course, the superblindsighter has a thought that
there is an X in his blind field that is both A-conscious and
P-conscious. I am not talking about the thought, however,
but about the state of his perceptual system that gives rise
to the thought. It is this state that is A-conscious without
being P-conscious.15
Is there actually such a thing as superblindsight? Hum-
phrey (1992) describes a monkey (Helen) who despite
near-total loss of the visual cortex could nonetheless act in
a somewhat normal way (as if seeing) in certain circum-
stances, without any "prompting." One reason to doubt
that Helen is a case of superblindsight is that Helen may
be a case of sight. There was some visual cortex left, and
the situations in which she showed unprompted visual
discrimination were natural ones in which there was no
control of where the stimuli engaged her retina. Another
possibility mentioned by Cowie and Stoerig (1992, attri-
buted to an unpublished paper by Humphrey) is that
there were P-conscious sensory events, though perhaps
auditory in nature. Helen appeared to confuse brief tones
with visual stimuli. Cowie and Stoerig propose a number
of ways of getting out of monkeys information that is close
to what we get out of blindsighted humans. Weiskrantz
(1992) mentions that a patient GY sometimes knows there
is a stimulus (though not what it is) while claiming to see
nothing. GY also seems to be having some kind of P-
conscious sensation, however (see Cowie & Stoerig 1992).
The (apparent) nonexistence of superblindsight is a
striking fact, one that a number of writers have noticed.
Indeed, it is the basis for the target reasoning. After all,
what Marcel was in effect pointing out was that the
blindsight patients, in not reaching for a glass of water, are
not superblindsighters. Farah (1994) notes that blindsight
(and blind perception generally) turns out always to be
degraded. In other words, blind perception is never
superblind perception.16
I don't know whether there are any actual cases of
A-consciousness without P-consciousness, but I hope I
have illustrated their conceptual possibility.
4.2. P-consciousness without A-consciousness
Consider an animal you are happy to think of as having
P-consciousness, for which brain damage has destroyed
centers of reasoning and rational control of action, thus
preventing A-consciousness. It certainly seems concep-
tually possible that the neural bases of P-consciousness
systems and A-consciousness systems are distinct; if so,
then it is possible, at least conceptually, for one to be
damaged while the other is working well. Evidence has
been accumulating for 25 years that the primate visual
system has distinct dorsal and ventral subsystems.
Though there is much disagreement about the specializa-
tions of the two systems, it does appear that much of the
information in the ventral system is much more closely
connected to P-consciousness than that in the dorsal
system (Goodale & Milner 1992). So it may actually be
possible to damage A-consciousness without P-conscious-
ness and vice versa.17
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1995) 18:2
233

Block: Confusion about consciousness
One might suppose (Rey 1983; 1988; White 1987) that
some of our own subsystems - say, each of the hemi-
spheres of the brain - could themselves be separately
P-conscious. [See Puccetti, "The Case for Mental Du-
ality" 4(1) 1981.] Some of these subsystems might also be
A-conscious, but other subsystems might not have
enough machinery for reasoning or reporting or rational
control of action to allow their P-conscious states to be
A-conscious; so if those states are not accessible to another
system that does have adequate machinery, they will be
P-conscious but not A-conscious.
Here is another reason to believe in P-consciousness
without A-consciousness: suppose you are engaged in
intense conversation when suddenly at noon you realize
that right outside your window there is - and has been for
some time - a deafening pneumatic drill digging up the
street. You were aware of the noise all along, but only at
noon are you consciously aware of it. That is, you were
P-conscious of the noise all along, but at noon you are both
P-conscious and A-conscious of it. Of course, there is a
very similar string of events in which the crucial event at
noon is a bit more intellectual. In this alternative sce-
nario, at noon you realize not just that there is and has
been a noise, but also that you are now and have been
experiencing the noise. In this alternative scenario, you
get "higher order thought" as well as A-consciousness at
noon. So, on the first scenario, the belief that is acquired
at noon is that there is and has been a noise, and on the
second scenario, the beliefs that are acquired at noon are
the first one plus the belief that you are and have been
experiencing the noise. But it is the first scenario, not the
second, that interests me, for it is a pure case of P-
consciousness without A-consciousness. Note that this
case involves a natural use of "conscious" and "aware" for
A-consciousness and P-consciousness, respectively. "Con-
scious" and "aware" are more or less synonymous, so call-
ing the initial P-consciousness "awareness" makes it natu-
ral to call the later P-consciousness plus A-consciousness
"conscious awareness." Of course I rely here on introspec-
tion, but when it comes to P-consciousness, introspection
is an important source of insight.18 This case of P-
consciousness without A-consciousness exploits what
William James (1890) called "secondary consciousness,"
a category in which he meant to include cases of P-
consciousness without attention.19
I have found that the argument of the last paragraph
makes those who are mistrustful of introspection uncom-
fortable. I agree that introspection is not the last word,
but it is the first word, when it comes to P-consciousness.
The example shows the conceptual distinctness of P-
consciousness from A-consciousness, and it also puts the
burden of proof on anyone who would argue that as a
matter of empirical fact they come to the same thing.
Different concepts of consciousness give rise to differ-
ent types of zombie. We have already encountered the
phenomenal zombies that appear in science-fiction and
philosophers' examples - the familiar computers and
robots that think but don't feel. Their states are A-
conscious, but not P-conscious. However, our culture also
acknowledges the concept of voodoo zombies and zom-
bies in "Night of the Living Dead." If we found that
voodoo zombies are cognitively or affectively diminished
- say, without will - rather than phenomenally dimin-
ished, we would not decide that they were not zombies
after all. And on seeing the next installment in the "Living
Dead" series, we would not feel that our concept of a
zombie had been toyed with if it turned out that there is
something it is like for these zombies to eat their relatives
(They say "Yumm!"). No doubt we have no very well-
formed zombie-concept, but the considerations just men-
tioned motivate the view that a zombie is something that
is mentally dead in one respect or another, and the
different respects give rise to different zombies.
Akins (1993) has argued against the distinction between
a phenomenal and a representational aspect of experi-
ence. She asks one to look around one's office, noting what
it is like to have that experience. Then she challenges one
to imagine that "a bat's consciousness is just like that -the
feel of the scene is exactly the same - except, of course, all
those visual sensations mean something quite different to
the bat. They represent quite different properties. Imag-
ine that!" She goes on to say, "The problem is that you
cannot imagine that, no matter how hard you try" (p. 267).
Of course, she is right that you cannot imagine that. But
the explanation of this fact is not that there is no distinc-
tion between the P-conscious and representational as-
pects of experience. The explanation is that, as I said
earlier, many representational differences themselves
make a P-conscious difference. To repeat the example
given earlier, what it is like to hear a sound as coming from
the left is different from what it is like to hear a sound as
coming from the right. Or suppose that you are taken to
what appears to be a town from the Old West; then you are
told that it is a backdrop for a film and that what appear to
be buildings are mere fronts. This representational differ-
ence can make a difference in what the buildings look like
to you. A visual experience as of a facade differs from a
visual experience as of a building, even if the retinal
image is the same. (Terminological note: In philosophers'
jargon, a visual experience as of a building represents
what is seen as a building.) Or consider the difference in
what it is like to hear sounds in French before and after
you have learned the language (McCullough 1993).
This just about completes my justification and explana-
tion of the difference between P-consciousness and
A-consciousness. One remaining objection, however, still
requires comment. The contrast between P-conscious-
ness and A-consciousness was in part based on the distinc-
tion between representational and phenomenal content,
with P-conscious content phenomenal and A-conscious
content representational. I said this equation was rough
because many phenomenal contents are also representa-
tional. Some will object that phenomenal content just is a
kind of representational content (Dretske, 1993, andTye,
in press, a; b, take this line; Shoemaker, 1994, has a more
moderate version). The representational/phenomenal
distinction is discussed by Jackson (1977), Shoemaker
(1981b), and Peacocke (1983). My reply is, first, that
phenomenal content need not be representational at all
(my favorite example is the phenomenal content of or-
gasm). Second, suppose I have an auditory experience as
of something overhead, and a simultaneous visual experi-
ence as of something overhead. I am imagining a case
where one has an impression only of where something is
without an impression of other features. For example, in
the case of the visual experience, one catches a glimpse in
peripheral vision of something overhead without any
impression of a specific shape or color (so the difference
234
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1995) 18:2

Block: Confusion about consciousness
cannot be ascribed to further representational differ-
ences). The phenomenal contents of both experiences
represent something as being overhead, but there is no
common phenomenal quality of the experiences in virtue
of which they have this representational commonality.
Note that the point is not just that there is a representa-
tional overlap without a corresponding phenomenal over-
lap (as is said, for example, in Pendlebury 1992). That
would be compatible with the following story (offered to
me by Michael Tye): phenomenal content is just one kind
of representational content, but these experiences over-
lap in nonphenomenal representational content. The
point, rather, is that there is a modal difference that is not
at all a matter of representation but rather a matter of how
those modes of representation feel. The look and the
sound are both as of something overhead, but the two
phenomenal contents represent this via different phe-
nomenal qualities.20
4.2.1. Self-consciousness. By this term I mean the pos-
session of the concept of the self and the ability to use this
concept in thinking about oneself. A number of higher
primates show signs of recognizing themselves in mirrors.
They display interest in correspondences between their
own actions and the movements of their mirror images.
By contrast, both monkeys and dogs treat their mirror
images as strangers at first, slowly habituating. In one
experiment, colored spots are painted on the foreheads
and ears of anesthetized primates. When they awaken and
look in the mirror, chimps between 7 and 15 years old
usually try to wipe the spot off (Gallup 1982; Povinelli
1994). Monkeys do not do this. Human babies don't show
similar behavior until the last half of their second year.
Perhaps this is a test for self-consciousness. (Or perhaps it
is only a test for understanding mirrors; but what is
involved in understanding mirrors if not that it is oneself
one is seeing?) Even if monkeys and dogs have no self-
consciousness, however, no one should deny that they
have P-conscious pains, or that there is something it is like
for them to see their reflections in the mirror. P-conscious
states often seem to have a "me-ishness" about them; the
phenomenal content often represents the state as a "state
of me." But this fact does not at all suggest that we can
reduce P-consciousness to self-consciousness, since such
"me-ishness" is the same in states whose P-conscious
content is different. For example, the experience as of
red is the same as the experience as of green in self-
orientation, but the two states are different in phenome-
nal feel.21
4.2.2. Monitorlng-consciousness. The idea of conscious-
ness as some sort of internal monitoring takes many
forms. One is that of some sort of inner perception. This
could be a form of P-consciousness, namely, P-conscious-
ness of one's own states or of the self. Another notion is
often put in information-processing terms: internal scan-
ning. A third, metacognitive notion is that of higher order
thought: a conscious state in this sense is a state accom-
panied by a thought to the effect that one is in that state.
The thought must be arrived at nonobservationally and
noninferentially. Otherwise, as Rosenthal (1986) points
out, the higher-order thought definition would yield the
wrong result for the case in which I come to know about
my anger by inferring it from my own behavior.22 Given
my liberal terminological policy, I have no objection to
any of these notions as notions of consciousness. Where I
balk is at attempts to identify P-consciousness with any of
these cognitive notions.
To identify P-consciousness with internal scanning
is just to grease the slide to eliminativism about P-
consciousness. Indeed, as Rey (1983) has pointed out,
ordinary laptop computers are capable of various types of
self-scanning, but as he also points out, no one would
think of a laptop computer as "conscious" (using the term
in the ordinary way, without making any of the dis-
tinctions I have introduced). According to Rey, internal
scanning is essential to consciousness, so he concludes
that the concept of consciousness is incoherent. The
problem here is the failure to make distinctions of the sort
I have been making. Even if the laptop has "internal
scanning consciousness," it nonetheless lacks P-con-
sciousness.23
The concepts of consciousness that are the focus of
this target article (P-consciousness and A-consciousness)
differ in their logics from those just mentioned: self-
consciousness and monitoring-consciousness. A distinc-
tion is often made between the sense of "conscious" in
which a person or other creature is conscious and the
sense in which a state of mind is a conscious state. What it
is for there to be something it is like to be me, that is for
me to be P-conscious, is for me to have one or more states
that are P-conscious. If a person is in a dreamless sleep
and then has a P-conscious pain, he is to that extent
P-conscious. For P-consciousness, it is states that are
primary; likewise for A-consciousness. If a state has the
three properties mentioned earlier (inferential promis-
cuity, etc.) it is A-conscious, and one is A-conscious just
in case one has an A-conscious state. In case of self-
consciousness and reflective consciousness, however,
creature consciousness is basic. For a pain to be reflec-
tively conscious, for example, the person whose pain it is
must have another state that is about that pain. And it is
creatures who can think about themselves. It is not even
clear what a self-conscious state would be.
Perhaps you are wondering why I am being so termino-
logically liberal, counting P-consciousness, A-conscious-
ness, monitoring-consciousness, and self-consciousness
all as types of consciousness. Oddly, I find that many
critics wonder why I would count phenomenal conscious-
ness as consciousness, whereas many others wonder why
I would count access- or monitoring- or seZ/-consciousness
as consciousness. In fact two referees of this paper com-
plained about my terminological liberalism, but for in-
compatible reasons. One said:
While what he uses ["P-consciousness"] to refer to - the "what
it is like" aspect of mentality - seems to me interesting and
important. I suspect that the discussion of it under the
heading "consciousness" is a source of confusion . . . he is
right to distinguish access-consciousness (which is what I
think deserves the name "consciousness") from this.
Another reviewer said: "I really still can't see why access
is called . . . access-consciousness? Why isn't access
just . . . a purely information processing (functionalist)
analysis?" This is not a merely verbal disagreement. In my
view, all of us, despite our explicit verbal preferences,
have some tendency to use "conscious" and related words
in both ways, and our failure to see this causes a good deal
of difficulty in thinking about "consciousness." This point
will be illustrated below.
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1995) 18:2
235

Block: Confusion about consciousness
I have been talking about different concepts of "con-
sciousness" and I have also said that the concept of
consciousness is a mongrel concept. Perhaps you are
thinking that I should make up my mind. My view is that
"consciousness" is actually an ambiguous word, though
the ambiguity I have in mind is not one that I have found
in any dictionary. The paper started with an analogy
between "consciousness" and "velocity"; there is an im-
portant similarity. One important difference, however, is
that in the case of "velocity," it is easy to get rid of the
temptation to conflate the two senses, even though for
many purposes the distinction is not very useful. With
"consciousness," there is a tendency toward "now you see
it, now you don't." The main reason for this is that P-
consciousness presents itself to us in a way that makes it
hard to imagine how a conscious state could fail to be
accessible and self-reflective, so it is easy to fall into habits
of thought that do not distinguish these concepts.
The chief alternative to the ambiguity hypothesis is that
there is a single cluster concept of consciousness. For ex-
ample, a prototypical religion involves belief in supernat-
ural beings, sacred and profane objects, rituals, a moral
code, religious feelings, prayer, a world view, an organiza-
tion of life based on this world view, and a social group
bound together by the previous items (Alston 1967). But
for all of these items, there are actual or possible religions
that lack them; for example, some forms of Buddhism do
not involve belief in a supreme being, and Quakers have
no sacred objects. It is convenient for us to use a concept
of religion that binds together a number of disparate
concepts whose referents are often found together.
The distinction between the ambiguity and cluster
concept hypotheses can be drawn in a number of equally
legitimate ways that classify some cases differently; there
is some indeterminacy in the distinction. Some might
even say that velocity is a cluster concept, because for
many purposes it is convenient to group average and
instantaneous velocity together. I favor drawing the dis-
tinction in terms of conflation: if there can be conflation,
we have ambiguity. When one catches a glimpse of a car
flashing by so quickly that it is a blur, calling it "fast" is
plausibly calling it high in instantaneous velocity, since
there seems no implicit relativization to a trip with a high
average velocity. A similarly pure use in the case of
"consciousness" is provided by the earlier science fiction
example of the robot that is computationally like us even
though it lacks consciousness. What it is supposed to lack
is P-consciousness. Pure uses for one element of a cluster
suggest the possibility of conflation.
To call consciousness a mongrel concept is to declare
allegiance to the ambiguity theory, not the cluster the-
ory. An ambiguous word often corresponds to an am-
biguous mental representation, one that functions in
thought as a unitary entity and thereby misleads. These
are mongrels. I would also describe velocity and degree
of heat (as used by the Florentine Experimenters of the
seventeenth century) as mongrel concepts. Note the
distinction between the claim that the concept of con-
sciousness is a mongrel concept, a nonunitary concept -
and the claim that consciousness is like dirt or cancer
in not being a natural kind (Churchland 1983). The for-
mer is a claim about the concept, the latter is a claim
about what the concept picks out. The former can be
settled by reflection, the latter requires empirical investi-
gation.
5. Conflations
Conflation of P-consciousness and A-consciousness is
ubiquitous in the burgeoning literature on consciousness,
especially in the literature on syndromes like blindsight.
Nearly every article I read on the subject by philosophers
and psychologists involves some confusion. For example,
Baars (1988, p. 14) makes it abundantly clear that he is
talking about P-consciousness. "What is a theory of con-
sciousness a theory of? In the first instance . . . it is a
theory of the nature of experience. The reader's private
experience of this word, his or her mental image of
yesterday's breakfast, or the feeling of a toothache — these
are all contents of consciousness." Yet his theory is a
"global workspace" model of A-consciousness. Shallice
(1988a; 1988b) says he is giving an account of "phe-
nomenal experience" but actually gives an information-
processing theory of A-consciousness (his 1988b is about
an "information-processing model of consciousness").
Mandler (1985) describes consciousness in P-conscious
terms such as "phenomenal" and "experience" but gives a
totally cognitive account appropriate to A-consciousness.
Edelman's (1989) theory is also intended to explain P-
consciousness, but it seems a theory of access-consciousness
and self-consciousness (see Chalmers 1993). Kosslyn and
Koenig (1992, pp. 431-33) say, "We will address here the
everyday sense of the term ["consciousness"]; it refers to
the phenomenology of experience, the feeling of red and
so forth" (I am indebted to Michael Tye for calling this
quotation to my attention). But then they give a "parity
check" theory that seems more of a theory of monitoring-
consciousness or A-consciousness.
One result of conflating P-consciousness with other
types of consciousness is a tendency to regard as plausible
ideas that should be seen as way out on a limb. For
example, Johnson-Laird (1988, pp. 360-61) talks of con-
sciousness, using terms like "subjective experience." He
goes on to hypothesize that consciousness is a matter of
building models of the self and models of the self build-
ing, models of itself, and so on. This hypothesis has two
strikes against it, as should be obvious if one is clear
about the distinction between P-consciousness and self-
consciousness. Dogs and babies may not build such com-
plex models, but the burden of proof is surely on anyone
who doubts that they have P-consciousness.
Another example: in a discussion of phenomena of im-
plicit perception, Kihlstrom et al. (1992, p. 42) make it
clear that the phenomena concern P-consciousness: "In
the final analysis, consciousness is a phenomenal quality
that may accompany perception." Yet they claim that self-
consciousness is precisely what is lacking in implicit
perception: "This connection to the self is just what
appears to be lacking in the phenomena of implicit per-
ception. . . . When contact occurs between the repre-
sentation of the event - what might be called the fact node
and the representation of oneself- what might be called
the self node, the event comes into consciousness"
(p. 42). But again, as we go down the phylogenetic scale
we may well encounter creatures that are P-conscious but
have no "self-node," and the same may be true of the very
236
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1995) 18:2

Block: Confusion about consciousness
young of our own species. What should be announced
as a theory that conflicts with common sense, that P-
consciousness arises from representing the self, can ap-
pear innocuous if one is not careful to make the distinc-
tions among the consciousnesses.
Andrade (1993, p. 13) makes it clear that the concern is
P-consciousness; for example, "Without consciousness,
there is no pain. There may be tissue damage, and
physiological responses to tissue damage, but there will
not be the phenomenological experience of pain." Con-
sidering work on control by a central Executive System,
Andrade (correctly, I think) takes the dominant theories
to "identify" consciousness with central executive control:
"Current psychological theories identify consciousness
with systems that coordinate lower-level information pro-
cessing." But there are two very different paths to such
an identification: (1) conflating P-consciousness with A-
consciousness and theorizing about A-consciousness in
terms of the systems Andrade mentions, (2) clearly distin-
guishing P-consciousness from A-consciousness and hy-
pothesizing that the mechanisms that underlie the latter
give rise to the former. I doubt that any objective reader
of this literature will think that the hypothesis of path (2) is
often very likely.
In the writings of some psychologists, the assimilation
of P-consciousness to A-consciousness is a product of the
(admirable) desire to be able to measure P-consciousness.
Jacoby et al. (1992) assimilate P-consciousness to A-
consciousness for that reason. Their subject matter is
perception without "subjective experience, in normal
perceivers, in conditions of divided attention or degraded
presentations; in other words, perception without P-
consciousness, often known as subliminal perception.
Jacoby et al. note that it is very difficult to disentangle
conscious perception from unconscious perception, be-
cause no one has conceived of an experimental paradigm
that isolates one of these modes. "We avoid this problem,"
they say, "by inferring awareness ["subjective experi-
ence"] - from conscious control and defining unconscious
influences as effects that cannot be controlled" (1992,
p. 108). The effect of this procedure is to disallow by
definition phenomenal events that have no effect on later
mental processes and to type phenomenal events defini-
tionally by appealing to judgments based on them. "Sub-
jective experience," they say, "results from an attribution
process in which mental events are interpreted in the
context of current circumstances" (p. 112). I am reminded
of an article I once read in the sociology of science that
defined the quality of a scientific paper as the number of
references to it in the literature. Operational definitions
do harm if the result is measuring something else.
Schacter (1989) is explicit about what he means by
"consciousness" (which he often calls "conscious aware-
ness"), namely P-consciousness. He mentions that the
sense he has in mind is that of "phenomenal aware-
ness, . . . 'the running span of subjective experience'"
(quoting Dimond 1976), and consciousness in his sense is
repeatedly contrasted with information-processing no-
tions. Nonetheless, in an effort to associate the "Con-
scious Awareness System" (what I call the phenomenal
consciousness system in my labeling of his model in
Figure 1) with the inferior parietal lobes, Schacter says
that lesions in this area
have also been associated with confusional states, which are
characterized by disordered thought, severe disorientation,
and a breakdown of selective attention - in short, a global
disorder of conscious awareness. . . . Several lines of evi-
dence indicate that lesions to certain regions of the parietal
lobes can produce disorders of conscious awareness. First,
global confusional states have been reported in right parietal
patients. . . . Second, the syndrome of anosognosia - un-
awareness and denial of a neuropsychological deficit - is often
associated with parietal damage. . . . Anosognosic patients . . .
may be unaware of motor deficits . . . perceptual deficits
. . . and complete unawareness can be observed even when
the primary deficit is severe. (1989, p. 371)
Here, Schacter reverts to a use of "consciousness" and
"awareness" in a variety of cognitive senses. Disordered
thought, disorientation, and a breakdown of selective
attention are not primarily disorders of P-consciousness,
and anosognosia is primarily a defect in A-consciousness,
not P-consciousness. Anosognosia is a neurological syn-
drome that involves an inability to acknowledge or have
access to information about another neurological syn-
drome. A patient might have anosognosia for, say, his
prosopagnosia while complaining incessantly about an-
other deficit. Young (1994a) describes a woman who was a
painter before becoming prosopagnosic. Looking at por-
traits she had painted, trying to figure out whom they
represented, she laboriously determined the subject of
each painting, reasoning out loud about the person's
apparent age, sex, and any significant objects in the
picture, plus her verbal memories of the portraits that she
had painted. When the experimenter commented on her
prosopagnosia, she said that she "had recognized them,"
and did not think that there was anything odd about her
laborious reasoning.24
The crucial feature of anosognosia about prosopagnosia
is that the patients' access to information about their own
inability to recognize faces is in some way blocked. They
cannot report this inability or reason about it or use
information about it to control their actions. There may
also be some defect of P-consciousness. Perhaps everyone
looks familiar or, more likely, patients with prosopagnosia
no longer have the ability to have visual feelings of
familiarity for faces that are distinct from feelings of
unfamiliarity. This is not crucial to the syndrome, how-
ever, as is shown by the fact that we confidently ascribe
anosognosia on the basis of the patient's cognitive state -
the lack of knowledge of the deficit - without know-
ing what defects of P-consciousness may or may not
be involved. Furthermore, the same defects of P-
consciousness could be present in a non-anosognosic
prosopagnosic without discrediting the patient's status as
non-anosognosic. One can imagine such a person saying,
"Gosh, I don't recognize anyone - in fact, I no longer have
a visual sense of the difference between familiar and
unfamiliar faces." This would be prosopagnosia without
anosognosia. To take anosognosia as primarily a defect of
P-consciousness is a mistake.
I do not think these conflations cause any real problem
in Schacter's theorizing, but as a general rule, if you want
to get anywhere in theorizing about X you should have a
good pretheoretical grip on the difference between X and
things that are easily confused with it.
Dennett (1986; 1991) provides another example of the
conflation of a number of concepts of consciousness (see
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1995) 18:2
237

Block: Confusion about consciousness
Block 1993, 1994). I will focus on Dennett's claim that
consciousness is a cultural construction. He theorizes that
"human consciousness (1) is too recent an innovation to be
hard-wired into the innate machinery, and (2) is largely
the product of cultural evolution that gets imparted to
brains in early training" (1991, p. 219). Sometimes Den-
nett puts the point in terms of memes, which are ideas
such as that of the wheel or the calendar; memes are the
smallest cultural units that replicate themselves reliably,
namely cultural analogs of genes. In these terms then,
Dennett's claim is that "human consciousness is itself a
huge complex of memes" (1991, p. 210). This view is
connected with Dennett's idea that you can't have con-
sciousness without having the concept of consciousness.
He says that consciousness is like love and money in this
regard, though in the case of the latter, what is required
for one to have money is that someone have the concept of
money (1986, p. 152; 1991, p. 24).
I think the reason Dennett says "largely' the product of
cultural evolution is that he thinks of consciousness as the
software that operates on genetically determined hard-
ware that is the product of biological evolution. Though
consciousness requires the concept of consciousness,
with consciousness, as with love, there is a biological basis
without which the software could not run.
Now I hope it is obvious that P-consciousness is not a
cultural construction. Remember, we are talking about
P-consciousness itself, not the concept of P-conscious-
ness. The idea would be that perhaps there was a time
when people genetically like us ate, drank, and had sex,
but there was nothing it was like for them to do these
things. Furthermore, each of us would have been like that
if not for specific concepts we acquired from our culture
in growing up. Ridiculous! Of course, culture affects P-
consciousness; the wondrous experience of drinking a
great wine takes training to develop. But culture affects
feet too; people who have spent their lives going barefoot
in the Himalayas have feet that differ from those of people
who have worn tight shoes 18 hours a day. We mustn't
confuse the idea that culture influences consciousness
with the idea that it (largely) creates it.
What about A-consciousness? Could there have been a
time when humans who were biologically the same as us
never had the contents of their perceptions and thoughts
poised for free use in reasoning or in rational control of
action? Is this ability one that culture imparts to us as
children? Could it be that until we acquired the concept
of poised for free use in reasoning or in rational control
of action, none of our perceptual contents were A-
conscious? Again, there is no reason to take such an idea
seriously. Very much lower animals are A-conscious, pre-
sumably without any such concept.
A-consciousness is as close as we get to the official view
of consciousness in Consciousness Explained and in later
writings (e.g., Dennett 1993). The official theory of Den-
nett (1991) is the Multiple Drafts Theory that there are
distinct parallel tracks of representation vying for access
to reasoning, verbalization, and behavior. This seems a
theory of A-consciousness. Dennett (1993, p. 929) says,
"Consciousness is cerebral celebrity - nothing more and
nothing less. Those contents are conscious that perse-
vere, that monopolize resources long enough to achieve
certain typical and "symptomatic" effects - on memory,
on the control of behavior, and so forth." Could it be
anything other than a biological fact about humans that
some brain representations persevere enough to affect
memory, control behavior, and so forth? So on the closest
thing to Dennett's official kind of consciousness, the
thesis (that consciousness is a cultural construction) is no
serious proposal.
What about monitoring-consciousness? No doubt
there was a time when people were less introspective
than some of us are now, but is there any evidence that
there was a time when people genetically like us had no
capacity to think or express the thought that one's leg
hurts? To be able to think this thought involves being
able to think that one's leg hurts, and that is a higher-
order thought of the sort that is a plausible candidate for
monitoring-consciousness (Rosenthal 1986). Here for the
first time we do enter the realm of actual empirical
questions, but without some very powerful evidence for
such a view there is no reason to give it any credence.
Dennett gives us not the slightest hint of the kind of
weird evidence we would need to begin to take this
claim seriously, hence it would be a disservice so to
interpret him.
What about self-consciousness? I mentioned Gallup's
and Povinelli's "mark test" evidence (the chimp tries to
wipe offa mark on its face seen in a mirror) that chimps are
self-conscious. An experiment in this vein that Dennett
(1991, p. 428) actually mentions, and mentions positively,
is that a chimp can learn to get bananas through a hole in
its cage by watching its arm on a closed-circuit TV whose
camera is some distance away (Menzel et al. 1985). The
literature on the topic of animal self-consciousness is full
of controversy (see Anderson 1993; R. W Byrne 1993; de
Lannoy 1993; Gallup & Povinelli 1993; Heyes 1993; Mit-
chell 1993a; 1993b). Hauser et al. (forthcoming) give
strong reason to believe that the controversy over the
mark test derives simply from the use of a not very salient
mark. They find strong evidence of self-recognition in
tiny monkeys which have tufts that are dyed electric
colors. I have no space to do justice to the issues, so I will
have to make do with just stating my view: I think
the evidence in favor of minimal self-consciousness on
the part of chimps is overwhelming. By minimal self-
consciousness I mean the ability to think about oneself in
some way or other - that is, no particular way is required.
Many of the criticisms of the mark test actually presup-
pose that the chimp is self-conscious in this minimal
sense. For example, it is often suggested that chimps that
pass the mark test think they are seeing another chimp
(e.g., Heyes 1993), and since the chimp in the mirror has a
mark on its forehead, the chimps who are looking wonder
whether they do too. But for me to wonder whether /
have a mark on my forehead, I have to be able to think
about myself. In any case, Dennett does not get into
these issues (except, as mentioned, to favor chimp self-
consciousness), so he does not appear to have this inter-
pretation in mind.
So far, according to all the concepts of consciousness I
have mentioned, Dennett's thesis turns out to be false.
There is a trend, however: of the concepts I considered,
the first two made the thesis silly, even applied to animals.
In the case of monitoring-consciousness, there is a real
empirical issue in the case of many types of mammals, so it
238
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1995) 18:2

Block: Confusion about consciousness
is not completely silly to wonder about whether people
have it. Only in the last case, self-consciousness, is there a
serious issue about whether chimps are conscious, and
that suggests we might get a notion of self-consciousness
that requires some cultural elements. In recent years, the
idea of the self as a federation of somewhat autonomous
agencies has become popular, and for good reason. Nagel
(1971) made a good case on the basis of split-brain data,
and Gazzaniga and LeDoux (1978) and Gazzaniga (1985)
have added additional considerations that have some
plausibility. Dennett has a chapter about the self at the
end of the book that gives similar arguments. Maybe what
Dennett is saying is that nonfederal self-consciousness,
the ability to think of oneself as not being such a federa-
tion (or more simply, federal-self-consciousness) is a cul-
tural construction.
But now we have moved from falsity to banality. I am
not saying the proposal that we are federations is banal.
What is banal is that having and applying a sophisticated
concept such as being a federation (or not being a federa-
tion) requires a cultural construction. Consider chairman
self-consciousness, the ability to think of oneself as chair-
man, as the one who guides the department, the one who
has the keys, and so on. It is a banality that a cultural
construction is required for a person to think of himself in
that way, and the corresponding point about federal self-
consciousness is similarly banal.
The great oddity of Dennett's discussion is that
throughout he gives the impression that his theory is
about P-consciousness, though he concedes that what he
says about it conflicts with our normal way of thinking
about consciousness. This comes out especially strongly in
an extended discussion of Jaynes's (1976) book, which he
credits with a version of the view I am discussing, namely,
that consciousness is a cultural construction that requires
its own concept. Dennett says:
Perhaps this is an autobiographical confession: I am rather
fond of his [Jaynes's] way of using these terms; ["conscious-
ness," "mind,' and other mental terms] I rather like his way of
carving up consciousness. It is in fact very similar to the way
that I independently decided to carve up consciousness some
years ago.
So what then is the project? The project is, in one sense, very
simple and very familiar. It is bridging what he calls the
"awesome chasm" between mere inert matter and the inward-
ness, as he puts it, of a conscious being. Consider the awe-
some chasm between a brick and a bricklayer. There isn't, in
Thomas Nagel's (1974) famous phrase, anything that it is like
to be a brick. But there is something that it is like to be a
bricklayer, and we want to know what the conditions were
under which there happened to come to be entities that it was
like something to be in this rather special sense. That is the
story, the developmental, evolutionary, historical story, that
Jaynes sets out to tell. (1986, p. 149)
In sum, Dennett's thesis is trivially false if it is con-
strued to be about P-consciousness, as advertised. It is
also false if taken to be about A-consciousness, which is
Dennett's official view of consciousness. But if taken to be
about a highly sophisticated version of self-consciousness,
it is banal. That is what can happen if you talk about
consciousness without making the sorts of distinctions I
am urging.
6. The fallacy of the target reasoning
We now come to the denouement of the paper, the
application of the P-consciousness/A-consciousness dis-
tinction to the fallacy of the target reasoning. Let me
begin with the Penfield/van Gulick/Searle reasoning.
Searle (1992) adopts Penfield's (1975) claim that during
petit mal seizures patients are "totally unconscious."
Quoting Penfield at length, Searle describes three pa-
tients who, despite being "totally unconscious" continue
walking or driving home or playing the piano, but in a
mechanical way. Van Gulick (1989, p. 220) gives a briefer
treatment, also quoting Penfield. He says, "The impor-
tance of conscious experience for the construction and
control of action plans is nicely illustrated by the phenom-
enon of automatism associated with some petit mal epi-
leptic seizures. In such cases, electrical disorder leads to a
loss of function in the higher brain stem. . . . As a re-
sult the patient suffers a loss of conscious experience in
the phenomenal sense although he can continue to re-
act selectively to environmental stimuli." Because van
Gulick's treatment is more equivocal and less detailed,
and because Searle also comments on my accusations of
conflating A-consciousness with P-consciousness, I will
focus on Searle. Searle says:
The epileptic seizure rendered the patient totally uncon-
scious, yet the patient continued to exhibit what would
normally be called goal-directed behavior. . . . In all these
cases, we have complex forms of apparently goal-directed
behavior without any consciousness. Now why could all be-
havior not be like that? Notice that in the cases, the patients
were performing types of actions that were habitual, routine
and memorized . . . normal, human, conscious behavior has
a degree of flexibility and creativity that is absent from the
Penfield cases of the unconscious driver and the unconscious
pianist. Consciousness adds powers of discrimination and
flexibility even to memorized routine activities. . . . One of
the evolutionary advantages conferred on us by conscious-
ness is the much greater flexibility, sensitivity, and creativity
we derive from being conscious. (1992, pp. 108-9, italics
Searle's reasoning is that consciousness is missing, and
with it flexibility, sensitivity, and creativity, so this is an
indication that a function of consciousness is to add these
qualities. Now it is completely clear that the concept of
consciousness invoked by both Searle and van Gulick is
P-consciousness. Van Gulick speaks of "conscious experi-
ence in the phenomenal sense," and Searle criticizes me
for supposing that there is a legitimate use of "conscious"
to mean A-conscious: "Some philosophers (e.g., Block,
"Two Concepts of Consciousness") claim that there is a
sense of this word that implies no sentience whatever, a
sense in which a total zombie could be 'conscious.' I know
of no such sense, but in any case, that is not the sense in
which I am using the word" (Searle 1992, p. 84). But
neither Searle nor van Gulick nor Penfield give any
reason to believe that P-consciousness is missing or even
diminished in the epileptics they describe. The piano
player, the walker, and the driver don't cope with new
situations very well, but they do show every sign of
normal sensation. For example, Searle, quoting Penfield,
describes the epileptic walker as "threading] his way"
through the crowd. Doesn't he see the obstacles he
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1995) 18:2
239

Block: Confusion about consciousness
avoids? Suppose he gets home by turning right at a red
wall. Isn't there something it is like for him to see the red
wall - and isn't it different from what it is like for him to
see a green wall? Searle gives no reason to think the
answer is no. Because of the very inflexibility and lack of
creativity of the behavior they exhibit, it is the thought
processes of these patients (including A-consciousness)
that are most obviously deficient; no reason at all is given
to think that their P-conscious states lack vivacity or
intensity. Of course, I don't claim to know what it is really
like for these epileptics; my point is rather that for the
argument for the function of P-consciousness to have any
force, a case would have to be made that P-consciousness
is actually missing, or at least diminished. Searle argues:
P-consciousness is missing; so is creativity; therefore the
former lack explains the latter lack. But no support at all is
given for the first premise, and as we shall see, it is no
stretch to suppose that what has gone wrong is that the
ordinary mongrel notion of consciousness is being used; it
wraps P-consciousness and A-consciousness together,
and so an obvious function of A-consciousness is illicitly
transferred to P-consciousness.
This difficulty in the reasoning is highlighted if we
assume Schacter's model. In terms of Schacter's model,
there is no reason to doubt that the information from
the epileptic's senses reaches the P-conscious module,
but there is reason to doubt that the Executive System
processes this information in the normal way. So there
is reason to blame their inflexibility and lack of creativ-
ity on problems in the Executive System or the link
between P-consciousness module and the Executive
System.25
Searle and van Gulick base their arguments on Pen-
field's claim that a petit mal seizure "converts the individ-
ual into a mindless automaton" (Penfield 1975, p. 37).
Indeed, Penfield repeatedly refers to these patients as
"unconscious,' "mindless," and as "automata.' But what
does Penfield mean? Searle and van Gulick assume that
Penfield means lacking P-consciousness, since they adopt:
the idea that that is what the term means (although, as we
shall see, Searle himself sometimes uses "consciousness"
to mean A-consciousness). Attending to Penfield's ac-
count, we find the very shifting among different concepts
of consciousness that I have described here, but the
dominant theme by far involves thinking of the patients as
cognitively rather than phenomenally deficient during
petit mal seizures. Here is Penfield's summary of the
description of the patients:
In an attack of automatism the patient becomes suddenly
unconscious, but, since other mechanisms in the brain con-
tinue to function, he changes into an automaton. He may
wander about, confused and aimless. Or he may continue to
carry out whatever purpose his mind was in the act of handing
on to his automatic sensory-motor mechanism when the
highest brain-mechanism went out of action. Or he follows a
stereotyped, habitual pattern of behavior. In every case,
however, the automaton can make few, if any decisions for
which there has been no precedent. He makes no record of a
stream of consciousness. Thus, he will have complete amnesia
for the period of epileptic discharge. . . . In general, if new
decisions are to be made, the automaton cannot make them.
In such a circumstance, he may become completely unrea-
sonable and uncontrollable and even dangerous. (1975,
pp. 38-40)
In these passages, and throughout the book, the domi-
nant theme in descriptions of these patients is one of
deficits in thinking, planning, and decision making. No
mention is made of any sensory or phenomenal deficit.26
My interpretation is supported by a consideration of
Penfield's theoretical rationale for his claim that petit mal
victims are unconscious. He distinguishes two brain
mechanisms, "(a) the mind's mechanism (or highest brain
mechanism); and (b) the computer (or automatic sensory-
motor mechanism)" (p. 40, italics Penfield's). The mind's
mechanism is most prominently mentioned in connection
with planning and decision making, for example, "the
highest brain mechanism is the mind's executive." When
arguing that there is a soul that is connected to the mind's
mechanism, he mentions only cognitive functions: he asks
whether such a soul is improbable, and answers, "It is not
so improbable, to my mind, as is the alternative expecta-
tion - that the highest brain mechanism should itself
understand, and reason, and direct voluntary action, and
decide where attention should be turned and what the
computer must learn, and record, and reveal on demand"
(p. 82). Penfield's soul is a cognitive soul.
By contrast, the computer is devoted to sensory and
motor functions. Indeed, he emphasizes that the mind
only has contact with sensory and motor areas of the
cortex through controlling the computer, which itself has
direct contact with the sensory and motor areas. Since it is
the mind's mechanism that is knocked out in petit mal
seizures, the sensory areas are intact in the "automaton."
Searle (1990b, p. 635) attempts (though of course he
wouldn't accept this description) to use the idea of de-
grees of P-consciousness to substitute for A-conscious-
ness. I will quote a chunk of what he says about this (the
details of the context do not matter).
By consciousness I simply mean those subjective stages of
awareness or sentience that begin when one wakes in the
morning and continue throughout the period that one is
awake until one falls into a dreamless sleep, into a coma, or
dies or is otherwise, as they say, unconscious.
I quoted this passage earlier as an example of how a
characterization of consciousness can go wrong by point-
ing to too many things. Searle means to be pointing to
P-consciousness. But A-consciousness and P-conscious-
ness normally occur together when one is awake, and both
are normally absent in a coma and a dreamless sleep - so
this characterization doesn't distinguish them.
On my account, dreams are a form of consciousness,
. . . though they are of less intensity than full blown waking
alertness. Consciousness is an on/off switch: You are either
conscious or not. Though once conscious, the system func-
tions like a rheostat, and there can be an indefinite range of
different degrees of consciousness, ranging from the drowsi-
ness just before one falls asleep to the full blown complete
alertness of the obsessive.
Degrees of P-consciousness are one thing, obses-
sive attentiveness is another - indeed the latter is
a notion from the category of A-consciousness, not
P-consciousness.
There are lots of different degrees of consciousness, but door
knobs, bits of chalk, and shingles are not conscious at all. . . .
These points, it seems to me, are misunderstood by Block. He
refers to what he calls an "access sense of consciousness." On
my account there is no such sense. I believe that he . . .
240
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1995) 18:2

Block: Confusion about consciousness
[confuses] what I would call peripheral consciousness or
inattentiveness with total unconsciousness. It is true, for
example, that when I am driving my car "on automatic pilot"
I am not paying much attention to the details of the road and
the traffic. But it is simply not true that I am totally uncon-
scious of these phenomena. If I were, there would be a car
crash. We need therefore to make a distinction between the
center of my attention, the focus of my consciousness on the
one hand, and the periphery on the other. . . . There are
lots of phenomena right now of which I am peripherally
conscious, for example the feel of the shirt on my neck, the
touch of the computer keys at my finger tips, and so on. But
as I use the notion, none of these is unconscious in the sense
in which the secretion of enzymes in my stomach is uncon-
scious. (All these quotations are from Searle, 1990b, p. 635;
italics added)
The first thing to note is the contradiction. Earlier, I
quoted Searle saying that a "totally unconscious" epileptic
could nonetheless drive home. Here, he says that if a
driver were totally unconscious, the car would crash. The
sense of "conscious" in which the car would crash if the
driver weren't conscious is A-consciousness, 
not P-
consciousness. P-consciousness all by itself wouldn't keep
the car from crashing - the P-conscious contents have to
be put to use in rationally controlling the car, which is an
aspect of A-cO7isciousness. When Searle says the "totally
unconscious" epileptic can nonetheless drive home, he
is talking about P-consciousness; when he says the car
would crash if the driver were totally unconscious, he
is talking mainly about A-consciousness. Notice that it
will do no good for Searle to say that in the last passage
quoted he is talking about creature-consciousness rather
than state-consciousness. What it is for a person to be
P-unconscious is for his states (all or the relevant ones) to
lack P-consciousness. Creature P-consciousness is para-
sitic on state P-consciousness. Also, it will do him no good
to appeal to the "conscious'7"conscious-of" distinction.
The epileptics were "totally unconscious" and therefore,
since Searle has no official concept of A-consciousness, he
must say the epileptics were totally unconscious of any-
thing. If Searle allowed that someone who is totally
unconscious can nonetheless be conscious of something,
that would be a backhanded way of acknowledging my
P/A distinction.
The upshot is that Searle finds himself drawn to using
"consciousness" in the sense of A-consciousness, despite
his official position that there is no such sense, and when
he tries to use a notion of degrees of P-consciousness, he
ends up talking about A-consciousness - or about both
A-consciousness and P-consciousness wrapped together
in the usual mongrel concept. Inattentiveness just is lack
of A-consciousness (though it will have effects on P-
consciousness). Thus, Searle may be right about the
inattentive driver (note, the inattentive driver, not the
petit mal case). When the inattentive driver stops at a red
light, there is presumably something it is like for him to
see the red light - the red light no doubt looks red in the
usual way, that is, it appears as brightly and vividly to him
as red normally does. Because he is thinking about some-
thing else, however, he may not be using this information
very much in his reasoning nor is he using it to control his
speech or action in any sophisticated way - that is,
perhaps his A-consciousness of what he sees is diminished
(of course, it cannot be totally gone or the car would
crash). Alternatively, A-consciousness might be normal,
and the driver's poor memory of the trip may just be due
to failure to put contents that are both P-conscious and
A-conscious into memory; my point is that to the extent
that Searle's story is right about any kind of consciousness
being diminished, it is right about A-consciousness, not
P-consciousness.
Searle's talk of the center and the periphery is in the
first instance about kinds of or degrees of access, not
"degrees of phenomenality." You may recall that in intro-
ducing the A/P distinction, I used Searle's example of
attending to the feel of the shirt on the back of one's neck.
My point was that A- and P-consciousness interact: bring-
ing something from the periphery to the center can affect
one's phenomenal state. The attention makes the experi-
ence finer-grained, more intense (though a pain that is
already intense need not become more intense when one
attends to it). There is a phenomenal difference between
figure and ground, although the perception of the colors
of the ground can be just as intense as those of the figure,
or so it seems to me. Access and phenomenality often
interact, one bringing along the other - but that should
not blind us to the difference. Although my complaint is
partly verbal, there is more to it. For the end result of
deploying a mongrel concept is wrong reasoning about a
function of P-consciousness.
In a related form of reasoning, Flanagan (1992,
pp. 142-45) discusses Luria's (1972) patient Zazetsky, a
soldier who lost the memories of his "middle" past -
between childhood and brain injury. The information
about his past is represented in Zazetsky's brain, but it
only comes out via "automatic writing." Flanagan says,
"The saddest irony is that although each piece of
Zazetsky's autobiography was consciously reappropriated
by him each time he hit upon a veridical memory in
writing, he himself was never able to fully reappropriate,
to keep in clear and continuous view, to live with, the self
he reconstructed in the thousand pages he wrote."
Flanagan goes on to blame the difficulty on a defect of
consciousness, and he means P-consciousness: "Zazet-
sky's conscious capacities are (partly) maimed. His dys-
function is rooted in certain defects of consciousness"
(pp. 144-45). But Zazetsky's root problem appears to be
a difficulty in A-consciousness, though that has an effect
on self-consciousness and P-consciousness. The problem
seems to be that the memories of the middle past are
not accessible to him in the manner of his memories of
childhood and the recent past. To the extent that he
knows about the middle past, it is as a result of reading his
automatic writing, and so he has the sort of access we have
to a story about someone else. The root difficulty is
segregation of information, and whatever P-conscious
feelings of fragmentation he has can be taken to result
from this segregation. Nothing in this case suggests a
function of P-consciousness.
Let us now move to the line of thought mentioned
at the outset about why the thirsty blindsight patient
doesn't reach for the glass of water in the blind field.27
The reasoning is that (1) consciousness is missing, and
(2) information that the patient in some sense possesses is
not used in reasoning, guiding action or reporting, hence
(3) the function of consciousness must be somehow to
allow information from the senses to be so used in guiding
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1995) 18:2
241

Block: Confusion about consciousness
action (Marcel 1986; 1988). Flanagan (1992) agrees with
Marcel: "Conscious awareness of a water fountain to my
right will lead me to drink from it if I am thirsty. But the
thirsty blindsighted person will make no move towards
the fountain unless pressed to do so. The inference to the
best explanation is that conscious awareness of the envi-
ronment facilitates semantic comprehension and adaptive
motor actions in creatures like us." And: "Blindsighted
patients never initiate activity toward the blindfield be-
cause they lack subjective awareness of things in that
field" (Flanagan 1992, pp. 141-42; the same reasoning
occurs in his 1991, p. 349). Van Gulick (1989, p. 220)
agrees with Marcel, saying, "subjects never initiate on
their own any actions informed by perceptions from the
blindfield. The moral to be drawn from this is that infor-
mation must normally be represented in phenomenal
consciousness if it is to play any role in guiding voluntary
action."
Schacter (1989) quotes Marcel approvingly, using this
reasoning (about why the thirsty blindsight patient
doesn't reach) to some extent in formulating the model of
Figure 1. The P-consciousness module has the function of
integrating information from the specialized modules,
injecting them with P-conscious content, and of sending
these contents to the system in charge of reasoning and
rational control of action and reporting.
Baars (1988, p. 356) argues for eighteen different func-
tions of consciousness on the same ground. He says that
the argument for these functions is "that loss of conscious-
ness - through habituation, automaticity, distraction,
masking, anesthesia, and the like - inhibits or destroys
the functions listed here."28
This is the fallacy: in the blindsight patient, both
P-consciousness and A-consciousness of the glass of wa-
ter are missing. There is an obvious explanation of why
the patient doesn't reach for the glass in terms of the
information about it not reaching mechanisms of reason-
ing and rational control of speech and action, the ma-
chinery of A-consciousness. (If we believe in an Execu-
tive System, we can explain why the blindsight patient
does not reach for the water by appealing to the claim
that the information about the water does not reach the
Executive System.) More generally, A-consciousness and
P-consciousness are almost always present or absent to-
gether, or rather this seems plausible. This is, after all,
why they are folded together in a mongrel concept. A
function of the mechanisms underlying A-consciousness
is completely obvious. If information from the senses did
not get to mechanisms of control of reasoning and of
rational control of action and reporting, we would not
be able to use our senses to guide our action and report-
ing. But it is a mistake to slide from a function of the ma-
chinery of A-consciousness to any function at all of P-
consciousness.
Of course, it could be that the lack of P-consciousness is
itself responsible for the lack of A-consciousness. If that is
the argument in any of these cases, I do not say "fallacy."
The idea that the lack of P-consciousness is responsible for
the lack of A-consciousness is a bold hypothesis, not a
fallacy. Recall, however, that there is some reason to
ascribe the opposite view to the field as a whole. The
discussion in section 5 of Baars, Shallice, Kosslyn and
Koenig, Edelman, Johnson-Laird, Andrade, and Kihl-
strom et al. suggested that to the extent that the different
types of consciousness are distinguished from one an-
other, it is often thought that P-consciousn^ss is a product
of (or is identical to) cognitive processing. In this climate
of opinion, if P-consciousness and A-consciousness were
clearly distinguished, and something like the opposite of
the usual view of their relation advanced, we would
expect some comment on this fact, something that does
not appear in any of the works cited.
The fallacy, then, is jumping from the premise that
"consciousness" is missing - without being clear about
what kind of consciousness is missing — to the conclu-
sion that P-consciousness has a certain function. If the
distinction were seen clearly, the relevant possibili-
ties could be reasoned about. Perhaps the lack of P-
consciousness causes the lack of A-consciousness. Or
perhaps the converse is the case: P-consciousness is
somehow a product of A-consciousness, or both could be
the result of something else. If the distinction were
clearly made, these alternatives would come to the fore.
The fallacy is failing to make the distinction, rendering
the alternatives invisible.
Note that the claim that P-consciousness is missing in
blindsight is just an assumption. I decided to take the
blindsight patient's word for his lack of P-consciousness of
stimuli in the blind field. Maybe this assumption is
mistaken; but if it is, then the fallacy now under discussion
reduces to the fallacy of the Searle-Penfield reasoning: if
the assumption is wrong, if the blindsight patient does
have P-consciousness of stimuli in the blind field, then
only A-consciousness of the stimuli in the blind field is
missing, so of course we cannot draw the aforementioned
conclusion about the function of P-consciousness from
blindsight.
I said at the outset that although there is a serious
fallacy in the target reasoning, something important is
also right about it: in blindsight, both A-consciousness
and (I assume) P-consciousness are gone, just as in normal
perception both are present. So blindsight is yet another
case in which P-consciousness and A-consciousness are
both present or both absent. In addition, as mentioned
earlier, cases of A-consciousness without P-conscious-
ness, such as my "superblindsight patient," do not appear
to exist. Training of blindsight patients has produced
a number of phenomena that look a bit like superblind-
sight, but each such lead I have pursued has failed. This
suggests an intimate relation between A-consciousness
and P-consciousness. Perhaps there is something about
P-consciousness that greases the wheels of accessibility.
Perhaps P-consciousness is like the liquid in a hydraulic
computer, the means by which A-consciousness operates.
Alternatively, perhaps P-consciousness is the gateway to
mechanisms of access as in Schacter's (1989) model, in
which case P-consciousness would have the function Mar-
cel and the others mention. Or perhaps P-consciousness
and A-consciousness amount to much the same thing
empirically even though they differ conceptually, in
which case P-consciousness would also have the afore-
mentioned function. Perhaps the two are so intertwined
that there is no empirical sense to the idea of one without
the other.
Compare the model of Figure 1 (Schacter's model) with
those of Figures 2 and 3. The model of Figure 2 is just like
Schacter's model, except that the Executive System and
the P-consciousness System are collapsed together. We
242
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1995) 18:2

Block: Confusion about consciousness
Specialized ,
Modules
Response Systems
CZ1
Phenomenal Consciousness
and Executive
SYSTEM
Declarative/
Episodic
Memory
Procedural/Habit System
Figure 2. The Collapse Hypothesis, in which the Executive
System and the Phenomenal Consciousness System are one and
the same.
might call the hypothesis embodied in it the "collapse
hypothesis."29 Figure 3 is a variant on Schacter's model in
which the Executive System module and the P-conscious-
ness System module are reversed. Schacter's model
clearly gives P-consciousness a function in controlling
action. The model in Figure 3 clearly gives it no function.
The model in Figure 2 can be interpreted in a variety of
ways, some of which give P-consciousness a function,
others of which do not. If P-consciousness is literally
identical to some sort of information processing, then
Specialized ,
Modules
Response Systems
Executive System
Declarative/
Episodic
Memory
Phenomenal Consciousness
Procedural/Habit System
Figure 3. Epiphenomenalism: The Executive System and the
Phenomenal Consciousness System transposed.
P-consciousness will have whatever function information
processing has. But if P-consciousness is, say, a byproduct
of and "supervenient on" (Kim 1995) certain kinds of
information processing (something that could also be
represented by the Fig. 3 model), then P-consciousness
will in that respect at least have no function. What is right
about the Marcel and others' reasoning is that some of the
explanations for the phenomenon give P-consciousness a
role; what is wrong with the reasoning is that one cannot
immediately conclude from missing "consciousness" to
P-consciousness having that role.
7. Can we distinguish among the models?
The point of my paper has been made, but having raised
the issue of the three competing models, I can't resist
making some suggestions for distinguishing among them.
My approach is one that takes introspection seriously.
Introspection has its well-known problems (Jacoby et al.
1992; Nisbett & Wilson 1977), but it would be foolish to
conclude that we can afford to ignore our own experience.
One phenomenon that counts against the "collapse
hypothesis" (Fig. 2) is the familiar phenomenon of the
solution to a difficult problem just popping into P-
consciousness. If the solution involves high-level thought,
it must be accomplished by high-level reasoning pro-
cesses that are not P-conscious (they aren't A-conscious
either, since one can't report or base action on the
intermediate stages of such reasoning). There will always
be disputes about famous cases (e.g., Kekule's discovery of
the benzene ring in a dream), but we should not be
skeptical about the idea that. although the results of
thought are both P-conscious and A-conscious, many
intermediate stages are neither. If we assume that all
high-level reasoning is done in the Executive System and
that the model in Figure 2 is committed to all Executive
processes being P-conscious, then this model is incompat-
ible with solutions popping into P-consciousness. Of
course, alternative forms of this model that do not make
these assumptions may not make any such predictions.
If investigated further, a number of phenomena might
lead to evidence for P-consciousness without A-conscious-
ness and thus provide some reason to reject the Figure 2
model in favor of Schacter's model (Fig. 1). (I also think
that these phenomena, if investigated further, might
yield some reason to reject the third model in favor of
Schacter's, but I cannot go into that here.) I repeat: the
phenomena I am about to mention don't show anything on
their own. I claim only that they are intriguing and
deserve further attention.
One such phenomenon - perhaps it should be de-
scribed as an idea rather than a phenomenon - is the
hypothesis, already mentioned, that there could be ani-
mals whose P-conscious brain processes are intact, but
whose A-conscious brain processes are not. Another is the
case mentioned earlier of states of P-consciousness that go
on for some time without attention and only become
A-conscious with the focusing of attention (see also, Hill
1991).
Here is another phenomenon that may be relevant:
Sperling (1960) flashed groups of letters (e.g., in 3 by 3
arrays) to subjects for brief periods (e.g., 50 milliseconds).
Subjects typically report that they can see all or most of
the letters, but they can report only about half of them.
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1995) 18:2
243

Block: Confusion about consciousness
Were the subjects right in saying that they could see all
the letters? Sperling tried signaling the subjects with a
tone. A high tone meant the subject was to report the top
row, a medium tone indicated the middle row, and so on.
If the tone was given immediately after the stimulus, the
subjects could usually get all the letters in the row,
whichever row was indicated. Once they had named
those letters, however, they could usually name no
others. This experiment is taken to indicate some sort of
raw visual storage, the "icon." But the crucial issue here
concerns what it is like to be a subject in this experiment.
My own experience is that I see all or almost all the
letters, and this is what other subjects describe (Baars
1988, p. 15). Focusing on one row allows me to report
what letters are in that row (and only that row), and again
this is what other subjects report. Here is the description
I think is right and that I need for my case: I am P-
conscious of all (or almost all - I will omit this qualifica-
tion) the letters at once, that is, jointly, and not just as
blurry or vague letters, but as specific letters (or at least
specific shapes), but I don't have access to all of them
jointly, all at once. (I would like to know whether others
describe what it is like in this way, but the prejudice
against introspection in psychology tends to keep answers
to such questions from the journals.) One item of uncer-
tainty about this phenomenon is that responses are serial;
perhaps if some parallel form of response were available
the results would be different. Ignoring that issue, the
suggestion is that I am P-conscious, but not A-conscious,
of all jointly.30
It may be that some evidence for P-consciousness
without A-consciousness can be derived from phenomena
involving hypnosis. Consider the phenomenon known as
hypnotic analgesia, in which hypnosis blocks a patient's
access to pain, say from an arm in cold water or from the
dentist's drill. Pain must be P-conscious, it might be said,
but access is blocked by the hypnosis, so perhaps this is P-
without A-consciousness? But what reason is there to
think that there is any pain at all in cases of hypnotic
analgesia? One reason is that there are the normal psycho-
physiological indications that would be expected for pain
of the sort that would be caused by the stimulus, such as
an increase in heart rate and blood pressure (Kihlstrom et
al. 1992; Melzack & Wall 1988). Another (weaker) indica-
tion is that reports of the pain can be elicited by Hilgard's
"hidden observer" technique, in which the hypnotist tries
to make contact with a "hidden part" of the person who
knows about the pain (Hilgard 1986; Kihlstrom 1987). The
hidden observer often describes the pain as excruciating
and characterizes the time course of the pain in a way that
fits the stimulation. Now there is no point in supposing
that the pain is not P-conscious. If we believe the hidden
observer, there is a pain that has phenomenal properties,
and phenomenal properties could not be P-unconscious.
One way to think about this situation is that we have
different persons sharing some part of one body. The pain
is both P-conscious and A-conscious to the system that
reports as the "hidden observer." This system doesn't
control behavior, but since it can report, it may have that
capacity under some circumstances. This reasoning is
supported by the idea that if there is a P-conscious state in
me to which I don't have access, then that state is not fully
mine. A different way of thinking about what is going on is
that there is one system, the person, who has some sort of
dissociation problem. There is P-conscious pain in there
somewhere, but the person does not have access to that
pain, as shown by the failure to report it and by the failure
to use the information to escape the pain. Only on the
latter view would we have P- without A-consciousness.
Another phenomenon that could lead to evidence of
P- without A-consciousness has to do with persistent
reports over the years of P-conscious events under gen-
eral anesthesia. Patients wake up and say that the opera-
tion hurt. (A number of doctors have told me that this is
why doctors make a point of giving patients intravenous
valium, a known amnestic, to wipe out memory of the
pain. If the patients don't remember the pain, they will
not sue.) General anesthesia is thought to suppress rea-
soning power in subanesthetic doses (Kihlstrom 1987; see
also Ghoneim et al. 1984), thus plausibly interfering with
Executive System function and A-consciousness, but I
know of no reports that would suggest diminished P-
consciousness. If P-consciousness were diminished much
more than A-consciousness, for example, we could per-
haps have analogs of superblindsight, although I am not
sure how it would manifest itself. So if there are P-
conscious states under general anesthesia, they may be
states of more or less normal P-consciousness with dimin-
ished A-consciousness. In addition, Crick and Koch
(1990) note that the aforementioned neural oscillations
persist under light general anesthesia. Kihlstrom and
Schacter (1990), Kihlstrom and Couture (1992), and
Ghoneim and Block (1993) conclude that the phenome-
non depends, in ways that are not understood, on details
of the procedure and the anesthetic cocktail, but there do
appear to be some methods that reveal some kind of
memory for events under anesthesia. Bennett etal. (1988)
gave patients under anesthesia suggestions to lift their
index fingers at a special signal, whereas other patients
were told to pull their ears. Control groups were given
similar procedures without the suggestions. The result:
the experimental group exhibited the designated actions
at a much higher rate than the controls. Of course, even if
these results hold up, they don't show that the patients
heard the suggestions under anesthesia. Perhaps what
took place was some sort of auditory analog of blindsight.
More pertinent for present purposes is a study con-
ducted by a pair of American dentists on pilots during
World War II (Melzack & Wall 1988; Nathan 1985). The
unpressurized cabins of the time caused pilots to experi-
ence sensations that were described as a reactivation of
the pain of previous dental work. The mechanism in-
volved stimulation of the sinuses by the air pressure
changes. The dentists coined the term "aerodontalgia" for
this phenomenon. They were interested in the relation of
aerodontalgia to general and local anesthesia, so they did
dental work on patients using combinations of both. For
example, they would put a patient under general anesthe-
sia, locally anesthetize only one side of the mouth, and
then drill or pull teeth on both sides. The result (with
stimulation of the nasal mucosa in place of the sinus
stimulation caused by pressure changes) was re-creation
of dental pain only for work done under general anesthe-
sia, not for local anesthesia, regardless of whether the
local was used alone or together with general anesthesia.
Of course, there may have been no pain at all under
general anesthesia, only memories of the sort that would
have been laid down if there had been pain. If you hate
244
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1995) 18:2

Block: Confusion about consciousness
pain, however, and if both general and local anesthesia
make medical sense, would you take the chance on
general anesthesia? At any rate, the tantalizing suggestion
is that this is a case of P-consciousness without
A-consciousness.
7.1. Conclusions
The form of the target reasoning discussed misses the
distinction between P-consciousness and A-conscious-
ness and thus jumps from the fact that consciousness in
some sense or other is missing simultaneously with miss-
ing creativity or voluntary action to the conclusion that
P-consciousness functions to promote the missing quali-
ties in normal people. If we make the right distinctions,
however, we can investigate nonfallaciously whether any
such conclusion can be drawn. The model in Figure 2
would identify P-consciousness with A-consciousness,
thus embodying an aspect of the target reasoning. This
model is disconfirmed, however, by the apparent fact that
much of our reasoning is neither P-conscious nor A-
conscious. I have made additional suggestions for phe-
nomena that may provide examples of P-consciousness
without A-consciousness, further disconfirming the Fig-
ure 2 model.
My purpose in this target article has been to expose a
confusion about consciousness. But in reasoning about it I
raised the possibility that it may be possible to find out
something about the function of P-consciousness without
knowing very much about what it is. Indeed, learning
something about the function of P-consciousness may
help us in finding out what it is.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
I would like to thank Tyler Burge, Susan Carey, David
Chalmers, Martin Davies, Wayne Davis, Bert Dreyfus, Paul
Horwich, Jerry Katz, Leonard Katz, Joe Levine, David Rosen-
thai, Jerome Shaffer, Sydney Shoemaker, Stephen White, and
Andrew Young for their very helpful comments on earlier
versions of this paper. I am grateful to Kathleen Akins for her
presentation as Commentator when this paper was given at a
conference at the University of Washington in 1991. I am also
grateful to many audiences at talks on this material for their
criticisms, especially the audience at the conference on my work
at the University of Barcelona in June 1993.
NOTES
1. The phenomenon just mentioned is very similar to phe-
nomena involving "subliminal perception," in which stimuli are
degraded or presented very briefly. Holender (1986) harshly
criticizes a variety of "subliminal perception" experiments, but
the experimental paradigm just mentioned and many others
are, in my judgment, free of the problems of certain other
studies. Another such experimental paradigm is the familiar
dichotic listening experiment in which subjects wear head-
phones that present different stimuli to different ears. If sub-
jects are asked to pay attention to the stimuli in one ear, they can
report only superficial features of the unattended stimuli, but
the latter influences the interpretation of ambiguous sentences
presented to the attended ear (see Lackner & Garrett 1973).
2. See, for example, Dennett and Kinsboume's (1992b) scorn
in response to my suggestion of Cartesian modularism. I should
add that in Dennett's more recent writings, Cartesian material-
ism has tended to expand considerably from its original meaning
of a literal place in the brain at which "it all comes together" for
consciousness. In reply to Shoemaker (1993) and Tye (1993),
both of whom echo Dennett's (1991) and Dennett and Kins-
bourne's (1992a) admission that no one really is a proponent of
Cartesian materialism, Dennett (1993) says "Indeed, if Tye and
Shoemaker want to see a card-carrying Cartesian materialist,
each may look in the mirror." (See also Jackson 1993.)
3. But what is it about thoughts that makes them P-conscious?
One possibility is that it is just a series of mental images or
subvocalizations that make thoughts P-conscious. Another pos-
sibility is that the contents themselves have a P-conscious aspect
independently of their vehicles (see Lormand, forthcoming).
4. I say both that P-consciousness is not an intentional prop-
erty and that intentional differences can make a P-conscious
difference. My view is that although P-conscious content cannot
be reduced to intentional content, P-conscious contents often
have an intentional aspect, and also that P-conscious contents
often represent in a primitive, nonintentional way. A perceptual
experience can represent space as being Riled in certain ways
without representing the object perceived as falling under any
concept. Thus, the experiences of a creature that does not
possess the concept of a donut could represent space as being
filled in a donutlike way (see Davies [1992, in press]; Peacocke
[1992]; and finally Evans [1982] in which the distinction be-
tween conceptualized and nonconceptualized content is first
introduced).
5. Levine (1983) coined the term "explanatory gap" and has
elaborated the idea in interesting ways (see also Levine 1993).
Van Gulick (1993) and Flanagan (1992, p. 59) note that the more
we know about the connection between (say) hitting middle C on
the piano and the resulting experience, the more we have in the
way of hooks on which to hang something that could potentially
close the explanatory gap. Some philosophers have adopted
what might be called a deflationary attitude toward the explana-
tory gap (see Block 1994; A. Byrne 1993; Chalmers 1993; Jackson
1993; Levine 1993).
6. I know some will think that I invoked inverted and absent
qualm a few paragraphs ago when I described the explanatory
gap as involving the question of why a creature possessing
a brain with a physiological and functional nature like ours
couldn't have different experience or none.at all. But the spirit of
the question as I asked it allows for an answer that explains why
such creatures cannot exist, and thus there is no presupposition
that these are real possibilities. Levine (1983; 1993) stresses that
the relevant modality is epistemic possibility.
7. Poised = ready and waiting. To be poised to attack is to be on
the verge of attacking. What if an A-unconscious state causes an A-
conscious state with the same content? Then it could be said that
the first state must be A-conscious because it is in virtue of hav-
ing that state that the content it shares with the other state satisfies
the three conditions. So the state is A-unconscious by hypoth-
esis, but A-conscious by my definition (I am indebted to Paul
Horwich). What this case points to is a refinement needed in the
notion of "in virtue of. "One does not want to count the inferential
promiscuity of a content as being in virtue of having a state if that
state can only cause this inferential promiscuity via another state.
I will not try to produce an analysis of "in virtue of here.
8. I have been using the P-consciousness/A-consciousness
distinction in my lectures for many years, but it only found its
way into print in "Consciousness and Accessibility" (Block
1990b) and in Block 1991, 1992, and 1993. My claims about the
distinction have been criticized by Searle (1990; 1992) and
Flanagan (1992); and there is an illuminating discussion in
Davies and Humphreys (1993). See also Levine's (1994) discus-
sion of Flanagan's critique of the distinction. See also Kirk (1992)
for an identification of P-consciousness with something like
A-consciousness.
9. Some may say that only fully conceptualized content
can play a role in reasoning, be reportable, and rationally con-
trol action. If so, then nonconceptualized content is not A-
conscious.
10. However, I acknowledge the empirical possibility that
the scientific nature of P-consciousness has something to do with
information processing. We can ill afford to close off empirical
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1995) 18:2
245

Block: Confusion about consciousness
possibilities given the difficulty of solving the mystery of P-
consciousness (cf. Loar 1990).
11. In my view, there are a number of problems with the first
of these suggestions. One of them is that perhaps the represen-
tational content of pain is too primitive for a role in inference.
Arguably, the representational content of pain is nonconcep-
tualized. After all, dogs can have pain and one can reasonably
wonder whether dogs have the relevant concepts at all. Davies
and Humphreys (1993) discuss a related issue. Applying a
suggestion of theirs about the higher-order thought notion
of consciousness to A-consciousness, we could characterize A-
consciousness of a state with nonconceptualized content as
follows: such a state is A-conscious if, in virtue of one's having the
state, its content would be inferentially promiscuous and avail-
able for rational control of action and speech if the subject were
to have had the concepts required for that content to be a
conceptualized content. The idea is to bypass the inferential
disadvantage of nonconceptualized content by thinking of its
accessibility counterfactually - in terms of the rational relations
it would have if the subject were to have the relevant concepts
(see Lormand, forthcoming, on the self-representing nature of
pain).
12. Later in this paper I introduce the distinction between
creature-consciousness and state-consciousness. In those terms,
transitivity has to do primarily with creature-consciousness,
whereas in the case of P-consciousness and A-consciousness, it is
state-consciousness that is basic (see the discussion at the end of
this section).
13. The distinction has some similarity to the sensation/
perception distinction; I will not take the space to lay out the
differences (see Humphrey, 1992, for an interesting discussion
of the latter distinction).
14. Tye (in press a) argues (on the basis of a neuropsychologi-
cal claim) that the visual information processing in blindsight
includes no processing by the object recognition system or the
spatial attention system, and so is very different from the
processing of normal vision. This does not challenge my claim
that the superblindsight case is a very limited partial zombie.
Note that superblindsight, as I describe it, does not require
object recognition or spatial attention. Whatever it is that allows
the blindsight patient to discriminate an X from an O and a
horizontal from a vertical line, will do. I will argue later that the
fact that such cases do not exist, if it is a fact, is important.
Humphrey (1992) suggests that blindsight is mainly a motor
phenomenon - the patient is perceptually influenced by his own
motor tendencies.
15. If you are tempted to deny the existence of these states of
the perceptual system, you should think back to the total zombie
just mentioned. Putting aside the issue of the possibility of this
zombie, note that on a computational notion of cognition, the
zombie has all the same A-conscious contents that you have (if he
is your computational duplicate). A-consciousness is an informa-
tional notion. The states of the superblindsighter's perceptual
system are A-conscious for the same reason as the zombie's.
16. Actually, my notion of A-consciousness seems to fit the
data better than the conceptual apparatus she uses. Blindsight
isn't always more degraded in any normal sense than sight.
Weiskrantz (1988) notes that his patient DB had better acuity in
some areas of the blind field (in some circumstances) than in his
sighted field. It would be better to understand her use of
"degraded' in terms of lack of access. Notice that the super-
blindsighter I have described is just a little bit different (though
in a crucial way) from the ordinary blindsight patient. In particu-
lar, I am not relying on what might be thought of as a full-fledged
quasi-zombie, a super-duper-blindsighter whose blindsight is
every bit as good, functionally speaking, as his sight. In the case
of the super-duper-blindsighter, the only difference between
vision in the blind and sighted fields, functionally speaking, is
that the quasi-zombie himself regards them differently. Such an
example will be regarded by some (although not by me) as
incoherent - see Dennett (1991) for example. But we can avoid
disagreement about the super-duper-blindsighter by illustrat-
ing the idea of A-consciousness without P-consciousness by
appealing only to the superblindsighter. Functionalists may
want to know why the superblindsight case counts as A-
consciousness without P-consciousness. After all, they may say,
if we have really high-quality access in mind, the superblind-
sighter that I have described does not have it, so he lacks both
P-consciousness and truly high-quality A-consciousness. The
super-duper-blindsighter, on the other hand, has both, accord-
ing to the functionalist, so in neither case, the objection goes, is
there A-consciousness without P-consciousness. But the dis-
agreement about the super-duper-blindsighter is irrelevant to
the issue about the superblindsighter, and the issue about the
superblindsighter is merely verbal. I have chosen a notion of
A-consciousness whose standards are lower in part to avoid
conflict with the functionalist. One could put the point by
distinguishing three types of access: (1) truly high-quality ac-
cess, (2) medium access, and (3) poor access. The actual blind-
sight patient has poor access, the superblindsight patient has
medium access, and the super-duper-blindsight patient - as
well as most of us - has really high-quality access. The func-
tionalist identifies P-consciousness with A-consciousness of the
truly high-quality kind. Although functionalists should agree
with me that there can be A-consciousness without P-conscious-
ness, some functionalists will see the significance of such
cases very differently from the way I see them. Some functional-
ists will see the distinction between A-consciousness and P-
consciousness primarily as a difference in degree rather than in
kind, as is suggested by the contrast between truly high-quality
access and medium access. So all that A-consciousness without
P-consciousness illustrates, on this functionalist view, is some
access without more access. Other functionalists will stress kind
rather than degree of information processing. The idea behind
this approach is that there is no reason to think that the
P-consciousness of animals whose capacities for reasoning, re-
porting, and rational guidance of action are more limited than
ours thereby have anything less in the way of P-consciousness.
The functionalist can concede that this thought is correct, and
thereby treat the difference between A-consciousness and
P-consciousness as a difference of kind, albeit kind of informa-
tion processing.
17. Thus, there is a conflict between this psychological claim
and the Schacter model, which dictates that destroying the
P-consciousness module will prevent A-consciousness.
18. There is a misleading aspect to this example - namely,
that to the extent that "conscious" and "aware" differ in ordinary
talk, the difference goes in the opposite direction.
19. Of course, even those who do not believe in P-conscious-
ness at all, as distinct from A-consciousness, can accept the
distinction between a noise that is A-conscious and a noise that is
not A-conscious. There is a more familiar situation that illus-
trates the same points. Think back to all those times you have
been sitting in the kitchen when suddenly the compressor in the
refrigerator goes off. Again, one might naturally say that one was
aware of the noise, but only at the moment when it went off was
one consciously aware of it. I didn't use this example because I
am not sure that one really has P-consciousness of the noise of
the compressor all along; habituation would perhaps prevent it.
Perhaps what happens at the moment it goes off is that one is
P-conscious of the change only.
20. There is a line of thought about the phenomenal/
representational distinction that involves versions of the tradi-
tionaTinverted spectrum" hypothesis (see Block 1990a; Shoe-
maker 1981b; 1993).
21. See White (1987) for an account of why self-consciousness
should be firmly distinguished from P-consciousness, and why
self-consciousness is more relevant to certain issues of value.
22. The pioneer of these ideas in the philosophical literature
is Armstrong (1968; 1980). Lycan (1987) has energetically pur-
246
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1995) 18:2

Commentary/Block: Confusion about consciousness
sued self-scanning, and Rosenthal (1986; 1993), Carruthers
(1989; 1992), and Nelkin (1993) have championed higher-order
thought (see also Natsoulas 1993). Lormand (forthcoming)
makes some powerful criticisms of Rosenthal.
23. To be fair to Rey, his argument is more like a dilemma: for
any supposed feature of consciousness, either a laptop of the sort
we have today has it or else you can't be sure you have it yourself.
So in the case of P-consciousness, the focus might be on the
latter disjunct.
24. It is interesting to note that she was in many respects
much worse at many face-perception tasks than LH (the pro-
sopagnosic mentioned earlier) - she couldn't match photo-
graphs of faces, for example. I have noticed that people who
know little about anosognosia tend to favor various debunking
hypotheses. That is, they assume that the experimenters have
made one or another silly mistake in describing the syndrome,
because, after all, how could anyone fail to notice that they
can't recognize faces, or worse, that they were blind. See Young
& deHaan (1993) for a good debunking of the debunking
hypotheses.
25. There is an additional problem in the reasoning that I will
not go into except here. There is a well-known difficulty in
reasoning of the form: X is missing; the patient has lost the
ability to do such and such; therefore a function of X is to
facilitate such and such. In a complex system, a loss may
reverberate through the system, triggering a variety of malfunc-
tions that are not connected in any serious way with the function
of the missing item. An imperfect but memorable example (that
I heard from Tom Bever) will illustrate: the Martians want to find
out about the function of various Earthly items. They begin with
the Pentagon, and focus in on a particular drinking fountain in a
hall on the third floor of the north side of the building. "If we can
figure out what that is for,' they think, "we can move on to
something more complex." So they vaporize the drinking foun-
tain, causing noise and spurting pipes. Everyone comes out of
their offices to see what happened and the Martians conclude
that the function of the fountain was to keep people in their
offices. The application of this point to the petit mal case is that
even if I am right that it is A-consciousness, not P-consciousness,
that is diminished or missing, I would not jump to the conclu-
sion that A-consciousness has a function of adding powers of
discrimination, flexibility, and creativity. Creativity, for ex-
ample, may have its sources in the A-unconscious, requiring
powers of reasoning and control of action and reporting only for
its expression.
26. Indeed, in the italicized passage above (italics mine)
there is an implicit suggestion that perhaps there are P-
conscious events of which no record is made. I could only find
one place in the book where Penfield (1975, p. 60) says anything
that might be taken to contradict this interpretation: "Thus, the
automaton can walk through traffic as though he were aware of
all that he hears and sees, and so continue on his way home. But
he is aware of nothing and so makes no memory record. If a
policeman were to accost him he might consider the poor fellow
to be walking in his sleep."To understand this properly, we need
to know what Penfield means by "awareness," and what he
thinks goes on in sleep. Judging by his use of synonyms, by
"awareness' he means something in the category of the higher-
order thought analyses or the self-consciousness sense. For
example, in discussing his peculiar view that ants are conscious,
Penfield seems to use "conscious" and "aware" to mean self-
aware (pp. 62, 105, 106). In addition, he makes it clear that
although the mind is shut off during sleep, the sensory cortex is
quite active.
27. A similar line of reasoning appears in Shevrin (1992); he
notes that in subliminal perception we don't fix the source of a
mental content. Subliminal percepts aren't conscious, so con-
sciousness must have the function of fixing the source of mental
contents.
28. Although Baars is talking about the function of "conscious
experience," he does have a tendency to combine P-conscious-
ness with A-consciousness under this heading.
29. The collapse hypothesis should not be confused with
Marcel's (1988, pp. 135-37) identity hypothesis, which hypo-
thesizes that the processing of stimuli is identical with con-
sciousness of them. As Marcel points out, blindsight and similar
phenomena suggest that we can have processing without
consciousness.
30. I am indebted to Jerry Fodor here.
Open Peer Commentary
Commentary submitted by the qualified professional readership of this
journal will be considered for publication in a later issue as Continuing
Commentary on this article. Integrative overviews and syntheses are
especially encouraged.
Perception-consciousness and
action-consciousness?
D. M. Armstrong
Department of Philosophy, Sydney University, New South Wales, Australia
2006. david.armstrong@phllosophy.su.edu.au
Abstract: Block's distinction between phenomenal and access conscious-
ness is accepted, and it is agreed that one may be found without the
other, but his account of the distinction is challenged. Phenomenal
consciousness is perceptual consciousness, and it is a matter of gaining
information of a detailed, nonverbal sort about the subject's body and
environment. Access consciousness is good, old-fashioned intro-
spection.
Block's distinction between phenomenal and access conscious-
ness seems well motivated and he shows that a number of
persons pass illegitimately from one to the other in the course of
their discussions of consciousness.^ A-consciousness without
P-consciousness seems possible, although it may be doubted
whether in fact A ever occurs in the total absence of P. P-
consciousness without A-consciousness has traditionally been
found more difficult, probably because of Cartesian hangovers.
(Besides the KK fallacy - if you know you must know that you
know, there is the CC fallacy - if you are conscious you must be
conscious that you are conscious.) The case given by Block in
section 4.2, where the intense conversation makes one unaware
of the pneumatic drill but at a certain point one realizes that one
has been P-conscious of the drill for some time, seems convinc-
ing to me. But I would argue for the conceivability, the possi-
bility, and the probable actuality of deep lack of A-consciousness
of P-consciousness. Block does introduce such material in sec-
tion 7, referring to observations that suggest that pain may be
felt under hypnosis or anesthesia, although A-consciousness
may be minimal or absent (see also Armstrong & Malcolm 1984,
pp. 121-37).
To draw a distinction and to analyze it correctly need not be
the same thing. I take issue with Block when he denies that
P-consciousness is a cognitive, intentional, or functional prop-
erty. At the center of P-consciousness, is perception, and per-
ception, I think, is essentially prepositional, a matter of perceiv-
ing or misperceiving that something has a certain property or
that a certain thing is related in a certain way with a further thing
or things. The word "propositional" here, of course, is not
intended in any way to suggest language. Though propositional
or representational, perception is a completely different type of
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1995) 18:2
247

Commentary /Block: Confusion about consciousness
representational system from that found in thought and belief of
a nonperceptual sort. The one may naturally be compared to
picturing, the other to speaking or writing. Another comparison
is between analogue and digital representation. P-consciousness
includes bodily sensation, of course, which I take to be a species
of perception: bodily perception or proprioception. It perhaps
extends to imaging, which stands in close, if hard to spell out,
relation to perception and to feelings of emotion (where the link
may be bodily sensation). As Block recognizes, this form of
consciousness is thoroughly interpenetrated by thought and
belief, which suggests that it is itself representational in nature.
P-consciousness yields very detailed, if easily lost, information
(and misinformation) about a narrow field: the current state of
our own body and its current environment.
The mammals, at least, are capable of a certain amount of
inner planning. They have decision-making procedures that go
on within their heads. This produces more efficient bodily
action (which in our species includes speech). But this inner
action, because it is purposive, cannot proceed without feedback
about the current state of play inside the mind. Action without
information is blind. A-consciousness, I suggest, provides that
feedback. I would identify it with traditional introspective
awareness.
Why is A-consciousness, though it includes awareness of
P-consciousness, so different from P-consciousness? I suggest
that the.difference springs from the different tasks that A and P
perform. The point of A is to allow inner planning that will result
in bodily action that achieves goals. Goals will be somewhat
indeterminate. One wants a bit of that meat, but any bit of
reasonable size will do. One wants to get from a certain place to
another, but innumerable slightly different ways of doing it will
suffice, and no decision between the ways need be made until
the physical action starts. Hence we get the relatively vague and
indeterminate concepts that are associated with goals. One may
hypothesize that A uses the detritus of P, mental images, in
some way to signify these goals (and to remember). Perhaps in
the evolutionary process thinking started as a calling up and
manipulation of images, somehow tagged.
By contrast, in the course of proceeding toward a goal,
information must be precise. One needs to know exactly how the
situation is developing right up to and including achievement..
So we have the specificity of P-consciousness. Block's "phenom-
enal content," I hypothesize, is no more than a species of
representational content of a particularly detailed sort.
If it is P-consciousness that gives us information about the
world, and A-consciousness that yields information about what
goes on in the mind itself (including information about the
content of P-consciousness), superblindsight, if it existed, would
presumably be P-consciousness, and one that got plenty of
information further up into the mind. But it would be P-
consciousness of which there was no direct A-consciousness.
Actual blindsight could still be full P-consciousness, but with
only a little information trickling up to the higher centers. Or, as
seems more likely, it is less than the full P.
I would expect, however, that P-consciousness is always the
guardian of the gateway to the world. Agreeing with Block that P
and A interact, I find A for access an unhelpful piece of terminol-
ogy. What is the access access to? Better, I suggest, A for action;
but still better, perhaps, I, for good, old-fashioned intro-
spection.
Consciousness without conflation
Anthony P. Atkinson and Martin Davies
Department of Experimental Psychology, University of Oxford, Oxford 0X1
3UD, England, apa@vax.ox.ac.uk and mdavies@psy.ox.ac.uk
Abstract: Although information-processing theories cannot provide a
full explanatory account of P-consciousness, there is less conflation and
confusion in cognitive psychology than Block suspects. Some of the
reasoning that Block criticises can be interpreted plausibly in the light of
a folk psychological view of relation between P-consciousness and
A-consciousness.
The history of cognitive psychology is studded with attempts
to associate or identify various aspects of consciousness with
information-processing constructs. Consciousness is putatively
explained in terms of the operation of, for example, short-term
memory, attentional, and central executive systems, often with a
(usually serial) "limited capacity." According to Block, much of
this psychological theorising is undermined by a failure to
distinguish between P-consciousness and A-consciousness, but
we do not think that what is going on here is a simple conflation.
We agree with Block that there is an important distinction to
be drawn between P-consciousness and A-consciousness, and
that P-consciousness leaves us (at least in our current state of
understanding) with an explanatory gap (Davies 1955; Davies &
Humphreys 1993). Nagel (1974) says that "structural features" of
experience "might be better candidates for objective explana-
tions of a more familiar sort." But even if these structural
features are explained in information-processing terms, we are
still left with the question of why there should be something
rather than nothing that it is like to have certain processes going
on in our brains. Current information-processing theories of
P-consciousness are bound to be incomplete whereas (we as-
sume with Block) there is no similar obstacle in the way of an
information-processing explanation of A-consciousness. To that
extent, standard cognitive psychological accounts of conscious-
ness are more appropriate to A-consciousness than to P-
consciousness. But that is not to say that there is a systematic
tendency toward confused theorising grounded in the failure to
distinguish between the two notions of consciousness.
In the context of an investigation of "automatic" and "con-
trolled" processing, Shiffrin and Schneider (1977, p. 157) specu-
late, for example, that "the phenomenological feeling of con-
sciousness may lie in a subset of STS [the short-term store],
particularly in the subset that is attended to and given controlled
processing." It is easy to imagine an objection: what purports to
be an account of an aspect of phenomenal experience is cast in
terms of storage and processing, terms that are appropriate for a
theory of A-consciousness (cf. what Block says about Baars,
Shallice, and others). But although Shiffrin and Schneider do not
fully settle the question of the causal relation between being in
the special subset of STS and being subject to controlled
processing, there is no real evidence of conflation here.
A more sympathetic view of the cognitive psychological litera-
ture is possible if we begin from the plausible idea that P-
consciousness may figure in the causal explanation of A-
consciousness. Why do we say that the idea of a causal relation
running from P-consciousness to A-consciousness is plausible?
Briefly, Block's notion of A-consciousness is a dispositional
notion; and when a state has a dispositional property, it is natural
to seek a more intrinsic property of the state in virtue of which it
has that disposition. So, we can ask, in virtue of what property of
my pain state am I in a position to report that I have pain? Or, in
virtue of what property of the pain in my leg is it the case that the
content / have a pain in my leg is poised for rational control of my
actions? The intuitive folk psychological answer is that these
dispositions are grounded in my pain's being a phenomenally
conscious state. It is because the pain is P-conscious that it is
A-conscious.
An A-conscious belief likewise has dispositional properties,
and once again we may ask for a property of the belief state that
explains why the content of the belief is poised to figure in
theoretical and practical reasoning, and why I am able to express
and report the belief. On some accounts of the distinction
between P-consciousness and A-consciousness, on which beliefs
that are not P-conscious states, this question proves to be
problematic. But Block is explicit that P-consciousness extends
to thoughts, so he can allow the answer that it is in virtue of being
248
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1995) 18:2

CommentaryVBlock: Confusion about consciousness
a P-conscious state that a belief has the dispositional properties
characteristic of A-consciousness.
This folk psychological view of the relation between P-
consciousness and A-consciousness cannot currently be fully
reflected in information-processing psychology, since - given
the explanatory gap - we cannot give a full explanation of
P-consciousness in information-processing terms. But a partial
reflection would be seen in the idea that the conditions that
explain "structural features" of phenomenal experience might
be found among the immediate antecedents of the processing
that underpins reasoning, decision taking, and reporting. This
view would also encourage the thought that there is an asym-
metric dependence relation between P-consciousness and
A-consciousness, as follows. If, as we are actually constituted,
P-consciousness is the categorical and relatively intrinsic basis
for the dispositional and relatively relational A-consciousness,
then we should expect there to be actual cases of P-conscious-
ness without A-consciousness produced when crucial relational
links are missing. But, we should not expect to find actual cases
of A-consciousness without P-consciousness. This is just the
asymmetry to which Block points (sects. 4.1, 4.2).
Given the possibility of this more sympathetic reading of the
cognitive psychological literature, what are we to make of the
target reasoning that Block criticises? We shall surely agree that
some arguments are nonstarters. If P-consciousness is actually
present when flexibility in behaviour is absent (as in the epilep-
tic seizure case), then any argument for the addition of flexibility
as a function of P-consciousness is undercut. In the cases of
prosopagnosia and blindsight, however, important aspects of
normal conscious experience are plausibly absent: there is a
P-consciousness deficit. And even if there is covert knowledge of
the identity or profession of the person whose face is presented,
this information is not at the service of rational decision taking:
there is an A-consciousness deficit. We agree with Block that it
would be a mistake to infer anything about one-way causal
dependence, or about the function of P-consciousness, given
only the association between these two deficits. But still, their
cooccurrence is consistent with, and makes sense in the light of,
the folk psychological view of the relationship between P-
consciousness and A-consciousness.
Evidence that phenomenal consciousness
is the same as access consciousness
Bernard J. Baars
The Wright Institute, Berkeley, CA 94704. baars@cogsci.berkeley.edu
Abstract: Block seems to propose untested answers to empirical ques-
tions. Whether consciousness is a "mongrel problem," rather than a
single core fact with many facets, is an empirical issue. Likewise, the
intimate relationship between personal consciousness and global access
functions cannot be decided pretheoretically. This point is demon-
strated by the reader's private experience of foveal versus parafoveal
vision, and for conscious versus unconscious representation of the many
meanings of common words.
Whether consciousness is a "mongrel problem" or a purebred is
an empirical question. Cancer, it used to be said, is a mongrel
problem: the differences between leukemia and skin cancer are
vast. A decade ago it was common to read that there was no such
thing as cancer, there were only a mixed bag of cancers. Well, no
more. Recent insights about the genes that control cell growth
suggest that all cancers involve the same underlying dysfunc-
tion, expressed by different pathways and in different tissues.
The appropriate reply to Block's claim about the mongrel
nature of consciousness is: How do you know? What is your
evidence, and what models do you use to come to this debatable
conclusion? In my own work, after a decade of carefully consid-
ering the vast amount of psychological evidence relevant to
consciousness, and building seven explicit, increasingly inclu-
sive models, I conclude that consciousness is a unified problem
with many superficially different aspects (Baars 1988).
The relationship between personal consciousness and the
access functions of consciousness is also an empirical issue.
Consider the following. If you, the reader, focus on a single
letter on this page, you may be conscious of neighboring letters
within a few degrees, but of nothing beyond that into your visual
periphery - though we know the peripheral field can process
printed words in order to aim accurate saccades in reading. For
another example, while reading the word "focus" in the previous
sentence, you were very probably unaware of its nine alternative
meanings. There is good evidence that at least some alternative
meanings of ambiguous words are processed unconsciously in
normal reading. These examples show-natural contrasts be-
tween similar conscious and unconscious processes, much like
experimental comparisons. There are dozens of such contrasts,
and they constrain any theory of consciousness in an empirically
solid way (Baars 1988; 1994a).
These contrastive pairs suggest that personal consciousness is
functional and has an access function (Baars 1988; 1994; in press
a; in press b). How do we know that personal consciousness is
involved? The easiest proof is for the reader simply to go back to
the demonstration above: Is the fixation point on this page really
conscious? Is the periphery really not conscious? Can you report
the conscious experience overtly, by word or signal? Is your
report demonstrably accurate? Can you then discriminate, act
upon, learn, retrieve, or imagine the letters at your fixation
point? For conscious contents the answer is always yes - which is
to say that we can access the letters at the fixation point percep-
tually, we can access information triggered by those letters (such
as the meanings of words), we can access memory, learning abil-
ities, short-term memory, voluntary control, and so on, based on
consciousness of the target. Although the information in the
periphery is at least partly processed, it provides none of these
forms of access (e.g., Greenwald 1992).
The idea of conscious access is essential in everyday psychol-
ogy as well. We ask people to pay attention to something
because we would like them to gain conscious access to it. Block
is asking us to pay attention to his target article for precisely this
reason. If we only moved our eyes along the printed page and
failed to become conscious of his meaning, he would certainly
not be satisfied that his work has finally reached its intended
audience. Implicitly, therefore, we all treat consciousness as an
access function, one that is empirically inseparable from per-
sonal experience.
An explicit mechanism for conscious access is proposed in
global workspace (GW) theory (Baars 1988; 1993; 1994; in press;
Newman & Baars 1993). GW theory shows that the equivalence
between personal consciousness and access consciousness is
very productive indeed. Indeed, how could it be otherwise?
Consciousness is a supremely functional adaptation. Biological
evolution is not likely to produce two nearly identical organs in
the same organism, one mirroring the other, one functional and
the other merely personal. That is not how the natural world
works. To say it once more: consciousness as an object of
scientific scrutiny fits our personal experience remarkably well.
This is not likely to be coincidence (Baars 1991).
More empirical cases to break the accord of
phenomenal and access-consciousness
Talis Bachmann
Tallinn University of Social and Educational Sciences, Tallinn, EE0100
Estonia, tbach@lin.tpu.ee
Abstract: Additional experiments show that P-consciousness and A-
consciousness can be empirically dissociated for the theoretically so-
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1995) 18:2
249

Commentary /Block: Confusion about consciousness
phisticated observer. Phenomenal consciousness can have several
degrees that are indirectly measurable.
The main way to show that Block's theorizing is more than just
playing with words is to provide empirical cases where A-
consciousness and P-consciousness can be, if not fully dissoci-
ated, then at least put into discord. I will describe some
suggestive psychophysical experiments that lend support to the
views put forward in the target article. (Minor disagreements
will be pointed out at the end.)
1. Mutual masking. Suppose that two spatially overlapping
but temporally discrete stimulus images, A and B, are exposed
for a brief time (e.g., 10 msec) with short stimulus onset
asynchrony (SOA, say, 70 msec). If any of the stimuli had been
presented separately, they would have been perceived with
100% accuracy, but with mutual masking the percent correct (a
measure of the type of consciousness necessarily including
A-consciousness) is considerably lower or may even be at chance
level. In our lab we have demonstrated that one can increase the
intensity of the first stimulus, A, so that its recognizability does
not increase but the subjective contrast or phenomenal clarity
(an aspect of P-consciousness) of the following stimulus, B,
increases without necessarily increasing the recognizability of B
either. A problem emerges: How can one stimulus that does not
benefit from the increase in intensity either, in terms of A-
consciousness or in terms of P-consciousness produce a benefit
that is related to P-conscious aspects of the succeeding stimu-
lus? Solutions to this problem (e.g., perceptual retouch
theory, Bach marm 1984; 1994) .could also help clarify the role
of underlying neural mechanisms in distinguishing A- and
P-consciousness.
2. Stroboscoplc motion. Suppose A and B are identical bars,
but separated in space so that their successive flashing leads to
perceived, stroboscopic motions (phenomenally experienced as
A moving from one position to another). For cognitively sophisti-
cated observers it is evident that the space between A and B is
empty and that two objects are actually being exposed (aspects
of A-consciousness); nevertheless, they see motion (phenomenal
motion). A problem emerges: it is difficult to suppose that in this
creative interaction no representations for stimuli-in-motion
are activated physiologically; so it is curious how physiological
representations are involved, together with phenomenal expe-
rience of the motion-type-of-feeling, without any actual motion
or rational belief in it. [See also Pylyshyn: "Computation and
Cognition" BBS 3(1) 1980.]
3. Binocular rivalry. If two sufficiently different images, A and
B, are simultaneously exposed in a stereoscope for longer
observation times (at least for more than 150-200 msec, but
better if for dozens of sec), A for the right eye and B for the left
eye, then phenomenally subjects experience either A or B, but
not both; usually, alteration is observed. Now, suppose A has just
disappeared from direct experience? being replaced by B, but
subjects can voluntarily analyze the memory-image of A men-
tally without experiencing much from B in terms of A-conscious-
ness, even though B prevails in direct experience (an aspect of
P-consciousness). A problem emerges: How is it that in direct
visual experience a simultaneous P-conscious state of alternative
images received via different visual channels is impossible,
whereas memory-representations of the stimulus that is sup-
pressed from the direct image can still be present as activated
(apprehended) during the direct perceptual experience of the
alternative image? Answers (including neuroscientific ones
based, for example, on PET studies) could help us better
understand the role of memory representation vis-a-vis "fresh"
sensory signals in creating consciousness.
4. Illusory contours. We all are familiar with examples of
visual images containing illusory contours or objects (e.g., Petry
& Meyer 1987). One such example can be seen in Figure 1. To a
cognitively sophisticated observer, careful analytic introspec-
tion should show that regions that appear to contain quite clear
Figure 1 (Bachmann). An example of an image containing
illusory contour.
contours (an aspect of consciousness necessarily including
P-consciousness) actually lack photometric gradients of lumi-
nance in those spatial regions where visible contours seem to be
located. It is obvious that without the special arrangement of the
inducing elements so that perceptual representations that "sug-
gest" some "absent" contours are activated, the phenomenon
would not take place. A problem emerges: How is it that rational
beliefs (an aspect of A-consciousness) contradict what the per-
ceptual representations of inducing elements do in creating
visible contours (an aspect of consciousness including P-
consciousness) at the locus in space where all actual sensory
signals indicating physical luminance gradients are absent? I
would accordingly like to draw attention to another aspect of the
discussion, namely, the problem of the role of A- and P-
consciousness in testing and suggesting the veridicality of the
components of mental experience. In the present case a curious
possibility seems to be found where neither rational (theoreti-
cal) thought nor local sensory signals from the surface should
suggest any visible contours, but the perceptual representation
of the configuration of inducing elements provides the basis for a
nonveridical sensory experience. My personal suggestion would
be to invoke the concept of typicality to escape from this trap
and allow mental representations to lead to nonveridical percep-
tual experience, given that this nonveridical experience is more
representative of typicality than failing to sense objectively
nonexistent contours would be. The very special arrangement
(including alignment) of the inducing elements in the images
that contain illusory contours makes it possible to create a
typical (expected) perceptual image that includes nonveridical
aspects. Experimental research based on stimuli with emergent
(illusory) contours should be useful in further analyzing this side
of the consciousness problem.
In the second part of this commentary let me present some
more critical remarks.
First, Block regards P-conscious properties as distinct from
any cognitive, intentional, or functional property. As far as
cognitive neuroscience is avoided, I do not see any big problem
in this, given good operational concepts. But if we consider that
the activity of certain special neural mechanisms (e.g., reticular
formation, nucleus reticularis thalami, etc.) is necessary for the
P-conscious state to emerge then we may have some problems.
For example, cognition includes selective attention, but more
and more data suggest that attentional and consciousness-
250
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1995) 18:2

Commentary /Block: Confusion about consciousness
generating functions share common mechanisms (Crick & Koch
1990; LaBerge 1990; Naatanen 1992; Smirnov 1974). Moreover,
computer programs can simulate the interaction of specific
cortical neuronal modules and nonspecific modulatory pathways
from thalamus in the process of creating P-conscious aspects of
mental activity (e.g., Bachmann 1994).
Similarly, P-consciousness is said to depend on what goes on
inside the P-consciousness module (sect. 4, para. 8), but avail-
able data suggest that the P-conscious quality of a mental process
(e.g., perception) is based on (or at least correlated with) the
interaction of specific cortical neuronal representations and
nonspecific, but selectively channelled thalamic modulation of
the excitatory postsynaptic potentials of these neurons (Buser &
Rougeul-Buser 1978; Sokolov 1986). A suggestive example
comes from neurosurgical observations on artificial sensations in
a clinic in St. Petersburg (Smirnov 1974). If certain thalamic
nuclei of the patients were excited by implanted electrodes
while specific afferent pathways remained unstimulated, pa-
tients often sensed phosphenes with an apparent position in
visual space. These "blobs" at first lacked any specific object
quality, but with repetitive thalamic stimulation they acquired
figural identity (e.g., square, "flame," etc.). My speculation is
that the neural systems for providing the necessary activation for
the P-conscious aspect of experience were artificially used in
isolation and initially created a form of "pure visual conscious-
ness" without access to specific representation. However, with
repeated stimulation specific representations were also re-
cruited and integrated into the activation system. (By the way,
through artificial stimulation of these thalamic structures Smir-
nov and colleagues (Smirnov 1974) were able to vary the P-
conscious aspect of the mental state not in a discrete, all-or-none
manner but on a continuum from "dull," unclear, and weak, to
clear, bright, and intense visual feeling.)
Thus Block's fears about the impossibility of measuring P-
conscious aspects of experience are not substantiated. Although
the "attensity" (to use Titchener's [1908] term) or subjective
clarity of visual experiences irrespective of the form or specific
representation involved can be measured by several psycho-
physical scales; and although this ties A-conscious and P-con-
scious properties together by showing that it may be impossible
to study the latter without the former being involved in subjects'
reports, P-consciousness can nevertheless be measured, at least
indirectly.
Second, Block seems to imply (sect. 4) that concepts have only
a semantic/linguistic quality. But visual "abstractions" of certain
classes of forms and patterns may also exist.
Third, Block seems to suppose (sect. 4.2, para. 7) that if some
experience cannot be conceptualized or identified by some
concrete category, then mental states or processes are nonrepre-
sentational. But mental representations themselves are a system
of hierarchically organized entities in which more differentiated
and specific ones grow out of less specific and less differentiated
ones microgenetically. Thus, at the basis of this system we may
find "sensations as such" without much content except, perhaps,
of general subjective clarity and maybe vague "whereness" (cf.,
e.g., Hanlon 1991). In other words, "nonrepresentational" men-
tal states are "embryonic" states of representational ones, repre-
senting the fact of experiencing that "something is existential"
(that is, belongs to the category of existing objects). Both in
ontogeny and in the liiicrogenesis of cognitive processes it is a
long path from being conscious of "don't know what" to being
conscious of a definite object. Another problem is that some
neural modules may be needed to provide the subject with the
capacity for P-consciousness (cf. thalamus, RF). (But then I have
some difficulties in considering modules that are 100% non-
representational.)
Finally, in the target article, diminished P-consciousness is
declared to be unreal (sect. 7, para. 8). But what if there is still a
special module or set of modules for P-consciousness? And what
if, either by the means of pharmacological treatment or by direct
brain stimulation, we can vary the degree of activity of this
system? I am convinced that subjects can report corresponding
changes in their general "feeling." Although the means of
registering these changes require A-consciousness mecha-
nisms, the change in the state of P-consciousness is effected
through the change in the state of P-consciousness module(s).
Fallacies or analyses?
Jennifer Church
Department of Philosophy, Vassar College, Poughkeepsie, NY 12601.
church@vassar.edu
Abstract: To demonstrate that a fallacy is committed, Block needs to
convince us of two things: first, that the concept of phenomenal con-
sciousness is distinct from that of access consciousness, and second, that
it picks out a different property from that of access consciousness. I raise
doubt about both of these claims, suggesting that the concept of a
phenomenal property is the concept of a property to which we have a
special sort of access.
Ned Block accuses several writers of a fallacy - the fallacy of
equivocation. According to him, from premises about what is
true of consciousness in one sense of the term, conclusions about
an entirely different sense of consciousness are drawn. The two
senses of consciousness at issue are "access-consciousness,"
understood as a state's "availability for use in reasoning and
rationally guiding speech and action," and "phenomenal con-
sciousness," understood as the experiential aspect of a state.
To demonstrate that a fallacy is committed, Block needs to
convince us of two things: first, that there are indeed two
separate concepts at issue, and second, that the shift from claims
that use concept to claims that use the other is not justified - as it
might be, for example, by an argument to the effect that the two
separate concepts actually pick out the same property. I am not
sure that he has done either.
As Block himself reminds us, the concept of a "phenomenal"
property is notoriously elusive, but he refuses to be embar-
rassed by this fact. Even those who suspect the concept of
incoherence can, he claims, recognize that it is a different
concept from that of "accessibility to reasoning, etc." I'm not
sure what it means to judge that an incoherent concept (as
opposed to each of its incompatible constituents) is different
from some other concept; Block relies on examples (real and
imaginary) to demonstrate the distinction, but it is doubtful that
those who suspect incoherence can be persuaded in this way,
since an incoherent concept, by definition, can have no referent.
Most of the writers in question, however, seem to think that to
talk of phenomenal properties is merely a loose or imprecise way
of talking about what is more carefully rendered in terms of
various access relations. I agree with Block in thinking that the
shift from one way of talking to the other often occurs with very
little by way of justification, but I remain unconvinced that there
is a conflation of two distinct senses of consciousness.
As I see it, the reasons for thinking that the concept of a
"phenomenal" property is incoherent actually overlap with the
reasons for thinking that the concept of phenomenal conscious-
ness and the concept of access-consciousness are indeed the
same concept. To those of us with Kantian sympathies, anyway,
it seems that a state cannot have a phenomenal property (or,
equally, that it cannot count as an "experience," and there
cannot be "something it is like" to be in that state), unless it is a
certain way for, or to a subject. Which is to say, for a state to have
a phenomenal property it must stand in a particular relation to
the subject of that state. But, assuming that we have done away
with the Cartesian idea of an insubstantial or homuncular self, a
state can stand in some relation to the subject of that state only if
it stands in some relation(s) to various other states of that
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1995) 18:2
251

Commentaryi'Block: Confusion about consciousness
subject. So if one insists, as most advocates of phenomenal
properties do, that a state such as the state of pain has the
phenomenal character it has regardless of its relations with other
states of the subject, one encounters a contradiction: the phe-
nomenal properties of a state must be properties had in virtue of
some relation between the state and a subject, yet they cannot
be relational properties because they are supposed to be intrin-
sic to the states that have them. If, on the other hand, one
accepts that phenomenal properties are relational properties, it
is plausible to suppose that the relevant relations are some sorts
of access relations - relations connecting the state to reasoning
and to rational action, for example - since these are just the sorts
of connections that shape an organism into a subject. If these are
not the access relations that constitute a subject, presumably
some other access relations (memory access, for example) are,
and it is these others that will be necessary for consciousness.
As I said, Block depends on examples to demonstrate the
independence of phenomenal consciousness and access-
consciousness. But in addition to underestimating the problems
posed by the charge of incoherence vis-a-vis phenomenal con-
sciousness, he seems to underestimate the resources available to
those who think that phenomenal consciousness is access-
consciousness. Consider the example of a noise that I suddenly
realize I have been hearing for the last hour. Block uses it to
show that, prior to my realization, there is phenomenal con-
sciousness without access-consciousness - thus that the two
types of consciousness are distinct. But the accessibility (i.e.,
the access potential) of the hearing experience is evident from
the fact that I do eventually access it. Moreover, it seems that I
would have accessed it sooner had it been a matter of greater
importance - and thus, in a still stronger sense, it was accessible
all along. Finally, it is not even clear that it was not actually
accessed all along insofar as it rationally guided my behavior in
causing me to speak louder, or move closer, and so on (similar
moves seem plausible in several of the other cases cited).
Accessibility, like its close cousin, verifiability, is a notoriously
accommodating notion. For this reason, among others, I am
partial to analyses that emphasize actual rather than potential
access - especially access by second-order thoughts, or what
Block calls "reflective consciousness." But that is another story.
I have noted some reasons to wonder whether the concept of
phenomenal consciousness, if it is coherent, is really different
from that of access-consciousness. Even if one grants the distinc-
tion, however, one could maintain that they refer to the same
property - just as the concept of water and the concept of H2O
may be thought to refer to the same property. Once one accepts
such an identity, there will be no fallacy in supposing that what is
true of access-consciousness must be true of phenomenal con-
sciousness as well - just as there is no fallacy in supposing that
what is true of H2O must be true of water as well. There are, of
course, complicated and controversial metaphysical debates
(concerning the nature of properties, essences, and identity, to
name a few) that have a bearing on this line of reasoning; and,
like Block, I find that the reasoning of the cited writers is often
unclear. If one is prepared to treat consciousness as a natural
kind, however, then the fact that in real life phenomenal con-
sciousness and access-consciousness seem always to occur to-
gether may be treated as strong evidence in favor of the hypoth-
esis that they are indeed one and the same thing.
At the end of his paper Block briefly entertains this possibil-
ity, remarking that phenomenal consciousness and access-
consciousness may "amount to much the same thing empirically
even though they differ conceptually. "He acknowledges that his
imagined case of "superblindsight" (where there is complete
access-consciousness but no phenomenal consciousness) never
actually occurs, yet he goes on to suggest the existence of real
cases (such as Sperling's [1960] letter display experiment),
where phenomenal consciousness and access-consciousness do
part company. Again, however, in my opinion Block overesti-
mates the power of examples, because he underestimates both
the need to defend the concept of phenomenal consciousness
against charges of incoherence, and the potential for endless
accommodation by the concept of access-consciousness.
The path not taken
Daniel Dennett
Center for Cognitive Studies, Tufts University, Medford, MA 02155.
ddennett@emerald.tufts.edu
Abstract: The differences Block attempts to capture with his putative
distinction between P-consciousness and A-consciousness are more
directly and perspicuously handled in terms of differences in richness of
content and degree of influence. Block's critiques, based on his mis-
begotten distinction, evaporate on closer inspection.
Block amply demonstrates that there is ubiquitous confusion
among researchers about consciousness, and he is right to locate
a major source of the confusion in the spectrum of differences
he attempts to tame with his purported distinction between P-
consciousness and A-consciousness. That distinction may start
out seeming quite intuitive. Indeed, Block relies heavily on
appeals to our intuitions to hold it in place until he can get it
properly defined and defended, but once that effort gets under-
way, he runs into a swarm of difficulties from which there is
apparently no escape. I for one found it difficult to keep track of
the tangle of objections and counterobjections, exemptions,
caveats and promissory notes, and will be interested to see if
other commentators can find their way into, and back out of, the
maze Block has created.
There is an alternative, much more direct path that Block
ignores, perhaps because it is deeply counterintuitive at first
blush: the varieties of consciousness he thinks he sees falling
under P-consciousness and A-consciousness can all be accom-
modated under the two rough quantitative headings of richness
of content and degree of influence. Some episodes of mental life
have impoverished contents, whereas others are so rich in
content - so full of information about the perceived world, for
instance - that one has the sense that no practical description or
catalog could do justice to them. The latter - and they are the
normal, everyday episodes of consciousness - Block would
declare to be instances of P-consciousness because they are,
shall we say, phenomenologicaUy impressive. The former, such
as actual (as opposed to imaginary) cases of blindsight, have such
vanishingly little content that subjects standardly deny that they
are conscious of any content at all, though forced-choice guess-
ing famously demonstrates that there was some content at work
there after all, capable of influencing some choices, but unable
to serve as the cue or prompt for rational action (Weiskrantz
1986; 1990). Can such simple differences of quantity, not quality,
do justice to the variety of phenomena? Don't we need some-
thing altogether different - qualia (or their absence) - as well? I
have said no, and have defended this claim at length (Dennett
1991), but it was apparently too drastic a strdke for some readers
to accept - or in the case of Block, to be recognized as a serious
alternative to be dealt with at all. Yet now Block has done my
theory a fine service: nothing could make my admittedly coun-
terintuitive starting point easier to swallow than Block's involun-
tary demonstration of the pitfalls one must encounter if one
turns one's back on it and tries to take his purported distinction
seriously.
The main trouble with Block's attempt to motivate two inde-
pendent dividing lines (where I would put differences in degree)
is that in the normal run of things, his two kinds of consciousness
run together, as he himself acknowledges several times. He
cannot provide clear examples of A-consciousness without
P-consciousness or P-consciousness without A-consciousness,
and although he claims that both are "conceptually possible," it
252
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1995) 18:2

Commentary /Block: Confusion about consciousness
is unclear what this comes to. Moreover, if these two sorts of
consciousness are conceptually independent, as Block insists,
then he is not entitled to several claims he makes about P-
consciousness. Consider, for instance, his discussion of the
phenomenon in which the solution to a difficult problem sud-
denly comes to you without conscious thought. He surmises that
the "high-level reasoning processes" by which you solve such a
problem are not P-conscious (in addition to not being A-
conscious). How does he know this? How could he know this, or
even deem this more probable than not? He notes - but is
apparently not embarrassed by - a similar problem with his
account of blindsight. "Note that the claim that P-consciousness
is missing in blindsight is just an assumption. I decided to take
the blindsight patient's word for his lack of P-consciousness of
stimuli in the blind field" (sect. 6, para. 21). But taking the
subject's word is using the best criterion for A-consciousness as
one's sole evidence of P-consciousness. Block himself demon-
strates thereby that the very idea of a sort of consciousness
independent of access is incoherent.
Although Block discusses my theory of consciousness at some
length, his discussion always leans on the presupposition that
his putative distinction is in place. My theory of consciousness is
stranded, he concludes, between being trivially false (if a theory
of P-consciousness), nontrivially false (if a theory of "just" A-
consciousness), and banal if a theory of "a highly sophisticated
version of self-consciousness" (sect. 5, last para.). Because I not
only decline to draw any such distinction but argue at length
against any such distinction, Block's critique is simply question-
begging. I may be wrong to deny the distinction, but this could
not be shown by proclaiming the distinction, ignoring the
grounds I have given for denying it, and then showing what a
hash can be made of ideas I have expressed in other terms, with
other presuppositions. If Block thinks his distinction is too
obvious to need further defense, he has missed the whole point
of my radical alternative. This is a fundamental weakness in the
strategy Block employs, and it vitiates his discoveries of "falla-
cies" in the thinking of other theorists as well. Those of us who
are not impressed by his candidate distinction are free to run the
implication in the other direction: since our reasoning is not
fallacious after all, his distinction must be bogus.
What would a good test of the two different starting points be?
Look at their treatment of a particular phenomenon - for
example, blindsight - from a neutral point of view. In my own
discussion of blindsight (Dennett 1991, pp. 332-43) I argued
that if a patient could be trained to treat blindsight stimuli as
self-cuing or prompting, this would amount to restoring the
patient's consciousness of events in the scotoma, the only re-
maining difference between such experience and normal vision
being the relative poverty of the content of what could be
gleaned from the scotoma. Relative poverty of content - not
"absence of qualia" or lack of P-consciousness - was a non-
optional hallmark of blindsight, I claimed. To drive the point
home, I asked counterfactually, what we would conclude if we
encountered someone who claimed to suffer from blindsight of a
strange high-content variety - correctly "guessing" not just the
words written on a page placed in the putative scotoma, for
example, but their typeface and color, for instance. I claimed
this would stretch our credulity beyond the limit; we would not
and should not take somebody's word that they were "just
guessing" in the absence of all consciousness (all P-conscious-
ness, in Block's terms) in such a case. Block, interestingly, thinks
otherwise. He does not refer to my discussion of blindsight, but
coins the term "superblindsight" to discuss much the same sort
of imaginary case, and supposes without argument that in such a
case we would credit the patient: "The superblindsighter himself
contrasts what it is like to know visually about an X in his blind
field and an X in his sighted field. There is something it is like to
experience the latter, but not the former" (sect. 4.1, para. 5).
Now here we have a direct difference of implication between
the two starting points - a useful point of contrast even if the
cases are not likely to come up for empirical confirmation! But
the issue is not yet joined if we imagine the case the way Block
invites us to do, with the huge normal difference in richness of
content between the sighted field and the scotoma or blind field.
If our imaginary patient, like all actual blindsight patients yet
studied, can identify the typeface, size, colors, and textures of
the sighted-field X and its background, but can only identify that
there is an X (as opposed to an O) in the blind field, this would be
a large difference in richness of content that would account, on
my view, for the patient's willingness to draw the sort of contrast
Block imagines the superblindsighter to draw: it is "like some-
thing" to detect the X in the sighted field, and it isn't like
anything to detect the X in the blind field.
For Block to put his claim about blindsight in direct competi-
tion with my alternative, he must control for richness of content,
which I claim is the only other important variable; he must
stipulate - in whichever way he chooses - that the richness in
content is the same in both fields. The patient can tell us no
more about the X in the sighted field than about the X in the
blind field - either because the former is bizarrely impoverished
or the latter is bizarrely rich. Take the latter case first: would you
"take the subject's word," as Block says, that it wasn't like
anything at all for him to come to know, swiftly and effortlessly,
that there was a bright orange Times Roman italic X about two
inches high, on a blue-green background, with a pale gray
smudge on the upper right arm, almost touching the intersec-
tion? (That's a sample of the sort of richness of content normally
to be gleaned from the sighted field, after all.) I for one would
wonder what sort of lexical amnesia or madness had overcome
anybody who could gather that much information from a glance
and yet deny having any conscious visual experience. Alter-
natively, if all our imaginary patient can tell us about the X in the
sighted field is that it was an X, not an O, I think most people
would be baffled about what he could possibly mean by his
insistence that nevertheless he had "P-consciousness" of the
sighted field, but not of the blind field (in which he made the
same discrimination).
Imaginary cases are of limited value in such theoretical
explorations, but this time I think the flight of fancy nicely
reveals how Block mislocates the issue. It is not that we others
are "conflating" two sorts of consciousness; it is that he is inflating
differences in degree into imaginary differences in kind.
Breakthrough on the consciousness front
or much ado about nothing?
N. F. Dixon
Department of Psychology, University College London, London WC1E 6BT,
United Kingdom
Abstract: Propositions as to the nature of consciousness, based on
disorders of perception that result from brain damage, and taking
insufficient account of the numerous ways in which normal subjects may
deviate from that "usual" sequence of events (input —* subjective
awareness —» output) risk increasing rather than diminishing any existing
confusion about the function of consciousness.
Few could argue with the unsurprising proposition that being
conscious of something is not the same as acting on that informa-
tion, or conversely, that we may not do anything about much of
which we are aware. Block's treatment of this truism is, how-
ever, not above criticism. First, it is itself an oversimplification
of what are really very complex issues. If the purpose is to tackle
the "dangerous" conflation of P-consciousness and A-conscious-
ness there are at least six situations which need to be considered:
1. S is aware of something (P-consciousness) to which he tries
respond but because, say, curarized, fails to do so (i.e., access-
consciousness without access).
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1995) 18:2
253

Commentary /Block: Confusion about consciousness
2. S fails to respond to something of which he is aware,
because he chooses not to (i.e., a case of voluntary prevention of
A-consciousness actually evoking a response).
3. S has P-consciousness of a stimulus to which he uncon-
sciously (or involuntarily) responds, as in the case of a startle
response. This scenario is complicated by the fact that he may or
may not be conscious of his response or of exactly what preceded
it. Compare, for example, CNS-mediated responses like the
startle reflex with such ANS reactions as facial vasodilation. On
the grounds that response time to the former is much faster than
to the latter (after all, we don't talk about a "blush reflex") we
have the paradoxical possibility that A-consciousness may medi-
ate involuntary behavior, the physiological bases of which are
usually associated with unconscious responding!
4. S is aware of something (P-consciousness) he mistakenly
believes caused his response when, in fact, the latter was
triggered by cerebral events which occurred prior to its phe-
nomenal representation (see Libet et al. 1983). Quite apart from
reducing the whole notion of A-consciousness to a delusional
figment of P-consciousness, this scenario calls into question any
attempts to divide up consciousness into Ps and As without first
determining or at least deciding what consciousness is. If it is a
mere epiphenomenon then distinctions between Ps and As are
meaningless.
5. S responds to external stimuli of which he was (or claims to
have been) unaware. This is the situation which Block uses to
make his point about distinctions between P and A conscious-
ness. But once again the issues involved are rather more com-
plex than he leads us to suppose. Thus, though unaware of
the external stimulus S may or may not be aware (i.e., have P-
consciousness) of the fact that he is being stimulated (e.g.,
compare tachistoscopic presentations of a stimulus with pro-
longed presentations at intensities below the aware threshold).
Similarly, though presumably unaware of the contingency be-
tween the stimulus and his response, he may or may not be
aware of making a response. The relationship between P- and
A-consciousness is further confounded by the finding (Groeger
1984; see also Dixon 1981) that contingent responses initiated by
stimuli for which S had partial (i.e., P-conscious) information
may differ qualitatively from those causally related to the same
stimuli but without any intervening P-consciousness (i.e., struc-
tural similarities between stimulus and response are replaced by
semantic relationships between the two).
Of a similar genre are those interesting situations wherein S
responds inappropriately because unable to distinguish be-
tween two P-consciousness experiences, one real, the other in
hypnotically induced hallucination (see Hilgard 1977, p. 99). In
such cases are there one or two A-consciousness experiences?
The same might be asked for another, less uncommon situation,
that of so-called absent-mindedness (see Reason & Mycielska
1982), wherein S intends one pattern of behaviour but, through
force of habit, carries out another. Of all the situations dis-
cussed, it is this one which casts the greatest doubt on the
usefulness of hiving off A- from P-consciousness.
6. Finally, any distinction between the two sorts of conscious-
ness is further clouded by those situations wherein for emotional
reasons S suppresses consciousness of the external scene yet
nevertheless shows - by, for example, some ANS reaction - that
he has unconsciously registered its meaning. The data from
numerous studies of perceptual defense and the time-honoured
clinical observation that patients presenting with hysterical
blindness are remarkably adept at avoiding obstacles placed in
their path exemplify this scenario. As to the latter, are we to
conclude that there is such a state or function as unconscious
access-consciousness?
So much for a by-no-means exhaustive list of instances which
exemplify the extraordinarily diverse nature of possible relation-
ships that can obtain between brain, mind, behavior, and the
external world. Faced with this plethora of possible interactions,
it is not immediately clear how partitioning consciousness into
two states, P and A, when either can occur without the other, or
one after the other, or both together, helps our understanding of
either.
My last point concerns the empirical grounds on which Block
bases his argument. Unlike the situations listed above, they
involve the behaviour and/or introspections of people who have
suffered brain damage. Interesting though it may be, such
evidence is, for any general theory of consciousness, at best
dubious, at worst irrelevant, even misleading. Not only may
organic syndromes include altered states of consciousness
and/or a variety of compensatory mechanisms not usually found
in connection with undamaged brains, but the number of cases
studied hardly qualifies as a scientifically valid sample for the
making of any sweeping generalisations. The number of (re-
putedly) thirsty blindsight patients studied near a glass of water
is not, I suspect, very large. And even if it were, how could we be
sure that people so afflicted wouldn't feel, at some P-conscious
level, deserving of something a little stronger?
The only justification for yet another concept in an area
already overloaded with vague labels for ill-defined mental
processes is that the new concept refers to some constant
function. If one compares the sustained conscious attention
necessitated by, say, sinking a long shot on the putting-green
with the disruptive effects of conscious effort in other high-grade
skills, the case for a concept of A-consciousness as some sort of
"lubricant" is hardly justified. There is certainly a difference
between being aware of something and reacting to this fact, but
not, I would suggest, in the quality of consciousness concerned.
Attaching rather more importance to my own introspective data
than to other people's blindsight I would submit that differences
in the attention afforded elements of P-consciousness are per-
haps more important for theories of consciousness than how
these elements affect subsequent behaviour.
Is consciousness of perception really
separable from perception?
Martha J. Farah
Department of Psychology, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA
19104-6196. mfarah@cattell.psych.upenn.edu
Abstract: Although not the main point of his target article, Block
defends the view that perception and awareness of perception could be
functions of different brain systems. I will argue that the available data
do not support this view, and that Block's defense of the view rests on
problematic eonstruals of the "executive system" and of the components
of information-processing models.
Schacter's model of perception-awareness dissociations, with
its box labeled "consciousness," has been criticized by anti-
Cartesian modularists, including me. The model is interesting
and worthy of discussion because it embodies a particular view
of consciousness in a very explicit way. Specifically, it includes a
component that is necessary for phenomenal consciousness of
perception, but not necessary for perception itself. The idea that
there is some separate brain substrate dedicated to conscious-
ness goes back at least as far as Descartes' theorizing about the
pineal gland, and seems justified in our modern scientific
framework by the observation that localized brain damage can
sometimes seem to impair conscious awareness of perception
but not the perception itself. However, a closer look at such
cases reveals that perception is not, in fact, normal. I have
suggested that the correlation that exists between degraded
perception and loss of phenomenal awareness is more consistent
with the view that conscious awareness (both the access and
phenomenal kinds) depends on the quality of information repre-
sentation within perceptual systems, rather than on the involve-
ment of a separate consciousness system (Farah 1994).
Block gives two arguments in defense of Schacter's model.
254
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1995) 18:2

CommentaryVBlock: Confusion about consciousness
The first rests on the idea that the Phenomenal Consciousness
System is also required for integrating the outputs of the various
modules and transmitting information to the Executive System.
From this he infers that the loss of such a component would
result in just the degraded perception to which I have already
referred, because such individuals cannot integrate and trans-
mit to their executive system the unconsciously perceived
information. Thus, according to Block, the fact that implicit or
covert perceptual performance is generally inferior to normal
performance on the same tasks should not lead us to reject the
model of Schacter or, more generally, models that feature
consciousness boxes.
But do the perceptual tasks discussed by Block and Schacter
require information integration and the involvement of the
Executive System? For example, why would detecting or lo-
calizing a spot of light require cross-module integration? Even
the association of a face with semantic knowledge about the
person is hypothesized to be a within-module operation accord-
ing to the model (see sect. 2 of the target article). The role of the
Executive System in these tasks is also questionable. We have
some independent information about the kinds of tasks that do
and do not require executive processing, and the perceptual
tasks in question do not. The idea of an Executive System in
psychology derives partly from the behavior of patients with
prefrontal damage whose reasoning and actions seem poorly
orchestrated or disorganized. Indeed, such patients provide the
most direct evidence for the existence of a distinct and dissocia-
ble system in charge of executive functions. But empirically,
prefrontal damage of the kind that impairs executive functions
does not impair the ability to localize spots of light, recognize
faces, or read printed words. Nor is it apparent why, a priori, we
would expect such simple tasks to involve executive processes.
What about the possibility that consciousness is like the water
in a hydraulic computer? According to Block, "even if there
could be an electrical computer that is isomorphic to the hydrau-
lic computer but works without water, one should not conclude
that the water in the hydraulic system does nothing" (sect. 2,
para. 9). I grant that, for all we know, there could be aspects of
the implementation of an information-processing system that
determine whether or not that system has consciousness. By
implementation I mean all of the ways in which the physical
substrates of two systems might differ and still perform the same
information processing as diagrammed in a box-and-arrow
model. However, this type of difference would not be reflected
in a functionalist information-processing model. The boxes and
arrows ought to be the same for Block's electronic and hydraulic
systems if they are indeed isomorphic. Hence if one wanted to
pursue an account of consciousness based on the roles of
implementation-specific aspects of the system, such as the water
in a hydraulic computer, one would not hypothesize a Phenome-
nal Consciousness System, or any function component dedi-
cated to consciousness. The parts (boxes and arrows) of a func-
tional information-processing model <lo not correspond to just
any parts (e.g., water) of a physical system; rather, they are
constrained to be entities that take information as input, store or
transform it, and give information as output. I conclude that, in
the absence of what Block calls "superblindsight" (or its equiva-
lents in prosopagnosia, neglect, or alexia), there is no reason to
believe in a consciousness module whose function is to take
input from perceptual systems and transduce them into con-
sciousness.
Guilty consciousness
George Graham
Departments of Philosophy and Psychology, University of Alabama at
Binvingham, Binvingham, AL 35294. arhu006@uabdpo
Abstract: Should we distinguish between access and phenomenal con-
sciousness? Block says yes and that various pathologies of consciousness
support and clarify the distinction. The commentary charge that the
distinction is neither supported nor clarified by the clinical data. It
recommends an alternative reading of the data and urges Block to clarify
the distinction.
Imagine that the patient XYZ (case adapted from Bauer 1984), an
untenured professor of philosophy at Rutgers University, suf-
fered bilateral traumatic hematomas of the occipitotemporal
regions and posterior temporal lobes, causing him to be severely
prosopagnosic. The prosopagnosia degraded his recognition of
family members, departmental colleagues (such as Jerry Fodor),
and his own mirror image. On one occasion, staff neurologists at
the hospital where he was treated dressed XYZ's philosophy
department colleagues and clinical personnel in hospital attire
and asked the patient to point to individually named persons.
He performed at random level.
A modified decriminalized version of the Guilty Knowledge
Test (GKT; see Bauer 1984) was applied to the patient. Skin
conductance was recorded. Electrodermal responses revealed
much more accurate discrimination between correct and inap-
propriate names, suggesting that the patient "recognized" col-
leagues' facial identities at the visceroautonomic level. As an
attending physician reported with a touch of metaphor, "GKT
revealed an island of spared information in a sea of cognitive
insensitivity."
Enter Ned Block, whose rich and fascinating target article
contains far more content than I can cover in this commentary. I
shall place him in the role of attending neurologist to pinpoint
primary concerns with his article.
"Were you conscious of Jerry Fodor?" "No," says XYZ, "I saw
someone but I certainly did not appreciate that he was Fodor."
"However using psychophysiological measures, we have shown
that you 'discriminated' Fodor from among those in your room,
despite his being dressed in hospital garb," says Block. "So
what?" says XYZ, somewhat impatiently.
Block does not wish to challenge XYZ's denial of being Fodor-
conscious. Block takes XYZ at his word. XYZ eyed Fodor and
knew that he saw someone but failed to recognize (overtly and
specifically) that it was Fodor. "So here is how I describe your
situation," says Block:
Cases of prosopagnosia and other modality-specific disorders of iden-
tification are cases in which two types of consciousness may be absent.
One, the access-type, figures in certain sorts of intelligent or rational
behavior, especially verbal behavior and introspective reports. The
other, phenomenal consciousness, consists in what it is like for a
subject to do or undergo something (to see, hear, smell, taste, and
have pains). Had you been phenomenally conscious of Fodor you
would have had a "Fodor-ish' visual image or perhaps a feeling of
familiarity when looking at Fodor. But you did not. So phenomenal
consciousness of Fodor was absent. Meanwhile, had you been access-
conscious of Fodor you would have reported his presence or directed
activity at him in a manner distinctively appropriate to his presence.
But again you did not. So access-consciousness of Fodor was also
missing.
XYZ is no slouch. He is a philosopher. He is at Rutgers. He
has views about mind, is puzzled by Block's distinction, and
worries about whether he is better off thinking of himself in
either of the following ways:
More-Block-than-Block 
(MBB): Adopt Block's two types
of consciousness distinction, but acknowledge that access-
consciousness can be degraded, and say that he (XYZ) was
access-conscious of Fodor because this helps to explain his
arousal at Fodor's presence. Admittedly, visceroautonomic
arousal is not a paradigmatic form of rational or intelligent
behavior, but it does prime or poise persons for intelligent, goal-
directed activity. It could have set the behavioral stage for XYZ's
communicating with Fodor if he also had been phenomenally
consciousness of Fodor and then asked Fodor why he was in his
(XYZ's) hospital room.
Unmitigated what-it-is-like-theorist 
(WLT): Reject Block's
distinction. Then assert (Flanagan 1992) that all consciousness is
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1995) 18:2
255

Commentary/Block: Confusion about consciousness
phenomenal consciousness and that a person can be informa-
tionally sensitive without that information making a subjective
or conscious appearance. XYZ was informationally sensitive to
Fodor without being Fodor-conscious.
What recommends Block's diagnosis of XYZ over either MBB
or WLT? Nothing I can spot.
Consider MBB. A central presupposition of cognitive neuro-
psychology is that brain damage often produces selective im-
pairment of specific cognitive functions. This is called the
"fractionation assumption" (Caramazza 1992). The fractionation
assumption does not require that a specific component of intel-
ligence be totally damaged, only that damage be sufficiently
severe to be noticeable behaviorally. Cognitive neuropsychol-
ogy (McCarthy & Warrington 1990) is filled with descriptions of
neurologically impaired and partially degraded forms of intel-
ligent behavior. So it is to perch on a thin reed to insist that
access-consciousness figures in rational action or intelligent
behavior, but then to disallow, as Block apparently does, that
deficits and impairments are very small windows through which
access-consciousness can still be glimpsed. Fodor-arousal may
not gain XYZ tenure, but it may reveal attenuated access-
consciousness of Fodor.
If human intelligence can be partially degraded, then so it
seems can access-consciousness. Between plenty of access-
consciousness and no access-consciousness lies the huge con-
ceptual midway of some access-consciousness.. Fodor-arousal
could inhabit that midway.
Now consider WLT. Discordance between informational and
experiential sensitivity does not require invoking access-
consciousness. XYZ's arousal demonstrates that Fodor has
meaning for him even though Fodor does not have phenomenal
meaning. So what allows Block to assume that phenomenal
consciousness is a restricted type of consciousness and that there
is an additional type?
Nothing in Block's argument for access-consciousness indi-
cates that reference to access-consciousness will prove useful in
understanding agnosia. In the end the justification is concep-
tual: if imaginatively there could be robust intelligence without
phenomenal consciousness, then there should be a distinction
between access and phenomenal consciousness. Or again: if we
can picture a zombie version of XYZ gaining tenure at Rutgers
regardless of lacking phenomenal consciousness, then there
should be a distinction between XYZ's phenomenal conscious-
ness of Fodor and his access consciousness of Fodor.
But why accept the conceptual possibility of zombies? What
guarantee do we have that a zombie's performance would be
sufficient for tenure? Zombie after tenure? Perhaps. But before?
Hardly.
Nietzsche once remarked "one can lie with the mouth, but
with the accompanying grimace one nevertheless tells the
truth." XYZ is no liar but his "accompanying grimace" reveals
that in some sense he knew that Fodor was present. Call this
sense S. S either is or is not an instance of consciousness. If the
only consciousness is phenomenal, then S is not an instance of
consciousness, for S is not phenomenal consciousness. If, how-
ever, something nonphenomenal can count as consciousness,
then why not count S - Fodor arousal - as consciousness? Why
not specifically count it as an instance of access-consciousness?
Here is my worry in a nutshell: Block wants to raise the access-
consciousness threshold so as to exclude something like S from
counting as access-consciousness, but it is not clear where or
how the threshold is to be set. He also wants to include a form of
consciousness other than phenomenal consciousness, but it is
not clear why.
Perhaps there is something in Block's argument I just do not
see. Certainly on other occasions and in response to other sorts
of psychopathological data I am eager to draw distinctions within
the domain of consciousness (Graham & Stephens 1994). I am
not in general opposed to consciousness distinctions. I would
hate to be blind to the wisdom of Block's distinction.
Phenomenal fallacies and conflations
Gilbert Harman
Department of Philosophy, Princeton University, Princeton, NJ 08455-1006.
ghh@princeton.edu
Abstract: A "fallacy" is something like the sense-datum fallacy, involving
a logically invalid argument. A "conflation" is something like Block's
conflation of the (alleged) raw feel of an experience with what it is like to
have the experience. Trivially, a self is conscious of something only if it
accesses it. Substantive issues concern the nature of the conscious self
and the nature of access.
1. Fallacy. Block claims that a number of authors commit a
fallacy in discussing consciousness. To evaluate his claim, it may
be useful to have an example of a real logical fallacy. Here is one,
the sense-datum fallacy.
When you see something, what you are most directly aware of could
be the same even if there was nothing before you and you were
merely hallucinating.
So, when you see something, what you are most directly aware of
must be a purely mental sense-datum.
Apart from the truth or falsity of the conclusion of this
argument, the argument itself is logically fallacious, since it
has the same logical form as another argument that is clearly
invalid.
You can look for something even if there is nothing in your environ-
ment (or anywhere else in the world) of the sort you are looking for.
So, when you look for something, you are always looking for some-
thing mental.
The conclusion here clearly does not follow from the premises.
You may look for something that does not exist. In that case, you
aren't looking for something mental - an idea of the desired
object. That does exist and you already have it!
Similarly, you can see something that doesn't exist. From the
fact that what you are aware of may not exist, it does not follow
that what you are aware of is something mental. To suppose that
this does follow is to commit the sense-datum fallacy (Harman
1990).
It isn't clear that Block convicts anyone he mentions of a
logical fallacy in the sense in which the sense-datum fallacy is a
logical fallacy. That Block accepts the sense-datum theory is
clear from remarks such as the following. "Consider a perceptual
state of seeing a square. This state has a P-conscious content that
represents something, a square" (sect. 4, para. 9). "[SJuppose I
have an auditory experience as of something overhead, and a
simultaneous visual experience as of something overhead. . . .
The look and the sound are both as of something overhead, but
the two phenomenal contents represent this via different phe-
nomenal qualities" (sect. 4.2, para. 7).
Now I am not saying that anyone who accepts the sense-
datum theory of perception (as Block does) must have commit-
ted the sense-datum fallacy. One can only commit a fallacy by
arguing in a certain way. Block does not on this occasion argue
for those aspects of the sense-datum theory that he accepts, so
he cannot be accused of arguing fallaciously for them!
2. Conflation. Block also claims that various authors conflate
different kinds of consciousness. Here too it would be useful to
have an example of an actual conflation. A pertinent example
would be Block's conflating "what it is like" to have a certain
experience with the nonrepresentational "raw feel" of the expe-
rience, if any.
2.1. What is it like? Asking what it is like to have a particular
experience is similar to asking what someone means by a
particular expression (Harman 1993). I understand another's use
of an expression only if I can find an equivalent expression in my
own language (and sometimes I have to enlarge my language to
do so). Even if the meaning of an expression is determined by
the way the expression is used, telling me how the expression is
used will not tell me what it means unless I can use what you tell
256
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1995) 18:2

Commentary /Block: Confusion about consciousness
me to find (or invent) an equivalent expression of my own.
Similarly, even if the character of an experience is determined
by its physical or functional aspects, telling me those aspects will
not tell me what it is like to undergo that experience unless I can
use what you tell me to remember or imagine myself undergo-
ing the experience (Nagel 1974).
2.2. Representation versus raw feel. Experiences typically have
representational ("intentional") content! Perceptual experience
represents one as oriented within a particular environment, for
example. Two questions arise about this. First, do all experi-
ences have representational content or are there raw feels
without such content? For example, are sensations raw feels?
Second, if there are raw feels, do perceptual experiences
consist in raw feels that serve as the representations with the
relevant perceptual content? I have elsewhere (Harman 1990)
reviewed arguments that sensations are not raw feels but are
instead experiences representing events in parts of one's body.
Block disagrees, although his orgasm example (sect. 4.2, para. 7)
is not the obvious counterexample he appears to believe it is. I
have also reviewed (in Harman 1990) arguments that perceivers
are not and cannot become aware of those qualities of their
experience (the splotches of "mental paint," as it were) that
serve to represent aspects of the environment. Here again Block
disagrees.
2.3. Consciousness as access to the self. Conscious experi-
ences do not float around unattached to selves. A conscious
experience is always the experience of some self S. An event
with representational content or raw feel (if there is such a thing)
can exist within S without being one of S's conscious experi-
ences, for example, a representation of stomach acidity used in
digestive functioning or a representation of edges used in visual
processing. For S to experience E consciously, S (and not just
some subsystem of S) must consciously access the relevant feel
or content.
So, there is a sense in which it is (or should be) trivial and
uncontroversial that consciousness is "access-consciousness." A
substantive theory of consciousness necessarily involves a the-
ory of what constitutes a self and of what constitutes access to
that self. A theory that identifies the essence of a self with
rationality (especially including rational control of action and
rational thought), will suppose that access to the self is access to
rationality, the exact details varying with the theory in question.
2.4. Three distinctions. There is a distinction between (la)
content and raw feel (if such exists) that is accessed by the self in
the sense that it is experienced by the self and (lb) content and
raw feel that is not accessed by the self in this sense. If there are
raw feels (which many theorists have argued against), there is a
distinction between (2a) the content of a representation and (2b)
the raw feel of a representation. There is also a distinction
between (3a) and those features of an event and (3b) those
features of an event that do not constitute what it is like to
experience the content and feel of the event.
Block's purported distinction between "access consciousness"
and "phenomenal consciousness" appears to conflate these three
different distinctions. In particular, his distinction appears to
conflate the (alleged) raw feel of an experience (2b) with what it
is like to have the experience (3a). These are clearly different
because (i) what it is like to have an experience can include
having an experience with a certain content and (ii) it is in
dispute whether raw feels are ever experienced but it is not in
dispute that there is something that it is like to have one or
another experience.
Furthermore, "access consciousness" is redundant, since to
access an experience is simply to be conscious of it, allowing for
substantive disagreements about what a conscious self is and
what sort of access counts as consciousness.
Finally, I do not see that Block convicts any of the theorists
that he discusses of any conflations in the sense of "conflation" in
which his own distinction between "active consciousness" and
"phenomenal consciousness" seems to represent one.
Blocking out the distinction between
sensation and perception: Superblindsight
and the case of Helen
Nicholas Humphrey
Darwin College, Cambridge University, Cambridge, CB3 9EU,
United Kingdom
Abstract: Block's notion of P-consciousness catches too much in its net.
He would do better to exclude all states that do not have a sensory
component. I question what he says about my work with the "blind"
monkey, Helen.
I am all for Block's distinction between phenomenal and access-
consciousness. But it is a shame he does not have the courage of
his own convictions, and so fails to make as radical or clean a
division as is needed. His P-consciousness is itself something of a
mongrel, including a whole lot that (to my mind) has no phe-
nomenal content at all.
In A History of the Mind (Humphrey 1992) I argued that to be
phenomenally conscious is to be conscious of bodily sensations
("bodily" being widely interpreted to include all the sensory
surface - eyes, ears, nose, as-well as skin) and that that is it,
nothing else counts. Although one can be P-conscious of itches,
colours, sounds, and so on, one cannot be P-conscious of, say,
chairs, numbers, or sentences. The latter are simply in the
wrong domain.
Block notes (n. 13) that "The distinction [between P- and A-
consciousness] has some similarity to the sensation/perception
distinction. . . See Humphrey (1992) for an interesting discus-
sion." But anyone who looks this up will find Humphrey arguing
not just that there is some similarity here, but that the distinc-
tion is - at least it ought to be - the very same one.
Take the case of "what it is like to see a glass of water." In my
book almost everything that it is like to see a glass of water is
comprised by having the visual sensations of coloured light, and
almost nothing by having the elaborated perception or thought
that this is in fact a glass of water. I say "almost everything" and
"almost nothing," because there is of course a certain difference
at a phenomenal level between seeing X as glass of water and
seeing X as something else (or, as Wittgenstein might have
suggested, between hearing the exclamation "Block!" as a re-
quest for a building block and hearing the exclamation "Block!"
as a greeting to the philosopher). But if there is indeed a bit of
difference, it js only because perceptual content can have a
marginal top-down effect on the structure of the sensory field -
on figure-ground relations and so on - and not because the idea
of its being a glass of water (or a blockish sort of Block) directly
enters phenomenal consciousness.
I agree with Block that there has been confusion about
precisely what aspect of consciousness is missing in blindsight.
And in the past I myself have probably contributed to the
confusion (although in A History of the Mind, where I suggest
that while visual sensation is missing in blindsight, some motor-
related aspects of visual perception are left intact, I get it nearer
right.) A lot of what Block says here is good, but I should take this
chance to correct several misapprehensions in his references to
my study of the monkey, Helen (sect. 4.1, para. 7).
1. Helen, several years after removal of the visual cortex,
developed a virtually normal capacity for ambient spatial vision,
such that she could move around under visual guidance just like
any other monkey. This was certainly unprompted, and in that
respect "super" blindsight; but in other respects her capacity for
vision was much less than super. For, as I wrote in my case
report on Helen (Humphrey 1974), "With the important excep-
tion of her spatial vision she appeared to be totally agnosia After
years of experience she never showed any signs of recognising
even those objects most familiar to her, whether the object was a
carrot, another monkey or myself." She could not even tell the
difference between a circle and a triangle. In this respect,
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1995) 18:2
257

Commentary /Block: Confusion about consciousness
therefore, she was not even the equal of ordinary human
blindsight cases - though in other ways her capacity was far
superior.
2. Helen did have a tiny tag of visual cortex left apparently
intact. If this were functioning at all (which it may not have
been), it would have given her a little patch of far-peripheral
vision, restricted to the top right-hand corner of the field of her
right eye. But to suggest, as Block does, that there is therefore
reason to suppose that Helen's visually guided behaviour was a
case of sight, not blindsight, is completely unwarranted. In my
1974 paper I listed a series of reasons for thinking that her
impressive capacity for spatial vision could not possibly have
been due to any residual visual cortex - including evidence that
she always fixated objects centrally.
3. Helen, when first tested, did confuse auditory events with
visual ones. Having been trained to reach for a light, she would
try to reach for a sound. But the construction Block puts on this is
just the opposite of what I myself originally argued. I never
suggested that Helen was having anything like auditory sensa-
tions when she saw a light. I suggested, on the contrary, that,
although she noticed the light, she was having no sensations, not
auditory or visual or anything else. As far as she was concerned,
the visual event was amodal: it might as well have been an
auditory one, and so she easily transferred her response from
one to the other. (I do not blame Block for getting this wrong,
since Cowey & Stoerig's [1992] reference to my unpublished
work, which he cites, gets it wrong too.)
On distinguishing phenomenal
consciousness from the representational
functions of mind
Leonard D. Katz
Department of Linguistics and Philosophy, MIT, Cambridge, MA 02139.
lkatz@athena.mit.edu
Abstract: One can share Block's aim of distinguishing "phenomenal"
experience from cognitive function and agree with much in his views,
yet hold that the inclusion of representational content within phenome-
nal content, if only in certain spatial cases, obscures this distinction. It
may also exclude some modular theories, although it is interestingly
suggestive of what may be the limits of the phenomenal penetration of
the representational mind.
Including some representational and intentional1 content
within phenomenal content obscures Block's valid conceptual
distinction between "immediate," "qualitative," or "phenome-
nal" experience and cognitive function. It also excludes theoreti-
cal alternatives that, in his criticism of the "target reasoning,"
Block has striven to keep open.
Introspection is often tricky. It is all too easy to misascribe
features of our thought and language to less representational
aspects of mind. This, I suspect, is what Block and others have
done, in arguing from first person examples to the conclusion
that "P-consciousness is often representational (sect. 3, para. 3).
Granted that there would be a phenomenal difference be-
tween normal seeing and "just knowing" what we normally see
in the absence of visual experience, it is less than clear that there
would be any similar phenomenal deficit relative to normal
people in someone who "just knew" the direction of a sound
while phenomenally aware of it as sound but not of its direction.
At least I am uncertain whether I am not like that myself. But
even if we grant Block that "what it is like to hear a sound as
coming from the left differs from what it is like to hear a sound as
coming from the right" (sect. 3, para. 3), it need not follow that
phenomenal content is sometimes intentional. For one could
surely admit that what it is like to be married is different from
what it is like to be single without admitting a phenomenal
content that is intrinsically social and institutional. Different
phenomenal experiences consequent on orienting or attending
to the left rather than to the right (and asymmetrical activation
of our emotionally asymmetrical hemispheres) when hearing,
like different life experiences when married, may constitute
the phenomenal differences without our having any special
phenomenal-and-intentional representations of leftness or of
matrimony. One need not conclude from this case "that differ-
ences in intentional content often make a P-conscious differ-
ence" (sect. 3, para. 3) by virtue of the P-conscious contents
themselves often having "an intentional aspect" (n. 4).
But suppose that a simple phenomenal leftishness does seem
to be involved. Although the point will not depend on views
about spectrum inversion, among those of us who accept this
possibility for phenomenal states generally (including Block
1990a), the point may be conveniently put thus: phenomenal
leftishness and phenomenal rightishness could in principle
switch their total functional, and hence representational, roles.
So these phenomenal contents do not include the intentional
contents "from the left" and "from the right" in themselves but at
most have only extrinsic functional roles of transmitting this
information within the larger system, for which alone, in conse-
quence of their use, they mean from the left or from the right.
The crux of the issue is that intentional content is supposed to
be at least rather broadly functional and system-relative,
whereas "P-consciousness is not a functional notion" (sect. 4,
para. 8). That is why Block believes that phenomenal conscious-
ness, but not access-consciousness, could go on inside a single
mental module (sect. 4, para. 8). But since Block also believes
that intentionality is functional and system-relative, he should
agree that to include intentionality in phenomenal conscious-
ness is pro tanto to exclude not only the modularist hypothesis
according to which there is a single P-consciousness module, but
also all other hypotheses in which each modality or instance of
P-consciousness depends directly only on what goes on in some
relatively restricted parts of the brain or mind. Moreover, if
representational content is determined by the functionality of
the organism in its environment, it will generally involve not
only much P-unconscious processing but often also much of the
external world.
But perhaps the examples Block uses (sects. 3, para. 2 and 4,
para. 10, and note 4), which all turn on spatial localization and
the like, do point to a way in which we sometimes have some
phenomenal sense of "intending" our thought beyond our phe-
nomenal selves. The P-consciousness accompanying attending
toward certain regions of space, in perception and in spatial
imagination (and perhaps also when we attend to addresses in
similar but nonspatial buffers), may be or reflect the demonstra-
tive mental gesture that - by calling on and connecting the right
unconscious processors and transducers, with their cooperation
and that of the world - makes that mental ostension mean
something determinate (not by virtue of how it feels but rather
by virtue of its causal relations). At the limit, the phenomenal
consciousness of thought may be just the phenomenal con-
sciousness of, so to speak, clicking on a certain region of a spatial
or other buffer. (It feels the same whatever mental "hypertext"
item is there.) Perhaps this is why some of us find that the
phenomenal content of our thinking consists in spatial or motor
imagery.
Maybe some such account will some day explain the poverty
of the phenomenal consciousness that accompanies representa-
tional thought, in contrast to the richness of visual sensation -
how it's often only very barely "like anything" at all to think,
without any vividly differentiated phenomenal consciousness to
match the amazing multiplicity conceptually contained in our
phenomenally unconscious representational mind (space per-
ception and motor plans, tailored to fit each other, are commen-
surate). In the meantime, keeping separate conceptual books for
representational content and what seem to be the less ho-
listically mediated phenomena of qualitative consciousness will
258
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1995) 18:2

Commentary I'Block: Confusion about consciousness
avoid prejudging the case against the modular theoretical alter-
natives. It will also avoid the confusion, under the heading
"content," of sensation with thought, and in general of (rela-
tively) unmediated presentation with meaning - the overcom-
ing of which I still regard as the outstanding contribution of the
twentieth-century philosophy of mind. But perhaps Block - by
limiting the overlap of representation and phenomenal experi-
ence roughly to the area we have (following him) just been
considering - is showing us how to avoid these pitfalls and how to
illumine the interface of experience and function while still
saving the phenomenal from more than an acceptably minor and
very limited holistic and externalist infection.
NOTE
1. In my discussion of Block I follow his usage of "intentional" for,
roughly, "fully representational" — so that all intentional states are
representational (see his note 4).
Triangulating phenomenal consciousness
Patricia Kitcher
Department of Philosophy, University of California, San Diego, La Mia, CA
92093. pwkitche@ucsd.edu
Abstract: This commentary offers two criticisms of Block's account of
phenomenal consciousness and a brief sketch of a rival account. The
negative points are that monitoring consciousness also involves the
possession of certain states and that phenomenal consciousness inevita-
bly involves some sort of monitoring. My positive suggestion is that
"phenomenal consciousness" may refer to our ability to monitor the rich
but preconceptual states that retain perceptual information for complex
processing.
Block locates phenomenal consciousness by offering two nega-
tive contrasts and a positive characterization. The central
negative contrast is with "access'-consciousness. Access-
consciousness involves highly processed, sophisticated repre-
sentations whose contents are (1) informationally promiscuous,
and (2) available to speech and the rational control of action. By
contrast, if phenomenal consciousness involves information at
all, it is presumably in some type of preconceptual form.
I find Block s second contrast somewhat puzzling. He sug-
gests that for both "phenomenal" and "access"-consciousness,
the primary application is to mental states. So a person is
phenomenally conscious by virtue of being in a state that is
phenomenally conscious. Conversely, monitoring conscious-
ness is primarily a designation of a creature as self-conscious or
reflectively conscious. Yet as Block notes, what it is for someone
to be reflectively conscious is for "the person whose pain it
is must have another state that is.about that pain" (sect. 4.2.2,
para. 3).
Although I fear that I am missing Block's real point, his
account of the second contrast seems inconsistent, since mon-
itoring consciousness also seems a matter of having certain
states; Moreover, it also seems inconsistent with his positive
characterization. Block appeals to the familiar "what it is like"
locution to give a positive pointer to "phenomenal conscious-
ness." He elaborates by noting that this is the type of con-
sciousness about which philosophers have feared an inevitable
"explanatory gap." Notice, however, that if phenomenal con-
sciousness essentially involves what it is like to be in a state, then
it concerns some type of awareness of the subject's own states
and this would seem to require monitoring consciousness. At
least 1 don't know how to make sense of the "what it is like"
locution other than in terms of however inchoate a knowledge or
belief about a property of the subject's own states. (Were this
lacking, what would be the other relatum of the explanatory gap
with science?)
Presumably Block's reason for prising phenomenal conscious-
ness apart from monitoring consciousness is that animals can
have phenomenal consciousness even though they might lack
self-consciousness. If this is so, however, I think that it is only
because Block makes self-consciousness a very sophisticated
capacity, involving a sense of self. I think a much more natural
characterization, and one that Block himself suggests (see
above), is that self-consciousness involves having states that are
about other states. Although this is an empirical matter, it
strikes me as highly implausible that a creature could enjoy
phenomenal consciousness - there is something that it is like for
that creature to be in certain states - unless it was also self-
conscious in this sense of those states.
Let me build on these critical notes to make a brief positive
suggestion. On my amended version of Block, phenomenal
consciousness involves some type of monitoring of precon-
ceptual states. Block declares his opposition to eliminativism,
and it seems safe to assume that he is not an epiphenomenalist
either. What, then, could be the function of phenomenal
consciousness?
Consider two experiences, viewing the (west) rose window at
Chartres from inside the cathedral and hearing the familiar
theme from Dvorak's New World Symphony. I choose these
examples because they obviously involve the integration of
information over time. How can we hear the theme when the
first few notes are no longer present except by retaining infor-
mation about them in some form or other, which then allows us
to hear them all together in the aptly named "specious present"?
And similarly for the amazing array of colored glass at Chartres;
we can see the whole window with its distinctive rose design by
integrating a vast amount of color information in a coherent
form. These well-known observations tempt me to believe that a
classic objection to the representational theory of perception is
overstated. We do not see blue by having a blue representation
in us. To see the rose window, however, we must have some
inner state(s) that can serve as surrogate(s) for a blue array, that
can carry the amazingly rich information we extract from arrays
of colors. Now let us assume a general monitoring ability - a
capacity to have states that carry information about other states,
whether or not that information is in the sophisticated form
required for reporting. This then would be my candidate for
phenomenal consciousness: phenomenal consciousness arises
because we are able to monitor our states, including the states
that preserve rich, preconceptual perceptual information. This
account explains three important facts about phenomenal con-
sciousness and perception: why it is ineffable (because the
information is preconceptual); why, when people try to describe
what it is like to see blue, they are drawn to characterizations
that also fit blue itself- namely, cold, similar to "seeing' purple,
and so on; and why the idea that perceiving blue involves a
"bluish" state is so natural.
This sketch is probably too deflationary for Block's interests.
It implies that phenomenal consciousness involves a mistake -
the transfer of properties of objective properties (blue, F#) onto
subjective states. Still, it does provide a functional explanation
for phenomenal consciousness, since there are functions for
both the preservation of sensory information and for monitoring
consciousness. In addition, it does not involve the conflation of
phenomenal and access-consciousness that is Block's central
point, for there is no reason to believe that the contents of states
that are about states that retain perceptual information for the
construction of rich percepts need be informationally promis-
cuous or able to guide rational action, including speech. Since
(ex hypothesi) we are able to make reports about the existence of
phenomenal consciousness, such states must lead to more
sophisticated states, but that is going to be true on any account.
I close with an obvious objection. This account may not
generalize to the other central case of phenomenal conscious-
ness, pains and the like. Although this may be true, even if it is,
it does not bother me very much. I see nothing other than
philosophical tradition that puts seeing blue in the same cate-
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1995) 18:2
259

Commentary /Block: Confusion about consciousness
gory as feeling pain. Indeed, as Kant pointed out a very long
time ago, there is an enormous difference: pains inform the
subjects about their own states, whereas the primary function of
visual and auditory percepts is to provide information about
"external" objects.
Access and what it is like
Bernard W. Kobes
Department of Philosophy, Arizona State University, Tempe, AZ
85287-2004. kobes@asu.edu
Abstract: Block's cases of superblindsight, the pneumatic drill, and
the Sperling experiments do not show that P-consciousness and A-
consciousness can come apart. On certain tendentious but not implausi-
ble construals of the concepts of P- and A-consciousness, they refer to
the same psychological phenomenon.
Access — your flexible friend.
(advertising slogan for Access credit cards,
circa 1981)
When Block's superblindsighter reports spontaneously and re-
liably about objects in his blind field, his thought, or perhaps
better, the nonvisual sensation, the "feeling" that there is an X,
is both access-conscious and phenomenally conscious; but what
of the underlying state of his perceptual system? Block claims
that it would be A-conscious. But it is only in virtue of the
underlying perceptual state's causing the thought that "there is
an X" that this content is inferentially promiscuous and available
for control of voluntary action and speech. The availability is
directly in virtue of the thought, and only indirectly in virtue of
the underlying state of the perceptual system. Based on Block's
own Note 7, therefore, the underlying state of the perceptual
system is not A-conscious. Block talks of the content being
A-conscious, but this is a derivative notion; what matters is
which state is A-conscious, and the underlying state of the
perceptual system does not make itself available.
In the pneumatic drill example, your hearing the noise prior
to noon is supposed to be a case of pure P-consciousness without
A-consciousness; the sound must have been P-conscious at
11:50, because what you realize at noon is that someone has
been noisily digging up the street/or some time. One alternative
explanation is that what you realize at noon is that it is deaf-
eningly noisy and that there has been no change in the noise
level for some time. So it is not obvious that there is P-conscious-
ness of the noise prior to noon; there may have been habituation,
as in the refrigerator example of Note 19, in which, despite
habituation, you are aware of a change in the noise level.
Yet another alternative explanation is that you had some P-
consciousness of the noise but also diminished A-consciousness
of the noise simply as a noise, without (prior to noon) conceiving
of it as unusual, as the noise of a pneumatic drill, a noise that
makes it hard to concentrate, or the noise of your tax dollars at
work. The nature and degree of minimally conceptualized
A-consciousness corresponds exactly to the nature and degree of
minimally conceptualized P-consciousness.
In the Sperling (1960) experiments in iconic vision, Block
suggests, you are P-conscious of all the letters jointly as specific
letters, but not A-conscious of all jointly. This seems implausible
as soon as we ask: When? After the icon fades you are no longer
P-conscious of all the letters jointly. While the icon is briefly
present you do have access to all the letters jointly; how else can
you report the existence of three rows of letters, and how else
can you select which to attend to? Access to all the letters jointly
fades quickly, in step with fading P-consciousness.
Why is it so difficult even to imagine, coherently, P-conscious-
ness without A-consciousness? Perhaps because although there
are two distinct concepts of consciousness, they refer to the
same psychological phenomenon. With some tweaking of the
concepts, this can be seen to be a live option. The identity is
quasi-conceptual - not open to direct empirical test. But if the
concepts are tweaked in empirically fruitful ways, then we
should take them as identifying real psychological kinds. I
propose the identity as necessary a posteriori.
One point to begin with is that a state is A-conscious if it is
poised or promiscuously available for such inference or action or
speech as the particular creature might be capable of. This is
consistent with the creature actually having only the most
rudimentary reasoning abilities, or its being as stupid or irra-
tional or disoriented as a conscious creature can get, or its being
physically incapable of appropriate action, or its being speech-
less. Access is not diminished merely in virtue of the creature's
having less power to reason or act, though the question of why
evolution might have put the access there is of course pertinent.
Indeed, a state might be A-conscious to a hemisphere, or
subpersonal system. The availability, the poisedness, is all;
whether it is actually used by a particular creature (hemisphere,
subpersonal system) in a manner conducive to survival is an-
other matter. A-consciousness has a teleological function, no
doubt, but it is not simply identical to such a function and need
not invariably serve it.
A second point is that A-consciousness can be identical to
P-consciousness only on a wide construal of P-consciousness.
For any A-conscious thought token (e. g., that there are infinitely
many twin primes, that God is eternal, that there was once an
RNA world), there is something it is like to think it, even if there
is no particular image or sensory quality or feeling tone intrinsic
to the thought.
A third point is that P-consciousness is a relational notion. To
say that a state is P-conscious is to say that it is P-conscious to
some person or, perhaps, to some subpersonal system. But no
state could be P-conscious to person or subsystem S without
being poised or promiscuously available for such inference or
voluntary action as S may be capable of. If one of our own
subsystems has, separately, P-conscious states, those states will
also be A-conscious to that system (recall that no threshold of
actual reasoning power or rational control of action or speech is
required). This is not to say that creature P-consciousness is the
more basic notion; I agree with Block that state P-consciousness
is basic. But I am suggesting, contrary to Block, that no state is
P-conscious intrinsically, in and of itself. Any state is P-conscious
only in virtue of its relations to a larger person or system.
Finally, we should distinguish a state's being P-conscious from
its having any given particular sensory or phenomenal quality.
What our thesis identifies with a state's being A-conscious is the
fact of there being something that it is like to be in that state, not
any of the more particular facts of form: what it is like to be in
that state is [. . .]. The thesis does not entail that any particular
sensory or phenomenal quality of a state can be identified with
or explained in terms of access (or functional role broadly
construed) but only that the more abstract or general feature of
the state, its being P-conscious, can be identified with or
explained in terms of access.
If these points are granted, and I think they are not implausi-
ble, then arguments of the following form become live options:
(1) P-consciousness = A-consciousness; (2) The teleological
functions of A-consciousness are F, G, H, and so on; therefore,
(3) the teleological functions of P-consciousness are F, G, H, and
so on. Certainly not all defenders of the target reasoning will
warm to this reconstruction, but the friends of access may.
260
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1995) 18:2

Commentary /Block: Confusion about consciousness
Phenomenal access: A moving target
Joseph Levine
Department of Philosophy and Religion, North Carolina State University,
Raleigh, NC 27695-8103. Joe.levlne@ncsu.edu
Abstract: Basically agreeing with Block regarding the need for a distinc-
tion between P- and A-consciousness, I characterize the problem some-
what diflerently, relating it more directly to the explanatory gap. I also
speculate on the relation between the two forms of consciousness,
arguing that some notion of access is essentially involved in phenomenal
experience.
Block argues that conflating A- and P-consciousness is responsi-
ble for a "fallacy" in the "target reasoning" that is his target in this
article. The philosophers and psychologists in question find that
when P-consciousness is missing there is also a certain functional
deficit; hence P-consciousness must have the requisite function.
However, the functional deficit at issue is itself a lack of A-
consciousness, so, Block argues, the inference to a function for
P-consciousness is unwarranted.
I agree wholeheartedly with Block's main point that it is
necessary to distinguish A- from P-consciousness and that con-
flating the two is a source of confusion in both philosophical and
psychological discussions of consciousness. However, I see the
targets and the diagnosis slightly differently, though not, I
believe, so differently as to cause serious disagreement.
First of all, as Block himself admits (sect. 6, para. 19), the
target reasoning need not be based on a fallacy. Perhaps P-
consciousness is causally necessary for the performance of cer-
tain tasks definitive of A-consciousness. Certainly the correla-
tion of missing P-consciousness with functional deficiency is
some evidence for this hypothesis. I suppose Block thinks it is
fairly weak evidence, and therefore only conflating the two
kinds of consciousness could explain a theorist's drawing the
inference. Fair enough.
To my mind, the really egregious target reasoning is the one
that infers from the fact that P-consciousness has a function
related to A-consciousness to the claim that P-consciousnessjust
is a form of A-consciousness. This is fallacious through and
through, as Block himself notes (sect. 2, para. 8) in passing. In
fact, to say that a state's having phenomenal character performs
the function of making it more accessible to reasoning and
executive control presumes that phenomenal character itself is
not analyzable in these terms. Yet somehow many functionalists
seem to take the idea that phenomenal character plays a func-
tional role as support for the claim that it is a kind of functional
role.
So what about the hypothesis that P-consciousness plays the
functional role of enabling access to reasoning and executive
control? On the surface, there seems something reasonable
about this. The more phenomenally aware of a sensation I seem
to be, the more access I seem to have to it. But there are two
problems here. First, some of the plausibility undoubtedly
steins from just the conflation that Block is out to unmask. By
saying the "more aware" we are, even if we mean the vividness of
the phenomenal character, we inevitably slide into thinking of
access. Not only is this illegitimate because of the conflation, but
it also shows that we have no real explanation of access here since
what we are really saying is that more access buys you more
access. Only if we keep the notion of phenomenal awareness
pure can it then be used, via an empirical hypothesis, to explain
access.
The second problem, though, is the "explanatory gap." Once
we accomplish the purification of the notion of phenomenal
character, it becomes clear that we really have no idea how its
presence could "grease the wheels" of access, because we have
no idea what it really is. Unlike in the case of the liquid of a
hydraulic computer (see sect. 6, para. 22), we don't understand
how phenomenal character could realize mechanisms of infor-
mation flow. So even the nonfallacious form of the target reason-
ing - namely, the form that takes it to be an empirical hypothesis
that phenomenal awareness enables certain access functions to
be performed properly - faces a dilemma: if we focus on a pure
notion of phenomenal character we don't understand how it
could perform this function, and if we allow a notion of access to
sneak in we make the explanation tautologous.
Having endorsed Block's strict distinction between A- and
P-consciousness so far, let me conclude by registering some
dissatisfaction with it. In diagnosing the conflation of the two,
Block blames it on the fact that consciousness is a "mongrel
concept." He explicitly compares it to Aristotle's conception of
velocity, which didn't distinguish instantaneous from average
velocity. But I suspect there is a deeper reason for the conflation,
one that has to do with the puzzling nature of phenomenal
character itself. That is, phenomenal character seems to be, in
itself, a kind of presentation. Experience is essentially con-
nected with a subject for whom it is an experience, and this
immediately brings with it a relation of access. Of course this
does not entail that all forms of access are involved, so it does not
vitiate the point of Block's distinction. But still it does seem that
the phenomenon of subjectivity, which is at the core of phenom-
enal experience, involves access essentially, and it is this fact, I
believe, that is responsible for our inability to sharply distin-
guish A- from P-consciousness.
The essential involvement of access in phenomenal experi-
ence is especially noticeable when confronting the examples
that are supposed to demonstrate the possibility of P- without
A-consciousness. In all of the plausible cases, such as our
suddenly noticing a loud noise that has been going on for some
time (sect. 4.2, para. 3), it does seem to be a matter of degree of
access that has changed. The idea of having an experience that
one is totally unaware of (in the access sense of "unaware') just
seems downright incoherent. (Of course that does not mean
either that phenomenal character is merely a form of access
or that it performs the access function the target reasoning as-
signs it.)
In the end, I think we are dealing with a distinction between
forms of access as well as between phenomenal character and
access. One form of access is the sort with which cognitive
science deals quite well, the sort that is strictly a matter of
information flow, which is itself explicable in terms of causal
relations. The other is the sort that is inextricably connected to
subjective experience. Although it certainly involves informa-
tion flow in some way, it involves a whole lot more that we do not
remotely yet understand.
Access denied
Dan Lloyd
Department of Philosophy, Trinity College, Hartford, CT 06106.
dan.lloyd@trlncoll.edu
Abstract: The 
information 
processing 
that 
constitutes 
access-
consciousness is not sufficient to make a representational state conscious
in any sense. Standard examples of computation without consciousness
undermine A-consciousness, and Block's cases seem to derive their
plausibility from a lurking phenomenal awareness. That is, people and
other minded systems seem to have access-consciousness only insofar as
the state accessed is a phenomenal one, or the state resulting from access
is phenomenal, or both.
"Heel," says Ned Block to the mongrel concept of conscious-
ness, and through a distinction between phenomenal and
"access"-consciousness, the unruly beast settles a bit. Although
Block's version of the distinction is clear, the conflation of P- and
A-consciousness by other authors may not be inadvertent. The
authors Block criticizes may intend to analyze P-consciousness
in terms of access (or other kinds of information processing),
making them guilty not so much of a fallacy as of deliberate
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1995) 18:2
261

Commentary/Block: Confusion about consciousness
reductive identification. Nonetheless, as Block points out, the
differences between P-consciousness and A-consciousness open
a significant explanatory gap, not easily spanned by the machina-
tions of information processing.
But are there two concepts of consciousness? In particular,
what role does "access" play in the constitution of conscious
systems? In section 4, Block calls a state access-conscious if a
representation of its content is "informationally promiscuous" in
potential reasoning, rational action, or rational speech. ("Ratio-
nal" here seems to mean, approximately, "potentially highly
interactive with other information states of the same general
type." It does not seem to suggest normative standards of
reasoning or logic.) So, if a(c) is a token representation with the
content c, and as a result of a(c) a system can generate other
representations inferentially derived from c (and other prem-
ises), or behave in ways contingent on e, then the system has
access-conscious states. Specifically, in this case a(c) is access-
conscious (if I understand Block correctly). In my discussion, I
will consider both this position and another with initial plau-
sibility, namely, that access-consciousness is a property of the
resultant representations and responses, whose "downstream"
states with content or interpretation contingent on c.
Many systems meet Block's standards of promiscuity. The
computerized card catalog at the Library of Congress, for
example, is a rich processor of representations, capable of
sophisticated logic and always ready to report on its internal
states. Any implemented computer program, for that matter,
will exhibit the interplay of information that Block describes.
But it seems to me to greatly distort the concept of consciousness
to confer consciousness in any sense on the basis of information
processes such as these. Promiscuous behavior does not in itself
make a state conscious (in any sense). Information with the
potential to interact with other information, to control behavior,
or to display itself to the world is still just plain information -
even in very simple computers information enjoys these sorts of
access. Something more than the simple process of access is
needed.
What makes Block's examples of access-consciousness plausi-
ble as examples of consciousness is that they arise in the
company of phenomenal consciousness. There are two possi-
bilities. First, the state being accessed, a(c), may already be a
state of (P-)consciousness, in which case A-consciousness should
be understood as informationally promiscuous access to a state
of consciousness. Alternatively, the states consequent to access
may be, for phenomenal reasons, states of consciousness in
which case A-consciousness is a property of states of con-
sciousness arising from access to other information states. The
two possibilities are not exclusive. A-consciousness might be
ascribed to systems where either condition is met. Or both
A-consciousness might be the state of a system where states of
consciousness are promiscuously accessible to other states of
consciousness.
In short, phenomenal consciousness is basic. A-consciousness
is parasitic, depending on the existence of states that are
conscious not because of processing but conscious "in them-
selves," states that there is something it is like to be in. By simi-
lar reasoning, self-consciousness and monitoring-consciousness
are variations of content and functional relations to other states,
but insofar as they are states of consciousness at all, they involve
states with experimental properties.
Moreover, access (or other processing) does not seem to
spread phenomenal consciousness around, as two further cases
suggest. Case 1: When I read a book, token representations on
the page cause me to enter various promiscuous information
states with contents derived from the printed words. The book
occupies the role of a(c), yet the representations that cover its
pages do not thereby become conscious (in any senses; instead, I
have P-consciousness of them, or P-consciousness access to
them). Case 2: Imagine a computer equipped to scan and
interpret my brain states. Among the states scanned are my
P-conscious experiences. Based on its scans, the computer
might make inferences about my experience, which it could
report to its operators. But none of the computer's internal states
would thereby become states of consciousness. Taken together,
the two examples further support the conclusion that neither
being accessed nor being the result of access constitutes con-
sciousness (in any sense).
Block's thought experiments about superblindsight also de-
pend on phenomenal consciousness. Block allows in section 4.1
that blindsighted patients have conscious thoughts about their
world. Once again, these are P-conscious thoughts, whether
abstract and prepositional ("Hmm, somehow I suspect there is
an X to my left") or imaginal (perhaps like an unbidden mental
image). Take away these downstream thoughts or images, and
what is left? A blindsighted person with no experience what-
soever about the visual stimulus seems to me to be a visual
zombie. In the absence of something phenomenal, some experi-
ence that is in some way about the visual stimulus, there is
simply no visual consciousness there, regardless of conditions of
access.
Consciousness is a pure breed after all, and I suggest that
Block has committed the very fallacy he critiques, but in the
opposite direction. In contrast to sneaking functional access
properties into phenomenal consciousness, Block has hidden
phenomenal experience in his analysis of access-consciousness.
In short, the conscious mind is a collection of experiential states.
These states vary in their content, duration, and intensity. They
also vary in their promiscuity, but this is not what makes them
conscious.
We've only just begun
William G. Lycan
Department of Philosophy, University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill, NC
27599-3125
Abstract: Block contends that the concept of consciousness is a mongrel
concept and that researchers go astray by conflating different notions of
"consciousness." This is certainly true. In fact, it is truer than Block
acknowledges, because his own notion of P-consciousness runs together
two, or arguably three, quite different and separable features of a
sensory state.
Block writes:
The concept of consciousness is a hybrid, or better, a mongrel
concept: the word "consciousness' connotes a number of different
concepts and denotes a number of different phenomena. We reason
about "consciousness" using some premises that apply to one of the
phenomena that fall under "consciousness," other premises that
apply to other "consciousnesses," and we end up with trouble, (sect.
1, para. 1)
The entirely different senses of "conscious" have been confused
with each other because, as it happens in real life, mental
contents that are "conscious" in one of the senses are typically
also "conscious' in the other.
How true that is. Truer, in fact, than Block has acknowledged.
In introducing his notion of "phenomenal consciousness" (sect.
3), he rightly faults Searle's characterization for"point[ing] to too
many things"; but his own characterization is subject to the same
charge. His term "P-consciousness" comprehends two, or argua-
bly three, different features of a sensory state.
To see this, consider first a third notion of "consciousness" that
Block mentions only in passing: introspective awareness, or
what he calls "monitoring-consciousness" (sect. 4.2.2). Some of
our psychological states are "conscious" ones, in that we are
internally aware of being in them, whereas others are un-, sub-,
pre- or otherwise nonconscious in that sense. In my view
(Lycan, in press), awareness of this sort is fairly literally a matter
262
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1995) 18:2

Commentary /Block: Confusion about consciousness
of self-monitoring, of mobilizing one's internal attention mecha-
nisms. Note, first, that this notion cuts across each of Block's main
two: one may be aware of being in a state, whether or not the state
is access-conscious, and one may be aware of being in a state
whether or not the state involves any qualitative or phenomenal
character. Note too, as Block does, that nothingabout monitoring
consciousness seems likely to explicate phenomenal character.1
What, then, is phenomenal character? First and foremost, I
suggest, sensory states involve qualia in a carefully strict sense
of that unhappy word. The sense I have in mind is roughly C. I.
Lewis's (1929) original one, in which a "quale' is the introspect-
ible monadic qualitative property of what seems to be a phe-
nomenal individual, such as the color of what Bertrand Russell
called a visual sense-datum. For example, if you are visually
healthy and looking at a ripe tomato in good light, the tomato
will look red to you, and if you focus your introspective attention
on the corresponding subregion of your visual field, you will see
it as an individual red patch having a roundish shape. The
redness of that phenomenal patch is the quale of the containing
visual sensation.2 One registers such a quale whenever one
perceives a colored object as such.
Yet "registers" there is to be understood very weakly. For
some of our perceivings are un- or subconscious in the monitor-
ing sense. Armstrong (1980) gives the well-known example of
the long-distance truck driver who is absent-mindedly driving
on (so to speak) automatic pilot while thinking of something
entirely different; the driver "comes to" and suddenly realizes
that he has driven for miles without any awareness of what he is
doing. Yet he must have perceived the bends in the road, the
road signs, the stop lights, and so on. Suppose he did in fact stop
at a red light. Presumably the light looked red rather than green
to him; that is the only reason he would have stopped. So, in our
present strict sense of the term, he was presented with a red
quale; a subregion of his visual field had redness as its phenome-
nal or qualitative character. But the driver was not aware of any
such thing; it was an un- or subconscious perceiving (Rosenthal,
1991, makes a similar point).
Yet some philosophers, at least, might be loath to credit the
truck driver with having had a sensory experience of red; after
all, he was entirely unaware of his perceptual encounter with the
stop light. There is certainly a sense in which one has not
experienced phenomenal red, or felt pain, unless one is aware of
the redness or the pain. To experience a sensation in that fuller
sense, one must both have the relevant quale and notice it
introspectively.
What of the pathetic phrase, "what it's like"? It is now
ambiguous, as between phenomenal character, namely, a quale
in our strict sense, and the conscious experience of such a quale.
It is important, both for psychologists and for philosophers, to
separate questions about qualia from questions about awareness
and monitoring consciousness; and (though I cannot document
my claim here) failure to notice the difference has led to some
considerable confusion in research on consciousness.3
One final distinction: I am among those philosophers who
think that qualia are merely the representational contents of the
sensations that feature them. As Block says (sect. 3), he dis-
agrees, and holds that in addition to such representational
contents there are qualia in a more exotic, perhaps capitalized
sense: nonintentional, "intrinsic" qualitative contents that out-
run the sensations' representational contents (see Block 1990;
Peacocke 1983). I find that a weird idea and the arguments for it
unconvincing; but if it is true, then there is a third distinct
element lumped in under P-consciousness in addition to qualia
and awareness: Q-ualia of this new sort.
NOTES
1. Contrary to some philosophers' misreadings of the "internal mon-
itoring" literature, monitoring consciousness or introspective awareness
has virtually never been claimed to explicate phenomenal character -
though Lycan (1990) invokes a feature of internal monitoring to explain
the "subjectivity' of sensory experience, quite a different matter.
2. One need not endorse Russellian sense-datum metaphycis or
epistemology in order to use the term "quale" in this way; just think of
the color that suffuses a particular subregion of your visual field at such-
and-such a time.
3. And Block would do well to note that, in particular, the puzzle of
the "explanatory gap" applies to sensory experience of the fuller,
attended sort but not, or not obviously, to qualia strictly so-called.
Phenomenal and attentional consciousness
may be inextricable
Adam Morton
University of Bristol, Department of Philosophy, Bristol BS8 1TB,
United Kingdom, adam.morton@bristol.ac.uk
Abstract: In common sense consciousness has a fairly determinate
content — the (single) way an experience feels, the (single) line of
thought being consciously followed. The determinacy of the object may
be achieved by linking Block's two concepts, so that as long as we hold on
to the determinacy of content we are unable to separate P and A.
At the heart of Block's argument is the distinction between
P-consciousness and A-consciousness. They are clearly differ-
ent, and clearly both exist. How, then, could it be anything but a
confusion to apply the same word to both? Compare: being the
smallest member of the genus that includes lions and tigers,
being the most common domesticated mouse-catching animal.
These are clearly different and both clearly exist, but it would be
crazy to have two words for them, since they apply to the same
things. In section 6 Block agrees that the "bold hypothesis' that
lack of P-consciousness can be responsible for lack of A-
consciousness is not confused (and in sect. 4 he agrees that
A- and P-consciousness interact). I expect that several commen-
tators will argue that hypotheses of mutual dependence are in
fact more than speculations, and that there are many systematic
connections between A and P.
I shall argue for something stronger. Perhaps A and P are
conceptually linked. Perhaps we could not have the concept we
do of either if both did not exist and were not interdependent.
An intrinsic dependence of P on A is suggested by consider-
ations of the many-layered nature of P-consciousness. Consider
an example.
Two experts on optical illusions are setting up an experiment
involving a number of Muller-Lyer diagrams of various propor-
tions imbedded in various contexts. Their knowledge of visual
perception allows each of them to correct for the effect of some of
the subtler diagrams so that often the illusion does not work for
them (the lines look the same length). Yet these same diagrams
sometimes present their illusory appearance. It depends on
what each expert is thinking of at the moment. At any time both
a "same length" and a "different length" appearance are in some
sense present. Which one is the way the diagram looks to them,
which one is the content of P-consciousness, depends on each
person's attention, and on the way perception and actions are
being coordinated, in other words on A-consciousness.
Our perceptual experience must always be a tissue of overlap-
ping layers of different, often contradictory appearances result-
ing from the play of many interacting perceptual subsystems.
Color, form, motion, spatial configuration, and facial character
are only loosely linked, so "the" way things look at any moment
is either highly ambiguous, substantially multiple, or deeply
perspectival, where the perspective is given by the aspect of the
whole that is at that moment the object of P-consciousness (this
fact underlies many of the examples used by Dennett 1991).
One can tell a plausible story, although it is no more than that,
about how something similar could happen in the opposite
direction. Anyone at any time has many beliefs and desires that
are inferentially promiscuous and poised for control of action.
Many of them are, intuitively, not conscious. One characteristic
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1995) 18:2
263

Commentaryv'Block: Confusion about consciousness
of the ones we consider conscious is that they are the ones
involved in chains of inference and means-end reasoning that we
are explicitly monitoring and controlling. They are selected as
objects of occurrent second-order thinking (see Mellor 1978;
Rosenthal 1986). They are parts of chains of reasoning that one is
keeping track of roughly as one would a process in the environ-
ment. So it is not surprising that such thoughts get colored with
qualitative aspects, which identify them in a way that allows
them to be tracked. So, on this story, P-consciousness of thought
is essential to the functioning of A-consciousness.
Both this dependence of A on P and the reverse dependence,
supposing they are real, are contingent features of human
psychology. But their effect is to allow us to have a concept we
could not otherwise have. For, seen in either A or P terms,
consciousness involves an implicit uniqueness condition: the
way it looks, the thought one is thinking. Folk psychology tries
to satisfy these conditions by bringing in each concept to
reinforce the other: the perceptual P-aspect presented to A-
consciousness, the cognitive process which has been given a P-
conscious quality. And the result is thus a fused concept:
consciousness. (So, if this is right, consciousness is a cluster
rather than a mongrel.) In fact, the fusion cannot work; unique-
ness is still a myth, even if a generally serviceable one. But if we
fall back to the separated A and P components, we will find they
are different from any intuitive concept of consciousness. We
will find that there is no such thing as the (single) way an
experience feels to a person or the (single) content of a persons
thinking.
How access-consciousness might be a kind
of consciousness
Thomas Natsoulas
Department of Psychology, University of California, Davis, Davis, CA 95616
Abstract: In response to the objection that his "access-consciousness" is
not really consciousness but a matter of the availability of certain
information for certain kinds of processing, Block will probably have to
argue that consciousness in a more basic, familiar, traditional sense is an
essential component of any instance of access-consciousness and thus
justifies the name.
In the target article, Block himself mentions the following
objection to his account of access-consciousness: it can be
argued that what Block calls "access-consciousness" amounts to
no more than a readiness - a certain representation's being
"poised" - for use in information processing, that is, a readiness
that we have no reason to describe as a case of consciousness.
Thus, Block's discussion of access-consciousness illustrates the
error of "referential displacement': in this instance, the not
uncommon tendency of psychologists and philosophers to focus
instead on something else - something less refractory to their
understanding - when they purport to be addressing conscious-
ness.
How is consciousness involved in all those instances of reason-
ing, reporting, and other rational behaviors that Block insists are
cases of a mental state's being access-conscious? How should
Block respond to what might be called the access objection? In
this commentary, I formulate an answer to the access objection
on Block's behalf. However, my answer is critical of Block's
position as he has stated it so far. My answer suggests that
access-consciousness qualifies as a kind of consciousness for the
reason that each instance of access-consciousness crucially in-
volves conscious awareness in the usual sense. Absent such
awareness, access-consciousness would not be instantiated.
In response to the access objection, Block could begin by
saying, as he does in the target article, that a representation of
the content of a phenomenal mental state is necessary for the
latter state to be access-conscious. The example I shall use here
is of a phenomenal mental state that is access-conscious; perhaps
not all access-conscious states are phenomenal: perhaps not all
have phenomenal properties as these are explained by Block in
his target article. Also, I shall refer to the representation I just
mentioned (of the content of a phenomenal mental state) as
"the requisite representation," since it is necessary for access-
consciousness.
Note that the requisite representation is perforce occurrent.
It is itself an occurrent awareness either of the phenomenal
mental state or of its object (i.e., whatever the phenomenal state
is an awareness of). The requisite representation could not be
merely a potentiality for occurrent awareness. The existence
merely of a corresponding dispositional representation would
not serve to distinguish as access-conscious a present phenome-
nal mental state, in contrast to previous phenomenal mental
states that have occurred in the same individual and whose
contents continue to be represented in the form of nonoccur-
rent, dispositional belief-states possessed by that individual.
Thus, the requisite representation of a phenomenal mental
state's content is as much an instance of consciousness as is the
phenomenal mental state the requisite representation is sup-
posed to render access-conscious. Both states are occurrent
awarenesses of something. The latter statement is typically true;
there may also occur phenomenal mental states that are intransi-
tive - that are not about anything, whether real or fictitious.
Also, it would seem to be entirely compatible with Block's
thinking on this topic that the requisite representation may
likewise be a phenomenal mental state.
Moreover, it would seem that the requisite representation
must itself be access-conscious. That is, for this representation
to enter into the processes of reasoning or engaging in rational
behavior, there must in turn occur an awareness of the represen-
tation. Otherwise, it would be, from the first-person perspec-
tive, as though the requisite representation had not occurred. It
would be like a phenomenal mental state's occurring without
that state's being access-conscious. Such a representation might
have effects on some kinds of behavior or reactions, but those
effects would not be of the kind, of course, in which a state of
affairs is consciously taken into account.
The need for awareness of the requisite representation be-
comes especially apparent at the point where Block speaks of
first hearing a noise in the absence of any access-consciousness
and then hearing the same noise, which has continued, along
with having access-consciousness of the noise. From the start of
this example, the perceptual mental state involved in hearing
the noise would itself be a representation of the noise. Hence a
further representation simply of the noise would add nothing
unless the noise was now represented differently: as being the
object of the respective perceptual mental state: as being a
sound that one is now hearing. Contrary to Block's suggestion, a
representation that was simply of the noise would not make the
perceptual mental state a conscious .awareness.
A second representation (beyond the perceptual mental state)
that is an occurrent awareness of the perceptual mental state,
would correspond, of course, to a familiar kind of consciousness,
namely, inner consciousness or direct awareness, wherein the
individual has a noninferential, nonobservational apprehension
of the occurrence of a particular present mental state. Thus, the
present mental state is a conscious, rather than a nonconscious
or unconscious, mental state.' Similarly, for the requisite repre-
sentation of an access-conscious mental state's content to func-
tion in reasoning and rational behavior, it must be access-
conscious: an object of a present occurrent representation.
Block's interpretation of access as a kind of consciousness is
persuasive only because the access he has in mind essentially
involves consciousness in a more basic sense.
NOTE
1. I should mention that I myself favor a different conception of how a
mental-occurrence instance is conscious in the sense of its being the
264
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1995) 18:2

Commentary/Block: Confusion about consciousness
object of inner consciousness (or direct awareness). Contrary to the
various "appendage" theories that are currently popular, I hold that
conscious mental-occurrence instances are intrinsically conscious. That
is, inner consciousness of them occurs as part of their very own
phenomenological structure. However, in my view, not all mental-
occurrence instances have a reflective structure in this sense. There
occur, for example, reflective and nonreflective instances of visual
experience. There may even be both reflective and nonreflective in-
stances of pain and itch.
A-consciousness: The local newspaper
of the mind?
David Navon
Department of Psychology, University of Haifa, Haifa 31905, Israel.
rsps311@halfauvm
Abstract: A-consciousness may be regarded as the visibility of informa-
tion that is the output of a process within a community of other
processes. The most prominent function of "public" dissemination of
information is giving access to it to processes whose relevance is not
clear at the moment of dissemination. The function of P-consciousness
may be outside the realm of cognition.
I basically agree with Block. Actually, I have been agreeing for a
long time. I have made a similar distinction between the phe-
nomenal and the informational aspects of consciousness, in
several places (Navon 1989a; 1989b; 1991; 1993). The distinction
is especially crucial when one tries to understand the function of
consciousness: "it makes a difference whether we ask what is the
function of awareness in the sense of information or we ask what
is the function of phenomenal experience proper. The problem
is that in any empirical investigation . . . the two are con-
founded. . . . For example, one might suggest that blindsight is
a case of lack of experience coupled with availability of informa-
tion. Actually, however, the ability of the cortically blind to
respond properly cannot be taken as evidence that information
is disseminated in her/his processing system as much as it is
normally. . . . It seems reasonable that blindsight is associated
with some malfunction in the flow of information" (Navon 1993).
Let me offer one possible understanding of what Block calls
A-consciousness. As I suggested elsewhere (Navon 1989a),
awareness, in the informational sense, can be construed as the'
availability of information about the output of a process for other
processes within a community of processes that may exchange
information. In other words, awareness in this sense is viewed
neither as some sort of module or store nor as availability of
information yielded by a process for some other process, like the
executive. Rather, it is regarded as accessibility of that informa-
tion to all other processes, or many of them. Awareness defined
in this collective manner bypasses the homunculus problem.
Furthermore, it may have an important function, namely, dis-
semination of information "publicly" within a community of
processes that may act on it.
There are several functional advantages of having "public"
dissemination of information. The most prominent is securing
an outlet for potentially useful information. Such information is
not clearly relevant for any process in particular but may turn out
to be relevant for some processes whose identity is not known to
the process that disseminates the information (as when we put
an ad in the local newspaper). Consciousness (or, what Block
would prefer to call A-consciousness) may subserve exactly that
function: the local newspaper of the mind.'
Yet newspapers can exist in a community without generating
any collective phenomenal experience. So, to the extent that
our mind does have phenomenal experience that transcends the
information embodied in it (and I agree, of course, with Block
that it does), its role in the story of our cognition remains a
puzzle. Conceivably, "any particular phenomenal experience
may not affect the processing to which it corresponds at the
moment. However, that does not entail that having the property
of being capable of phenomenal experience in general does not
have any function for the being that has that property" (Navon
1993).
If my hunch is right, the answer should be found in the
domain of motivation rather than in cognition. For example, a
being that feels an acute pain must behave differently from a
being that just cognizes the existence of the pain source, as any
dentist can attest and any dental patient would admit. Similarly,
a being that feels sexually aroused must behave differently from
a being that is just internally informed of the action-readiness of
its sex organs, the close presence of a possible candidate for
mating, and the desirability of the goal. The evolutionary advan-
tage of those disparities in behavior, or in the tenacity to exhibit
the behavior, is evident.
Future computing machines may have the capability for
sophisticated information dissemination, which might help
them mimic intelligent creatures that have consciousness. In
this sense, A-consciousness might be reducible to information-
processing terminology. However, can P-consciousness be re-
duced to information processing? Block is very careful to avoid
controversies - a good idea, indeed. So, let me just make a
personal statement: I shall be convinced that experience is
reducible to information processing as soon as I see the first
machine that, in my judgment, is capable of feeling, say, sexual
arousal. And since in this domain external symptoms are easy to
fake successfully, as demonstrated so compellingly in "When
Harry met Sally," I am going to be somewhat more suspicious
than Turing1 would probably be.
NOTE
1. And talking about Turing tests, the discomfort often felt toward
them as tests of understanding may be due, in part, to our evidence that
understanding, owing as much as it does to underlying information
processing is, after all, a sort of feeling. What may pass as a test of
capability may not qualify as a test of feeling. Stressing again that Turing
tests are meant to test only capabilities seems like a useful byproduct of
the explicit distinction between information and experience.
Conscious and nonconscious control
of action
Antti Revonsuo
Department of Philosophy/Center for Cognitive Neuroscience, University of
Turku, FIN-20500 Turku, Finland, revonsuo@sara.utu.fi
Abstract: I criticize Block's examples of P-consciousness and A-
consciousness for being flawed and the notion of A-consciousness for not
being a notion of consciousness at all. I argue that an empirically
important distinction can be made between behavior that is supported
by an underlying conscious experience and behavior that is brought
about by nonconscious action-control mechanisms. This distinction is
different from that made by Block.
The characterizations of the central notions of this target article
are problematic. Block says (sect. 4.1, para. 6) that the state of
the superblindsighter who is A-conscious without being P-
conscious is not the thought I have an X in my blind field but the
"state of [the] perceptual system that gives rise to the thought"
(sect. 4.1, para. 6). However, he gives no reason to believe that
such a state could be A-conscious in itself, in the absence of the
(P-conscious and A-conscious) thought. Why does the super-
blindsighter need the thought at all if there is some other state
that already provides A-consciousness? Perhaps because with-
out the (P-conscious) thought the superblindsighter does no
better than an ordinary blindsighter. And a superblindsighter
who does not have the P-conscious thoughts but still demon-
strates good control of action is actually a zombie. Thus, Block's
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1995) 18:2
265

Commentary /Block: Confusion about consciousness
example leaves it unclear how there could be a system that is not
a zombie but nevertheless manifests A-consciousness without
P-consciousness.
The example of a pure case of P-consciousness without A-
consciousness is likewise not without flaws. Block invites us to
imagine an intense conversation with background noise that is
noticed only after it has been P-conscious for some time.
However, even when unattended, such noise is used for rational
control of action, since the speakers adjust the loudness of their
speech in order to be heard. This phenomenon is vividly
manifested by people listening to a walkman and shouting
embarrassingly loud to overcome background noise that only
the speaker can hear. Thus, background noise is very likely to be
A-conscious, which makes the example less pure.
Furthermore, I think that the whole notion of A-conscious-
ness is debatable. My position is that P-consciousness is the core
of our notion of consciousness. Consequently, I would not like to
muddy the waters unnecessarily by the term "A-consciousness,"
which is something even total zombies have. The confusion that
such terminology brings is manifested when Block says (sect.
4.2) that the philosopher's zombies "think but don't feel." I take
it that "thinking" is a mental notion that does not apply to
systems that are by definition absolutely devoid of any subjec-
tively experienced phenomenological states. If totally noncon-
scious systems can have mentality, what is the difference be-
tween mental and nonmental systems (Searle 1992)? [See also
Searle: "Consciousness, Explanatory Inversion, and Cognitive
Science" BBS 13(4) 1990.]
A scientific research program on consciousness ought to
refine but not distort beyond recognition our pretheoretical
understanding of the notion of consciousness (Revonsuo 1993). A
theory of consciousness should postulate a system that is de-
scribed at the "phenomenological level of organization" (P-
consciousness); the theory ought to account for the lower-level
mechanisms that bind this "experienced world" to a seemingly
coherent whole, and it ought to explicate the role of this system
in the control of adaptive behavior (Revonsuo 1993; 1994). Now,
how is the system that has P-conscious properties causally
related to nonconscious systems mediating perceptual input and
behavioral output? A good example of the system operating in
the absence of perceptual input and behavioral output is dream-
ing (Revonsuo, in press). The mere existence of dreams shows
that neither current perceptual input nor behavioral output is
necessary for a full-blown experienced world to exist. The brain
is generating states closely resembling those caused by external
stimulation during waking: "As far as the neurons are con-
cerned, the brain is both seeing and moving in REM sleep"
(Hobson 1988, p. 171).
Dreaming seems to be a pure case of P-consciousness without
A-consciousness: it has all the phenomenological properties
without having any of the normal functional relationships to
perceptual input or external behavior. However, if the motor
output blockade is removed during dreaming, the person or
animal will act out the dreamed behavior in accordance with the
dream events (Hobson 1988, p. 150). The observed behavior is
in such a case driven by current conscious experience, but it
would hardly count as "rational control of action" from an
outsider's point of view - people who have REM sleep without
atonia often injure themselves badly during attempted dream
enactment (Schenk et al. 1986). Thus, there is complex control
of action that is the expression of an underlying mental reality
but that would probably not be considered A-conscious.
Moreover, Block seems to think (sect. 4.2) that the studies of
Goodale and Milner (1992) imply that P-consciousness and
A-consciousness might use anatomically different pathways.
This hypothesis, however, completely ignores the vast differ-
ences between the kinds of action these different pathways
support. Block disregards the fact that such object-oriented
actions as are realized online by the dorsal system are based on
quite limited information and straightforward input-output
transformations. By contrast, the goals of action can only be
defined with the help of conscious representation of the world
(see discussion in Jeannerod 1994). The dorsal system is a slave
system for fast and accurate realization of goals consciously
determined by other systems. Rather than being an example of
distinct neural realization of P-consciousness and A-conscious-
ness, these findings highlight the qualitative difference be-
tween consciously and nonconsciously driven action systems.
The dorsal system appears to be a nonconscious zombie inside
our brain, and to ascribe a kind of consciousness to it only
obscures the distinction between neural systems that support
phenomenological (and mental) properties and those that
do not.
I would argue that, as a matter of empirical fact, behavior that
is the expression of and supported by an underlying conscious
experience is qualitatively different from behavior carried out
without any underlying phenomenological or mental reality.
This distinction is different from Block's, since it divides behav-
ior with regard to its causal relation to P-consciousness. The
above examples show that there can be nonrational (non-
A-conscious) complex behavior that is causally related to P-
consciousness (REM sleep without atonia), and rational (A-
conscious) control of action that is not related to P-consciousness
(action guided by the dorsal system in isolation).
It is consequently difficult to formulate the hypothesis I am
putting forward in terms of a causal relation between P-
consciousness and A-consciousness. Control of action causally
related to P-consciousness need not always be "rational," and
not all rational action has any connection to P-consciousness.
Instead, empirical findings suggest that P-consciousness is caus-
ally related to "an entire spectrum of global, integrated, and
flexible (nonautomatic) behaviors. . . . It constitutes a central
junction ofinformation, one in which information from different
sources and modalities are integrated to produce a unified and
coherent body of behaviors" (Lahav 1993, p. 79). It would
probably be right to say that P-consciousness is a (qualitatively
distinctive) "gateway to mechanisms of access" (Block, sect. 6,
para. 22). This involves no conflation of P-consciousness and
something else. Hence, as far as we know the relevant empirical
facts, Schacter's (1989) model, by and large, seems to be on the
right track.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The research for this commentary was financially supported by the
Academy of Finland.
Block's philosophical anosognosia
G. Rey
Department of Philosophy, University of Maryland, College Park, MD
20742, rey@umiacs.umd.edu
Abstract: Block's P-/A-consciousness distinction rules out P's involving a
specific kind of cognitive access and commits him to a "strong" P-
consciousness. This not only confounds plausible research in the area
but betrays an anosognosia about Wittgenstein's diagnosis about our
philosophical "introspection" of mysterious inner processes.
We talk of processes and states and leave their nature undecided.
Sometime perhaps we shall know more about them - we think. But
this is just what commits us to a particular way of looking at the
matter. . . . (The decisive movement in the conjuring trick has been
made.) (Wittgenstein 1953, p. 308)
Although I do not think this remark is true generally about our
talk of mental states - there is nothing particularly mysterious
about the computational states of cognitive psychology - it does
seem to me to raise a challenge to Block's postulation of "P-
consciousness." If all he intends by it is a distinction within
266
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1995) 18:2

Commentary/Block: Confusion about consciousness
cognitive processing then, of course, it is not worse off than
computational states generally: call such a state "weak P-
conscious.' But Block's discussion suggests he has more in mind;
call that "strong P-consciousness." It is the P-consciousness to
which he can only "point": "not a functional notion" (sect. 4,
para. 6), it might "have no function" (sect. 6, last para.) or "effect
on later mental processes" (sect. 5, para. 5); "it is not easy to see
how current approaches . . . could yield an account of it" (sect.
3, para. 6); but - almost echoing my epigraph - Block looks
forward "at some time in the future, . . . hav[ing] the concepts
to conceive of much more about [its] explanation" (sect. 3, para.
7).' But what reason is there to suppose that there actually is
anything that Block can be taken to be "pointing to" in this way?
What reason does he have for thinking he is not in the grip of the
picture of the private world that Wittgenstein argued we impose
on experience by poor analogy with the public one?
Of course, there are many reasons to distinguish between
experiential and nonexperiential states, or, anyway, between
introspectible and nonintrospectible ones, as well as between
perception and ordinary judgment. Many have proposed cap-
turing these distinctions by a cognitive theory that distinguishes
among access relations and different forms of representation.
For example, in viewofNisbettand Wilson's (1977) discussion, I
develop in Rey (1988) some suggestions of Bach's (1981) and
Dennett's (1969; 1978),2 distinguishing the introspectible in
terms of the contents of certain addresses not always accessed in
the production of nonverbal intentional action. Building on that
in Rey (1992a; 1992b), I try to show how a computational theory
could capture distinctions among perceptions and judgments, as
well as what's worth capturing about "what it's like."3 Ericsson
and Simon (1984/1993) discuss the processes of introspection
and verbal report in greater theoretical and experimental detail,
relating these processes to recognition, attention, and struc-
tures of short- and long-term memory. One would expect these
to lead to some insight into the puzzling cases of blindsight and
petit mal seizures that are the focus of Block's concern (sect. 6).
But Block strangely avoids such accounts, lumping together
under A-consciousness a variety of functional features - inferen-
tial promiscuity, "rational control of action," and "rational con-
trol of speech" (sect. 4, para. 2) - that they arduously distin-
guish. At best, he argues against certain functionalist proposals,
for example, that P-consciousness is a kind of self-consciousness,
a second-order thought (sect. 4.2.1), involving an "executive
module' (sect. 6, para. 24). But, as the above accounts show,
there are heaps more functional and accessibility relations to
consider than those! Of course, those accounts are all of weak
P-conscious states; Block is after stronger stuff.
But what good would the stronger stuff do? Although Block is
right to point out the many confusions and contradictions in a
number of the writings he considers, his strong P-consciousness
seems only to further confound research. What should we begin
to look for as evidence for strong P-consciousness in any of the
problem cases he considers? Given that strong P-consciousness
may be "without function" or "effect on later mental processes,"
what possible reason could we have to posit it in anyone's case,
even our own?
Indeed, the latter "epiphenomenal" possibility poses a partic-
ular problem for Block himself, who sets such store by intro-
spection (sect. 4.2, para. 3). Introspection, after all, is a kind of
access (or does Block imagine that there could be P-conscious
events that are not even introspectible?). If P-consciousness
were, for example, "like the liquid in a hydraulic computer"
(sect. 6, para. 22), there would still be the question of how its
properties could be accessed and represented or otherwise
incorporated into someone's mental life. So even strong P-
consciousness needs to involve some form of A-consciousness.
But then one might wonder what difference the actual "hydrau-
lics" would make to introspectors, who could thereby think they
were strongly P-conscious without actually being so.
It is difficulties such as these that led me to reject at least
strong P-consciousness in the articles of mine that Block cites
(sect. 4.2.2, para. 2). To be sure, the above weak accounts could
also be realized on a laptop. So much the worse, I say, for our
indeed "mongrel" notion of consciousness, which is supposed to
do not only explanatory but also moral and phenomenological
work. There can be little doubt that the weak notion is morally
and phenomenologically unsatisfying; but, unlike Block, I am
unwilling to let this fact alone - even my lost intense introspec-
tive intuitions about the existence of strong P-consciousness -
undermine its explanatory work. For the lack of any non-
question-begging evidence for the postulation of strong P-
consciousness, belief in it would seem no better off than belief
in, for example, private devils, a personal soul, or (strong) free
will, beliefs also often defended by vivid introspections. What
Block needs to show is that he is not in the position of Young's
(1994a) painter (sect. 5, para. 7), in his case anosognosic with
respect to Wittgenstein's diagnosis of the peculiarly philosophi-
cal, but empirically unmotivated, pictures of the mind that
tempt so many of us.
NOTES
1. Block does in a note (n. 16) attempt to be neutral with regard to
"functionalist" accounts, allowing the possibility that P-consciousness is
simply "high quality" A-consciousness, but this seems disingenuous.
Throughout most of the target article he writes in this antifunctionalist
mode and dismisses a number of proposals that might treat P- as a
specific form of A-consciousness (sect. 5, para. 1).
2. Not to be confused with his more recent proposals (Dennett 1991)
rightly deplored by Block.
3. Lycan (1990) and Leeds (1992) make similar proposals.
What is an agent that it experiences
P-consciousness? And what is
P-consciousness that it moves an agent?
Roger N. Shepard
Department of Psychology, Stanford University, Stanford, CA 94305-2130.
roger@psych.stanford.edu
Abstract: If phenomenal consciousness is distinct from the computa-
tionally based access-consciousness that controls overt behavior, how
can I tell which things (other than myself) enjoy phenomenal conscious-
ness? And if phenomenal consciousness'plays no role in controlling overt
behavior, how do human bodies come to write target articles arguing for
the existence of phenomenal consciousness?
Contemporary philosophers, seeking to associate themselves
with the progress now being made in the cognitive and brain
sciences, have largely backed away from the venerable but
seemingly intractable puzzles concerning the nature of the
mental as distinguished from the physical. Many now deny the
existence of a problem or suggest that if there is a problem, it is
to be solved in the laboratory. There are two risks: such philoso-
phers may be relegating themselves to the secondary role of
merely picking among the empirical chips flying out the doors of
the neuroscience laboratories; and they may be abandoning a
conceptual issue of singular depth and moral import.
Fortunately, a few philosophers, like Block, continue to
recognize a problem of consciousness and to struggle toward its
clarification. I have been in agreement with Block that the
authors who persistently assimilate phenomenal consciousness
(Block's P-consciousness) to what Block refers to as access-
consciousness (A-consciousness) have only muddied the philo-
sophical waters (see Shepard (1993). Still, Block's own analysis
bypasses two issues that cry out for clarification.
What sort of thing experiences phenomenal consciousness?
Who or what, exactly, are the entities or agents to which Block
would attribute P-consciousness? Do they include only himself
(the solipsistic resolution of the problem of other minds), or do
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1995) 18:2
267

Commentary/Block: 
Confusion about consciousness
they include other persons, other primates, or individuals of
other, more remote species - perhaps ranging down to insects,
worms, paramecia, or viruses? Are they necessarily whole
individuals (e.g., persons), or do they include brains, cerebral
hemispheres, or more localized cell assemblies - perhaps rang-
ing down to individual neurons or even synapses? Are they
restricted to natural biological systems, or might they include
purely physical systems such as robots, computers, or their
various physical components - perhaps ranging down to individ-
ual transistors, or even to molecules, atoms, or electrons?
(Although widely regarded as absurd, this last possibility is not
without eminent sponsorship: "At the very origin . . . each
atom . . . must have had an aboriginal atom of consciousness
linked with it" (James 1890, p. 149).
In short, where along such series - graded by similarity to the
self, by holism, by complexity, or by natural origin - is the line to
be drawn between those entities that do and those that do not
enjoy (or suffer) P-consciousness? Presumably, A-conscious-
ness, being computational in nature, must peter out as we move
to sufficiently simple systems or their subparts, whether natural
or artificial. But does P-consciousness in any way depend on
complexity? What could be simpler or less "effable" than an
isolated twinge of pain or flash of red? If there is no requirement
that P-consciousness be externally accessible or reportable, why
may not the firing of a single neuron be accompanied by its own
private twinge or flash? Indeed, why may not the jump of an
electron from a higher to a lower energy state be accompanied
not only by the emission of an externally observable photon but
also by an internal quale of relaxation? The emitted photon tells
us no more about the quality of such an inward relaxation than a
person's verbal ejaculation "Ah!,' or no more than even the more
articulate "I just experienced a red flash" tells us about the
subjective quality of that experience. To the extent that an agent
of any sort is able to externalize anything about its interior
events, it is presumably evidence of A-consciousness and not, I
take it, of P-consciousness.
How does an agent come to speak of phenomenal conscious-
ness? If it is thus the function of A-consciousness, as distinct
from P-consciousness, to control overt action, what exactly is the
causal origin of the efferent neural impulses that presumably
actuated Block's own fingers (say) when he physically typed out
his arguments for the existence of a P-consciousness as distinct
from A-consciousness? Block seems to venture perilously close
to the problem that has always dogged epiphenomenalism: if
conscious experience is merely epiphenomenal, how do our
physical bodies ever come to talk about it?
Ethical Implications. Can we find defensible grounds for moral
action without having unraveled the mind-world knot? A signifi-
cant onus would seem to attach to the needless infliction of pain
and suffering on other entities (whether persons, animals, or
machines) only if their pain and suffering is felt. In frivolous
moments I have been tempted to wonder whether even human
beings- irrespective of intelligence, education, or occupation-
come in two distinct types: those whose neural activities are
accompanied by phenomenal consciousness and those whose
neural activities, though seemingly working identically in the
physical world, are not. As a simple test for the possession of
such a phenomenal accompaniment, we might ask an individual:
"When you and I are looking at a surface that we both call red,
how do you know whether my subjective experience is the same
as yours, and not like the experience you have when we are
looking at a surface that we both call green? Or how, indeed, do
you know whether I am having any subjective experience at all?"
Those who profess to see no problem here might be presumed to
be of the second type. Unfortunately, through computations
evolved in the service of self-preservation, such individuals
might also infer our purpose and dissemble. A pity, really.
Otherwise, we could bring the dispute about the existence of
phenomenal experience to an end, without ethical qualms,
simply by dispatching all those individuals (mere automata, after
all) that fail our test.
Blindsight, orgasm, and representational
overlap
Michael Tye
Department of Philosophy, Temple University, Philadelphia, PA 19122.
tye@templevm.bitnet
Abstract: It is argued that there is no fallacy in the reasoning in the
example of the thirsty blindsight subject, on one reconstruction of that
reasoning. Neither the case of orgasm nor the case of a visual versus an
auditory experience as of something overheard shows that phenomenal
content is not representational.
I agree with Block that consciousness is a mongrel concept and I
accept many of the points he makes in his excellent target
article. I have three critical comments.
(1) The alleged fallacy in the reasoning in the blindsight
example. Why does the thirsty blindsight patient not reach for a
glass of water in his blind field? Answer: the patient lacks
consciousness with respect to the blind field. Block claims that
this is too hasty and that it fails to distinguish two sorts of
consciousness that need to be kept distinct - P-consciousness
and A-consciousness. He also says that "there is an obvious
explanation of why the patient does not reach for the glass in
terms of information about it not reaching the mechanisms of
reasoning and rational control of speech and action, the machin-
ery of A-consciousness" (sect. 6, para. 20).
This seems right, as far as it goes. But why does information
about the glass not get to the Executive System? That too calls
for explanation. The obvious answer, surely, to those who
believe in P-consciousness of the sort that Block specifies, is that
P-consciousness is absent. P-consciousness, after all, is precon-
ceptual experience: it does not involve the Executive System at
all. So we cannot plausibly suppose that P-consciousness is
missing because information fails to arrive at the Central Pro-
cessing Unit (CPU). Rather, the explanation is best taken to go
the other way around.
Nor does it help to appeal to the missing A-consciousness as
an alternative explanation for why information about the glass
fails to reach the Executive System. A-consciousness, insofar as I
understand it, is just access (of certain sorts) to information. It is
no explanation of why information fails to reach the Executive
System to say that the access to information is blocked or
missing. That is blatantly circular and uninformative.
Of course, it could be that some other, as yet unknown, factor
is responsible for both the missing P-consciousness and the
failure of information about the glass to arrive at the CPU. But
pointing to unspecified possibilities in logical space is not to the
point in the present context. Inference to the best explanation is
always inference to the best available explanation. And the best
available psychological explanation, I suggest, of why thirsty
blindsight subjects do not reach for the glass of water ultimately
adverts (in the way I have specified) to the fact that they lack
P-consciousness. I infer that a function of P-consciousness is to
channel information from the senses to the CPU, for subsequent
use there in the production of rational action. Block is mistaken
when he remarks that, "the fallacy is: an obvious function of the
machinery of access-consciousness is illicitly transferred to phe-
nomenal consciousness" (abstract).
(2) Orgasms. I do not see why Block thinks that orgasms
present a problem for a representational approach to P-
consciousness (sect. 4.2, para. 7). Orgasms are bodily sensations
of a certain sort. As such, they can be treated in the same general
way as other bodily sensations. To have a pain in a leg, for
268
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1995) 18:2

Commentary /Block: Confusion about consciousness
example, is to undergo a certain sort of experience. What one
experiences is that something in the leg is painful (or hurts).
Hurting is experienced as being in the leg (not as being in the
head where the experience itself is actually located). Similarly, if
one has an itch in a toe, what one experiences is that something
in a toe is itching. So an itch in toe (itself an experience) has
representational content. Likewise, orgasms. In this case, one
undergoes intense, throbbing pleasure in the genital region.
What one experiences, in part, is that something very pleasing is
happening down there. One also experiences the pleasingness
alternately increasing and diminishing in its intensity. This too is
part of the representational content of the experience. One feels
that the changes in intensity are occurring. There are, of course,
a variety of other bodily sensations that are present during
orgasm. But they can be treated in the same general way.'
(3) Having a visual experience as of something overhead
versus having an auditory experience as of something overhead.
Block claims this example shows there are phenomenal differ-
ences that are not representational. There is supposedly no
common phenomenal quality to these experiences, even though
they overlap representationally. This is not obviously true. What
is obviously true is that the look and the sound differ phenome-
nally. Block says that, in the case he has in mind, one only
catches a glimpse so that "the (phenomenal) difference cannot
be ascribed to further representational differences" (sect. 4.2,
para. 7).
But even if one has no visual experience as of a specific color or
shape, there will inevitably be other features one does experi-
ence in addition to relative spatial position that are not repre-
sented in the auditory experience. For example, one is bound to
have some visual impression of the thing's size (tiny as a speck,
large as a nearby bird, etc.). Likewise, in the case of the auditory
experience, one is bound to have some impression of how loud
the sound is. And that will not be represented in the visual
experience. So there seems to me no serious trouble here for the
representationalist about phenomenal experience. It is also
worth noting that an alternative reply is available to the repre-
sentationalist, one which concedes Block's premise that the two
experiences have nothing in common phenomenally. Phenome-
nal qualities, in the case of perceptual experiences, could be
identified with the observational properties represented in the
experiences under modes of representation. So, given that the
two experiences deploy different modes of representation with
respect to the property of being overheard, there will be no
shared phenomenal quality, and again no trouble for repre-
sentationalism.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The author is also affiliated with King's College, London.
NOTE
1. For more on the representational content of bodily sensations and
a discussion of nonconceptual, representational content, see Tye (in
press).
Consciousness is not a natural kind
J. van Brakel
Institute of Philosophy, University of Leuven, B-3000 Leuven, Belgium.
brakel@phil.ruu.nl
Abstract: Blocks distinction between "phenomenal feel" consciousness
and "thought/cognition" consciousness is a cultural construction. Con-
sciousness (and its subspecies") is not a natural kind. Some cross-
cultural data are presented to support this.
There is much I fail to understand in Block's target article, so my
main purpose here is to raise a few questions. Does Block
assume that consciousness is a natural kind? And does he aim to
give it a further taxonomy? This would explain why "it is obvious
that P-consciousness is not a cultural construction," and why he
makes a clear distinction between "the concept P-conscious-
ness " and "P-consciousness itself." My next question concerns
how words like "phenomenal feel," and "thought" are to be
understood. If I am right that Block is looking for natural kinds,
the existence of and difference between P- and A-consciousness
should be an empirical question. But how could we investigate
this? How would Block formulate valid operational criteria to
identify a "phenomenal feel" and a "thought" respectively,
without presupposing that we already know what these expres-
sions refer to?
I am unable to believe that consciousness is a natural kind (cf.
Wilkes 1988). Specifically, I think Block's ideas about P- and
A-consciousness are a product of late twentieth-century Ameri-
can thought. He proposes a dichotomy that could, if I had more
space, be traced to the mongrel root metaphor of Cartesian
dualism and the think/feel dichotomy. My next question there-
fore is whether it is correct to associate the P-/A- dichotomy with
the think/feel pair? I am not a cultural relativist: human beings
share more than can be said (van Brakel 1994). But it is an
ethnocentric fallacy that diligent research in the behavioral and
brain sciences will eventually disclose once and for all the
complete taxonomy of human thought, feeling, and action.
Block suggests there might be an intimate relationship between
A- and P-consciousness; that P-consciousness perhaps "greases
the wheels of accessibility,' or is the "gateway to mechanisms of
access." Or perhaps P- and A-consciousness "amount to much
the same thing empirically even though they differ concep-
tually" or perhaps they are "so entwined together that there is no
empirical sense to the idea of one without the other." Although,
he gives many options, one, the correct one, is left out: neither
P- nor A-consciousness refers to anything well determined.
Different ideas about consciousness and things like it slide into
one another and vary with place and time. There are many
similarities, but there is no one true taxonomy. (This is not to
deny the value of learning more about it, for example, by
analyzing the behavior of blindsight patients.)
Block appeals to introspection as a serious source of evidence
for the reality of P-consciousness. Should we also appeal to
introspection for the reference of words like "think" and "feel"?
And whose introspection is to count? Only those human beings
whose commentaries are acceptable for publication in Behav-
ioral and Brain Sciences? To press the point further, I will
provide some examples of esoteric views on these issues (more
details in van Brakel 1994). My question is: what metatheoretic
framework can be appealed to for dismissing these esoteric
views as serious alternatives to (partial) theories of conscious-
ness and its congeners?
The first point to note is that most Western people are full of
talk of how they feel; hence the introspection Block calls upon
has no problem associating P-consciousness with all kinds of
happenings to them. But this is not as self-evident as it may
seem. Gerber (1985) observed that Samoans frequently say,
with the full force of self-evident conventional wisdom, "we
cannot know what is in another person's depths,' or "we cannot
tell what another person is thinking." Similar accounts are given
by, for example, Howell (1981) for the Chewong people and by
Fajans (1985) for the Baining people.
The second point is that if the distinction between thought
and feeling, or body and mind, or between the moral and the
personal is made very differently or not at all, this will have a
profound effect on how introspection guides the development of
a theory of consciousness. For example, in Hindi (and Dravidian
languages) there is no word that translates as "to feel" (Lynch
1990). The Balinese word keneh is glossed as the "feeling-mind"
and a popular Balinese proverb as "who can think but with their
feelings" (Wikan 1989). The Maori see the "mind" (ngakau) as
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1995) 18:2
269

Commentary /Block: Confusion about consciousness
an undifferentiated whole of cognition, emotion, and volition
(Smith 1981). The Temiar people place feelings, thoughts,
awareness, and memory in the heart (hup), but vocalized expres-
sions are located in the "head soul" (retoaay; Roseman 1988).
And there are many similar examples (van Brakel 1994). Among
Giriama people, the liver and heart are the seat of the innermost
sentiments, feelings, desires, and so on; greed and envy origi-
nate from the eye; selfhood is located in the heart; the core of an
argument is in the liver (Parkin 1985). The Ifaluk people subdi-
vide the niferash "our insides" into nunuwan and tip, which
distinguish between socially standard and idiosyncratic "pro-
cesses"; they fuse thought and feeling and do not distinguish
between desire and intention (Lutz 1987).
Perhaps what is wrong is the desire to pigeon-hole every-
thing. Needham (1972), in a detailed study of Nuer, has shown
that "belief" cannot be established as a distinct inner state:
"inner states are not universals and do not in this sense consti-
tute natural resemblances among men" (Needham 1981). This
applies to all taxonomic levels; at no level are there cores or
essences of natural kinds, which human beings are trying to
grasp. Fear can be the display of instinctive "feel" or can consist
solely of thoughts. It is not clear what would be "common to fear
of famine and fear of cockroaches, fear of biting a tongue and fear
of the dentist's drill, fear of overpopulation and fear of being
overdressed, fear of being thought a parvenu and fear of catching
AIDS" (Kenny 1989, p. 53). There is not one thing that it is to
have fear, or that is prototypically fear. Levy (1984) says about
"fear" and Tahitian ri'ari'a: "th'e central tendencies named by
various emotional terms are probably universal but . . . the
borders of the categories may differ." But who is judging in
which direction the central tendency is going? Levy tells us
about ri'ari'a that [1] it only names "fear as present experience,"
not "anticipatory fear" (which is mata'u), and [2] ri'ari'a also
"includes mild aversions to certain foods.' Now who is to say that
"present experience" or "mild aversion to certain foods" is not
part of the "central tendency" of "fear" (and all words from other
languages that are usually translated as "fear")? Who is to say,
and on what grounds, that "phenomenal feel" is not part of the
central tendency of cognition?
Should we continue to study
consciousness?
Richard M. Warren
Department of Psychology, University of Wisconsin at Milwaukee,
Milwaukee, Wl 53201. nnwarren@csd4.csd.uwm.edu
Abstract: Block has attempted to reduce the confusion and controversy
concerning the term "consciousness" by suggesting that there are two
forms or types of consciousness, each of which has several characteristics
or properties. This suggestion appears to further becloud the topic,
however. Perhaps consciousness cannot be defined adequately and
should not be considered as a topic that can be studied scientifically.
Block considers consciousness to be a "mongrel" concept. Mon-
grels, either as animals or concepts, are not all bad. There is a
less pejorative animal metaphor that has been used to compare
Linus Pauling's extremely influential concept of structural reso-
nance to a mule, which is not a horse part of the time and a
donkey part of the time but a mule all of the time. Block's
mongrel of consciousness is not a blend but an assortment of
different breeds, since he stated that "there are a number of very
different 'consciousnesses.' The target article makes a convinc-
ing case that the literature abounds with conflicting meanings of
the same word, and that when different writers refer to "con-
sciousness," they may be referring to different entities. Recog-
nizing this difficulty, and the harm that this does to coherent and
rational dialogue, Block suggests what to me appears to be a
poor solution to the problem. He suggests that there are two
categories of consciousness, P-consciousness (phenomenal con-
sciousness) and A-consciousness (access-consciousness). This
suggestion may compound rather than resolve the confusion of
terms. Leaving the problem of conflicting meanings aside for
the moment, Block states that "I cannot define P-consciousness
in any remotely noncircular way," and that "really all one can do
is point to the phenomenon" (sect. 3, para. 7). He indicates that
one way of pointing is to use "rough synonyms," such as his
statement that P-consciousness is experience, so that "a state is
P-conscious if it has experiential properties." The P-conscious
properties of consciousness were stated to include the experien-
tial aspects of sensations, feelings, and perception, as well as
thoughts, wants, and emotions. This list leaves us with a series of
subjective states, some of which are almost as hard to define as
consciousness.
The requirements used to characterize "A-consciousness" are
no clearer. To avoid possible misrepresentation of this crucial
characterization, I will quote from Block.
A state is access-conscious (A-conscious) if, in virtue of one's having
the state, a representation of its content is (1) inferentially promis-
cuous (Stich 1978), that is, poised for use as a premise in reasoning,
(2) poised for rational control of action, and (3) poised for rational
control of speech. (I will speak of both states and their contents as A-
conscious.) These three conditions are together sufficient, but not all
necessary. I regard (3) as not necessary (and not independent of the
others), because I want to allow that nonlinguistic animals, for
example, chimps, have A-conscious states, (sect. 4, para. 1)
I have doubts that reasoning uses representations of any
conscious state as premises - indeed I am not sure that I know
what it means to use a subjective state as a premise. As for the
second characterization, I am not sure that I understand what is
meant by rational control of action - could not a conscious state
be used for an irrational control of action? As for the third
characteristic, I am confused by the term "rational control of
speech." Leaving aside what is meant by "rational," what aspects
of speech is Block referring to?
Since this contribution is to be evaluated in terms of its
contribution to science (as implied by its appearance in a journal
using "science" in its title), the clarity and lack of ambiguity in its
terminology and concepts are of the utmost importance. Block is
well aware of the need to clarify the concept of consciousness.
Indeed, in the final paragraph of the target article he states "My
purpose in this target article has been to expose a confusion
about consciousness." He has succeeded in his attempt to
expose the confusion of others who have dealt with the topic of
consciousness. However, I believe his article has added its own
confusion to this difficult and dismal topic. As Block points out in
his introduction, in the seventeenth century Florentine Experi-
menters used a single term for temperature and for heat,
generating paradoxes, and there is a similar problem with
"consciousness," that is, "very different concepts are treated as a
single concept" (sect. 1, para. 1). Block's attempt to clarify the
topic by stating that there are two types of consciousness does
not solve the problem. If so much confusion abounds in dealing
with what is meant by the term "consciousness," perhaps it is
necessary either to abandon the topic completely, or to ex-
change the terms and concepts for others that are unambiguous.
In his preface to the Elements of Chemistry, 
Lavoisier
(1790/1965), who is considered the father of modern chemistry,
stated that advances in science require that clear and unam-
biguous terms be used, and that terms that "suggest false ideas"
be abandoned. He quoted liberally from the Abb6 de Condillac,
including his statement of the "impossibility of separating the
nomenclature of a science from the science itself," and "we
cannot improve the language of any science without at the same
time improving the science itself; neither can we, on the other
hand, improve a science, without improving a language or
nomenclature that belongs to it. However, certain facts of any
science may be, and however just the ideas we may have formed
270
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1995) 18:2

Commentary/Block: Confusion about consciousness
of these facts, we can only communicate false impressions to
others, while we want words by which these may be properly
expressed.
More on prosopagnosia
Andrew W. Young
MRC Applied Psychology Unit, Cambridge CB2 2EF, England.
andy.young@mrc-apu.cam.ac.uk
Abstract: Some cases of prosopagnosia involve a highly circumscribed
loss of A-consciousness. When seen in this way they offer further
support for the arguments made in Block's target article.
I agree with the thrust of the target article. Consciousness can
have different meanings, and it is easy to conflate them. Block's
paper helps considerably in tidying up, but I am going to try to
push the argument further. Some cases of prosopagnosia seem
to me good examples of domain-specific loss of A-consciousness,
yet they are not discussed quite like this in the target article.
Most prosopagnosics also suffer some degree of general visual
impairment, and this must affect P-consciousness. Even so, loss
of recognition is not always directly attributable to the visual
impairment, since comparison can be made to people with
equally or more severely impaired vision and no prosopagnosia
(De Renzi 1986; McNeil & Warrington 1991; Young & Ellis
1989).
There are also a minority of cases with only minimal visual
problems, and hence what seems pretty normal P-conscious-
ness. Consider Mr. W (Bruyer et al. 1983), one of the most
thoroughly documented cases in the literature. Although he
could not recognise many familiar faces, Mr. W would make
accurate copies of line drawings of faces, identify the sex of faces
when a hood covered the hair, correctly interpret facial expres-
sions, and decide whether photographs of unfamiliar faces
showed the same or different people. For all these tasks, Mr. W
performed as well as normal control subjects.
Cases like Mr. W make it difficult to argue that prosopagnosia
must always be linked to any major impairment of P-conscious-
ness; when Mr. W looked at faces, we have no grounds for
thinking he saw them very differently from how you or I would
see them. Yet Mr. W often had no sense of who the person might
be; in Block's terms, this is a failure of A-consciousness with
relatively intact P-consciousness. I say relatively intact because
some aspects of P-consciousness will necessarily be altered; for
example, the prosopagnosic person will no longer experience
any sense of familiarity when looking at known faces. This is
what seems to make Block hold back from this interpretation in
the target article. But these changes in P-consciousness are
simply consequences of the loss of recognition. There is no
pervasive inability to experience familiarity in prosopagnosia;
voices, objects, and other recognisable things seem perfectly
normal and familiar. Hence, it is reasonable to consider such
cases as primarily involving failures of A-consciousness. This
interpretation is strengthened by the findings of covert recogni-
tion mentioned in the target article, but it can hold without
them.
Such failures of A-consciousness can be highly circumscribed.
One of De Renzi's (1986) cases could find his own belongings
when they were mixed in with similar objects, identify his own
handwriting, pick out a Siamese cat among photographs of other
cats, recognise his own car without reading the number plate,
and sort domestic coins from foreign coins. In all of these tasks
he was therefore able to identify individual members of visual
categories with high interitem similarity, yet he could not
recognise the faces of relatives and close friends. Just as
strikingly, the deficit can affect mainly human faces; when
McNeil and Warrington's (1993) prosopagnosic patient took up
farming, he was able to learn to recognise his sheep, and
correctly identified several of them from photographs of their
faces!
If I am right that prosopagnosia can involve a selective loss of
A-consciousness, it fits Block's argument perfectly. Despite
their relatively preserved P-consciousness, prosopagnosic pa-
tients do not act as if they recognise faces in everyday life.
Examples abound in the literature. Block notes that LH's
girlfriend wore a special ribbon so he would know who she was.
A young girl we studied for several years would not recognise
even her own mother if she came to her school unexpectedly, but
would know her immediately once she spoke (Young & Ellis
1989). Newcombe et al. (1994) described some of the problems
experienced by a retired mathematician who had been pro-
sopagnosic all his life:
At the age of 16 years, while on holiday, he stood in a queue for 30 min
next to a family friend whom he had known all his life, without any
experience of familiarity. The friend complained — mildly -r to his
parents and his father reacted strongly to this apparent discourtesy.
Soon after, cycling from the village to his home, he saw a man walking
toward him. In his own words: "Mindful of my father's recent forceful
comments, I decided to play it safe. As we passed, I said "Good
morning, Sir." My father said later that I had never addressed him as
politely before or since." (Newcombe et al. 1994, p. 108)
This holds even for the cases with covert recognition. PH,
who has cooperated with my colleagues in an investigation
which has also lasted for many years, does not act as if he can
recognise us, even though he shows covert recognition of our
faces (de Haan et al. 1987). So in prosopagnosia one finds
precisely the loss of intentional actions based on recognition that
Block would predict to follow from loss of A-consciousness. This
offers further support for the arguments made in the target
article.
But there is a caveat. We should not conclude that P-
consciousness is entirely unrelated to intentional action. Isn't it
P-consciousness that gives us the confidence to act? Let's create
a simple example of A-consciousness without P-consciousness.
Suppose I invented a totally transparent plastic and used it to
make a bridge over a ravine. If I tell you where the bridge is,
would you be willing to step on it even though you can't see it? I
think you would be reluctant, and you would probably try to
touch it or gain some other form of P-consciousness of its
existence. Similarly, doesn't the lack of P-consciousness contrib-
ute to blindsight patients' thinking their answers are guesses?
I'm not trying to imply that P-consciousness is performing any
indispensable role; but it may have its uses.
Feeling of knowing and phenomenal
consciousness
Tiziana Zalla and Adriano P. Palma
Centre de Recherche en Epist6mologie Applique" (CREA), Ecole
Potytechnique, 75005 Paris, France, palma@poly.polytechnlque.fr and
zalla@polytechnlque.fr
Abstract: In Feeling ofKnowingcases, subjects have a form of conscious-
ness about the presence of a content (such as an item of information)
without having access to it. If this phenomenon can be correctly
interpreted as having to do with consciousness, then there would be a
P-conscious mental experience which is dissociated from access.
Suppose someone seen and known a long time ago comes to play
some role in one's reasoning processes. Usually a wealth of
information about that person is stored in long-term memory.
Seeing her face again triggers some specialized module (say, face
recognition) but one cannot recall her name, though one has the
"feeling of knowing" that name. When cued (with the first letter
of the proper name) one is able to recall the name itself. A small-
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1995) 18:2
271

Response /Block: Confusion about consciousness?
scale binding problem is solved: a lexical module is activated and
the integrated information from different modules finds its way
to the Executive System. There is an experiential quality
throughout this story: one "feels one knows." The phenomenal
consciousness is an awareness of an item one cannot focus on
with enough resolution to be able to identify it, of having
"access" to its representation in memory. When the retrieval
is successful, P-consciousness is indistinguishable from A-
consciousness. In all cases in which for some reason or other the
retrieval is not successful, we experience a separation between
phenomenal and access-consciousness.
A weakness of Block's target article is the relative paucity of
empirical data alleged to distinguish the two functions of con-
sciousness. We suggest that a frequent phenomenon, experi-
enced by most people at some time or other, can be seen as
empirical support for the reality of Block's distinction. The
phenomenon has been variously termed "Feeling of Knowing"
(FOK), "tip of the tongue experience" (when the item to be
retrieved is a lexical one), and so on. It is the rather common
situation in which subjects who are asked to recall some item
they have "stored" in memory cannot recall it but have the
distinct feeling of knowing it without being able to identify it.
Several experiments indicate that the item is indeed present in
memory: the majority of the subjects when cued or prompted
with some partial information (such as the first letter of the word
to be recalled or something along those lines) is able to retrieve
the "missing" item with a rate of success which is generally above
purely random guessing rates (see Hart 1965; 1967; Schacter
1983; Schacter & Worling 1985).
In FOK situations we are in a P-consciousness state without
being simultaneously in an A-consciousness state, for while the
experience is there, the content is not available to conscious
thinking, planning, reasoning (hence FOK states fail Block's test
for A-consciousness, sect. 4). FOK states can be described as
states of awareness of the existence of a content but not of the
content itself. Discussion of FOK phenomena in the literature
revolves around two main axes of explanation: the trace-based
view, which posits the existence of an internal monitoring
system, or, alternatively some form of retrieval procedure based
on inferential and contextual knowledge (see Koriat, 1993, for a
critical discussion of the two approaches). Neuropsychological
studies on impaired patients have tentatively connected deficits
in the reliability of FOK judgment with a metamemory impair-
ment brought about my frontal lobe lesions (see Janowsky et al.
1989; Shimamura & Squire 1986).
If this piece of empirical evidenced is correctly interpreted as
a case of P-consciousness without A-consciousness, it does
present some reason to distinguish model 1 (see Fig. 1 in target
article) from the others and their variants. Indeed, if taken at
face-value, it supports the idea that P-consciousness does have
a function. One possible hypothesis about FOK is that the P-
conscious mental states are cases of partial integration of infor-
mation. Being partial integrations, FOK states fall short of being
capable of activating A-consciousness (they are not inferentially
promiscuous and they do not trigger the executive functions).
FOK states appear to be ones in which information is processed
on the basis of cues and contextual elements. Though P-
conscious, they are unable to reach the Executive System of
Schacter's (1989) model because of memory retrieval failure of
some sort. This "failure" to access the Executive System is
normally short-lived, but it can last longer as some pathologies
show. But even by itself P-consciousness would have the role of
gateway to the access-consciousness machinery.
The point made here is limited to FOK. It suggests that there
is a functional role for P-consciousness. However, in agreement
with Block, our understanding of this function (if there is one
function of P-consciousness) is so poor that a variety of investiga-
tions will have to be carried out before we come to something
close to scientific plausibility for our claim. The phenomenon
itself is there (we tend to trust introspection in this regard) but it
may very well turn out to be epiphenomenally supervenient on
an array of mental states and operations, each having its own
function wholly separated from the quality of our experiences.
EDITORIAL C O M M E N T A R Y
A Zombie - a thing that has no experiences, no one home in there -
lacks something, and that something is consciousness. Does it lack
more than one thing? Even if it is not as inert as a rock, but as
behaviorally capable as ourselves (including our ability to speak and
reason): if it is indeed a Zombie, it is a Zombie. There is no point in
saying, say: "It knows but it cannot feel." What could that mean? I think
I know where we get these incoherent, peekaboo intuitions about the
mental life of things that, by hypothesis, have no mental lives at all: We
get them from our own experiences of knowing, not-knowing, or just-
barely-knowing things. But none of this can be legitimately attributed
to the Zombie. The Zombie is not like us when we know something,
but we don't know we know it, because it isn't like anything to be that
Zombie, whereas there is something it's like to be what we are when
we are in any of our various mental states. To put it more specifically:
there's something it's like to know (believe, mean, etc.), just as there is
something it's like to see .and feel and want - indeed, there's some-
thing it feels like to know (or not-know, or barely-known, or just-realize-
you-know, or be-able-to-do-without-quite-knowing-how). You might
just as well substitute "feels-like" for "like" in all the "something-it's-
like" locutions. The rest is just the details about what you happen to
know or not-know, which is to say: about whether it feels-like this or
feels-like that to be you. The invariant in all this is that it always (when
you are alive and not obtunded) feels like something to be you,
feeling/knowing whatever you feel/know (and being able to do what-
ever you can do, while feeling, usually, that you know how you do it -
whereas of course if you really knew how you do it, there would be
nothing left for cognitive scientists to do). Access to anything like that
is denied completely to a Zombie by hypothesis, and that's conscious-
ness. Apart from that, what is there? You can't be a partial Zombie,
after all (and neither the blindsight patient nor the epileptic is a partia*
Zombie, make no mistake about it, otherwise all of us are, trivially).
And if the inert, terminal-coma patient is indeed a Zombie, then he's
gone. He's got access to nothing, just like the hypothetical dynamic,
behaviorally capable zombie who might be chatting with you right
now. The only one with "access" is the one with the consciousness,
and the only thing he has access to is whatever he is ("phenomenally")
experiencing; the rest is just the details about what and when he is and
is not experiencing. For his Zombie counterpart, talk about access to
data, if you like, and consequent performance capacity (be it ever so
super-duper), but forget about consciousness; there's no one home in
there. 
- Ed.
Author's Response
How many concepts of consciousness?
Ned Block
Department of Linguistics and Philosophy, Massachusetts Institute of
Technology, Cambridge, MA 02139.
Electronic mall: block@psyche.mit.edu
Abstract: With some help from the commentators, a few adjustments to
the characterizations of A-consciousness and P-consciousness can avoid
some trivial cases of one without the other. But it still seems that the case
for the existence of P without A is stronger than that for A without P. If
indeed there can be P without A, but not A without P, this would be a
remarkable result that would need explanation.
I learned a great deal from the commentators about ways
in which what I said was wrong or easily misunderstood. I
272
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1995) 18:2

Response/Block: Confusion about consciousness?
am grateful for the opportunity to rethink and rephrase in
response to the criticisms. A number of superb commen-
taries also had to be held over to a future issue, and I look
forward to grappling with them as well.
R1. Is P-conscious content just highly
informational content?
Armstrong accepts P-consciousness but says it is "a spe-
cies of representational content of a particularly detailed
sort." Farah notes that perception in blindsight and other
such cases is degraded and concludes (here and in other
publications) that P-consciousness depends on quality of
information representation. [See also Farah: "Neuropsy-
chological Inference with an Interactive Brain" BBS 17(1)
1994.] Dennett says that my A/P distinction should really
be seen as a continuum, a continuum of richness of content
and degree of influence. He says I am "inflating differences
in degree into imaginary differences in kind." In Note 16
of the target article I suggested that some functionalists
"will see the distinction between A-consciousness and
P-consciousness primarily as a difference in degree rather
than in kind." But I was alluding to degree of access, not
degree of informational content. I think the high degree
of information views of P don't get to first base.
To see what is wrong with highly informational repre-
sentational content as a substitute for P-content, consider
the common types of blindness in which the (legally) blind
person is able to distinguish a few degrees of light and
dark, much as you or I can with our eyes closed. This is
P-conscious content that is relatively informationally
poor, not informationally rich. Furthermore, senses can
differ in information richness without differing in phe-
nomenality. Perhaps taste (not including smell via the
mouth or mouth feel) is less rich than vision (Kapsalis
1987, p. 66). But is taste any less phenomenal than vision?
Or consider orgasm again. Are we supposed to think that
orgasm is informationally rich? Tye has made a valiant
attempt to characterize (partially) the phenomenal con-
tent of orgasm in representational terms: something that
is very pleasing (and changes in intensity) is happening
down there. Even if this does capture the phenomenal
content of orgasm (which I don't believe for a second),
this is not a very informationally rich content. Yet there
can be no doubt that orgasm is "phenomenologically
impressive"!
Weiskrantz (1988) notes that his patient DB had better
acuity in some areas of the blind field (in some circum-
stances) than in his sighted field. Suppose a blindsight
patient with fairly good acuity in the blind field were to
become near-blind in the sighted field, able to distinguish
only a few shades of light and dark. He experiences the
light and dark but does not experience the blindsight. The
blindsight is informationally richer but (presumably) not
phenomenal, whereas the near-blind vision is phenome-
nal and informationally poorer.1
Dennett describes the informational content of blind-
sight as "vanishingly" small. In Dennett (1991), he em-
phasizes the cases in which the blindsight patient is given
a forced-choice, for example, an X or an O. But blindsight
patients can exhibit contents that have more informa-
tional value than that. In Poppel et al. (1973), the first
human blindsight study, the patients were asked to move
their eyes in the direction of the stimuli that they appar-
ently had no experience of seeing. The patients could do
so even though they thought they were guessing. In
addition, as I mentioned in the target article, blindsight
patients can catch a ball thrown in the blind field and can
shape their hands appropriately so as to grasp an object
presented in the blind field. The information involved in
these nonphenomenal activities is surely at least as great
as the phenomenal discriminations of the blind people
just mentioned or of some sighted people with their eyes
closed. In addition, the implicit prosopagnosics men-
tioned in the target article have the capacity to recognize
un-P-consciously the face of, say, John Wayne. I skipped
over most of the empirical literature on this topic for lack
of space, but let me just mention one phenomenon:
Semantic priming is a phenomenon in which the pre-
sentation of one stimulus facilitates the subject's response
to a related stimulus. For example, if normal Americans
are asked to press a button when a familiar face appears in
a series of faces presented rapidly one after another, the
subject tends to press the button sooner if a related name
has been presented recently. For example, "Reagan"
facilitates reactions to Bush's face. Likewise, one name
primes another and one face primes a "related" name.
Here is the result: in a few prosopagnosics who have been
studied in detail and who exhibit some of the other
indications of "covert knowledge" of faces, faces prime
related names despite the prosopagnosics' insistence that
they have no idea whose face it is. For example, Lady Di's
face primes Prince Charles's name even though the sub-
ject insists that he does not know whose face it is. See also
the phenomenon mentioned by Graham. The perceptual
content that it is Lady Di's face is moderately informa-
tionally rich, but this is not a P-conscious content. So once
again, we have moderate informational richness without
P, contradicting the point of view of Armstrong, Farah,
and Dennett.
Dennett constructs a thought experiment, a super-
blindsight patient who conies to be able to tell us -
effortlessly - very detailed facts about the visual proper-
ties in his blind field. He can tell us that there is a bright
orange Times Roman italic X on a blue-green background
about 2 inches high with a smudge. This superblind-
sighter says that he knows these sorts of features of stimuli
in his blind field, even though he is just guessing, and
contrasts what is going on with the real visual experiences
of his sighted field. Dennett rightly says that it is hard to
swallow that "anybody who could gather that much infor-
mation from a glance" might have no visual experience.
And he adds, imagining another patient, that if all he can
tell us about the sighted field is that he saw an X rather
than an O, we would be baffled by his claim of P-conscious
experience.
Dennett is on to something here, but he has misdiag-
nosed what it is. There is some plausibility in the idea of
high-information representational content as an empiri-
cally sufficient condition of phenomenality in humans
(though not a conceptually sufficient condition). But there
is no plausibility at all to the idea that high information
content is a necessary condition for phenomenality, as is
shown by the example of orgasm and the discrimination of
a few degrees of light and dark with one's eyes closed. I
think that the reason for the plausibility of Dennett's
examples is that they illustrate depictive or pictorial
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1995) 18:2
273

Response/Block: Confusion about consciousness?
representations. And it is very tempting to believe that
pictorial visual representations must be P-conscious. That
explains Dennett's first example. In the second example,
if we think of the person as having a pictorial representa-
tion of an X, it is hard to imagine how the person could see
the X without seeing it as having some particular size,
typeface, color, and so on (hard only because one natu-
rally but wrongly thinks of images as photograph-like; see
Block 1983).
However, even mental images can apparently fail to be
P-conscious. Cooper and Shepard (1973) noted that when
subjects practiced image rotation to the point of automat-
icity, they reported that they had no image experiences,
yet the rotation data argued for the same images as before
(I am indebted here to Baars 1994). Kosslyn (1980; 1994)
asked subjects to zoom in on an imagined map to the point
where they could only see a part of it. It would be
interesting to see whether these subjects could make use
of the information in the "invisible" parts of the map
better than subjects who had not just had those parts in
the mind's eye.
So far I have been criticizing the view that P-content =
highly information content, the view of Armstrong and
Farah, but not quite Dennett's view. Dennett also men-
tions access. But how is access supposed to figure? Is P-
content content that is both highly informational and
highly accessible? If so, the legally blind contents I
mentioned are a counterexample since though they are
highly accessible, they are low in information. Or perhaps
the mode of combination is disjunction rather than con-
junction: P content is content that is high in information
or high in accessibility. But now the P-unconscious images
are a counterexample in the other direction. Further-
more, everyone has relatively high information but quies-
cent beliefs and desires that are not P-conscious.
R2. Does P exist?
Rey says it is strange that I did not explicitly consider any
of the accounts that have been offered of P-consciousness
in computational terms. This was an explicit strategic
decision. Not everything can be discussed in every paper.
This one was about some distinctions and how missing
them causes trouble. In other papers I have discussed
some computational (functional), intentional, and cog-
nitive theories of P-consciousness. Rey says that the
assumption of P-consciousness as noncomputational
and noncognitive impedes research. That depends on
whether P-consciousness is noncomputational and non-
cognitive. If it is, then Rey's assumption that it isn't
impedes research. Rey assumes that the right approach to
consciousness is that of computational and cognitive psy-
chology (computational in this context = functional; see
Block 1994). But why does Rey ignore the neuro-
physiological approach? The sort of research program
described, for example, in Crick (1994) does not accept
Rey's assumption, yet it seems to be going somewhere.
Rey admits that phenomenal consciousness deflated so as
to be amenable to computational analysis of the sort he
favors is "phenomenologically unsatisfying," but he per-
sists because he knows of no non-question-begging evi-
dence for the postulation of P-consciousness as distinct
from computational notions. I find Rey's stance baffling.
Let's look at a specific example. Above, I discussed the
idea that P-conscious content is simply highly informa-
tional content. I appealed to the evidence of our own
experience: when you close your eyes, you can nonethe-
less distinguish a few degrees of light and dark via truly
phenomenal experience, so phenomenal experience can
be low on the informational scale. Does Rey propose that
we should ignore the evidence of our own experience in
cases like this? To do so would be "phenomenologically
unsatisfying" in a way that carries some weight, namely, it
ignores a source of evidence that we all have from our own
experience.
Rey is worried about conundra involving epiphenome-
nalism, zombies and such, and to avoid them he wants to
reduce phenomenal consciousness to the computational.
If P can be functionally defined, epiphenomenalism is
ruled out and zombies are impossible. But this is the
wrong way to avoid the conundra. Russell once hypothe-
sized that the world was created five minutes ago with all
the evidence of an age of many billions of years. Some
philosophers have wanted to avoid this possibility by
defining the past in terms of its effect on the present. To
say that there were dinosaurs 65 million years ago is to say
there are dinosaur-signs now. But this is a foolish meta-
physical over-reaction. Better to face the conundra head
on as discussed below in section R13.
R3. Is A-consciousness consciousness at all?
Graham, Lloyd, Natsoulas, Revonsuo, and the EDI-
TORIAL COMMENTARY question whether A-consciousness
is consciousness at all. As Searle (1992) emphasizes, a
zombie that is a functional duplicate of us but lacks any
P-consciousness is not conscious at all. (This point is made
forcefully by Tyler Burge, forthcoming.) But it is a mistake
to jump from the idea that a zombie is not conscious in any
sense to the idea that A-consciousness is not a form of
consciousness. A-consciousness can be a kind of con-
sciousness even if it is in some way parasitic (as Burge,
Lloyd, and Revonsuo rightly say) on a core notion of
P-consciousness. (A parquet floor is a kind of floor even
though it requires another floor beneath it.) A-conscious-
ness can come and go in a background of a P-conscious-
ness person (that is, a person who sometimes has P-con-
scious states). Suppose a drunk becomes "unconscious."
He may have P-conscious states both before and during
his episode of unconsciousness; for example, while un-
conscious he may be seeing stars or having mental images
of various sorts. I don't want to try to specify exactly the
relation between being unconscious in this ordinary sense
and the concepts of P and A, but roughly, I think we count
the drunk as unconscious to the extent that he has no
A-consciousness of the environment via P-conscious per-
ceptions of it. The drunk is A-unconscious in a way the
specification of which involves appeal to P.
We tend to deploy the concept of A-consciousness in
describing unconscious phenomena, so it is not surprising
that many of the most common uses come in at a some-
what theoretical level. Consider, for example, Freudian
unconscious states. Suppose a person is tortured horribly
in a cinnabar room (a particular shade of orange-red). The
cinnabar color symbolizes the pain and is repressed. He
remembers the torture vividly but denies remembering
the color of the room. Nonetheless, the memory of the
color comes out in slips, associations, dreams, and so on.
274
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1995) 18:2

Response/Block: Confusion about consciousness?
For example, he dreams of horrid cinnabar things. When
he is in a cinnabar room he shudders violently and comes
up with an excuse to leave, but does not recognize why.
There is nothing in Freudian theory or common sense
that precludes repressed phenomenal color images of the
room. In fact, we can imagine the patient realizing this
himself after years of psychoanalysis. "I had a cinnabar
image all the time that I would not let myself acknowl-
edge." Whether or not this actually occurs, it makes sense
for there to be a blockage that keeps a phenomenal color
image from being informationally promiscuous. So the
sense in which repressed memories are unconscious is
A-unconscious. The Freudian type of unconsciousness
does not require P-unconsciousness, but it does require
A-unconsciousness.
Similar points apply to neurological syndromes such as
prosopagnosia, in which the patient is not "conscious" of
whose face he is seeing, even though he reveals in a
variety of experimental circumstances that the informa-
tion is unconsciously represented. The unconsciousness
is A-unconsciousness. It isn't the presence or absence of a
feeling of familiarity that defines prosopagnosia but rather
the patient lacking A-consciousness of the information
about the identity of the person. As Young notes, the lack
of a P-conscious feeling of familiarity is (normally) a
consequence of the lack of A-consciousness, but is not a
defining feature of the syndrome. This point is nicely
illustrated by Young's theory of Capgras's delusion, a
syndrome in which patients claim that people whom they
know (usually friends and relations) have been replaced
by aliens who look just like them. Young (1994c) provides
evidence that what is going on is that the subject recog-
nizes (say) his mother, but he gets no feeling of familiarity
from the perception, so he supposes the person is not
really his mother. (It may be that victims of Cotard's
syndrome, in which patients think they have died like-
wise, lack this feeling of familiarity, but blame it on
themselves instead of on the people who don't stimulate
the feeling of familiarity.) Suppose Young's suggestion is
right. Still, this lack of feeling of familiarity does not make
the patient a prosopagnosic. He recognizes his mother's
face and the faces of others despite the lack of the feeling
of familiarity. So lack of a P-conscious feeling is not at the
heart of prosopagnosia. In sum, though I agree that P is
the core notion, A is still a kind of consciousness.
R4. P without A; A without P
Many of the commentators agreed with at least some of
my cases of P without A. Revonsuo proposes a new one:
dreams. The trouble with dreams as cases of P without A is
that dreams often involve substantial rationality. For ex-
ample, Chomsky tells me he plans papers in his dreams,
and there is a well-known phenomenon of lucid dreaming
in which the dreamer, knowing he is dreaming, changes
the course of the dream. Of course, many dreams are
much less rational, on the surface at least, but I would be
reluctant to suppose that these dreams are unconscious in
a different sense of the term than less overtly sensible
dreams. I expect that dreams are unconscious in the sense
described in the discussion above of the unconscious
drunk.
What about A without P. In the target article I said that
such cases were conceptually possible, but I knew of no
actual ones. If it is so much easier to find P without A than
A without P, that is a striking empirical fact. Humphrey
was the only commentator to make any remarks in favor of
A without P. He argues that Helen was in some respects
such a case, correcting wrong impressions about his
unpublished work. But, as he notes, even if Helen is a
case of no visual phenomenality, she had no shape recog-
nition of any kind. So we need to know more about cases
such as Helen to count her as a good case of A without P.
I have long been troubled by cases from the "imageless
thought" controversy from the early part of the century
(G. Humphrey 1963 - not the same Humphrey). For
example, pick up an object from your desk, put it down,
and pick up another. If they differ substantially in weight,
you may "just know" this. My experience here is that I
have "images" of the weights of the two objects, but
apparently not of the relation between them. The relation
between them appears to be something I just know
without any phenomenal experience of it. This is a tricky
bit of introspection, just the sort of thing that got psychol-
ogists in trouble during this controversy. But it would be
foolish to ignore it, since it can guide experimentation. I
hope some clever experimentalist figures out how to get
an experimental handle on it. Burge (forthcoming) has
some very interesting arguments for A without P. One of
Burge's examples involves the familiar case of a solution to
a problem popping into mind. We often know we've got
the solution without actually expressing it in any internal
phenomenal clothes such as words or pictures.
I should add that from the point of view of empirical
model building, it is very important to distinguish be-
tween cases of A without P, like superblindsight, if it
exists, and Burge's sort of case. Both count against Model
2 because they show that some highly sophisticated
thought (that must be accomplished by the Executive
System if there is one such system) is not P. But neither
Burge's type of case nor the imageless thought case
challenges Schacter's (1989) model, because that model
allows for executive processes that are not P. However,
superblindsight, if it exists, would challenge Schacter's
model, because that model tells us that the only way for
perceptual information to get to the Executive is to pass
through the P-module. Of course, we already have good
reason to reject Model 2. As pointed out in the target
article, the intermediate steps in problem solving often
fail to be P, and that alone counts against Model 2.
Let us now move to objections to the idea of P without
A. Church, Kobes, and Revonsuo criticize my example of
the unattended noise as a case of P without A. They say
that people adjust the loudness of their speech in re-
sponse to noise even when not attending to it, and that is a
rational action that reflects A-consciousness of the noise.
But this noise adjustment does not show A-consciousness
in my sense of the term. There is no inferential promis-
cuity here. If the notion of A-consciousness were to be
weakened in this direction (also suggested by Graham
and in Flanagan's [1992] critique of my notion of A), the
consequence would be to let in cases of A without P. If
A-consciousness were watered down in this way, then
blindsight and the other "covert knowledge" syndromes
would be cases of A without P. Of course if you like A
without P and hate P without A, you could adopt
Graham's and Flanagan's suggestion, but your pleasure
would be purely verbal.
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1995) 18:2
275

Response /Block: Confusion about consciousness?
Kobes criticizes one of my arguments for conceptually
possible cases of P without A. In Note 7 of the target
article I worried about an A-unconscious state that caused
an A-conscious state with the same content. The first state
is ex hypothesis not A-conscious, but it is in virtue of one's
having that state that its content is inferentially promis-
cuous, so it seems that it does have to be A-conscious. I
avoided the problem by thinking of the "in virtue of" in
the definition of A-consciousness (a state is A-conscious if
in virtue of one's having the state, a representation of its
content is inferentially promiscuous, etc.) as directly in
virtue of. If state X has an inferentially promiscuous
content, but only because it causes state Y, which inherits
X's content, then X doesn't count as A-conscious. Kobes
thinks this answer gets me in trouble with the perceptual
states of the superblindsighter (who, you will recall, is
conceptually possible but apparently nonexistent). He
says that it is only in virtue of the effects of these percep-
tual states on the superblindsighter's thoughts that the
perceptual states are inferentially promiscuous, and so
on, so the perceptual states are neither A-conscious nor
P-conscious, and the supposed example of A without P
dissolves. But why suppose, as Kobes does, that the
superblindsighter's perceptual states of "seeing" an X
have their effects only via the causation of the thought that
there is an X? If such a perceptual state could only have an
effect by causing a specific thought, then it would not be
informationally promiscuous and it would not be
A-conscious. A genuinely A-conscious perceptual content
would be freely available for use in thought.
Kobes criticizes my account of the Sperling (1960)
experiment, saying that before the icon fades, the subject
is both P- and A-conscious of them all jointly, and after the
icon fades the subject is neither P- nor A-conscious of
them all jointly, so there is no divergence of P and A. Let
me try to state my point better. Consider the distinction
between jointly and severally. A pair of swimmers can be
poised to win jointly if, say, they are on the same team in a
race of teams. But in a race in which only one swimmer
can win, a pair of swimmers would be poised to win
severally, not jointly, that is each is poised to win, even
though they can't both win. In the Sperling experiment
there is never a time in which the letters are all poised to
win jointly (become inferentially promiscuous, etc.) be-
cause, as with the individual swimmers, they cannot all
win. But they can all jointly be P-conscious, or at any rate
that's my claim.
Zalla & Palma argue that the tip of the tongue phenom-
enon (and "Feeling of Knowing" states generally) is a case
of P without A. You have the feeling of knowing someone's
name, but you can't access it. But on the surface, at least,
the content that the name is known is both P and A, and
the specific name content (e.g., "Blanche") that leads to
knowledge of or correct guesses about features of the
name (rhymes with "ranch") is neither P nor A. I agree
with Zalla & Palma's statement that Feeling of Knowing
states involve consciousness of "the existence of a content
but not of the content itself." But as far as I can see, this
characterizes both P and A, so there is no gap here
between P and A. Zalla & Palma argue (if I understand
them rightly) that when I have the feeling that I know her
name, typically the name itself is P, but not A. "Blanche"
is a P-content but not an A-content. But I don't see why
the facts that they mention about frontal lobe patients are
supposed to support this idea. They point out that I have
not got a wealth of data to support the idea of P without A.
They are right, but I am hopeful for the future.
Baars thinks that P = A, but what is his evidence? In his
reply he mentions a few cases in which both P and A are
present and other cases in which both P and A are absent.
I mentioned in the target article that this sort of evidence
is suggestive of a rough correlation, but it can hardly show
that P = A. He says that "implicitly . . . we all treat" P
and A as "empirically inseparable." True, but implicitly
we treat the earth as stationary as well. Baars studies P by
studying A, so if P # A, his research program would have
to be reevaluated. Even if P and A are perfectly correlated
within some conditions, but not identical, his research
strategy would be questionable. One would want to know
why P and A are correlated. Weight and mass are corre-
lated at the surface of the earth, but studying weight is not
studying mass. He says, "GW theory shows that the
equivalence . . . is very productive indeed." I question
that; we know lots about A, almost nothing about P. I think
we are more likely to make progress by looking very
carefully at cases where P and A seem to diverge. If they
do diverge, that's where the interesting results are. Baars
just ignores the cases that cause problems for his view
instead of subjecting them to scrutiny. Church, Kobes,
Revonsuo, and Chalmers (forthcoming) agree with Baars
that P and A are correlated, but unlike Baars they take the
responsibility to confront the putative exceptions. Baars
should consider what Humphrey says about A without P.
Baars brings in evolution to argue for P = A, saying that
we are unlikely to get two nearly identical organs for one
job. "That is not how the natural world works." In our
state of ignorance of what P is and how P might be related
to access, I don't think such an argument has much
weight. One can imagine an uninformed person wonder-
ing why evolution needed both sperms and eggs, two
things for one job. Should the uninformed person con-
clude that sperm = egg? No, he should try to find out
more about the correlation. And we are no less ignorant
about consciousness than this uninformed person. Fur-
thermore, even sophisticated biologists do not agree
about why sex evolved. So the question of Why two things
for one job? is still a live one. Nonetheless, concluding
that sperm = egg would be a joke. Baars coauthored
"Does Philosophy Help or Hinder Scientific Work on
Consciousness?" (Baars & McGovern 1993), arguing that
philosophers should get out of the way. We should evalu-
ate this criticism in the light of the fact that philosophers
are the ones most likely to raise doubts about Baars's
research program.
R5. Why not make A easier to have?
Church, Graham, and Revonsuo think I set the A-hurdle
too high. Church suggests accessibility instead of being
poised for access, and Graham wants to set the hurdle low
enough so that the kind of access that blindsight patients
have is good enough for A. Flanagan (1992) reacted in a
similar manner to an earlier version of this paper, propos-
ing that we substitute a notion of "informational sensi-
tivity" for A, where blindsight patients are informa-
tionally sensitive to information in their blind fields.
Of course, one is free to define "Access-conscious" as
one chooses. What I was after was a notion of access that I
276
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1995) 18:2

Response/Block: Confusion about consciousness?
find in common-sense reasoning and that is the best shot
at coextension with P. Defining A in terms of informa-
tional sensitivity will frustrate that aim. As I mentioned,
blindsight will count as a case of A without P. Indeed, one
reason for choosing "poised for access" instead of "accessi-
ble" is to avoid classifying as A a familiar kind of inactive or
dormant belief. For example, we were all taught facts in
elementary school, such as that the sun is 93 million miles
away from the earth. Perhaps you were taught this and
have believed it ever since, even though you haven't
thought of this fact in years. It was an inactive belief. But if
we make A a matter of accessibility, then such inactive
beliefs will be A but not P, and that makes the failure of
coextension of A and P a trivial consequence of a defini-
tion. In the view of many of the commentators, A = Porat
least A and P are coextensive or can be made so with a
little tinkering with definitions. I disagree, but I do not
want my disagreement to rest on a triviality.
Similar points apply to the definition of "P." Humphrey
prefers to restrict P to the result of irritation of the sensory
surfaces. This leaves out, for example, images and the
phenomenal aspect of thinking, and would therefore
generate A without P. Perhaps Humphrey would want to
include images that reflect the same states as are pro-
duced by sensory surfaces, but then why leave out the
phenomenal aspect of thought?
As Chalmers (forthcoming) notes, I should welcome
attempts to tinker with the definitions of "P" and "A" so as
to make them coincide better. I don't want my claim that
P 7^ A to depend on anything that is merely verbal. So I
invite further attempts to improve these definitions.
R6. Why does A have to be rational?
I defined A using the notion of rationality, and this draws
complaints from Graham, Lloyd, Revonsuo, and Warren
as well as an excellent account of what I should have said
from Kobes. Though I think there are deep connections
between consciousness (both P and A) and rationality, I
didn't intend to imply that principles of logic or good
reasoning are necessary for A or that animals cannot have
A. I meant to appeal to the use of a representation in
reasoning, even if the reasoning is poor. And I intended a
relativization to the capacities of the type of animal in-
volved. As Kobes says, "Access is not diminished merely
in virtue of the creature's having less power to reason or
act." I apologize to my readers for not being clearer about
this.
R7. Is the P/A distinction useful?
What is good about the P/A distinction? (1) It is an
ordinary concept of consciousness, and so it is relevant to
how we think about ourselves. (2) It is the information-
processing image of P and thus a good candidate for what
P is in information-processing terms. And (3) the relative
ease of finding cases of P without A as compared with A
without P suggests the distinction is on to something to do
with the joints of nature.
Dixon argues that there is no point in distinguishing P
from A. He gives a number of cases that he apparently
sees as borderline ones, not clearly A or P. But to con-
clude from the existence of borderline cases that there is
no distinction or that the distinction is not useful is a
mistake. There are objects that are borderline cases
between a table and a chair - a bit table-like, a bit chair-
like, but neither table nor chair. That doesn't impugn the
utility of the table/chair distinction. Dixon mentions
many cases, but I'll just discuss the one he says casts the
greatest doubt on the distinction: Hypnosis induces a
hallucination in the subject of the experimenter, but
when the subject turns to the side he also sees the real
experimenter. Dixon seems to think that there is some
sort of conundrum here that casts doubt on the A/P
distinction. But if there is a genuine hallucination, then
when I'm having it I'm having one experience that is both
A and P, and when I see the real experimenter I have a
similar experience that is also both A and P. What's the
problem? Dixon goes on to argue that I should not have
constructed a theory of consciousness on the basis of
evidence from brain damage, because these patients may
have compensating defects that make them different from
normal people, and there are not enough of them for good
sample size. But if brain-damage cases show P without A,
then its existence is proved whether or not it ever occurs
in normal people, and if brain damage does not yield cases
of A without P, this is an especially interesting fact given
the fantastic wealth of variation in brain-damage cases.
These points illustrate why general cautions like, "You
can't show anything by appealing to brain damage" are so
weak. Every source of evidence has its pitfalls - the critic
of a particular bit of empirical reasoning must show that
the pitfalls have been engaged.
Warren rejects the A/P distinction because it is not
defined in a completely clear and unambiguous way. But
the demand for such definitions is misplaced. Especially
at the beginning of a scientific enterprise there is no
alternative to going by the seat of one's pants. I once saw a
book that discussed the quality of scientific articles. The
authors shared Warren's mistaken view of definition.
They felt it was important to define "scientific quality,"
and they did so in terms of the number of references to the
article in the subsequent literature. As anyone can see,
that is no good - for example, an article can be referred to
as a standard example of a terrible mistake. At an early
stage in inquiry, noncircular definition is usually not
possible. It took a whole thermodynamic theory to
ground the thermodynamic definition of temperature,
and further work reducing this theory to statistical me-
chanics to ground the definition of temperature as mean
molecular kinetic energy. Definition and theory must
progress together. The demand for definition at an early
stage encourages misplaced precision.
R8. Is there a fallacy at all?
Atkinson & Davies quote Shiflrin and Schneider (1977)
giving a theory of P in terms of A, and they say reasonably
that there is no conflation here. But the fact that Shifirin
and Schneider don't exhibit a conflation does not show
that others don't either. The sign of lack of conflation in
what they quote is that in a single sentence the authors say
they are going to give an information-processing theory of
the "phenomenological feeling of consciousness." But
there is another route to a theory of P in terms of A: first
you conflate P and A, and then you give a theory of A,
talcing it to be a theory of P. The cases I quoted look quite
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1995) 18:2
277

Response/Block: Confusion about consciousness?
different from Shiffrin and Schneider, more in the direc-
tion of the second story. The important point is that the
difference here is not in premises and conclusion. I agree
that in that regard Shiffrin and Schneider are more or less
the same as a number of the cases I mention. The
difference lies not in the premises and the conclusion but
in the means of getting from one to the other.
Atkinson & Davies go on to suggest a new argument for
explaining A in terms of P. P is relatively intrinsic and
categorical compared to A, whereas A is relatively rela-
tional and dispositional. They are right about this, but the
upshot for matters causal is limited. Atkinson & Davies
think the relation between P and A is like that between
the chemical basis of solubility and the tendency to
dissolve. However, a token thought can be accessible at
one time but not another, depending on the whole system
and the pathways available. We do not know that P
content is a force toward mechanisms of reasoning and
reporting. This is of course intuitively plausible, but then
blindsight is or was intuitively implausible. Suppose, for
example, that Schacter's (1989) model is correct. Then we
may be able to explain why P-conscious representations
tend to be A-conscious without any appeal to the intrinsic
properties of P. It is a property of the model that anything
that gets to the P module is close to the Executive System
and (perhaps) likely to be sent there.
Tye also argues that there is no fallacy, but on a different
ground. P is preconceptual, so how could it involve the
Executive System? So it must be that information fails to
arrive at the Executive System because it fails to be P; so
there is no fallacy. On the substance of Tye's argument:
How do we know if P is preconceptual? I used the phrase
"representational" to describe P-content instead of "in-
tentional" to allow for that possibility, but I have seen no
convincing argument to the effect that P-content is pre-
conceptual. Furthermore, there is reason to doubt the
preconceptual claim. The specialized modules appear to
have lots of conceptualized information. For example,
there appears to be information in the face module about
people's occupations (see Sergent & Poncet 1990; Young
1994a; 1994b). On Schacter's (1989) model, all the inputs
to the P-module are from sources that contain concep-
tualized contents. But suppose that Tye is right. Still, this
is a new argument. When someone finds a good argument
from premises to a conclusion, there is a temptation to
suppose that this is what others have had in mind who
have argued, apparently fallaciously, from the same prem-
ises to the same conclusion. However, I saw no sign of
Tye's argument in the works that I criticized.
R9. Is P at all representational?
Katz argues that I have not presented sufficient reason to
conclude that P-content is at all representational. He
notes that even though what it is like to hear a sound from
the right T4 what it is like to hear a sound from the left, one
cannot conclude that P-content is representational. What
it is like to be married # what is it like to be single; marital
status is social, but it would be a mistake to conclude that
P-content is social. The argument form is certainly not
valid, but it has something to it: the premises call for an
account of the difference. In the case of marriage, we have
an adequate account of why what it is like to be married #
what is it like to be single without assuming that phenom-
enal content is social. And in the direction case, as Katz
says, we could explain the different P-contents on the
basis of a difference in attention or orienting. But I believe
that there are many cases for which the best explanation
of the difference between the P-content of seeing X T4
the P content of seeing Y appeals to representational fea-
tures of P.
Consider the P content of seeing a square compared to
the P-content of seeing a circle. These P-contents allow
one to see that the squares are packable together without
gaps, whereas the circles are not. Also, the squares have a
small number of axes of symmetry, but the circles have a
large number. These examples show that P-content is
representational, but they also show something stronger
and more interesting, something that must be Katz's real
target. Katz's position allows that P-content represents as
ink represents, namely, extrinsically, that is, it can be
used to represent. But what the examples show is that
P-contents represent per se. The P-contents are intrin-
sically packable (for the square-representing contents) or
not packable (for the circle-representing contents). The
P-contents alone allow one to see such facts.
Katz notes that my examples are spatial, and suggests
that to the extent that I am right, it may be because
P-consciousness involves "clicking" on a region of a spatial
buffer. But nonspatial properties, for example causality,
are represented by P-contents. Roll a ball at another so
that the first makes the second move. I don't think that
very subjective type could be experienced as the second
ball acting on the first (see Michotte 1946). Katz points out
that for P properties that are subject to spectrum inver-
sion or an analog of it, the P-contents can represent the
properties involved in inversion only extrinsically. True,
but the possibility of spectrum inversion applies notably
to "secondary" qualities like colors and not to P-contents,
of, for example, shapes or causal properties. Katz also
objects that there is some tension between P-content
being representational and there being a P-module. But
the representational features of P-contents could depend
on processes that occur prior to the P-module (say in the
specialized modules) or after it. The idea would be that
non-P representations sent to the P-module become rep-
resentational P-contents within it. Like Farah, Katz sees
the P-module as concerned only with intrinsic properties
of the representations in it. Katz does not comment on
whether, for example, thoughts are P-states, but his views
fit best with Humphrey's restriction of P to sensory
properties.
R10. Is there an important distinction left out?
Harman and Lycan have similar criticisms. First, both
think that I have left out a distinction. Lycan distinguishes
between a quale, for example, a red area of the visual
field, on the one hand, and self-monitoring of that quale
on the other. The self-monitoring apparently consists in
mobilizing internal attention toward the quale or alter-
natively, in the views of many students of this issue,
having a higher order thought about the quale. Lycan says
that my term "P" comprehends both of these, and he
seems to suggest that "P," (as with "what it is like") is
ambiguous between the two. I find it hard to take the
criticism that I left out any P/monitoring distinction, since
I explicitly mentioned three forms of internal monitoring-
278
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1995) 18:2

Response/Block: Confusion about consciousness?
consciousness and I explicitly distinguished them from P
(sect. 4.2.2, para. 1). Lycan also disagrees with me about
whether qualia are entirely representational, that is,
whether there is more to P-content than representational
content. I say yes, Lycan says no. But Lycan promotes
this entirely legitimate disagreement into another sense
of P-consciousness. He calls my qualia, the ones that they
aren't entirely exhausted by their representational prop-
erties, "Q-ualia." I don't see why a disagreement about
P-content should be blown up into a new sense of P.
Harman says I miss the distinction between "raw feel"
and "what is it like." Raw feel is Harman's word for Lycan's
Q-ualia, the P-contents that I accept, and he rejects that
they are supposed to outrun their representational con-
tent. Harman's what it is like is Lycan's monitoring
consciousness. So raw feels are P-contents that are at least
in part nonrepresentational and can exist without mon-
itoring, and what it is like, which Harman feels is the
proper referent of "consciousness," is entirely representa-
tional and has a constitutive connection to the self. As with
Lycan, I find it hard to take seriously the criticism that I
have conflated these things. I was very explicit about
all the "pieces." The issue between me and Harman is
one of what the most revealing way of assembling these
pieces is.
What separates Harman and Lycan from me is mainly
two issues. First, I say the phenomenal content of an
experience goes beyond its representational content.
They disagree (more on this later). A second source of
disagreement has to do with the relation between con-
sciousness and the self and monitoring. My P-content is a
kind of phenomenal content that need not be monitored,
and I give little emphasis to the connection with the self.
(I describe P-content at a few points as having a "me-ish"
phenomenal quality.) So my major category does not
emphasize monitoring or connection with the self, and in
fact I mention monitoring and self-consciousness as sepa-
rate categories. By contrast, Lycan emphasizes monitor-
ing. For example, he says that there is an explanatory gap
for monitoring consciousness, but not (or not obviously)
for the phenomenal content that is itself monitored. And
Harman emphasizes that A-conscious experience is al-
ways an experience of a self.
To sum up, (1) I have a substantive disagreement with
both Lycan and Harman about whether there is any
phenomenal but not entirely representational content.
And (2) there is a substantive disagreement with Lycan
about the explanatory gap. But (3) there is also a much
more diffuse issue between me and them about what is
important in the study of phenomenal consciousness.
Lycan emphasizes monitoring, Harman emphasizes the
self (at least by contrast with me), and I emphasize the
phenomenal quality of experience. Because there are
some differences between Lycan and Harman, let me
discuss them separately.
Lycan in effect criticizes (see especially his Note 4) my
claim in the target article that the "explanatory gap"
applies to P-consciousness. He says there is an explana-
tory gap for monitoring consciousness (P attended), but
not, or not obviously, to P itself. I would like to see Lycan
back this up. Attention is as likely to yield to the
information-processing theories of cognitive psychology
and cognitive neuroscience as is, say, memory or any
other cognitive process. It is an active area of research
with many competing theories - see, for example, the
seven articles in Attention and Performance XV (Umilta &
Moscovitch 1994), or the seven articles in Attention and
Performance XIV (Meyer & Kornblum 1993). By contrast,
there are really no theories (nothing that deserves to be
called a theory) of P. No one really has any idea about what
P is. As mentioned earlier, the typical research program is
to study A, hoping A = P (see Baars). Monitoring con-
sciousness is attended P-consciousness, so what is likely
to be understood within the confines of current research
paradigms is just the part that Lycan thinks adds the
mystery.
Harman says that A-conscious experience is always an
experience of a self and necessarily involves access to that
self, so, trivially, consciousness is "access consciousness."
Is access to the self supposed to involve engagement with
mechanisms of reasoning and reporting bringing with
them inferential promiscuity, and so on. If so, then
Harman owes us some comment on the putative cases of P
without A. If not, then I don't think there is a large
disagreement here, for Harman's view does not then
preclude P without A. (Levine makes essentially this
point.) But there is at least a difference in emphasis. I am a
Humean about the self (like Dennett and Church), seeing
the self-regarding aspect of P-consciousness as being a
matter of connection of the P-state to other states. I said in
the target article that P-content often represents the state
as a state of mine. Part of the self-regarding aspect of P in
my view is further P-attribute that involves some appre-
hension of the connection to other states. But I am also
willing to countenance P-states in my body that are not
fully mine. (I mentioned hypnotic analgesia as a possible
example.)
There is one issue that I have not yet mentioned on
which Lycan agrees with me rather than Harman. Lycan
allows a category of qualia (e.g., a red area of the visual
field) that are phenomenal but not necessarily monitored.
I would guess that these fit into the category of what
Harman calls "sense data," which he takes me (wrongly) as
endorsing. I am grateful to Lycan for explicitly not sup-
posing (as he did in Lycan, 1987, and as Harman does
here) that the advocate of qualia is committed to sense
data or "phenomenal individuals." If any of us is commit-
ted to sense data, it is Lycan, Armstrong, Church,
Kitcher (and perhaps Harman) and other advocates of
monitoring. The rest of us can agree with Harman (1990)
that we look through our experiences, and that the expe-
riences do not need to be observed in order to be phe-
nomenally conscious.
Lycan and Harman think that P-content is entirely
representational. They note that I think P-content out-
runs representational content, and they both appear to
conclude that I am therefore committed to some new
strange kind of phenomenal content that is entirely non-
representational, Lycan's Q-ualia and Harman's raw feels.
I did say that the P-content of orgasm represented noth-
ing at all, but this is not a strongly held view. I am happy to
say that very little of the phenomenal content of orgasm is
representational. Certainly very little of what matters
about orgasm is representational. What puzzles me about
Lycan and Harman is that they appear to think that the
idea that there is more to phenomenal content than what
it represents entails some "weird" or "exotic" realm of
sense data that are entirely nonrepresentational and of
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1995) 18:2
279

Response/Block: Confusion about consciousness?
which one is "directly aware" in perception. As reflection
on the example of the phenomenal content of orgasm
should make clear, the idea that there is more to phenom-
enal experience than its representational content is just
common sense from which it should take argument to
dislodge us. Furthermore, why should believing in phe-
nomenal contents that are partly nonrepresentational
commit one to wholly nonrepresentational phenomenal
contents (of the sort Katz advocates)? Perhaps Harman
and Lycan think that if a P-content is partly nonrepresen-
tational, one can simply separate off the nonrepresenta-
tional part and think of it as a separate realm. But once the
argument is made explicit it looks dubious. Consider the
examples I used in my reply to Katz, say, the example of
packability in the case of experiences as of squares con-
trasted with circles. Is it obvious that there is any separ-
able phenomenal content of that experience that is phe-
nomenal but not representational? I don't think so.
R11. More on monitoring
Kitcher objects to my contrast between P-consciousness,
which applies primarily to states, and monitoring or
reflective consciousness, which applies primarily to per-
sons. A pain is monitoring conscious if (roughly speaking)
the person has another state that is about the pain. She
notes that monitoring consciousness is a matter of some
states being about others, and wonders why I make this
distinction. The answer is that if a state of mine is about a
pain of yours, your pain is not thereby monitoring con-
scious. So the notion of a person is crucial. (Someone
could argue, as Kitcher does not, that the same is true of
A-consciousness.)
Kitcher also says that she cannot see what "what it is
like" could evoke if not monitoring consciousness and that
the explanatory gap applies most obviously to monitored
states. She also finds it implausible that there could even
be phenomenal consciousness without monitoring. These
points should sound familiar, since I just discussed ver-
sions of them in the comment by Lycan, and to a slightly
lesser extent in the comment by Harman. Church also
favors the view. See also Rosenthal (1986) and Burge
(forthcoming). I find this difference of opinion far more
troubling than any other that comes up about conscious-
ness. I really don't know how to explain the vast di-
vergence we see here. The magnitude of the gulf is
apparent from the fact that two of the commentators,
Armstrong and Natsoulas, assumed that / mean monitor-
ing consciousness to be involved in A or A and P together.
Armstrong complains about the term. "A" would be bet-
ter, he says, if it stood for action; and even better: change
it in for "I" for introspection. My A-consciousness, how-
ever, requires no introspection. Natsoulas says - and he
says that I agree - that if we have an A-conscious P-state,
then we must have another representation of that state.
He calls this representation of the phenomenal state "the
required representation," since it is supposed to be nec-
essary for A-consciousness. I am not sure that I follow the
rest of the argument, but he seems to go on to argue that
the required representation itself has to be the object of
yet another state.2
What can be said in favor of the idea that monitoring is
necessary for phenomenal states, or at least for "sensory
experience" (Lycan). Kitcher mentions that listening to a
piece of music requires integration over time. But what
reason is there to think that sensory integration requires
states that are about other states? It requires memory, of
course, but memory images can be linked in the appropri-
ate way without any "aboutness." Lycan appeals to the
familiar long-distance truck driver who drives compe-
tently but in a daze. He stops at red lights and so must
have had a real quale, but for experience, says Lycan, he
has to notice the quale, that is be aware of it. Nissan is
funding some work at MIT that apparently includes an
investigation of this phenomenon, and I have been told
some simple preliminary results. If you probe "uncon-
scious" drivers, what you find is that they can always recall
(accurately) the road, decisions, perception, and so on, for
the prior 30-45 seconds, but farther back than that it's all
a blank. No one should be surprised by this result. What
else would one expect? If you were a subject who was just
asked about the last 30 seconds, do you think you would
say that you had not experienced the last 30 seconds? If
you say yes, you are in the grip of a theory. This seems a
clear case of experience as genuine as any but quickly
forgotten, a moving window of memory. The driver is
paying some attention - to the road. Otherwise the car
would crash. He is not paying attention to his own states,
but one rarely is. Of course, more attention to the road or
to the experiences themselves would yield different expe-
riences. But the inattentive driver is still experiencing the
bends in the road, the red lights, the other cars maneu-
vering around him. Why should anyone suppose that
there is nothing it is like to be that driver or that to the
extent that there is an explanatory gap it doesn't apply
here?
One way to see what is wrong with the idea that
monitoring consciousness is crucial for P-consciousness is
to note that even if I were to come to know about states of
my liver noninferentially and nonobservationally (as some
people know what time it is), that wouldn't make those
states P-conscious. Furthermore, even if I were to come
to know of states of my mind that way - say, the operation
of my language-understanding mechanisms, or Freudian
unconscious states - that wouldn't make those states
P-conscious. Of course, all this observation shows is that
monitoring isn't sufficient for P, but if monitoring is
necessary for P, what else is required to get a sufficient
condition? Advocates of this view have not provided an
answer to this question.
A second point is that monitoring seems too intellectual
a requirement for phenomenal consciousness. Dogs and
babies may have phenomenal pains without anything like
thoughts to the effect that they have them. If we have two
dogs, one of which has a pain whereas the other has a
similar pain plus a thought about it, surely the latter dog
has an A-conscious state even if the former doesn't! Yes,
but it is the converse that is problematic. The first dog
could be conscious without being conscious of anything.
Kitcher anticipates the dog objection and replies that I
make monitoring a sophisticated activity requiring a
sense of self. Not so. What I doubt is that a dog that has a
phenomenal state need have any further state that is about
the first one. I don't require a sense of self.
As observed in the target article, advocates of the
higher-order thought perspective (e.g., Rosenthal) note
that if I infer my anger from my behavior, that does not
make my anger conscious. They therefore include a
280
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1995) 18:2

Response/Block: Confusion about consciousness?
requirement that the higher-order thought be arrived at
noninferentially and nonobservationally. But as Byrne
(forthcoming) notes, why should these details of the
causation of the monitoring state matter to whether the
state that is monitored is conscious? Byrne mentions a
number of other conundra for the advocates of monitoring
having to do with the level of detail of the monitoring state
and the question of whether the description included in
the monitoring state could be false of the state monitored.
Levine makes some remarks that may help to explain
this puzzling difference of opinion with advocates of
monitoring. He notes that phenomenal character itself is
a "kind of presentation," a presentation to the self. He also
says that this brings with it a kind of access that is distinct
from A, phenomenal access as distinct from information-
processing access. And he suggests that the existence of
two kinds of access is partly responsible for the difficulty
in distinguishing A from P. There is at least something
right about this. It is often said that phenomenology is
self-revealing, that there is something intrinsically epis-
temic about phenomenology. Perhaps phenomenal access
is itself a phenomenal quality, a quality that has some
representational features. These representational fea-
tures represent the state as a state of me. But it does not
follow that any kind of information-processing access
(such as A) or monitoring is necessary for P.
R12. Does P outrun its representational content?
Armstrong, Harman, Lycan, and Tye all take the view
that P-content is entirely representational. I like Tye's
approach best because he doesn't treat it as obvious that
representationalism is right, but rather sees a respon-
sibility to say what the representational contents actually
are. In the case of orgasm, he specifies that the represen-
tational content is in part that something that is intense,
throbbing, changing in intensity, and very pleasing is
happening down there. OK, I will concede one thing -
that there is some representational content to orgasm. But
this representational content is one that I could have
toward another person. Suppose I have perceptual con-
tents about my partner's orgasm without having one
myself. The location of "down there" might differ slightly
from my own orgasm, but why should that matter? Of
course, the subject the orgasm is ascribed to is itself a
representational matter. But is that the difference be-
tween my having one and perceiving yours - that I ascribe
it to me instead of you? What if I mistakenly ascribe yours
to me? Furthermore, the phenomenal quality of orgasm
varies from time to time. Similarly, there are very differ-
ent phenomenal experiences that fit descriptions like "in
the toe," "intense," "burning," and the like.
I had a pain yesterday that is quite different phenome-
nally from the one I am having now, but not in any way
describable in words. Of course, we should not demand
that a representationalist be able to capture his contents
in words, but we should be told something about the
representational difference. Suppose the content is spe-
cified in terms of recognitional capacities. That runs into
the problem that recognitional capacities can work with-
out P-content, as in blindsight. At this point of the
dialectic, the representationalist often appeals to func-
tional role to specify the representational contents. So is
the debate about whether phenomenal content is entirely
representational just the old debate about functionalism
and qualia? Representationalists certainly give the im-
pression that their position is stronger than mere func-
tionalism, that they can accommodate the idea that there
are phenomenal contents, but that those contents are
representational.
The way in which representationalism is stronger than
mere functionalism comes out in Tye's criticism of my
example of two kinds of experiences as of something
overhead. Tye doesn't just say: sure, the representational
difference resides in the functional difference (though
that might be the upshot of the last two sentences of his
commentary). Instead, he tries to say what the represen-
tational differences are. He argues that the difference will
reside in other visual and auditory features. I believe that
Tye is wrong about vision but right about audition. In
peripheral vision, something can be seen only as having a
certain location, without any color, shape, or size. (Try
waving your hand near your ear while looking straight
ahead.) But without a comparable point in audition, my
example will not work, and I know of no auditory analog of
peripheral vision. However, my side has another arrow,
for the loudness of the sound is irrelevant to its represent-
ing something as of overhead. The as-of-overhead-ness of
the visual perception seems independent of color, shape,
and so on, and likewise for the auditory perception. The
difference seems to reside in the phenomenal character of
vision as opposed to audition, and that has not been
shown to be a representational difference.
R13. What is the relation between A and P?
Shepard, as usual, asks hard questions. How do we know
if P peters out as we go down the phylogenetic scale as
A peters out? It is a measure of our ignorance about
P-consciousness that we have no idea how to go about
answering such a question. I think all we can do is
investigate P in the creatures we know best and hope that
the answer we get throws some light on creatures who are
very different from us. Shepard says that what agents do is
evidence of A, not of P. I disagree. Sure, purposive action
is evidence of A, but it is also evidence, albeit indirect
evidence, of P. For example, let us accept for the moment
Crick's (1994) current theory of P: that P is a matter of
neuronal activity in reverberating cortico-thalamic cir-
cuits that run between cortical layer five and the
thalamus. Such a theory can only be arrived at on the basis
of behavior that indicates A. But once we have the theory
(and especially when we understand why that neuronal
activity underlies P) we can use it to isolate cases of P
without A, or cases, if they exist, of A without P. Of
course, we have to explain the discrepancy. Thus, if we
find the neuronal activity but no A and hence no outward
indication of consciousness, we have two choices: con-
clude that Crick's theory is wrong, or find some reason
why in this particular case there is no A.
This line of thought also supplies my answer to Rey's
charge that if P is not identical to anything functional,
intentional or cognitive, "what possible reason could we
have to posit it in anyone's case, even our own?" I think it
is always a mistake to suppose that no one could ever find
evidence of something (with a few exceptions - e.g., the
thing is literally defined in terms of there being no
possible evidence for it). This is just an argument from
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1995) 18:2
281

Response /Block: Confusion about consciousness?
lack of imagination. A neat example is provided by the
familiar idea that the world was created five minutes ago
complete with all the evidence of an earlier age. It is
tempting to argue that no one could find any evidence for
or against such a theory, but that would be a mistake.
Steady state cosmology plus the second law of thermo-
dynamics (entropy increases in a closed system) dictate
that the relatively ordered state we see around us is a
result of a random fluctuation from a steady disordered
state. The great fluctuation that created our order hap-
pened in the past, but when? Answer: the most likely
moment for the fluctuation is the least ordered moment,
and that is the most recent moment, that is, now. So the
evidence against steady state theory is evidence fnr the
existence of a real past.
Furthermore, in thinking about this sort of possibility,
we should not ignore the utility of ordinary considerations
of scientific simplicity and ad hocness. For example, one
can maintain any theory - even that the earth is flat - if
one is willing to adopt all sorts of ad hoc auxiliary hypoth-
eses to explain away recalcitrant observations. In so do-
ing, one could arrive at a totally wacko theory that is
observationally equivalent to contemporary physics. But
the wacko theory can be ruled out just because it is ad
hoc. A further point about the "epiphenomenal" possi-
bility is that the epiphenomenalism of Figure 3 (target
article) is not the "philosopher's epiphenomenalism" in
which the epiphenomenal entity has no effects at all.
Rather, it is the psychologists' epiphenomenalism that
rules out effects only in a system. The latter allows for
effects, but outside the system. The color of the wires in a
computer are epiphenomenal in the psychologist's sense
but not in the philosopher's sense, since there are effects
on observers. Thus the P-module of Figure 3 could be
detectable by physiologists even if it had no psychological
function.
I agree with what Morton says about the interdepen-
dence of A and P, and I gave a number of similar examples
myself. (There is a foreground/background example in
sect. 4, para. 3 and three more examples in sect. 4.2, para.
6.) I also agree with the idea that we would not have the
concepts we have if not for these facts. But I do not agree
that the intuitive idea of there being only one conscious-
ness shows that the concept of consciousness is a cluster
concept rather than a mongrel. The distinction, as I
intended it, was linked to the concept of a conflation. If
conflation is possible, then mongrel; if not, cluster. If the
myth of uniqueness is enough to make a cluster, then
Aristotle's conception of velocity is a cluster concept. Of
course, there is no right or wrong here, only utility. If we
adopt Morton's terminology, we shall have to make a
distinction within the cluster concepts between those that
allow conflation and those that do not.
Farah argues that if superblindsight existed, that
would be evidence for Schacter's model, complete with
P-module, and the nonexistence of superblindsight is
evidence against such a P-module. In other words, she
thinks that if the presence or absence of such a module
made no difference to perception (but only to whether the
subject says he is having experiences) that would be
evidence for such a module. This seems to me to be
precisely backwards. If a module has some information-
processing function - and why else would it deserve a box
- then whether it is present or absent should make a
difference. It seems to be an essential feature of a
P-module on Farah's idea of it, that it doesn't do much of
anything except paint representations with P-paint and
promote reports of experience. Sure, if it has little in the
way of an information-processing function then its pres-
ence or absence shouldn't make much of a difference. But
why assume that if there is a P-module it doesn't have
much of an information-processing function? For exam-
ple, perhaps the Executive System can do things with P
representations that it can't do with non-P represen-
tations.
Farah objects to my suggestion of P-consciousness as
the implementation of the function specified by the Phe-
nomenal Consciousness box in Schacter's model. As I
mentioned in the target article, the function specified by
that box (and there may be others not specified by the box)
is that of talking to the specialized modules, integrating
information from them, and talking to the Executive
System about that information. I suggested that perhaps
P-consciousness is part of the implementation of that
function. I used an analogy in which this function could be
implemented in a number of ways, some involving con-
sciousness, others not involving consciousness. Farah
interprets the label on the box as specifying the sole
function represented. I tried to cancel that reading in the
text by mentioning that the function was to be understood
partly in terms of the box, arrow, their relations, and the
textual remarks on how these are to be interpreted. Since
the label is "phenomenal consciousness," she assumes
that that is the one and only intended function. So we
were at cross purposes.
Young suggests that P is responsible for confidence.
After all, people who "just know" what time it is don't have
the confidence of people who are looking at a clock that
they know to be reliable. This is certainly sensible and
compelling. But blindsight raises a doubt about such
commonsensical ideas: maybe we could know without P?
And if we could know without P, why not confidence
without P?
Navon suggests that the function of P may be found
primarily in motivation rather than cognition (I made the
same suggestion in Block 1991). But there is an evolution-
ary puzzle that this idea raises, one that derives from
William Paley (1964) (via a column by Stephen Jay Gould).
Paley pointed out that there is no mystery about why birds
copulate - pleasure is the answer. But we can't give the
same answer to the question of why the bird sits on the
egg. (Paley backs this up with a description of the misery
of sitting on the egg.) But why does evolution deploy two
such different motivators?
Bachmann notes that I say that P depends on what goes
on inside the P-module, and he goes on to indicate that
this is incompatible with interaction effects involving
representational contents (see the replies to Katz and
Farah). But these are not incompatible ideas, and I was
careful in the target article to describe a number of
respects in which P-consciousness is (in the words of
Armstrong describing my views) "thoroughly interpene-
trated" by representational matters. Note that in Schac-
ter's model, the P-module talks to the Executive System
and the specialized modules, so interactions are allowed
for. Bachmann mentions the possibility that a P-module
might have its activity lowered, but he somehow takes me
to be denying this possibility and doubting the possibility
282
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1995) 18:2

Response/Block: Confusion about consciousness?
of measurement of P. Bachmann mentions a number of
fascinating phenomena that may cast some light on the
relation between A and P, but I have not investigated
these phenomenon sufficiently to comment on them.
R14. Is consciousness a cultural construction?
Dennett says that my critique of his view that conscious-
ness is a cultural construction simply begs the question. I
assume the A/P distinction, but he rejects it, he says.
"Because I not only decline to draw any such distinction
but argue at length against any such distinction, Block's
critique is simply question-begging." This is a strange
response from Dennett, since he does not actually reject
the A/P distinction but rather reconstructs it in terms of
information and access. Perhaps he thinks that the recon-
structed A/P distinction is so different from what I meant
that it is tantamount to rejecting the distinction. Well,
then, let's suppose Dennett is completely right. To the
extent that there is an A/P distinction, it is a matter of
degree of access and information. Dennett's theory of
access, you will recall, is that it is a matter of brain
representations persevering so as to affect memory, con-
trol behavior, and so on. So the P/A distinction is a matter
of brain representations' degree of informational content
and degree of persevering. Then Dennett ought to be
able to tell us to what degree or range of degrees of
persevering and informational content his theory applies
to. I'm not being very demanding. I don't insist on
precision, just some idea of what degrees of information
and control make for cultural construction. Perhaps he
will say it is the highly informational and accessible
contents he is talking about, the rich displays of colors
and shapes that appear in his examples (e.g., the Times
Roman X on a blue-green background). But we have good
reason to think that these types of contents are not very
influenced by culture. Long ago, Eleanor Rosch (1973)
showed that the Dani, a tribe with only two color words,
represented colors much as we do. In sum, my point
against Dennett does not depend at all on whether the
A/P distinction is a matter of degree or of kind. If it is a
matter of degree, he must tell us what band of degrees he
is talking about.
Dennett used to be an eliminativist (in "On the Ab-
sence of Phenomenology" [1979], for example). In recent
years, especially since Dennett (1991), he has shifted
gears, saying he is a realist about consciousness and at the
same time saying that his position is not all that different
from what it used to be. He appeals to the truth that the
difference between eliminativism and reductionist real-
ism is often purely tactical. However, not all reduction-
isms are close to eliminativism. Indeed, Dennett's new
position is very different from his old one, as many
readers have recognized (see Rey, e.g.). In giving what he
insists is a theory of consciousness, with such highly
substantive claims as that consciousness is a cultural
construction, Dennett has left eliminativism far behind.
Now he is a real realist, a reductionist or a deflationist,
and the theory is supposed to be true of some deflated
version of consciousness or something consciousness is
reduced to. The trouble is that he has neglected to make
up his mind about which deflated version he wants or
what it is that he is reducing consciousness to.
My advice to Dennett is to read Church - that's the
view of A and P that best captures his intentions. Church
says that my analogy with the development of the con-
cepts of heat and temperature is miscast. I said that we
have an intuitive preanalytic concept of consciousness
that can be resolved into P, A, monitoring consciousness,
and self-consciousness. She argues that P should be seen
as the preanalytic concept, and given its confused nature,
we should abandon it in favor of ideas such as A, monitor-
ing, and self-consciousness. She gives an interesting argu-
ment for the confused nature of P. A P-state must be a
state of a self, and given that there is no Cartesian self,
being a state of a self must involve relations to other
states. Then comes the step that mainly bothers me:
according to Church, P (if it exists) is intrinsic. Since P is
both intrinsic and involves a relation, P is a confusion. My
view is that this step conflates concepts with the proper-
ties that they are concepts of. The concept of a color does
not involve relations, but color (the property) is highly
relational. The concept of water has nothing to do with
molecules, but water (or the property of being water) is
constituted by being a molecular amalgam of hydrogen
and oxygen. Similarly, the concept of P (of a state) has
nothing to do with other states, but P itself could turn out
to be relational. This point is briefly mentioned in Note 10
of the target article.
Oddly enough, Church is well aware of the con-
cept/property distinction, and pins the incoherence on
the concept. Yet in laying out her argument, she shifts to
properties, saying that the property of being phenomenal
is both intrinsic and relational. I also have some disquiet
about the prior step in her argument. I agree that a P state
must be a state of the self, and I agree about the deflation-
ary view of selves. But I am not convinced that the way in
which P involves the self is incompatible with intrinsic-
ness. At a minimum, the mode of self-involvement could
be simple, a phenomenal property, the "me-ishness" I
described (see Levine and my reply to his comment).
Alternatively, the state could in some sense be about
other states or about the self (it could represent the state
as a state of me, as I said in the target article) but not in a
way that would satisfy a functionalist. I can want a sloop
even if there aren't any sloops. And the relation to other
states or to the self could be like that.
Van Brakel takes me to be an advocate of "one true
taxonomy," but I took pains to avoid this characterization.
I emphasized repeatedly that there are many notions of
access-consciousness with utility for different purposes.
My purpose had mainly to do with a notion of access as a
surrogate for phenomenal consciousness. Furthermore,
there are somewhat different notions of phenomenal
consciousness that are legitimate for some purposes, for
example, the limitation to bodily sensations suggested by
Humphrey (see also Katz). I am perfectly happy to allow
that culture affects P-consciousness. I emphasized that
intentional and phenomenal content interpenetrate, and
I don't think anyone should doubt that culture can affect
intentional content. But note the difference between the
idea that culture affects phenomenal consciousness and
the idea that culture creates it. Culture affects feet -
the feet of Himalayan tribesmen who walk barefoot in
the mountains are different from the bound feet of
nineteenth-century Chinese women. But culture does
not create feet.
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1995) 18:2
283

References/Block: Confusion about consciousness
I have to admit skepticism about much of van Brakel's
evidence, however. Whorfians thought culture affected
color and form perception until Berlin and Kay (1969) and
Rosch (1973) showed the effects were overrated. Van
Brakel's evidence is best evaluated when we know enough
about consciousness to see whether it really differs in
different cultures.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
I am grateful for comments from Alex Byrne, David Chalmers,
Leonard Katz, and Daniel Stoljar.
NOTES
1. Opponents of the inverted-spectrum thought experiment
should pay attention to cases like the legal blindness/eyes-
closed case. It is much easier to come up with an inverted-
spectrum type of thought experiment for a sensory modality
with reduced informational content. Tye, for example, has
objected to the inverted spectrum hypothesis on the basis of
asymmetries in color - blue can be blackish but yellow cannot.
But such objects do not apply to vision in the legal blindness/
eyes-closed mode.
2. I can surmise that what misled Natsoulas was a remark
in Note 11. It would take me too far afield to raise the issue
here.
References
Letters "a" and "r" appearing before authors' initials refer to target article
and response, respectively.
Akins, K. (1993) A bat without qualities. In: Consciousness: Psychological and
philosophical essays, ed. M. Davies & G. Humphreys. Blackwell. [aNB]
Alston, W. (1967) Religion. In: The encyclopedia of philosophy.
Macmillan/Free Press. [aNB]
Anderson, J. (1993) To see ourselves as others see us: A response to Mitchell.
New Ideas in Psychology ll(3):339-34. [aNB]
Andrade, J. (1993) Consciousness: Current views. In: Depth of anesthesia, ed.
J. G. Jones. Little Brown. [aNB]
Armstrong, D. M. (1968) A materialist theory of mind. Humanities
Press. [aNB]
(1980) What is consciousness? In: The nature of mind. Cornell University
Press. 
[aNB, WGL]
Armstrong, D. M. & Malcolm, N. (1984) Consciousness and causality.
Blackwell. [DMA]
Baars, B. J. (1988) A cognitive theory of consciousness. Cambridge University
Press. 
[aNB, BJB]
(1993) How does a serial, integrated and very limited stream of
consciousness emerge from a nervous system that is mostly unconscious,
distributed, and of enormous capacity? In: C1BA Symposium on
experimental and theoretical consciousness, ed. G. Bock & J. Marsh.
Wiley. [BJB]
(1994a) A thoroughly empirical approach to consciousness. Psyche: An
International Journal of Consciousness Research 1(2). 
[BJB, rNB]
(1994b) Consciousness creates access: The case of working memory. Paper
presented at the Third Practical Aspects of Memory Conference,
University of Maryland,
(in press a) Consciousness creates access: The view from global workspace
theory. In: Toward a scientific basis for consciousness, ed. A. Kazsniak, S.
Hameroff& J. Laukes. MIT/Bradford Books. [BJB]
(in press b) Bats! A philosophical dispute. In: The trouble with
consciousness: The vicissitudes of human experience in cognitive science,
philosophy, and the history of psychology MIT/Bradford Books. [BJB]
Baars, B. & McGovern, K. (1993) Does philosophy help or hinder scientific
work on consciousness? Consciousness and Cognition 2, 18-27. [rNB]
Bach, K. (1981) An analysis of self-deception. Philosophy and
Phenomenological Research 41:351-70. [GR]
Bachmann, T. (1984) The process of perceptual retouch: Nonspecific afferent
activation dynamics in explaining visual masking. Perception and
Psychophysics 35:69-84. [TB]
(1994) Psychophysiology of visual masking. The fine structure of conscious
experience. Nova Science. [TB]
Bauer, R. M. (1984) Autonomic recognition: A neuropsychological application
of the guilty knowledge test. Neuropsychologica 22:457-69. [GG]
Bennett, H. (1988) Perception and memory of events during adequate general
anesthesia for surgical operations. In: Hypnosis and memory, ed. H.
Pettinati. Guilford. [rNB]
Berlin, B. & Kay, P. (1969) Basic color terms. University of California Press. [rNB]
Block, N. (1983) The photographic fallacy in the debate about mental imagery,
Nous XVII, 4. [rNB]
Block, N. (1980) What is fiinctionalism? In: Readings in the philosophy of
psychology, vol. 1, ed. N. Block. Harvard University Press. [aNB]
(1990a) Inverted earth. In: Philosophical perspectives, vol. 4, ed. J.
Tomberlin. Ridgeview. 
[aNB, LDK, WGL]
(1990b) Consciousness and accessibility. Behavioral and Brain Sciences
13:596-59. [aNB]
(1991) Evidence against epiphenomenalism. Behavioral and Brain Sciences
14:670-67. 
[aNB, rNB]
(1992) Begging the question against phenomenal consciousness. Behavioral
and Brain Sciences 15:205-07. [aNB]
(1993) Review of Dennett: Consciousness explained. The Journal of
Philosophy 4:181-19. [aNB]
(1994) Tunctionalism," "Qualia." In: A companion to philosophy of mind,
ed. S. Guttenplan. Blackwell. 
[aNB, rNB]
(in press) What is Dennett's theory about? Philosophical topics. [rNB]
Bomstein, R. & Pittman, T. (1992) Perception without aivarcness. Guilford
Press. [aNB]
Bowers, J. & Schacter, D. (1990) Implicit memory and test awareness. Journal
of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory and Cognition 16(3):404-
41. [aNB]
Bruyer, R., Laterre, C , Seron, X., Feyereisen, P., Strypstein, E., Pierrard,
E. & Rectem, D. (1983) A case of prosopagnosia with some preserved
covert remembrance of familiar faces. Brain and Cognition 2:257—
84. [AY]
Burge, T. (forthcoming) Two kinds of consciousness. [rNB]
Buser, P. A. & Rougeul-Buser, A., eds. (1978) Cerebral correlates of
conscious experience. North-Holland. [TB]
Byrne, A. (1993) The emergent mind. Princeton University, PhD
dissertation. [aNB]
Byrne, R. W. (1993) The meaning of awareness': A response to Mitchell. New
Ideas in Psychology ll(3):347-35. [aNB]
Caramazza, A. (1992) Is cognitive neuropsychology possible? Journal of
Cognitive Neuroscience 4:80-95. [GG]
Carruthers, P. (1989) Brute experience. Journal of Philosophy 86. [aNB]
(1992) Consciousness and concepts. Proceedings of the Aristotelian Society
(Supplement) 66:40-5. [aNB]
Chalmers, D. J. (1993) Toward a theory of consciousness. University of
Indiana PhD thesis. [aNB]
Chalmers, D. (forthcoming) Availability: The cognitive basis of
experience? [rNB]
Churchland, P. S. (1983) Consciousness: The transmutation of a concept.
Pacific Philosophical Quarterly 64:80-93. [aNB]
(1986) Reduction and the neurobiological basis of consciousness. In:
Consciousness in contemporary society, ed. A. J. Marcel & E. Bisiach.
Oxford University Press. [aNB]
Cooper, L. & Shepard, R. (1982) Chronometric studies of the rotation of
mental images. In: Visual information processing, ed. W. Chase.
Academic Press. Reprinted in R. Shepard & L. Cooper, Mental images
and their transformation. MIT Press. [rNB]
Coslett, H. & Saffran, E. (1994) Mechanisms of implicit reading in alexia. /n:
The neuropsychology of high-level vision, ed. M. Farah & G. Ratcliff.
Erlbaum. [aNB]
Cowie, A. & Stoerig, P. (1992) Reflections on blindsight. In: The
neuropsychology of consciousness, ed. B. Milner & M. Rugg. Academic
Press. [aNB]
Crick, F. (1994) The astonishing hypothesis, Scribner's. [rNB]
Crick, F. & Koch, C. (1990) Towards a neurobiological theory of
consciousness. Seminars in the Neurosdences 2:263-75. 
[aNB, TB]
Davies, M. (1992) Perceptual content and local supervenience. Proceedings of
the Aristotelian Society 92:21-45. [aNB]
(1995) Consciousness and the varieties of aboutness. In: The philosophy of
psychology: Debates on psychological explanation, ed. C. MacDonald fit
G. MacDonald. [APA]
(forthcoming) Externalism and experience. In: Categories, consciousness
and reasoning, ed. A. Clark, J. Exquerro, J. Larrazabal.
Dordrecht. [aNB]
Davies, M. & Humphreys, G. (1993a) Consciousness: Psychological and
philosophical essays. Blackwell. 
[aNB, APA, GG]
(1993b) Introduction. In: Consciousness, ed. M. Davies fit G. Humphreys.
Blackwell. [aNB]
284
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1995) 18:2

References/Block: Confusion about consciousness
de Haan, E. H. F., Young, A. & Newcombe, F. (1987) Face recognition
without awareness. Cognitive Neuropsychology 4:385—415. [AY]
de Lannoy, J. Two theories of a mental model of mirror self-recognition: A
response to Mitchell. New Ideas in Psychology ll(3):337-33. [aNB]
De Renzi, E. (1986) Current issues in prosopagnosia. In: Aspects of face
processing, ed. H. D. Ellis, M. A. Jeeves, F. Newcombe & A. Young.
Dordrecht. [AY]
Dennett, D. C. (1969) Content and consciousness. Routledge Kegan
Paul. [GR]
(1978) Brainstorms. Bradford Books. [BJB]
(1978) Towards a cognitive theory of consciousness. In: Brainstorms.
MIT/Bradford Books. [GR]
(1979) On the absence of phenomenology. In: Body, mind and method:
Essays in honor of Virgil Aldrich, ed. D. Gustafson & B. Tapscott.
Dordrecht. [rNB]
(1986) Julian Jaynes' software archeology. Canadian Psychology 27(2):149-
15. [aNB]
(1991) Consciousness explained. Little Brown. 
[aNB, DCD, AM, rNB]
(1993) The message is: There is no medium. In: Philosophy and
Phenomenological Research III. [aNB]
Dennett, D. & Kinsboume, M. (1992a) Time and the observer: The where
and when of consciousness in the brain. Behavioral and Brain Sciences
15:183-20. [aNB]
(1992b) Escape from the Cartesian theater. Behavioral and Brain Sciences
15:234-24. [aNB]
Dimond, S. (1976) Brain circuits for consciousness. Brain, Behavior and
Evolution 13:376-95. [aNB]
Dixon, N. F. (1981) Preconsdous processing. Wiley. [NFD]
Dretske, F. (1993) Conscious experience. Mind 102 406:263-84. [aNB]
Dupre, J. (1981) Natural kinds and biological taxa. Philosophical Review
90:66-9. [aNB]
Edelman, G. (1989) The remetnbered present: A biological theory of
consciousness. Basic Books. [aNB]
Ericcson, K. & Simon, H. (1984/1993) Protocol analysis: Verbal reports as
data. MIT/Bradford Books. [GR]
Etcoff, N. L., Freeman, R. & Cave, K. Can we lose memories of faces?
Content specificity and awareness in a prosopagnosic. Journal of
Cognitive Neuroscience 3. [aNB]
Etcoff, N. L. & Magee, J. J. (1992) Covert recognition of emotional
expressions. Journal of Clinical and Experimental Neuropsychology
14:95-9. [aNB]
Evans. G. (1982) The varieties of reference. Oxford University Press.
Fajans, J. (1985) The person in social context: The social character of baining
'psychology'. In: Person, self, and experience: Exploring Pacific
cthnopsychologies, ed. G. M. White & J. Kirkpatrick. University of
California Press. [JvB]
Farah, M. (1994) Visual perception and visual awareness after brain damage: A
tutorial overview. In: Attention and performance 15, ed. C. Umila & M.
Moscovitch. MIT Press. [aNB]
Flanagan, O. (1991) The science of the mind, 2d ed. MIT Press. [aNB]
(1992) Consciousness reconsidered. MIT Press. 
[aNB, GG, rNB]
Gallup, G. (1982) Self-awareness and the emergence of mind in primates.
American Journal of Primatology 2:237—48. [aNB]
Gallup, G. & Povinelli, D. Mirror, mirror on the wall, which is the most
heuristic theory of them all? A response to Mitchell. New Ideas in
Psychology 11:327-3. [aNB]
Gazzaniga, M. (1985) The social train. Basic Books. [rNB]
Gcrber, E. R. (1985) Rage and obligation: Samoan emotion in conflict.
In: Person, self, and experience: Exploring Pacific ethnopsychologies,
ed. G. M. White & J. Kirkpatrick. University of California Press.
[JvB]
Ghoneim, M. or Block, R. (1993) Learning during anesthesia. In: Depth of
anesthesia, ed. J. G. Jones. Little Brown. [aNB]
Choneim, M., Hinrichs, J. & Mewaldt, S. (1984) Dose-response analysis of
the behavioral effects of diazepam: 1. Learning and memory.
Psychopharmacology 82:291-95. [aNB]
Goldman, A. (1993a) The psychology of folk psychology. Behavioral and Brain
Sciences 16:15-82. [aNB]
(1993b) Consciousness, folk psychology and cognitive science. Consciousness
and Cognition 11. [aNB]
Goodale, M. A. & Milner, A. D. (1992) Separate visual pathways for
perception and action. Trends in Neurosciences 15:20-25. 
[aNB, AR]
Graham, G. & Stephens, G. L. (1994) Mind and mine. In: Philosophical
psychopathology, ed. G. Graham & G. L. Stephens. MIT Press. [GG]
Groeger, J. A. (1984) Evidence of unconscious semantic processing from a
forced error situation. British Journal of Psychology 75:305-14. [NFD]
Greenwald, A. (1992) New look 3: Evidence for subliminal perception.
American Psychologist. [BJB]
Hanlon, R. E., ed. (1991) Cognitive microgenesis: A neuropsychological
perspective. Springer. [TB]
Harman, G. (1990) The intrinsic quality of experience. In: Philosophical
perspectives, vol. 4, ed. J. Tomberlin. Ridgeview. 
(aNB, GH, rNB]
(1993) Can science understand the mind? In: Conceptions of the mind:
Essays in honor of George A. Miller, ed. G. Harman. Erlbaum.
[GH]
Hart, J. T. (1965) Memory and the feeling of knowing experience. Journal of
Educational Psychology 56:208-16. [APP]
(1967) Memory and the memory-monitoring process. Journal of Verbal
Learning and Verbal Behavior 6:685-91. [APP]
Hauser, M., Kralik, J., Botto-Mahan, C , Garrett, M. & Oser, J. (submitted)
Self-recognition in primates: Phylogeny and the salience of species-typical
features. [rNB]
Heyes, C. (1993) Reflections on self-recognition in primates. Animal
Behavior. [aNB]
Hilgard, E. R. (1977) Divided consciousness. Wiley. [NFD]
(1986) Divided consciousness, 2d ed. Wiley. [aNB]
Hill, C. (1991) Sensations: A defense of type materialism. Cambridge
University Press. [aNB]
Hobson, J. A. (1988) The dreaming brain. Basic Books. [AR]
Holender, D. (1986) Semantic activation without conscious identification in
dichotic listening, parafoveal vision, and visual masking: A survey and
appraisal. Behavioral and Brain Sciences 9:1-66. 
[arNB]
Howell, S. (1981) Rules not words. In: Indigenous psychologies: The
anthropology of the self, ed. P. Heelas & A. Lock. Academic
Press. [JvB]
Humphrey, G. (1963) Thinking. Wiley. [rNB]
Humphrey, N. (1992) A history of the mind. Simon & Schuster. 
[aNB, rNB]
Huxley, T. H. (1866) Lessons in elementary psychology. Quoted in Humphrey,
1992. [aNB]
Jackendoff, R. (1987) Consciousness and the computational mind. MIT
Press. [aNB]
Jackson, F. (1977) Perception. Cambridge University Press. [aNB]
(1986) What Mary didn't know. Journal of Philosophy 83:291-9. [aNB]
(1993a) Appendix A (for philosophers). In: Philosophy and phenomenological
research III. [aNB]
(1993b) Armchair metaphysics. In: Philosophy in mind, ed. J. O'Leary-
Hawthorne & M. Michael. Kluwer. [aNB]
Jacoby, L., Toth, J., Lindsay, D. & Debner, J. (1992) Lectures for a layperson:
Methods for revealing unconscious processes. In: Perception without
awareness, ed. R. Bornstein & T. Pittman. Guilford Press. [aNB]
James, W. (1890) The principles of psychology. Dover, 1950. [aNB, RNS]
Janowsky, J. S., Shimamura, A. P. & Squire, L. R. (1989) Memory and
metamemory: Comparisons between patients with frontal lobe lesions and
amnesic patients. Psychobiology 17(1):3—11. [APP]
Jaynes, J. (1976) The origin of consciousness in the breakdown of the
bicameral mind. Houghton-Mifflin. [aNB]
Jeannerod, M. (1994) The representing brain: Neural correlates of motor
intention and imagery. Behavioral and Brain Sciences 17:187—245. [AR]
Johnson-Laird, P. (1988) The computer and the mind. Harvard University
Press. [rNB]
Jones, J. G. (1993) Depth of anesthesia. Little Brown. [aNB]
Kapsalist, J.G. (1987) Objective Methods in Food Quality Assessment. CRC
Press. [rNB]
Kenny, A. (1989) The metaphysics of mind. Clarendon Press. [JvB]
Kihlstrom, J. (1987) The cognitive unconscious. Science 237:1445-145. [aNB]
Kihlstrom, J. & Barnhardt, T. & Tataryn, D. (1992) Implicit perception. In:
Perception without awareness, ed. R. Bornstein & T. Pittman. Guilford
Press. [aNB]
Kihlstrom, J. & Couture, L. (1992) Awareness and information processing in
general anesthesia. Journal of Psychopharmacology 6(3):41O-41. [aNB]
Kihlstrom, J. & Schacter, D. (1990) Anaesthesia, amnesia, and the cognitive
unconscious. In: Memory, and awareness in anaesthesia, ed. B. Bonke.
Swets & Zeitlinger. [aNB]
Kim, J. (1995) "Supervenience." In Blackwell's Companion to Metaphysics, ed.
J. Kim & E. Sosa. B. H. Blackwell. [rNB]
Kirk, R. (1992) Consciousness and concepts. Proceedings of the Aristotelian
Society (Supplement) 66:23-4. [aNB]
Koriat, A. How do we know that we know? The accessibility model of the
feeling of knowing. Psychological Review 100(4):609-39. [APP]
Kosslyn, S. (1980) Image and mind, Harvard University Press. [rNB]
(1994) Image and brain. MIT Press. [rNB]
Kosslyn, S. & Koenig, O. (1992) Wet mind: The new cognitive neuroscience.
Free Press. [rNB]
Kuhn, T. (1964) A function for thought experiments. In: Melanges Alexandre
Koyre, vol 1. Hermann. [aNB]
LaBerge, D. (1990) Thalamic and cortical mechanisms of attention suggested
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1995) 18:2
285

References/Block: Confusion about consciousness
by recent positron emission tomographic experiments. Journal of
Cognitive Neuroscience 2:358-72. [TB]
Lackner, J. & Garrett, M. (1973) Resolving ambiguity: Effects of biasing
context in the unattended ear. Cognition 1:359-37. [aNB]
Lahav, R. (1993) What neuropsychology tells us about consciousness.
Philosophy of Science 60:67-85. [AR]
Landis, T., Regard, M. & Serrat, A. (1980) Iconic reading in a case of alexia
without agraphia caused by a brain tumour: A tachistoscopic study. Brain
and Language 11:45-53. [aNB]
Lavoisier, A.-L. (1965) Elements of chemistry (republication of W. Creech's
translation, 1790). Dover. [RMV]
Leeds, S. (1992) Qualia, awareness and sellars. Nous. [GR]
Levine, J. (1983) Materialism and qualia: The explanatory gap. Pacific
Philosophical Quarterly 64:354-36. [aNB]
(1993) On leaving out what it is like. In: Consciousness: Psychological and
philosophical essays, ed. M. Davies & G. Humphreys. Blackwell. [aNB]
(1994) Review of Owen Flanagan: Consciousness reconsidered. Philosophical
Review. [aNB]
Levy, R. I. (1984) Emotion, knowing and culture. In: Culture theory: Essays
on mind, self, and emotion, ed. R. Shweder & R. Levine. Cambridge
University Press. [JvB]
Libet, B., Cleason, C. A., Wright, E. W. & Pearl, D. K. (1983) Time of
conscious intention to act in relation to onset of cerebral activities
(readiness potential): The unconscious initiation of a freely voluntary act.
Brain 106:623-42. [NFD]
Loar, B. (1990) Phenomenal properties. In: Philosophical perspectives:
Action theory and philosophy of mind, ed. J. Tomberlin. Ridgeview.
[aNB]
Lormand, E. (forthcoming) What qualitative consciousness is like. [aNB]
Luria, A. (1972) The man with the shattered world. Harvard University Press
(translation: 1987). [rNB]
Lutz, C. (1987) Goals, events, and understanding in Ifaluk emotion theory. In:
Cultural models in language and thought, ed. D. Holland & N. Quinn.
Cambridge University Press. [JvB]
Lycan, W. C. (1987) Consciousness. MIT Press. 
[aNB, rNB]
(1990) What is the "Subjectivity of the mental"? In: Philosophical
perspectives, vol. 4: Action theory and philosophy of mind, ed. J.
Tomberlin. Ridgeview. 
[WGL, GR]
(in press) Consciousness as internal monitoring. Philosophical Perspectives.
[WGL]
Lynch, O. M. (1990) The social construction of emotion in India. In: Divine
passions: The social construction of emotion in India, ed. O. M. Lynch.
University of California Press. [JvB]
Mandler, G. (1985) Cognitive psychology. Erlbaum. [aNB]
Marcel, A. J. (1983) Conscious and unconscious perception: An approach to
relations between phenomenal experience and perceptual processes.
Cognitive Psychology 15:238-300. [aNB]
(1986) Consciousness and processing: Choosing and testing a null
hypothesis. Behavioral and Brain Sciences 9:40-44. [aNB]
(1988) Phenomenal experience and functionalism. In: Consciousness in
contemporary society, ed. A. J. Marcel & E. Bisiach. Oxford University
Press. [aNB]
Marcel, A. J. & Bisiach, E., eds. (1988) Consciousness in contemporary
science. Oxford University Press. [aNB]
McCarthy, R. & Warrington, E. (1990) Cognitive neuropsychology: A clinical
introduction. Academic Press. [GG]
McCullough, G. (1993) The very idea of the phenomenological. Proceedings of
the Aristotelian Society 93:39-58. [aNB]
McGinn, C. (1991) The problem of consciousness. Blaekwell. [aNB]
(1993) Consciousness and cosmology: Hyperdualism ventilated. In:
Consciousness: Psychological and philosophical essays, ed. M. Davies &
G. Humphreys. Blackwell. [aNB]
McNeil, J. E. & Warrington, E. K. (1991) Prosopagnosia: A reclassification.
Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psychology 43A:267-87. [AY]
(1993) Prosopagnosia: A face specific disorder. Quarterly Journal of
Experimental Psychology 46A:l-10. [AY]
Mellor, D. H. (1978) Conscious belief. Proceedings of the Aristotelian Society
78:87-10. [AM]
Melzack, R. & Wall, P. (1988) The challenge of pain, 2d ed. Penguin. [aNB]
Menzel, E., Savage-Rumbaugh, E. & Lawson, J. (1985) Chimpanzee ({Pan
troglogdytes}) spatial problem solving with the use of mirrors and
televised equivalents of mirrors. Journal of Comparative Psychology
99:211-17. [aNB]
Meyer, D. E. And Kornblum, S. (1993) Attention and Performance XIV.
Synergies in Experimental Psychology, Artificial Intelligence, and
Cognitive Neuroscience. MIT Press. [rNB]
Michotte, A. (1946) The Perception of causality, translated by Miles, T. R. and
E., 1963. London. [rNB]
Milner, B. & Rugg, M., eds. (1992) The neuropsychology of consciousness.
Academic Press. [aNB]
Mitchell, R. W. (1993a) Mental models of mirror self-recognition: Two
theories. New Ideas in Psychology 11:295-32. [aNB]
(1993b) Recognizing one's self in a mirror? A reply to Gallup and Povinelli,
de Lannoy, Anderson, and Byrne. New Ideas in Psychology 11:351—
77. [aNB]
Moscovitch, M., Goshen-Gottstein, Y. & Vriezen, E. (1994) Memory without
conscious recollection: A tutorial review from a neuropsychological
perspective. In: Attention and performance 15, ed. C. Umilta & M.
Moscovitch. MIT Press. [aNB]
Niiatanen, R. (1992) Attention and brain function. Erlbaum. [TB]
Nagel, T. (1971) Brain bisection and the unity of consciousness. Synthese
22:396-413. [rNB]
(1974) What is it like to be a bat? Philosophical Review 83:435-50.
[APA, GH]
(1979) Mortal questions. Cambridge University Press. [aNB]
(1986) The view from nowhere. Oxford University Press. [aNB]
Nathan, P. (1985) Pain and nociception in the clinical context. Philosophical
Transactions of the Royal Society London B 308:219-22. [aNB]
Natsoulas, T. (1993) What is wrong with the appendage theory of
consciousness? Philosophical Psychology 6(2):137-15. [aNB]
Navon, D. (1989a) The importance of being visible: On the role of attention in
a mind viewed as an anarchic intelligence system. I. Basic tenets.
European Journal of Cognitive Psychology 1:191-213. [DN]
(1989b) The importance of being visible: On the role of attention in a mind
viewed as an anarchic intelligence system. II. Application to the field of
attention. European Journal of Cognitive Psychology 1:215-38. [DN]
(1991) The function of consciousness or of information? Behavioral and
Brain Sciences 14:690-91. [DN]
(1993) Experience and information should be distinguished. Behavioral and
Brain Sciences 16:405-6. [DN]
Needham, R. (1972) Belief, language, and experience. Blackwell. [JvB]
(1981) Inner states as universals: Sceptical reflections on human nature. In:
Indigenous psychologies: The anthropology of the self, ed. P. Heelas & A.
Lock. Academic Press. [JvB]
Nelkin, N. (1993) The connection between intentionality and consciousness.
In: Consciousness: Psychological and philosophical essays, ed. M. Davies
& G. Humphreys. Blackwell. [aNB]
Newcombe, F., Mehta, Z. & de Haan, E. H. F. (1994) Category specificity in
visual recognition. In: The neuropsychology of high-level vision: Collected
tutorial essays, ed. M. J. Farah or G. Ratclifif. Erlbaum. [AY]
Newman, J. & Baars, B. J. (1993) A neural attentional model for access to
consciousness: A global workspace perspective. Concepts in Neuroscience
4:255-90. [BJB]
Nisbett, R. & Wilson, T. (1977) Telling more than we can know: Verbal reports
on mental processes. Psychological Review 84:231-59. 
[aNB, GR]
Paley, W. (1964) Natural theology, ed. F. Ferre. Indiana University Press.
Parkin, D. (1985) Reason, emotion, and the embodiment of power. In: Reason
and morality, ed. J. Overing. Tavistock. [JvB]
Peacocke, C. (1983) Sense and content. Oxford University Press. [aNB,
WGL]
(1992) A study of concepts. MIT Press. [aNB]
Pendlebury, M. (1992) Theories of experience. In: A companion to
epistemology, ed. J. Dancy & E. Sosa. Blackwell. [aNB]
Penfleld, W. (1975) The mystery of the mind: A critical study of consciousness
and the human brain. Princeton University Press. [aNB]
Petry, S. & Meyer, G. E. (1987) The perception of illusory contours.
Springer. [TB]
Plourde, G. (1993) Clinical use of the 40-Hz auditory steady state response.
In: Depth of anesthesia, ed. J. G. Jones. Little Brown. [aNB]
Poppel, E., Held, R. & Frost, D. (1973) Residual visual function after brain
wounds involving the central visual pathways in man. Nature 243:295-
96. [rNB]
Povinelli, D. (1994) What chimpanzees know about the mind. In: Behavioral
diversity in chimpanzees. Harvard University Press. [aNB]
Putnam, H. (1975) The meaning of'meaning*. In: Mind, language and reality,
ed. H. Putnam. Cambridge University Press. [aNB]
Reingold, E. & Merikle, P. (1993) Theory and measurement in the study of
unconscious processes. In: Consciousness: Psychological and philosophical
essays, ed. M. Davies & G. Humphreys. Blackwell. [aNB]
Revonsuo, A. (1993) Is there a ghost in the cognitive machinery? Philosophical
Psychology 6:387-405. [AR]
(1994) In search of the science of consciousness. In: Consciousness in
philosophy and cognitive neuroscience, ed. A. Revonsuo & M.
Kamppinen. Erlbaum. [AR]
(in press) Consciousness, dreams, and virtual realities. Philosophical
Psychology. [AR]
286
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1995) 18:2

References /Block: Confusion about consciousness
Rey, G. (1983) A reason for doubting the existence of consciousness. In:
Consciousness and self-regulation, vol 3., ed. R. Davidson, G. Schwartz
& D. Shapiro. Plenum. 
[aNB]
(1988) A question about consciousness. In: Perspectives on mind, ed. H.
Otto & J. Tuedio. Reidel. 
[aNB]
(1992a) Sensational sentences. In: Consciousness: Psychological and
philosophical essays, ed. M. Davies & G. Humphreys. Blackwell.
[GR]
(1992b) Sensational sentences switched. Philosophical Studies 68:289-
31. 
[GR]
Rosch, E. (1973) On the internal structure of perceptual and semantic
categories in T. E. Moore, ed. Cognitive Development and the
Acquisition of Language 1:111-144. 
[rNB]
Roseman, M. (1988) Head, heart, odor, and shadow: The structure of the self
and the emotional word and ritual performance among Senoi Temiar.
Ethos 16:227-50. 
[JvB]
Rosenthal, D. (1986) Two concepts of consciousness. Philosophical Studies
49:329-35. 
[aNB, AM]
(1993) Thinking that one thinks. In: Consciousness: Psychological and
philosophical essays, ed. M. Davies & G. Humphreys. Blackwell.
[aNB]
(1991) The independence of consciousness and sensory quality. In:
Philosophical issues: 1. Consciousness, ed. E. Villanueva.
Ridgeview. 
[WGL]
Schacter, D. L. (1983) Feeling of knowing in episodic memory. Journal of
Experimental Psychology, Learning, Memory, and Cognition 9:39-
54. 
[APP]
(1989) On the relation between memory and consciousness: Dissociable
interactions and conscious experience. In: Varieties of memory and
consciousness: Essays in honour of Endel Tulving, ed. H. Roediger & F.
Craik. Erlbaum. 
[aNB, APP]
Schacter, D., McAndrews, M. & Moscovitch, M. (1988) Access to
consciousness: Dissociations between implicit and explicit knowledge in
neuropsychological syndromes. In: Thought without Language, ed., L.
Weiskrantz. Oxford University Press. 
[rNB]
Schacter, D. L. & Worling, J. R. (1985) Attribute information and the feeling-
of-knowing. Canadian Journal of Psychology 39(3)467-75. 
[APP. rNB]
Schenck, C. H., Bundlie, S. R., Ettinger, M. G. & Mahowald, M. W. (1986)
Chronic behavioral disorders of human REM sleep: A new category of
parasomnia. Sleep 9:293-308. 
[AR]
Searle, J. R. (1983) Intentionality. Cambridge University Press. 
[arNB]
(1990a) Consciousness, explanatory inversion and cognitive science.
Behavioral and Brain Sciences 13:4:585-95. 
[aNB]
(1990b) Who is computing with the brain? Behavioral and Brain Sciences
13:4:632-64. 
[aNB]
(1992) The rediscovery of the mind. MIT Press. 
[aNB, AR, rNB]
Sergent, J. & Poneet, M. (1990) From covert to overt recognition of faces in a
prosopagnosic patient. Brain 113:989-1004. 
[aNB]
Shallice, T. (1988a) From neuropsychology to mental structure. Cambridge
University Press. 
[aNB]
(1988b) Information-processing models of consciousness: Possibilities and
problems. In: Consciousness in contemporary society, ed. A. J. Marcel &
E. Bisiach. Oxford University Press. 
[aNB]
Shepard, R. N. (1993) On the physical basis, linguistic representation, and
conscious experience of colors. In: Conceptions of the human mind:
Essays in honor of Ceorge A. Miller, ed. G. Harman. Erlbaum. 
[RNS]
Shevrin, H. (1992) Subliminal perception, memory and consciousness:
Cognitive and dynamic perspectives. In: Perception without awareness,
ed. R. Bornstein & T. Pittman. Guilford Press. 
[aNB]
Shiffrin, R. M. & Schneider, W. (1977) Controlled and automatic human
information processing: II. Perceptual learning, automatic attending, and
a general theory. Psychological Review 84:127-90. 
[APA, rNB]
Shimamura, A. P. & Squire, L. R. (1986) Memory and metamemory: A study
of the feeling-of-knowing phenomenon in amnesic patients. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition 12(3)452-
60. 
[APP]
Shoemaker, S. (1975) Functionalistn and qualia. Philosophical Studies 27:291-
315. 
[aNB]
(1981a) Absent qualia are impossible—a reply to Block. Philosophical
Review 90(4):581-59. 
[aNB]
(1981b) The inverted spectrum. Journal of Philosophy 74(7):357-38. 
[aNB]
(1993) Lovely and suspect ideas. Philosophy and Phenomenological Research
3(4):905-91. 
[aNB]
(1994) Phenomenal character. Nous. 
[aNB]
Smirnov, V. M. (1974) Electrical stimulation of the human brain and the
functional anatomy of mentality. In: Neurophysiological mechanisms of
mental activity (in Russian), ed. N. P. Bechtereva. Leningrad:
Nauka. 
[TB]
Smith, J. (1981) Self and experience in Maori culture. In: Indigenous
psychologies: The anthropology of the self, ed. P. Heelas & A. Lock.
Academic Press. 
[JvB]
Sokolov, E. N. (1986) Theoretical psychophysiology. Moscow University
Press. 
[TB]
Sperling, G. (1960) The information available in brief visual presentations.
Psychological Monographs 74:11. 
[aNB]
Stich, S. (1978) Beliefs and sub-doxastic states. Philosophy of Science 45:499-
58. 
[aNB]
Tomberlin, J., ed. (1990) Philosophical perspectives, vol. 4: Action theory and
philosophy of mind. Ridgeview. 
[WGL]
Tye, M. (1991) The imagery debate. MIT Press. 
[aNB]
(1993) Reflections on Dennett and consciousness. Philosophy and
Phenomenological Research 34:893-98. 
[aNB]
(forthcoming a) Blindsight, the absent qualia hypothesis and the mystery of
consciousness. 
[aNB]
(forthcoming b) Does pain lie within the domain of cognitive psychology?
In: Philosophical perspectives, ed. J. Tomberlin. 
[aNB]
Umilta, C. & Moscovitch, M. (1994) Attention and performance 15. MIT
Press. 
[aNB, rNB]
Van Brakel, J. (1994) Emotions as the fabric of forms of life: A cross-cultural
perspective. In: Social perspectives on emotion, vol. 2, ed. W. M.
Wentworth & J. Ryan. JAI Press. 
[JvB]
Van Gulick, R. (1989) What difference does consciousness make? Philosophical
Topics 17(l):211-23. 
[aNB]
(1993) Understanding the phenomenal mind: Are we all just armadillos? In:
Consciousness: Psychological and philosophical essays, ed. M. Davies &
C. Humphreys. Blackwell. 
[aNB]
Villanueva, E., ed. (1991) Philosophical issues, I: Consciousness.
Ridgeview. 
[WGL]
Weiskrantz, L. (1986) Blindsight. Oxford University Press. 
[aNB]
(1988) Some contributions of neuropsychology of vision and memory to the
problem of consciousness. In: Consciousness in contemporary society, ed.
A. J. Marcel & E. Bisiach. Oxford University Press. 
[aNB]
(1992) Introduction: Dissociated issues. In: The neuropsychology of
consciousness, ed. B. Milner & M. Rugg. Academic Press. 
[aNB]
White, S. L. (1987) What is it like to be an homunculus. Pacific Philosophical
Quarterly 68:148-17. 
[aNB]
(1991) Transcendentalism and its discontents. In: The unity of the self, ed.
S. L. White. MIT Press. 
[aNB]
Wikan, U. (1989) Managing the heart to brighten face and soul: Emotions in
Balinese morality and health care. American Ethnologist 16:294-
312. 
[JvB]
Wilkes, K. V. (1988) 
, yishi, duh, um, and consciousness. In:
Consciousness in contemporary science, ed. A. J. Marcel & E. Bisiach.
Clarendon Press. 
[JvB]
Wiser, M. & Carey, S. (1983) When heat and temperature were one. In:
Mental models, ed. D. Centner & A. Stevens. Erlbaum. 
[aNB]
Wittgenstein, L. (1953) Philosophical investigations, translated by E.
Anscombe. Macmillan. 
[CR]
Young, A. W. (1994a) Covert recognition. In: The neuropsychology of higher
vision: Collected tutorial essays, ed. M. Farah & G. Ratcliif.
Erlbaum. 
[aNB, GR]
(1994b) Neuropsychology of awareness In: Consciousness in philosophy and
cognitive neurosdence, ed. M. Kappinen & A. Revonsuo.
Erlbaum. 
[aNB]
Young, A. (1994c) Conscious and non-conscious recognition of familiar faces.
In Umilta and Moscovitch, ed., Attention and Performance 15. MIT
Press. 
[rNB]
Young, A. W. & De Haan, E. (1993) Impairments of visual awareness. In:
Consciousness: Psychological and philosophical essays, ed. M. Davies &
C. Humphreys. Blackwell. 
[aNB]
Young, A. W. & Ellis, H. D. (1989) Childhood prosopagnosia. Brain and
Cognition 9:16-47. 
[AY]
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1995) 18:2
287

New Edition
Scientific Style and Format
The CBE Manual for Authors, Editors, and
Publishers
Sixth Edition
Edward J. Huth
From reviews of the Sixth Edition:
SCIENTIFIC STYLE
A|W> FORMAT
Sixth Editi
vering a//the
"Ihere is no other book like this for the scientific
itiul technological community. 
It should be the
major desk reference for anyone writing a scientific
article or book. Students should be made aware of
the manual early in their educational career so
that old habits can be broken and correct proce-
dures adhered to. Highly recommended.... "
-Booklist/Reference Books Bulletin
This detailed and authoritative manual
is completely reorganized with coverage
expanded to all sciences and with a new
focus on general and scientific publication
style and formats for science papers,
journals, and books.
Contents:
PART 1: Scientific notation: A brief history/
PART 2: General style conventions/ Alphabets,
symbols and signs/ Punctuation and related
marks/ Spelling and word formation/ Prose style and
word choice/ Names, terms of address, honors, and degrees/ Capitalization/Type
conventions, excerpts, quotations, and ellipses/Abbreviations/ Numbers, units, mathematical
expressions, statistics/ Times and dates/Addresses and geographic description/ PART 3: Special scientific
conventions/ The electromagnetic spectrum/ Subatomic particles, atoms, elements/ Chemical formulas/
Chemical kinetics/ Analytical methods/ Drugs andpharmacokineticsl Cells, chromosomes, and genes/
Viruses/ Bacteria/ Plants and fungi/ Human and animal life/ Human history and society/ The Earth/
Astronomical objects and time systems/PART 4: Journals and books/Journal style and format/ Book
style and format/ Citations and references/Accessories to text: Tables, figures, and indexes/ PART 5:
Publishing progress/ Typography and manuscript markup, manual and electronic/ Proof correction
1994 
782 pp. 
47154-0 
Hardback 
$34.95
Available in bookstores or from
CAMBRIDGE
UNIVERSITY PRESS
40 West 20th Street,
New York, NY 10011-4211
Call toll-free 800-872-7423.
iVlastcrCartl/VISA accepted. Prices subject to change.

