FOREWORD
“What is the point of my life?” This question cannot have haunted 
many people in earlier centuries; they were too busy scratching out 
a living, providing food and shelter for their families, fending off 
threats to their health and security. But now that we have pretty well 
solved the most pressing problems of staying alive, and have the free 
time to reflect on what it all means, we are assaulted at every turn 
by a flood of information about the apparently meaningful lives of 
a lucky few—doctors, judges, guitar heroes, sports stars, billionaires, 
celebrities, politicians, explorers of ocean depths, and conquerors of 
the highest mountains. If we can’t all have glamorous lives—if we can’t 
all be famous for even fifteen minutes—what is the point, really? Why 
should we care about anything?   
The best answer today has been the best answer for millennia: find 
something more important than you are, and devote your life to it, 
protecting it, improving it, making it work, celebrating it. But doesn’t 
this usually require joining forces with others, finding a supporting 
organization with a clear vision? Yes, it does, and for centuries the 
premier options have been religions, made all the more irresistible by 
one of the great master strokes of advertising: you can’t be good without 
God. There may well have been a time when this was practically true, 
when the only feasible path to a life of importance (and we all want 
our lives to be important) was to be a member in good standing of 
11

12 • foreword by daniel c. dennett
one church or another, one temple or another. Step One in the project 
of having a meaningful life was to be God-fearing. Those who weren’t 
God-fearing were seen as disreputable, untrustworthy, sinful, defective, 
empty. 
The term “God-fearing” is a fascinating fossil trace of earlier 
times, when the standard or default conception of God was as an 
anthropomorphic Protector of Us (but not Them), Merciful Judge, 
Witness to our sins, Appreciator of our praise and our incessant 
declarations of undying loyalty. And that largely obsolete conception 
of God was itself a direct descendant of earlier conceptions of gods that 
were genuinely frightening, because they had to be appeased, and were 
far from loving or just or even good. How strange that the term should 
survive today with so little recognition of not only its obsolescence but 
its embarrassing history of oppression! 
Wake up, folks! Listen to what your holy texts actually say! Among 
the delights of Dan Barker’s book are the succession of startling 
juxtapositions, looking at our religious practices through the eyes of 
a quizzical Martian. Did you realize that all Christian ministers are 
essentially slave traders, prized for their ability to soothe and cajole 
their flock of slaves into ever more submissive obedience, and even 
getting them to pay their keepers? 
Asking, “If there is no God, what is the purpose of life?” is like ask-
ing, “If there is no Master, whose slave will I be?” If the purpose of 
life is to become a submissive slave, then your meaning comes from 
flattering the ego of a person whom you should despise.
The historical Jesus is nicely compared to the historical Paul Bunyan. 
(Was there a huge lumberjack in the North Woods who inspired the tales? 
Maybe. Does it matter?) Then there is Barker’s darker demonstration 
of how religion compromises our moral judgment, by telling a story 
of utter depravity and eliciting a judgment from an audience that this 
was the deed of a moral monster, and then changing the names and 

foreword by daniel c. dennett • 13
circumstances oh so slightly and turning it into the horrific tale in the 
book of Job. As Richard Dawkins has so vividly and memorably put it, 
in The God Delusion,
The God of the Old Testament is arguably the most unpleasant char-
acter in all fiction: jealous and proud of it; a petty, unjust, unforgiving 
control-freak; a vindictive, bloodthirsty ethnic cleanser; a misogynis-
tic, homophobic, racist, infanticidal, genocidal, filicidal, pestilential, 
megalomaniacal, sadomasochistic, capriciously malevolent bully.   
Some people have found this assertion unforgivably rude, but if 
they pause to reflect on what the tales from the Old Testament, read 
literally, actually tell us, how can they not acknowledge that it is a 
fair assessment? Barker’s ingenious exercises of imagination draw the 
point to our attention in a more playful spirit than Dawkins’ blunt 
condemnation, but the message is the same. And the broader conclusion 
to draw is that a religion that cannot survive looking at itself through 
the eyes of others does not deserve to survive. 
Barker is so good at this because he is intelligent and honest 
and has had lots of practice. As a former minister himself, he has an 
intimate knowledge not only of the Bible but of all the ways that clergy 
and their congregations subliminally conspire to blur their own vision 
when confronting the flaws in their traditions. He does not shrink 
from acknowledging the bleak prospect, even the terror, of letting go 
of all the paternalistic pabulum and becoming a grownup. But then 
he shows how surprisingly easy it is to be a good person! Yes, you can 
learn to ride a bike, and yes, you can become a good and meaningful 
person without bothering yourself with all the dark confusions and 
contradictions imposed on you by your heritage of irrationality and 
obfuscation.   
We don’t need religion to be good. Religion actually gets in the way. 
Getting rid of purely religious mandates makes life simpler and safer. 

Rejecting religion filters out the noise to bring a clarity of judgment, 
making it easier to be a good atheist than a good Christian.
	
We all want to find purpose in our lives. Pastor Rick Warren, in 
his best-seller The Purpose Driven Life, designed an eloquent and subtle 
advertisement for subjecting yourself to the demands of Christianity, 
and without a doubt there are thousands of feckless young people who 
discovered thereby the discipline and self-respect to turn themselves 
into good citizens of the world, responsible and caring—but at a 
huge price: blinding themselves to the possibility of other good lives 
(for their purpose must be converting the world to Warren’s brand of 
Christianity) and to all the hard-won discoveries of science (and history 
and literature) that contradict the Christian message. 
Former pastor Dan Barker has designed an equally eloquent and 
subtle antidote in Life Driven Purpose, showing us by example how a 
very good person can get along fine without religion, inspiring others, 
accomplishing great works, and having a lot of fun in the bargain. 
  —Daniel C. Dennett
   	 Tufts University
	
14 • foreword by daniel c. dennett

life driven purpose 
How an Atheist Finds Meaning 
dan barker
ForEWoRD BY daniel c. dennett
PITCHSTONE PUBLISHING
Durham, North Carolina

Copyright © 2015 by Dan Barker
All rights reserved
Pitchstone Publishing
Durham, North Carolina 27705
www.pitchstonepublishing.com
To contact the publisher, please e-mail info@pitchstonepublishing.com
Printed in the United States of America
10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Barker, Dan.
  Life driven purpose : how an atheist finds meaning / Dan Barker ; foreword by 
Daniel C. Dennett.
       pages cm
  Includes bibliographical references and index.
  ISBN 978-1-939578-21-1 (pbk. : alk. paper)
 1.  Life. 2.  Conduct of life. 3.  Ethics. 4.  Atheism.  I. Title.
  BD431.B2788 2014
  211’.8—dc23
                                                            2013049775
Cover photo by Ingrid Laas

