THE BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1979), 2,583-629
Printed in the United States of America
Tweety years of haunting eidetic
s
Ralph Norman Haber
Department of Psychology, University of Illinois at Chicago Circle, Chicago, III. 60680
Abstracts This paper is a theoretical analysis of eidetic imagery, based upon the author's ten-year study of elementary-school-aged children.
The presence of eidetic imagery is inferred from reports of persisting visual images of stimuli when they are no longer in view. According to the
criteria for differentiating eidetic images from afterimages, eidetic images should occur even when saccadic eye movements are made during
exposure to the stimulus; it should be possible to make saccadic eye movements while one is reporting the image without the image also moving;
the image should last long, and it should be positive. The criteria for differentiating eidetic images from nonvisual memorial representations
include: reports of seeing an image projected onto a surface in space, the consistent use of present tense when reporting images as opposed to
past tense when reporting from nonvisual memory, and the ability to superimpose two images and report the composite image.
Eidetic images are only available to a small percentage of children 6-12 years old, and are virtually nonexistent in adults. However, extensive
research has failed to demonstrate consistent correlates between the presence of eidetic imagery and any cognitive, intellectual, neurological, or
emotional measure. The negative correlation between eidetic imagery and age has prompted hypotheses to explain eidetic imagery as a
developmentally less mature memorial representation, which is gradually replaced by more abstract representations as the child acquires
abstract thought, reading, and more advanced cognitive abilities. The evidence in the present review casts doubt on this hypothesis on numerous
grounds: an extensive longitudinal study over the entire span of elementary school years found that eidetic abilities remain remarkably stable;
there is no correlation between eidetic imagery and abstract thinking or reading performance; there is no higher incidence in preschool ages,
among retarded or brain-injured subjects, or among illiterate subjects in crosscultural studies.
It is concluded that we should not abandon work on eidetic imagery or simply force it into a preconceived mold of what memory must be, but
rather, expand work on the phenomenological indicators of perception and memory.
Keywords: afterimages; eidetic imagery; imagery; memory; vision
Personal preface
Twenty years ago I tested my first eidetic subject - ten years ago my
last. In 1960 and for the preceding 25 years no respectable experi-
mental work was being done on eidetic imagery. In fact, I could
locate only ten papers of any kind published between 1935 and 1960
that reported data on eidetic imagery; most of these were case studies
of individual and unusual patients. Of course, 1900 to 1935 had seen
a vast proliferation of research, mainly in Germany, and most of it
empirical, which described the major characteristics of eidetic imag-
ery in children. This interest died out by the mid 1930s for two
reasons: the major contributor to the early literature used the
research to espouse "scientific" support for Nazi propaganda in the
1930s, casting doubt on the respectability of the concept and upon its
researchers; and even without such a stigma, the concept was not
proving productive and self-supportive. So it died.
And stayed dead until I resurrected it, for very misguided reasons.
In 1959 I heard George Sperling describe his dissertation research
(Sperling 1960) in which he rediscovered (see Baxt 1871) evidence
for a very brief visual persistence following the termination of visual
stimulation. He showed that normal adult perceivers had access to
this persistence and could extract information from it for up to
several tenths of a second. I raced back to my laboratory and
replicated his experiment to my satisfaction. But I also remembered
reading in graduate school studies by Gordon Allport (1924, 1928)
describing another kind of visual persistence. Except for the order-
of-rnagnitude differences in duration, the eidetic imagery described
by Allport looked superficially similar to Sperling's brief visual
process. After reading in the voluminous literature of the 1920s and
1930s and completely ignoring its cessation by the mid 1930s, I
decided to get the jump on Sperling by studying information
extraction without using multichannel tachistoscopes and sophisti-
cated experimental designs.
Of course I now know there are no shortcuts in information
processing, especially around George Sperling, and that eidetic
imagery bears little resemblance to any other brief visual persistence.
That fact was evident to me when I found my first eidetic child in
1960. Even so, in my laboratory we continued to sample over a
thousand children and adults and tested a hundred of them exten-
sively. In addition, almost a hundred other publications have
appeared in these twenty years using the methods and materials that
were developed and tested in this research project.
I quit after ten years of intensive work and wrote down all that I
had learned about eidetic imagery in a long monograph (Leask,
Haber, and Haber 1969) and in a more general summary (Haber
1969). It took me ten years to disengage because eidetic imagery was
and still is a very seductive phenomenon to me. While I do not
understand what it is, I am convinced that eidetic children do possess
a kind of visual imagery different from that of other children, and
from virtually all adults. Our theories of perception have no way to
describe, let alone account for, this imagery.
I am still as confused in 1980 as I was in 1970, and far more
confident in my confusion than I was in 1960. Eidetic imagery still
haunts me personally, and psychology more generally. In this paper I
would like to try to point to the ghost. It is an important ghost, and it
requires a powerful exorcist.
What is eidetic imagery?
Since methods of measurement play such an important role in this
research, I will first describe the typical procedures used in most of
© 1979 Cambridge University Press
0140-525X/79/RHABE028/$04.00
583

Haber: Eidetic imagery
the research on eidetic imagery. I will then provide some examples
taken from verbatim transcripts of subjects who met most of the
criteria for eidetic imagery. The following paragraphs are from
Haber and Haber (1964), pp. 133-38.
"S was brought into a small room which contained a table with an
easel on it. The easel (30 in. wide by 24 in. high, in a neutral grey
finish) was tilted away from S slightly, and had a narrow ledge along
the bottom on which the pictures were rested. S was seated 20 in.
away from the easel, his eyes level with the middle of it. Room
illumination was normal, with strong sunlight blocked by curtains
when necessary. A tape recorder transcribed both S's and E's voices.
"The sequence of events was the same for each S. He first was
shown a 4-in. red square, mounted on a board 10 in. by 12 in., of the
same material as the easel. E placed the stimulus on the easel, left it
there for 10 sec, and then removed it rapidly. S reported what he
still saw on the easel. Three other colored squares (blue, black, and
yellow), always in this order, were presented in a similar fashion.
After the fourth square was shown, four pictures were presented for
30 sec each, in the same manner.
"The following instructions were given to S at the beginning:
" 'We are going to play a game with colors and with pictures.
Here on this easel I am going to show you some colors and some
pictures, and then we are going to talk about them. When I put a
colored square here (pointing), I want you to stare at the center of it
as hard as you can, and try not to move your eyes at all as long as I
leave the square there. When I take the square away, I want you to
continue to stare as hard as you can where the square was. If you
stare hard enough, you will still be able to see something there. It is
very much like when you stare hard at a light bulb and then look
away - you can still see something out there in front of your eyes. (If
any child acted as if he was unfamiliar with this demonstration, he
was instructed to try it then with one of the overhead lights in the
room.) The important thing is to stare hard at the colored square
when I put it on the easel - so as not to take your eyes away or move
them around. When I remove the square, do not look at me, or
follow the color as I take it away, but keep staring at the place where
it was on the easel. As soon as I take the color away, I want you to
tell me what you still see there, if you see anything. You do not have
to wait until I ask you - you can begin telling me right away. OK,
here is the first colored square.'
"E was watching carefully during the exposure to be sure S did
not move his eyes. If S reported that he saw nothing at all after the
square was removed, he was encouraged by being assured that it was
all right to see things after the color was removed. If he still said he
saw nothing, he was reminded to stare hard, and not to move his
eyes at all, and he was questioned again as to whether he knew what
these instructions meant. Then E presented the next square,
increasing the duration by 10 sec over the previous exposure.
"If S said he saw something, he was allowed to report
spontaneously. When he stopped, he was questioned on whichever
of the following items he had not reported: Was the image still
visible? What was its color and shape? Did color and shape change,
and if so, how? In what direction did the image move? How did it
disappear? Did it move when the eyes moved (S was instructed to
try to move his eyes to the top of the easel)? After these points had
been covered, and the image had faded completely, E gave the
initial instructions again, and showed another square. The same
procedure was followed for the four squares.
"After the last square was shown and S had finished his response,
the instructions for the pictures were given.
" 'Now, I am going to show you some pictures. For these,
however, I do not want you to stare in one place, but to move your
eyes around so that you can be sure you can see all of the details.
When I take the picture away, I want you to continue to look hard at
the easel where the picture was, and tell me what you can still see
after I take it away. After I take it away, you also can move your
eyes all over where it was on the easel. And be sure, while the
picture is on the easel that you move your eyes around it to see all of
the parts.'
Figure 1. Indian hunting silhouette picture used in both New Haven (Haber
and Haber 1964) and Rochester studies (Leask, Haber, and Haber 1969), as well
as many others.
"AH four pictures were presented for 30 sec each. E watched
closely to be sure the pictures were scanned and not fixated. The
first picture was of a family scene, black pictures pasted on a grey
board to form a silhouette. The second, constructed in the same way,
was of an Indian hunting, with a deer, other animals, and some birds
(reproduced in Fig. 1 above). The third, in full color, showed an
Indian fishing in a canoe with many fish in the water. The fourth,
also in color, from Alice in Wonderland, depicted Alice standing at
the base of a large tree staring up at the Cheshire cat (reproduced in
Fig. 2). A number of other similar pictures had been used in
pretesting and in extra testing with some of the same Ss.
Figure 2. Alice picture, used in both sets of studies.
584
THE BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1979), 2

Haber: Eidetic imagery
"After the first picture was removed, S was told to continue to
look at the easel, and to tell E whatever he could still see. S was
reminded that he could move his eyes. If S reported seeing
something, E asked if he was actually seeing it then or remembering
it from when the picture was still on the easel. E asked frequently if
he was still seeing it, since Ss often would not report the fading of
the image but would continue reporting it from memory. If S
stopped his report, E asked if he could see anything else. If S said no,
but said he was still seeing an image, E asked if he could describe
anything else about that image. E probed for further description and
attributes of all objects still visible in the images. S was also asked to
move his eyes if he had not done so spontaneously. E noted the
relation between direction of gaze and details of report. This process
was repeated for all four pictures. The average time for testing
varied from 4 to 5 miri with a young S having no visual imagery to
more than 30 min for an older S with extensive imagery.
"To score the tape recordings, they were encoded onto specially
prepared data sheets, which indicated the content of all responses
(images and memory). A different coding sheet was set up for each
stimulus. The reliability of this condensation of the data was nearly
perfect, since the coding sheets had categories for every object and
most of their attributes for each stimulus; the coder rarely had to
make any scoring decision. All further scoring was done from these
data sheets except the durations of responses, which were taken
directly from the tape recordings."
More details on procedures and variations are provided in Leask,
et al. (1969), and these are reviewed in some detail by Gray and
Gummerman (1975).
The following excerpts from transcripts provide some feel for what
subjects with extensive imagery say when tested in the above fashion.
These are all taken from Leask et al. (1969), pp. 29-32.
"Example 1 is from a 10-year-old boy to the Indian silhouette (Fig. 1).
E: 
Do you see anything there?
S: 
I can see the cactus - it's got three limbs and 1 can see the
Indian, he's holding something in his hand, there's a deer
beside him on his right-hand side - it looks like it's looking
toward me and three birds in upper left-hand corner one in
right-hand corner, it's larger and a rabbit jumping off the little
hill.
E: 
Can you tell me about the Indian - can you tell me about his
feathers, how many are there?
S: 
Three or two.
E: 
Can you tell me about the feet of the deer?
S: 
They're small.
E: 
Are they all on the ground?
S: 
No.
E: 
Can you tell which ones aren't?
S: 
One of the front ones isn't.
E: 
Tell rne if it fades.
S: 
I can still see the birds and the Indian. I can't see the rabbit
anymore, (pause) Now it's all gone.
Example 2 is by the same S to the Alice picture (Fig. 2).
E: 
Do you see something there?
S: 
I see the tree, grey tree with three limbs, I see the cat with
stripes around its tail.
E: 
Can you count those stripes?
S: 
Yes, (pause) there's about sixteen.
E: 
You're counting what? Black, white, or both?
S: 
Both.
E: 
Tell me what else you see.
S: 
And I can see the flowers on the bottom, there's about three
stems, but you can see two pairs of flowers - one on the right
has green leaves, red flower on bottom with yellow on top . . .
and I can see the girl with a green dress - she's got blond hair
and a red hair band and there are some leaves in the upper left-
hand corner where the tree is.
E: 
Can you tell me about the roots of the tree?
S: 
Well, there's two of them going down here (points) and there's
one that cuts off on the left-hand side of the picture.
E: 
What is the cat doing with its paws?
S: 
Well - one of them he's holding out and the other one is on the
tree.
E: 
What color is the sky?
S: 
Can't tell.
E: 
Can't tell at all?
S: 
No, I can see the yellowish ground, though.
E: 
Tell me if any of the parts go away or change at all as I'm
talking to you. What color is the girl's dress?
S: 
Green - it has some white on it.
E: 
How about her legs and feet?
S: 
(S looks away from easel and then back again)
E: 
Is the image gone?
S: 
Yes - except for the tree.
E: 
Tell me when it goes away.
S: 
(Pause) It went away.
Example 3 is also by the same S to the Indian and Animals picture
(Fig. 3).
E: 
Can you see it?
S: 
Yes, I can see the white and blue sky and the ground has two
different shades of green in it with some blue on it... and I
can see two different squirrels, one is gray and the Indian's
holding him in his hand and he's eating a nut. The one on the
ground - he's red with a white stripe on him. There are three
birds in the air - they're green, orange — they've got some red
on them.
E: 
Can you see the birds' mouths?
S: 
No - I can see the deer and the cloth on the Indian's belt, it has
many colors on it, yellow is the biggest color - and I can see his
bow he's holding, it's got zigzag red on it.
E: 
Anything else - any other animals?
S: 
There's three rabbits - two of them are brown and one of them
is white - the one brown and white one are next to each other
and there's another brown one in the right-hand corner.
Figure 3. Indian and animals picture, used in both sets of studies.
THE BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1979), 2 
585

Haber: Eidetic imagery
•-m
Figure 4. 
Kipling's animal picture, used in Rochester studiei
E: 
What are they doing?
S: 
One over in the right-hand corner is jumping and the other two
are just standing around.
E: 
Tell me more about the Indian.
S: 
Well -
E: 
Start at the top and move down.
S: 
Well, he's got a headband on - he doesn't have a shirt on, he's
got a belt on with a cloth hanging out which is red, yellow. He's
got Indian moccasins on - I think they're brown.
E: 
Has he got anything else on?
S: 
No.
E: 
Anything else you can tell me - and tell me is any of the parts
go away.
S: 
The rabbits and birds are going away (pause) and the sky
(pause) that's it - it's all gone.
Example 4 is by an 11-year-old girl from the Kipling Animal picture
(Fig. 4).
E: 
Do you see anything?
S: 
Yes.
E: 
Start at the left and tell me about it.
S: 
He looks sort of like an elf. He's got a yellow hat and it goes up
to a yellow globe - it looks like a sun and the trees behind are
sort of bubbly looking - dark green. Ground is dark greenish
brown, then there's a momma and a little leopard and there's a
native sitting against him. Then there's a pool with a crab on it
- coming to it - with a fish in it and I think there are turtles
walking in front and a porcupine down near the right-hand
corner of the pool. Then back on the right, there's a tree that
separates a cow in half - the cow's brown and white, and
there's something up in the tree - I can't see the bottom right-
hand corner - there's a sun with a lot of rays on it near the top
on the right.
E: 
Can you count the rays?
S: 
About eight. . . . (pause) There's a lot in that one.
E: 
Can you see anything else?
S: 
No, (pause) there's something red in the tree around where the
cow is.
E: 
Any other animals or people?
S: 
No more people - can't see the right-hand corner. The
porcupine has a lot of bristles on it - oh, there's a little
something down away from him to the right - it's black and
white (pause). That's about all.
E: 
Can you still see it?
S: 
Most of it.
E: 
Tell me if it begins to go away or if you see anything else, (long
pause) Still seeing something?
S: 
Yes, but not the sky above the trees. I can't see what's in front
of the native anymore - it's sort of going, there's something in
the left-hand corner like a clump of bushes - dark, it's fading.
E: 
Tell me what parts fade.
S: 
The right is disappearing - I can still see that cow that's
divided by the tree, (pause) Oh! There's a crocodile or alligator
in the right-hand corner. You can't see all of him.
E: 
Can you see the right-hand side better now?
S: 
No - that's all I see from it.
E: 
Anything else in the middle?
S: 
Well, there's the fish in the pool and the pool is sort of odd-
shaped, there might be something in back of it.
E: 
Is there any left now?
S: 
It's very faint - only the bright yellow of the man's hat - that's
about all.
E: 
Tell me when it goes away.
S: 
(pause) It's gone.
Example 5 is by the same girl from the Feast picture (Fig. 5).
E: 
Tell me what you see.
S: 
Up above it looks like stairs coming down and then there's a
bench and a boy, then a girl and a couple of boys sitting on it,
and then there's a very long table and on the table it looks like
more plates without anything on them than food. There's
people of all kinds sitting around the table and then it looks like
a lady serving behind the table and then by the doorway it
looks like children just gushing in and there's a clock by that -
up in the left-hand corner there's a china cabinet and a big
hefty woman is putting dishes in there.
E: 
Which hand is she using?
S: 
Both of them and there's a coffee pot above the doorway - and
586
THE BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1979), 2

Haber: Eidetic imagery
Figure 5. Feast picture, used in Rochester studies.
then there's a stove, it's round and white, there's a fire burning
with about three logs and there's a mantel around the top of it
with four objects on it. Then over by the corner there's a wood
place, a wood pile, and a man's hat hanging on a hook and a
bench with one boy eating on it, and a hook without a hat on it
and then the table - looks like stairs above that corner too.
There are lots of children, more grownups at the table.
E: 
Can you tell me what any of them have on?
S: 
The woman serving has on a gray dress with some red on it and
then there's one man with a little child, climbing up into his lap
- near the left. There are quite a few bald heads. It looks like
children coming in the doorway.
E: 
Any other furniture?
S: 
No. . . . Between the clock and china cabinet there's something
that looks yellow and it's made in a bunch of Vs. The china
cabinet is really pretty and I think there are doors that open up,
not too many plates on it. There's fish on the table and
something yellow like a casserole. The clock is probably a
grandfather clock.
E: 
Would you go around the table and tell me about the people?
S: 
I can't tell you about any distinctly. I think there's an old man
in the left-hand corner ... at the end of the table. I think
there's a woman at the other end - can't tell you anything more
about the people.
E: 
You can still see all these things?
S: 
Yes, there're a lot of people laughing at the table.
E: 
Can you tell me about the walls?
S: 
Where the yellow thing is by the clock, underneath that it's
turquoise. By the china cabinet there's a wooden spoon and a
broom. In the middle of the picture on the top it squares off,
gets flat. It's kinda fading - mostly the table. I can't see it as
one whole picture anymore. I can go around and see the
different parts, (pause) It's fading - can't see too many colors
although I can still see things. There's a window beside the
chest on the left and I think there're lacy curtains on it, I'm not
sure though, (long pause) That's it."
What criteria distinguish eidetic Imagery from everything else?
The distinctive feature of subjects properly classified as eidetic is that
they say they can continue to "see " a representation of a stimulus
that is no longer physically present. To be interesting, the property of
"seeing" must be distinguished both from "remembering" without a
visualization of the previously exposed stimulus, and from less
interesting (at least in this context) afterimages.
Historically, the only definition of eidetic imagery is phenomeno-
logical - a description by the subject of what he is seeing. Thus, in the
older literature the defining characteristic is a report by a child that
he continues to see the stimulus in front of his eyes after the stimulus
is removed from sight. Usually the child reports not only that he can
still see it, but that he can describe its contents in detail. It is usually
the case that if a child makes one such report about one stimulus, he
can do so for most of the stimuli presented to him. Therefore, this
purely phenomenological report is bolstered by data on the number
of such reports and on the mean duration of the reported image after
stimulus removal; the strength of eidetic imagery is specified accord-
ing to the magnitude of these two measures. While other criteria
have occasionally been suggested, the above summarizes the defini-
tion of eidetic imagery in the empirical literature up to 1964.
In our first work (Haber and Haber 1964) we proposed seven
criteria that would specify the presence of eidetic imagery and
differentiate it from memory and afterimages, between concurrent
perception and subsequent memory, from confusion and from
demand characteristics of the testing. These criteria are: (1) the child
reports that he sees an image; (2) that image is located in front of his
eyes on the plane of the stimulus he has scanned; (3) the duration of
the image is substantial, especially compared to afterimages from
comparable stimuli; (4) he uses the present tense to describe his
image but shifts reliably to the past tense to describe from memory
those parts that have faded or that he never saw in his image at all;
(5) he can move his eyes over the stimulus during the inspection of it;
(6) he can move his eyes over his image - for example, he looks on the
left side of the surface when describing the left side of the image; and
(7) accuracy of detail should he high and better than would be
THE BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1979), 2
587

Haber: Eidetic imagery
expected from normal memory. Much of our subsequent work
provided evaluations of these criteria to determine which ones were
critical.
The first three criteria are the phenomenological ones - they
depend upon our acceptance of the report from the child that he sees
• an image in front of his eyes. The other criteria are converging
operations (Garner, Hake, and Eriksen 1956) to increase our confi-
dence in the phenomenological descriptions. In developing these
criteria, my greatest interest was to isolate eidetic imagery as a visual
process. When a child says he sees something on the easel when the
easel is blank, how can I be sure that he is relating a visual
experience, and not some kind of nonvisual memory which he has
chosen to describe with visual metaphors. The critical distinction is
visual versus nonvisual, and not visual versus memory. By definition,
reports of imagery are memories; they require some maintenance of
a representation of information that outlasts stimulation. When an
eidetic child says he see the stimulus on the easel, he is telling us that
at that moment, his memory representation is visual. The purpose of
the study of eidetic imagery is to understand and explain how some
memory representations can be visual.
I will first discuss criteria 4 through 7, and comment on an eighth;
none of these depends directly upon phenomenological description.
Then I will return to the first three, which are direct reports of
perceptual experience.
Consistent use of the present tense to describe images and the past
tense to describe memory after an image has faded (criterion 4)
provides some validation for the distinction between current percep-
tion and memory for prior perception. In 1969 we reported experi-
ments testing whether eidetic children are consistent in their use of
tenses. Our results were quite strong. Of the 12 eidetic children (as
defined by all seven criteria) who were questioned without the use of
a tense by the experimenter (e.g., "tell me about the color of the cat")
six children were always consistent, three continued to use the
present tense for more than half of the stimuli to report memory
after the image faded, two used the present tense occasionally (less
than 15% of the time), and one child used present and past tense
interchangeably for both image and memory. With this last child as
the exception, 11 of the 12 subjects always used the present tense
when reporting what they said they saw before their eyes, though as
noted, half of the children sometimes also used present tense to
report their memories. In a control condition testing 12 noneidetic
children (who never reported seeing anything after the picture was
removed), no present tense descriptions were ever used to describe
their memories of the pictures. Therefore, the tense criterion is a
powerful one. When a child says he sees an image before his eyes, he
always describes it in the present tense..
Criteria 5 and 6 concern eye movements and are designed
primarily to differentiate eidetic imagery from afterimages. Once an
afterimage is formed, presumably by differential adaptation of
receptor or neural units, subsequent eye movements should cause the
image to shift with the movement, so that the image itself cannot be
scanned. All eidetic children can move their eyes while looking at the
stimulus (which should prevent the formation of an adequate after-
image) and can move their eyes to different locations on the easel
when reporting the content that had originally been in those
locations. Further, it is unlikely that afterimages last as long as most
of the images reported by these children, especially in positive as
compared to negative forms.
In our experiments there are many subjects who report relatively
brief negative afterimages. When such subjects are asked to move
their eyes around the easel, without exception they report that the
image moves as well. Therefore, the two eye-movement criteria seem
to be important differentiators of eidetic images from afterimages.
They also have an important bearing on the question of the demand
characteristics of the task, since presumably the children would not
have had expectations about what kinds of movements they ought to
report in order to meet these criteria.
Based on their review of the evidence, Gray and Gummerman
(1975) find eye movements less convincing as a criterion than the
above comments would suggest. They reported that only Pollen and
Trachtenberg (1972) actually measured the eye movements of an
eidetic subject during scanning and imagery, and while the move-
ments were sufficient to preclude afterimages, they were much
smaller and more variable than would have been predicted from the
verbal report of the images. All the other evidence is less precise and
usually involves no more than the experimenter watching the
subject's eyes during the task.
Haber and Haber (1964) proposed the criterion only to avoid
confounding eidetic images with afterimages, and not as a necessary
feature of eidetic imagery itself. Even the less precise visual inspec-
tion of eye movements is sufficient for that distinction. There is no
reason why an eidetic child can not maintain fixation on one part of
his image while reporting another part, or shift eye position around
while continuing to describe a small area. Both of these take place
while stimuli are actually being viewed, so they can in theory also
occur while one is looking at images of such stimuli. Hence, the
eye-movement scanning criterion should not be used as a defining
characteristic of eidetic imagery, buy only to differentiate it from
afterimages.
The seventh criterion suggested by Haber and Haber (1964)
concerned the accuracy of the reported details of the images. This
criterion is often cited in the older literature and reflects the frequent
confusion between eidetic imagery and photographic memory
(whatever that might be). In any event, Leask et al. (1969) reported a
number of experiments and demonstrations to show that accuracy
cannot be used as a criterion. Some eidetic children can report highly
detailed images while others report quite sketchy and fragmentary
ones. Several of the tests involve comparing the accuracy of eidetic
children's imagery, evoked by a picture, with the accuracy of control
subjects reporting a picture from memory. We never found a
significant difference in accuracy in any of these tests. These results
are strongly supported by Gray and Gummerman's (1972) data on a
single eidetic subject who was strikingly eidetic but whose memorial
accuracy was no better than that of control subjects.
The accuracy criterion for eidetic imagery must accordingly be
abandoned, despite its appeal. We suggested this ten years ago
(Leask et al. 1969), and Gray and Gummerman (1975) strongly
concurred. However, the popularity of accuracy as a criterion, has
been most resistant to contrary evidence since many generalizations
about eidetic imagery are based exclusively on the most impressive
subject in the sample (as, for example, in the verbatim transcripts
presented earlier). Even so, fidelity of imagery to the stimulus is not a
distinguishing characteristic of the reports of the subjects in these
experiments, nor is it in any other research on imagery.
Leask et al. (1969) proposed an eighth criterion, also an objective
one, designed to isolate the visual characteristics of eidetic imagery
from possible memorial, demand, or suggestibility components. We
took a meaningful picture and decomposed it into two separate
pictures by assigning the different contours of the complete version
to one or the other of the decomposed versions. Figure 6 shows the
first example we tried. One of the two decomposed versions is
presented for 30 seconds and is then removed. Then the other version
is presented after a delay of 5 to 30 seconds. If the child can form and
maintain a complete image of the first picture and align that image
with either the stimulus picture or an (internal) image of the second
one, that alignment should permit him to see and describe the
original composite, even though the composite had never actually
been presented.
We found that only 4 of 23 eidetic children could do the composite
image test, though none of a large control group of either children or
adults was able to describe the composite from seeing either version
separately. It is clearly a more difficult test of eidetic imagery
because it depends upon having good long persisting visual images
that are complete rather than fragmentary and are sufficiently
manageable so that the child can align them properly.
The composite image test has also been used by Gray and
Gummerman (1975), with comparable success. Its most dramatic use
was reported by Stromeyer and Psotka (1970): the two decomposed
versions were the appropriate halves of a Julesz random dot stereo-
gram pair. The one adult subject they tested was able to report the
588
THE BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1979), 2

Haber: Eidetic imagery
Figure 6. Composite picture test item. One of the two upper pictures is
presented for 30 seconds and then removed. After a brief delay, the other upper
one is presented and then removed. The lower picture is a superimposed
composite, which is what a good eidetic subject describes.
correct object in depth, even when the two pairs were substantially
separated in time. Since we have typically been unable to get good
images from nonsense or meaningless forms or patterns in eidetic
children, their report describes one of the most powerful uses of the
composite criterion.
In any event, as a criterion the composite picture test is overly
restrictive. It seems unlikely that we could account for the behavior
of the children who achieve it, by any other interpretation than a
capacity to maintain a detailed visual image. Those who fail it may
still be quite eidetic by the other criteria, but they may not have
sufficiently complete, moveable, or persisting images to perform this
demanding task.
I have briefly described criteria 4-8 (tenses, scanning of stimuli,
scanning of images, accuracy of report, and composite images),
which depend upon some objective measure of perceptual behavior
over and above the subjective report, "I see something." These
criteria are relatively powerful and persuasive, but only in the
context of the phenomenological report of imagery. Therefore in this
sense the first three criteria - the report of seeing an image, the
location of the image in front of the eyes, and a substantial duration
of the image - are still going to be the most important, and of these
the first is obviously the most crucial.
Much of the research reported by Leask et al. (1969) was designed
to examine operations converging around the first criterion. The
following is a brief summary taken from Leask et al. (p. 46) of the
kinds of observations or experimental results that provide converging
evidence to support the first of the alternatives - that the child's
report is of an image he is presently looking at when he says he can
see it in front of his eyes.
1. The duration of exposure determines the probability of an
image appearing, even from a fully familiar picture that the child
has seen many times.
2. Nearly all eidetic children use blinking as a mechanism to
terminate their images. This is supportive not only because of its
universality, but also because it is a visual rather than a cognitive
control mechanism.
3. An eidetic image seems to be restricted to the eye exposed.
While this may be due to erasure through blinking, it suggests that
the child must be reporting what he sees, rather than what he
remembers or knows, which need not be limited to one eye.
4. Even though the child may be familiar with the picture, he
reports he can see an image of only those parts of the picture he has
just looked at.
5. Conversely, he can remember parts that he cannot see in his
image, suggesting that he has some basis for a distinction between
seeing and remembering.
6. A few eidetic children report three-dimensional images of
three-dimensional objects.
7. These same eidetic children can see reversals of orientation in
their image of a Necker cube. While they are aware that reversals
occur during examination of the cube itself, reporting them also in
their image must be the result of seeing the cube itself in their
image.
8. Nearly all children report their image 'falls off' the edge and
disappears when they attempt to move it from its original surface to
another one. This is a visual description without doubt.
9. When viewing single letters that slide into place in a window,
all eidetic children report that they move their image of each
previously seen letter along the surface until they 'fall off' at the
edge.
10. All children report their images disappear in parts by fading;
and that the nature of the fading process seems to be the same for all
children, too.
11. When any child reports from memory, he does so with less
confidence, more hesitations and 'searching memory' than an eidetic
child does when he reports his image. This is true even though there
are n© differences in the content of the reports.
12. Images of nonsense verbal material are no different in quality
or content from meaningful words. Since memory representations
clearly are different, this must be prior to memory.
THE BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1979), 2
589

Haber: Eidetic Imagery
13. Quality of the image report is clearly related to recency of
scanning, and not to variables associated with verbal learning and
memory research.
14. Nonsense words, at least, can be reported as easily (if not
more so) in the reverse order to viewing the letters. While this needs
to be demonstrated for meaningful words as well, there is no reason
to doubt it.
15. Images are most likely to be formed when S pays no cognitive
attention to the stimulus and makes no attempt to memorize it.
Imagery and memory seem opposites, not confounded.
This list is a very mixed bag of evidence, some of which can be
relied upon, some merely suggestive. Taken together it lends substan-
tial credence to the conclusion that when an eidetic child says he sees
something on the blank easel, his report should be taken at face value
in the same way that we take a report of seeing something when the
stimulus is still present on the easel.
Given all of the criteria, and the converging evidence in support of
the subjective ones, it is not surprising that the few children who
satisfy the latter alone are classified as eidetic. In fact, one of the
"extra" criteria that we have often used is to take skeptical colleagues
along to observe or participate in the testing. This never fails to
convert them into accepting the report as a genuine description of
visual imagery the child can see before his eyes even though the easel
is blank.
Paivio and Cohen (1977) have reported a factor analysis of the
correlation matrix among the criterion scores they collected on a
sample of 242 second- and third-grade children in London, Ontario.
The procedures were modeled closely after those of Haber and
Haber (1964). They classified 21 children (8.6% of the sample) as
eidetic based upon these criteria and found that two factors
accounted for most of the variance among the criterion score
correlations. The strongest factor, accounting for 81% of the vari-
ance, loaded highly on all of the non-memory items, such as reported
imagery, duration of over 40 seconds, projection of the image in front
of the eyes, being able to scan both the stimulus and the image, and
the use of the present tense. These criteria relate to or describe the
phenomenological characteristics of the imagery. The second factor
was clearly a memory factor, with loadings on the criteria concerned
with accuracy of recall of detail and color. The independence of
these two factors in their study further supports our conclusion that
the memory-based criteria can be abandoned.
A final note about criteria: Several test-retest reliability analyses
have been reported. Each of the children in the original Haber and
Haber (1964) study was retested with different experimenters several
times over a five-year period. Only one of the 12 children was
reclassified as noneidetic, and he was the poorest one originally. A
comparable test-retest was carried out in the second sample in
Rochester (also reported in Leask et al. 1969) over a six-month period
with equivalent results. Cohen (1976) also did a retest after nearly a
year's delay (with new experimenters) in which all 20 eidetic subjects
plus a comparable number of controls were retested. He found
nearly 90% agreement in classification. Both of the last two intervals
are too short to be considered longitudinal data, but they do provide
evidence for the reliability and short-term stability of the eidetic
classification.
The phenomenology of eidetic imagery
Having accepted eidetic imagery as the report of a perceptual
process, which can be reliably elicited and scored, what do we know
about the content of the images? Some of this information has
already been described in the discussion of criteria, but I want to
discuss this question in greater detail. These data and observations
come mainly from Leask et al. (1969), though some are described by
other experimenters as well. Unfortunately, except for a few of the
case studies, there is very little about the content of eidetic imagery
in published reports. The Leask, Haber, and Haber monograph,
therefore represents a rare data base. I will not provide information
on the procedures that elicited this information, but will only
describe the results and conclusions. Further details can be found in
the monograph.
Eidetic imagery is not photographic. I have already argued that
the accuracy criterion has to be dropped, because eidetic children are
no more accurate in describing details from their images than from
their memory (nor are their descriptions more accurate than the
memory of noneidetic children). It appears as if the images are r
constructed or organized in the same way that verbal memory is, so
that some visual details are omitted, others moved around, and some
added. Thus, the content of imagery is also organized, and not simply
an internal template or photograph of the stimulus.
An eidetic image may often contain less information than the
child's subsequent verbal description based on memory for the
picture that evoked the image. Whether or not an object appears in
the image depends on whether that area of the picture is looked at
for at least 3 to 5 seconds. Shorter glances usually fail to produce
images of a particular part, even though the child can remember
those details when asked about them. The only way to get a complete
image of a picture is to look at each part of it for enough time. If the
picture is quite large, this requires a substantial inspection time. Parts
omitted are not imaged, even though they are usually remembered.
On the other hand, the eidetic child's report of his image is made
fluently and with confidence, as if he is actually looking at what he is
describing. However, when he describes his memory, or when a
noneidetic child describes his memory of a previous stimulus, after
the first few items are reported, the verbalizations become hesitant,
as if the child is searching an imperfect memory. The fluidity and
confidence of the report of images as compared to memory could be
used as a distinguishing criterion for eidetic imagery, if we had an
easy way to score it.
Several techniques are used by eidetic children to prevent images
from forming. Some children report they have images only when
they concentrate on the stimulus visually, while others say that they
always get images of what they look at unless they actively prevent
them. The main prevention technique described by nearly all eidetic
children is active, cognitive, verbal rehearsal of the stimulus. If, while
looking at a picture, the child names each of the items in it, no visual
image develops. Thus, it appears as if eidetic children have two
modes of processing visual stimuli: a visual mode, which leads to a
visual image, and a verbal rehearsal mode, which blocks the image,
though it probably aids verbal memory.
The opposition of these two modes probably also accounts for the
difficulty eidetic children have in achieving images of print or highly
informative or detailed stimuli that they expect to be questioned
about. Presented with print, they tend to read it; this, by the very
nature of the naming process, prevents an image from forming.
Nearly all eidetic children say they can terminate an image by
blinking their eyes, looking away, or shifting their gaze to a new
stimulus. This apparently helps them control unwanted images, as
well as preventing images from overlapping when eidetic subjects
scan the world or turn pages.
Nearly all eidetic children report the same pattern of fading for
their images; this fading is due to a combination of purely visual
factors (such as loss of clarity, contrast, color, and distinctiveness) and
organizational or meaningful factors that cause whole items to fade
out together. Since the descriptions of the images are verbal, the
latter factors are probably exaggerated, as it is much easier to say, for
example, that the tree is fading than that the left side of the bark is
now harder to see.
The eidetic children say that they see their images projected onto
the surfaces that contained the stimulus. A few, however, do say they
can sometimes see an image inside their head. The latter is a much
more typical report from some of the eidetic subjects in the African
societies studied by Doob (1965, 1966, 1970). While most eidetic
children can move their images around on the surface, a small
number (about 25%) can shift them to another coplanar surface, and
one or two can move them to any surface at will. One of these last
children reported that she could also change the size of her image at
590
THE BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1979), 2

Haber: Eidetic imagery
will (making it difficult to test Emmert's law with such a subject),
and even turn it upside down. Some tests were made to substantiate
this last claim, with equivocal results.
If a picture produces an image that is still visible when a second
picture is presented, some eidetic children report a composite image
of the two pictures. They can describe which parts of the image came
from which picture, but they are still seeing a single image of two
stimuli. This does not happen to all children, because for some,
presenting the new picture terminates the image of the first (presum-
ably because they blink their eyes or glance away).
A few examples of three-dimensional images have been reported,
and some children can develop such images with appropriate stimuli
easily. A two-dimensional drawing of a Necker cube produced
reversals of three-dimensional orientations in images, further
supporting the three-dimensionality of eidetic images, at least for
some children.
Most eidetic children have no difficulty in getting monocular images
to monocular presentations, but transferring an image to the other eye is
difficult because of the inevitable opening and closing of eyes, which
routinely terminates images. Every child who could get a monocular
image in one eye could do so for the other eye as well - contrary to the
report by Freides and Hayden (1966), who showed that at least some of
their eidetic children were unilaterally monocular.
This is obviously a very abbreviated list, but it should give some
sense of the flavor of eidetic imagery, and of some of the eliciting
conditions that affect imaging. This list is particularly important
because it continues to point out the visual nature of eidetic imagery
and its independence from nonvisual memory for the same stimuli.
Accepting the evidence and interpretation that there are some
children who can maintain detailed visual images beyond reasonable
bounds of physiological time, what do we know about the prevalence
and distribution in the population, and what do we know about the
causes or at least the correlates of eidetic imagery? Both of these
questions can only be answered in sketchy and somewhat unsatisfac-
tory ways.
Incidence of eidetic Imagery
The literature before 1935 implies that on the average 50% of all
school children have some eidetic abilities, with a range from 0 to
100%. Since no subsequent sampling has approached yielding such
high percentages, I assume that the earlier figures include substantial
numbers of misclassifications resulting from inclusion of children
with good afterimages and children reporting their memory rather
than their current images.
Virtually every study carried out since 1964 (no empirical studies
are reported between 1935 and 1964) uses the methods described
above. With these methods, the frequency of eidetic imagery among
elementary-school-aged children ranges from less than 2% to about
15% (see bibliographical section on empirical studies for references).
In our own work in New Haven (Haber and Haber 1964) and in
Rochester (Leask et al. 1969; Haber 1969) we never exceeded 10% of
any sample. Several studies have been done with cross-cultural
samples, with subjects presumably selected to have far less exposure
to literacy training. These studies report frequencies in the same
range or slightly above (see section on cross-cultural studies in
bibliography). A few studies have used clinically impaired subjects,
especially mentally retarded or brain-damaged children and young
adults. The results are less consistent, though most of them find
percentages in the same range as with normal subjects. Finally,
several studies have sampled adult subjects. Reported frequencies are
uniformly near zero except in one study by Giray, Roodin, Altkin,
Yoon, and Flagg (1978), who found elevated percentages in a
geriatric population, approaching 25% in ninety-year olds.
Testing procedures vary substantially, of course, even when they
are closely modeled after those of Haber and Haber (1964). Without
providing a detailed methodological analysis it seems most parsimon-
ious to believe that all of these child samples, regardless of composi-
tion, are drawn from the same population, with a mean frequency of
around five eidetic subjects per one hundred, and that all of the adult
samples are drawn from a different population containing less than
one eidetic per thousand. The observed variation is probably as much
due to inconsistencies in applying all the criteria during testing and
in the inability of some subjects to understand what it means to
report images. In fact, no single study, including those reported by
Haber and Haber (1964) and Leask et al. (1960) applied all the
criteria to each child throughout the sample. The tense criterion,
quite a powerful one, for example, is rarely applied. This failure
produces a bias toward overestimating the frequency of occurrence
of eidetic imagery. Hence, I have selected the more conservative
population estimates.
Is there a continuum from eidetic to noneidetic Imagery?
In both Haber and Haber (1964) and Leask et al. (1969) we provided
evidence of a discontinuity between the few children classified as
eidetic and most of the rest of the children sampled. When the
criteria are used separately to classify children, some of them
individually produce discontinuous distributions in which there is no
overlap between the classifications. This is true for the eye-scanning
measures and the tense switching especially, and to only a slightly
lesser degree for the percentage and duration of images. When
several criteria are combined together, however, there is no doubt of
a discontinuity. The occasional child who has a very long afterimage,
for example (and who would be classified as eidetic on the duration
criterion alone), fails to meet any of the other criteria, so he is
classified as noneidetic with great confidence.
The discontinuity in classification makes it tempting to conclude
that eidetic imagery is a kind of memory representation qualitatively
different from any other kind, and distinct from normal perception
as well. I expressed such a conclusion in 1969, though without great
conviction. Nothing has been published in the ensuing ten years to
change either the conclusion or the confidence, though Gray and
Gummerman (1975) have argued for an apparently contrary position
- a difference in degree rather than kind. The continuum implied in
their argument is in terms of the vividness of a visualization compo-
nent in memory, with some people sometimes able to represent
memory entirely in visual terms (which we call eidetic), others able
to do this only occasionally and only hazily or weakly, and some
never having a visual representation of nonconcurrent stimulation. In
the following pages most of Gray and Gummerman's arguments are
covered (though not always explicitly attributed to them). As will be
apparent, I find the visualization capacity of children categorized as
eidetic so impressive that I still lean toward a discontinutiy conclu-
sion.
What might the continuum be if eidetic imagery is merely one end
of it? While there is a growing literature on the functional role of
visual imagery in memory (for example, Paivio 1975; Erdelyi 1976),
in discrimination (for example, Shepard 1978) and in general cogni-
tive processes (for example, Kosslyn, Pinker, Smith, and Schwartz
1979, this issue) in none of these studies are the subjects ever asked to
describe the vividness or the content of their images directly. Rather,
the fact that the subject used visual imagery is inferred from the
nature of the stimulus material (e.g., using stimuli independently
ranked as being exemplars of easily imaged objects), or the instruc-
tions to the subject (e.g., "form a visual image of the stimulus before
you answer"), or a postsession questionnaire. Therefore, in spite of
the success of these kinds of experiments, they tell us virtually
nothing about the phenomenology of visual imagery and even less
about the individual differences in such subjective states. While I
consider the data of Kosslyn et al. to be overwhelming evidence for
the use of visual imagery in their tasks, I cannot learn much from
their results about how visual their subjects' images are, how long the
images last, how complete the details of their images are, and
particularly, whether the subjects "see" the objects being imaged in
the same sense that eidetic subjects say they do.
THE BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1979), 2
591

Haber: Eidetic Imagery
Paivio and Cohen (1977) provide some data relevant to the
discontinuity question. In addition to testing for the presence of
eidetic imagery in their sample of 242 children, they administered
four tests of spatial abilities, one self-report test of vividness of visual
imagery, and two tests of verbal ability. When all the intercorrela-
tions were factor analyzed, these investigators still found the same
phenomenological eidetic factor described earlier. This factor had no
loadings in common with factors reflecting spatial relations, vivid-
ness of imagery, and verbal ability. Granting that the reports of
eidetic children do reflect something they are seeing, Paivio and
Cohen's data imply that whatever that is, it is different from either
spatial or verbal abilities, and even from self-report measures of the
vividness of imagery in everyday life.
From this kind of evidence it seems difficult to know how one is
simply to place eidetic imagery at the extreme end of a continuum of
memory representation. However, to say that eidetic imagery is some
unique perceptual ability qualitatively different from all other
perceptual abilities is equally difficult in the absence of any converg-
ing evidence for the uniqueness of the children who possess eidetic
imagery. As the following sections will show, such evidence is
virtually completely absent.
A major focus of much of the work reported in Leask et al. (1969)
was to find the ways in which eidetic children differed from other
children who did not possess eidetic imagery. We looked at reason-
able correlates, such as intellectual measures, achievement measures,
school performance, psychological adjustment and mental health,
neurological indexes, visual performance measures, and genetic
factors. Even hints - no matter how unreasonable or how ungeneral-
izable - that might differentiate children were pursued. The results
of this quest can be summarized simply: the eidetic children
appeared to be a random sample drawn from the school population
on all measures except their eideticism. We could find virtually no
evidence of any kind that separated these children from the nonei-
detic ones. We did find that eidetic children were more likely to
wear glasses than noneidetic children, but the difference was due
primarily to corrections for refractive error. Since refractive errors
are not likely to produce eidetic images, I dismissed this finding as a
chance effect. A search of the published literature provides the same
picture. The findings by Paivio and Cohen summarize it all. Eidetic
imagery stands alone.
There is of course one correlate that is universally reported.
Eidetic imagery is found almost exclusively in school-age children
and is virtually absent in adults. Does this finding help at all to
explicate the discontinuity?
Age and eidetic Imagery
The literature prior to 1935 reported substantial negative correlations
between the prevalence of eidetic imagery and the age of the
subjects, with the incidence in high school years a fraction of that in
elementary school, and virtually zero among adults. Since most of the
recent empirical studies have assumed this relationship to be valid,
there is little new evidence on subjects beyond puberty. Gummer-
man, Gray, and Wilson (1972) tested a large sample of adults and
found no eidetics, and Giray et al. (1978) found a percentage near
zero among ages 20-60. There have also been a number of cross-
cultural studies primarily using adults in less literate societies, but I
will consider these separately below, since they represent a special
problem of interpretation.
I should add that there are many published reports of individual
adult eidetic subjects who are studied and described in great detail.
In fact, nearly a third of all publications on eidetic imagery since
1930 are such case studies. However, since the sampling distribution
of these case studies cannot be determined, nor the characteristics of
the populations from which they are drawn, the mere popularity of
such descriptions tells us nothing about the likelihood of there being
substantial numbers of adult eidetics. Further, since a careful reading
of these case studies shows that many of the subjects do not even meet
the basic criteria of eidetic imagery and that many of them show
substantial symptoms of hallucinatory or confabulatory activity, I
feel that my earlier claim of less than one eidetic per thousand adults
is quite generous.
But what about the younger ages? What are we to make of the
concentration of eidetic imagery in children of ages six to twelve?
Perhaps the oldest and most important hypothesis concerning the
origins and functional significance of eidetic imagery is tied to its age
correlate: eidetic imagery is typical or common in very young
children and disappears as more advanced cognitive and perceptual
processes develop, especially those associated with abstract thought
and reading. Nearly every investigator has pursued aspects of this
hypothesis in one form or another.
For support, the hypothesis has to account for more than just the
negative correlation of eidetic imagery with age, since that is what it
was based on. There are, however, no confirmatory data for this
hypothesis beyond the correlation with age (and even that correlation
is problematic, as I shall show below). One test of the hypothesis is the
prediction that children with eidetic imagery are delayed or retarded
on abstract tasks, since such tasks interfere with, replace, or overlay
eidetic imagery. No experiment since 1930 has reported any signifi-
cant correlation between the presence or absence of eidetic imagery
(or even the degree of eidetic imagery) and intellectual ability, skill
at abstract reasoning, school achievement, or reading ability. Eidetic
subjects are neither better nor worse on any of these skills or abilities
than noneidetic controls at any age. The lack of any such differences
between eidetic and noneidetic subjects casts strong doubt on the
hypothesis.
In addition, there is some positive evidence against it. In the only
reported longitudinal study on eidetic imagery (Leask et al. 1969),
only one of the original twelve children failed to remain eidetic.
Further, we could find no significant differences on any of the
criteria from year to year. Since the age of five to fifteen covers the
years over which the developmental hypothesis predicts that eidetic
imagery should drop out, the lack of changes within the same
subjects has to be considered damaging to the hypothesis.
The stability of eidetic imagery over nearly the entire elementary
school period is clearly inconsistent with the developmental hypothe-
sis. In fact, in the studies that tested enough children at each age,
there is not much difference in the prevalence of eidetic imagery at
age 7 as compared to age 10 or 11 (see also Giray, Altkin, Vaughton
and Roodin 1976). It is only when older children or adults are tested
that it is difficult to find any that are eidetic.
Another failure of the developmental hypothesis is that it should
predict especially high eidetic-imagery prevalence at very young
ages. Five to ten per hundred is hardly a high percentage. It is of
course possible that children younger than six or seven would be
more likely to be eidetic, and that most would have lost the ability by
the first or second grade. Only Giray, Altkin, Vaught, and Roodin
(1976) have reported data on children of five or six. They found
higher percentages than at ages 7-18, though not nearly large
enough to support this kind of hypothesis. In 1961 we tried to test
some five and six year olds and found no eidetic children. However,
we felt that the testing procedures were not adapted to such young
children, so a few may have been eidetic. On the other hand, we
were convinced by the little testing we did do that eidetic imagery is
not at all typical in kindergarten and first grade.
Cross-cultural data
A slightly different version of the developmental hypothesis was
initially explored by Doob (1964) followed by a number of others (see
the bibliographic section on cross-cultural studies). Doob argued that
if eidetic imagery was cognitively more concrete, then if subjects
were selected who never developed complex abstract skills such as
reading, or were less exposed to Western-style educational systems,
they should show a higher prevalence of eidetic imagery. Following
this reasoning he tested adult subjects in several African societies,
contrasting groups that differed in exposure to education or Western
culture. In Doob's work, and the six subsequent publications using
592
THE BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1979), 2

Haber: Eidetic imagery
African, Brazilian, or Australian subjects contrasted for acculturation
and education, there is no consistent support for this version of the
development hypothesis. Specifically, while the incidence of eidetic
imagery is more variable, ranging from 0 to 20%, there is no
consistent pattern of differences between the acculturated and the
less acculturated groups. Further, since each of the published articles
describes the difficulties in maintaining consistent testing proce-
dures, particularly in assuring that the instructions about what to
report mean the same thing to the subjects that they do to the testers,
significant results would need to be treated with great care. Since the
data are so messy, the cross-cultural data cannot easily be applied to
the developmental hypothesis, and certainly not as positive support.
Eidetic Imagery and neurological pathology
Siipola and Hayden (1965; see also Giray, Altkin, Vaught, and
Roodin 1976; Giray, Altkin, and Barclay 1976, Giray et al. 1978)
pursued another version of the developmental hypothesis, arguing
that subjects with either mental deficiencies or neurological deficits
that interfere with abstract thought processes should still have access
to their eidetic abilities because high levels of cognitive abilities did
not develop to replace or interfere with the eidetic skills. In their
experiment, they tested sixteen brain-injured retardates and found
eight of them eidetic, using the Haber and Haber procedures and
criteria. This high percentage has never been found again. Subse-
quent studies by Richardson and Cant (1970), Symmes (1971),
Gummerman, Gray, and Wilson (1972) and Giray, Altkin, and
Barclay (1976) found, respectively, 2%, 19%, 0%, and 10%, eidetic
subjects among brain-injured retardates. Among non-brain-injured
retardates, Siipola and Hayden, Symmes, Gummerman, Gray, and
Wilson, and Giray, Altkin, and Barclay found, respectively, 6%, 13%,
11%, and 4% to be eidetic. The two exceptions to these low numbers
are the original finding by Siipola and Hayden (1965) of 50% among
sixteen brain-injured subjects and a more recent finding by Giray,
Altkin, and Barclay (1976) of 78% eidetic among fourteen hydroce-
phalic subjects. It is difficult to know how to interpret a few positive
findings among a larger number of negative ones, especially since the
procedures seem adequate. But with this variable pattern of results,
the evidence does little to sustain the neurological-deficit version of
the developmental hypothesis.
To this negative conclusion should be added the highly variable
data reported on individual clinical case studies of eidetic imagery. It
seems much more likely that such data are contaminated with
hallucinatory types of reports. As Gray and Gummerman (1975)
note, on the surface, eidetic imagery may resemble some kinds of
hallucinations, but it is certainly possible and easy to differentiate the
two kinds of phenomena in order to avoid confounding conclusions.
The clinical literature rarely does this. As a final note, even given the
low incidence, it is still relatively easy to find a few eidetic children
in any classroom of a North American elementary school, and these
children do not have any obvious signs of neurological pathology. In
neither of the samples collected by Haber and Haber (1964) or Leask
et al. (1969) were there any obvious signs of pathology in their
subjects. Therefore, any link between neurological deficits and
eidetic abilities is yet to be demonstrated.
Giray and his colleagues have pursued the neurological version of
the developmental hypothesis most vigorously in recent years. Since
the correlations between neurological pathology and eidetic imagery
are generally so low and inconsistent across categories of pathology,
and since there is no evidence for assuming they ought to be related, I
find it unlikely that this hypothesis will be supported.
The discontinuity Issue revisited
The last few sections have been written as if eidetic imagery were not
continuous with other kinds of perceptual behavior or memory.
There exists little more evidence than what I have discussed. Gray
and Gummerman (1975) covered the same territory but concluded
that eidetic imagery was just a more vivid visual variety of memory
imagery, and that there was no dichotomy or discontinuity. They also
considered the possibility that eidetic imagery is a perceptual anoma-
ly, a deviation from normal perceptual functioning. They rejected
this argument for lack of any reliable data, or even a viable
theoretical framework with which to describe the nature of the
anomaly.
I do not consider eidetic abilities to be anomalous, nor do I
consider them to be just a vivid form of memory. The entire thrust of
this paper, and of my ten years of research, is to distinguish
poststimulus reports that are visual from those that are nonvisual.
This is not a memory issue, since any residual information remaining
after stimulation terminates must be called memory. In this sense,
eidetic imagery is a memorial phenomena, just as is any verbal
description of the content of a previously seen stimulus. What
distinguishes those memories called eidetic is the report by the
perceiver that he can "see" the absent stimulus as if it were still
present. Eidetic imagery is not just more vivid, as Gray and
Gummerman (1975) suggest: it is visual, something the perceiver is
capable of looking at.
There certainly is a continuum of visual imagery, from the very
vivid, which characterizes most eidetic responses, to hazy, ill-formed,
and unreliable visualization that many people report when asked to
form a visual image of something familiar or seen before. Some
people are never able to create or maintain a viewable visual image.
It is this continuum of visualization that we need to study and
understand, instead of arguing about whether eidetic imagery is
really just an extreme form of memory.
So, where's the ghost?
I can summarize my main points easily. (1) The production of eidetic
images is a relatively easy perceptual behavior to elicit from a small
but stable percentage of elementary-school-aged children. (2) The
criteria that differentiate eidetic imagery from afterimages and from
memory reliably discriminate between children with and without
eidetic capacity; further, the criteria are internally consistent, and
the categories so specified have very high test-retest reliabilities. (3)
The evidence that the criteria specify visual memory as distinct from
some nonvisual memorial process is overwhelming. (4) There is no
evidence to support any version of a developmental hypothesis, even
though the incidence of eidetic subjects is clearly less among adults
than among children. Its incidence is not negatively related to age
per se, abstract cognitive abilities, education, or acculturation, and it
is not positively related to neurological deficits that may reduce
abstract cognitive abilities.
In light of conclusions like this, it is not surprising that some
researchers (e.g., IVlorsh and Abbott 1945) have suggested abandon-
ing the concept of eidetic imagery altogether. I feel that this is a silly
suggestion, equivalent to arguing that the best way to handle any
problem of unknown dimensions is to turn your back on it and
maybe it will go away. There are a few children who possess an
eidetic ability rather different from any other kind of perceptual
behavior. Such children seem to be just like all other children not so
endowed, in all respects except this one. For a scientist, this is an
unreasonable state - something must make these children different.
Two directions are possible for future work. One is to continue to
search for correlates. For example, try and find a new test of neural
function or spatial abilities or a new index of cognitive development.
If we work hard enough, we should be able to find something that
works. The other alternative is to study eidetic images and imaging
more carefully, so that we can learn more about the components and
content of the images and the conditions and stimuli that produce
and terminate them. I consider the latter a far more fruitful
approach. It is unfortunate that most of the empirical studies that
locate eidetic children by sampling classrooms spend so little time
and effort in examining the content of eidetic imagery beyond what
is needed simply to satisfy the classification criteria. Some of the
clinical case studies do provide such information, but often on
THE BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1979), 2
593

Commentary/Haber: Eidetic imagery
subjects that are otherwise so atypical that the generalizations are
very dubious. Further, such case reports rarely include control
observations elicited by different conditions or stimuli of the kind
reported in detail by Leask et al. (1969).
A few people have absolute pitch for auditory tones. It is a
remarkable ability that mystifies the vast majority of us, who do well
just to make accurate relative judgments of pitch. But we do not
decide, just because the ability is rare or remarkable or uncorrelated
with other perceptual skills, that it does not actually occur, or that it
is really no different from what everybody else can do except a bit
more so. I grant that absolute pitch can be examined by discrimina-
tion techniques that do not require any phenomenological descrip-
tion. But I have spent a decade of my professional life trying to show
that phenomenological indicators of perception can have the same
value in a science of perception as do psychophysical discrimination
indicators. What is needed to understand eidetic imagery is more
attention to the experimental psychology of phenomenology. Then
we can have a chance to discover not only the nature of eidetic
imagery, but how it comes about and develops and what other
perceptual processes, if any, occur with it.
The ghost of eidetic imagery is the fear of phenomenology.
Psychologists in general, and perception researchers in particular,
have invested enormous energy in developing methodologies in
which we never have to trust what the subject says. Often we have
found techniques in which we never ask him questions requiring a
more complex or ambiguous answer than yes or no. If more words
are required, we arrange converging operations which allow us to
replace the content analysis of the words with other indicators.
Subjects in such experiments are never asked, or even allowed, to tell
us what the stimulus display looked like. Sometimes we can even get
all the psychophysical information we want without letting the
subject open his mouth. But when we believe that we can discover
and understand all the rules of perception by treating the subject as a
null indicator then we must fail. The study of visual imagery is
perhaps the clearest case of this failure.
To avoid the failure in this context we have to know more about
the imagery itself, and that means we have to depend upon what
subjects tell us. We should not abandon experimental control - such
control becomes even more important for the analysis of reports of
perceptual experience than for null indicators (see especially Natsou-
las 1965). But we should not try to circumvent these reports or
redefine them as simply the same as other more conventional or
acceptable indicators until we understand them. And to do that we
have to ask more questions about the phenomenological indicators of
perception, not less. Until we do so, eidetic imagery will haunt us all.
NOTE
Illustrations supplied from the author's private collection.
Open Peer Commentary
Commentaries submitted by the qualified professional readership of
this journal will be considered for publication in a later issue as
Continuing Commentary on this article.
by Akhter Ahsen
Eidetic Analysis Institute, Yonkers, N. Y. 10705
EidetScs: redefinition of the ghost and its clinical
application
In an earlier overview article on the eidetic (Ahsen 1977), I had clarified
the issues concerning the definition of the eidetic in the classic setting
of the criteria for distinctions (Russell 1921, p. 145). The consensus of
the classical experimental research on eidetics is that it is an interme-
diate phenomenon between afterimage and memory in particular, and
other imagery levels in general. G. Allport in his definition of the eidetic
(1924) had emphasized four important aspects: (1) being of interme-
diate position; (2) being not necessarily dependent on an external
stimulus; (3) "seen" as projected outward and the seeing being
accompanied by clear ocular tension, other somatic events, feeling,
and meanings; and finally (4) the "healthful" structure of the eidetic,
which excludes the possibility that it can be considered pathological in
any form of inference whatever. Allport, whose definition of the eidetic
differs from Haber's, stated that this "definition should be understood
to exclude both pathological hallucinations, and dream images, and to
admit those spontaneous 
images of phantasy which, though
possessed of perceptual character, cannot be said to be literally
revivals or restorations of any specific previous perception" (Allport
1924, p. 100).
In most current publications, the eidetic, however, continues to be
erroneously characterized as "an especially vivid memory image"
(Horowitz 1970, p. 22), "an exceptionally vivid memory image that
occurs immediately after the perception" (Hebb 1972, p. 242), "the
ability possessed by a minority of people to 'see' an image that is an
exact copy of the original sensory experience" (Kagan and Havemann
1972, p. 588), the "half-way house to hallucination" (Drever 1964, p.
80). Even Leask, Haber, and Haber (1969) provide too narrow a
definition when they describe the eidetic as "a visual image, repre-
senting a previously scanned stimulus, persisting for up to several
minutes, and phenomenally located in front of the eyes" (p. 25).
R. N. Haber's target article, unfortunately, continues to perpetuate
the fallacy arising from an overnarrow definition. In my attempt to
diagnose the cause of this trend and bridge the gap, I had tried in the
overview article to deal with the fallacy in a practical way, suggesting
that in the future we should adopt the use of two separate terms: (1)
"typographic eidetic," to represent the eidetic induced through an
external stimulus, as in Haber's own and similar studies and (2)
"structural eidetic," to represent the study of those eidetic images that
are in no way dependent on an external stimulus but are in essence
internal evocations, as in Allport's treatment. I had hoped that once we
achieved a basic clarity through the use of these two separate terms,
the seeming contradictions in the research data would be cleared up.
The unqualified term "eidetic" historically covered only those inter-
nal eidetic phenomena that had been noted from the time of Muller
under "subjective vision" (1826). Later, as this eidetic became a
subject of interest to the experimentalists in the laboratory, two
separate methodologies continued to be employed by the research-
ers, one based on presentation of a current external picture to a
subject (typographic method) and the other introspective study of
spontaneous eidetic pictures from both the recent and the remote past
(structural method). Both bodies of research were ultimately unified in
theory and concerned with the study of the dynamics of the eidetic as a
subjective phenomenon. The older researchers had hoped that the
study of eidetics through these two methods would be helpful in the
study of mental dynamics and would help develop an objective system
of psychotherapy (Kroh 1922; Jaensch 1930). The psychotherapy
field, in general, including behaviorism (Pavlov 1941) and psychoanaly-
sis (Schilder 1926), was aware of the limitation of the prevailing
methods, which were restricted to mere conditioning or verbal reenact-
ment of experience rather than making full use of the potential of the
experience itself. Eidetics were expected to make available the very
fabric of experience and finally generate a revolutionary method of
handling mental issues in a much more direct and fruitful manner.
Haber's bibliography contains numerous references to early publica-
tions on the clinical use of eidetics, involving such topics as synthesis
(Allport 1924; Jaensch 1930), fragmentation (Kluver 1930), alpha
wave characteristics (Furst, Fuld, and Pancoe 1974; Pollen and
Trachtenberg 
1972), hallucination (Barber 
1959a; Saltzman and
Machover 1952), psychosis (Floyd 1956; Kao and Lyman 1944; Miller
1931a), obsessive neurosis (Essler and Rowe 1926), hypnosis (Walk-
er, Garrett, and Wallace 1976), insomnia (Sheikh 1976), hydrocephalic
children (Giray, Altkin, and Barclay 1976), brain-injured children (Giray
and Barclay 1977; Symmes 1971), retardates (Siipola and Hayden
1965), learning disabilities (Pierro 1966), phobia, (Dolan and Sheikh
1977), identification processes (Dolan 1977), and eidetic psychother-
apy (Ahsen 1968, 1977; Panagiotou and Sheikh 1974). Some further
references deal with hemispheric experiments on eidetic images of
594
THE BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1979), 2

Commentary/Haber: Eidetic iuiagery
parents (Ahsen 1959), eidetics and evocation of mental structures
(Ahsen 1962), eidetic images, symptoms, and character formation
(Ahsen 1964), a short introduction to eidetic psychotherapy (Ahsen
1965), eidetics and self-analytic consciousness (Ahsen 1977a), eidet-
ics in the treatment of accident trauma, stress conditions, and chronic
emotional blocking (Ahsen 1978), eidetic psychotherapy (Sheikh
1978), and eidetics in the hospital setting (Twente, Turner, and Haney
1978). The renaissance of clinical eidetic research which began
vigorously in the mid-sixties started to feel comfortable and bear fruit in
the beginning of the seventies and is now an independent school in
psychotherapy (Singer and Pope 1978; Lazarus 1972; Wolpe 1969).
There is a functional difference between typographic eidetics and
structural eidetics caused mainly by methodological differences. The
clinical structural study of the eidetic is concerned with the nature of
growth experience, and the developmental potential of the eidetic
image and its possible long-term impact on the personality. This the
typographic method cannot study because it uses clinically indifferent
material and a brief time format. The emphasis and direction of
research, by necessity, differ drastically if one looks at three examples
from Haber's own article.
1. The experimental material in the typographic method is the easel
and a few photographs or paintings, which do not allow ample flow of
information from diversified fields of developmental areas.
The materials and questions in the structural method are selected
from the vast field of clinically relevant imagery events. Eidetic pictures
are presented either from a problematic memory field where neurotic
and healthy components interpolate, or from a positive fundamental
developmental situation which will evoke a rich eidetic response and
throw light on conflicting memory material. The following two instances
will make the point in question clear.
a. The subject is instructed to picture mentally the following projec-
tion (for fuller details, see Ahsen 1977a, pp. 23-32).
Eidetic Parents Test instruction no. 1: "Picture your parents in the
house where you lived most of the time with them, the house which
gives you the feeling of a home. Where do you see them? What are
they doing? How do you feel when you see the images?"
b. Or, following the above-mentioned rationale, an important ele-
ment from a subject's reported symptoms is marked out for exposure
to a positive eidetic from a developmentally important situation. The
eidetic is made to focus on the symptom through repeated mental
projection. This results in resolution of the symptom.
Case history: The patient had a much larger pupil dilation in the left
eye than in the right one. No other problem or deformity accompanied
the condition. The patient was treated through a special set of left-right
eidetic images of parents. In the course of a few months of this
treatment, the overly dilated pupil became normal.
2. The character of presentation of material and the dialogue with
the subject differ in an important way also, in the clinical approach. For
instance, in the transcripts Haber describes E asking this question
of S:
E. Tell me if it fades.
S. I can still see the birds and the Indian.
In the clinical setting, the emphasis is naturally on the opposite
direction, that is, on the search for more lucidity. One asks which
features tend to persist in the eidetic so that one can study the
permanent features that tend to indicate what controls the structure of
an experience. The clinician would ask the question instead:
E. Tell me if someone becomes clearer as you see this picture.
S. I can now see my mother more clearly after concentration.
3. In an opposite way the emphasis in Haber's transcript is on the
visual fixity of the image which in the clinical literature is rather a sign of
fixed neurotic memory than a flowing emotional response that shows
itself in a moving picture. Haber's leading question on this aspect looks
for visual fixity along these lines:
E. Can you count those stripes?
S. Yes, (pause) there's about sixteen.
In the clinical setting, the eidetic researcher would look for details
carrying emotions in the image. It is a sign of fuller response to the
picture with release of therapeutic values, such as:
E. How do you feel when you see the mother?
S. I feel pleased (or indifferent, or hostile, as the case may be).
The fact of visual availability of emotion is next treated with a view to
see if experiential transformation can be effected in the disturbed area.
In Haber's transcript, all the leading questions are asked in black-white
fashion to confirm or to deny visual fixity alone, which is not the central
quality of the eidetic image (Allport 1924).
One can see why the eidetic had a greater chance of surviving
through the clinical literature where observations were directed at
developing it rather than challenging it, or putting it into a straitjacket.
Through the favorable structural approach, eidetics show up where
none were reported before and evolve in a fascinating way from mere
smears of light, blank spaces, and dark holes to bright and sensuously
dazzling experiences in the mind.
The clinical theory of eidetics in the form of the current school of
eidetic psychotherapy developed out of the full-blooded use of the
classical orientation toward structural study of the eidetic. The work
reported by this school has successfully destroyed the false myth that
the eidetic appears only in a few gifted children and very rarely in
adults. Allport, who considered memory a structured imagery process
entirely different from the eidetic, recognized the fact that there are
memory levels at which issues regarding needs of the organism had
been settled, as there are also levels at which the significance of the
material was still being comprehended. He suggested that in the latter
areas the importance of the eidetic was fundamental: "The El seems to
serve essentially the same purpose in the mental development of the
child as does the repetition of a stimulus situation. . . . Such pseudo-
sensory experience enables him to 'study out' in his own way and in his
own time the various possibilities [italics mine] for response contained
within the stimulus situation" (Allport 1924, p. 117). The individual, as
he grows from childhood to adulthood, retreats into fixed memory,
using less and less of the vast creative potential in the eidetic response
(Pavlov 1941). Neurotic as well as uncreative behavioral tendencies of
the adult emerge essentially out of this retreat into the memory
mechanism. Clinical study of eidetics discloses to us that this process
can be easily reversed through release of the eidetic process again, in
the locked-up areas. The creative function of the eidetic does not stop
near adolescence; instead it continues on in the adult right into middle
and old age. This special orientation gives eidetic psychotherapy its
special status among other psychotherapies.
In brief, the main principle in structural eidetics and eidetic psycho-
therapy involves the enactment of problematic experience with a view
to changing it through eidetic interlocking. Various possibilities inherent
in the original experience are eidetically reenacted through brief eidetic
experiments. As a result the best developmental structure when it
emerges through these various progressions is spontaneously
confirmed by the organism for future use. Through this simple principle,
techniques are being developed by various researchers to treat
pathological orientations, neuroses, psychoses, and the like.
John Dewey (1891), in discussing how concepts arise from
percepts, said that the concepts are abstract, not sensuous, general,
not particular, and construct through omission of details rather than
through inclusion. The concepts that build with reference to this
principle of construction omit the "knowledge of the concrete object in
its qualitative, spatial and temporal limitations." Psychotherapy through
eidetics makes the patients reevaluate their abstract "concepts," that
is, their developmentally inaccurate and unreal views through enact-
ment of the original experience. The wholesome pieces of information
and percepts are retrieved and confirmed for future use. The eidetic
release in the enactment of these original percepts procures a
spontaneous reevaluation of neurotic mechanisms and transforms
biased memory structures into better experiential structures. The
reappraisal and reconstruction of the personality mechanisms at this
root point of percepts is the essence of structural eidetics, an
approach with a distinctive flavor and ethos.
In broad conclusion, Haber's role in reviving interest in eidetics must
THE BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1979), 2
595

Commentary/Haber: Eidetic imagery
be recognized. The target article is a good summary of his efforts and
his views, not excluding, of course, the admission of wonder and
confusion regarding certain behaviors of this important ghost. In the
opinion of this commentator, the ghost would be less enigmatic if some
of the terms were redefined as suggested and if the vast clinical
literature were involved in this redefinition and search for the identifica-
tion of the ghost.
by R. Ashton
Department of Psychology, University of Queensland, St. Luica, 4067, Australia
Eidetic imagery and stimulus control
The thrust of Haber's paper is that there is a qualitative difference
between memory and eidetic images. He argues against any notion
that they are merely quantitatively different. An important semantic
problem arises in his discussion of memory. One presumes that when
he uses the word "memory," he is talking about visual images, as
assessed by such questionnaires as Betts's Questionnaire upon
Mental Imagery (1909). But this usage carries with it the implication that
all such invoked images must be memorial - a similar percept must
have been experienced at some time in the past. What, however,
about the formation of images of things never experienced, clear
images evoked by vivid prose describing life on other planets, for
example? Haber must be arguing that such evoked visual images are
not the same as eidetic ones. His data are not, I submit, compelling
enough for such a distinction to be needed.
Haber himself dismisses most of the evidence for qualitative differ-
ences, such as the presence of eye movements (present during the
production of "ordinary" images; not very large; and, anyway, what is
the pattern during real perception?), and the finding that eidetic
children can read off the letters of nonsense words in their reverse
order (who knows what would happen with real words, or when
instructed to form an "ordinary" image?). The pieces of evidence to
which he attaches most weight are the use of the present tense when
describing the image, and the fact that the image seems to be
projected onto a screen by the eideticker. The former evidence seems
too thin. Ask most people to form an image of the face of a colleague
and then describe the image formed (not the colleague's face), and
the present tense is invariably used. The projection evidence alone
seems to remain. This result, however, is not unique to eidetic images.
Hypnogogic hallucinations, which sometimes occur when we are falling
asleep, are often projected as images out into the real world. They are
not uncommon. Furthermore, even if such projection were unique to
the reports of eidetickers, this fact would not necessitate the formula-
tion of some unique kind of cognitive processing ability. The evidence
could be reinterpreted in terms of the idea of stimulus control. That is,
the frame of the screen helps some subjects (the eidetickers) to
visualize the material previously viewed, probably by facilitating the
retrieval process. Again, this is not uncommon. Some people, when
trying to retrieve written information, evoke an image of the page on
which it was printed. And going back to places not visited for some
time invariably evokes memories and images of things experienced
there. This stimulus control theory also explains the finding reported by
Haber of nontransference from an exposed to a nonexposed eye. This
sounds just like the findings reported when spreading depression of
hemispheric activity is used to study learning. Schneider (1967)
explained the nontransference of the information between hemi-
spheres in this case in terms of stimulus control. Thus eidetickers are
simply more dependent upon the presence of the seemingly irrelevant
aspects of the testing environment for the retrieval of information.
One issue not really explored adequately by Haber is the develop-
mental one. He claims that the ability to form such images is very stable
in some children. Where do they go to, given that adult eidetickers are,
on his reckoning, so rare? A developmental change (namely a
decrease in incidence) must occur, and this fits into the stimulus
control theory. Thus young children find it difficult to pay attention; their
gaze wanders around and off what the experimenter considers to be
the stimulus. Under these conditions other features (such as the easel
frame) become very salient and are incorporated as part of the
memory structure. Haber's own finding, that the less attention the
subjects pay to the stimulus the better the image, is clear support for
this argument. Here the "irrelevant" material scanned by the subject
forms part of the memory, and reexposure to this material, minus the
target picture, facilitates recall of the target material.
by Theodore X. Barber
Proseminar Institute, Gushing Hospital, Framingham, Mass. 01701
ESdetic Imagery and the ability to hallucinate at will
Dr. Haber's research is very important and praiseworthy; it provides
carefully gathered data and analyses that clearly enhance our under-
standing of eidetic imagery. However, I believe that further research in
this area will proceed more effectively if investigators keep in mind that
the picture-description technique used by Haber is only one possible
method for studying eidetic imagery. Another method for studying what
I believe is the same phenomenon is simply to ask subjects if they can
see in the room an object that is not actually present. We have used
this kind of procedure with individuals who were serving as control
subjects for hypnosis experiments; and we found that about 1-2% of
the control subjects testified that they saw, and also behaved as if they
saw, the object that was not present (Spanos, Ham, and Barber 1973).
Of course, in this type of experimental situation, there are obvious
demand characteristics, and subjects' reports are effected by many
extraneous variables; for example, whether the rating scale allows
subjects to say that they imagined rather than saw the object in the
room (Barber 1964b, 1970a; Barber and Calverley 1964; Barber,
Spanos, and Chaves 1974, pp. 74-76; Ham and Spanos 1974;
IvicPeake and Spanos 1973; Orne 1962; Spanos and Barber 1968;
Spanos, McPeake, and Carter 1973). Nevertheless, when I say that
about 1-2% of our adult control subjects apparently "see" the object
they are asked to see, I am referring to the residue of subjects who
testify postexperimentally that they actually saw the object, even when
(a) the experimental demands make it easy for them to say they
imagined it rather than saw it, and (b) we had attempted to exclude
other demand characteristics by requesting several times during the
experiment that the subjects give strictly truthful reports (Spanos et al.,
1973). I believe that both Haber's data and our data derive from the
simple fact that a small percentage of children and a very small
percentage of adults have an ability or skill that others either lack or
possess to a small degree. As I pointed out twenty years ago (Barber
1959b), this skill or ability has at times been labeled as "eidetic
imagery" and at times as the "ability to hallucinate at will." Galton
made this clear back in 1883, when he found in "sane and healthy"
persons that there is "continuity between all the forms of visualization,
beginning with an almost total absence of it, and ending with a
complete hallucination."
I would like to emphasize that when investigators probe deeply into
the phenomenon of "eidetic imagery," they find that they are studying
the same phenomenon that, during the last century, was labeled as
"the waking hallucinations of healthy persons" (Parish 1897). For
instance, our subjects who insist that they see the object that is not
present also typically insist that they can touch it, smell it, move it,
manipulate it, and so on. During the past year, Sheryl C. Wilson and I
have conducted intensive interviews with four individuals who have this
ability, and we were surprised to find that they all have another related
ability in common: they have an amazingly vivid memory of objects and
events that they have encountered during their life. They can, for
example, vividly recall the way a childhood doll looked, felt, and
smelled. When they are asked now to see a doll sitting in a chair in
front of them, their memory of the doll is so total that they literally feel
that they see it, touch it, and smell it again.
From my experience in this area, which includes the studies
mentioned above plus additional studies (Barber 1959a, 1964a,
1970b, 1971), I have arrived at the following conclusions, which I would
like to see tested in further research:
1. The 1-2% of control subjects who insist that they can see in the
room the object or person they are asked to see are the same
individuals who perform well on the picture-description test used by
596
THE BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1979), 2

Commentary/Haber: Eidetic imagery
Haber and other investigators.
2. These individuals are the same ones who are labeled as "excel-
lent subjects" or "somnambulistic" subjects in hypnotic experiments.
More concretely, since they can easily "see" objects that they are
asked to see, they easily respond to suggestions for visual hallucina-
tions given in hypnotic experiments; since they can "block out" an
object from the visual field by "seeing" another object in front of it,
they can easily respond to suggestions not to see something present in
the room; since they have a vivid memory for childhood events, they
can easily "age regress" to childhood; and so on.
3. These subjects are also the same individuals who are prone to
see ghosts or apparitions. Surprisingly, this contention was docu-
mented many years ago (Martin 1915) and then apparently forgotten.
4. Some of these subjects are also among our great novelists and
poets. For instance, Marcel Proust, who was able to recall vividly and
to "see" his entire life experiences when he was recording them in his
novels, was almost certainly an eidetiker - he would have scored at
the very top in our experimental situation or in Haber's experiments.
Also, the American novelist Thomas Wolfe would almost certainly have
been rated as an eidetiker, especially since he stated many times that
he could vividly recall and see again the events in his life; for example,
suddenly I would remember the iron railing that goes along the
boardwalk of Atlantic City. I could see it instantly just the way it was,
the heavy iron pipe; the raw, galvanized look; the way the joints were
fitted together. It was all so vivid and concrete that I could feel my
hand upon it and know the exact dimensions, its size and weight and
shape (Wolfe 1936).
5. These same individuals who obtain high scores in our experi-
ments (or in Haber's experiments) would be much more likely than
other subjects to report visual hallucinations if they were in a sensory
isolation situation or if they had ingested a small dose of LSD or
mescaline (Barber 1970b).
In conclusion, I would like to urge Haber and others working in this
area not to prematurely define eidetic imagery operationally by one
type of experimental procedure - the picture-description technique -
and thus to exclude by definition from the rubric of "eidetic imagery"
the results obtained by other experimental procedures. The data
obtained by Haber may differ in some ways from our data, not because
we are studying different phenomena, but because we are studying
essentially the same phenomenon with different methods and proce-
dures. Both experimental methods have their own sets of demand
characteristics and both are intertwined with suggestions (Barber
1970a; Gray and Gummerman 1975, pp. 403-4); nevertheless, both
methods should be used in a careful, critical manner, first to find and
then to study intensively the life history of additional individuals who
have this skill or ability.
by Jeanine Blanc-Garin
Laboratoire de Psychophysiologie, ERA au CNRS, University of Provence, 13397
Marseille Cedex 4, France
is eidetic imagerf stilS eidos?
Why was the adjective "eidetic" chosen by the students of this
fascinating aspect of imagery in Germany at the beginning of the
century? The Greek term "eidos" refers to "the form of a thing in the
mind," and the same root, "idein," gave "idea" and "idol." At the
same time, in Germany, "eidetic" was used by Husserl, in phenomeno-
logical philosophy, to indicate "essence," as distinct from "appear-
ance."
For the early students, the eidetic image (El) was considered the
best image, the ideal way to study and analyze cognitive imagery.
However, some recent experiments and contemporary theories indi-
cate that imagery can no longer be regarded as a unitary phenome-
non. Thus, it is in terms of discontinuity that Haber discusses the place
of El in imagery processes.
For a while, El was envisaged as a genuine reproduction of the
stimulus display, and, consequently, an excellent example of memory
image representations (MIR). Three characteristics of El (vividness,
temporal stability, and good precision) were thought important in the
preservation of sensory data. These characteristics can no longer be
viewed as good criteria for cognitive MIR, however. It is now known that
vividness does not fully reflect the strength and efficiency of imagery; it
is not correlated with cognitive capacities, such as spatial abilities
(Richardson 1977), or creativity (Florisha 1978).
The stability of El over a long period can be viewed as the reverse of
cognitive flexibility: a subject's capacity to replace an image by
another - his active control over his imagery - is a manifestation of
"adaptive flexibility" (Gordon 1949, Richardson 1977). Anticipatory
images (Piaget and Inhelder 1966) are other examples of MIR: incom-
ing data can be managed and transformed, and a new reality, not yet
perceived, can be constructed.
Great precision is hardly an advantage in perceptual processing and
memory. All the recent models emphasize the organism's ability to
filter, select, reduce the flow of inputs, and choose among possible
patterns; that is, to construct a personal representation. Thus, "sub-
jects do not remember what was displayed, but the idea generated by
it" (Piaget and Inhelder 1968, p. 457). The visual display is not kept in
mind, but a new pattern is built up, with traces of sensory data in a
mold of schemes (Piaget's sense) or schemata (Piaget's and Bartlett's
sense).
Thus, the three characteristics that make El a good reproduction of
stimulus display are not good criteria for an efficient MIR, probably
because a memory image is not a stimulus trace, it is a representation;
unlike El, it does not reproduce, it signifies.
These observations support the distinction between sensory materi-
als and organization in internal representation. Sensory materials
(visualized content, more or less vividly experienced) have to be
distinguished from underlying mechanisms (see, for example, Blanc-
Garin 1974; Kosslyn 1975). "Resembling" and "describing" (Pylyshyn
1975) coexist, but have different functions. It is probable that the
surface features (the sensory aspects of which the subject is aware, or
can evoke), are important for the affective record, for psychological
comfort, for a feeling of permanence about the world and persons; but,
certainly, the efficiency of MIR in cognitive processing is related to
deep structure, to organizing and abstracting activity, which manages
these sensory materials, and, probably is often without access to
consciousness.
Results on El show, dramatically, that analogs, traces isomorphic
with external input, passively reproduced, have no relation to MIR; not
even to the sensory dimension of MIR. This was stressed by Haber,
who cites Paivio's results (Paivio and Cohen 1977), showing a lack of
correlation between the eidetic factor and vividness of imagery.
The developmental hypothesis about El was tempting because it
implied that during maturation "cognitive transformation" effects were
added to or replaced "reproduction" processes. But, clearly, as Haber
argues, we must abandon this hypothesis. It seems to me that we have
to assume that the nature of El is differnt from that of MIR.
It appears impossible to escape the discontinuity issue; the synthe-
sis presented by Haber has completely convinced me of the following
points: (1) Although different from afterimages, El is an aftereffect, not
a memory: it is stimulus bound; it cannot be evoked by anything other
than the picture. (2) El is an image only if we agree to use this term in a
very wide sense; etymologically, an image would be a replica (from
Latin imitari = to imitate). (3) El is a passive reproduction, not a true
representation; if cognitive factors are efficient, its role is more
inhibitory than constructive. Thus, El would not be what is suggested by
the Greek eidos (near idea), which implies seeing and knowing. (4)
Only the visual aspect relates El to the mental image, in which the visual
component is often experienced. Is there any continuity, as suggested
by Haber? Perhaps rather than being on a continuum, the two
processes can be regarded as two branches of a common root (visual
function: (a) the El process, which preserves visual material, and is not
well developed in man; and (b) the MIR process, which selects,
translates, codes, and retrieves. This latter is developed in man from
the visual function, and is one aspect of "semiotic processes"
(Piaget).
Whatever the mechanism, it may be that in phylogenetic develop-
ment, El was once an aspect of visual function. This opportunity, not
selected for by the evolutionary process, is now manifest as a blind
THE BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1979), 2
597

Commentary /Maber: Eidetic imagery
alley, while the other branch was expanded as the cerebral cortex
enlarged.
by Bruce Bridgeman
Psychology Board of Studies, University of California, Santa Cruz, Calif. 95064
Toward a neurological theory of eidetic imagery
There is no question that El (eidetic imagery) exists, even though it is
rare, and Haber's well-documented article shows that the earlier
methodological doubts of psychologists have been resolved. Though
Haber draws a distinction between psychophysical discrimination
techniques and phenomenological methods, he has invested great
effort in developing phenomenological methods that have in common
with discrimination techniques the crucial property that they prevent the
subject from "cheating," or telling the experimenter what the subject
thinks he wants to hear. He has shown that it is possible to make
phenomenology as reliable as discrimination. The most extreme exam-
ple of the combination of rigorous methods with eidetic imagery is
Stromeyer and Psotka's (1970) use of Julesz stereograms, though the
ability to combine stored and seen dot patterns to make three-
dimensional images unfortunately appears to be rare even among
eidetikers.
After presenting an overwhelming case for eidetic imagery and
listing its characteristics, Haber expresses dissatisfaction that the
ability does not seem to be linked with other unusual abilities or traits.
El is not the only trait to show a seemingly random appearance in
otherwise normal subjects, however, and even neurological conditions
are sometimes present in otherwise normal children. An example is
febrile epileptic convulsions, which occur in up to 25% of otherwise
normal children during bouts of high fever. They are not followed by
subsequent epilepsy and usually do not recur. Like El, febrile convul-
sion is rare in adults. This susceptibility to convulsion suggests that
there is something different about children's brains, that they are more
sensitive in some way than adult brains. Perhaps El is another
manifestation of this sensitivity.
The neurological basis of El is still a complete mystery, and its
implications for normal visual function are equally unknown. Some of its
characteristics, however, enable us to make a few guesses about its
representation in the brain. The photographic nature of El indicates
that the eidetic information should be stored in a topographic projec-
tion of the visual system, and the close relationship between attention
and El points to a location somewhere in the cerebral cortex, where
interaction with higher-level processing is most likely. The only property
of El inconsistent with this interpretation is the apparent difficulty in
interocular transfer, though Haber points out that that property may be
an artifact of opening and closing the eyes.
Because eidetic children scan their images with eye movements, the
image is probably held at a stage at which image information is no
longer tied to retinal position, though such a "space-constant" projec-
tion area has not yet been found. The only data available on this
question (Bridgeman 1973) show that the topographic map in area 17
is tied to specific locations on the retina. Recent data (Schlag and
Schlag-Rey 1977; Peck and Schlag-Rey 1979) suggest that the visual
system does not achieve space constancy across eye movements by
use of a topographic surface with space-constant rather than retina-
constant receptive fields, but rather by combining retinotopic informa-
tion with eye position information in a way not yet fully understood.
Thus, one or more of the known retinotopic maps in visual areas of the
brain might serve as substrates for El. The other requirements for a
cortical area supporting El correspond to Haber's list of El characteris-
tics, including its perceptual nature, erasure with blinks, and interfer-
ence by cognitive naming operations.
I propose that El might plausibly be modeled as a positive feedback
that maintains images in the absence of other disrupting inputs to a
cortical area. The pyramidal cells that constitute the cortical output
also typically have recurrent collaterals which reenter the neuropil near
the dendritic tree of the same cell, and might provide an anatomical
substrate for the reentry of information into the cortical area that
originated it. Because it is stored as an active trace, the information
stored in this feedback network would be disrupted by outside input
related to the image, input such as reciprocal interactions with other
cortical areas involved in naming parts of the image. Blinks, with their
abrupt changes in stimulus brightness, might, for similar reasons, erase
the El from the upstream rather than the downstream direction.
Normally the information coded on this substrate would be quickly
recoded into nontopographic memory and lost to the topographic field
that supports visible images, but in children the recoding process might
be less automatic and the positive feedback stronger. A speculation
that children possess less neural inhibition of positive feedback loops
would be relevant to both the El and the febrile convulsion data; both
phenomena imply an overreactivity of immature cortex. As dendritic
trees grow with age, and more inhibition is available, both El and febrile
convulsions would become less likely. Embryologically, excitatory
connections generally develop before inhibitory ones.
If positive feedback or some similar process preserves image
information (when it would normally dissipate) in the same cortical
structures that normally mediate the image, then the children's matter-
of-fact confidence in their image information and most of Haber's
remaining properties of El would follow immediately. Haber's final
property of El, that it is most likely to occur when the subject makes no
effort to memorize an image and pays no cognitive attention to it, is a
passive state of mind that might be more likely in children before their
cognitive search and memory strategies are well developed. The very
small number of adults who possess eidetic abilities may have learned
to preserve this attitude, maintaining the integrity of their images by
learning not to concentrate on them.
This modest proposal is far too simple to account for the richness
and subtlety of El without extensive further work, and it may prove to be
unprovable. It shows, however, that El can be conceived in concrete
physiological terms, and that our understanding of both El and the
physiology of visual perception would be enhanced by further study of
their combination.
byB. R. Bugelski
Department of Psychology, State University of New York at Buffalo, Buffalo, N. Y.
14226
Eidetic possession: is exorcism necessary?
Ralph Norman Haber has been haunted for twenty years by his findings
of eidetic imagery in a small percentage of children (5 to 10% of 6 to 12
year olds). He calls for an exorcist, but surely neither Haber nor the
children are possessed of evil spirits, and the call should properly be
for a ghost chaser. Ghost chasers, however, are notoriously unsuc-
cessful even when the ghosts are operationally defined, and eidetic
children will remain with us as long as we keep writing about them.
Haber has done a good job of extermination and demonstrates that his
eidetic children were not different from random samples of children in
any way other than their being labeled eidetic, a condition that doesn't
appear to be harmful in any way. Haber remains convinced that the
label has a significant and meaningful referent, and he may well be
right, but it should be recognized that the label really refers to only one
feature of the behavior of a small percentage of children (use of the
present tense) in a rather rigidly circumscribed situation. It might be
worthwhile to examine this situation.
In designing his research Haber was properly concerned about
controlling the observations to be made. He created an experimental
setting in which children could be observed systematically. Instructions
were uniform, and all the children went through the same procedure.
The procedure consisted of pretraining with colors placed on an easel
to, in effect, demonstrate to the children that they could experience
negative afterimages; this pretraining was followed by the exposure of
several pictures in the same place and for the same time as the last of
the color samples. In both cases (colors and pictures) the children
were asked the same thing: do you see anything on the easel? (after
the colors or pictures were removed). The pretraining with afterimages
was considered desirable by Haber but by creating an experimental
bias in some children, may have been responsible for the findings.
Although Haber is obviously aware of the nature of experimental
598
THE BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1979), 2

Commentary/Haber: Eidetic imagery
demand characteristics (he frequently mentions them), he apparently
feels that the demand characteristics of the task were somehow
eliminated by convergence of lines of evidence. Could this really have
been the case?
If we examine the procedure and data reported by Haber, we find
that he lists seven criteria (augmented by a rather unsupported eighth)
for deciding that a child is worthy of the designation of "eidetic." The
criteria, however, boil down to whether or not a child uses the present
tense and says "I see" instead of "I saw." None of the other criteria,
especially that of accuracy, appear to bear any real weight. The first
criterion of simply reporting an image certainly is redundant with the
fourth (the use of the present tense). Moving the eyes in examination of
real and imaged pictures (criteria 5 and 6) does not appear meaningful
as an independent feature - all children move their eyes when told to
do so. Having the image appear on the easel is an unusual demand.
Memory images do not require a projection surface - they are known
to be "inside" the imager, even though many adults have been heard
to say, "I can see him just as plainly as if he were standing right
there."
By pretraining with negative afterimages which are projected onto a
surface, Haber might very well have created certain expectations in his
child subjects. Because the children were directed to look at the easel,
the images, if any, would necessarily be related to parts of the easel. If
the child subject in the scientific, university laboratory were told in
effect that he might very well continue to see something on the easel
after it was removed and this had proved demonstrably so with the
colors, would he not be inclined to believe this? He could also
presumably refer to parts of the image as located at various portions of
the easel. This would be an obvious requirement if he were seeing
something. In a study with sixteen picture objects in four rows of four
items, I have found people reporting the location of the previously
exposed objects by pointing to spaces in a blank matrix of sixteen
squares. We can all locate objects after a fashion.
When one considers the instructions and setting, plus the prior
experience of real afterimages, it might be somewhat amazing that
more children do not use the present tense in reporting on their just
preceding visual experience. Is it so amazing that 5-10% of the
children happen to use the present tense in a somewhat glib descrip-
tion of a just seen picture? That so few were found to be suggestible
might be the concern of interest. The obvious control should include
taking a large number of children and showing them only one picture to
screen out those who might show some uunusual talent or claim. The
lack of accuracy (i.e. no superiority over noneidetics) raises the old
question of whether a difference that makes no difference really is a
difference. If the children were really seeing something, they should
have been able to report differently in some regard besides glibness.
Haber must have thought so, too, as he listed accuracy as a criterion.
It is also possible that the children labeled eidetic used different
observational techniques - they could have, for example, engaged in
some story creation or looked for specific details of color, size,
relationships, meanings, and so forth. The "processing" of the original
stimulation might have enabled some of the children to adopt the role
of visualizer when the pictures were removed with a ready-to-hand kind
of account of "what I am seeing." The emphasis on the present tense
seems somewhat misplaced. People who report the use of energy in
mnemonic research frequently describe their images "as if" they were
viewing objects at the moment. They can report "visualizing" objects
never actually seen before, for example, a purple cow as if they were
then and there viewing something. The only distinction from Haber's
child subjects is the lack of an easel and immediately prior visual
inspection.
Whether the demand characteristics account attempted here is
relevant or not, Haber has made a strong contribution in removing the
eidetic image from the current field of investigation of imagery by
divorcing it from the memory image or other cognitive interpretations of
representational operations. He has made it a strictly visual phenome-
non, and it may well be that such visual phenomena do characterize
some of our young citizens. The lack of support for any developmental
hypothesis is also very helpful in clarifying the current theoretical field.
The fewer encumbrances image researchers must bear the more likely
it is that they can make progress in the field. The additional failure to
find much in the abstract-concrete speculations of cultural researchers
is also welcome, as is the failure of the retardate/brain-damage
speculation. Haber may be left with a ghost, but he has reduced it to a
rather insignificant one that requires easels, 30-second exposures,
and prior afterimage training, and is neither help nor hindrance. Such a
ghost we can live with and examine in a more leisurely way.
by Daniel C. Dennett
Center for Advanced Study in the Behavioral Sciences, Stanford, Calif. 94305, and
Department of Philosophy, Tufts University, Medford, Mass. 02155
Breeding cognitiwe strategies
I will assume, on Haber's showing, that the phenomenon of eidetic
imagery is discontinuous from normal visual memory and afterimages,
and a perfectly robust phenomenon in its own right. In any event, it will
be empirical studies and not worries about the "metaphysical" status
of eidetic images that will settle that issue. Philosophers can be
counted on to find a suitable ontological home, and a licensed
description, for any phenomenon that survives the surveyed and
projected empirical scrutiny. Curious it may be, and some proffered
descriptions of it may warrant the retort, "Impossible!," but that should
not forestall investigation.
Haber presents us, then, with a phenomenon in need of a theory, a
circumstance that invites speculation, not premature argument.
Haber's description of the phenomenon encourages the following
speculations from me about how to think about the options for theory.
Suppose that the developing cognitive systems of young children are
opportunistic generators and adopters of cognitive strategies, relying
in some measure on ransom or merely fortuitous generation of
candidate strategies, but also, of course, subject to a variety of
constraints: initial system architecture, history of early experience (or
"stimulation"), history of cognitive "demands." Consider these factors
to determine a sort of environmental niche, in which various strategies,
should they happen to occur, will be candidates for short- or long-term
survival. Then suppose that the strategy of developing eidetic imagery
is in most individual cases a fence sitter - likely to occur in a sizable
percentage of cases, and not so clearly benign (useful, efficient) so
clearly detrimental, so unstable or ineradicable (whatever its value) as
to permit any high-probability predictions of its fate when and if it
appears. That is, suppose that for this strategy, the constraints
underdetermine its fate, so that the random or fortuitous factor plays a
magnified role in the statistics, relative to other, more predictable
features of the developing cognitive system.
If this were the case, then we would expect the search for correlates
to be in vain, unless we were lucky enough to discover, "from the
outside" as it were, correlates very directly tied to the actual mecha-
nism of strategy implementation (the actual footprints or skeletons of
the embodied strategy). We might find that there were no salient
preconditions for eidetic imagery, since almost everyone met them; in
many subjects who meet all the identifiable preconditions the strategy
simply never happens to occur as a candidate for adoption. In many
others it might occur briefly and inconsequentially. And we might find
no subsequent symptoms of adoption of the strategy (beyond the
evidence that the strategy has in fact been adopted - that the child is
an eidetiker) because it does not interfere (drastically or even notice-
ably) with the development of other needed cognitive apparatus; it can
share the niche with them for some time before eventual abandonment.
Apparently something does favor its extinction before adulthood;
something else needs and gets the resources required for eidetic
imagery, or the cognitive demands on the system change in such a way
as to lower the relative utility of eidetic imagery, ... or something. The
regularity of the loss of eidetic capacity is apparently one of the few
fixed points, and asking why there should be this upper limit on the
strategy's lifespan might be a fruitful avenue for future investigation.
Certainly what is known of the phenomenon does not require that it
be viewed in this light, but so far as I can see, what is known is
temptingly consonant with this view. So far, eidetic imagery has the
earmarks of such a fence sitter. There is no strong reason (of utility,
THE BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1979), 2
599

Commentary/Haber: Eidetic imagery
say) why we should all be eidetikers - so we needn't expect an answer
to the question, "What's wrong with the rest of us?", and, no strong
reason (of disutility, say) why no one should be an eidetiker, so we
needn't expect an answer to the question, "So what's wrong with
them?" Although no concomitant cognitive deficits have been found,
some deficits (due to old age or brain damage) may provide a slightly
better niche for the strategy to develop in, and hence favor its adoption
and maintenance in those to whom it happens to occur. There are
independent reasons for supposing that while it may not be a detrimen-
tal strategy, it is clearly suboptimal. It is no more accurate' or
voluminous an information store than ordinary visual memory because
whatever form the storage takes, what is stored is clearly postinterpre-
tation and hence subject to the information losses (including discards)
and distortions of the interpretation process. As Haber importantly
notes, it is not "photographic memory" except perhaps in the remark-
able case reported by Stromeyer and Psotka (1970). It probably
makes relatively inefficient use of the storage machinery by requiring
the reintroduction of inaccurate or at least unreliable specific-image-
maintaining information after this information has been discarded by
the interpretation process of perception. (Consider the extra informa-
tion-transmission costs of generating a police artist's sketch from
nothing but a witness's verbal description and sending both the picture
and the words to all patrol cars). It is certainly somewhat inefficient in
requiring control loops that go through so much of the subject's visual
system (requiring an eyeblink for "erasure," for instance), and hence
being only indirectly controllable by the subject's will (as one might just
as well say). Given this mediocre scoring on a speculative cost-benefit
analysis it is somewhat surprising that the strategy ever survives, as
apparently it does, but perhaps it has as yet unnoticed advantages
when exploited in the solution of cognitive problems peculiar to
childhood, or perhaps it survives through a loophole in the brain's no
doubt imperfect implementation of cost-benefit analysis - the princi-
ples, whatever they are, of strategy selection. In any event, it is entirely
possible, and not at all abhorrent to science, as Haber seems to think,
that some children are eidetikers simply because it occurred to them to
be (not consciously, of course), and that others aren't simply because
it never occurred to them.
Haber suggests that a more aggressive and interactive exploration
of the phenomenology of eidetic imagery could be fruitful, and I
certainly agree. An elaboration of that approach would be the attempt
to train children or adults to have, or improve, their eidetic capacities,
for this might clarify the conditions under which the capacity appears
and survives. But here a caveat is in order. We might well find that
nothing we could devise would induce the eidetic strategy in noneide-
tikers or prolong it in maturing eidetikers, but in that case our
disappointment should be mixed with relief, for we might succeed, and
we don't yet know that there are no steep prices being paid by those
who are lured into this curious cognitive mode, and even if we became
very confident that the strategy as it occurs in nature is benign, we
would have no guarantee that artificially induced or enhanced muta-
tions of the natural strategy might not prove more persistent or more
imperialistic in their demands on the available cognitive machinery. So
on prelude to any further experimentation that might uncover tech-
niques for inculcating the strategy should be still more exhaustive and
systematic canvasses for deficits in longitudinal studies, whose contin-
ued barrenness we could view as encouraging, not discouraging, since
it is a prerequisite for conducting the sorts of experiments that might
unlock the phenomenon and yield a good theory. Another necessary
prelude would be self-experimentation and experimentation with other
informed adults, however dim the prospects of positive results.
by Leonard W. Boob
Institution for Social and Policy Studies, Yale University, New Haven, Conn. 06520
The cross-cultural approach to eidetic images
My emotions and convictions deviate only slightly from Haber's, which
he reports so conscientiously. Eidetic images intrigue me, and ten
years later I also continue to be haunted by them and by my own
inability to locate their social or psychological correlates in African
societies. They remain, as I called them then, a bewildering will-
o'-the-wisp. Occasionally when a skeptic doubts their existence or
importance, I play a tape containing in English the protocol from a
young African who replied to my challenge ("you see . . . only what you
have seen") with indignation ("no, I see them [the details] now").
In his autobiographically tinged review, however, Haber is not
impressed with cross-cultural findings based on a slight modification of
his own method. He prefers data from what he continually calls his
"laboratory" (a quiet room, often in a school building) where presum-
ably the emerging reports are never, never, or hardly ever "messy."
The present commentary, derived from the nine available references,
and the only ones he lists under "Cross-cultural studies," would timidly
suggest that his conventional bias has caused him to overlook support
for many of his theses and promising leads from these very studies.
Most impressive should be the discovery that, in spite of admitted
verbal but challenging confusion (which, Haber sometimes forgets,
also exists when he and his subjects converse in English), not only
children but also numerous adults outside the Western orbit (adults
and children in seven African societies, four groups of aboriginal
children in Australia, adults in Brazil, children in Iran) report and behave
in virtually the same manner as Jaensch's original subjects in Marburg,
Germany, more than half a century ago and Haber's in New Haven and
Rochester in the United States. Such an apparently universal phenome-
non - ranging from saccadic eye movements and the use of the
present tense in describing the images to making a spontaneous
distinction between "seeing" and remembering - 
merits more than
perfunctory bow. Although some subjects in Ghana may have falsified
their reports, and although a Kamba sample in Kenya was influenced
by one experimental manipulation but not by others, on the whole the
appearance of the images cannot be attributed to the demand
characteristics of the social situation. With eyes watering from serious
concentration, a young Swahili male apologized, "I keep looking at the
screen but, I am sorry, I see nothing." Some Somali nomads reported
nothing after being told, "Most people can see something on the
screen after I take [the picture] away; you will probably see something
too." Hutu subjects in Rwanda, after witnessing a peer being rewarded
with a small gift and with profuse praise heaped upon his ability to
report eidetic images, more frequently than not stated they "saw"
nothing on the easel. A crowd of Ibo spectators in Nigeria kept looking
at the blank screen as if a slide were being projected upon it; some
voluntarily and spontaneously corrected a false statement by the
eidetic subject. Responses to culturally irrelevant drawings (e.g., the
"Alice picture") did not differ appreciably from those evoked by
culturally relevant pholotgraphs (e.g., Africans milling around a bus).
These non-Western individuals also have contributed inaccuracies that
debunk the miraculous accuracy previously attributed to eidetic
images.
Haber dismisses too blithely the reports of many Africans that their
images were not out there but in their heads (pictorial images). After
all, traditional peoples as well as Americans do not wander about with
an easel and screen in front of their eyes upon which they can "see"
images. The Kamba and Swahili informants who claimed to find their
images generally useful in their everyday existence and in recalling their
deceased kin apparently were prone to "view" such images in
privacy.
The hypothesis that there is a negative relation between eidetic
images and westernization, modernization, or acculturation, either
within a society or between societies, which Haber and others have
stated, has not been consistently validated. Perhaps I myself should
have quit eidetic research in Africa after publishing the preliminary
finding that eidetic incidence was significantly higher among the rural
than among the urban Ibo. Then I would not have uncovered a
disturbing reverse relation in a Swahili-speaking sample in Tanzania.
That hypothesis, however, cannot be dismissed: at the moment it is
clear that the postulated relation is evident in some but not in all
instances for which we have data; yet the societies are too few, and
exceptions (e.g., validation for an aboriginal group and European
Australians, but not for two aboriginal groups) challenge us to locate
600
THE BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1979), 2

Commentary/Usher: Eidetic imagery
the mediating circumstances.
I turn now to the promising leads that are suggested by cross-
cultural research and that might be useful to explain the reactions of
American children. Both within and between societies individuals differ
with respect to whether they have previously been aware of their own
eidetic propensity: if the images have served some compellingly useful
function, why were some persons surprised when they were induced to
"see" them and why among the Bororo of Brazil was witchcraft
suspected? Among the Kamba a significant relation existed between
replies in an interview about images and actual responses three
months later in the testing situation. The greater confidence displayed
when eidetic or pictorial rather than memory images are reported might
be a reflection of the fact that in these traditional societies information
could not be stored in the form of writing. The less or the no more
accurate recall days or weeks later of the Kamba who allegedly had
"seen" images of the exposed stimuli, in comparison with those
claiming to lack such images, on the other hand, suggests that images
may not provide more efficient storage and is perhaps of greater
psychological significance than the relatively high and low reliabilities
reported, respectively, in the United States or Australia, and in Ghana.
The sharp distinction subjects made between details they did and did
not perceive during the original exposure points to the probability that
whatever is "seen" in the images depends as much upon attention as
almost any other act of perception and hence may lead to omissions
and errors ("I wanted to put them in my mind, but then you took the
picture away so quickly," a Kamba complained). Since the superimpo-
sition of an image upon a stimulus was too difficult for the Kamba, Hutu,
and the aborigines, it may not be a valid test.
On the whole, I repeat, I think Haber is right: we must keep searching
for the correlates of these perplexing images. Whether we are more
likely to find them in the phenomenology he somewhat vaguely
proposes for himself and his laboratory colleagues or in irritating,
real-life field situations I do not know. Let us keep all doors open.
by K« Anders Ericsson, William G. Chase? and Herbert A.
Simon
Department of Psychology, Carnegie-Mellon University, Pittsburgh, Penna. 15213
Phenomenoiogicai reports as data
Haber claims that eidetic imagery is supported by phenomenological
reports and proposes that phenomenological evidence should be
more widely accepted as legitimate scientific evidence. In this
commentary we will first address the general issues of using verbal
reports as data; then, in light of this discussion, we will turn to an
analysis of the particular phenomenological evidence cited by Haber in
support of eidetic imagery.
In their review of general issues associated with using verbal reports
of cognitive processes, Ericsson and Simon (1978, 1979) proposed
that verbal reports be viewed like any other kind of data; any model
that can reproduce them (or their content) is legitimate. A subject who
reports using a subgoal for a problem or computed partial results in a
mental multiplication need not be trusted. The veracity of reports can
be assessed by an independant analysis of the task; a model is sought
that both regenerates the reported intermediate steps and generates
the same solution as the subject does.
In analyzing the broad range of instructions and circumstances
under which verbal reports have been solicited, Ericsson and Simon
(1978, 1979) found that valid reports are obtained when subjects are
asked to verbalize the information they are currently attending to, that
is, "to think aloud." Within an information-processing model, we can
assume that attended information is directly available for further
processing, and thus also for recoding into the verbal form to be
reported. Cases of invalid verbal reporting are invariably associated
with asking subjects for reports of information not otherwise directly
attended; these reports require inferences. There is explicit evidence
(Nisbett and Wilson 1977) that, in response to questions about the
reasons for their behavior, subjects resort to inferences based on
general knowledge - their answers no longer reflect any direct memory
trace of the cognitive process.
If we want to use verbal reports as data in support of some
proposed cognitive mechanism, we need to propose an explicit model
for how the verbalized information is generated by accessing this
mechanism. Second, we need to show that alternative hypotheses for
how the subjects generate their verbal reports without this mechanism
are not pausible given the recorded verbal reports. In short, in
evaluating verbal reports, we need to apply the same criteria as for any
other type of data.
In reviewing the phenomenological evidence cited by Haber, we
raise the issue of whether subjects are making direct reports of
attended information or whether they are making inferences. For
example, in the composite picture test (Figure 6), do eidetic subjects
actually "see" a composite image of a face directly, or do they "figure
it out"? Are people classified as eidetic on the basis of their visual
imagery processes, or on the basis of their ability to make the
appropriate inferences? One unfortunate problem with identifying
eidetic subjects is that they cannot be discriminated on the basis of
superior memory performance, nor are the subjects in general sponta-
neously aware of their eidetic ability. Hence, a rather elaborate
procedure of instruction and direct questioning of subjects is neces-
sary to identify an eidetiker and to produce the phenomena and verbal
reports associated with eidetic imagery (Leask, Haber, and Haber
1969). The specific questions asked by the experimenter leave rather
little information for the subjects to report, for example, "Yes, I see X."
The small amount of information generated makes it reasonable to
consider other hypotheses than Haber's assertion that a distinct
eidetic memory is accessed. Furthermore, many of the studies Haber
cites were designed to explore characteristics of eidetic memory (such
as the location of the image), and used questions and probes that may
well have biased the content of the verbal reports. Leask, et al. (1969)
were explicitly aware of the demand characteristics of their assess-
ment procedure and the presuppositions in their questions. In fact, they
even uncovered at least one subject faking his report of "seeing" the
images. Under such conditions we cannot rule out the possibility that
reports were generated without access to a phenomenological experi-
ence. Instead of resorting to disputes over whether subjects can be
trusted, one should devise an experimental procedure so as to clearly
eliminate such a hypothesis. For example, Comstock and Kittredge
(1922) were able to elicit verbal reports of afterimages from children
while explicitly avoiding any suggestion with a general instruction (e.g.,
"Tell me what you see; tell me all about it."). The verbal reports
accurately reflected the existence of complementary colors, intensity
of afterimage as a function of the stimulus, and so on, as predicted by
a physiologically based theory of afterimages. Any model of the
process that generates these verbal reports without accessible after-
images appears implausible.
How, exactly, are the verbal reports used to define eidetic imagery?
From the verbal reports of attended and remembered information,
Haber has analyzed the reported content of a picture, as well as
information suggesting whether the reported content was directly
attended or required retrieval from memory. Eidetic subjects could not
be discriminated from noneidetic subjects on the basis of what or how
much information was reported. However, eidetic subjects appeared to
have some pictorial content directly available, as shown by their use of
present tenses of verbs and the greater fluency of their reports.
(Differentiation of recall and verbalization of attended information by
verb tense has also been used by Benjafield (1969) in comparing
retrospective reports to "think aloud.") In response to requests for
specific information about the picture, Haber found the tense criterion
to be a "powerful" one in discriminating between eidetic and nonei-
detic subjects. Let us look more closely at the model, which is
proposed to account for the differences between eidetic and nonei-
detic subjects. In explaining why one eidetic subject used past and
present tense intermittently while her eidetic image was supposedly
available, Leask et al. (1969) suggested that, because of the incom-
pleteness of the eidetic image, some requested information was not
available, thus requiring retrieval and the use of the past tense. The
other eleven subjects' consistent use of present tense while the eidetic
THE BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1979), 2
601

Commentary/Haber: Eidetic imagery
image was available then seems unreasonable, and was explained by
suggesting a bias against switching tenses. The mixed use of tenses
by the eidetic subjects after the image was reported to have faded
doesn't lend itself to a simple explanation either. Even granted that
some subjects actively retain some presented information in attention
after the picture has been taken away, there are other consistent
models (e.g. Gray and Gummerman 1975) that do not require a distinct
eidetic memory.
In conclusion, we find that we can agree with Haber's call for more
research analyzing verbal reports, yet the particular evidence cited by
Haber does not present convincing evidence for eidetic imagery.
Ericsson and Simon (1978) found in their review that studies collecting
verbal reports have done so without much concern for control and
methodological rigor, or alternative explanations, because the re-
searchers felt these reports could not be considered anything more
than suggestive evidence anyway. We agree with Haber's concluding
remark that for verbal reports to achieve their appropriate status as an
informative and significant data source for cognitive psychology, it is
necessary to apply the same methodological rigor and theoretical
precision as for other, already accepted sources of data.
by Charles J. Furst
Neuropsychiatric Institute, University of California, Los Angeles, Los Angeles, Calif.
90024
The inside and oytside of eidetic imagery
Whether eidetic imagery (El) turns out to be a scientifically interesting
phenomenon or a red herring depends on whether an objective
criterion can be found. During 1972-1974 I tested over 250 children for
eidetic imagery and found 25 who satisfied criteria modeled after
Haber and Haber (1964). My frustration in being unable to find strong
correlates of eideticism together with an inability to arrive at an
objective test for identifying eidetikers led me to become skeptical
about El.
One approach to finding an objective criterion is to examine the
accuracy of subjects' verbal descriptions of their El. Contrary to
Haber's data, which gave no evidence for better pictorial recall for
eidetikers than others, our results using a scoring procedure for
open-ended responses (and thereby allowing for idiosyncratic coding
for each S), showed that eidetikers tended to have better visual recall
than most, but not all, other children. Eidetikers tended to be near the
top of the distribution of recall scores, but still they were not off the
distribution (Furst, Fuld, and Pancoe 1974).
Haber believes that accuracy of report should not be used as an
objective indicator, but if the El is not dense in information, as visual
perception is, then how is it "visual" or different in kind from other
forms of memory? Haber says that El may be fragmentary, but if so,
shouldn't eideticism imply something about the grain of the fragments?
One implication might be Haber's eighth criterion - a test of the
ability to fuse two separate pictures by superimposing one (eidetically
remembered) onto another (visible) to form a third or target image not
present in either image alone. A strict fusion test, most people would
agree, would form an objective demonstration of the reality of El, since
it would be beyond ordinary abilities. Despite Haber's report that four
of twenty-three eidetikers could fuse his Figure 6, this stimulus does
not quite satisfy the fusion criterion, since the target pattern is visible in
the first component alone. The fact that his eidetikers could identify it
may represent no more than that they are talented at visuospatial or
pictorial cognition. This talent is suggested by the data on recall
accuracy and also by other unpublished data I have collected showing
that eidetikers are superior to other children in the Kohs Block-Design,
a putative test of right-hemisphere cognition (Furst and Fuld, 1975).
My own efforts to devise an objective test for El using the imagefu-
sion principle were unfruitful, eidetikers and other children alike proving
unable to fuse any of a variety of component images to find a figure
revealed in their superposition. Gummerman, Gray, and Wilson (1972)
were also unsuccessful in having eidetic children demonstrate their
abilities with a fusion test.
Another approach I took was to devise a pictorial recognition task
that might favor accurate visualization of picture fragments and that
would not require verbalization of response (verbalization is said to
inhibit the persistence of an El). In this test, subjects were required to
point to the spatial location of a sample piece from a large complex
scene, following a standard procedure for inducing an eidetic image of
the scene. We found that eidetic subjects were no better at this than
other children. As a final stab, I tried to see if El is related to an
unusually persistent visual "icon." It wasn't.
In the absence of an objective criterion, it is difficult to see the utility
of the notion of eidetic imagery. If El does not make a difference, then it
is reasonable to view it as not different in kind from ordinary visual
memory, but merely a difference in the way some people construe
some mnemonic experiences. When Haber says that the critical
distinction is the visual-nonvisual one, he blurs the issue of whether El
differs from run-of-the-mill visual images, the kind most people have.
That these ordinary "pictures in the head" are visual is clear, not only
on phenomenological grounds but also from Shepard's demonstra-
tions of structural isomorphism between this coding system and visual
perception (e.g., Shepard and Chipman 1970).
The localization of an ordinary visual image inside one's head may
be as arbitrary as placing it anywhere else - being based on a
metaphor related to prevailing theories of the locus of mind in the brain.
It could be argued that it makes about as much sense to say that a
mental event occurred in one's head as to say it occurred in Cleveland:
mental events, as Descartes was fond of saying, are "unextended
substance" which don't occur, strictly speaking, in any place at all.
It is true that the phenomenology of El, as described by Haber, is
intriguing - that's what got us all interested in the first place - but these
phenomenological reports may only represent the fanciful elaborations
of suggestible subjects in a domain for which there are few rules of
discourse. Wittgenstein (1953) and others (e.g., Sarbin 1968) have
convincingly argued the socially determined nature of constructions of
mental experience.
Some of Haber's "converging evidence" that an eidetic child
actually sees El externally located could be viewed merely as logical
extensions of the situational demands. If a child has reported seeing an
image on the easel in front of him, then it is reasonable for the child,
when questioned, to elaborate by saying that the image falls off the
edge when he tries to move it. Other bits of "evidence" can be viewed
as properties equally applicable to ordinary visual memories - for
example, reversals of Necker cubes (try imagining a Necker cube),
fading of parts, quality related to recency of scanning, and so on.
Particularly troublesome for those who try to make sense of El is the
failure to find support for the developmental hypothesis. My own data
contradict the assertion that El declines with age. In fact, over second
through fourth grades in our sample, we found an increasing age trend,
adding to the puzzle presented by Haber's finding in a longitudinal
study that only one of twelve eidetikers lost that classification with age.
These findings are contrary to the hypothesis that El is a primitive
cognitive ability displaced by more analytic strategies, but they are
consistent with the view that the behaviors of an eidetiker represent
compliance with the considerable demand characteristics of the test-
ing situation - compliance that would be expected to increase with
socialization. Also, having in the past acceded to the experimenter's
suggestion, a child would on retesting be motivated to make El reports
that were consistent with earlier ones. By this view, El is not found
among adults because there is something unconvincing about the
testing situation for them, and they have more firmly acquired the
prevailing metaphor for visual images, which is "in the head," rather
than "out there." This would also explain the reported prevalence of
adult eidetikers among certain African societies (Doob 1964, 1965),
cultures that may be isolated from the "in the head" metaphor.
The assertion that El is phenomenologically distinct from other
images, but not distinct by any objective criterion, is unsatisfying from a
scientific point of view, as Haber is good to point out. If there are no
objective, operational means of distinguishing a true eidetiker from a
subject who is merely compliant, then eidetic imagery has questionable
utility for a science of mind, much like hypnotic age-regression,
602
THE BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1979), 2

Commentary/Haber: Eidetic imagery
dermo-optica! perception, and other psychological wills-o'-the-wisp,
which may very well have reality to those who experience them but
which seem to make little difference on the "outside."
by Alastalr Hannay
Department of Philosophy, University of Trondheim, 7000 Trondheim, Norway
Eidetic Imagery: theories and ghosts
Ghosts and anomalies. 
Out of context Haber's concession to
Gray and Gummerman about eidetic ability not being an anomaly might
be seriously misleading. In a sense now familiar from discussions on
the nature of scientific development, initiated by Kuhn (1962, p. 82),
Haber's position is precisely that eidetic imagery does constitute an
anomaly. It is not an anomaly in the specific sense, intended by Haber,
of being a deviation from some "normal" function - a sense that allows
the phenomenon to be saved, or the "ghost" exorcised, by being
brought within the scope of the accepted theories of that function, as is
similarly done when a phenomenon is viewed as an extreme case of a
normal function. It is, rather, an anomaly in the more general sense of
being a deviation from the natural (in this case psychological) order as
such, a theoretically displaced phenomenon that can only be "saved"
by some adjustment, more or less radical, in our theoretical grasp of
the whole area, including whatever appears to be normal in it.
Haber's metatheoretical and methodological remarks make it quite
clear that he does regard eidetic imagery as an anomaly in Kuhn's
sense. He says (in his "Personal preface") that the going theories of
perception "have no way to describe, let alone account for, this
imagery." It is less clear perhaps that in his concluding advice to "ask
more questions about the phenomenological indicators of perception,
not less," he is advocating that kind of more or less radical revision of
the current theoretical framework that Kuhn claims is the eventual
outcome of the recognition of a theoretically recalcitrant phenomenon.
But the advice at least opens the way to the sort of revision of what
counts as acceptable evidence for theories of perception (and mem-
ory) that would make the more radical revision of the theoretical
framework itself possible. It is this aspect of Haber's paper that I shall
comment upon.
Theories and phenomenology. 
Fear of phenomenology in
science seems to have two distinct roots: on the one hand the
strictness of current requirements of proof and objectivity and on the
other the difficulty of fitting the objects of phenomenological descrip-
tions into the current scientific world view. Though they are distinct,
these two roots are obviously connected. Any relaxation of the
requirements that brings the objects of these descriptions (what I have
called "proximal" events, etc., Hannay 1977) out of the shade
immediately makes more glaring the difficulty of fitting them into the
conventional unispatial conception of the universe, and a fortiori into
the theories of perception that conform to that conception. Such
theories are of two general kinds: those that say we say have direct
visual access to a common public environment and those that say that
perception is an indirect response to that environment from a location
within it (i.e. not in some private space).
I have two comments. One is that despite its oddity, eidetic imagery
is really only one of a range of phenomenologically distinguishable
phenomena that call in question the adequacy of the current theoretical
framework. Along with it must be included other forms of mental
imagery, for example, memory images (according to Haber's some-
what misleading terminology these are not "visual," while eidetic
images are, but in a sense of course they are and we must distinguish
between noneidetic visual memory and memory unaccompanied by
any visual imagery at all), deliberate visualizing, hallucination, qualities
of perception not derived from environmental stimuli, and so on. What
may be peculiar to eidetic imagery (though perhaps it shares this
peculiarity with hallucination) is its apparent unsortability, being, as
Haber concludes, neither perception nor memory (though he accepts
that it is a "memorial" phenomenon in a minimal sense, "just as is any
verbal description of the content of a previously seen stimulus"). But
the fact that some function or phenomenon or other is sui generis does
not in itself constitute a threat to the theoretical framework in which we
try to describe it; any framework must allow for the possibility of
irreducible kinds. The critical problem is how to account for the
possibility of the phenomenon, however we choose to describe it, and
that problem arises for the whole range, not just for eidetic imagery.
The second comment qualifies the first. Perhaps eidetic imagery is,
after all, the most fruitful of these phenomena for purposes of theory
construction, not just because it has been more thoroughly researched
than the others in the range - though that is one factor - but also
because it combines problems general to the range with a number of
special puzzles of its own. Why, for example, is it found as a rule only in
children? What accounts for variations in eidetic ability from subject to
subject? To what extent, and in what sense, is it more a "visual" than a
"cognitive" function? And so on. Therefore I would like to append to
this comment a suggestion as to the kind of theory that might
effectively exorcise the ghost of eidetic imagery, not by denying its
existence (some scientists try to do that by appealing to the require-
ments of proof and objectivity, but that is a matter of bad faith), but by
providing a theoretical basis for its existence from which it is also
possible to derive testable explanations of its special features.
According to Haber's conclusions (whose tenability I am not quali-
fied to doubt) a theory of eidetic imagery would have to explain (1) how
eidetic images can be scanned, (2) how they can be shifted, inverted,
and altered in size, (3) how some details of the withdrawn stimulus can
be omitted, others added, and others moved, (4) why blinking, looking
away from where the stimulus was, and shifting one's gaze to a new
stimulus are routinely effective ways of terminating the image, (5) why
"active, cognitive rehearsal of the stimulus" is a routinely effective way
of preventing an eidetic image's occurrence, and (6) why as a rule
only, but then again not all, children have eidetic ability.
The primary puzzle is surely how a perception (of a stimulus) can
become, without appreciable alteration in the subject's visual experi-
ence, a kind (though "qualitatively different kind") of memory repre-
sentation of the same stimulus. But if perceptual experience in general
were related to the stimulus world as visual effect to nonvisual cause
(Haber's stimulus is of course a visual one), and cause and effect were
interpreted as logically and temporally distinct, eidetic imagery could
be treated as a deviant form of perception, in other words as an
anomaly in Haber's sense, and thus relieved of its theoretical recalci-
trancy. It could be construed (nonanomalously in Kuhn's sense) as a
special case of a visual effect of a nonvisual cause (or rather causes),
the peculiarity being that here the subsequent causal chains emanating
from the relevant parts of the stimulus world (e.g. those corresponding
to the empty easel) fail to reach the visual stage, fail to oust the visual
effect of the previous chain(s) as they do in normal perception. (Here
there would be more point in calling eidetic imagery a perceptual
phenomenon than a memorial one, though there may well be cases of
eidetic imagery that come closer to memory because they are uncon-
strained by the kind of experimental setup described by Haber, which
links the image to perception via the stimulus.) The question would then
be, what inhibits these subsequent chains before their visual comple-
tion? Not a very mystery-laden question. In these general terms it would
even make sense to conjecture that the inhibiting factor was once a
"natural" feature of perception and eidetic ability the rule rather than
the exception. It might be further conjectured that the ability as we now
know it is a case of ontogenetic playback, the survival during a fairly
short period in an individual's development of a function once prevalent
throughout an individual's life. Perhaps it once served an evolutionary
purpose, but altered circumstances, or the development of better
means for serving that purpose, put it out of fashion. My point is not, of
course, that such conjectures are plausible, but only that within a
framework of this kind they make sense.
Although Haber's paper is not concerned with the construction of
alternative theoretical frameworks, it obviously enjoins that topic on
those who stand by the theories to which they are more or less happily
wedded. His call for greater attention to the experimental psychology
of phenomenology (with all the methodological adjustments that
implies) is surely justified, as is his claim that this is a more fruitful
approach than the continued search for correlates among functions
THE BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1979), 2
603

Commentary/JrLaber: Eidetic imagery
measurable by the conventionally accepted methods. But if the
difficulty in finding satisfactory correlates is due to an inadequate
theory of these functions, it may be that once a better theory comes
along the search will be more successful. Even so, and before one
looks for correlates, it is obvious, indeed it should be so obvious as to
be a platitude, that the phenomena should be allowed to have their say
first.
by Klaus Helnerth
Institut fur Padagogische Psychologie, UniversMt Frankfurt/Main, D-6000 Frank-
furt/Main, W. Germany
Autochthonous and phenomenal eidefic capacity
Haber's target article invites certain objections. He has evidently
performed exactly the same experiments I have (as in his typical
child-experimenter dialogue, typical behavior of the Ss, typical
phenomenology), but he comes to different conclusions. I shall briefly
summarize my experiments and the conclusions arising from extensive
statistical analysis (Heinerth and Nickel 1975) and intensive determinis-
tic research (Nickel, Heinerth, and Bittmann 1975) in the form of theses
and hypotheses.
1. Studies of eidetikers have an element of direct, personal involve-
ment (in Haber's studies as well as my own).
2. Although essential, this direct involvement is dangerous: it intro-
duces bias in spite of all precautions. This bias is clearly visible in
Haber's convictions, which are based on interpretations, as opposed
to imperative facts. At first, I was inquisitive, then an ardent exponent of
eidetic imagery, and finally a skeptic, unwilling simply to accept
evidence but seeking rigorous demonstrations (such as Stromeyer and
Psotka's 1970 successive stereoscopic images).
3. Suggestibility plays an important role, not only with subjects (Ss)
but also with the experimenter, who considers the "typical" verbal and
nonverbal expressions of Ss convincing. I have myself been seduced
by subjective testimony, and I have insisted upon strict criteria.
4. Eidetic function does not exist independently of criteria. It is
useful to differentiate between two kinds of eidetic capacity: autoch-
thonous and phenomenal.
5. Autochthonous eidetic function is extremely rare (<1%). It should
be regarded as present only if testing criteria compellingly demonstrate
a phenomenon sui generis (so far this has only been achieved by
Stromeyer and Psotka). Such a rare phenomenon really should not be
regarded as an object of general psychology. All Haber's other criteria
seem to be obvious, but they are insufficient, even the eighth one. It
does not have the rigor of Stromeyer and Psotka's method. Haber
discredits the stereoscopic method as being overly restrictive for
testing children. I cannot accept this: as long as this method is the only
one that convincingly demonstrates the existence of eidetic capacity, it
should be refined but not rejected.
6. Any other eidetic endowment should be regarded as occurring
only at the phenomenal level. It differs from afterimages but not from
visual concepts which form a continuum with eidetic images.
7. The objections raised by Haber against such a continuum are
plausible but not conclusive. As long as there are no opposing
reasons, one's interpretations should be conservative: phenomenal
eidetic capacity is not an additional endowment but an extremely good
capacity for visualization, closest to guided daydream ("catathymical-
ly" experienced images in the sense of Leuner 1970).
8. Daydreams differ from eidetic images by degree: their images
are generated by phantasy, while eidetic images constitute memories
of stimuli. Manipulation of the images as well as training is possible in
both cases.
9. Eidetic function is a ubiquitous phenomenon experienced by
children. It fades during cognitive development if it is not further trained
(children are amazed to be told that adults cannot "product images").
The fact that no correlations between cognitive development and
eidetic capacity have been found does not mean that there are none.
(The fact that no needle has been found in a haystack does not prove
that there is none.)
10. I prefer to remain conservative in considering the phenomena of
occurrence and age. Eidetic function tends to be opposed to normal
cognitive development. It is highest at the time of the smallest cognitive
rapport of Ss (during the earliest childhood) and lowest when the
rapport is tight. (This makes experimentation quite difficult.) Longitudi-
nal studies may obscure correlations between eidetic function and
age. Continuing testing trains performance, but eidetic ability itself
seems to remain stable.
11. Phenomenological research is indeed called for. There has
been enough extensive research: intensive work is necessary, if better
testing methods are to be developed. My own hypothesis is that
imagination can be trained, and even adults may be able to learn to
visualize eidetically.
12. As for the rest: eidetic function is a problem for noneidetics
only!
by Dennis H. Holding
Department of Psychology, University of Louisville, Louisville, Ky. 40208
Does being "eidetic" matter?
For most people, the exciting feature of the eidetic hypothesis has
been the possibility of revealing vivid detail in imagery. Casual familiar-
ity with the field probably conjures up the Allport (1924) illustration of
the introductory text, with children magically deciphering "Gartenwirth-
schaft" from an incomprehensible visual display, and perhaps the even
more dramatic Stromeyer and Psotka (1970) demonstration of delayed
synthesis of Julesz patterns. Unfortunately, as Haber emphasizes,
these feats are quite atypical of eidetic performance.
Haber's eight criteria are of several kinds. The first three, though
phenomenological, are viewed as the primary distinguishing features of
eidetic performance; they deal with the subject's report of an externally
referred image of relatively long duration. Criterion 4, concerning use
of the present tense, is clearly implied by the earlier criteria. Criteria 5
and 6, dealing with eye movements, are "technical" in nature and only
provide corroborative evidence if the phenomenon is already estab-
lished. Criterion 7, regarding accuracy of report, has been discounted
by most researchers and is often achievable by noneidetic subjects.
Criterion 8, requiring the synthesis of decomposed stimuli, seems
potentially the strongest, but this too must be abandoned if eidetikers
are to be regarded as a homogeneous group. Thus, for instance, the 2
out of 270 subjects identified as eidetic on the "seeing it out there"
type of criterion, both retardates, were unable to carry out either of
Gummerman, Gray, and Wilson's (1972) superimposition tasks, and
Haber's own data include few subjects with both types of ability. In fact,
the overall impression gleaned from the paper is that we must doubt
whether all of the eight criteria are selecting the same population. This
impression is strongly reinforced by the Paivio and Cohen (1977)
analysis, which shows that the "eidetic" factor is loaded neither on
accuracy of report nor on the ability to synthesize percepts.
It appears, therefore, that we have essentially to deal with the group
of criteria based on the finding that the eidetic subject somehow
ascribes his image to the real world, locating it outside rather than
inside his body schema. But this seems almost trivial, unless further
consequences can be demonstrated. Where people locate their
images and percepts may not be completely arbitrary, but this type of
ascription is certainly manipulable. At the level of auditory localization
we have examples like Jackson's (1953) demonstration that a whis-
tling kettle is referred to the observed vapor source rather than the
actual sound source. At the level of images versus percepts there is
the classic demonstration by Perky (1910), whose subjects thought
they were imagining objects which, in reality, had been faintly projected
onto a screen by the experimenter. Segal (1971), who has repeated
and considerably extended this work, points out that it complements
an earlier experiment by KOIpe (1902). The earlier work shows a
reversed Perky effect. Subjects who were shown a dim and fluctuating
test stimulus, such as a red square, often developed hallucinatory
percepts traceable to autokinetic, entoptic, and other subjective
phenomena, but thought that their percepts were real. In fact, it was
the apparent lability of the decision whether percepts were classed as
imaginary or as generated by the experimenter that suggested that the
604
THE BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1979), 2

Commentary /Haber: Eidetic imagery
Perky (1910) experiment might be viable. Finally, Segal (1971)
concludes on the basis of her own work that "the decision concerning
reality is essentially a probability decision" (p. 96).
One might further argue that attempting to discover where subjects
locate their images is of no great interest for most purposes. What one
needs to know is whether people classed as eidetic on these grounds
can do anything that distinguishes them in other areas of performance.
At the moment, the answer seems to be that they cannot. If this area of
research is to make any progress, something approaching a new
paradigm is needed. The further consequences of being eidetic, if any,
must be made to yield significant hypotheses for experimental test.
Haber has presented a good deal of the accumulated data on
individual differences, the confusing discrepancy between the promi-
nence of eidetic phenomena in childhood and the absence of longitudi-
nal change, the lack of relation with developmental deficits, and the
dubious validity of cross-cultural studies. However, he has not
proposed any further experimental procedures. If it could be predicted
and verified that eidetic subjects can supply their own unmasking of
metacontrast, or that they generate different slopes of information gain
from noisy histoforms, or if any other solid consequences were
indicated, the distinction between eidetic and noneidetic subjects
would be noteworthy. However, nothing of the kind is foreshadowed in
the paper, nor is the suggestion made how that ascription of "reality"
to images might be further explored. As things stand, one is led to
conclude that the eidetic hypothesis is relatively sterile.
by Ian M. L. Hunter
Department of Psychology, University of Keele, Staffordshire, ST5 5BG, England.
The easel procedure and eidetic characteristics
My comments concern the easel procedure and the preconceptions
governing its use and interpretation. The procedure was devised by
Jaensch to explore his theory about afterimages, eidetic images, and
memory images. And Haber's own interest in the procedure was
prompted by a possible physiological mechanism, namely, a sensory
aftereffect that persists for some minutes and manifests itself autono-
mously as eidetic imagery, provided there are no masking or distract-
ing circumstances. Such a mechanism is not inherently implausible:
consider McCollough Effects, also those long-lasting visual aftereffects
that can follow a day spent fishing in rippling water. However, if I read
Haber correctly, he proposes to abandon this notion, at least in the
context of the easel procedure. I agree with this proposal. But although
Haber may reject the notion, it still colours his discussion. Also the
notion, or something like it, permeates the easel procedure: witness
the elicitation of afterimages and the manner of interrogating subjects.
Let me make my own assumptions explicit. First, remembering (and
also imagining) can be more or less eidetic in its characteristics; that is,
the remembered (or imagined) scene can be treated as if it were more
or less perceptually present. Haber lists some of these characteristics
which can vary in strength and also vary independently of each other.
So, we should not classify people as all-or-none eidetikers but, rather,
describe remembering performances and the ways in which they are
eidetic. Second, when eidetic imaging occurs in the easel procedure,
we are witnessing not an autonomous sensory aftereffect, but a
remembering that is rich in various eidetic characteristics.
These two assumptions cast the easel procedure and its findings in
a fresh light. They make plain that the procedure is not reliably free
from demand characteristics and interpretations which may fluctuate
from one investigation to the next. They accommodate the otherwise
anomalous finding that some subjects "revive eidetic images" at later
times. They make sense of the finding that the presence or absence of
eidetic characteristics does not necessarily relate to the amount and
accuracy of what is remembered. They also raise the question: is the
procedure not a niggardly and chancy way of eliciting remembering? In
other words, may the procedure militate against the occurrence of
remembering which may, on occasion, turn out to have eidetic charac-
teristics?
I pursued this question by imagining myself as a subject. Following
preliminaries involving afterimages, I am shown a picture to examine.
Now comes the critical point. The picture is removed, and I am asked
to continue looking at the easel and report what I see. My answer
would be "nothing" or "a grey surface." Thereupon I would probably
be classed noneidetic (the literature says little about the reactions of
subjects so classed). But suppose, on removal of the picture, I were
asked to imagine, to the best of my ability, that I still see the picture and
that I should describe this imagined picture. I would probably conduct
myself so as to be classed eidetic.
I have proceeded to conduct some rough-and-ready experiments
with four colleagues who happened to have been available: a techni-
cian specializing in audiovisual aids and three university lecturers. I
explained that what I was about to ask of them might seem slightly
crazy. I placed a coloured picture (the cover of a magazine The Great
Outdoors) on the table. I would ask them to look at it and, ignoring the
printed wording, consider what the picture showed, note the things in it,
their colours and how they related spatially to each other. Then I would
cover the picture with plain cardboard and ask the subjects to imagine
they could still see the picture underneath.
When I covered the picture and asked, "What are the main things in
the picture?," subjects replied, in the present tense, by mentioning
contents. The technician spontaneously accompanied his descriptions
by tracing them on the blank surface, and the lecturers resorted to
pointing when I asked, "Where is that?" Subjects answered supple-
mentary questions like, "What is the colour of the rucksack?" and "Is
there anything on the ground behind the hiker?" When I pointed to
different parts of the surface and asked, "What is there?," answers
were appropriate. Any eavesdropper would suppose we were talking
about a perceptually present picture. The only hint that we were not so
doing was the occasional past-tense comment "I didn't notice that"
when I asked about some detail such as, "Is the hiker wearing a
wristwatch?"
I do not suggest that these subjects evinced eidetic imagery as
traditionally conceived. But their remembering did have some eidetic
characteristics and provided a sympathetic start to exploring how fully
and strongly they were remembering eidetically. As it happened, two
lecturers reported, one more vehemently than the other, that their
remembering was based on verbal encoding and involved nothing
describable as "actual seeing." The remaining lecturer suspected he
was merely persuading himself that he was actually seeing. The
technician furnished a much fuller repertoire of eidetic characteristics
with comments like, "You'd think the cardboard was transparent,"
and, "You could draw round the shapes."
Surveying the literature about the easel procedure, we meet implicit
preconceptions, some of which may work against the appearance of
eidetic remembering. We meet a historical trend toward tightening the
criteria by which remembering is classed "genuinely eidetic." We meet
confirmation of the finding that intrigued Galton (1883), namely,
children's remembering tends to be more readily and fully eidetic than
that of most, but not all, adults. Galton, and later Werner (1940),
sought to account for this finding by two plausible hypotheses: the
demands of "intellectual" pursuits lead people to encode verbally
rather than visually; and the demands of self-analytic reflection lead
people to differentiate subjective and objective phenomena (see also
Piaget 1929).
Finally, Galton suggested that when adults undertake pursuits that,
like drawing, demand more careful attention to visual properties, their
remembering becomes more eidetic, at least in some contexts.
Assuming a merit in exploring human functioning by starting with highly
accomplished real-life instances of it (Hunter 1979), Galton's sugges-
tion is a worthwhile opening for future studies of eidetic remembering,
its ecology and its uses.
by Julian Jafnes
Department of Psychology, Princeton University, Princeton, N.J. 08544
Palaeolithic cawe paintings as eidetic images
I propose the hypothesis that the well-known cave paintings and
engravings at Lascaux, Altamira, and in about a hundred other caves in
southern France and northern Spain, dating somewhere between
THE BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1979), 2
605

Commentary/Haber: Eidetic imagery
Figure 1 (Jaynes). 
Engravings on a fallen slab of stalagmite from the
cave of La Mairie at Teyjat. Note the seeming double vision of the head
of the bison as if the eidetic image has slipped (after Breuil 1952;
artwork by Judith Economos).
20,000 and 10,000 B.C., are tracings of eidetic images rather than art
in its usual sense. The purpose of this note is to discuss whether
Haber's thorough and welcome revival of the topic sheds any light on
this issue, and conversely whether consideration of such a hypothesis
suggests new ways to study the still perplexing and inconsistent
phenomena of eidetic imagery.
The arguments in favor of the hypothesis are as follows: (1) the cave
paintings cannot be art in our sense of being meant for public display
or ritual observance since they are usually located in the most difficult
and inaccessible positions inside the caves; (2) if they were drawn by
artists in our sense, we would expect to find preliminary atttempts, as if
learning to draw, but such are not found; (3) if drawn by artists in our
sense, we would expect a homogeneity of skill regardless of subject,
but we do not: the paintings or engravings of animals (about 90% of
the total) are of an astonishing sweep, beauty, and likeness, while
those of humans are almost entirely sticklike and not likenesses at all;
and no scenery is ever attempted; (4) the most prominent reason to
think of these paintings and engravings specifically as tracings of
eidetic images is their common superposition one over the other, as if
each animal was projected on the cave wall regardless of what was
there in the first place.
Particularly because of (4) - which I find difficult to understand
otherwise - I think we should take the eidetic hypothesis of the origin of
these paintings seriously. But if we do, we are assuming much stronger
and longer-lasting properties of eidetic imagery in Cro-Magnon man
than we find in laboratory studies of the phenomenon today. We must
posit that an individual out on a hunt with his group, perhaps stared into
the dusk waiting to see the hunted animal; and then finally, either as the
animal was at bay or as it was killed, registered the eidetic representa-
tion, which, after returning to the deep interior of his cave, he then by
torchlight traced out with charcoal and colored ochres on the wall (or
where the surface was softer, engraved with a pointed stone) - and all
in disregard of what had been drawn there before. (I assume here that
the deeper engraving and scraping techniques which are sometimes
found were reworkings of previous paintings - for which there is
considerable evidence.) Such a picture of the Cro-Magnon painter is
full of new assumptions that seem implausible from what we know of
eidetic imagery in the laboratory.
It assumes that an eidetic image under late Pleistocene conditions is
not "blinked away" as in Haber's studies, nor does the image "fall off"
when transferred to another background. But we should recall that at
least some eidetic children today can shift images to any surface at
will, superimposing them over any subject, and can even change their
size as they wish (Leask, Haber, and Haber 1969). The last character-
istic is consistent with the lack of relative size constancy in the cave
paintings.
It assumes that from a brief exposure, the Palaeolithic eidetic image
can be maintained over longer periods than is commonly found in
laboratory studies. But the duration in modern studies outside the
laboratory can be longer. One investigator reported what seem to have
been spontaneous eidetic images in Tanzanian children, which often
lasted twenty minutes or more (Doob 1970).
A further difference is that we usually think of eidetic imagery as
being a scene, whereas the cave paintings are of solitary animals
without any vegetation or scenery. But one thing that all eidetic
researchers agree on is that the only way for a subject to get a
complete picture is to look at each part of it for enough time; parts
omitted are not seen, though they may be remembered on questioning.
Hence in the Cro-Magnon situation, it is only the emotionally salient
target animal and sometimes only a part of the animal that is stared at
and registered, not other hunters or scenic background. (The poorly
drawn human figures may indeed be attempts to draw noneidetic
memory images, or they may have been added a century or a
millennium or more later, as I suspect most of the nonpictorial slashes
and graffiti were.)
Whatever these somewhat tenuous comparisons suggest, the huge
difference between the Palaeolithic and the contemporary situation is
the emotional salience of the image. The animals on the cave walls and
ceilings are life and death matters. They are those hunted for food in
the desperations of the last glacial age or else dreaded predators such
as lion or bear. The importance of such targets to the Cro-Magnon
hunter and the waiting dangerous excitement connected with his vision
of the animal is in high contrast with the bland picture-book stimuli in
the usual eidetic study.
While there is no necessary reason to think that the brain of a
modern eidetic child and that of a Cro-Magnon adult 15,000 years ago
demonstrate the same processes in so esoteric an area, nevertheless
discovery of the pertinence of these variables in the modern condition,
particularly of emotional salience, would be some support for the
hypothesis.
These possibilities could easily be studied by using pictures of
stronger emotional and personal impact, such as food displays with
hungry subjects, photographs of the subject's family in various settings
after some separation as in children's hospitals, or highly desired
objects such as a bicycle or other toy that we know (by pretesting) the
child impatiently desires, and then comparing the results with control
pictures. The waiting expectancy could be simulated by using projec-
tions slowly brought into focus or intensity in dim light and compared
with the same pictures presented for the same duration in the usual
way. Moreover, dark adaptation of the subject might in itself produce a
longer lasting eidetic image, since a bright surround may actually wash
out the image. In the study of Tanzanian children with eidetic images of
long duration, such images were usually seen one or two feet in front of
the eyes in darkness as the child lay down for sleep.
The most interesting of Haber's results to me is that nearly all eidetic
children can (and commonly do) prevent an eidetic image from forming
by naming the items in the picture while seeing it. This immediately
suggests that in the usual procedure, the naming of the objects in the
testing for imagery (see Haber's protocols) may have hastened the
fading of the image. It would thus seem that a nonverbal technique of
testing for the image would be preferable, such as asking the child to
trace the eidetic image on the blank easel with a felt pen or crayon [cf.
Neisser, this commentary] - even perhaps as did his Upper Palaeolithic
ancestors in a different way and context.
One of Haber's conclusions can, I think, be questioned in part. This
606
THE BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1979), 2

Commentary/Haber: Eidetic imagery
is that fidelity of the eidetic image to the stimulus is no better than
memory, a conclusion that has a considerable history in eidetic
research. My difficulty has to do with how we can compare what are
almost two different modalities. It does not seem to me correct to
compare the verbal replies to analytic questions about numbers of
items and details, since two such different procedures are involved: the
eidetic where the subject is not to verbalize, and memory where
analytic verbalization is encouraged. What we really want to know here
is the accuracy of depiction, not accuracy of report. Because of the
verbal erasing factor, this could be better studied by again comparing
tracings by eidetic children with memory drawings of the same picture
by noneidetic children. I would suspect that such a study might return
the accuracy criterion for eidetic imagery to its former popular favor.
To sum up, I have suggested that if the hypothesis that cave
paintings are eidetic images is correct, we might find that the strength,
duration, and accuracy of modern eidetic images could be increased
by using stimuli of greater emotional salience after an expectancy
period in dim light and asking the subject to trace out the image on a
blank easel instead of verbally reporting about it. If none of these new
variables proved pertinent, I think the hypothesis would be weakened.
And if one appreciates the total situation and the number of
individuals involved, one might conjecture that the hypothesis would
not have to be completely abandoned. We commonly call these
paintings Palaeolithic art with the unthinking connotation that the
paintings were made over ten thousand years or more of the Late
Pleistocene as a cultural tradition. That this is false can be seen from
the fact that there were at best fewer than 100 paintings in any one
cave, which (if it were a cultural tradition over this period) would work
out to be only one painting every century or two. I think this is absurd,
particularly when we remember that primates and particularly human
primates tend to continue and even teach a learned activity of this sort
that is suddenly discovered and found pleasurable. It is thus more
plausible to think of all of the paintings and engravings in these one
hundred caves as being done over only a few decades by only a few
Cro-Magnon persons, a unique few whose strong eidetic imagery may
have been more similar to the extreme of Luria's adult mnemonist
(Luria 1968) than to the usual eidetic child.
by Beia Julesz
Bell Laboratories, Murray Hill, N.J. 07974
Random-dot correlogram test for eidetic imagery
Questions as to the existence and nature of eidetic imagery are of
great theoretical importance to psychobiology. Haber's target article,
in not letting researchers' interest in this enigmatic problem wane,
makes a real contribution to this field.
Although I have never worked on eidetic imagery myself, I have
consented to be a commentator, since in my book, Foundations of
Cyclopean Perception (1971), an entire chapter is devoted to the
Stromeyer and Psotka (1970) study. These investigators tested an
unusually able eidetic subject with the technique of random-dot stereo-
grams. I thought some of my colleagues might be interested in my
present opinion on this problem, almost a decade later, which Haber's
excellent review helps me to formulate.
In my commentary the emphasis will be on Haber's "eighth criteri-
on," that of the subject's (S's) being able to build up a composite
image from partly eidetic, partly physical, components. I regard this
criterion alone - particularly in the case of random-dot stereograms
and correlograms - as objective enough to establish and quantify
eidetic imagery.
Before I go into detail, let me outline an "unfakable" test for eidetic
imagery and then discuss how close some investigators have come to
such a test.
1. An Meal test for eidetic imagery. As I pointed out in my
book, my main interest in the Stromeyer and Psotka study was the use
of random-dot stereograms, which I still regard as an "unfakable" test
for eidetic imagery, provided the cyclopean (monocularly nonexistent)
information is known to S (and preferably to the experimenter, too).
Indeed, if one generates a single random-dot stereogram half-pair
Figure 1 (Julesz). 
Test random-dot stereograms for eidetic imagery.
Center matrix is inspected until an eidetic image is built up. When the
surrounding matrices are viewed, fusion with the eidetic image should
reveal a square (A), cross (B), diamond (C), or disk (D).
(presented, say to the left eye) and a series of corresponding stereo
half-pairs (shown to the other eye), then when the left image is fused
one by one with the right images, a series of cyclopean forms can be
successively obtained that, a priori, are unknown to either subject or
experimenter. In my book (Figs. 8.1-1, a,b,c, and d; reproduced here
as Fig. 1) a common random-dot left image is printed, which, when
fused with four corresponding right images, portrays a square, cross,
diamond, and disk hovering in vivid depth above the background.
These random-dot stereograms are typically 100 x 
100 picture
element arrays, and the cyclopean shapes contain many random black
and white dots. However, a random-dot stereogram containing only a
few hundred dots (picture elements) can portray rather complex
cyclopean forms. Ideally, a 100 x 100 random-dot stereogram can
portray highly perceptible 3-digit alphanumeric characters in depth.
Now, the subject is asked to view the common half-image with one
eye, and to build up an eidetic image by inspecting it for long periods,
allowing it to be refreshed any time it seems to fade. The correspond-
ing half-pairs are presented in succession after a fixed latency to the
other eye, after the image to the first eye is occluded. Only if S has
eidetic imagery (and functional stereopsis) can the hidden cyclopean
messages be reported. The advantage of this method is that only a
single random-dot array has to be stored by S throughout an entire
session, while many independent tests can be performed with this
same eidetic image.
A variant of this method is to use random-dot correlograms instead
of random-dot stereograms (Julesz 1971). Correlograms are similar to
stereograms except that the cyclopean shapes are not the result of
several binocular disparities; instead the left random-dot array is
identical to the right array (i.e. has zero disparity) except for some
uncorrelated (or negatively correlated) areas. When binocularly
viewed, the identical areas give rise to binocular fusion, while the
uncorrelated (or negatively correlated) areas yield binocular rivalry. In a
typical test one can use a 100 x 100 randomly black and white dot
array for the common stereo half-image, while the other half-image is
identical to the first, except for, say, a 3 x 3 dot array that is its
negative (i.e. negatively correlated). The position of this small rivalry-
inducing patch will vary in successive tests, and the subject has to
THE BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1979), 2
607

Commentary/Haber: Eidetic imagery
report which quadrant contains this patch. A noneidetic subject can
guess correctly on each trial with probability = 0.25. The odds,
however, of guessing, say, 20 successive patches' positions correctly
is infinitesimal. Obviously, the coordinates of the uncorrelated patches
can be randomly generated by a computer, so neither subject nor
experimenter knows the answer at the time of the test. (Present
computer technology permits the generation of a 525 x 525 random-
dot stereogram in 33 msec.) Changing the patch size might permit the
quantification of the spatial resolution of the eidetic image, provided
one could discover anyone who could perform such a series of tests.
2. How close hawe experiments come to the ideal one? Let
us now examine the few existing tests that have emulated to some
extent the ideal tests outlined above. The first such test, proposed by
Leask, Haber, and Haber (1969) based on monocularly superimposing
two part images (one eidetic, one physical) in a composite one, is
described in Haber's target article. This technique of composite
pictures has two disadvantages. The images typically used are not
random-dot arrays, so in theory S could encode the contoured figures
in some other form, making quantification difficult. But, more important,
as Haber himself points out, S might be eidetic, but unable to perform
the demanding task of moving, in registration, (i.e. with corresponding
coordinates exactly aligned), two images in the same eye. On the other
hand, for subjects with functional stereopsis (98% of the population),
the alignment of the left and right image (if presented within Panum's
fusional area) is accomplished automatically by the neural machinery
of stereopsis. So, if the ideal test using cyclopean stimuli is presented
such that S is asked to scan one stereo half-pair in the vicinity of a
fixation marker, and then the second stereo half-image is presented in
close spatial registration, the large identical backgrounds are fused,
coalescing in the two eyes' views.
The fact that only four of Haber's twenty-three eidetic children, and
none of his larger group of children and adults, could perform the
composite task attests to the difficulty of this test. I only wonder
whether, if he had presented the composite images dichoptically, with
a large identical random-dot frame around them to facilitate superposi-
tion, better results could not have been obtained.
Now, let us turn to the Stromeyer and Psotka (1970) report. The
subject used - a twenty-three-year-old, intelligent young woman - had
remarkable eidetic capabilities. Her performance on pictures and
reading tests (while measuring her alpha rhythm) has been indepen-
dently reported by Pollen and Trachtenberg (1972). That she could
store 1,000 x 1,000 random-dot stereogram half-pairs and correctly
report complex surfaces emerging even after hours of delay is a most
remarkable feat.
It is a pity that Stromeyer and Psotka used only my published
stereograms, limited to a dozen or so cyclopean shapes - the same
stereograms I used in my many talks at universities and scientific
meetings. Using such a limited and widely known set of stereograms
has many obvious pitfalls. I only hope that if another "supereidetiker"
is found, the random-dot correlogram test (outlined above) will be
applied.
It is important to stress that Stromeyer and Psotka's finding was
recently corroborated by Walker, Garrett, and Wallace (1976), who
used three 100 x 100 random-dot stereograms from my book
(portraying a T-shape, a triangle, and a Necker cube). Twenty adult
subjects were hypnotically regressed to seven years of age, and after
a 60-sec delay between the eidetic and physical image presentations,
two subjects were able to report the three cyclopean shapes correctly.
The same subjects could not perform this task under normal waking
conditions or in neutral hypnosis (without age regression). "During the
postexperimental interview, the two eidetikers both mentioned that as
a child (7 or 8 years old) they recalled being able to look at a picture
and later reproduce a clear image of it," Walker et al. wrote in this
astonishing report.
3. Discussion. The Walker et al. (1976) experiment comes close
to the ideal test proposed above, but is still unnecessarily strict. The
random-dot correlogram test is simpler and might give a better "yield,"
although their 10% success rate (2 out of 20) is similar to that of Haber
and Haber's (1964) 8% (12 out of 179) eidetikers among children. The
important contribution of Walker et al. is to make it possible to increase
markedly the number of eidetikers in the available population by using
hypnotic age regression. This, combined with the random-dot stereo-
gram test (or perhaps improved by using random-dot correlograms),
opens up the scientific study of eidetic imagery.
Of course, I can imagine how many of my colleagues who were
skeptical before might increase their disbelief when hypnotic age
regression, another enigmatic phenomenon, is added to the elusive
eidetic phenomenon. If eidetic imagery were just an oddity, I would
agree with the skeptics: why bother? However, eidetic imagery,
particularly with the high resolution and long persistence some of the
supereidetikers exhibit, is an "existence proof" that the central
nervous system is capable of storing a huge amount of information for
long periods. Whether this detailed storage of texture is for minutes,
hours, or days is an intriguing question and should be pursued by any
reproducible means available.
When we are confronted by some extremely rare mental phenom-
ena, exhibited by a select few individuals, their implications for brain
research are perhaps more important than the phenomena in them-
selves. The music of J. S. Bach, or the theories of Einstein, are great
treasures of mankind, but more important, the existence of such
individuals illustrates the depth of human creative capabilities. I am in
full agreement with Haber that the goal of establishing and describing
eidetic phenomena is worth pursuing, since there is hardly any problem
more interesting than the structure and detail of visual memory.
by Israel Liebllch
Department of Psychology, The Hebrew University of Jerusalem, Jerusalem, Israel
Eidetic imagery: do not use ghosts to hunt ghosts of
the same species
We are going to play a game with scientific knowledge. Here on this
page I am going to show you a summary of scientific knowledge
related to eidetic images. Look at it as long as you wish but I do not
want you to stare at it. You may move your eyes. After you finish, go
back to Haber's target article, which describes twenty years of
haunting eidetic imagery mainly by use of phenomenological indicators,
and indicate what if anything is new.
Some individuals after examining a picture and then being asked to
project their image of it on a gray screen, behave as if they were still
actually seeing the picture and can describe it in great detail. Such
an "eidetic" image is sometimes regarded as a special kind of
image, almost photographic. Jaensch (1920) was largely responsi-
ble for attracting attention to this phenomenon. It is fairly common in
children but rare in adults. It may be related to personality traits. But
we know little about the actual nature of the eidetic image, despite a
large number of studies; good summaries will be found in Allport
(1924) and Kluver (1926, 1928, 1932). At present we cannot tell
how the eidetic child establishes his image or whether it is qualita-
tively different from the ordinary strong visual imagery of many
people. (Woodworth and Schlosberg 1954, p. 722)
Following your own comparison, I would like to propose the main
thesis of the present commentary. It is high time to try to attach to each
research program in modern psychology a "monitor," which would
indicate periodically whether the given program develops or degener-
ates. Lakatos (1970) called attention to such progression and degen-
eration of scientific programs. I would like to propose, on the basis of
Haber's review, that the pure phenomenological program in eidetic
imagery is a clear failure, and thus, contrary to Haber's suggestion,
less rather than more research on pure phenomenological indicators of
perception should be undertaken.
Establishing a monitor for tracking the progression or degeneration
of programs needs some utility indicators to be monitored. Following
Lakatos's remarks, I have compiled a first-approximation list of such
indicators. For progress or degeneration respectively they are: fast or
slow progress; consistency or inconsistency of the measurement
procedures used; beauty, originality, and empirical success, versus
boring, "normal," and negative results; content-increasing explana-
tions versus ad hoc hypotheses; theoretically digested versus undi-
gested anomalies; theory-guided versus hack experimentation. Some
608
THE BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1979), 2

Commentary/tisiber: Eidetic imagery
of the indicators might be dependent, but still, passing the phenomeno-
logical program of research of eidetic images through all of them might
be instructive. As to the speed of progress of the phenomenological
program, I consider it to be almost nil. Woodworth and Schlosberg
(1954) end their summary by saying, "At present we cannot tell how
the eidetic child establishes his image"; 26 years later Haber ends his
[shorter] abstract [BBS 2(3) 1979: back cover] by stating "We do not
yet know why or how only a small percentage of children possess this
[eidetic] ability." This understanding is of course the main aim of the
program.
As to the consistency of the measurement procedure, although
Haber and Haber (1964) have contributed decisively to the standard-
ization of the measurement procedure of studies following them, they
might have introduced some inconsistencies that potentially pose
problems of continuity with the studies conducted before them. Wood-
worth (1938, p. 46) cautions against procedures such as staring with
no eye movement, which might induce the young subjects to form
afterimages during the test for eidetic images. Haber and Haber (1964)
start their experiments by requiring the subjects to stare and stop eye
movements, thus effectively training the young subject to form after-
images. Then the subject is required to unlearn this behavior during the
test for eidetic images. Afterimages are an excellent source for valid
visual information. Why should a young subject relinquish this proce-
dure when it is clear that he is being judged on his visualization
abilities? Gray and Gummerman (1975), as Haber describes, have
found that eye movements during eidetic image testing were smaller
and more variable than the verbal report of the images would predict,
which might be related to the peculiar procedure used. I would
conclude then, that the consistency of measurement procedures,
especially with the older literature, is imperfect, and that even within the
later period, confounding with afterimages is enhanced and not
reduced by the standard procedure of exposing the young subjects to
conditions that maximize afterimage occurrence.
As to the interest, beauty, and originality of the program, I am sad to
admit that except for Stromeyer and Psotka's (1970) study in which
two decomposed versions of a Julesz random dot stereogram were
presented, requiring as a correct response the report of a three-
dimensional object, no original or empirically successful results were
apparent from the review. On the contrary, most of it is full of negative
findings, or at least confusing ones. Stromeyer and Psotka's (1970)
methodology is surely far removed from the pure phenomenological
program normally used by the experimenters in the field.
As to content-increasing explanations, I did not detect any such
explanations. On the contrary, the explanation of the negative correla-
tion of the probability of detecting eidetic subjects with age left me very
confused. The review claims that an extensive longitudinal study over
the entire span of elementary school found that eidetic potential
remains stable, with no relation to thinking styles, reading proficiency,
or neurological and functional pathologies. Still the negative correlation
of the phenomenon with age exists. I did not detect further hypotheses
that might increase content. I am afraid that at this stage of the
program the only content-increasing explanation for the sudden drop
out of eidetic visualizers older than say fifteen is that this ability is lethal
in adulthood. . . .
The main problem of phenomenological research in eidetic imagery
rests with the last indicators of Lakatos. There is absolutely no
guidance of experimentation by theory. The requirement of the pure
phenomenological approach as applied to eidetic imagery is that it use
"rich" stimuli that might result in lengthy protocols, such as the one
demonstrated in the target article. This requirement precludes the
establishment of a theory or even a model for the phenomenon. As a
result, we are subjected to experimentation that is not guided by any
theory related to visual perception. The discontinuity claims, based,
among other evidence, on factor analytic studies, would hinder such
theorizing even more. The claim itself is an example of logical problems
with the program. Does the discontinuity reflect a typology of children
or a typology of visual experiences within a child?
Now to some positive indications. Stromeyer and Psotka's (1970)
experiment should, in my opinion, serve as the basis for anybody
interested in a theory of visual perception that would also be
constrained by the basic data of the research program of eidetic
imagery. The absolute lack of any demand characteristics, the strong
and unambiguous requirements of the task, the closeness of the
stimulus both for theorizing at the neural level, (e.g. Dev 1975) and for
the meaningful perceptual product it represents when viewed stereo-
scopically, could serve as necessary bases for new progress. As to
the pure phenomenological approach, I would suggest, on the basis of
the review and Lakatos's criteria, that it be abandoned in this domain.
by Martin S. Lindauer
Department of Psychology, State University of New York, College at Brockport,
Brockport, N. Y. 14420
Exorcising the ghosts in the study of eidetic Imagery
Haber's interesting and challenging review of his work on and thinking
about eidetic imagery (El) represents an area in which he has an
obvious intellectual (and personal) investment - despite its lack of
progress. For that reason, his paper is also an implicit call for help in
moving the problem along. It is in the spirit of offering such assistance
that this commentary is written.
Haber is to be applauded for championing the cause of phenome-
nology in a field known for its exquisite dependence on overdesigned,
highly technical, rigorously controlled, and reductionistic procedures;
and in which the Observer (O) is treated as if he or she were nothing
but a passive recording instrument. For Haber, phenomenology is the
essential indicator of El, and, as he insists in the conclusion of his
paper, the basis for its continuing study. Yet it is possible that Haber is
not phenomenological enough.
There is much more his Os could tell us about their El, either under
more naturalistic conditions (i.e., at home) or retrospectively (as could
their parents). Open-ended questions about eidetikers' thoughts and
feelings might be asked on such matters as how often El occurs, the
circumstances of its occurrence, and whether the child feels good or
bad (or anxious) about this ability. Interviews might provide more
information (or leads for more systematic research) than obtainable
under restricted laboratory circumstances. Even there, Haber is not as
phenomenological as he could be. For example, it might be useful to
know if some pictures are better liked or found more interesting than
others; or whether with a choice among stimuli, El would be more
forthcoming. In short, a broader conception of phenomenological
analysis might reveal information about El as a function of the type of
stimulus (including whether or not it was voluntarily chosen), the
viewing circumstances, and the state of O (e.g., whether relaxed or
not).
In addition, I do not think it would be unfair to direct a phenomeno-
logical inquiry to Haber himself, since he is refreshingly candid about
his own phenomenological stake in El. He is genuinely puzzled over the
phenomenon, yet never discloses why he thinks an understanding of El
is essential to a theory of perception. Unless more of a case is made,
I'm afraid the problem of El may well be abandoned, as Haber fears. It
seems as if Haber himself, in his reluctance to carry forth the
phenomenological method to its limits, is plagued by the ghost of
phenomenology.
Reflecting on my own phenomenology, I am troubled by Haber's
definition of El as a visual reconstruction of a memory. This seems to
turn upside down the way in which perception and memory have
traditionally been treated. That is, it is usually memory that is thought of
as a reconstruction of a percept. Haber, like others in the information-
processing movement, has not sufficiently appreciated the difficulty of
placing memory before perception. Returning to the definitional issue, I
do not think there is any real advantage to an overly precise definition
of El at this confused point in our knowledge. To do as Haber does
raises the thorny question of how to distinguish between perception
and memory, and the even more troublesome question of whether
there are different kinds of perceptions ("ordinary" ones and others:
eidetic, aesthetic, analytic, verbalizing, etc.). In keeping with a phenom-
enological perspective, definitions may work against an open mind on
El at this time.
I am also struck by Haber's failure to notice in his own data several
THE BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1979), 2
609

Commentary/Maber: Eidetic imagery
tantalizing hints as to future research directions. Haber reports some
differences between eidetikers (for example, in the ability to shift
images and to see 3-D images), yet he lumps all eidetikers together.
There may indeed be interesting differences between eidetikers.
These, if disentangled, might reveal the kinds of differences between
eidetikers and noneidetikers not otherwise noted (as well as disclose
previously not found correlations).
I also think Haber has too hastily divorced El from photographic
memory and from imagery in general. Haber does not tell us enough
about photographic memory to make as hard a distinction as he does.
For instance, the question of exactly what kind of images those with
photographic memory have, and how they use them, is not discussed.
(I am also more troubled than Haber appears to be about the lack of
accuracy in El reports. Which shows more error anyway: perception or
memory?) Further, one unpublished report by Paivio and Cohen on the
distinction between El and imagery does not seem enough to discount
the possibility of a continuum between the two. In my own work
(Lindauer 1969, 1972), interviews with vivid imagizers (adults) strongly
indicated to me at least that they were seeing an image. There are
many parallels between El and imagery, for example, the dependence
on self-reports, the absence of functional relationships (Lindauer
1977). Thus, I suspect Haber may be losing more than he is gaining by
considering El to be so unique a phenomenon. I would hypothesize that
were he to compare eidetikers with good imagizers, rather than with
randomly drawn noneidetikers, he would find less of a difference
between them, if any, than he reports from other comparisons. I would
also like to see Haber follow up on his use of perceptual tasks (e.g.,
the decomposed stimulus, and reversible figures). To the extent that Ei
acts like a perception - ambiguous figures shift in their figural saliency,
and prolonged inspection results in satiation effects - the possibility
exists that El is more perceptual than mnemonic.
In closing, I would point out two oversights in Haber's research
program. The first is the neglect of El in modes other than the visual.
There seems to be no inherent reason why eidetikers would not be
found in auditory or tactile modes. The second is the scarcity of
experimental paradigms, and instead, the favoring of the study of
individual differences and the use of correlational designs. Given the
beautifully described abilities of eidetikers, can we not make predic-
tions about their performance on subsequent tasks? May we ask
Haber to use his phenomenology to predict, for example, how eideti-
kers would do on visual versus verbal tasks; would they be field
dependents or independents on the hidden figure task; would the
autokinetic effect show more variability; and finally, would their thresh-
olds for the detection of subliminal stimuli be lowered (as they keep the
image in mind and fail to notice its absence in the stimulus field)?
Haber is too good a scientist to give up the ghost when so many
researchable questions still remain.
by Dawid Marks
Department of Psychology, University of Otago, Dunedin, New Zealand
Eidetic imagery: Haber's ghost and Hatakeyama's
ghoyS
Dr. Haber's review of eidetic imagery is an important resume of current
fact and fiction concerning this mysterious phenomenon. As one who
has long believed in the need for more intensive and rigorous study of
phenomenological indicators of imagery, perception, and memory
(following in the footsteps of my mentor and colleague Peter McKellar)
I give wholehearted support to Haber's plea for more, instead of less,
research into the nature and contents of mental experiences as
reported by the subject. A substantial amount of research in this area
indicates that verbal reports of conscious imagery experience provide
reliable and valid indicators of functional, cognitive activity. This
evidence, mostly collected by a group of psychologists working in New
Zealand and Australia (McKellar 1977; Marks 1977; Sheehan 1972;
Richardson 1969) suggests that verbal reports of imagery experience
enable strong predictions to be made about objectively measured
performance, going well beyond what is possible without reference to
those verbal reports.
Preliminary work in our laboratory based on reports by a Japanese
researcher (Hatakeyama 1974, 1975) using a phenomenological
approach has revealed important and fascinating properties of the
eidetic process that would pass unnoticed using other so-called more
objective procedures. To Haber's haunting by the eidetic ghost we
must now add a ghoulish presence revealed by Hatakeyama. The
question is, are Haber's ghost and Hatakeyama's ghoul one and the
same?
Experiments conducted by Doris Mcllwain and myself support earlier
work by Allport (1924) and Kluver (1932), and more recently by
Hatakeyama (1974, 1975), in showing that eidetic images are essen-
tially autonomous and flexible perceptuallike constructions of a central,
cognitive mechanism rather than peripheral copies or reproductions of
recent stimulus input. Important properties of the eidetic process are
missing from the description implied by the list of defining criteria
offered by Haber, although to be fair, Haber concludes his discussion
with a constructive concept of eidetic imagery not dissimilar to the
definition given here. The point is, though, are we looking in the right
places for the ghost that haunts us?
A good technique for the examination of the autonomous, construc-
tive nature of eidetic imagery is the "Open Circle" test used by
Hatakeyama (1975). A circle, five centimetres in diameter, on white
paper, is placed in front of the subject at a comfortable viewing
distance (30 to 45 cm.). The subject is instructed to gaze at the centre
of the circle and is told that the experimenter will say the name of a
color to him. He then tries to imagine the suggested color inside the
circle, and if any color, image, or shape appears, he reports such an
appearance. If it changes into anything else, the subject tells the
experimenter as it is happening and taps the desk each time the image
changes. Several color suggestions are tested in turn, with a minimum
of two minutes allowed for each. In our research we have found it highly
informative to have the subject draw any emergent images as accu-
rately as possible at the end of each trial.
In one study we compared the "Open Circle" test performance of
three adult eidetikers, selected on the basis of Haber's criteria, to that
of a control group of sixteen noneidetikers. In addition to meeting
Haber's criteria, the three eidetic subjects reported vivid, definite
images to four or more of the six suggested colors while the control
group produced an average of less than one. There was no overlap
between the eidetikers and controls on any measure of the responses
obtained, and responses reported by control subjects were always
faint or pale in comparison to the strong color reports from the eidetic
group.
Perhaps more striking than reports of color responses are the actual
images themselves which in all respects show qualitative and quantita-
tive differences between eidetikers and controls. Eidetikers report
significantly more emergent form, more changes in form, more move-
ment, and their images last five to twenty times longer. Typical
examples of autonomous imagery, elicited by one of our eidetikers
(K.L.) to the suggestion "red," are shown in Figure 1A, as drawn by
the subject herself. Figure 1B shows her responses to the same test
two years previously.
The sequence of transitions in the latter case was cyclical, as the
image metamorphosized through several stages and then cycled
through the same sequence again for as long as the subject concen-
trated (over three minutes). She reported that she could make the
cycles go as fast or as slowly as she liked, but she could not alter the
particular images or the progression of changes.
The emergent forms reported are not always simple or recogniz-
able. Yet there seems to be a discernible "nucleus" around which the
image sequence develops. Such nuclei usually develop in a natural
progression in keeping with Allport's assertion that in eidetic imagery
"the range of flexibility is very great indeed, but it does not extend to
include the ridiculous or unnatural" (Allport 1924, p. 110. see also
Ahsen 1977).
Striking three-dimensional emergent forms may also occur, such as
"an orange with pitted, textured skin and a green stalk," or "a pair of
velvet trousers" reported as "rising up from the surface" of the
projection card.
Note that our subjects were all university students, of high intelli-
610
THE BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1979), 2

Commentary/Haber: Eidetic imagery
5th/10th 
1st
6 t h
1st
moving
white 
2nd
slightly
darker red
pink-layered
yellow centre 
pink
4 / 
petals
yellow
pink
yellow
pink
A.
B.
Figure 1 (Marks). A: A sequence of eidetic images produced by subject K.L. to the color suggestion "red." B: A sequence produced
by the same subject two years previously to the same color suggestion. Note that in this instance the imagery progressed, and then cycled through
a sequence similar to that given in A. (Artwork by Judith Economos.)
gence and normal mental health, not hallucinating psychotics, and the
only stimulus for these reports was a circle on white paper and a
suggested color.
Spontaneous occurrences of autonomous eidetic images in the
absence of suggestion are also quite common. One of our eidetikers
reported the spontaneous appearance between two trials of the
experiment of "a bishop's head and shoulders," which the subject
described in the present tense in great detail as his eyes scanned the
blank easel in front of him. This image lasted for 266 seconds. No
movement was evident in this image, which was achromatic in tone.
Mcllwain (1978) reports:
At first the subject thought it adhered to the "ground" and would not
be on the other side of the card, but when the experimenter turned
the card over to test this, the image remained. It was rapidly
replaced by a second image of two men-one in Elizabethan garb
with an elaborate ruffle around his neck. The man in the background
carried a large cross. The subject could report details of the location
of the men and of the background terrain.
Other examples of autonomous eidetic imagery can be found in
Hatakeyama's (1975) study of Y.K. and in the earlier studies of Allport
(1924), Kluver (1964), and others.
While our own research has been based on a relatively small
number of adult eidetikers, it suggests a strong relation between
eidetic ability as defined by Haber's list of criteria and imagery of a
radically different nature as reported above and by Hatakeyama
(1975). Eidetic images may have peripheral or central origins, and the
emergent form seems to represent a dynamic interrelation between
these two sets of factors. Nuclear progression, fading, changes in
color, position, size, direction, and dimensionality indicate a highly
organized, fluid, and mysterious process.
If further research verifies our preliminary data on the content of
eidetic imagery, it will prove necessary to expand the currently
accepted list of criteria that define eidetic ability. Our studies suggest
that eidetic images based on visual picture stimuli are but one
manifestation of a far broader and more interesting phenomenon.
Autonomous flexibility is a major property of eidetic phenomena, and
this fact necessitates a reexamination of the whole area, which
remains poorly understood and neglected.
Of Haber's original list of eight criteria for eidetic imagery only six
now appear to have empirical support: image reported, in the present
tense, in front of the eyes, of substantial duration, the eyes having
moved over the stimulus (if there was one), and also over the image.
We believe that the reason the two other indicators originally proposed
by Haber (greater recall accuracy and the ability to form composites)
THE BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1979), 2
611

Commentary/Haber: Eidetic imagery
do not reliably occur is that the basic nature of eidetic images is
constructive and flexible, not reproductive. Eidetic images are autono-
mous and dynamic, subject to centrally controlled nuclear progres-
sions, not remnants or revivals of stimulus input at a peripheral level.
The ghost is also a ghoul.
With Haber I believe the phenomenology of eidetic imagery provides
a fascinating study, alive with possibilities, which will continue to haunt
us for many years to come.
by Joiin O- Merritt
Human Factors Research, Inc. Goleta, Calif. 93017
None In a million: results of mass screening for eidetic
ability using objectiwe tests published in newspapers
and magazines
The extraordinarily eidetic subject reported by Stromeyer and Psotka
(1970) was discovered quite by accident, and in effect, she discovered
herself when she overheard Stromeyer talking with a colleague about
Haber's recent research, and said, "I think I can do that." She was not
only able to pass all of the criteria suggested by Haber, but far
surpassed any previously reported eidetic abilities. Her nearly
complete control over highly accurate and detailed images permitted a
long series of experiments using methodology from standard psycho-
physical research.
The general approach was an extension of the "composite forma-
tion" method described by Haber, but requiring highly detailed and
"photographic" eidetic imagery. I became involved as a colleague in
t n e s e experiments as the other half of the double-blind presentation of
random-dot stereograms. Subsequently, we realized that these excit-
ing initial results would have to be replicated with other subjects in
order to make any general or theoretical inferences about the possible
mechanisms by which our individual subject was able to accomplish
these feats. After being unable to locate other such subjects on
campus, we turned to advertisements in the newspapers, again without
success. With the idea that eidetic talent sufficiently developed for our
experimental procedures must be extremely rare, we published several
articles in the popular press (e.g. McBroom 1970; Stromeyer 1970;
anonymous 1971; Davy 1971; Ford 1972; Merritt 1973) complete with
self-tests for the kind of eidetic ability we hoped to find. Figures 1 and 2
are typical of the tests used; specific instructions for self-testing are
contained in the caption of Figure 1. Although our first subject could
perform all of our tests with ease, we failed to find even one other
subject, out of the millions exposed to the self-tests, who could actually
perform in our presence.
About thirty adults and children correctly responded to the various
Figure 1 (Merritt). Self-testing instructions that accompanied articles in
the popular press: "Carefully examine the dot pattern for several
minutes. Move your gaze about to inspect all details. Do not stare at
one point. Shut your eyes and try to recall an image of the pattern. If
you can build up a good image, turn to the next page and superimpose
your eidetic image on the dot pattern at the top. Make the rectangular
borders coincide exactly. Do you see any numbers or letters? Each
pattern alone is a random array of dots, but when one is superimposed
on the other, very clear figures will appear." Reprinted with permission
of John Merritt.
Figure 2 (Merritt).
articles and textbook presentations of the self-tests, but when retested
in our presence, none was able to perform any test, including the
original self-tests (for which they knew the answers). We do not know
how to interpret this failure to perform in our presence the same tests
for which they were able to give correct answers when originally
reading the article in the newspaper or magazine. It is unlikely that
many of the subjects were deliberately constructing an elaborate hoax
simply as a means of meeting a real Harvard psychologist in person,
although in some cases this seemed to be the motivation. (A
sufficiently knowledgeable individual could, with the aid of tracing
paper or a copy machine, discover the correct answers to these
self-tests; it is our conservative opinion, however, that fraud was very
unlikely in most of the cases in which earnest and naive subjects did
their best to duplicate their originally successful performance with the
self-tests, but failed in our presence.) It could be that our presence
simply produced too much motivation and degraded performance of
what must for most eidetikers be a very delicate mental achievement.
We simply failed to find anyone who could duplicate in any way the
achievements of our first eidetic subject, and we can draw no useful
conclusions from this negative result.
It does seem important to describe this negative result, however,
since it involved the screening of millions of readers, as the sample of
references cited earlier suggests. Each of the articles contained at
least two self-tests, and instructions for reporting the results to this
commentator at Harvard's psychology department. As noted above,
about thirty people sent in the correct answers, but those we were able
to test in person (about fifteen subjects in the Philadelphia area)
uniformly failed to pass any objective tests. Stromeyer and I drove to
Rochester to test one of Haber's best subjects (the girl who could
move images about freely, even changing size and turning them over).
She, too, was unable to pass any of our more stringent objective
tests.
by Ulric Neisser
Department of Psychology, Cornell University, Ithaca, N.Y. 14853
Tracing eidetic imagery
I can find nothing to disagree with in Haber's thoughtful review. Instead,
I will use this space for two other purposes: to report an interesting
observation made on one eidetiker at Cornell and to indicate why the
notion of a continuum of imagery seems less attractive now than it was
a decade ago.
In 1974 Jean Dirks discovered a twelve-year-old eidetiker among
the subjects of an experiment on the development of recognition
memory (Dirks and Neisser 1977). B was a pleasant, mildly retarded
girl (she couldn't read) who attended a special school in Ithaca, N.Y.
She met all the Haber criteria, and her phenomenal reports of "still
seeing" the pictures were utterly convincing. Dirks has reported most
of the findings with B elsewhere (Dirks 1978); nothing in them suggests
that she was much different from other eidetic children. One additional
test is worth describing here, however, because the technique may be
useful to others. It is an image-tracing procedure [cf. Jaynes, this
commentary] that we adapted from a suggestion by Dr. Elsa Siipola
[8.v.] of Smith College. It included three steps. (1) We gave B a colorful
612
THE BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1979), 2

Commentary/Haber: Eidetic imagery
picture of an elephant, with a piece of tracing paper superimposed on
it, and asked her to trace the outline of the elephant with a pencil. She
had no difficulty in making an accurate tracing. (2) We put the elephant
picture on the table and aksed B to copy it on a separate piece of
paper. The result was a stereotyped drawing of the kind that children
often produce. (3) We had B form an eidetic image of the same
picture, slide it down from the vertical screen onto a piece of blank
paper (we had previously ascertained that this was possible), and then
"trace around the image" with a pencil. She complied with this request
cheerfully, as if what we were asking was an easy and natural thing to
do. The outcome was clear. The "tracing" B made from her image
was very similar to the drawing she had made in step (2); it was not at
all like the actual tracing in step (1).
The results of the tracing test suggest that B's image was a
construct rather than a copy; more like something she was making
than something she was seeing. Thus it is consistent with the view of
imagery as a constructive process that I suggested in Cognitive
Psychology (Neisser 1967). In that volume I treated imagining and
perceiving as very similar activities, both being "constructive." I have
more recently had second thoughts about perception, which seems
better described as the pickup of information guided by anticipatory
schemata (Neisser 1976). On that view images can be treated as
unfulfilled perceptual anticipations (Neisser 1976, 1978a, 1978b); as
"constructs" of a particular kind with a particular role to play in normal
perceptual acitivty. This hypothesis can successfully account for many
of the imagery effects that have been observed in the laboratory;
mental rotation, imagery mnemonics, perceptual set, and the like. If I
were to maintain the continuum position, I would have to argue that B's
eidetic images also represented some sort of perceptual readiness.
Such an argument could be made (her anticipations were evidently not
very specific), but I am not much inclined to make it. Eidetic imagery is
obviously different from what college-student subjects do in standard
experiments: why should we try to explain both with a single principle?
The notion that eidetic phenomena are on a continuum with "other
kinds of imagery" makes less and less sense as we discover that
those other kinds themselves are painfully diverse. Recent correla-
tional studies have made this obvious. Self-rating measures of imagery
correlate only moderately even among themselves, and hardly at all
with measures of spatial abilities (White, Sheehan, and Ashton 1977;
Ernest 1977). Lorraine Bahrick recently reconfirmed this in a study at
Cornell: she tested twenty-four subjects on mental rotation, the Space
Relations test, the Betts scale, Marks's VVIQ, Slee's VES, visual recall,
visual recognition, and Brooks's visual/verbal interference task. Factor
analysis suggested the possible presence of a spatial factor, a
self-rating factor, and other less easily interpretable components;
basically most of the correlations were just low. McGee (1979) has
recently reviewed literature that suggests the existence of two different
factors in the spatial domain alone. It is noteworthy that these
indications of wide diversity have appeared even though many types of
imagery have not even been included in the parametric studies. If we
knew more about hypnagogic imagery, recurrent imagery (like that
many people experience after repetitive visual experiences), dream
imagery, and the like, they would certainly complicate the picture
further. In the long run "imagery" seems likely to go the way of
"personality": instead of a consistent core we will find different
processes being used in different situations and described introspec-
tively in different ways. It would be a mistake, then, to generalize too
readily about eidetikers. Eidetic imagery is a real, special, remarkable
phenomenon that we will just have to study in its own right until we
understand it.
by Alan Richardson
Department of Psychology, University of Western Australia, Nedlands, W.A. 6009,
Australia
Eidetic imagery, occipital EEG activity, and paiinopsla
The evidence for a perceptlike experience of the kind so clearly
described by Ralph Haber is overwhelming. Its phenomenal character-
istics and the usual conditions of its emergence into awareness are
qualitatively different from those of the afterimage, the memory image,
and the imagination image. The primary distinguishing quality of an
eidetic image is that it can be seen, out there, as if the original stimulus
on which it is based were still present. However, this image is seldom, if
ever, an exact copy, and it is usually assumed that, as with all other
memory phenomena, some process of reconstruction is involved.
Almost all investigators have testified to its existence, and yet all are
uncertain as to its presumed adaptive function(s), the range and
significance of its manifestations in different individuals, and its gross
neurophysiological correlates and "causes." While agreeing in general
with almost everything written in Haber's target article, I will say a few
words on research possibilities both old and new.
Because eidetic imagery stands alone, with nothing to which it can
be consistently linked, it is probably a more fruitful policy, at the
present time, to encourage all forms of prospecting rather than to imply
that certain veins may have been worked out, as, for example, "There
is no evidence to support any version of a developmental hypothesis."
The language of "no" and "any" is too strong for the present.
Gold is sometimes found even in areas where previous digging has
been intensive and unproductive. What we are looking for is too
valuable to abandon any approach that might still lead to our goal.
Perhaps the developmental hypothesis is still capable of giving direc-
tion to eidetic research. What may be needed is a new method of
testing it.
One such method is suggested by the finding that eidetic imagery in
one adult (Pollen and Trachtenberg 1972) and in four children (Furst,
Gardner, and Kamiya 1974), is associated with high amplitude occipital
alpha activity. If these results receive further confirmation, it is possible
to envisage the study of eideticism from the first year of a child's life.
By using current methods for the investigation of visual perception in
young babies it would be possible to monitor EEG alpha activity during
the inspection phase of looking at an object and subsequently when
the object is removed. If a high level of occipital alphas were to be
found, it might be inferred, tentatively, that an eidetic image had been
present.
The incidence of this inferred eideticism could be determined, and a
sample of babies followed through into late childhood. The parents of
babies identified as having eidetic imagery could be encouraged to
note instances of behaviour that might be interpreted as having an
eidetic component. One such instance was reported by Harry Helson
(1933) whose four-year-old son had said, "Do you know, daddy, I can
see pictures on the wall in here if I look at it and think." When asked if
he could see them outside or at night he replied, "No, not outside and
not when it's dark. Only when it's not too light or too dark, only when
it's just right."
Good evidence exists that weak memory imagery can be made
more vivid by training (Walsh, White, and Ashton 1978). Large individ-
ual differences have been noted in the vividness, completeness,
controllability, colour, duration, and course of eidetic imagery, but little
is known about the way in which any of these characteristics might be
changed or strengthened. A beginning might be made by recording the
eye movement patterns of those who have strong and weak forms of
some eidetic characteristic. If discriminable patterns could be found,
they could provide the kind of information and understanding from
which rational training programmes could be developed.
Last, a word on brain injury and eideticism. While it is unlikely to be a
necessary condition for the production of eidetic imagery, the possibil-
ity that some form of injury may be a sufficient condition should not be
ruled out. Quite apart from the recurrence of the eidetic/brain-injury
theme in the psychological literature, an accumulation of reports on a
comparable phenomenon (palinopsia) exists in the neurological litera-
ture. Bender, Feldman, and Sobin (1968) define palinopsia as "the
persistence or recurrence of visual images after the exciting stimulus
object has been removed." Meadows and Munro (1977) remark that
"the mechanism underlying palinopsia is unknown" but then go on to
state that "right-sided lesions cause palinopsia more commonly than
left-sided ones." A search for palinopsic patients who would be
prepared to undergo an eidetic testing programme might prove to be
especially rewarding. Such a search is currently underway, with the aim
of establishing whether or not palinopsic patients are eidetic in terms of
Haber's criteria.
THE BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1979), 2
613

Commentary/H^ber: Eidetic imagery
by Cf nthia Roberts-Gray
Perceptronics, Monterey Operations, Presidio of Monterey, Calif. 93940
The wisualizatlon continuum
Haber's proposal that the concept of visualization is the key to
understanding visual imagery is intriguing. There is great appeal in his
assertion that the purpose of studying eidetic imagery is to understand
and explain how "some memory representations can be visual." In this
framework his arguments persuaded me away from my original posi-
tion (Gray and Gummerman 1975) that "vividness" is the feature that
distinguishes eidetic from other types of visual memory imagery.
Haber's emphasis on visualization in distinction to vividness or fidelity
suggested to me that research should be focused on imagery as a
mode of representation; that is, one should focus on the functional
rather than the structural aspects of imaging. "Vividness" and "con-
creteness" are structural dimensions. "Visualization" sounds like a
process or functional dimension. Indeed, Haber speaks briefly to the
"functional role of visual imagery in memory" and to the "functional
significance" of eidetic imagery per se. A functional perspective for the
study of eidetic imagery is most attractive. It suggests that researchers
could leave off asking who the eidetikers are or what the eidetic image
is like and begin instead to ask what the eidetiker can do with the
eidetic image. But Haber dismisses the functional perspective by
pointing out that no correlates (except age) have been discovered for
eidetic imagery. Perhaps I misunderstood Haber's intent in emphasiz-
ing visualization.
He says that visualization is a continuum and that it is this continuum
that we need to study and understand. But he puts his major effort into
convincing his reader that eidetic imagery is "distinct from normal
perception," that it is a "kind o f . . . imagery different from that of other
children, and from virtually all adults," and that it "stands alone." The
implication of this argument is that the visualization continuum is not
really a continuum at all, or that eidetic images are the only images that
occur on the visualization continuum. This interpretation seems
confirmed by Haber's statements that the criteria for scoring images as
eidetic "differentiate eidetic imagery from . . . memory" and "specify
visual memory as distinct from some nonvisual memorial process."
Such reasoning denies the whole impressive literature which illustrates
that persons without eidetic abilities are capable of visualizing. Brooks
(1967), for example, has demonstrated that problem solving that
requires visualization of an unseen block design is more difficult when
the problem is presented in written rather than oral form. Perky's
(1910) classic work demonstrated that normal adults can and do
confuse objective visual stimulation with the products of their own
efforts at visualization. Sheehan (1966) has shown that adults can use
a slide projector to create objective matches for the images they are
visualizing as memory images of a previous slide presentation. Thus it
is not necessary, as Haber implies, to infer that noneidetic people
visualize. There are numerous data sources to show that eidetikers are
not the only people whose memory representations can be visual.
If we are to maintain that the study of eidetic imagery is going to
enlighten us about the "continuum of visualization," we must conclude
that eidetic imagery is a form of whatever else is represented on the
continuum. We cannot isolate it as a phenomenon distinct from other
forms of visual imagery. Furthermore, if we are to conceptualize a
continuum for study, we need a conceptual scale with which to identify
points on that continuum. I am now convinced that we should disallow
vividness as the conceptual scale for differentiating eidetic images
from other forms on the continuum. Haber has not, however, described
any alternative. It is possible that when we have, as Haber suggests,
learned more about the components and content of the images and
the conditions and stimuli that produce and terminate them, we will
discover the conceptual scale(s) that will help us to understand and
explain the continuum of visualization. But it seems to me that a very
large amount of time and research has already been devoted to
describing the contents and conditions of eidetic imagery. Allport's
(1924, 1928) and Kluver's (1925, 1931) work is particularly important
in this respect.
As an alternative, therefore, I would propose that a direction for
future work might be to take up the functional approach, which I
thought Haber was going to suggest. I think we should focus on
visualization as a mode of representation and study eidetic imagery as
a specific point on that functional continuum. A likely measure for
scaling the continuum would be the frequency with which visualization
is exercised as the preferred mode for representing information for
further processing. Haber says that "it appears as if eidetic children
have two modes of processing visual stimuli: a visual mode, which
leads to a visual image, and a verbal rehearsal mode, which blocks the
image, though it probably aids verbal memory." It is tempting to
rephrase the first clause to make it read, "a visual rehearsal mode
which aids visual memory.'1 Research questions might then be framed
to determine what circumstances elicit one mode of rehearsal rather
than another.
It seems obvious that a task that requires the person to provide a list
or narrative composed of verbal labels to describe the contents of a
visual stimulus would ordinarly drive the individual to choose the verbal
rehearsal mode. Since this is the type of task employed in the standard
imagery research procedure, it is not surprising to find that Haber
proposes to abandon the "memory-based" criteria for scoring images
as eidetic. But surely there are tasks that could drive the individual to a
visual rehearsal mode. Sequential hue or shape discriminations may be
examples of such a task. Do eidetikers perform better in such tasks?
Or is it simply that they are individuals who prefer the visual rehearsal
mode unless forced into a verbal rehearsal mode? The essential
question is one about function: are eidetikers able to do special things
with their images? Or are their images different from those of other
children and adults by virtue of the frequency with which visualization is
selected as the mode of memory representation?
While I can agree with Haber's comment that perceptual research-
ers should not try to circumvent phenomenological indicators of
perception, I cannot agree that a greater emphasis on phenomenologi-
cal indicators is the most fruitful approach for future study of eidetic
imagery. Instead of asking yet more questions about the components,
contents, and conditions of eidetic imagery, the time has come for
asking questions about the functions of visualization.
by Paul A. Roodin and Erol F* Giray
Department of Psychology, State University of New York at Oswego, Oswego, New
York 13126
Eidetic imagery is not a ghost
A number of useful conclusions are found in Haber's careful update of
eidetic imagery research. Perhaps the most significant is that eidetic
imagery exists as a distinct phenomenon separate from other forms of
nonvisual memory and afterimages. Interestingly, this conclusion has
been arrived at after a review of much of the same general data cited
by Gray and Gummerman in 1975. Unlike Haber's current synthesis,
however, Gray and Gummerman suggested that eidetic imagery is
nothing more than the upper limit of traditional perceptual-memorial
processing strategies, that is, a matter of a quantitative not a qualita-
tive distinction.
From our own research on the process of eidetic imagery, it seems
clear that we are in support of the conclusion developed from the data
by Haber. Eidetic imagery is neither "enigmatic" nor the simple additive
extension of traditional visual-imagery processes (e.g. quantitative
ones) as suggested earlier by Gray and Gummerman (1975). With the
criteria originally outlined by Haber and Haber (1964) one can easily
identify subjects whose performance on eidetic imagery tasks is
qualitatively different from that of others who do not possess this
ability. Eidetic imagery is not a matter of degree. As Haber has once
again illustrated, these subjects, although by no means common,
satisfy all of the criteria in response to all test stimuli while noneidetic
subjects rarely meet any of these criteria in a systematic fashion. We
have found in our own studies that subjects consistently represent two
distinctly bimodal populations with no overlapping of subjects. Eidetic
imagery is an "all-or-none" phenomenon and such subjects are clearly
discontinuous in a qualitative, empirical, and statistical sense from
those who do not show evidence of this ability. On this issue we could
614
THE BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1979), 2

Commentary/Haber: Eidetic imagery
not be more in agreement with Haber.
Eidetic imagery and development The conclusion that eidetic
imagery is unrelated to development seems a bit premature. Although
significant improvements and much-needed modification in the
measurement of eidetic imagery have occurred, the "developmental
hypothesis" has remained essentially unchanged and accepted uncriti-
cally for over sixty years. This hypothesis needs to be examined
closely to see, for example, that an extremely simplistic model of
development has been implicitly assumed: a decrement model. That is,
at one stage of development a "primitive" strategy or processing
mode is present while at a second stage of development this strategy
is said to be absent. Such an inverse relationship can be identified
nominally in some research, but perhaps the lack of additional general
support stems from a far too narrow and limited conceptualization of
development.
Recent theorists suggest that development is multilinear and encom-
passes the entire life span (Baltes and Willis 1977; Chandler 1976).
Thus development may reflect processes that reflect incremental,
decremental, and a host of curvilinear relations (e.g. U-shaped and
inverted U-shaped functions). Even the meaning of stages in recent
theory [see Brainerd: BBS 1(2) 1978] suggests a heightened aware-
ness of a broader and more complex definition of development and
developmental processes. Some suggest a less absolute or static view
of stages and advocate a more dynamic, relativistic, and equilibrium-
based model (Flavell 1971). Thus, in considering the relation of eidetic
imagery to development, several reformulations and new perspectives
need to be addressed. First, there is no necessary reason to postulate
that eidetic abilities must be supplanted by more advanced processing
abilities: coexistence of both primitive and advanced abilities or states
is a fact of modern theories of development. Second, if some develop-
mental processes are represented by curvilinear relations, then tests of
the relation between eidetic imagery and development need to be
extended systematically beyond the years of childhood, especially to
old age. In order to conclude that eidetic imagery and development are
unrelated, the full range of potential variance of this relationship needs
to be explored (e.g. life-span developmental research). Our initial
foray into this area (Giray, Altkin, Roodin, Yoon, and Flagg 1978)
offers tentative support for the logic of extending this search across
the life span since eidetic imagery did appear with increasing frequency
among the aged (70-95 years of age).
Eidetic imagery and neurological 
development It is difficult
to accept Haber's contention that attempts to link eidetic imagery and
neurological development or pathology will prove fruitless. One of
Haber's major criticisms of this approach is the lack of a consistent set
of data linking eidetic imagery and neurological development or
pathology. Surely the problem lies in the methodology employed by
past investigators who have defined categories of neurological pathol-
ogy in rather global fashion and searched for rather unspecified links,
often reporting fortuitous positive results. Such generally defined
categories can only add error variance, and as Haber correctly notes
there is a great deal of inconsistency among the studies in this area in
terms of trends, percentages, and support for the relation between
eidetic imagery and neurological pathology or development. This
speaks to a problem in method not in theory. In fact, the possibility that
eidetic imagery is related to neurological pathology or development
appears to be the only "new" viewpoint presented in Haber's review.
While the search for relations between eidetic imagery and other more
mature forms of processing has proved unsuccessful, there appears
enough suggestive evidence that neurological studies of this ability are
a very worthwhile way to proceed. Just as the "developmental
hypothesis" needs further specification and delineation prior to addi-
tional testing, we suggest that a careful rationale be developed for
those investigators who continue to search for relationships between
eidetic imagery and neurological pathology or development. The
perpetuation of research in this area without such a rationale or plan
seems pointless. We need to think about why the continued postnatal
development of the central nervous system might lead to the appear-
ance, suppression, elimination, or reemergence in later life of eidetic
abilities.
by Peter W. Sheehan
Department of Psychology, University of Queensland, St. Lucia, Old. 4067,
Australia
Eidetic imagery: continuing to be an enigmatic
phenomenon
The phenomenon of eidetic imagery is haunting not because we should
look upon it as a ghost that ought to be exorcised, but rather because
we need to know more about it to be able to live with its idiosyncrasies.
The study of eidetic imagery among school children over a ten-year
period by Haber and his associates (Leask, Haber, and Haber 1969) is
a classic in the imagery literature, and Haber remains one of the most
experienced testers of eidetic imagery that we have in psychology
today. The essential enigma of the phenomenon is that the search for
its correlates has been decidedly unrewarding, and our conviction as
to the reality of the phenomenon basically remains tied to our faith in
subjective report. As Hebb (1968) suggests, to the skeptic eidetic
imagery sounds like an image that has got stuck to the viewing surface.
Yet the reports of eidetic subjects are peculiarly compelling; one
cannot fail to be impressed, for instance, as the imager talks of the
picture he or she is seeing falling off the edge of the easel, or of this or
that detail occurring in the upper left-hand side of the picture that exists
"out there."
It is true as Haber argues that the procedures of many contemporary
investigators of memory imagery tell us virtually nothing about the
phenomenology of visual imagery and even less about the individual
differences that accompany such subjective states. But, on the other
hand, the study of eidetic imagery lacks the methodological rigor
associated with much of the research into other forms of mental
imagery. Objective test procedures and equipment can determine, for
example, if the eyes are actually scanning the stimulus and also the
eidetic image that the subject reports, but such measurement is rarely
adopted, and investigators ultimately come to trust in what their
subjects say.
Recognizing the problems of proceeding on the basis of phenome-
nological criteria for arguing the reality of eidetic imagery, Haber
carefully attempts to discount alternative hypotheses about why
subjects report as they do. Eidetic imagery, for example, must be
distinguished from simple remembering, and it must not be explainable
in terms of the demand characteristics associated with the test
situation. The strength of his position lies basically in the extent to
which the evidence for the reality of eidetic imagery converges and the
degree to which standard test procedures for investigating the
phenomenon yield stability of imagery classification. No small part of
the frustration experienced by the investigator in this field is the fact
that attempts to be objective - such as using the composite picture
test - are frequently rendered invalid because the test conflicts with
the experience of subjects. Subjects, for example, may have trouble in
aligning mental pictures, or their imagery may be too fragmentary for
the task at hand.
The methodological demands of eidetic imagery research are
challenging, and this provocative paper tends somewhat to underesti-
mate them. As eidetic imagery is a memorial phenomenon, yet one that
is distinct from memory imagery and remembering without imagery, the
investigator must be able to discriminate confabulation in the subject's
report. The statement that the clock "is probably a grandfather clock,"
for exarripie, offers a comment about an experience. Procedures, then,
must separate the experience itself from any elaboration of the
experience as reported. A problem also exists when parts of the
original picture that is imaged eidetically remain in view while other
parts do not. This shift from one category of response to another
requires test procedures that are sensitive enough to reliably separate
seeing a picture from remembering one. Perhaps the largest threat to
the phenomenon, however, comes from the criticism that eidetic
subjects may be reporting an externally projected image because they
are strongly cued to do so. This potential criticism is a major one when
it is recognised that Haber focuses on the report of seeing the image
externally as the critical criterion for asserting the reality of the
phenomenon. When the subject is told to continue to look at the easel,
THE BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1979), 2
615

Commentary/Haber: Eidetic imagery
for example, and to tell the investigator whatever he still sees, the
demand characteristics for "external" report are especially obvious.
Similarly, procedures that play an important part in familiarizing
subjects with the broad concerns of the study (e.g., those that test
initially for negative afterimages) themselves serve to accentuate the
very response that is the defining criterion. Other measures said to
differentiate eidetic imagery raise the possibility of related sources of
artifact. Use of the present tense, for example, may serve to partially
validate the distinction between current perception and memory of
prior perception but may, on the other hand, simply reflect the most
obvious and consistent way for subjects to describe something that
they are mistakenly reporting as "out there."
The most provocative aspect of the study of eidetic imagery relates
to the question of its theoretical significance. Haber argues forcibly
against the view that eidetic imagery represents an offshoot from an
early developmental stage or that it is a suggestibility phenomenon; he
asserts that eidetic imagery is visual in nature and should be consid-
ered independent from nonvisual memory. The discontinuity in its
classification tempts Haber to conclude that eidetic imagery is a
qualitatively different kind of memory representation from any other
kind, and distinct from normal perception. Factor analytic work offers
encourating support for this point of view, but Haber relies heavily on
the evidence he has gathered to suggest that eidetic imagery is
unrelated to lack of symbolic skills or education and that it is actually
quite stable over the relatively long period that he has studied. In
evaluating the data collected from neurological studies, case studies,
and cross-cultural research, he also relies heavily on the assumption
that the inconsistencies in the literature represent variations due to the
fact that investigators don't apply all of the criteria, and the inability of
subjects to understand the test procedures that have been adopted.
The fact is, however, that some of that variability suggests the
influence of complex mediational factors.
In this commentator's own work (Sheehan 1973), for instance,
regularity of eidetic imagery function has been argued on the grounds
of within-group consistency of data and the uniform way in which the
phenomenon manifests itself for particular groups of subjects, the data
suggesting that the observable variability across different testing
groups is not necessarily erratic but meaningfully related to specific
factors operating within the groups that are investigated. The available
data don't entirely support Haber's interpretation of the meaning of
eidetic imagery, any more than they lead us to endorse Gray and
Gummerman's (1975) alternative hypothesis that eidetic imagery is
different in degree rather than kind and represents the vividness of the
visualization component in memory. Finally, Haber's emphasis on the
stability of eidetic imagery over time represents an especially puzzling
aspect of his case. We aren't told, for instance, what turns a stable
occurrence among children into a rare phenomenon among adults.
The strength of the evidence on eidetic imagery essentially appears
to lie in the extent to which it points to the differentiation of eidetic
imagery from other types of mental functioning. Eidetic imagery, for
instance, is not just another kind of visual persistence, and it bears little
resemblance to afterimagery or other such manifestations of persis-
tence. It is true that if we simply take phenomenologica! report, many
aspects of eidetic imagery are similar to other kinds of imagery, but
data on eye movements appear to firmly differentiate eidetic imagery
as a distinctive phenomenon. Eye movements, for example, lead to
reported instability of the afterimage, but not of the eidetic image; and
that finding remains difficult to explain on the basis of demand
characteristics, or common mechanisms said to be operating for the
two kinds of imagery.
Clearly, the enigmatic nature of eidetic imagery can only be resolved
by future research. Search for the correlates must continue, though it
would appear that we need to address ourselves not just to one
correlate (level of education) versus another (age), but to the influence
of correlates considered jointly, so that their mutual contribution can be
assessed. Haber is very probably right when he argues that research
should address the conditions and stimuli that produce and terminate
the phenomenon. Strategies of this kind are far more likely to throw
light on the structure of eidetic imagery than detailed analysis of the
content of the imagery, or its subjective attributes.
There are a host of intriguing questions to pursue. Why, for example,
are the percentages of eidetic imagery elevated in the geriatric
population (Giray, Altkin, Roodin, Yoon, and Flagg 1978), and what is
the structure of the eidetic imagery that occurs in different sensory
modalities? Haber does not address the illustration of eidetic imagery
in other than the visual modality. Data from research on these and
other issues are urgently needed to clarify why eidetic imagery is so
seductive. That seduction exists precisely because the phenomenon
seems so distinct, yet the processes underlying it remain obscure.
by Michael H. Siege!
Department of Psychology, State University of New York, College at Oneonta,
Oneonta, N. Y. 13820
ESdetic imagery: where's the ghost?
Professor Haber has written a clear summary of a cloudy area. He has
succeeded in presenting the major problems together with suggestions
for further research. My comments are largely related to his emphasis.
Theory. A justifiable criticism of most research in this area is that it
lacks a theoretical base. Case studies provide a richness and a flavor
that experimental studies lack, and the former need to be continued.
Experimental studies certainly do add to our fund of information and
should also continue. Both would be made more meaningful, though,
by the elaboration of a convincing and comprehensive theory of eidetic
imagery. Such a theory could be used to plan a sequence of studies
and certainly would lead to dispelling some of the mystery from this
area.
Walidity. Haber pointed out that research on eidetic imagery
virtually disappeared for almost thirty years after 1930. Certainly an
important reason for its apparent demise was the insistence on
studying and measuring objective behavior. The essence of eidetic
imagery is personal and immediate. American psychology was for
three decades inhibited by the proscriptions of what became standard,
good experimental practice for conducting research whose validity
could not have an external check.
Actually it was largely the work of Haber and his associates that
helped to repromote interest and research on eidetic imagery. By
specifying standard rules of stimulus presentation and criteria for
classification as eidetic, Haber made the entire testing procedure
easier to reproduce.
Still, even with what has become standard testing, the essence of
eidetic imagery remains personal and immediate. The distinction
between imagery and other forms of memory rests largely upon verbal
reports and has to do with accuracy of detail, use of the present tense
in reporting the image, and the fact that the subject can or must scan
the image: four of the seven criteria restated by Haber in the target
article. Although the verbal report is objectively measured and the
duration of the eidetic image can be timed, none of these criteria
permits anything but a weak inference of eidetic imagery.
Perhaps even more important than his standardization of the eidetic
testing situation was Haber's description and use of an eighth criterion.
Subjects looked successively at two visual stimuli. If they could
preserve a complete image of the first and align and combine it with the
second, they would be able to detect and describe a composite image
that had never been presented. Regrettably, not all subjects classified
as eidetic using the other seven criteria can produce this composite
image successfully, so this procedure should not be the sole "indirect"
test; nevertheless, the use of a technique such as this is critical. One
important task for researchers in this area is to develop a variety of
"indirect" tests of this unusual imagery ability. Only with such proce-
dures can validity be assured.
Nonwisual modalities. 
One of the more humbling exercises, for
someone involved with current and original research, is to review
literature usually considered ancient, only to discover surprisingly
modem ideas. As early as 1927, Griffitts worked on individual differ-
ences in imagery across modalities. One of the debates then, and
perhaps now, was about a general imagery factor, one not limited to a
single sense modality.
Image perseveration certainly occurs in sense modalities other than
616
THE BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1979), 2

Commentary/Haber: Eidetic imagery
vision. There have been many fine studies of absolute pitch, for
example. A strong case could be made for these illustrating eidetic
imagery. In his presentation Haber devoted only a paragraph to
absolute pitch. The space reserved is probably appropriate, but it
seems clear that whatever the eidetic ghost is, it may materialize in any
modality.
Analogs to visual eidetic imagery and absolute pitch in other senses
probably occur, but have not been a popular or an easy topic for
research. It would be of some interest to look at the issue of
superordinate imagery that transcends a single modality. Demonstra-
tions of its presence might serve to shed some light on a physiological
system for image preservation and might provide some clues about the
purpose and the evolution of such abilities.
by Eisa M. Siipola
Department of Psychology, Clark Science Center, Smith College, Northampton,
Mass. 01060
The search for neurological correlates of eidetic
Haber's conclusions on the present status of the search for valid
correlates of eidetic imagery puzzle me. He does not seem open-
minded since he overlooks promising leads provided in the references.
Instead of being a penetrating analysis of the research in a given area,
his final judgment is often based upon taking a poll of how many are for
or against the variable investigated. If the results are inconsistent, the
proposed correlate is branded as unpromising. No attempt is made to
discover sampling or procedural differences that might explain the
inconsistency. This basic weakness applies to several areas, but
illustrations here will be confined to the section on neurological
pathology.
The early research of Siipola and Hayden (1965) was based upon
two assumptions, both of which were modified by the results obtained.
The developmental theory was not supported since the frequency of
eidetics was low in the familial retardate group. A generalized neuro-
logical deficit theory was strikingly supported. But since the results
were inconsistent across diagnostic categories of brain damage, a
specific locus of neurological damage was suggested as the critical
variable related to eidetic images.
The task since then has been to find the specific neurological
correlate. This assignment is a difficult one, since even today one
cannot identify directly the presence and locus of subtle neurological
aberrations in human subjects. The time-honored solution to this
obstacle has been that of selecting for study clinical cases with
well-documented neurological damage in specific locations.
The empirical studies summarized by Haber have also approached
the problem indirectly by selecting samples of retarded children
(classified as familial or brain damaged) in the hope of finding clues to
the neurological substrate of eidetic images. But unfortunately, accu-
rate differentiation of the brain-damaged from the familial retardate is
also impossible. The diagnosis of brain damage indicates only possible
neural damage in some unspecified area; it includes such heteroge-
neous diagnoses that one could hardly expect the subjects to have
identical loci of neural damage. Inaccuracy also applies to the classifi-
cation of familial retardates diagnosed as such merely because crude
medical diagnoses indicate no obvious brain damage.
The inconsistency in the research findings may, then, be largely
attributed to these difficulties, which have resulted in dissimilar compo-
sitions of the small experimental groups. For example, Giray, Altkin,
and Barclay (1976) noted an important sampling difference. Hydroce-
phalic subjects, 78% of whom were found by them to be eidetic, were
missing from the brain-damaged samples in two projects yielding
negative results. They were also deliberately excluded from the miscel-
laneous brain-damaged sample of Giray et al. (1976).
There is also the problem of defining a proper control group. Should
it consist of familial retardates some of whom may actually be brain
damaged? Or should it consist of Haber's so-called normal children?
The final interpretation and poll count necessarily depend upon the
composition of the experimental groups and the type of control group
selected for comparison. Thus, one can even find a majority (rather
than a minority) of positive findings supporting a neurological deficit
theory, if one is inclined to do so.
In addition to these sampling problems, wide variability in the
procedures for identifying eidetics has also magnified inconsistency in
the results obtained in the neuropathological area. Although Haber's
development of a standard procedure has been a valuable contribu-
tion, researchers do not follow his method literally. Such procedural
deviation is inevitable since a method designed for school children in
New Haven has to be adapted to ensure similarity in understanding of
the task for subjects varying in age from childhood to senility, from
normality to severe pathology, and from highly acculturated groups to
aboriginal samples. However, for a given sample the adaptations can
. be very similar. For example, the procedural adaptations made by
Siipola and Hayden (1965) and by Giray et al. (1976) to handle the
retardate's difficulties in communication were almost identical.
Despite all of the above obstacles, the recent research has led to
different theories of the specific neural deficit that might account for
eidetic imagery. Giray et al. (1976) have proposed structural damage
in a particular area of the visual information-processing area. They
hold that such damage might be caused by a number of factors other
than hydrocephalus. Richardson and Cant (1970) favor the occipital
lobe as the locus of damage. Freides and Hayden (1966) have
suggested that the locus may vary among eidetics, and that the clue in
an individual case might be obtained by determining whether the
eidetic image is monocular or binocular. Both types were found by
them in their clinical and institutional population.
The promise of a neuropathological approach is that it provides a
method for discovering the necessary and sufficient neural condition
giving rise to eidetic images and the possibility of finding a more valid
technique to identify the phenomenon. The critical neural correlate may
turn out to be a minor deviation from the norm, a localized deficit like
color blindness. However, a neurological theory is not intended to
supply the complete answer to all the mysteries of eidetic imagery. The
following important questions would also need solution. Is there a
genetic factor involved? Are there different types of eidetikers? Does
the condition limit or enhance cognitive or artistic abilities or the
enjoyment of life? Do the answers to some of these questions depend
upon cultural factors?
Why does Haber find the neurological approach so unpromising?
Actually most of his theses are congruent with a neurological deficit
theory, which, if adopted, would integrate his stand on several issues.
The discontinuity principle is supported by considering eidetic imagery
as an anomaly. The same is true of the stability principle. Also, Haber's
rejection of the standard developmental theory requires a substitute to
fill the void.
In summary, a more penetrating and open-minded analysis of the
research data could have produced a more positive picture of the
present search for correlates. Instead, most of the possible
approaches and leads suggested by others are overlooked or
dismissed. This leaves Haber with nothing to contemplate except the
vivid phenomenal eidetic image itself, which gradually fades into just a
mysterious haunting ghost.
by Gudmynd Smith
Department of Psychology, Lund University, S-223 50 Lund, Sweden
TEhi© need for strict differentiation between eidetics
and noneidetics
One of the more disturbing features of the literature on eidetic imagery
is the inconsistency among various studies with regard to the reported
frequency of eidetic subjects. As Haber points out, students of this
phenomenon have used "eidetic" criteria with varying degrees of
strictness. However, some studies have also used indirect criteria. This
accounts for the high incidence of eidetic subjects in early German
studies.
For E.R. Jaensch, for instance, a size-constant afterimage (an
afterimage not changing in apparent size with the projection distance)
was a sign of an "eidetic disposition." An eidetic child's afterimage
THE BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1979), 2
617

Commentary/Haber: Eidetic imagery
was thus regarded as part of a joint personal reaction - deeply
embedded in the person, to use William Stern's terminology - not an
isolated retinal reaction, as in noneidetic adults. Consequently, the
afterimage of an eidetic child did not follow the sensory laws of
perception.
Jaensch's explanation is unsatisfactory for many reasons. One of
them is that you can easily explain the size-constant afterimage by
referring to the cognitive immaturity of the child, his inability to
distinguish clearly between self and nonself factors in the visual world,
and his concomitant tendency to view afterimages as part of outside
reality (Smith and Danielsson 1978). Afterimage size can, moreover, be
influenced by the afterimage theory presented to the subject, regard-
less of age (Smith and Sjoholm 1974).
Using the Jaensch school as a background, it seems safe to follow
Haber in his discussion of eidetic imagery knowing that his criteria are
strict and reliable. The very strictness of the criteria may, however, be
one reason there are no in-between subjects in his samples, no
subjects who are only partly or vaguely eidetic. To be sure, Haber's
arguments for a sharp distinction between eidetics and noneidetics
seem well-founded. I would nevertheless like to see him pursue the
continuity hypothesis a little further. As an isolated curiosity, eidetic
imagery might be very difficult to explain psychologically.
Talking of explanations, there is an intriguing sentence in Haber's
paper: "The main prevention technique described by nearly all eidetic
children is active, cognitive, verbal rehearsal of the stimulus." The
verbal mode of memorizing thus seems to exclude the eidetic mode.
This observation should be considered in the light of Doob's findings
that the eidetic ability in illiterate subjects disappears when they learn
to read. Even if messy and difficult to control, Doob's data may be
worth analyzing more carefully, and to be cross-validated, if possible.
After all, a partial explanation of eidetic imagery could very well be
found along these lines.
Finally, I fully agree with Haber that eidetic images should be studied
phenomenologically. At the same time, however, eidetic children's way
of memorizing, of handling visual afterimages, of dreaming, and so
forth, should be studied in the same manner. Maybe one reason no
correlations have been found between eidetic ability and other psycho-
logical variables is that the latter have been crude, irrelevant, and
nonphenomenological. Jaensch was not only a manic and unreliable
scientist but also a creative one. Some of his ideas about the eidetic
personality could be worth reexamining - using tools that are both
reliable and sensitive.
by Benjamin Wallace
Department of Psychology, Cleveland State University, Cleveland, Ohio 44115
Eidetic imagery need not haunt us: a supportiwe
example for the use of phenomenological reports
Unlike Ralph Norman Haber, I entered the realm of investigating eidetic
imagery very recently (Walker, Garrett, and Wallace 1976). Also, unlike
Haber, I have not studied such imagery in children, per se. Rather I
have perhaps added more controversy to an already controversial
area by using hypnotically age-regressed adults as my target popula-
tion. Of course, there is a sound, methodological reason for this which I
will elaborate upon here. Before doing so, however, I wish to agree with
one conclusion reached by Haber and others, namely that eidetic
imagery (whatever it is) is a very rare phenomenon. But exactly how
rare is this ability to scan a pictorial scene or stimulus and report
perceiving a visual image? According to many sources cited by Haber,
the incidence of such imagery ranges between 8% and 20% of a
mostly young population (between the ages of 6 and 12). The modal
age for its appearance or discovery is around 7 years. Unfortunately,
for reasons unknown to us, the ability to use eidetic imagery seems to
disappear around the age of 12, never, it seems, to reappear.
However, if adult subjects "can be found who are highly hypnotizable
and who can be regressed to the age at which eidetic imagery is most
prevalent in children, it may be possible to study this phenomenon in
such a population. This has been one of my endeavors for the last five
years.
In my first experiment (Walker, et al. 1976), I employed random-dot
stereograms in a very conservative and rigorous test of eidetic imagery
abilities. College students, who had been found to be highly hypnotiz-
able, were regressed to 7 years of age and were shown 3 different
stereograms, in a random order, so that in composite form, they
produced either a triangle, a T-shape, or a cube. The paradigm
employed was similar to that used by Stromeyer and Psotka (1970)
and is briefly described by Haber in his target article.
Of 20 subjects tested in my first experiment, 2, or 10% correctly
identified all 3 stereogram composites. In a postexperimental interview,
it was also learned that both of these subjects had some recollections
of having some eidetic imagery abilities as children. As a result, my
most recent study (Wallace 1978) dealt with this important clue as a
possible method for identifying adults who could be hypnotically
age-regressed to demonstrate eidetic imagery abilities. Unfortunately,
the endeavor was only partially successful. Of 24 subjects who
reported having had some memory of eidetic abilities as children and
who could be successfully hypnotically age-regressed, only 2 were
able to identify stereogram composites correctly using the paradigm of
my 1976 study.
The small number of subjects able to demonstrate eidetic imagery
during hypnotic age-regression points to a major problem in conduct-
ing research in this area, a problem that does not appear to have been
addressed by Haber in a meaningful fashion. At least with my
paradigm, it appears that 2 requirements are necessary for demon-
strating such imagery in adults: (1) the ability to be hypnotically
age-regressed and (2) a history of childhood eidetic imagery. As this
combination represents a very small portion of the general population,
conducting large-scale studies would be extremely difficult. For exam-
ple, in my 1978 study, I was able to find 63 highly hypnotizable subjects
from a sample of 482. To find subjects who recalled having some
eidetic imagery abilities as children, the number was further reduced to
26. Fortunately, 24 of those subjects volunteered for my 1978 study.
As such, the percentage of subjects who actually demonstrated eidetic
imagery abilities in a hypnotically age-regressed situation was 8.33%,
or 2 of the 24 subjects who met the supposed requirements for such.
However, this percentage constitutes 8.33% of the top 10% to 15% of
the range of hypnotic susceptibility and not of the general population.
In other words, the actual figure for the incidence of the phenomenon
may range from 0.83% to 1.25%, not 10% as I concluded in my 1976
paper.
As a result, I have reached two conclusions: (1) it is possible to
restore eidetic imagery abilities for some former childhood eidetikers
with the aid of hypnotic age-regression, and (2) the percentage of
subjects with whom this manipulation can be performed successfully is
extremely small, in fact so small that of the theoretical 8% to 20% of
children who may have been eidetikers, most of these cannot be
identified in adulthood, let alone be made to retrieve the eidetic ability,
even with the aid of hypnotic age-regression. Therefore, even though
my methods for probing into the mysteries of eidetic imagery are
unique and might eventually help define the process, a patient group of
scientists must emerge who are willing to spend many months or even
years to study a phenomenon or process that gives us very few clues
as to its identity. And because such clues are few in number, the
extremely conservative tests I and others have employed for testing
the existence of eidetic imagery may play against us in solving the
mysteries of this phenomenon. Although in the end I believe the
rigorous methodology that I imposed will be necessary, I and others
may have acted prematurely in imposing this rigor, especially when
eidetic imagery is such a rare bird to capture. In agreeing with Haber, I
feel that unless the rigor is relaxed somewhat, eidetic imagery will be
haunting us for a very long time.
Finally, because of the relatively few individuals who can be identi-
fied as eidetikers, either as children or with the aid of hypnotic
age-regression, I believe it may be futile to try to locate great numbers
of eidetikers who may not even exist. A more fruitful experimental
strategy would be to conduct as many experiments as possible on
subjects identified as eidetikers to try to improve our understanding of
what the phenomenon is or to what it is related. I agree with Haber that
it is different from Sperling's visual image, but that does not help to
618
THE BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1979), 2

Response/Haber: Eidetic imagery
identify what it is. I also agree with Haber that it would be a mistake to
stop conducting research on this very interesting, albeit controversial,
area of perception. However, since Haber did not include a warning for
future scientists in this area, I shall do so: you may have to run many
subjects before you find an eidetiker, but if you are sufficiently patient,
you may find one or two!
Author's Response
by Ralph Norman Haber
Department of Psychology, University of Illinois at Chicago Circle, Chicago, III.
60680
Eidetic imagery still lives, thanks to twenty-nine
exorcists
While there may be a substantial sampling bias in terms of who was
invited to comment, and who accepted that invitation, I feel quite
gratified that only two of twenty-nine eminent scientists (about the
same percentage as that of eidetic children in the population of
children) suggested that work on eidetic imagery was so sterile or
unproductive as to be unworthy of further effort. While each of the
remaining commentators suggests many criticisms and problems,
they all accept, at least implicitly, the premise that the enterprise is
appropriate or even valuable. This acceptance is critical because,
from 1935 to 1965 at least, eidetic imagery must have ranked only
marginally ahead of ESP and well behind hypnosis (to choose at
random two other somewhat dicey subjects) as a legitimate topic for
research in psychology.
Since I have been somewhat personally identified with whatever
recovery of professional interest there is in eidetic imagery, my
initial reaction in reading the twenty-nine commentaries was to
classify them into pro and con, feeling smug about the pros and ready
to heap carefully reasoned invective on the cons. As I made such a
classification, however, I began to see the great diversity in perspec-
tive represented by these commentaries. Further, I saw that on a
topic with as checkered a Jhistory as this one, there cannot yet be any
perspectives that are either right or wrong, or any clearly correct or
incorrect directions for future work.
Redefinition of eidetic imagery. Since more than half of the
commentators referred to some aspect of differentiating eidetic
imagery from other facets of mental life, I am forced to reconsider
the definition I offered in the target article.
Are there visual images that would not be called eidetic, or are the
words "eidetic" and "image" synonomous? These questions are
raised by BLANC-GARIN, ROBERTS-GRAY, and especially highlighted by
AHSEN, who extends the term "eidetic" to cover virtually any form of
re-creation of memory (Ahsen 1977).
I would like to restrict the term "eidetic imagery" to those cases
the respondent reports as modality-specific, and for which some
converging operations are available to support the specificity of the
modality. An image differs from a percept in that the latter occurs in
the presence of stimulation whereas the former occurs when there is
no stimulus present. Eidetic images differ from other images, or from
memory more generally, in that the former are represented in a
specific sensory modality, such as vision, audition, touch, and so on.
In most instances the modality of the eidetic image is the same as the
modality of the original stimulation, but there is no necessity for this
correspondence. What is critical is that the subject says (and acts as if)
he is currently seeing (or hearing, etc.) something that is not
presently stimulating him. If the report is not explicitly anchored in a
specific modality, it should not be included as eidetic imagery, but
treated more generally as nondescript imagery, or thinking, or
fantasy, as the case may be.
ROBERTS-GRAY, in the introductory paragraph of her commentary,
clearly reflects my stress on visualization and differentiates
visualization from vividness. I wish to reject Gray and Gummerman's
(1975) proposal that vividness be a criterion for eidetic imagery. To
say that the subject "sees" his image involves no claim that his image
is vivid, only that it is visible. Some eidetic images may be very vivid
and others pale. We need to study this dimension of vividness in
eidetic imagery as we do in other forms of imagery, but vividness
should not be a criterion.
AHSEN's instructions for the Eidetic Parents Test (Ahsen 1977) also
pertain to my concern about visualization. In that test, the subject is
asked the following: "Picture your parents in the house where you
lived most of the time with them, the house which gives you the
feeling of a home. Where do you see them? What are they doing?
How do you feel when you see the images?" Such instructions, when
given under the appropriate conditions, can certainly elicit a
substantial verbal output, an output that undoubtedly reflects
memories of prior experiences. But there is no demand that the
responses reflect specific prior experiences, nor that the responses be
anchored in modality-specific content. Thus, some of these responses
will have nothing to do with seeing (or reseeing), or with hearing,
tasting, or touching, even though they do represent descriptions of
some kind of mental phenomena.
AHSEN's commentary is a request to broaden the definition of
eidetic imagery to cover reports of experience that are in no way
dependent upon an immediately prior external stimulus, but are "in
essence internal evocations." BARBER makes a similar request, since
he reports that some experimental subjects, when asked "if they can
see in the room an object that is not present," do describe images that
are visual in content. However, I see a fundamental difference
between the expansions proposed by Ahsen and by Barber, in that
while both ask for an internal evocation rather than induction by an
immediately prior stimulus, only Barber demands that the response
meet criteria for being modality specific (usually visual). It is this
difference that I feel is critical and should form the basis for
distinguishing eidetic imagery from other forms of mental activity.
Thus, eidetic images need not be restricted to those induced by an
immediately prior exposure of a stimulus, but can be evoked by
instructions to form an image, in a particular modality, of any event
or action known to the subject. The definition does exclude reports
that are simply descriptions of memories without reference to
modality. Therefore, some, but not all of the reports elicited by
Ahsen's instructions would meet this criterion.
Perhaps, since eidetic imagery is a very old concept - see Ahsen
(1977) for a good review - it might be best to abandon it to the
historians and invent a new set of terms: one for each modality. Thus,
my own research has concerned visual imagery elicited in the
absence of a present visual stimulus, a visual stimulusless vision.
BARBER'S work, referred to in his commentary, would also fall into
this category, as would most of the examples suggested by ASHTON.
Excluded would be reports of memories or hallucinations that were
not specifically visual (or in some other sensory modality), or for
which it was not possible to present converging evidence that the
respondent was indeed seeing something at the time he made his
report.
Both ROBERTS-GRAY and LINDAUER, and to a lesser extent HANNAY,
question why eidetic imagery should be differentiated from any
other kind of vivid imagery as long as the subject's report that he is
seeing an image is convincing. According to the redefinition offered
here, no differentiation should be made — vivid imagers, as assessed
by Lindauer (1969, 1972, 1977), or Sheehan (1972), or Richardson
(1969) would all be displaying eidetic images as long as the images
were anchored in vision (or some other sense). The critical issue is
whether the subject is seeing a scene or object that is not concurrently
present in the visual field of view. The picture-induction procedure is
a convenient and fairly well controlled method to elicit such
modality-specific images, but instructions to form an image may be
just as useful. It is an empirical question, yet to be tested, as to
whether subjects classified as eidetic by the picture-induction
procedure also give responses classified as eidetic when those
responses are elicited by other procedures.
One hint of a negative answer comes from finding that the
classification of subjects by the picture-induction procedure is almost
THE BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1979), 2
619

Response/Haber: Eidetic imagery
always bimodal (see ROODIN & GIRAY), whereas instructions to form
images are most likely to yield a continuous distribution of self-
reported images (Sheehan 1972). Of course, in the latter case, there
are usually no converging operations to ensure that the subjects are
reporting images that they were actually seeing. If those are
included, I expect that the subjects who can self-generate visual
images that they can see may turn out to be a small and discontinuous
subset of all subjects who are good imaginers.
But what about ROBERTS-GRAY's comment that there is impressive
evidence that subjects exist who are presumably without eidetic
imagery, yet still capable of visualizing (for example, Brooks 1967;
Perky 1910; Sheehan 1966). As I noted before, we badly need data on
the similarities of these different kinds of visualizing tasks, just as we
need to know whether the picture-induction and the instruction-
to-visualize procedures produce comparable results. In none of the
references just given was the subject required to identify his images
as visual. Brooks did not even assess imagery directly, so he did not
know what his subjects were doing, let alone seeing. I think it quite
likely that there are some subjects who are good at visualizing who
yet fail to do so in the picture-induction test for eidetic imagery. We
need to know how these various tasks differ.
It is useful to limit eidetic imagery to modality-specific reports
because these reports pose the more interesting theoretical problems.
Theories of visual perception are concerned (at least in part) with
explaining how excitation of the photoreceptors can elicit an
awareness of a visual world in front of the eyes. Research on eidetic
imagery suggests that we can at times be aware of a visual world even
when that world is not actually in front of the eyes. To examine this
form of awareness with any hope of explaining it, we have to
separate it from non-sensory descriptions that are more properly
called thoughts, feelings (in the nonhaptic sense of the word), wishes,
musings, ideas, cognitions, or fantasies. When any of these last terms
refer to a visually present sensory experience, then we should include
it as eidetic, but not otherwise. I am not saying that these other
phenomena are uninteresting or unimportant for a science of
psychology. It is just that they are not explicitly visual (or auditory,
etc.). When the question is posed as to whether a person can see
something that is not presently stimulating his receptors, we need to
insist both that he is seeing, and that there be converging evidence to
give us confidence in that claim.
This redefinition of eidetic imagery provides a testable set of
predictions about the relation of eidetic imagery to other forms of
imagination and to memory, as well as predictions about the efficacy
of different types of elicitation procedures. Finally, it firmly anchors
eidetic imagery close to perceptual processes in general, so that it
becomes important for perceptual theory to explain the basis of
awareness of perceiving, irrespective of whether a stimulus is present
(a percept) or not (an eidetic image). This haunting connection
between eidetic imagery and general processes of perception
explains its fascination for me - to answer LINDAUER and HANNAY.
NEISSER'S provocative commentary indicates the importance of the
distinctions just made. He wants to distinguish eidetic images from
other kinds of imagery precisely because he feels that the latter
represent a widely diverse set of phenomena that may not have much
in common with each other, let alone with eidetic imagery. He cites a
wide range of correlational and experimental evidence to support the
existence of this diversity among types of imagery and imagining
abilities. Thus he too recommends that we study eidetic imagery in
its own right and not force it into a preconceived mold with other
forms of mental activity.
Are eidetic Images reproductions of some prior stimulus or
constructive? Historically, the accuracy criterion for the presence of
eidetic imagery was based upon the assumption that such images
were faithful reproductions of the inducing picture and would
therefore be perfectly accurate - a kind of photographic memory.
Virtually every investigation of eidetic imagery has shown this
assumption to be false. Not only are the reports of eidetic imagers
often fragmentary, but they often contain details or arrangements
not present in the stimulus. It is for this reason that I have referred to
eidetic images, as well as to perception in general, as constructive and
not reproductive (see Haber 1978; and Haber and Hershenson 1980
for further details).
NEISSER makes this same point, from somewhat the same
theoretical perspective. He illustrates this with an example from
drawings made by an eidetic twelve year old, In which the drawing
of an image of an elephant resembles the way elephants look to her
and not necessarily the way they are depicted in the stimulus picture.
In the same vein, MARKS describes how eidetic subjects (selected
according to picture-induction procedures) can be induced to
visualize images on blank surfaces, which then grow, move, and are
transformed as the subject continues to look at the surface. These
images are still eidetic, in the sense of being visual, but they certainly
possess a dynamism not possessed by photographic reproductions.
When good imagers are asked to form an image of a familiar
object or person, their images are usually nonspecific with respect to
irrelevant details. Thus, while I can "see" an image of my wife, in
which she is wearing shoes, I cannot see what kind of shoes, unless I
am specifically asked. In other words, I construct the image
according to my cognitive state at the moment, and while it is
visual - I see her - it is not necessarily complete or even accurate.
The expectation that Images will be photographically realistic is
probably the same one that leads most of us (including specialists who
should know better) to think of the perceptual apparatus as being like
a camera, the retinal Image like a picture, and perceiving like taking
a picture. The eye-camera metaphor has been most mischievous in
perceptual theories (see Braunstein 1975, for the best treatment of
the history and misuses of this metaphor), and accounts for the
mistaken expectation of fidelity in imagery, too.
Are the only eidetic Images visual ones? Eidetic imagery is
almost invariably defined In the experimental literature as a form of
visual imagery, as distinct from auditory, olfactory, or other
modality-specific forms. Thus, we describe eidetic responses as
reported visual images of visual stimuli that are not presently in the
visual field to view. Does this mean that there are no auditory eidetic
images, and that somehow auditory images have some other property
(besides modality) that makes them noneidetic? My comment on
perfect pitch at the end of my target article was picked up by SIEGEL,
who suggested that this might be considered a form of auditory
eidetic Imagery, and SHEEHAN, LINDAUER, HOLDING, and others have
discussed imagery in other modalities. While I had implicitly
restricted eidetic Imagery to the visual modality in the target article,
I now see no theoretical reason to do so; it should be possible to
demonstrate such imagery in other modalities. All that is required is
careful attention to definitions and operations. If such Imagery is
found in other modalities, it is then an empirical matter to determine
the relationships among the different kinds of imagery within the
same subjects.
Comments on the picture-Induction procedure. Several
commentators (AHSEN, BARBER, ASHTON, SIEGEL) mentioned that the
picture-induction method followed in my research, and in most other
recent studies, may be a narrow-minded procedure. Historically -
that is prior to 1935 - researchers made use both of pictures (Ahsen's
typographic eidetic) and of instructions simply to Imagine (Ahsen's
structural eidetic). When I began my work in the 1960s, I selected
the former procedure only because I could more easily adapt it to the
rigors of the laboratory without losing the phenomenon I sought. I see
nothing intrinsic to eidetic imagery that requires one method rather
than the other, except that the problems of control are so much more
difficult in the instruction-to-imagine procedure.
The picture-Induction procedure, however, Is specifically
criticized by HUNTER, JAYNES, and SHEEHAN, with some telling points.
Hunter, for example, objects to the form in which the questions are
asked. He assumes that remembering and imagining are on a
continuum in which eidetic characteristics are more or less present.
For example, he says that, with the traditional easel procedure,
asking the subject whether he can see anything after the picture is
removed reduces the likelihood of eideticlike responses, especially as
620
THE BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1979), 2

Response/Haber: Eidetic imagery
compared to asking the subject to imagine that he can still see the
picture and to describe the imagined picture. Hunter reports on four
subjects with whom the latter version of the instructions was used;
these "data" do indeed include more eideticlike responses in all four
subjects. However, the most critical datum is absent in at least three
of the four - the subjects said they were remembering a verbal
encoding of the picture and not actually seeing it where it had been
before. Thus, Hunter does not need a converging operation - the
subjects themselves deny the visual component of the remembering.
This is fortunate, because otherwise switching the instructions from
"see" to "imagine" opens the door to a far wider range of potentially
mischievous responses. Any subject who is able to see his images
should be able to do so just as easily with the "see" instructions as he
can with the "imagine" instructions, whereas the less rigorous
"imagine" instructions run the risk of eliciting responses that appear
to be eidetic without being visual at all. Therefore any instruction
procedure should stress seeing and not just imagining.
HUNTER, JAYNES, and ROBERTS-GRAY raise a different and more
interesting objection to the picture-induction procedure, one that I
think does call for a major change in method. All three note the
findings from Leask, Haber, and Haber (1969) that verbalizations by
an eidetic subject during the inspection of an inducing picture erase
what would otherwise be a subsequent eidetic image of that picture.
This was a robust finding which applied to every eidetic subject on
which it was tested. Given this finding, is it not also likely that
verbalization during description of the subsequent image reduces the
duration, completeness, and accuracy of that image? All three
commentators suggest as an alternative procedure that instead of
making a verbal response, the subject should draw or trace what he
sees, without any attendant verbal description. NEISSER describes one
example of the use of a tracing procedure with a twelve-year-old
eidetic subject, and shows how he obtained different and better
results than he would have done using only a verbal report indicator.
The general success of this procedure is an empirical matter,
which can be established by testing some eidetic subjects with and
without verbalization responses. As a further test, subjects could even
be trained to suppress implicit verbalization during the inspection of
an inducing picture, to see if this increases the quality of eidetic
responses. ROBERTS-GRAY offers some specific suggestions about
possible procedures.
If empirical evidence suggests that verbalization during the
response interferes with eidetic imagery, then we will have further
demonstration of verbalization-visualization antagonism, beyond
what Leask et al. already reported. Leask et al. very loosely linked
this antagonism to a developmental hypothesis of eidetic imagery,
suggesting that simultaneous visual and verbal encoding of the same
stimulus is very difficult, and that younger children are better at or
more likely to perform the former whereas older children and adults
rely more upon the latter. In the target article I was very critical of
the developmental hypothesis (see more below), but the visual-verbal
opposition can be present without any developmental implications. It
may be that visualizing and verbalizing are two naturally interfering
ways of representing stimulation or memory at all ages, and that the
degree of interference does not change much with age or cognitive
style. The interference of the two modes has been amply
demonstrated in adults by Allport, Antonitis, and Reynolds (1972)
and by Brooks (1967), for several kinds of simultaneously performed
tasks, and appears as a basic opposition in the literature on
lateralization of cerebral hemispheric function (see especially
Kinsbourne 1978). For these reasons I see the tests suggested by
ROBERTS-GRAY, HUNTER, and JAYNES as critically important. They may
even provide us with more powerful tests of eidetic imagery than the
picture-induction procedures.
AHSEN, JAYNES, LINDAUER, and SIEGEL each mention another
objection to the picture-induction method. They suggest that eidetic
responses will be more likely to occur if richer, more important, or
more emotional material is used as the basis for induction, or if a
more personal relationship exists between tester and subject. Each
commentator pointed to the relative sterility of the pictures typically
used, such as Alice in Wonderland and other old-fashioned scenes.
The argument in this context is entirely empirical and can be
answered by experiment. I know of no evidence that the incidence or
any other characteristics of eidetic imagery varies as a function of the
emotionality of the material or transference of the testing situation,
but there is no reason such evidence could not be collected. DOOB
mentions some negative evidence in that African subjects found
Western stimuli just as imagery-inducing as stimuli from their own
cultures. If such evidence of differences among pictures is
forthcoming, it would suggest a new direction for theorizing rather
different from any explored in the target article.
I have reviewed a number of comments about the testing
procedure. While all of my work has used a picture-induction
procedure, I acknowledge that instructions to visualize something not
presently in view can be just as useful. What is critical with such a
procedure, however, is that the instruction be to visualize rather than
merely to imagine, or to describe, or to think out loud; and that there
be included some kind of converging operation to differentiate these
different kinds of reports.
Alternative induction procedures. In addition to picture
inductions and instructions to visualize, at least two other techniques
are mentioned in the commentaries: composite pictures or
stereograms and hypnotic age regression. JULESZ describes the
stereogram procedure in some detail and properly calls it
"unfakable," and superior in this respect to the composite picture
versions I developed (Leask et al. 1969). Julesz himself should even
be credited with that composite picture test (though not held
responsible for it). After my first report appeared (Haber and Haber
1964), he sent me several sets of stereograms, suggesting that I try
them. After considering them, I decided, without even trying them
on any of my subjects, that such a test would be too difficult. But I
used his idea and proceeded to make up a number of composite
picture sets, the results of which have been described. Fortunately,
Stromeyer and Psotka (1970) were less cautious, with startling success
on their one subject. WALLACE also reports several instances of success
using stereograms with eidetic subjects. On the other hand, MERRITT
describes a million failures, and there are undoubtedly other
unreported failures of eidetic subjects to do this difficult task.
JULESZ provides several reasons why stereograms should be easier
to fuse than the composite pictures. For any successive or dichotic
stimulus presentation task to work, the subject has both to align an
image of one stimulus with either an image or a perception of the
other, and to have sufficiently complete images to produce the fusion
necessary for the stereopsis or combination. Julesz's claim that
alignment is automatic with binocular vision, but problematic with
pictures is undoubtedly correct. However, the likelihood of an
incomplete image with a stereogram is much greater than with a
simple line drawing. As SHEEHAN also points out, any type of
composite picture is unusual for eidetic (let alone any other) subjects.
Finally, as I noted earlier (see Leask et al. 1969), all of our eidetic
subjects had much greater trouble achieving and maintaining images
of abstract or meaningless stimuli. Since even the separate halves of
the composite pictures are fairly abstract, and of course a random-
dot stereogram half is as meaningless as possible, all versions of this
testing procedure pose exceedingly difficult demands upon eidetic
subjects. It is for this reason that I ignored Julesz's suggestion
originally, trying instead to develop more meaningful pictures. In
any event, while I agree that the test is "unfakable," I still feel it is so
difficult and restrictive that it can only be used with already
identified "supereidetic subjects," as Julesz calls them.
WALLACE also used random-dot stereograms, but with hypnotically
age-regressed subjects. In two separate studies, he found four subjects
who could correctly report the stereoscopic pictures - the most ever
reported who could achieve this rigorous criterion. His subjects were
adults who were highly hypnotizable and who had some memories of
eideticlike abilities from their childhood. He selected these subjects
because of the evidence that eidetic abilities, while rare in childhood,
were even rarer in adulthood.
WALLACE'S work is a very promising, though exhausting, approach.
However, given the great conservatism of the stereogram fusion test,
THE BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1979), 2
621

Response/Haber: Eidetic imagery
I hope he tries some of the more traditional tests under his conditions.
I realize that the demand characteristics surrounding interpretation
of verbal responses under hypnosis are even more complex than
under normal conditions, but until we try, we do not know what can
be found.
Demand characteristics and pheeomenological reports. Five
commentators (BUGELSKI, ERICSSON et al., FURST, HEINERTH, and
HOLDING) raise serious objections to all the research done on eidetic
imagery because they feel there has been insufficient control over
the demand characteristics in the testing situation, especially those
that induce suggestibility. In general, each of these commentators
questions in some form whether there is any reliable evidence that
the subjects are experiencing a visual image projected before their
eyes when making their reports.
There are two threads to these comments: are the images seen
projected out into space (as are normal percepts of visible stimuli), or
are they inside the head or wherever else subjects feel their images to
be; and are the reports about visual images at all, or are the reports
merely verbal metaphors for a nonvisual memory of previously seen
stimuli?
The first of these threads, stressed by FURST and HOLDING, arises
because some experimenters (including myself, I am afraid) simply
assumed that eidetic images would be projected out rather than
internalized as "pictures in the head," to choose one possible
different location. Therefore I set up a projection surface, induced an
afterimage on it in nearly all subjects, and then asked them if they
could also project other kinds of images on the same surface. Most,
but not all of the eidetic subjects we tested said their images were on
the projection surface, but a few said their images were inside their
heads (Leask et al. 1969). Doob (1965) reports that many of his
subjects saw their images inside rather than outside, even with the
use of a projective surface. Would I have found more "insiders" if I
had used an instruction-induction procedure without any reference
to a projection surface? I do not know, and it would be interesting to
find out, for it might give us better data on the anatomical geography
of imagery. But while the projection surface may produce a demand
for projected rather than internalized images, it does not in itself
force subjects to say they can see something somewhere when they
cannot.
The second thread, touched on by all five commentators, is much
more important: do the reports reflect something that the subject is
seeing, even though the stimulus for it is not in view, or do they
reflect only a nonvisual memory of what was previously seen?
Although I discussed at some length parallel observations and
converging operations designed to make the visual interpretation
more imperative, these five commentators were apparently
unconvinced. I will consider their concerns one by one.
Did the afterimage test (which induced afterimages in nearly all
subjects) induce a few of them to continue to use a visual metaphor in
their subsequent reports (BUGELSKI, FURTH, ERICSSON et al.)? We used
the afterimage test in our screening initially because most young
children simply giggled when we asked them whether they would
see anything on the easel after we removed the picture. This was to
convince them that the question was reasonable. We knew we were
creating a demand, but it was one that was needed in order to
proceed at all. Note, however, that even using the nondirective
questioning form suggested by Ericsson et al., nearly all the
afterimages, and all of them for those subjects subsequently classified
as eidetic, were negative in color. Yet all of these eidetic children
gave positive color reports in their reports about the pictures. If we
set them up to use visual metaphors by the afterimage test, then we
should have found the same kinds of responses in both tasks. Further,
much of our subsequent screening did not use the afterimage test at
all, nor did much of the published research from other laboratories.
So even that demand is absent.
Did the way in which the subject was asked to tell us what he saw
demand that he use visual metaphors regardless of whether he had
visual imagery (ERICSSON et al., BUGELSKI, HOLDING, FURST)? Since
nearly all investigators using the picture-induction procedure begin
by asking whether the subjects can "see" anything there (after the
picture is removed from the easel), the subject is certainly given a
hint that the experimenter would be willing to accept any
affirmative response. I see little prospect of avoiding such suggestions
with this method. Therefore, the inference of visualization has to
come from the nature of the content of the responses, or from other
converging operations. I listed fourteen such instances in the section
on criteria in the target article. For example, consider items 4 and 5
on that list. In their reports, eidetic subjects reliably make distinctions
between what they can see and what they can remember (see Leask
et al. 1969, for details of these tests and data). When an eidetic
subject is tested on a picture he has seen before, but is given an
inadequate amount of time to view it on this subsequent occasion, he
reports having an image of part of it (the part he just looked at) but
can describe the other parts just as accurately from his memory. He
says he is remembering those parts from last time, not seeing them
now. It is this shifting of report back and forth between memory and
image, correlated with the induction of the image but not with a
difference in memory, that makes me confident that when a child
says he is seeing something, that is more than a visual metaphor for
nonvisual memory. The longest part of my 1969 monograph is
devoted to an examination of such converging operations, and I
present a variety of relevant data. My point here is that just because
the instruction to the subject may induce a demand does not mean
that the method is no good or that the results are inconclusive.
Rather, when a particular demand is inevitably induced, other
measures must be examined to determine how to interpret the data. I
feel that some of these commentaries focused only on the source of
the demands and did not carefully consider the analyses of the data.
Is any measure based only upon verbal report really useful
(HEINERTH, LIEBLICH, FURST)? The plea here is to depend only on the
JULESZ random-dot stereogram fusion test, because it alone is immune
to all demand characteristics and virtually forces a visual image
interpretation. As I said earlier, any subject who passes this test can
be comfortably called eidetic. But what about those subjects who fail
it, yet meet other criteria? Do we reject them out of hand? I hope not.
The Julesz test is too powerful and rejects some subjects who do not
have sufficient lability of imagery to meet its demands. I hope that
those investigators who find subjects who succeed on the Julesz test
will contrast them with subjects who fail, in order to examine those
restrictive demands. Such contrasts can add enormously to our
knowledge about the different tests, and especially about the role of
the variables that supposedly make one test more restrictive than
another.
Are subjects hypersuggestible because of the testers' prestige
(BUGELSKI)? None of my experiments was ever conducted in a
laboratory; they were run in classrooms, corridors, or closets at
elementary schools. Occasionally, the testing was done at the
subject's house, since in some studies we also tested the parents and
siblings of our eidetic subjects. Therefore, we engendered no
additional demands beyond those any tester creates in a school
setting.
Does repeated testing train eidetic imagery (HEINERTH and FURST)?
In the longitudinal sample described in Leask et al. (1969), each
subject was tested a number of times over a span of years. Only one
subject ceased to remain eidetic, and he was the poorest of the sample
initially. I tend to agree with Furst and Heinerth (and said so in 1969)
that these subjects may have retained their eidetic abilities because of
the repeated testing sessions, and that perhaps fewer of them would
have been eidetic if they had only been tested once at older ages.
Other than this one instance of perhaps inadvertent training, I do not
know of data on whether eidetic abilities can be enhanced or created,
by practice or training. If Furst and Heinerth are correct, this might
help resolve the discrepancy between the general downward trend in
eidetic imagery as age advances, and the stability of eidetic abilities
in this one sample.
Finally, I want to respond to the general theme of the commentary
by ERICSSON et al. They have been working for a number of years on
information-processing models of problem-solving behavior that
depend in part on verbal reports for their input. While Ericsson et al.
6 2 2 
THE BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1979), 2

Response/'Haber•: Eidetic imagery
have not been faced with distinguishing between visual and
nonvisual reports, they use reports of information to which the
subjects are currently attending, as compared to inferences based
upon general knowledge •- knowledge that is not a reflection of any
direct memory trace of their cognitive processes. This powerful
program of research has created independent models of the task at
hand that can generate the same data, including the same
intermediate steps, as those produced by the subject. In their
commentary, they suggest that the same criterion be applied to a
research program on eidetic imagery - that is, the research should be
validated by a model that will generate the same data as the subjects
do. If this can be done, then any argument about the nature of the
reports will be resolved, because the properties of the model will
describe the nature of the reports.
I wish I felt we had as much understanding of visual imagery as we
have of problem solving. Precisely because we lack detailed
knowledge about how imagery functions, I have appealed for more
research on the phenomenology of imagery. I see a close parallel
between the present status of work on imagery and Simon's research
over the past fifteen years, in which some of the early stages required
detailed examination of lengthy protocols from subjects as to how
they thought about each problem while they worked on it (see
Newell and Simon 1974). Such examinations gradually lead to
specific parts of models and then to full-fledged simulations. I do not
feel apologetic about being behind in model building. I think I am
right in noting what we are still missing and how we should go about
it. Simon's is a good model to follow!
Several commentaries express concern with some aspect of
interpretation of data or of theory in my target article. I will consider
each of these in turn.
Cross-cultural studies* In one of the most useful comments, DOOB
gently takes me to task for my rather brusque treatment of eidetic
research outside of American elementary schools. My review of that
work was entirely within the context of its relevance to the
developmental hypothesis for eidetic abilities: samples from
traditional, especially nonliterate societies should show a greater
incidence of eidetic subjects. Since they do not, I used that work to
cast further doubt on the developmental hypothesis.
But DOOB is entirely right when he claims that I missed the most
important point in the cross-cultural data: across a wide range of
subjects, cultures, ages, and testing conditions, both children and
adults provide the same type of responses as found in the more
controlled laboratory research in the United States and Germany
over nearly a century. In this sense, eidetic imagery, as measured in
this manner, is a universal phenomenon. Further, I slighted the
concern of cross-cultural research with the demand characteristics of
the task and the converging operations used to help provide
confidence in the visual character of the responses. I am very pleased
to have Doob's commentary co-appear in this treatment, thereby
allowing me to correct these omissions from my target article.
With respect to the hypothesized negative correlation between
Westernization and eidetic imagery, DOOB admits the inconsistency
among the various published findings, but says that to dismiss them
all is to ignore any chance to understand what may account for high
correlations in some samples and low ones in others. Both Doob and
SMITH argue for more work here.
Neurological correlates of eidetic imagery, SIIPOLA, RICHARDSON,
ROODIN & GIRAY, and BRIDGEMAN all feel I was overly negative in my
treatment of the research reporting differences in the prevalence of
eidetic imagery in populations with various neurological deficits. In
reading their commentaries, I realize I should have made a slightly
different distinction, one between the quality of the present evidence
and the validity of the pursuit.
With respect to the evidence at hand, SIIPOLA and ROODIN & GIRAY
add nothing to contradict my summary that the present data are too
inconsistent to allow any conclusion about possible neurological
correlates. In fact, Siipola especially describes the kinds of problems
that typically beset any such research program with humans in
whom it is virtually impossible to specify the locus of any particular
deficit. Therefore, at this point I still see a neurologically based
explanation of eidetic abilities as only a hypothesis, with little data to
support it.
Does this mean we should abandon the hypothesis? ROODIN & GIRAY
correctly point out that for the hypothesis to be useful, it needs to
provide a far better rationale than it does now. Which specific
aspects of normal neurological development and abnormal
development or damage would be expected to account for the
presence or absence of eidetic abilities? At present, I see the
hypothesis as only an offshoot of a developmental one. Its proponents
have not worked out in theoretical terms how neurology and
eideticism should covary. BRIDGEMAN'S intriguing commentary
outlines one example of how such a theory might be developed, but
only with such specificity can useful predictions be made and tested.
I am delighted that Bridgeman was willing to expose his speculations
in his commentary because, as ROODIN & GIRAY note, his ideas stand
out sharply in an area marked by a paucity of theory.
On the other hand, there are the isolated findings of higher than
typical percentages of eidetic subjects among certain clinically
defined samples. RICHARDSON, ROODIN & GIRAY, and SIIPOLA all urge
that these be treated as important leads to be pursued, and that they
not be simply abandoned because of their isolation, inconsistency, or
poor sampling specification. Richardson also notes the literature in
clinical neurology on palinopsia, in which certain brain-damaged
individuals have trouble suppressing visual images of no-longer-
viewed stimulus objects.
The bases for my lack of enthusiasm have been the difficulty of
defining the locus of deficit, the absence of a good model relating
neurological development and damage to eidetic abilities, and, most
important, the apparent normality of nearly all subjects identified as
eidetic. It is the last finding that is difficult to reconcile with a
neurological deficit theory. Perhaps, as RICHARDSON says,
neurological deficits may provide a sufficient condition for eidetic
imagery even if not a necessary one. If he is right, we may find that
there are two kinds of eidetic subjects, one in which the eidetic
abilities are the result of some neurological abnormality and the
other in which there is no such etiology. The next question would be
whether the two groups were also different in their eidetic skills. To
determine this we need to pay much closer attention than we have in
the past to the content of the eidetic responses of the subjects tested in
the studies on neurological deficits.
Developmental correlates of eidetic imagery. The last third of
my target article questioned the evidence reported to account for the
changes in the prevalence of eidetic imagery with age. Only
HEINERTH and FURST directly challenged my concerns, but two
others - DENNETT and ROODIN & GIRAY - offered some important
comments on the nature of developmental theory as it has been
applied to eidetic imagery. They both question the adequacy of
traditional developmental models to account for eidetic, as well as
many other phenomena. Without repeating their arguments here, let
me merely add that I concur with their assessments. When we fully
understand the processes underlying eidetic imagery, we will
undoubtedly find that younger subjects are more likely to use these
processes, or are better at them than older ones. It is to be hoped that
by that time we will have far more sophisticated theories of the
(multiple) courses of developmental change and the multiplicity of
causes that account for those changes.
Homogeneity of eidetic Imagery abilities. Most investigators
assume that all subjects classified as eidetic are basically the same in
their abilities. Several commentators have questioned this
assumption, LINDAUER and, to a lesser extent, SMITH and HOLDING,
suggest that when we find that eidetic subjects differ in their abilities
to do specific tasks (for example, to perceive a three-dimensional
image, to turn their images upside down, or to move their images to a
different surface), we should at least entertain the possibility that
eidetic abilities are not homogeneous. I certainly agree, though I
have more simply assumed that these differences are more likely to
THE BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1979), 2
628

References/Haber: Eidetic imagery
reflect quantitative differences in facility rather than qualitative
differences in kind of imagery or kind of subject. It is certainly worth
testing more explicitly.
Role of case studies of eidetic subjects. Only SIEGEL suggested
that we need more case studies. I was rather offhand in my treatment
of published case studies, being concerned about their sampling, the
presence of pathology (see AHSEN), and the lack of control over the
conditions producing the observations. Typically I see case studies as
a source of hypotheses rather than as a data base from which to test
hypotheses. Since there are so many case studies reported in the
literature, what we need now is someone to provide a detailed
analysis of them, something on the order of what Von Senden (1960)
did in summarizing all the published studies of recovery of
perception following recovery of vision. It is particularly important
in such an analysis to include as much information as possible on the
sampling and testing variables, so that proper weight can be given to
the observations.
Functional significance of eidetic imagery. LINDAUER and
ROBERTS-GRAY list a number of important suggestions as to other
sources of information that should be pursued. They suggest that we
try to find out more about the functional ecology of eidetic
responding: when does the subject use it, how does he feel when he
uses it, are others, such as parents or teachers, aware of his ability, can
he recall instances of eidetic abilities from earlier in life, what
circumstances or types of stimuli make eidetic images easy or
difficult to elicit, and so forth. For this, they suggest a number of
other tests, not necessarily to find correlates but to develop an
inventory of a constellation of skills that go with eidetic abilities.
ROBERTS-GRAY (as well as HANNAY) goes on to stress the need to ask
questions about the functional significance of visualization as a mode
of representation, especially as compared to verbalization. When do
subjects visualize rather than verbalize, and what benefit does it
provide them? Roberts-Gray is right in thinking I am interested in
such questions, though she is also right that I do not always maintain
a functional point of view. Her ideas of visual rehearsal are
intriguing, especially in the context of looking for tasks that favor one
type of representation over another.
Should we abandon eidetic imagery? Both LIEBLICH and
HOLDING say, by implication, that we should stop studying eidetic
imagery; the other twenty-seven commentators plus the author say
no. Lieblich proposes a scientific monitor who would determine the
scientific value of further work on a topic such as eidetic imagery,
and he reviews evidence on relevant criteria. In general, I am
concerned by a kind of scientific imperialism that such a monitor
might create, but on this topic I simply disagree with his assessment
of each criterion. While Holding is less imperious, he too feels the
research program on eidetic imagery is sterile, and shows little sign of
revitalization.
Both LIEBLICH and HOLDING save their strongest criticism for the
lack of a conceptual or theoretical base to guide experimentation and
model building. They, of course, are not the only commentators who
are distressed by the lack of well-developed theories of eidetic
imagery, but I feel that they are placing more stress on such lacks
than is appropriate. Rather, as most of the commentators say, and as I
have repeated many times in my target article and in this response,
much of the domain of eidetic imagery is yet to be mapped. We still
need to know more about the circumstances under which it is
produced, the variables that control its strength, vividness, or
frequency, and so forth. Clearly, some of these questions could be
answered more easily if we had a good theory of eidetic imagery, but
good experiments can be constructed and interpreted without
theories or models to guide them.
In addition, I have tried to focus on some of the older theories,
especially the developmental one, and to question the form of the
theory and the likelihood of its being correct. To be able to reject a
well-entrenched theory is probably an even more important
contribution (and certainly a more difficult one) than to provide
positive support for a current theory.
Therefore, we need more data. But we are also ready to try some
theories that transcend any particular experiment. Instead of trying
to pull eidetic imagery aside and study it in isolation, we should now
treat it as part of a more general model of perception. My detailed
discussion in the section of this Response entitled "Redefinition of
eidetic imagery," is designed to begin this process, and NElSSER's
recent work is an even broader attempt to do the same. For thirty
years research on- this topic ceased. We have now had nearly twenty
years of substantial research activity resting on a much firmer and
more reliable set of procedures. I started my target article by
admitting to being haunted. The commentators have been superb
exorcists, at least for my personal ghosts. With this BBS treatment as
a summary of those twenty years, we can be ready for the model
building and the breakthroughs that should follow.
REFERENCES
The literature on eidetic imagery spans nearly a century, several
languages, and many topics; I have attempted to collect a complete
bibliography of works written or published between 1900 and 1978. I
have subdivided it into five headings: primary sources of empirical
data on eidetic imagery, individual case studies of subjects with
eidetic imagery, theoretical and review articles on eidetic imagery
and related topics, cross-cultural studies of eidetic imagery, and
studies on eidetic imagery using neurologically Impaired subjects. In
the article I have referred to a few theoretical papers on other topics,
and these have been included in a final category of general
references. Of course, many of the articles reporting new data also
have theoretical discussions, but I have not listed them twice. Within
the big categories of data and theory, I have divided the references
appearing before and after 1964, as this date reiects a substantial
change in methodology.
Empirical studies of eidetic Imagery - pre-1964
Ahsen, A. (1959) Hemispheric experiments on eidetic images of parents. Paper
presented at the Pakistan Science Conference. 
[AA]
(1962) Eidetic images: a study of imagery steps for the evocation of mental
structures. Paper presented at the Psychological Society, Rawalpin-
di. [AA]
Allport, G. W. (1924) Eidetic imagery. British Journal of Psychology. 15:99-
120. [AA, RNH, DHH, IL, DM, CR]
(1928) The eidetic image and the afterimage. American Journal of Psychol-
ogy. 41:418-25. 
[RNH, CR]
Bonte, T. H. (1933) Uber die Suggestibilitat von Eidetikern und Nichteideti-
kera (The suggestibility of eidetikers and noneidetikers). Zeitschrift fur
angewandte Psychologie. 44:161-92. 
[RNH]
Freiling, H. (1923) Uber die raumlichen Wahmehmungen der Jugendlichen in
der eidetischen Entwicklungsphase (The spatial perception of the young
in eidetic development). Zeitschrift fur Sinnesphysiologie. 55:69-
132. [RNH]
Gengerelli, J. A. (1930) Some quantitative experiments with eidetic imagery.
American Journal of Psychology. 42:399-404. 
[RNH]
Jaensch, E. R. (1922a) fiber die subjektiven Anschauungsbilder (On subjective
imagery). Bericht uber den Kongress fur experimentelle Psychologie.
7:3. [RNH]
(1922b) Die Volkerkunde und der eidetische Tatsachenkries (Anthropology
and eidetic phenomena). Zeitschrift fur Psychologie. 91:88-l 11. 
[RNH]
(1930) Eidetic imagery and typological methods of investigation. Trans-
lated by O. Oeser. London: Kegan Paul, Trench, Trubner; New York:
Harcourt Brace. [AA, RNH]
Jaensch, E. R., and Jaensch, W. (1921) fiber die Verbreitung der eidetischen
Anlage im Jugendalter (On the incidence of eidetic ability during the
years of youth). Zeitschrift fur Psychologie. 87:91. [RNH]
Johannesson, B. (1939) Eidetische Untersuchungen in Island (Eidetic studies in
Iceland). Zeitschrift fur Psychologie. 146:161-81. 
[RNH]
Karger, P. (1925) Die eidetische Anlage der Jugendlichen in ihre Bedeutung
fur die Klinik und die Schulleistungen (The eidetic ability of youth and its
importance for the performance in clinic and school). Klinische Wochen-
schrift. 4:22-47. 
[RNH]
Katz, G. G. (1956) An investigation of eidetic imagery in conditions of hypo-
calcemia, with and without latent tetany. Doctoral dissertation, New York
University. [RNH]
6 2 4 
THE BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1979), 2

References/Haber: Eidetic imagery
Kliiver, H. (1925) Description of eidetic phenomena. Psychological Bulletin.
22:331. [RNH, CR]
(1926) An experimental study of the eidetic type. Genetic Psychology Mon-
ographs. 1:71-230. [RNH, IL]
(1928) Studies on the eidetic type and on eidetic imagery. Psychological
Bulletin. 25:69-104. [RNH, IL]
(1930) Fragmentary eidetic imagery. Psychological Review. 37:441-
58. [AA, RNH]
(1931) The eidetic child. In A handbook of child psychology, ed. C. Murchi-
son. Worcester, Mass.: Clark University Press. [RNH, CR]
(1932) Eidetic phenomena. Psychological Bulletin. 29:181-203. [RNH, IL,
DM]
Krellenberg, P. (1922) Uber die Herausdifferenzierung der Wahrnehmungs
und Vorstellungswelt aus der originaren eidetischen Einheit (The develop-
ment of perception and imagination from a primary eidetic state).
Zeitschrift fur Psychologie. 88:56-119. [RNH]
Kroh, O. (1922) Suhjektive Anschauungsbilder hei Jugendlichen. Gotting-
en. [AA, RNH]
(1924) Die eidetische Anlage bei Jugendlichen (The eidetic ability of young
people). Zeitschrift fur Kinderforschung mit hesonderer Beriicksichti-
gung der pddagogischen Pathologic. 29:63. [RNH]
(1952) Die Eidetik in neuer Beleuehtung (Eidetics in a new light). Psycho-
logische Rundschau. 1:257-65. [RNH]
Leven, D. (1926) Die eidetische Anlage der Jugendlichen (Eidetic ability in
young people). Klinische Wochenschrift. 5:271. [RNH]
Lief man, E. (1928) Untersuchungen iiber die eidetische Veranlagung von
Schulerinnen einer hoheren Madchenschule. Anhang: Einzelne Unter-
suchunger an Erwachsenen (Research on eidetic abilities in a girls' high
school. Appendix: Individual research on adults). Zeitschrift fur ange-
wandte Psychologie. (Beihefte) 43:111-96. [RNH]
Meenes, M. (1933) Eidetic phenomena in Negro school children. Psychological
Bulletin. 30:688-89. [RNH]
(1934) The relationship of the eidetic phenomenon to the after-image and to
the memory-image. Psychological Bulletin. 31:739. [RNH]
Meenes, M., and Morton, M. A. (1936) Characteristics of the eidetic phenome-
non. Journal of General Psychology. 14:370-91. [RNH]
Morsch, J. E. (1942) Further investigation of "eidetic imagery." Psychological
Bulletin. 39:611-12. [RNH]
Morsh, J. E., and Abbott, H. D. (1945) An investigation of after-images, jour-
nal of Comparative Psychology. 38:47-63. [RNH]
Nickols, J. (1962) Eidetic imagery synthesis. American Journal of Psychother-
apy. 16:76-82. [RNH]
Peck, L., and Hodges, A. B. (1937) A study of racial differences in eidetic im-
agery of preschool children. Journal of Genetic Psychology. 51:141-
61. [RNH]
Peck, L., and Walling, R. (1935) A preliminary study of the eidetic imagery of
preschool children. Journal of Genetic Psychology. 47:168-92. [RNH]
Purdy, D. M. (1936) Eidetic imagery and plasticity of perception. Journal of
General Psychology. 15:437-54. [RNH]
Quercy, P. (1925) Les eidetiques (The eidetikers). Journal de Psychologie.
22:801-11. [RNH]
(1926) Recherches sur 1'eidetisnie (Research in eideticism). Journal de Psy-
chologie. 23:702-22. [RNH]
Smith, G. (1949) Psychological studies in twin differences: with reference to
afterimage and eidetic phenomena as well as more general personality
characteristics. Lund: C. W. K. Gleercup. [RNH]
Teasdale, H. (1934) A quantitative study of eidetic imagery. British Journal of
Educational Psychology. 4:56-74. [RNH]
Traxel, W. (1962) Kritische Untersuchungen zur Eidetik. Archiv fur die Ge-
samte Psychologie. 114:260-336. [RNH]
Tripp, E. (1926) Observations sur l'image eidetique (Observations on the ei-
detic image). Archives de Psychologie. 20:53-72. [RNH]
Urbantschitsch, V. (1907) Uber subjektive optische Anschauungsbilder (On
subjective visual images). Leipzig and Vienna: Deuticke. [RNH]
Wachtel, J. (1934) Studjum eidetyzmu wsrod dorostych (Studies of eideticism
in adults). Kwartalnik Psychologiczny. 5:394-401. [RNH]
Zaworski, T. (1947) Akustyczne wyobrazenia eidetyczne (Acoustical eidetic
imagery). Kwartalnik Psychologiczny. 13:156-203. [RNH]
Zimmerman, M. (1931) Eidetik und Schulunterricht (Eidetic imagery and
school instruction). Langensalza: Hermann Beyer & Sohne. [RNH]
Empirical studies of eidetic images - post-1964
Ahsen, A. (1964) Eidetic images of parents, their relationship with symptoms
and character formation. Paper presented at the Psychological Society,
Rawalpindi. [AA]
Anonymous. (1971) Do you have a photographic mind? Current Science.
56:6. [JOM]
Cohen, M. W. (1975) Eidetic imagery and oral comprehension* Master's thesis,
University of Western Ontario. [RNH]
(1976) Eidetic imagery vs. language skills. Journal of Social Psychology.
99:143-44. [RNH]
Davy, J. (1971) The Observer. (London) Supplement, 21 March. [JOM]
Didlo, J. H. (1970) Operant conditioning procedures applied to eidetic image-
ry: a preliminary investigation. Doctoral dissertation, Colorado State Col-
lege. [RNH]
Dirks, J. (1978) Spatial memory of two eidetic subjects. Paper presented to the
American Psychological Association, Toronto. [UN]
Ford, B. (1972) You may have a photographic memory. Science Digest, pp.
56-71. [JOM]
Freides, D., and Hayden, S. P. (1966) Monocular testing: a methodological
note on eidetic imagery. Perceptual and Motor Skills. 23:88. [RNH,
EMS]
Furst, C. J., and Fuld, K. (1975) Verbal and spatial abilities of eidetikers. Un-
published paper. [CJF]
Furst, C. J.; Fuld, K.; and Paecoe, M. (1974) Recall accuracy of eidetikers.
Journal of Experimental Psychology. 102:1133-35. [AA, CJF, RNH]
Furst, C. J.; Gardner J.; and Karm'ya, J. (1974) Posterior alpha-wave character-
istics of eidetic children. Psychophysiology. 11:603-6. [RNH]
Giray, E. F.; Altkin, W. M; Roodin, P. A.; Yoon, G.; and Flagg, P. (1978) The
incidence of eidetic imagery in adulthood and old age. Paper presented at
American Psychological Association meeting, Toronto. [RNH, PAR,
PWS]
Giray, E. F.; Altkin, W. M.; Vaught, G. M; and Roodin, P. A. (1976) The inci-
dence of eidetic imagery as a function of age. Child Development.
47:1,207-10. [RNH]
Gummerman, K.; Gray, C. R.; and Wilson, J. M. (1972) An attempt to assess ei-
detic imagery objectively. Psychonomic Science. 28:115-18. [CJF,
RNH, DHH]
Haber, R. N. (1969) Eidetic images. Scientific American. 220(4):36-
44. [RNH]
Haber, R. N., and Haber, R. B. (1964) Eidetic imagery: I. Frequency. Percep-
tual and Motor Skills. 19:131-38. [CJF, RNH, BJ, IL, POR]
Hatakeyama, T. (1974) The process of having identified an adult eidetic per-
son and her eidetic experiences in daily life. Tohoku Psychologica Folia.
33:102-18. (RNH, DM]
(1975) The constructive character of eidetic imagery. Tohoku Psychologica
Folia. 34:38-51. (RNH, DM]
Heinerth, K., and Nickel, H. (1975) Reproduktionsleistungen von 10-14
jahrigen Schiilern und Studenten nach kurzzeitiger Darbietung einer Bild-
vorlage: Anschauliche Vorstellungen oder subjektive Anschauungsbilder?
(Reproductions of 10-44 year olds and university students after a short-
term presentation of a picture: memory or eidetic images). Psychologie in
Erziehungund Unterricht. 22:148-60. [RNH, KH]
Lamb, H. L. (1974) Eye movement in eidetic imagery. Dissertation Abstracts
International. 35:548. [RNH]
Leask, J., Haber, R. N., and Haber, R. B. (1969) Eidetic imagery in children:
II. Longitudinal and experimental results. Psychonomic Monograph Sup-
plements. 3:25-48. [AA, KAE, RNH, JJ, BJ, PWS]
Leuner, H. (1970) Katathymes Bilderleben. Stuttgart. Georg Thieme Ver-
lag. [KH]
Lin, C-S. (1972) An experimental study of visual eidetic imagery of Chinese
school children. Dissertation Abstracts International. 33:1,025. [RNH]
McBroom, P. (1970) Is your memory photographic? Philadelphia Inquirer.
November 8, Sec. 2, p. 1. [JOM]
Mcllwain, D. J. (1978) Eidetic abilities: a study of spontaneous and post-
picture imagery. Honors thesis, University of Otago. [DM]
McMains, M. J. (1975) The recall of geometric and random figures by children
with eidetic memory under conditions of interpolated interference. Dis-
sertation Abstracts International. 35:3,620. [RNH]
Merritt, J. (1973) Do you have a photographic memory? Informative Articles.
pp. 1-6. [JOM]
Nickel, H.; Heinerth, K.; and Bittman, F. (1975) Gibt es wirklich Eidetiker?
(Eidetic ability: fact or artifact?) Untersuchungen mit stereoskopischen
Vorlagen an Schulkindern und Studierenden. Psychologie in Erziehung
und Unterricht. 22:259-73. [RNH, KH]
Onizawa, T., and Seki, Y. (1974) Personality characteristics of the change type
and eon-change type of eidetic images. Tohoku Psychologia Folia. 33:88-
92. (RNH]
(1975) Recall of eidetic children. Tohoku Psychologica Folia. 34:33-
37. [RNH]
Paivio, A., and Cohen, M. W. (1977) Eidetic imagery and figural abilities in
children. Paper presented at a symposium on current directions in imag-
THE BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1979), 2
625

References/Haber: Eidetic imagery
ery, eidetic and otherwise, at the annual convention of the American Psy-
chological Association, San Francisco. [JB, RNH, DHH]
Pierro, P. S. (1966) An investigation of visual form perception and eidetic im-
agery in students who read well and spell poorly. Doctoral dissertation,
Northern Illinois University. [RNH]
Pollen, D. A., and Trachtenberg, M. C. (1972) Alpha rhythm and eye move-
ments in eidetic imagery. Nature. 237:109-12. [AA, RNH, BJ, AR]
Stromeyer, C. F., Ill (1970) Eidetikers. Psychology Today. 4:76-80. [RNH,
JOM]
Stromeyer, C. F., III., and Psotka, J. (1970) The detailed texture of eidetic
images. Nature. 225:347-49. [BB, DCD, RNH, KH, DHH, BJ, IL, JOM,
BW]
Wallace, B. (1978) Restoration of eidetic imagery via hypnotic age regression:
more evidence. Journal of Abnormal Psychology. 87:673-75. [BW]
Zelhart, P., and Johnson, R. C. (1959) An investigation of eidetic imagery. Pa-
per presented at Western Psychological Association meeting, San Jose,
California. Cited in Fundamentals of child development, ed. H. Munsin-
ger. New York: Holt, Rinehart & Winston, 1.971. [RNH]
Case studies of eidetic abilities - pre-1964
Antipoff, H. (1926) Un cas d'image eidetique spontanee (A case of spontaneous
eidetic imagery). Archives de Psychologic. 20:73. [RNH]
Bousfield, W. A., and Barry, H., Jr. (1933) The visual imagery of a lightning
calculator. American Journal of Psychology. 45:353-58. [RNH]
Helson, H. (1933) A child's spontaneous reports of imagery. American Journal
of Psychology. 360-61. [AR]
Hunter, I. M. L. (1962) An exceptional talent for calculative thinking. British
Journal of Psychology. 53:243-58. [RNH]
Jaensch, E. R., and Mehmel, H. (1928) Gedachtnisleistungen eines schwachsin-
nigen Eidetikers (Memory performance of a feeble-minded eidetic man).
Psychiatrisch-neurologische Wochenschrift. 30:101-3. [RNH]
Jelliffe, S. E. (1928) On eidetic psychology and psychiatric problems. Medical
Journal and Record. 128:80-83. [RNH]
Kao, C. C, and Lyman, R. S. (1944) The role of eidetic imagery in a psychosis.
Journal of Nervous and Mental Disease. 100:355-65. [AA, RNH]
Luria, A. R. (1968) The mind of amnemonist. Translated by L. Solotaroff.
New York: Basic Books. [RNH, JJ]
Miller, E. (1931a) The eidetic image - an undertone of psychosis, introduction
to a future inquiry. Proceedings of the Royal Society of Medicine.
24:1,223-30. [AA, RNH]
(1931b) Eidetic imagery. Journal of Neurology and Psychopathology. 12:1-
13. [RNH]
Miskolczy, D., and Schultz, G. (1929) Eidetik und Schizophrenic (Eideticism
and schizophrenia). Monatsschrift fur Psychiatrie und Neurologic.
72:354. [RNH]
Mota, A. (1950) Eidetismo e alucinacoes; correlacoes dinamicas (Eideticism
and hallucinations; dynamic correlations). Anais Porugueses de Psiquia-
tria. 2:359-75. [RNH]
Neymeyer, H. (1956) Uber pathologische Eidetisrnen (On pathologic eidetic
images). Psychiatrie, Neurologic und medizinische Psychologie. (Leipzig)
8:234-57. [RNH]
Rauth, J. E., and Sinnott, J. J. (1937) A new eidetic phenomenon. Child Devel-
opment. 8:112-13. [RNH]
Saltzman, S. S., and Machover, S. (1952) An inquiry into eidetic imagery with
particular reference to visual hallucinations. American Journal of Psy-
chiatry. 108:740-48. [AA, RNH]
Schilder, P. (1926) Psychoanalyse und Eidetik (Psychoanalysis and eidetics).
Zeitschrift fur Sexualwissenschaft. 13:56. [AA, RNH]
Stratton, G. M. (1917) The mnemonic feat of the "Shass Pollak." Psychological
Review. 24:244-47. [RNH]
Weiskrantz, L. (1950) An unusual case of after-imagery following fixation of
an "imaginary" visual pattern. Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psy-
chology. 2:170-75. [IMLH]
Wertham, F. (1930) Eidetic phenomena and psychopathology. Archives of
Neurology and Psychiatry. 24:809-21. [RNH]
Ziolko, H. U. (1953) Zur Bedeutung spontan-eidetischer Erscheinungen in der
Psychiatrie (Concerning the significance of spontaneous eidetic imagery
in psychiatry). Zeitschrift fur Psychotherapie und medizinische Psycho-
logie. 3:171-78. [RNH]
Case studies of eidetic abilities - post-1964
Ahsen, A. (1965) Eidetic psychotherapy: a short introduction. New York:
Brandon House. [AA]
(1.968) Basic concepts in eidetic psychotherapy. New York: Brandon
House. [AA]
(1977) Eidetics: an overview. Journal of Mental Imagery. 1:5-38. [AA,
RNH, DM]
(1977a) Psycheye. New York: Brandon House. [AA]
Coltheart, M., and Click, M. J. (1974) Visual imagery: a case study. Quarterly
Journal of Experimental Psychology. 26:438-53. [RNH]
Dolan, A. T., and Sheikh, A. A. (1977) Short-term treatment of phobia through
eidetic imagery. American Journal of Psychotherapy. 31:595-604. [AA,
RNH]
Gengerelli, J. A. (1976) Eidetic imagery in two subjects after 46 years. Journal
of General Psychology. 95:219-25. [RNH]
Gummerman, K., and Gray, C. R. (1972) Recall of visually presented material:
an unwonted case and a bibliography for eidetic imagery. Psychonomic
Monograph Supplements. 4:189-95. [RNH]
Hill, A. L. (1975) An investigation of calendar calculating by an idiot savant.
American Journal of Psychiatry. 132:557-60. [RNH]
Schale, F. C. (1972) Exploring the potential of the monocularly blind for faster
reading. Academic Therapy. 7:401-10. [RNH]
Sheehan, P. W. (1968) Color responses on the TAT: an instance of eidetic im-
agery? Journal of Psychology. 68:203-9. [RNH]
Sheikh, A. A. (1976) Treatment of insomnia through eidetic imagery: a new
technique. Perceptual and Motor Skills. 43:994. [AA, RNH]
Siegel, M. H. (1977) Visual and auditory imagery: a case study. Paper pre-
sented at American Psychological Association meeting, San Francis-
co. [RNH]
Walker, N. S.; Garrett, J. B.; and Wallace, B. (1976) The restoration of
eidetic imagery via hypnotic age regression: a preliminary report. Journal
of Abnormal Psychology. 85:335-37. [AA, RNH, BJ, BW]
Theoretical and review articles on eidetic Imagery -
pre-1964
Barber, T. X. (1959a) The after-images of "hallucinated" and "imagined"
colors. Journal of Abnormal and Social Psychology. 59:136-39. [AA,
TXB, RNH]
(1959b) The "eidetic image" and "hallucinatory" behavior: a suggestion for
further research. Psychological Bulletin. 56:236-39. [TXB, RNH]
Bonte, T. H. (1934) Die eidetische Anlage und ihre Bedeutung fur Erziehung
und Unterricht. (Eidetic ability and its importance for education). Leip-
zig: Barth. [RNH]
Carmichael, L. (1925) Eidetic imagery and the Binet test. Journal of Educa-
tional Psychology. 16:251-52. [RNH]
Cramaussel, E. (1926) Images eidetiques (Eidetic images). Journal de Psycho-
logie. 23:1,003-10. [RNH]
Dimitrow, M. (1931) Psychologie des images eidetiques spontanees (The psy-
chology of spontaneous eidetic images). Annuaire de I'Universite de So-
fia, Faculte Historico-Philologique. 27:150. [RNH]
Duker, H. (1965) Hat Jaenschs Lehre von der Eidetik heute noch Bedeutung?
(Is Jaensch's concept of eidetic phenomena still of significance?) Psycho-
logische Beitrage. 8:237-53. [RNH]
Feiman, G. (1935) Eideticism and school age. Moscow: Biomedgiz. [RNH]
Gressot, M. (1950) Essai sur Fimage eidetique et le probleme de la vision (Es-
say on the eidetic image and the problem of vision). Schweizer Archiv fur
Neurologic und Psychiatrie. 66:86-122. [RNH]
Hansen, W. (1929) Uber den gegenwartigen Stand der eidetischen Forschung
(The present status of eidetic research). Vierteljahrsschrift fur wissen-
schaftliche Padogogik. 5:347-83. [RNH]
Heller, T. (1930) Eidetik und Psychologie der Aussage (Eidetics and the psy-
chology of testimony). Zeitschrift fur angewandte Psychologie. 35:210-
12. [RNH]
Henning, H. (1923) Starre eidetische Klang-und Schmerzbilder and die eide--
tische Konstellation (Rigid eidetic sound and pain images and the eidetic
constellation). Zeitschrift fur Psychologie. 92:137-76. [RNH]
(1924) Die neuentdeckte Erlebnisklasse der Eidetik, die Urbilder und der
Konstitutions-typus (The newly discovered phenomenon of eidetic imag-
ery, archetypes, and body type). Deutsche Zeitschrift fur Nervenheil-
kunde. 81:180. [RNH]
Herbertz, R. (1930) Was ist "Eidetik"? (What is eideticism?) Psychologische
Rundschau. 1:35-358. [RNH]
Hofe, K. vom. (1926a) Beitrag zur Frage der eidetischen Anlage (Contribu-
tions to the questions of eidetic ability). Archiv fur Ophthalmologie.
117:40. [RNH]
626
THE BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1979), 2

References/Haber: Eidetic imagery
(1926b) Uber eidetische Anlage beirn Erwachsenen (About eidetic ability in
adults). Medizinische Klinik. 22:1361. [RNH]
Hofmarksrichter, K. (1931) Visuelle Kompensation und Eidetik bei Taubstum-
rnen (Visual compensation and eidetic imagery in deaf mutes). Archiv fur
die gesamte Psychologie. 82:329-402. [RNH]
Husen, T. (1946) Studier rorande de eidetiska fenornenen (Studies concerning
eidetic phenomena). Stockholm: H a Kan Ohlssons Boktryckeri. [RNH]
(1952) Studier rorande de eidetiska bildernas fenomenologi, II (Studies con-
cerning the phenomenology of eidetic imagery, II). Lunds Universitets
Arskrift. 48:1-85. [RNH]
Jaensch, E. R. (1921) Ueber psychophysische Konstitutionstypen. Monats-
schrift fur Kinderheilkunde. 2:22. [RNH]
Kiesow, F. (1925) Zur kritik der Eidetik (Criticism of eidetics). Archiv fur die
gesamte Psychologie. 53:447-84. [RNH]
Kirek, H. (1926) Die Bedeutung der sensoriellen Veranlagung fur die Bildung
von Objektvorstellungen insbesondere bei Eidetikern (The significance of
a person's sensory type for his ability to imagine objects, with special con-
sideration of this ability in eideticism). Zeitschrift filr die Behandlung
Schwachsinniger und Epileptischer. 46:121-23. [RNH]
Kluver, H. (1926) Mescal visions and eidetic vision. American Journal of Psy-
chology. 37:502-15. [RNH]
(1928) Mescal: the divine plant and its psychological effects. London: Ke-
gan Paul. [RNH]
(1932) Eidetic phenomena. Psychological Bulletin. 29:181-203. [RNH]
Luther, F. (1931) Die probleme der Eidetik Erich Jaenschs und seiner Schule
(The problem of eidetics for Erich Jaensch and his school). Zeitschrift fur
Menschenkunde. 6:401-19. [RNH]
Mata de Gregorio, J., and Poleo, M. A. (1958) El fenomeno eidetico (Eidetic
phenomena). Cuadernos Psicologia (Caracas). 1:8-11. [RNH]
O'Neill, H. E., and Rauth, J. E. (1934) Eidetic imagery. Catholic University of
America Educational Research. 8:22. [RNH]
Shipley, T. (1958) The horopter in eidetic subjects. Psychological Bulletin.
55:171-75. [RNH]
Wilhelm, F. (1927) Die Bedeutung der eidetischen Forschung fur Erziehung
und Unterricht (The importance of eidetic investigation for instruction
and education). Leipzig: J. Klinkhardt. [RNH]
Theoretical and review articles on eidetic imagery -
post-1964
Ahsen, A. (1972) Eidetic parents test and analysis: a practical guide to sys-
tematic and comprehensive analysis. New York: Brandon
House. [RNH]
(1973) Basic concepts in eidetic psychotherapy. New York: Brandon
House. [RNH]
Ahsen, A., and Lazarus, A. A. (1972) Eidetics: an internal behavior approach.
In Clinical behavior therapy, ed. A. A. Lazarus. New York: Brunner/
Mazel. [AA]
Blakemore, C; Braddick, O.; and Gregory, R. L. (1970) Detailed texture of ei-
detic images: a discussion. Nature. 226:1,267-68. [RNH]
Blanc-Garin, J. (1974) Recent research in mental images: their role in the pro-
cedures of perceptive and cognitive processes. AnneePsychologique.
74:533-63. [JB, RNH]
Dolan, A. T. (1977) Eidetic and general image theory of primary image objects
and identification processes. Journal of Mental Images. 1:217-27. [AA,
RNH]
Dolan, A. T., and Sheikh, A. A. (1976) Eidetics: a visual approach to psycho-
therapy. Psychology. 19:200-9. [RNH]
Giray, E. F.; Altkin, W. M.; Roodin, P. A.; and Vaught, G. M. (1977) The enig-
matic eidetic image: a reply to Gray and Gummerman. Perceptual and
Motor Skills. 44:191-94. [RNH]
Gray, C. R., and Gummerman, K. (1975) The enigmatic eidetic image: a criti-
cal examination of methods, data and theories. Psychological Bulletin.
82:383-407. [TXB, KAE, RNH, IL, CR, PAR, PWS]
Hebb, D. O. (1968) Concerning imagery. Psychological Review. 75:466-
77. [RNH, PWS]
Panagiotou, N., and Sheikh, A. A. (1974) Eidetic psychotherapy: introduction
and evaluation. International Journal of Social Psychiatry. 20:231-
41. [AA, RNH]
Richardson, A. (1969) Mental imagery. New York: Spring. [RNH, DM]
Sheikh, A. A. (1978) Eidetic psychotherapy. In The power of human imagina-
tion, ed. J. L. Singer and K. Pope. New York: Plenum Press. [AA]
Standing, L.; Bond, B.; Hall, J.; and Weller, J. (1972) A bibliography of
picture-memory studies. Psychonomic Science. 29:406-16. [RNH]
Taylor, J. G. (1973) A behavioral theory of images. South African Journal of
Psychology. 3:1-10. [RNH]
Tharp, V. K. (1972) Mnemonic techniques, visual imagery and brain function.
Biological Psychology Bulletin. 1:10-20. [RNH]
Twente, G. E.; Turner, D.; and Haney, J. (1978) Eidetics in the hospital setting
and private practice: a report on eidetic therapy procedures employed
with 69 patients. Journal of Mental Imagery. 2:275-90. [AA]
Cross-cultural studies of eidetic imagery
Ayixian, T. (1973) Cross-cultural and predictive aspects of eidetic imagery: a
comparative investigation. Dissertation Abstracts International.
33:6,168. [RNH]
Doob, L. W. (1964) Eidetic images among the Ibo. Ethnology. 3:357-
63. [CJF, RNH]
(1965) Exploring eidetic imagery among the Kamba of central Kenya. Jour-
nal of Social Psychology. 67:3-22. [CJF, RNH]
(1966) Eidetic imagery: a cross-cultural will-o'-the-wisp? Journal of Psy-
chology. 63:13-34. [RNH]
(1970) Correlates of eidetic imagery in Africa. Journal of Psychology.
76:223-30. [RNH, JJ]
Feldman, M. (1968) Eidetic imagery in Ghana: a cross-cultural will-o'-the-
wisp? Journal of Psychology. 69:259-69. [RNH]
Kearins, J. (1976) Skills of desert Aboriginal children. In Aboriginal cognition,
ed. G. E. Kearney and D. W. McElwain. Canberra: Australian Institute of
Aboriginal Studies. [IMLH]
(1978) The visual spatial memory of desert Aboriginal children. University
News (University of Western Australia) 9(2):8-10. [IMLH]
Levak, M. D. (1969) Eidetic images among the Bororo of Brazil. Journal of So-
cial Psychology. 79:135-37. [RNH]
Sheehan, P. W. (1973) The variability of eidetic imagery among Australian
aboriginal children. Journal of Social Psychology. 91:29-36. [RNH,
PWS]
Sheehan, P. W., and Stewart, S. J. (1972) A cross cultural study of eidetic imag-
ery among Australian aboriginal children. Journal of Social Psychology.
87:179-88. [RNH]
Eidetic imagery and neurological pathology
Ahsen, A. (1978) Eidetics: neural experiential growth potential for the treat-
ment of accident traumas, debilitating stress conditions, and chronic emo-
tional blocking. Journal of Mental Imagery. 2:1-22. [AA]
Bender, M. B.; Feldman, M; and Sobin, A. J. (1968) Palinopsia. Brain. 91:321-
38. [AR]
Critchley, M. (1951) Types of visual perseveration: "palinopsia" and "illusory
visual spread." Brain. 74:267-99. [PAR]
Essler, K. R., and Rowe, C. J. (1946) A note on eidetic imagery in a case of ob-
sessive neurosis. Journal of Clinical Psychology. 2:286-88. [AA, RNH]
Flournoy, H. (1926) Eidetisme chez une debile (The eideticism of a mental re-
tardate). Archives de Psychologie. 20:73-74. [RNH]
Floyd, L. G. (1956) Eidetic imagery in normal and psychotic cases: a study in
the incidence and characteristics of eidetic imagery in normal and psy-
chotic cases, and a comparative analysis of the groups. Doctoral disserta-
tion, New York University. [AA, RNH]
Furst, C. J.; Gardner, J.; and Kamiya, J. (1974) Posterior alpha-wave character-
istics of eidetic children. Psychophysiology. 11:603-6. [AR]
Giray, E. F.; Altkin, W. M; and Barclay, A. G. (1976) Frequency of eidetic im-
agery among hydrocephalic children. Perceptual and Motor Skills.
43:187-94. [AA, RNH, EMS]
Giray, E. F., and Barclay, A. G. (1977) Eidetic imagery: longitudinal results in
brain-damaged children. American Journal of Mental Deficiency.
82:311-14. [AA]
• Lessell, S. (1975) Higher disorders of visual function: positive phenomena. In
Neuro-ophthalmology, vol. 8, ed. J. S. Glaser and J. L. Smith, pp. 27-44.
St. Louis: C. V. Mosby Co. [PAR]
Meadows, J. C, and Munro, S. S. F. (1977) Palinopsia. Journal of Neurology,
Neurosurgery, and Psychiatry. 40:5-8. [AR]
Richardson, A., and Cant, R. (1970) Eidetic imagery and brain damage. Aus-
tralian Journal of Psychology. 22:47-54. [RNH, EMS]
Siipola, E. M., and Hayden, S. D. (1965) Exploring eidetic imagery among the
retarded. Perceptual and Motor Skills. 21:275-86. [AA, RNH, EMS]
Symmes, J. S. (1971) Visual imagery in brain-injured children. Perceptual and
Motor Skills. 33:507-14. [AA, RNH]
THE BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1979), 2
627

References/Haber: Eidetic imagery
General references
Allport, D. A.; Antonitis, B.; and Reynolds, P. (1972) On the division of atten-
tion: a disproof of the single channel hypothesis. Quarterly Journal of Ex-
perimental Psychology. 24:225-35. [RNH]
Baltes, P. B., and Willis, S. L. (1977) Toward psychological theories of aging
and development. In Handbook of the psychology of aging, ed. J. E. Bir-
ren and K. W. Schaie, pp. 128-54. New York: Van Nostrand Rein-
hold. [PAR]
Barber, T. X. (1964a) Hypnotically hallucinated colors and their negative af-
ter-images. American Journal of Psychology. 77:313-18. [TXB]
(1964b) Toward a theory of "hypnotic behavior": positive visual and audi-
tory hallucinations. Psychological Record. 14:197-210. [TXB]
(1970a) Hypnosis, suggestions, and auditory-visual hallucinations. In Origin
and mechanisms of hallucinations, ed. W. Keup, pp. 167-80. New York:
Plenum Press. [TXB]
(1970b) LSD, marihuana, yoga and hypnosis. Hawthorne, N. Y.: Al-
dine. [TXB]
(1971) Imagery and "hallucinations": effects of LSD contrasted with the ef-
fects of "hypnotic" suggestions. In Imagery: current cognitive ap-
proaches, ed. S. J. Segal, pp. 101-29. New York: Academic Press. [TXB]
Barber, T. X., and Calverley, D. S. (1964) An experimental study of "hypnot-
ic" (auditory and visual) hallucinations. Journal of Abnormal and Social
Psychology. 63:13-20. [TXB]
Barber, T. X.; Spanos, N. P.; and Chaves, J. F. (1974) Hypnosis, imagination
and human potentialities. New York: Pergamon. [TXB]
Baxt, N. (1871) Uber die Zeit welch notig ist, damit ein Gesichtseindruck zum
Bewusstsein kommt und uber die Grosse (Extension) der Bewusstseins
Wahrnehmung bei einem Gesichtseindrucke von gegebener Dauer. Pfug-
er's Archive gesammelte Physiologie. 4:325-36. [RNH]
Benjafield, J. (1969) Evidence that thinking aloud constitutes an externaliza-
tion of inner speech. Psychonomic Science. 15:83-84. [KAE]
Belts, G. H. (1909) The distribution and functions of mental imagery. New
York: Teachers College, Columbia University. [RA]
Braunstein, M. R. (1975) Depth perception through motion. New York: Aca-
demic Press. [RNH]
Breuil, H. (1952) Four Centuries of Cave Art. Montignac, Dordogne: Centre
d'Etudes et de Documentation Prehistoriques. [JJ]
Bridgeman, B. (1973) Receptive fields in single cells of monkey visual cor-
tex during visual tracking. International Journal of Neurosciences.
6:141-52. [BB]
Brooks, L. R. (1967) The suppression of visualization by reading. Quarterly
Journal of Experimental Psychology. 19:289-99. (RNH, CR]
Chandler, M. J. (1976) Social cognition and life-span approaches to the study
of child development. In Advances in child behavior and development,
vol. 11, ed. H. W. Reese, pp. 225-39. New York: Academic Press. [PAR]
Comstock, C, and Kittredge, H. (1922) An experimental study of children as
observers. American Journal of Psychology. 33:161-77. [KAE]
Dev, P. (1975) Computer simulation of a dynamic visual perception model. In-
ternational Journal of Man-Machine Studies. 7:511-28. [IL]
Dewey, J. (1891) How do concepts arise from percepts? Public-school journal.
November: 128-29. [AA]
Dirks, J., and Neisser, U. (1977) Memory for objects in real scenes: the develop-
ment of recognition and recall. Journal of Experimental Child Psycholo-
gy. 23:315-28. [UN]
Drever, J. (1964) A dictionary of psychology. Revised by H. Wallerstein. Balti-
more: Penguin Books. [AA]
Erdelyi, M. H. (1976) Coding modality vs. input modality in hypermnesia: is a
rose a rose a rose? Cognition. 4:311-19. [RNH]
Ericsson, K. A., and Simon, H. A. (1978) Retrospective verbal reports as data.
CLP. working paper no. 388. [KAE]
(1979) Thinking aloud protocols as data: effects of verbalization. C.I.P.
working paper no. 397. [KAE]
Ernest, C. H. (1977) Imagery ability and cognition: a critical review. Journal
of Mental Imagery. 1:181-216. [UN]
Flavell, J. H. (1971) Stage-related properties of cognitive development. Cogni-
tive Psychology. 2:421-53. [PAR]
Forisha, B. L. (1978) Mental imagery and creativity. Review and speculations.
Journal of Mental Imagery. 2:209-38. [JB]
Gallon, F. (1883) Inquiries into human faculty and its development. London:
Dent. [TXB, IMLH]
Garner, W. R.; Hake, H. W.; and Eriksen, C. W. (1956) Operationism and the
concept of perception. Psychological Review. 63:149-59. [RNH]
Gordon, R. (1949) An investigation into some of the factors that favour the for-
mation of stereotyped images. British Journal of Psychology. 39:156-
67. [JB]
Griffitts, C. H. (1927) Individual differences in imagery. Psychological Mono-
graphs. 37: number 172. [MHS]
Haber, R. N. (1978) Visual perception. Annual Review of Psychology. 29:25-
59. [RNH]
Haber, R. N., and Hershenson, M. (1980) The psychology of visual perception.
2d ed. New York: Holt, Rinehart & Winston. [RNH]
Ham, M. W., and Spanos, N. P. (1974) Suggested auditory and yisual halluci-
nations in task-motivated and hypnotic subjects. American Journal of
Clinical Hypnosis. 17:94-101. [TXB]
Hannay, A. (1972) Mental images - a defence. London: Allen & Unwin; New
York: Humanities Press. [AH]
(1977) Proximality as a mark of the mental. In Contemporary aspects of
philosophy, ed. G. Ryle. London and Boston: Oriel Press. [AH]
Hebb, D. O. (1972) Textbook of psychology. Philadelphia: W. B. Saunders
Co. [AA]
Horowitz, M. J. (1970) Image formation and congition. New York: Appleton-
Century-Crofts. [AA]
Hunter, I. M. L. (1979) Memory in everyday life. In Applied problems in
memory, ed. M. M. Gruneberg and P. E. Morris, pp. 1-24. London: Aca-
demic Press. [IMLH]
Jackson, C. V. (1953) Visual factors in auditory localisation. Quarterly Journal
of Experimental Psychology. 5:188-97. [DHH]
Jaensch, E. R. (1920) Zur Methodik experimenteller Untersuchungen an op-
tischen Auschauungsbildern. Zeitschrift der Psychologic. 85:37-82. [IL]
Julesz, B. (1971) Foundations of cyclopean perception. Chicago: University of
Chicago Press. [BJ]
Kagan, J., and Havemann, E. (1972) Psychology: an introduction. 2d ed. New
York: Harcourt Brace Jovanovich. [AA]
Kinsbourne, M. (1978) Asymmetrical function of the brain. Cambridge: Cam-
bridge University Press. [RNH]
Kosslyn, S. M. (1975) Information representation in visual images. Cognitive
Psychology. 7:341-70. [JB]
Kosslyn, S. M.; Pinker, S.; Smith, G.; and Shwartz, S. P. (1980, in press) On the
demystification of mental imagery. The Behavioral and Brain
Sciences. [RNH]
Kuhn, T. S. (1962) The structure of scientific revolutions. Chicago: Chicago
University Press. [AH]
Kiilpe, O. (1902) Uber die Objectivirung und Subjectivirung von Sinnesein-
drucken. Philosophische Studien. 19:508-36. [DHH]
Lakatos, I. (1970) Falsification and methodology of scientific research pro-
grammes. In Criticism and the growth of knowledge, ed. I. Lakatos and
A. Musgrave. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. [IL]
Lazarus, A. A., ed. (1972) Clinical behavior therapy. New York: Brunner/
Mazel. [AA]
Lindauer, M. S. (1969) Imagery and sensory modality. Perceptual and Motor
Skills. 29:203-15. [RNH, MSL]
(1972) The sensory attributes and functions of images and imagery evoking
stimuli. In The function and nature of imagery, ed. P. W. Sheehan, pp.
131-47. New York: Academic Press. [RNH, MSL]
(1977) Imagery from the point of view of psychological aesthetics, the arts,
and creativity. Journal of Mental Imagery. 1:343-62. [RNH, MSL]
McGee, M. G. (1979) Human spatial abilities: psychometric studies and envi-
ronmental, genetic, hormonal, and neurological influences. Psychological
Bulletin. 86:889-918. [UN]
McKellar, P. (1977) Autonomy, imagery and dissociation. Journal of Mental
Imagery. 1:93-108. [DM]
McPeake, J. D., and Spanos, N. P. (1973) The effects of the wording of rating
scales on hypnotic subjects' descriptions of visual hallucinations. American
Journal of Clinical Hypnosis. 15:239-44. [TXB]
Marks, D. (1972) Individual differences in the vividness of visual imagery and
their effect on function. In The function and nature of imagery, ed.
P. W. Sheehan, pp. 83-108. New York and London: Academic
Press. [DM]
(1977) Imagery and consciousness: a theoretical review from an individual
differences perspective. Journal of Mental Imagery. 1:275-90. [DM]
Martin, L. J. (1915) Ghosts and the projection of visual images. American Jour-
nal of Psychology. 26:251-57. [TXB]
Miiller, J. (1826) Uber die phantastische Gesichtserscheinungen. Coblenz:
Holscher. [AA]
Natsoulas, T. (1965) Converging operations for perceptual defense. Psycholog-
ical Bulletin. 64:393-401. [RNH]
Neisser, U. (1967) Cognitive psychology. New York: Appleton-Century-
Crofts. [UN]
(1976) Cognition and reality. San Francisco: Freeman. [UN]
(1978a) Anticipations, images and introspection. Cognition. 6:169-
74. [UN]
(1978b) Perceiving, anticipating, and imagining. In Minnesota studies in
the philosophy of science, vol. 9, ed. C. W. Savage. Minneapolis: Univer-
sity of Minnesota Press. [UN]
628
THE BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1979), 2

References/Maker: Eidetic imagery
Newell, A., and Simon, H. A. (1972) Human problem solving. Englewood
Cliffs, N.J.: Prentice-Hall. [RNH]
Nisbett, R. E., and Wilson, T. D. (1977) Telling more than we can know: ver-
bal reports on mental processes. Psychological Review. 84:231-59. [KAE]
Orne, M. T. (1962) On the social psychology of the psychological experiment:
with particular reference to demand characteristics and their implications.
American Psychologist. 17:776-83. [TXB]
Paivio, A. (1975) Perceptual comparisons through the mind's eye. Memory
and Cognition. 3:635-48. [RNH]
Parish, E. (1897) Hallucinations and illusions, a study of the fallacies of per-
ception. London: Scott. [TXB]
Pavlov, I. P. (1941) Conditioned reflexes and psychiatry. Translated and
edited by E. Horsley Gantt. New York: International Publishers Co. [AA]
Peck, C, and Schlag-Rey, M. (1979) Spatial coding of visual information in
cat's superior colliculus. Investigative Ophthalmology and Visual
Science. Supplement: 101-2. [BB]
Perky, C. W. (1910) An experimental study of imagination. American Journal
of Psychology. 21:422-52. [RNH, DHH, CR]
Piaget, J. (1929) The child's conception of the world. London: Routledge and
Kegan Paul. [IMLH]
Piaget, J., and Inhelder, B. (1966) L'image mentale chez I'enfant. Paris:
Presses Universitaires de France. [JB]
(1968) Memoire et intelligence. Paris: Presses Universitaires de
France. [JB]
Pylyshyn, Z. W. (1975) Do we need images and analogues? In Theoretical is-
sues in natural language processing. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press. [JB]
Richardson, A. (1977) The meaning and measurement of memory imagery.
British Journal of Psychology. 68:29-43. [JB]
(1969) Mental imagery. London: Routledge and Kegan Paul. [RNH]
Russell, Bertrand. (1921) Analysis of mind. New York: Macmillan. [AA]
Sarbin, T. R. (1968) Ontology recapitulates philology: the mythic nature of
anxiety. American Psychologist. 23:411-18. [CJF]
Schlag, J., and Schlag-Rey, M. (1977) Visuomotor properties of cells in cat tha-
lamic internal medullary lamina. In Control of gaze by brain stem neu-
rons, developments in neurosciences, vol. 1, ed. C. H. Baker and A. Ber-
thoz. Elsevier: North-Holland Biomedical Press. [BB]
Schneider, A. M. (1967) Control of memory by spreading critical depression: a
case for stimulus control. Psychological Review. 74:201-15. [RA]
Segal, S. J. (1971) Processing of the stimulus in imagery and perception. In Im-
agery: current cognitive approaches, ed. S. J. Segal. New York: Academic
Press. [DHH]
Sheehan, P. W. (1966) Accuracy and vividness of visual images. Perceptual
and Motor Skills. 23:391-98. [RNH, CR]
(1972) The function and nature of imagery. New York: Academic
Press. [RNH]
Shepard, R. N. (1978) The mental image. American Psychologist. 33:125-
37. [RNH]
Shepard, R. N., and Chipman, S. (1970) Second-order isomorphism of internal
representations: shapes of states. Cognitive Psychology. 1:1-17. [CJF]
Singer, J. L., and Pope, K. S., eds. (1978) The power of human imagination.
New York: Plenum Press. [AA]
Smith, G. J. W., and Danielsson, A. (1978) Psychopathology in childhood and
adolescence as reflected in projected afterimage serials. Scandinavian
Journal of Psychology. 19:29-39. [GS]
Smith, G. J. W., and Sjoholm, L. (1974) Can our theory of reality influence our
perception of it? Psychological Research Bulletin, Lund University. Mon-
ograph Series 14(l):l-27. [GS]
Spanos, N. P., and Barber, T. X. (1968) "Hypnotic" experiences as inferred
from subjective reports: auditory and visual hallucinations. Journal for
Experimental Research in Personality. 3:136-50. [TXB]
Spanos, N. P.; Ham, M. H.; and Barber, T. X. (1973) Suggested ("hypnotic")
visual hallucinations: experimental and phenomenological data. Journal
of Abnormal Psychology. 81:96-106. [TXB]
Spanos, N. P.; McPeake, J. D.; and Carter, W. (1973) Effects of pretesting on
response to a visual hallucination suggestion in hypnotic subjects. Journal
of Personality and Social Psychology. 28:293-97. [TXB]
Sperling, G. (1960) The information available in brief visual presentations.
Psychological Monographs 74: number 11. [RNH]
von Senden, M. (1960) Space and sight. Translated by P. Heath. London: Me-
thuen. [RNH]
Walsh, F. J.; White, K. D.; and Ashton, R. (1978) Imagery training: develop-
ment of a procedure and its evaluation. Unpublished research report, De-
partment of Psychology, University of Queensland. [AR]
Werner, H. (1940) Comparative psychology of mental development. New
York: Harper. [IMLH]
White, K.; Sheehan, P. W.; and Ashton, R. (1977) Imagery assessment: a survey
of self-report measures. Journal of Mental Imagery. 1:145-70. [UN]
Wittgenstein, L. (1953) Philosophical investigations. New York: Macmil-
lan. [CJF]
Wolfe, T. (1936) The story of a novel. New York: Scribners. [TXB]
Wolpe, J. (1969) The practice of behavior therapy. New York: Pergamon
Press. [AA]
Woodworth, R. S. (1938) Experimental psychology. New York: Holt and
Co. [IL]
Woodworth, R. S. and Schlosberg, H. (1954) Experimental psychology. 2d ed.
New York: Holt and Co. [IL]
THE BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1979), 2
629

