83
Commentary on Kraynak
Daniel C. Dennett
I
n my primary essay in this volume, I proposed a naturalistic de­
fense of the values of human dignity against the encroachments 
of science and technology, arguing that it was more robust than the 
traditional defenses, which I described as brittle and vulnerable. “We 
need to articulate these values in open forum. When we attempt this, 
we need to resist the strong temptation to resort to the old myths, 
since they are increasingly incredible, and will only foster incredulity 
and cynicism in those we need to persuade.”1 I concentrated on the 
strengths of my proposal rather than the shortcomings of the tradi­
tional alternatives, in part because I didn’t want to be suspected of 
choosing weak examples to quote and criticize. (Finding mediocre 
opponents to ridicule is usually easy and seldom instructive.) Now 
that Robert Kraynak’s essay has been delivered into my hands, I have 
a good example of just what I meant by a traditional defense, giving 
me a golden opportunity to illustrate the problems inherent in such 
an approach.
Kraynak sets out to defend what he conceives of as a middle 
ground between dualism and materialism, inspired by Aristotle’s 
tripartite division of plant (or vegetative) souls, animal souls, and 
rational, human souls. “As a living being, man shares characteristics 
with other animals while also being essentially different; he is neither 

84   |Daniel C. Dennett
a beast nor a god but an ‘embodied rational soul.’”2 I agree with this, 
so far as it goes. It is Kraynak’s unfortunate supplement, drawn from 
Christianity, to the effect that this embodied rational soul is immor­
tal, immaterial, and “mysterious,” that causes all the problems. How 
can I, an unflinching materialist, agree with Kraynak that what sets 
human beings aside from all other creatures is an embodied rational 
soul (as contrasted with a mere animal soul)? No problem. As Kray­
nak himself observes, I am not the kind of materialist Hobbes or 
Skinner were, denying the existence of freedom and dignity:
Dennett’s ambition is to apply the Darwinian algorithm 
to everything—e.g., our universe and its laws arose from a 
myriad of accidental tries with other combinations that did 
not survive.* This enables him to argue that the universe 
and man are accidental products of evolutionary forces, but 
they still have meaning and purpose once they are “frozen” 
in place. Thus, scientific materialism can be vindicated while 
avoiding moral relativism and affirming a culture based on 
modern liberalism, democracy, and respect for the dignity of 
persons.3
Just so. As Giulio Giorello once said, as the headline to an interview 
with me in Corriere della Sera, Milano, in 1997: Sì, abbiamo un’anima. 
Ma è fatta di tanti piccoli robot. “Yes, we have a soul, but it’s made 
of lots of tiny robots!” This has been my motto for almost a decade, 
and its import stands in stark contrast to Kraynak’s vision. The “tiny 
robots’” in question are cells (such as neurons) and even tinier robots 
(such as motor proteins and neurotransmitter molecules) that have 
evolved to form amazingly ingenious armies of operatives, uniting to 
form an organization—as Aristotle said—that sustains not just life, 
like the vegetative soul, and not just locomotion and perception, like 
the animal soul, but imaginative, rational, conscious thought. Kray­
nak accepts that Aristotle’s first two souls can be material organiza­
tions, as Aristotle himself maintained, but he thinks the rational soul 
must be composed according to altogether different principles. And 
in support of this he even quotes the passage from Aristotle that I 
*	 Kraynak cites my Darwin’s Dangerous Idea, p. 185; this is not quite accurate, but 
let it pass.

Commentary on Kraynak |  85
had alluded to in my essay. Kraynak observes that Aristotle held that 
“‘Man is not the best thing in the universe’ because the heavenly bod­
ies are more perfect; they move in eternal circular motion which man 
can contemplate and admire but cannot emulate.”4 But the great 
philosopher was wrong about this, as I pointed out:
One of Aristotle’s few major mistakes was declaring “the 
heavens” to be made of a different kind of stuff, entirely un­
like the matter here on Earth—a tactical error whose brittle­
ness became obvious once Galileo and company began their 
still-expanding campaign to understand the physics of the 
cosmos. Clinging similarly to an immaterial concept of a 
soul at a time when every day brings more understanding of 
how the material basis of the mind has evolved (and goes on 
evolving within each brain) is a likely path to obsolescence 
and extinction.5
Kraynak thinks that the soul has to stand outside the purview of 
the natural sciences—has to be “mysterious.” This is transparently 
wishful thinking. The soul is not going to stay mysterious, and it’s a 
good thing it isn’t, since as we come to understand how it works, we 
will also be able to explain why and how human minds are morally 
competent in a way animal minds are not. We don’t have to declare 
that this is a “mysterious election”—one of the least satisfying dodges 
I have ever seen. Courage, Professor Kraynak! We can explain these 
matters, just as we have explained reproduction and self-repair and 
metabolism, for instance.
Kraynak thinks I am contradicting myself, “reintroducing ‘sky­
hooks’” in my understanding of man:
What is missing in Dennett is the humility to acknowledge 
that he assumes an essential difference between humans and 
animals based on something like a rational soul, even though 
he reduces man to accidental evolutionary forces…. Thus, 
he implicitly embraces a dualism of substances (matter vs. 
mind or nature vs. freedom) that divides humanity into two 
orders of causality which cannot interact except by external 
mastery.6

86   |Daniel C. Dennett
Nonsense. This is a curious passage, since as examples of a “dualism 
of substances” Kraynak offers two candidates, only one of which, 
matter vs. mind, could be considered a dualism of substances. The 
opposition of “nature vs. freedom” is a telling category mistake. Nei­
ther nature nor freedom is a substance, and they are not suited for 
opposition—unless you are presupposing, as Kraynak apparently 
does, that freedom (free will) cannot be natural, must be a sort of 
magical abridgment of the laws of nature. This idea has a long tradi­
tion, but so have its rebuttals, unremarked by Kraynak. There is no 
problem of “two orders of causality”; all causality is physical. The 
space of reasons fits comfortably within the material world of living, 
evolved things.
More debilitating than his assumption—he offers no argument—
about the impossibility of a natural account of freedom is his pre­
sumptuous rhetoric:
“When Adam had lived a hundred and thirty years, he be­
came the father of a son in his own likeness, after his image, 
and named him Seth” (Genesis 5:1-3). A third passage occurs 
in the story of the Flood when God blesses Noah’s family: 
“Be fruitful and multiply, and fill the earth. The fear and 
the dread of you shall be upon every beast of the earth…. 
For your lifeblood I will surely require a reckoning…. Who­
ever sheds the blood of man, by man shall his blood be 
shed; for God made man in his own image” (Genesis 9:5-7).
  These are the only references in Genesis (and in the entire 
Hebrew Bible) to the Imago Dei. They show that God created 
the natural world as a hierarchy with the human species at 
the top, possessing a special right of dominion over the lower 
species. In the first grant of dominion, man is commanded to 
subdue the birds, fish, and cattle, but his food is restricted to 
plants (Genesis 1:29-30). When Adam and Eve are created in 
the Garden, they are further restricted by the prohibition not 
to eat of the tree of the knowledge of good and evil, lest they 
shall die. After they disobey, whatever dignity they previously 
possessed is henceforth combined with depravity and mortal­
ity; but their dignity is not entirely lost.7

Commentary on Kraynak |  87
What does he think he is doing here? These passages from scrip­
ture don’t “show” anything. Surely he knows that most of the people 
in the world—the people he should be attempting to reason with 
in this open forum on human dignity—don’t believe any of this! 
My friend Sally, who is always right, has informed me that human 
dignity is a gift from space aliens who visited the planet about six 
million years ago. Take my word for it—there’s nothing to discuss. 
Sally never makes a mistake! I take it that everyone can see that this 
claim of mine is simply an unacceptable move in the game. Kraynak’s 
flat assertion of the truth of these passages from the Bible is no more 
acceptable. I don’t object to his using scripture to try to make points, 
and it doesn’t matter whether the passages are true or not. (I think 
they are obviously false—the Garden of Eden never existed, and no­
body fathered a child at age 130.) But even if those of us who do not 
believe in the literal truth of the Bible are wrong, Kraynak has no 
right to assume this. He must argue for the truth of these passages, 
explain their truth, give reasons for believing them. Anything else is 
simply rude. We have to begin tuning our ears to these speech acts, 
and recognize them for what they are: personal fouls. Kraynak several 
times chides me and Searle for lack of “humility,” when it is his arro­
gant, in-your-face assertion of Christian dogma that would be truly 
offensive if it weren’t so comically ineffective.
Once we set aside such inappropriate contributions to the con­
versation, we have plenty to talk about. Human dignity is well worth 
protecting, and we can do it without first converting everybody to 
fundamentalist Christianity. Isn’t my appeal to science equally pre­
sumptuous? No, on two counts. First, there is no sectarian science—
no Muslim geology or Christian mathematics or Hindu biology. Ev­
ery religion in the world can be reasonably assumed to accept the 
scientific method—after all, they rely on it when collecting their 
alms and building their temples—so this is one of the few areas of 
truly common understanding around the world. (Music is arguably 
another, but it isn’t so much a method of understanding as a means 
of focusing and enhancing experience—you can’t solve a problem 
or explain a puzzle with a piece of music.) Second, at every point 
my appeal to the claims and presuppositions of science may be chal­
lenged. It is for this reason that my faith in science is not any sort of 
religious faith. It is based entirely on the proven record of scientific 

88   |Daniel C. Dennett
success, and makes no appeal to authority beyond the reasoning abil­
ity of each individual in the conversation. It has been fashionable 
in some academic groves in recent years to downplay the power of 
such methods, insisting that all conversations—however biased or 
illogical—are on a par, but fortunately that fad is going extinct, and 
people are resuming their appreciation of the truly thrilling power 
of open-ended rational questioning. If you “don’t get it” all you have 
to do is ask, persistently and politely, for an explanation of the baf­
fling points. This may sometimes be met with impatience and rude­
ness, but everyone knows that, officially, it is the responsibility of 
the scientific researcher to explain and defend every last claim. That 
contrasts sharply with the celebration of faith and mystery found in 
most religions, and this is what simply disqualifies them from playing 
the leading role in the peaceful, mutually respectful explorations we 
are now engaging in. The sacred texts of the world’s religions may be 
used as rich sources of ideas, but brandishing them as above criticism 
and then celebrating the “faith” with which one excuses oneself from 
defending them is an abuse of religious freedom.
Notes
1	 From my essay in this volume, p. 58.
2	 From Kraynak’s essay in this volume, p. 70.
3	 From Kraynak’s essay, p. 67.
4	 From Kraynak’s essay, p. 70.
5	 From my essay, p. 45.
6	 From Kraynak’s essay, p. 68.
7	 From Kraynak’s essay, p. 75.

Human Dignity and Bioethics
Essays Commissioned 
by the President’s Council 
on Bioethics
 
Washington, D.C.
WWW.BIOETHICS.GOV
 
March 2008

