The evolution of misbelief
Ryan T. McKay
Institute for Empirical Research in Economics, University of Zurich, Zurich
8006, Switzerland; and Centre for Anthropology and Mind, University of Oxford,
Oxford OX2 6PE, United Kingdom
ryantmckay@mac.com
http://homepage.mac.com/ryantmckay/
Daniel C. Dennett
The Center for Cognitive Studies, Tufts University, Medford, MA 02155-7059
ddennett@tufts.edu
http://ase.tufts.edu/cogstud/incbios/dennettd/dennettd.htm
Abstract: From an evolutionary standpoint, a default presumption is that true beliefs are adaptive and misbeliefs maladaptive. But if
humans are biologically engineered to appraise the world accurately and to form true beliefs, how are we to explain the routine
exceptions to this rule? How can we account for mistaken beliefs, bizarre delusions, and instances of self-deception? We explore
this question in some detail. We begin by articulating a distinction between two general types of misbelief: those resulting from a
breakdown in the normal functioning of the belief formation system (e.g., delusions) and those arising in the normal course of that
system’s operations (e.g., beliefs based on incomplete or inaccurate information). The former are instances of biological dysfunction
or pathology, reﬂecting “culpable” limitations of evolutionary design. Although the latter category includes undesirable (but
tolerable) by-products of “forgivably” limited design, our quarry is a contentious subclass of this category: misbeliefs best conceived
as design features. Such misbeliefs, unlike occasional lucky falsehoods, would have been systematically adaptive in the evolutionary
past. Such misbeliefs, furthermore, would not be reducible to judicious – but doxastically1 noncommittal – action policies. Finally,
such misbeliefs would have been adaptive in themselves, constituting more than mere by-products of adaptively biased misbelief-
producing systems. We explore a range of potential candidates for evolved misbelief, and conclude that, of those surveyed, only
positive illusions meet our criteria.
Keywords: adaptive; belief; delusions; design; evolution; misbelief; positive illusions; religion; self-deception
1. Introduction
A misbelief is simply a false belief, or at least a belief that is
not correct in all particulars. We can see this metaphori-
cally: If truth is a kind of target that we launch our
beliefs at, then misbeliefs are to some extent wide of the
mark. Of course, there is no philosophical consensus
about just what a belief actually is. In what follows we
intend to avoid this question, but we offer here the follow-
ing working deﬁnition of belief, general enough to cover
most representationalist and dispositional accounts: A
belief is a functional state of an organism that implements
or embodies that organism’s endorsement of a particular
state of affairs as actual.2 A misbelief, then, is a belief
that to some degree departs from actuality – that is, it is
a functional state endorsing a particular state of affairs
that happens not to obtain.
A prevailing assumption is that beliefs that maximise the
survival of the believer will be those that best approximate
reality (Dennett 1971; 1987; Fodor 1983; 1986; Millikan
1984a; 1984b; 1993). Humans are thus assumed to have
been biologically engineered to form true beliefs – by
evolution. On this assumption, our beliefs about the
world are essentially tools that enable us to act effectively
in the world. Moreover, to be reliable, such tools must
be produced in us, it is assumed, by systems designed
(by evolution) to be truth-aiming, and hence (barring
miracles) these systems must be designed to generate
RYAN T. MCKAY is a Research Fellow at the University
of Oxford, UK. He was educated at the University of
Western Australia (B.Sc. Hons. in Psychology) and at
Macquarie
University
(MClinPsych,
Ph.D.)
in
Sydney, Australia. His research interests include cogni-
tive neuropsychiatry, evolutionary psychology, and be-
havioural
economics.
He
has
held
previous
postdoctoral positions in Boston (Tufts University),
Belfast (Queen’s University), and Zu¨rich (University
of Zu¨rich). He has also previously worked as a clinical
neuropsychologist at the National Hospital for Neurol-
ogy and Neurosurgery in London and as a lecturer in
psychology at Charles Sturt University in Australia.
Recently, he has been conducting experimental investi-
gations in the cognitive science of religion.
DANIEL C. DENNETT is University Professor, Fletcher
Professor of Philosophy, and Co-Director of the Center
for Cognitive Studies at Tufts University. He is the
author of Consciousness Explained (1991), Darwin’s
Dangerous Idea (1995) and Breaking the Spell: Religion
as a Natural Phenomenon (2006), as well as other books
and articles in philosophy of mind, cognitive science,
and evolutionary theory. He is also the author or co-
author of three target articles (1983, 1988, 1992) and
32 commentaries in Behavioral and Brain Sciences
and was an Associate Editor of the journal for many
years.
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (2009) 32, 493–561
doi:10.1017/S0140525X09990975
# Cambridge University Press, 2010
0140-525X/09 $40.00
493

grounded beliefs (a system for generating ungrounded but
mostly true beliefs would be an oracle, as impossible as a
perpetual motion machine). Grounded beliefs are simply
beliefs that are appropriately founded on evidence and
existing beliefs; Bayes’ theorem (Bayes 1763) speciﬁes
the optimal procedure for revising prior beliefs in the
light of new evidence (assuming that veridical belief is
the goal, and given unlimited time and computational
resources; see Gigerenzer & Goldstein 1996). Of course,
just as we can have good grounds for believing prop-
ositions that turn out to be false, so can ungrounded
beliefs be serendipitously true (others arguably lack
truth values). To keep our exposition manageable, we
will not consider such ungrounded beliefs to be misbeliefs,
although we acknowledge that false and (serendipitously)
true ungrounded beliefs (and perhaps those lacking
truth values) may well be produced in much the same
way – and by much the same types of mechanism (we
return to this issue in sect. 14).
If evolution has designed us to appraise the world accu-
rately and to form true beliefs, how are we to account for
the routine exceptions to this rule – instances of misbe-
lief? Most of us at times believe propositions that end up
being disproved; many of us produce beliefs that others
consider obviously false to begin with; and some of us
form beliefs that are not just manifestly but bizarrely
false. How can this be? Are all these misbeliefs just acci-
dents, instances of pathology or breakdown, or at best
undesirable (but tolerable) by-products? Might some of
them, contra the default presumption, be adaptive in
and of themselves?3
Before we can answer that, we must develop a tentative
taxonomy of misbelief. We begin with a distinction
between two general types: those that result from some
kind of break in the normal functioning of the belief for-
mation system and those that arise in the normal course
of that system’s operations. We take this to represent the
orthodox, albeit unarticulated, view of misbelief. Part
and parcel of this orthodox view is that irrespective of
whether misbeliefs arise out of the normal or abnormal
operation of the belief formation system, the misbeliefs
themselves are maladaptive.
Our aim in this target article is to evaluate this claim. We
will proceed by a process of elimination, considering and
disqualifying various candidates until we arrive at what
we argue are bona ﬁde instances of adaptive misbelief.
Some candidates will prove not to be directly adaptive;
others may be false but not demonstrably so; and still
others will be rejected on the grounds that they are not,
in fact, beliefs. The process will highlight the theoretically
important differences between the phenomena, which are
interesting in their own right, and will clarify the hypoth-
esis defended – that a subset of the misbeliefs that arise
in the normal course of belief formation system operations
are, in and of themselves, adaptive. But ﬁrst we need to
reﬁne the distinction between abnormal functioning and
normal functioning, as ambiguity on this topic has bede-
villed the literature.
2. Manufacture and malfunction
First consider the domain of systems designed and manu-
factured by humans. Here we envisage the distinction as
one (codiﬁed in warranty legislation) between “culpable
design limitations” (malfunctions) and “forgivable design
limitations/features.” When a given artifact fails to
perform a particular task, this failure is always due to a
limitation in the design of that artifact. The question is
whether the design limitation concerned is – from the
designer’s perspective – a blameworthy, “culpable” limit-
ation (a design ﬂaw, or perhaps a ﬂaw in the execution
of the design), or whether it is a tolerable, “forgivable”
limitation. Examples of the former (with respect to the
arbitrary task of “keeping time”) include:
1. My $20,000 Bolex watch loses 10 seconds every day
(contra the advertisement).
2. My cheap Schmasio watch loses 10 minutes every
day (contra the advertisement).
Examples of the latter limitation include:
1. My toaster does not keep time at all.
2. My Bolex loses a second every day (within warranted
limits).
3. My cheap Schmasio loses a minute every day (within
warranted limits).
4. After putting it in a very hot oven for an hour, my
Bolex does not keep time at all.
What we can see from these examples is that manufac-
tured artifacts either work as intended (within a tolerable
margin of error), or they don’t work as intended (falling
outside the tolerable margin). What’s important is not
how well the artifacts objectively work, but how well
they work relative to how they were intended to work
(and the intentions of the manufacturer will bear upon
the advertised claims of the manufacturer). The Bolex
and Schmasio examples reﬂect this, because the malfunc-
tioning Bolex still works objectively better than the prop-
erly functioning Schmasio.
Of course, some apparent design limitations are in fact
deliberate design features. To cite a single example, con-
temporary consumers are frequently frustrated by DVD
region code restrictions. The fact that a region 1 DVD
player (sold in North America) cannot play discs sold in
Europe or Japan (region 2) is certainly, from the consumer’s
perspective at least,4 a limitation in the design of that DVD
player – and often a frustrating limitation. In our terminol-
ogy, however, the limitation is forgivable because such
players are not designed to play DVDs from other
regions, and indeed are deliberately designed not to do
so. Region restrictions are, as software designers often
say, “not a bug but a feature” of such machines, ostensibly
to safeguard copyright and ﬁlm distribution rights.
The essential lesson is that a manufactured artifact func-
tions properly if it functions as its designer intended (and
warranted) it to function, under the conditions in which it
was intended (and warranted) to function. If the artifact
fails to function under those conditions, then it has mal-
functioned, which may be due to a ﬂaw in the design or
a ﬂaw in the execution of the design. Here “malfunction”
is equated with “culpable design limitation” and is
deﬁned so as to exclude seeming breaks in function that
occur outside the constraints speciﬁed by the manufac-
turer (i.e., if a watch falls to pieces a day after the warranty
expires, this is not a malfunction – not on our deﬁnition of
malfunction, anyway – but a forgivable limitation).
Consider another example: Imagine a computer that is
equipped with software for solving physics problems.
The computer takes the problems as input, and produces
McKay & Dennett: The evolution of misbelief
494
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (2009) 32:6

purported solutions to the problems as output. Suppose,
further, that the program that the computer implements
when solving the problems utilizes Newtonian physics.
Consider then three different possible scenarios:
1. The computer is assigned a problem about an apple
falling from a tree on Earth. It produces the correct
solution.
2. The computer is assigned a problem about an apple
falling from a tree on Earth. Unfortunately, a low-level
glitch occurs – a ﬂaw in the execution of the program’s
design – causing the program to malfunction and to
produce an incorrect solution.
3. The computer is assigned a problem about the mass
of an apple as it approaches the speed of light. The
program runs smoothly and predictably but arrives at an
incorrect solution.
Do the second and third scenarios here map onto the
distinction between culpable and forgivable design limit-
ations? Whether this is the case depends on the precise
intentions of the program designer. If the designer had
implemented a Newtonian program because it was
easier and cheaper to do so, but was fully aware that Ein-
steinian problems would compute incorrectly, then the
third limitation is forgivable (if it was so advertised). If,
however, the designer intended his or her program to
solve physics problems of all types, then this limitation is
culpable (and constitutes a malfunction, in this rather
peculiar sense of the word).
Even such a common artifact as an electronic hand
calculator produces output that may appear culpable:
For instance, arithmetic tells us that 10 divided by 3 multiplied
by 3 is 10, but hand calculators will tell you that it is 9.999999,
owing to round-off or truncation error, a shortcoming the
designers have decided to live with, even though such errors
are extremely destructive under many conditions in larger
systems that do not have the beneﬁt of human observer/
users (or very smart homunculi!) to notice and correct them.
(Dennett 1998, p. 315)
A manufactured object (or feature thereof) works as a
model of adaptive misbelief if: (1) The object is a speciﬁc
focus of deliberate design (not a mistake or a by-product);
(2) the object appears, from a certain perspective, to be
malfunctioning or limited insofar as it misrepresents infor-
mation to the consumer of that information; and (3) such
misrepresentation is actually beneﬁcial to the consumer
of that information. None of the cases of artifacts con-
sidered thus far would qualify as analogues of adaptive
misbelief under these criteria, but here is one case that
gets close: the automotive mirror that is designed such
that objects appear farther away than they really are.
That this is misrepresentation is made clear by the
appended cautionary subtitle (required, no doubt, by the
manufacturer’s
lawyers):
“OBJECTS
IN
MIRROR
ARE
CLOSER THAN THEY APPEAR.” The trade-off in the goal of
this design is clear: to provide a wider ﬁeld of view than
a “veridical” mirror, which is deemed a beneﬁt that out-
weighs the distortion, a cost that is diminished, presum-
ably, by the attached warning. The reason this example
ultimately fails as a model of adaptive misbelief is that
the misrepresentation itself is not the speciﬁc focus of
design, nor is it (in and of itself) beneﬁcial to the consu-
mer; rather, the misrepresentation is an unavoidable
by-product of producing a wider ﬁeld of view.
We don’t know of other good candidates but can
describe a possible device with a similar design rationale:
an alarm clock designed to set itself 10 minutes ahead in
the middle of the night (and then to repair its “error”
later in the day). Its design rationale would be to give its
owner a little extra time to get going, but once the user
ﬁgured this out, the device would of course lose effective-
ness – a case of “the boy who cried wolf,” a design compli-
cation that we will discuss in some detail below. Before we
move on, we note that whereas artifacts designed to misre-
present information to their consumers may not exactly be
thick on the ground,5 there are certainly artifacts – such as
shear pins and fuses – that are designed to break. In due
course we will consider whether cognitive systems have
evolved any parallel.
3. Evolutionary design and dysfunction
Commercial disputes notwithstanding, the distinction
between abnormal and normal functioning seems intuitive
enough in the case of systems designed and manufactured
by humans. How neatly, however, does this distinction
carve nature at the joints? Is it equally clear for evolved,
biological systems? In such cases, our criterion for deter-
mining malfunction (the disparity between actual func-
tioning and intended functioning) would seem invalid,
because (unlike the good people at Bolex) evolution is a
blind watchmaker (Dawkins 1986), without intentions.
What we would like here is some way of making a distinc-
tion that is equivalent to the distinction between culpable
design limitations and forgivable design limitations/fea-
tures. Whereas culpable misdesign in manufactured
items is the essence of artifactual malfunction, the evolu-
tionary equivalent would be the marker of biological
dysfunction.
Consider the human immune system. What would count
as an example of immune system dysfunction? Presumably
if the immune system were to succumb to a run-of-the-mill
pathogen, we could speak uncontroversially of immune
dysfunction. In some instances, however, the immune
system “errs” in attempting to defend the body. Thus one
of the main problems in organ transplants is that the
immune system tries to protect the body against foreign
matter, even a new heart that would ensure its survival. Is
the activity of the immune system in the latter case strictly
in accordance with its normal function? Perhaps that
depends on what function we choose to impose upon the
system. Insofar as the system functions to attack foreign
matter, it has performed well. Insofar as the system is
construed with the more general function of safeguarding
the health of the body, however, it becomes less clear
whether it has functioned normally – and this is the
problem of evolutionary intentions-by-proxy.6 Is all func-
tionality just in the eye of the beholder? Millikan (1984a;
1993) proposes a more objective solution to this problem:
Associated with each of the proper functions that an organ or
system has is a Normal explanation for performance of this
function, which tells how that organ or system. . .historically
managed to perform that function. (Millikan 1993, p. 243)
According to Millikan, in order to determine the func-
tion of an organ or system we should consider not its
present properties, powers, and dispositions, but instead
its history.7 Given that organ transplants have not featured
McKay & Dennett: The evolution of misbelief
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (2009) 32:6
495

in the evolutionary history of immune systems, any con-
temporary immune system that attacks a donor heart is
functioning in accordance with the adaptive functioning
of immune systems historically. That system, therefore,
is functioning normally – or more precisely, Normally
(see
explanation
below) – and
its
limitations
are
“forgivable.”
Let us consider a further parallel with our proposed
misbelief taxonomy, this time by examining two types of
misperception. Those of us who are short-sighted perceive
(without our corrective lenses) a somewhat distorted visual
world. Due to a kind of breakdown or degeneration,
our visual systems (broadly construed) misrepresent the
facts – they cease to function properly. Consider, on the
other hand, what happens when we – with eyeglasses at
the ready – submerge a perfectly straight stick into a
pool of water. Do we continue to perceive the stick as
straight and unbroken? No – our visual systems fail to
compensate for the optical effect of refraction (they do
not compute and correct for Snell’s law; Boden 1984;
Casperson 1999),8 and the stick appears bent at the
point where it meets the surface of the water. Our visual
systems have again furnished us with misinformation, yet
this time they have functioned Normally. The capital
“N” here denotes a normative, rather than statistical,
construal of “normal” (Millikan 1984a; 1993).
This is important because although our two examples of
visual misperception (the short-sighted case and the stick-
in-water case) can be distinguished on normative grounds
(the ﬁrst – being a case of visual dysfunction – is abNor-
mal and the second Normal), they may both be “small-n”
normal on statistical grounds. After all, the prevalence of
myopia varies across ethnic groups, and is as high as 70–
90% in some Asian populations (Chow et al. 1990; Wong
et al. 2000). Millikan (1993), however, dismisses statistical
construals of “normal” functioning. In a vivid example she
points out that the proper function of sperm is to fertilise
an ovum, notwithstanding the fact that, statistically speak-
ing, it is exceedingly unlikely that any individual sperm will
successfully perform that function (Millikan 1984a).
Proper, Normal functioning, therefore, is not what
happens always or even on the average; sometimes it is
positively rare. Unless otherwise indicated, our sub-
sequent usage of “normal” will follow Millikan’s capita-
lised, normative sense.
Now, back to beliefs and misbeliefs. We contend that all
instances of misbelief can be roughly classiﬁed as the
output of either a dysfunctional, abnormal belief for-
mation system or of a properly functioning, normal
belief formation system. The former category, to which
we turn brieﬂy now, would not include adaptive misbeliefs
(although see section 10), but provides a necessary back-
ground for understanding the better candidates – which,
if they exist, will form a subset (design features) of the
latter category.
4. Doxastic dysfunction
In the ﬁrst category, misbeliefs result from breakdowns in
the machinery of belief formation. If we conceive of the
belief formation system as an information processing
system that takes certain inputs (e.g., perceptual inputs)
and (via manipulations of these inputs) produces certain
outputs (beliefs, e.g., beliefs about the environment that
the perceptual apparatus is directed upon), then these
misbeliefs arise from dysfunction in the system – doxastic
dysfunction. Such misbeliefs are the faulty output of a dis-
ordered, defective, abnormal cognitive system.
This view of misbelief is prominently exempliﬁed by a
branch of cognitive psychology known as cognitive neu-
ropsychiatry (David & Halligan 1996). Cognitive neurop-
sychiatrists apply the logic of cognitive neuropsychology,
which investigates disordered cognition in order to learn
more about normal cognition, to disorders of high-level
cognition such as delusions (Coltheart 2002; Ellis &
Young 1988). Notwithstanding objections to the so-called
doxastic conception of delusions (see sect. 9), delusions
are misbeliefs par excellence – false beliefs that are held
with strong conviction regardless of counterevidence and
despite the efforts of others to dissuade the deluded indi-
vidual (American Psychiatric Association 2000). They are
ﬁrst-rank symptoms of schizophrenia and prominent fea-
tures of numerous other psychiatric and neurological con-
ditions. Thematically speaking, delusions range from the
bizarre and exotic (e.g., “I am the Emperor of Antarctica”;
see David 1999) to the more mundane and ordinary (e.g.,
“My husband is cheating on me”). Researchers in cognitive
neuropsychiatry aim to develop a model of the processes
involved in normal belief generation and evaluation, and
to explain delusions in terms of damage to one or more
of these processes.
To illustrate the cognitive neuropsychiatric approach to
delusion, consider the case of “mirrored-self misidentiﬁca-
tion.” Patients with this rare delusion misidentify their own
reﬂected image, and may come to believe that a stranger is
following them around. Breen et al. (2001) investigated
two cases of this delusion and uncovered two apparent
routes to its development. The delusion of the ﬁrst
patient (“F.E.”) appeared to be underpinned by anoma-
lous face perception (“prosopagnosia”), as he demon-
strated
a
marked
deﬁcit
in
face
processing
on
neuropsychological tests. In contrast, the face processing
of the second patient (“T.H.”) was intact. This patient,
however, appeared to be “mirror agnosic” (Ramachandran
et al. 1997), in that he evinced an impaired appreciation of
mirror spatial relations and was unable to interact appro-
priately with mirrors. His delusion appeared to be under-
pinned by anomalous processing not of faces, but of
reﬂected space (see Breen et al. 2000, for transcripts of
interviews with the two patients; see Feinberg 2001, Fein-
berg & Shapiro 1989, and Spangenberg et al. 1998, for
descriptions of related cases).
An important question arising at this point is the ques-
tion of whether prosopagnosia (or mirror agnosia) is a
sufﬁcient condition for the mirror delusion. The answer
to this question is almost certainly No. Other cases of
mirror agnosia have been reported without any accompa-
nying misidentiﬁcation syndrome (Binkofski et al. 1999),
and non-delusional prosopagnosia is quite common.
Breen et al. (2001) thus proposed that the delusion of mir-
rored-self misidentiﬁcation results from the conjunction of
two cognitive deﬁcits, the ﬁrst of which gives rise to some
anomalous perceptual data (data concerning either faces
or reﬂected space), and the second of which allows the
individual to accept a highly implausible hypothesis
explaining these data. The ﬁrst deﬁcit accounts for the
content of the delusion (the fact that it concerns a stranger
McKay & Dennett: The evolution of misbelief
496
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (2009) 32:6

in the mirror), while the second deﬁcit accounts for why
the stranger-in-the-mirror belief, once generated, is then
adopted and maintained in the absence of appropriate evi-
dence for that hypothesis. These deﬁcits constitute break-
downs
in
the
belief
formation
system,
presumably
underpinned by neuroanatomical or neurophysiological
abnormalities. In both of the cases investigated by Breen
et al. (2001), the mirror delusion occurred in the context
of a progressive dementing illness.
Coltheart and colleagues (Coltheart et al., in press;
Davies & Coltheart 2000; Davies et al. 2001; Langdon &
Coltheart 2000; McKay et al. 2007a; 2009) have suggested
that a generalised framework of two concurrent cognitive
deﬁcits, or factors, might be used to explain delusions of
many different types. In general, the ﬁrst factor (Factor-1)
consists of some endogenously generated abnormal data
to which the individual is exposed. In addition to mir-
rored-self misidentiﬁcation, Factors-1 have been identiﬁed
or hypothesised that plausibly account for the content of
delusions such as thought insertion, the Capgras delusion
(the belief that a loved one has been replaced by an impos-
tor) and the Cotard delusion (the belief that one is dead).
The second factor (Factor-2), on the other hand, can be
characterised as a dysfunctional departure from Bayesian
belief revision (Coltheart et al., in press), a departure
that affects how beliefs are revised in the light of the
abnormal Factor-1 data. Bayes’ theorem is in a sense a
prescription for navigating a course between excessive
tendencies toward “observational adequacy” (whereby
new data is over-accommodated) and “doxastic conserva-
tism” (whereby existing beliefs are over-weighted) (Stone
& Young 1997). McKay et al. (2009) have suggested that
whereas some delusions – for example, mirrored-self mis-
identiﬁcation – might involve the former tendency (see
Langdon & Coltheart 2000; Langdon et al. 2006; Stone
& Young 1997; also see Huq et al. 1988), others – for
example, delusional denial of paralysis (“anosognosia”) –
might involve the latter (see Ramachandran 1994a;
1994b; 1995; 1996a; 1996b; Ramachandran & Blakeslee
1998). In general, therefore, Factor-2 might be thought
of as an acquired or congenital anomaly yielding one of
two dysfunctional doxastic biases – a bias toward observa-
tional adequacy or toward doxastic conservatism.
The fact that we are not presently equipped with fail-
safe belief-formation systems does not tell against an
evolutionary perspective. This is because evolution does
not necessarily produce
optimally designed systems
(Dawkins 1982; Stich 1990) and in fact often conspicu-
ously fails to do so. It would be Panglossian to think other-
wise (Gould & Lewontin 1979; Voltaire 1759/1962):
Brilliant as the design of the eye is, it betrays its origin with a
tell-tale ﬂaw: the retina is inside out. . . . No intelligent
designer would put such a clumsy arrangement in a camcor-
der. (Dennett 2005, p. 11)
Evolutionary explorations in Design Space are con-
strained, among other things, by economic considerations
(beyond a certain level, system improvements may exhibit
declining marginal utility; Stich 1990), historical vicissi-
tude (the appropriate mutations must occur if selection
is to act on them), and the topography of the ﬁtness land-
scape (selection cannot access optimal design solutions if
it must traverse a ﬁtness valley to do so; Dennett 1995a).
Because evolution is an imperfect design process, the
systems we have evolved for representing reality are
bound to be limited – and sometimes they will break.
5. Misbeliefs as the output of a properly
functioning system
Even if evolution were in some sense a “perfect” design
process, there would still be limitations; only a violation
of the laws of physics would permit, say, beliefs to be
formed instantaneously, with no time lag whatsoever, or
for an individual, ﬁnite believer to carry around in her
head beliefs about the lack of prime factors of each speciﬁc
prime number (only a brain of inﬁnite volume could rep-
resent each individual prime).9 The result is that even the
beliefs of textbook Bayesians will frequently be false (or at
least incomplete) – and such misbeliefs cannot be con-
sidered “culpable.”
Perhaps the most obvious examples of commonplace, for-
givable misbelief occur when we are victimised by liars.
Although extreme gullibility might be seen as dysfunctional
(perhaps involving a Factor-2 bias toward observational ade-
quacy), most of us (Bayesians included) are vulnerable to
carefully crafted and disseminated falsehood. However
adaptive it may be for us to believe truly, it may be adaptive
for other parties if we believe falsely (Wallace 1973).10
An evolutionary arms race of deceptive ploys and counter-
ploys may thus ensue. In some cases the “other parties” in
question may not even be animate agents, but cultural
traits or systems (Dawkins 2006a; 2006b; Dennett 1995a;
2006a). Although such cases are interesting in their own
right, the adaptive misbeliefs we pursue in this article are
beneﬁcial to their consumers – misbeliefs that evolve to
the detriment of their believers are not our quarries.
So, given inevitable contexts of imperfect information,
even lightning-fast Bayesians will frequently misbelieve,
and such misbeliefs must be deemed forgivable. We
brieﬂy consider now whether certain departures from
Bayesian updating might also be considered forgivable.
Gigerenzer and colleagues (e.g., Gigerenzer & Goldstein
1996; Gigerenzer et al. 1999) have argued that some
such departures, far from being defective, comprise “eco-
logically rational” decision strategies that operate effec-
tively,
given
inevitable
limitations
of
time
and
computational resources. These researchers have docu-
mented and investigated a series of such “fast and
frugal” heuristics, including the “take the best” heuristic
(Gigerenzer & Goldstein 1999) and the “recognition heur-
istic” (Goldstein & Gigerenzer 2002).
Some departures from normative rationality standards,
however, result from perturbations in belief formation
machinery and are not “heuristic” in any sense. As we
have noted, bizarre misbeliefs like mirrored-self misiden-
tiﬁcation and the Cotard delusion may occur subsequent
to neuropsychological damage. For example, Young et al.
(1992) described a patient who was injured in a serious
motorcycle accident and subsequently became convinced
that he was dead. Computerised tomography (CT) scans
revealed contusions affecting temporo-parietal areas of
this patient’s right hemisphere as well as some bilateral
damage to his frontal lobe. Misbeliefs, however, may also
arise from less acute disruptions to the machinery of
belief formation. For example, lapses in concentration
due to fatigue or inebriation may result in individuals
McKay & Dennett: The evolution of misbelief
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (2009) 32:6
497

coming to hold erroneous beliefs, at least temporarily. Are
such misbeliefs “culpable”? Do they reﬂect dysfunction in
the belief formation system?
Although misbelief might always reﬂect the limitations of
the system in some sense, it is not always easy to tell (absent
a warranty) where imperfect proper doxastic functioning
(forgivably limited) ends and where (culpably limited) dox-
astic dysfunction begins. This fuzziness is reﬂected in the
literature on certain putative psychological disorders. As
an example, consider the phenomenon of disordered
reading. There
are
debates
in the
literature about
whether there is a separate category of individuals who
are
disordered
readers
(e.g.,
see
Coltheart
1996).
Opponents of this view argue that so-called “disordered
readers” are just readers at the lower end of a Gaussian
distribution of reading ability. Similarly, one of the most
controversial psychiatric diagnoses in recent years has
been the diagnosis of Attention-Deﬁcit Hyperactivity Dis-
order (ADHD), which some commentators insist is a
ﬁgment, arguing that putatively ADHD children are just
children at the extreme ends of Gaussian distributions of
attention and activity (for a discussion, see Dennett 1990a).
Controversies such as these are difﬁcult to resolve.
While we consider that Millikan’s distinction between
Normal and abNormal functioning provides a useful rule
of thumb, we are not conﬁdent that this distinction – or
any distinction – can be used to decisively settle disputes
about forgivable versus culpable limitations in the biologi-
cal domain. In this domain these categories are not
discrete, but overlapping. Culpable misdesign in nature
is always ephemeral – where design anomalies are rare
or relatively benign, we will observe “tolerated” (forgiva-
ble) limitations; where anomalies begin to proliferate,
however, they raise the selection pressure for a design
revision, leading to either adaptive redesign or extinction.
The upshot is that it may be difﬁcult, if not impossible, to
adjudicate on intermediate cases. How fatigued does an
individual actually need to be before his doxastic lapses
are deemed (evolutionarily) forgivable? And if alcohol
did not feature in the evolutionary history of the belief
formation system, are false beliefs formed while tipsy
forgivable? Perhaps dousing one’s brain in alcohol is
akin to baking one’s Bolex in a hot oven – both are
forced to labour “under external conditions not Normal
for performance of their proper functions” (Millikan
1993, p. 74; emphasis in original).
We acknowledge the overlap between our two broad cat-
egories of functioning. Such overlaps, however, characterise
most biological categories: The boundaries – between, for
example, species, or territories, or even between life and
death – are porous and often violated. In any case, establish-
ing a means of settling disputes about forgivable versus culp-
able limitations of the belief formation system is not crucial
to our project. Although it is useful to be able to distinguish,
crudely, between normal and abnormal doxastic functioning,
the prevailing view is that misbeliefs formed in either case
will themselves be abnormal. We will now begin to question
this assumption. Contra the prevailing view, might there be
certain situations in which misbelief can actually be adaptive
(situations in which the misbeliefs themselves, not just the
systems that produce them, are normal)? In those situations,
if such there be, we would expect that we would be evolutio-
narily predisposed to form some misbeliefs. In short, misbe-
lief would evolve.
6. Adaptive misbelief?
O! who can hold a ﬁre in his hand
By thinking on the frosty Caucasus?
Or cloy the hungry edge of appetite
By bare imagination of a feast?
Or wallow naked in December snow
By thinking on fantastic summer’s heat?
— William Shakespeare (Richard II, Act I, scene iii, lines 294–
303)
How does religion ﬁt into a mind that one might have thought was
designed to reject the palpably not true? The common answer – that
people take comfort in the thought of a benevolent shepherd, a universal
plan, of an afterlife – is unsatisfying, because it only raises the question
of why a mind would evolve to ﬁnd comfort in beliefs it can plainly see
are false. A freezing person ﬁnds no comfort in believing he is warm; a
person face-to-face-with a lion is not put at ease by the conviction that it
is a rabbit.
— Steven Pinker (1997, pp. 554–5; emphasis in original)
We are anything but a mechanism set up to perceive the truth for its
own sake. Rather, we have evolved a nervous system that acts in the
interest of our gonads, and one attuned to the demands of reproductive
competition. If fools are more proliﬁc than wise men, then to that degree
folly will be favored by selection. And if ignorance aids in obtaining a
mate, then men and women will tend to be ignorant.
— Michael. T. Ghiselin (1974, p. 126)
How could it ever be beneﬁcial to believe a falsehood?
Granted, one can easily imagine that in many circum-
stances it might feel better to misbelieve (more on this in
sect. 10). Thus in Shakespeare’s Richard II, Bolingbroke,
who has been banished, is urged by his father to imagine
that he is not banished but rather has left of his own voli-
tion. Bolingbroke’s father appreciates that there may be
psychological comfort in such a false belief. Bolingbroke’s
reply, however (“O! who can hold a ﬁre in his hand. . .”),
speaks both to the difﬁculty of deliberately misbelieving
as well as to the apparent absence of tangible beneﬁts in
thus misbelieving. How could misbelief aid survival?
We note that it is easy to dream up anomalous offbeat
scenarios where true beliefs are in fact detrimental for
survival:
[Harry] believed that his ﬂight left at 7:45 am. . . . Harry’s
belief was true, and he got to the airport just on time. Unfor-
tunately, the ﬂight crashed, and Harry died. Had Harry falsely
believed that the ﬂight left at 8:45, he would have missed the
ﬂight and survived. So true belief is sometimes less conducive
to survival than false belief. (Stich 1990, p. 123)
As Stich (1990) notes, cases such as this are highly unusual,
and do little to refute the claim that true beliefs are gener-
ally adaptive (see also Millikan 1993). After all, natural
selection does not act on anomalous particulars, but
rather upon reliable generalizations. Our question, then,
is whether there might be cases where misbelief is system-
atically adaptive.
7. The boy who cried wolf
You’ve outdone yourself – as usual!
— Raymond Smullyan (1983)
Theoretical considerations converging from several differ-
ent research traditions suggest that any such systematic
falsehood must be unstable, yielding ephemeral instances,
McKay & Dennett: The evolution of misbelief
498
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (2009) 32:6

at best, of misbelief. Recognition of the problem is as old
as Aesop’s fable of the boy who cried wolf. Human com-
munication between agents with memories and the
capacity to check on the reliability of informants creates
a dynamical situation in which systematic lying eventually
exposes and discredits itself. As Quine (1960), Davidson
(1994; 2001), Millikan (2004), and other philosophers
have noted, without a prevailing background of truth-
telling, communication will erode, a practice that cannot
pay for itself. That does not mean, of course, that individ-
ual liars will never succeed for long, but just that their
success depends on their being rare and hard to track. A
parallel phenomenon in evolutionary biology is Batesian
mimicry, in which a non-poisonous species (or type
within a species) mimics the appearance of a poisonous
species (telling a falsehood about itself), getting protection
against predators without paying for the venom. When
mimics are rare, predators avoid them, having had more
encounters with the poisonous variety; when mimics are
common, the mimicry no longer works as well.
Quine and Ullian (1978) note an important wrinkle:
If we could count on people to lie most of the time, we could
get all the information from their testimony that we get under
the present system [of predominant truth-telling]. We could
even construe all their statements as containing an understood
and unspoken “not”, and hence as predominantly true after
all. Utterly random veracity, however, meshed with random
mendacity, would render language useless for gathering
information. (p. 52)
Isolated cases of the tacit negation suggested in this
passage actually occur, when what might be called sys-
tematic irony erodes itself with repetition. “Terriﬁc” no
longer means “provoking terror” but almost the opposite;
and if somebody calls your lecture “incredible” and “fan-
tastic,” you should not take offence – they almost certainly
don’t mean that they don’t believe a word of it and deem it
to be out of touch with reality. A related phenomenon is
“grade inﬂation” in academia. “Bþ” just doesn’t mean
today what it used to mean several decades ago. When
everybody is declared “better than average” the terms of
the declaration are perforce diminished in meaning or
credibility or both.
What, if anything, would prevent similar accommo-
dations from diluting the effect of systematic falsehoods
within the belief formation system of an individual organ-
ism? We know from many experiments with subjects
wearing inverting or distorting lenses (for a recent
summary, see Noe¨ 2004) that the falsehoods the eyes
send the brain lead initially to false beliefs that seriously
disable the subject, but in remarkably short time – a few
days of accommodation – subjects have made an adjust-
ment and can “get all the information from their testi-
mony,” as Quine and Ullian (1978) say, just as if they
had inserted a tacit “not” or switched the meaning of
“right” and “left” in the visual system’s vocabulary. For a
systematic
falsehood-generating
organ
or
tissue
or
network to have any staying power, it must send its lies
to something that has little or no source memory or little
or no plasticity in its evaluation of the credibility of the
source.
Something like that may well be the case in some
sensory systems. Akins (1996) discusses “narcissistic”
biases built into sensory systems in order to optimize
relevance and utility for the animal’s behavioural needs.
Instead of being designed to have their output states
vary in unison (linearly) with the input conditions they
are detecting (like thermometers or fuel gauges, which
are designed to give objectively accurate measurements),
these are designed to “distort” their responses (rather
like the rear view mirror). She notes: “When a sensory
system uses a narcissistic strategy to encode information,
there need not be any counteracting system that has the
task of decoding the output state” (p. 359). No “critics”
or “lie detectors” devalue the message, and so the whole
organism lives with a benign illusion of properties in the
world that “just happen” to be tailor-made for its discern-
ment. For instance, feedback from muscle stretch recep-
tors needs to be discriminating over several orders of
magnitude, so the “meaning” of the spike trains varies con-
tinuously over the range, the sensitivity being adjusted as
need be to maintain ﬁne-grained information over the
whole range. “What is important to realize, here, is that
there need not be any further device that records the ‘pos-
ition’ of the gain mechanism.” (p. 362). In other words, no
provision is made for reality-checking on what the stretch-
receptors are “telling” the rest of the system, but the effect
of this is to permit “inﬂation” to change the meaning of the
spike frequency continuously.
Here, then, are two distinct ways in which our nervous
systems can gracefully adjust the use to which they put
signals that one would brand as false were it not for the
adjustment. In the phenomena induced by artiﬁcially dis-
torting the sensory input, we can observe the adjustment
over time, with tell-tale behavioural errors and awkward-
ness giving way to quite effective and apparently effortless
responses as the new meanings of the input signals get
established. In the sort of cases Akins discusses, there is
no precedent, no “traditional meaning,” to overcome, so
there is no conﬂict to observe.
8. Alief and belief
Sometimes, however, the conﬂicts are not so readily
resolved and the inconsistencies in behaviour do not evap-
orate. Gendler (2008) notes the need for a category of
quasi-beliefs and proposes to distinguish between alief
and belief:
Paradigmatic alief can be characterized as a mental state with
associatively-linked content that is representational, affective
and behavioral, and that is activated – consciously or uncon-
sciously – by features of the subject’s internal or ambient
environment. Alief is a more primitive state than either
belief or imagination: it directly activates behavioral response
patterns (as opposed to motivating in conjunction with desire
or pretended desire.) (Gendler 2008, Abstract)
A person who trembles (or worse) when standing on the
glass-ﬂoored Skywalk that protrudes over the Grand
Canyon does not believe she is in danger, any more than
a moviegoer at a horror ﬁlm does, but her behaviour at
the time indicates that she is in a belief-like state that
has considerable behavioural impact. The reluctance of
subjects in Paul Rozin’s experiments with disgust (e.g.,
Rozin et al. 1986) to come in contact with perfectly
clean but disgusting looking objects, does not indicate
that they actually believe the objects are contaminated;
in Gendler’s terms, they alieve this. In a similar vein,
patients with Obsessive Compulsive Disorder (OCD)
McKay & Dennett: The evolution of misbelief
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (2009) 32:6
499

generally don’t believe that the repetitive behaviours they
feel compelled to engage in are necessary to prevent some
dreaded occurrence – but they may well alieve this. (The
Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders
[DSM-IV-TR; American Psychiatric Association 2000,
p. 463] contains a speciﬁer for OCD with “poor insight,”
which denotes patients who fail to recognise that their
obsessions and compulsions are “excessive or unreason-
able.” In such patients alief may be overlaid with belief.)
Are such aliefs adaptive? Probably not. They seem to
join other instances of “tolerated” side effects of imperfect
systems, but in any case they are not beliefs proper. The
question before us now is whether we ever evolve
systems for engendering false beliefs: informational states
of global and relatively enduring (inﬂation-proof) signiﬁ-
cance to the whole organism that miss the usual target of
truth and do so non-coincidentally.
9. Error management theory
[B]elief-formation systems that are maximally accurate (yielding beliefs
that most closely approximate external reality) are not necessarily those
that maximize the likelihood of survival: natural selection does not care
about truth; it cares only about reproductive success.
— Stephen Stich (1990, p. 62)
[T]he human mind shows good design, although it is design for ﬁtness
maximization, not truth preservation.
— Martie Haselton and Daniel Nettle (2006, p. 63)
Beliefs are notoriously hard to count. Is the belief that
3 þ 1 ¼ 4 distinct from the belief that 1 þ 3 ¼ 4, or are
these just one belief? Can you have one without the
other? (See Dennett 1982, for an analysis of the problems
attendant on such questions.) No matter how we individu-
ate beliefs, we might expect that optimal systems of belief
and decision would be maximally accurate. Given the con-
texts in which decisions are made, however, trade-offs may
arise between overall accuracy and accuracy in certain
situations. Dennett illustrates this point:
[I]t might be better for beast B to have some false beliefs about
whom B can beat up and whom B can’t. Ranking B’s likely
antagonists from ferocious to pushover, we certainly want B
to believe it can’t beat up all the ferocious ones and can beat
up all the obvious pushovers, but it is better (because it
“costs less” in discrimination tasks and protects against
random perturbations such as bad days and lucky blows) for
B to extend “I can’t beat up x” to cover even some beasts it
can in fact beat up. Erring on the side of prudence is a well-
recognized good strategy, and so Nature can be expected to
have valued it on occasions when it came up. (Dennett 1987,
p. 51, footnote 3, emphasis in original)
Stich echoes the logic of this scenario with an example of
his own:
Consider, for example, the question of whether a certain type
of food is poisonous. For an omnivore living in a gastronomi-
cally heterogeneous environment, a false positive on such a
question would be relatively cheap. If the organism comes
to believe that something is poisonous when it is not, it will
avoid that food unnecessarily. This may have a small negative
impact on its chances of survival and successful reproduction.
False negatives, on the other hand, are much more costly in
such situations. If the organism comes to believe that a given
kind of food is not poisonous when it is, it will not avoid the
food and will run a substantial risk of illness or death. (Stich
1990, pp. 61–62)
What these examples suggest is that when there are
reliable “asymmetries in the costs of errors” (Bratman
1992) – that is, when one type of error (false positive or
false negative) is consistently more detrimental to ﬁtness
than the other – then a system that is biased toward com-
mitting the less costly error may be more adaptive than an
unbiased system. The suggestion that biologically engin-
eered systems of decision and belief formation exploit
such adaptations is the basis of Error Management
Theory (EMT; Haselton 2007; Haselton & Buss 2000;
2003; Haselton & Nettle 2006). According to EMT, cogni-
tive errors (including misbeliefs) are not necessarily mal-
functions reﬂecting (culpable) limitations of evolutionary
design; rather, such errors may reﬂect judicious systematic
biases that maximise ﬁtness despite increasing overall
error rates.
Haselton and Buss (2000) use EMT to explain the
apparent tendency of men to overperceive the sexual
interest and intent of women (Abbey 1982; Haselton
2003). They argue that, for men, the perception of
sexual intent in women is a domain characterised by recur-
rent cost asymmetries, such that the cost of inferring
sexual intent where none exists (a false-positive error) is
outweighed by the cost of falsely inferring a lack of
sexual intent (a false-negative). The former error may
cost some time and effort spent in fruitless courtship,
but the latter error will entail a missed sexual, and thus
reproductive, opportunity – an altogether more serious
outcome as far as ﬁtness is concerned.
For women, the pattern of cost asymmetries is basically
reversed. The cost of inferring a man’s interest in familial
investment where none exists (a false-positive error) would
tend to outweigh the cost of falsely inferring a lack of such
interest (a false-negative). The former error may entail the
woman consenting to sex and being subsequently aban-
doned, a serious outcome indeed in arduous ancestral
environments. The latter error, on the other hand, would
tend merely to delay reproduction for the woman – a
less costly error, especially given that reproductive oppor-
tunities are generally easier for women to acquire than
for men (Haselton 2007). In view of such considerations,
proponents of EMT predict that women will tend to
underperceive the commitment intentions of men, a pre-
diction apparently supported by empirical evidence
(Haselton 2007; Haselton & Buss 2000).
Other EMT predictions that have received apparent
empirical support include the hypotheses that recurrent
cost asymmetries have produced evolved biases toward
overinferring aggressive intentions in others (Duntley &
Buss 1998; Haselton & Buss 2000), particularly in
members of other racial and ethnic groups (Haselton &
Nettle 2006; Krebs & Denton 1997; Quillian & Pager
2001); toward overinferring potential danger with regard
to snakes (see Haselton & Buss 2003; Haselton & Nettle
2006);
toward
underestimating
the
arrival
time
of
approaching sound sources (Haselton & Nettle 2006;
Neuhoff 2001); and – reﬂecting Stich’s (1990) example
above – toward overestimating the likelihood that food is
contaminated (see Rozin & Fallon 1987; Rozin et al.
1990). The error management perspective, moreover,
appears to be a fecund source of new predictions. In the
realm of sexuality and courtship, for example, Haselton
and Nettle (2006) predict biases toward overinferring
the romantic or sexual interest of (a) others in one’s
McKay & Dennett: The evolution of misbelief
500
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (2009) 32:6

partner (what they term the “interloper effect”); and (b)
one’s partner in others. These predictions complement a
series of other already conﬁrmed predictions stemming
from evolutionary analyses of jealousy (see Buss & Hasel-
ton [2005] for a brief review).
One objection that might be raised at this point is that
the above examples need not actually involve misbelief.
Stich’s omnivore need not believe that the food in question
is poisonous – it might remain quite agnostic on that
score. Similarly, jealous individuals need not harbour
beliefs about partner inﬁdelity – they might just be hyper-
vigilant for any signs of it. The issue here is what doxastic
inferences can be drawn from behaviour. After all, we
always look before crossing a road, even where we are
almost positive that there is no oncoming trafﬁc. Our
actions in such a case should not be read as reﬂecting a
belief that there is an oncoming vehicle, but rather as
reﬂecting a belief that there might be an oncoming
vehicle (and the absence of a vehicle does not render
that latter belief false). If we had to bet our lives one
way or another on the matter, we might well bet that
there isn’t an oncoming vehicle (Bratman 1992). Betting
our lives one way or the other, however, is a paradigm
case of error symmetry (if we’re wrong, we die – no
matter which option we choose). In everyday cases of
crossing the road, however, the errors are radically asym-
metrical – an error one way may indeed mean serious
injury or death, but an error the other way will entail
only a trivial waste of time and energy.
The upshot of this criticism is that tendencies to “over-
estimate” the likelihood that food is contaminated, to
“overperceive” the sexual interest of women, or to “overin-
fer” aggressive intentions in others, may reﬂect judicious
decision criteria for action rather than misbeliefs. Nature
may well prefer to create a bias on the side of prudence,
but she does not always need to instill erroneous beliefs
to accomplish this. She may instead make do with cautious
action policies that might be expressed as “when in doubt
[regarding some state of affairs relevant to current
welfare], do x.” Errors, therefore, may not need to be
managed doxastically. Some authors, however, have
suggested that certain delusions also involve error manage-
ment processes. Schipper et al. (2007), for example, con-
ceptualise delusional jealousy (also known as morbid
jealousy or Othello syndrome) as the extreme end of a
Gaussian distribution of jealousy, and hypothesise that
the same sex-speciﬁc patterns that characterise “normal”
jealousy – stemming from recurrent divergence in the
adaptive problems faced by each gender – will also
characterise delusional jealousy: “[H]ypersensitive jea-
lousy mechanisms . . . may serve the adaptive purpose of
preventing partner inﬁdelity” (Schipper et al. 2007,
p. 630; see also Easton et al. 2007). Whereas it may
be true, therefore, that errors are not ordinarily managed
doxastically, surely delusions involve genuine belief?
There are, however, serious objections to the notion that
delusions are beliefs (Hamilton 2007; Stephens & Graham
2004; see Bayne & Pacherie [2005] for a defence of the
“doxastic conception”). One objection stems from the
observation that although some individuals act on their
delusions – and sometimes violently (see Mowat 1966;
Silva et al. 1998) – other deluded individuals frequently
fail to act in accordance with their delusions. Individuals
with the Capgras delusion, for example, rarely ﬁle
missing persons reports on behalf of their replaced loved
ones, and those who claim to be Napoleon are seldom
seen issuing orders to their troops (Young 2000). In
response to such objections, some authors have provided
characterisations of delusions that dispense with the
doxastic stipulation. Jaspers (1913/1963) and Berrios
(1991), for example, have each proposed “non-assertoric”
accounts of delusions (Young 1999). Jaspers (1913/1963)
held that schizophrenic delusions are not understandable,
while for Berrios (1991) the verbalizations of deluded
patients are empty speech acts, mere noise masquerading
as mentality. Other authors have put forward metacogni-
tive accounts of delusions, whereby delusions are con-
ceived as higher-order meta-evaluations of standard,
lower-order mental items. For example, Currie and
colleagues (Currie 2000; Currie & Jureidini 2001; see
Bayne & Pacherie [2005] for a critique) argue that delu-
sions are in fact imaginings misidentiﬁed as beliefs. On
this account, the delusional belief of a Cotard patient is
not the belief that she is dead, but rather the belief that
she believes she is dead – when in fact she only imagines
that she is dead (see Stephens & Graham [2004] for a
variant of the metacognitive thesis).
In any case, it may be misguided to invoke delusions in
attempting to link error management with adaptive misbe-
lief. The reason is simple: Even if one overlooks objections
to the doxastic conception and insists that delusions
are beliefs, a serious problem remains – the issue of
whether delusions can, in any sense, be regarded as adap-
tive. We consider this question below.
10. Doxastic shear pins
In this article we have distinguished two broad categories
of misbelief – on the one hand, a category of misbeliefs
resulting from breaks in the belief formation system, and
on the other, a category of misbeliefs arising in the
normal course of belief system operations. Here we
brieﬂy consider an intriguing intermediate possibility: mis-
beliefs enabled by the action of “doxastic shear pins.” A
shear pin is a metal pin installed in, say, the drive train
of a marine engine. The shear pin locks the propeller to
the propeller shaft and is intended to “shear” should the
propeller hit a log or other hard object. Shear pins are
mechanical analogues of electrical fuses – each is a com-
ponent in a system that is designed to break (in certain cir-
cumstances) so as to protect other, more expensive parts of
the system. When a shear pin breaks (or a fuse blows), the
system ceases its normal function. However, the action of
the shear pin or fuse is not itself abnormal in these situ-
ations – in fact it is functioning perfectly as designed.
What might count as a doxastic analogue of shear pin
breakage? We envision doxastic shear pins as components
of belief evaluation machinery that are “designed” to break
in situations of extreme psychological stress (analogous to
the mechanical overload that breaks a shear pin or the
power surge that blows a fuse). Perhaps the normal func-
tion (both normatively and statistically construed) of such
components would be to constrain the inﬂuence of motiva-
tional processes on belief formation. Breakage of such
components,11 therefore, might permit the formation
and
maintenance
of
comforting
misbeliefs – beliefs
that would ordinarily be rejected as ungrounded, but
McKay & Dennett: The evolution of misbelief
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (2009) 32:6
501

that would facilitate the negotiation of overwhelming
circumstances (perhaps by enabling the management
of powerful negative emotions) and that would thus be
adaptive in such extraordinary circumstances.
Insofar as these misbeliefs were delusions, they would
have a different aetiology to the more clear-cut cases of
“deﬁcit delusions” discussed earlier (mirrored-self misi-
dentiﬁcation and the like), because the breakage permit-
ting their formation would serve a defensive, protective
function. In short, they would be motivated (see Bayne
& Ferna´ndez 2009; McKay & Kinsbourne, in press;
McKay et al. 2007a; 2009). Psychoanalytically inclined
authors have proposed motivational interpretations of
delusions such as the Capgras and Cotard delusions
(e.g., see Enoch & Ball 2001), but in the wake of more rig-
orous cognitive neuropsychiatric models such interpreta-
tions tend to be viewed with disdain as outlandish and
anachronistic (Ellis 2003).
Claims about motivational aetiologies for delusions are
more plausible in other domains, however. Consider, for
example, the following case of reverse Othello syndrome
(Butler 2000). The patient in question, “B.X.,” was a
gifted musician who had been left a quadriplegic following
a car accident. B.X. subsequently developed delusions
about the continuing ﬁdelity of his former romantic
partner (who had in fact severed all contact with him
and embarked on a new relationship soon after his acci-
dent). According to Butler, B.X.’s delusional system
provided a “defense against depressive overwhelm . . .
[going]
some
way
toward
reconferring
a
sense
of
meaning to his life experience and reintegrating his shat-
tered sense of self. Without it there was only the stark
reality of annihilating loss and confrontation with his
own emotional devastation” (2000, p. 89). Although this
seems a plausible motivational formulation, it comes
from an isolated case study, and Butler’s theorising is
unavoidably post hoc. Moreover, the fact that B.X. had
sustained severe head injuries in his accident opens up
the possibility that any breakage in his belief evaluation
system was, as it were, ateleological – adventitious, not
designed. More general (plausible) motivational interpreta-
tions exist for other delusions, however – especially for
so-called functional delusions, where the nature and role
of underlying neuropathy (if any) is unspeciﬁed (Langdon
& Coltheart 2000; Langdon et al. 2008). In particular,
there are well-worked-out motivational formulations for per-
secutory delusions (see Bentall & Kaney 1996; Kinderman &
Bentall 1996; 1997), interpretations that have garnered
recent empirical support (McKay et al. 2007b; Moritz et al.
2006; although, see Vazquez et al. 2008).
It seems, therefore, that certain delusions might serve
plausible defensive functions. Whether this implies that
such delusions are adaptive, however, is a different ques-
tion. To be sure, it might plausibly be argued that delu-
sions are psychologically adaptive in certain scenarios (as
the above reverse Othello case suggests). But this does
not establish a case for biological adaptation. Here we
must be careful to honour a distinction, often compla-
cently ignored, between human happiness and genetic
ﬁtness. If the most promising path, on average, to having
more surviving grandoffspring is one that involves pain
and hardship, natural selection will not be deterred in
the least from pursuing it (it is well to remind ourselves
of the insect species in which the males are beheaded in
the normal course of copulation, or – somewhat closer
to home – the ruthless siblingcide practiced by many
bird species). Perhaps the most that can presently be
claimed is that delusions may be produced by extreme ver-
sions of systems that have evolved in accordance with error
management principles, that is, evolved so as to exploit
recurrent
cost
asymmetries.
As
extreme
versions,
however, there
is every chance that such systems
manage errors in a maladaptive fashion. As Zolotova and
Bru¨ne conclude, “[T]he content of delusional beliefs
could be interpreted as pathological variants of adaptive
psychological mechanisms. . .” (2006, p. 192, our empha-
sis; see also Bru¨ne 2001; 2003a; 2003b).
In view of these caveats, it is unclear whether delusions
could form via the teleological “shearing” of particular
belief components under stressful circumstances. Non-
delusional misbeliefs, however, might potentially be
formed in something like this way (see section 13 for a dis-
cussion of health illusions). To an extent the issue here is
merely stipulative, hinging on the deﬁnition of “delusion”
one adopts. If delusions are dysfunctional by deﬁnition,
then they cannot be adaptive. Moreover, many have
reported that, in times of great stress, faith in God has
given them “the strength to go on.” It may be true that
there are no atheists in foxholes (although see Dennett
2006b), but if delusions are deﬁned so as to exclude conven-
tional religious beliefs (American Psychiatric Association
2000), then even if foxhole theism is biologically adaptive it
willnotcountasaninstanceofbiologicallyadaptivedelusion.
Accounts of religious belief as an adaptation in general
have been proposed by a number of commentators (e.g.,
Johnson & Bering 2006; Wilson 2002; but see Dennett
[2006a] for a critique and an alternative evolutionary
account). Given the costs associated with religious com-
mitment (see Bulbulia 2004b; Dawkins 2006a; Rufﬂe &
Sosis 2007; Sosis 2004), it seems likely that such commit-
ment is accompanied by bona ﬁde belief of one sort or
another (it might be only bona ﬁde belief in belief – see
Dennett 2006a). We therefore consider now whether in
religion we have a candidate domain of adaptive misbelief.
11. Supernatural agency
Interestingly, error management logic pervades contem-
porary thinking about the origin of religion, and it is also
apparent in some less-contemporary thinking:
God is, or is not. . . . Let us weigh up the gain and the loss by
calling heads that God exists . . . if you win, you win everything;
if you lose, you lose nothing. Wager that he exists then, without
hesitating! (Pascal 1670/1995, pp. 153–54.)
Pascal’s famous wager provides perhaps the quintessen-
tial statement of error management logic, although it is
important to note that the wager is an outcome of
domain general rationality, whereas error management
as implemented by evolved cognitive mechanisms is
always domain speciﬁc (Haselton & Nettle 2006). One
such domain relevant to religion is the domain of agency
detection. Guthrie (1993) has argued that a bias toward
inferring the presence of agents would have been adaptive
in the evolutionary past: “It is better for a hiker to mistake
a boulder for a bear, than to mistake a bear for a boulder”
(1993, p. 6). He argues further that religious belief may be
McKay & Dennett: The evolution of misbelief
502
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (2009) 32:6

a by-product of evolved cognitive mechanisms that
produce such biases – mechanisms that Barrett (2000)
has
termed
“Hyperactive
agent-detection
devices”
(HADDs). As a by-product theory of religion (see
further on), this account provides little suggestion that
religious belief is adaptive misbelief. Other authors,
however, have proposed accounts of religion as an adap-
tation that incorporate error management logic.
For example, Johnson, Bering, and colleagues (Bering
& Johnson 2005; Johnson 2005; Johnson & Bering 2006;
Johnson & Kru¨ger 2004; Johnson et al. 2003) have
advanced a “supernatural punishment hypothesis” regard-
ing the evolution of human cooperation. The nature and
extent of human cooperation poses a signiﬁcant evolution-
ary puzzle (Fehr & Gaechter 2002). Human societies
are strikingly anomalous in this respect relative to other
animal
species,
as
they
are
based
on
large-scale
cooperation between genetically unrelated individuals
(Fehr & Fischbacher 2003; 2004). Classic adaptationist
accounts of cooperation such as kin selection (Hamilton
1964)
and
direct
reciprocity
(Trivers
1971)
cannot
explain these features of human cooperation. Moreover,
the theories of indirect reciprocity (Alexander 1987) and
costly signalling (Gintis et al. 2001; Zahavi 1995), which
show how cooperation can emerge in larger groups
when individuals have the opportunity to establish reputa-
tions, struggle to explain the occurrence of cooperation in
situations that preclude reputation formation – such as in
anonymous, one-shot economic games (Fehr & Gaechter
2002; Gintis et al. 2003; Henrich & Fehr 2003).
Johnson, Bering, and colleagues (Bering & Johnson
2005; Johnson 2005; Johnson & Bering 2006; Johnson &
Kru¨ger 2004; Johnson et al. 2003) argue that belief in
morally interested supernatural agents – and fear of pun-
ishment by such agents – may sustain cooperation in such
situations. The argument they put forward is based expli-
citly on error management theory. They suggest that the
evolutionary advent of language, on the one hand, and
Theory of Mind (ToM; Premack & Woodruff 1978), on
the other (speciﬁcally, the evolution of the “intentionality
system,” a component of ToM geared toward representing
mental states as the unseen causes of behaviour; Bering
2002; Povinelli & Bering 2002), occasioned a novel set of
selection pressures. In particular, the evolution of these
cognitive capabilities increased the costs associated with
social defection (because one’s social transgressions
could be reported to absent third parties), and thus
increased the adaptiveness of mechanisms that inhibit
selﬁsh actions.
Belief
in
supernatural
punishment – an
incidental
by-product of the intentionality system – is one such
mechanism. Johnson, Bering, and colleagues thus argue
for supernatural belief as an exaptation (Gould & Vrba
1982), a fact that is important for the plausibility of their
model. Their central claim is that selection would favour
exaggerated estimates of the probability and/or conse-
quences of detection, and thus would favour belief in
morally interested supernatural agents. It is not clear,
however, that the latter would be necessary to drive the
former. Selection might simply implement biased beliefs
regarding the probability and/or consequences of detec-
tion (cutting out the middleman, as it were). Even more
parsimoniously, selection might favour accurate beliefs
and implement appropriately judicious action policies
vis-a`-vis social situations (cf. the social exchange heuristic
of Yamagishi et al. 2007). As per our earlier observations
regarding evolutionary explorations in Design Space,
however, such “simpler” solutions might be unavailable
to selection; it may be that the most direct means of inhi-
biting selﬁsh behaviour is via supernatural punishment
beliefs. If such beliefs were already on the evolutionary
scene as by-products of pre-existing intentionality system
structures, then they could be conveniently co-opted
without any need for the engineering of novel neuro-cog-
nitive machinery (see Bering 2006).
The argument depends on a crucial error manage-
ment assumption – that the costs of the two relevant
errors in this novel selection environment are recur-
rently asymmetric – that is, that the cost of cheating
and being caught reliably exceeds the cost of cooperat-
ing when cheating would have gone undetected. Pro-
vided that this inequality obtains, the theory claims
that a propensity to believe in morally interested super-
natural agents would have been selected for, because
individuals holding such beliefs would tend to err on
the (cooperative) side of caution in their dealings with
conspeciﬁcs. “Machiavellian” unbelievers would not
therefore gain an advantage, as they would lack impor-
tant “restraints on self-interested conduct” and thus be
“too blatantly selﬁsh for the subtleties of the new
social world” (Johnson 2005, p. 414).
What is the evidence for this theory? Johnson (2005)
utilized data from Murdock and White’s (1969) Standard
Cross-Cultural Sample (SCCS) of 186 human societies
around the globe to test whether the concept of superna-
tural punishment – indexed by the importance of mora-
lizing “high gods” – was associated with cooperation.
Johnson found “high gods” to be “signiﬁcantly associated
with societies that are larger, more norm compliant in
some tests (but not others), loan and use abstract
money, are centrally sanctioned, policed, and pay taxes”
(Johnson 2005, p. 426; see also Roes & Raymond 2003).
As Johnson acknowledges, his measures of supernatural
punishment and cooperation were imprecise (a limitation
of the data set employed), and his evidence is correla-
tional at best – the causal relationship between superna-
tural
punishment
beliefs
and
cooperation
remains
obscure. The same criticisms apply to Rossano’s (2007)
argument that the emergence (in the Upper Palaeolithic)
of certain ancient traits of religion (involving belief in
“ever-vigilant spiritual monitors”; p. 272) coincides with
evidence for a dramatic advance in human cooperation
(see Norenzayan & Shariff [2008] for a review of
further studies reporting correlational evidence of reli-
gious prosociality).
In view of this criticism, studies that elicit causal evi-
dence for the supernatural punishment hypothesis are
crucial. The ﬁndings of a recent study by Shariff and Nor-
enzayan (2007) are worth considering in this regard. These
authors used a scrambled-sentence paradigm to implicitly
prime “God” concepts, and found that participants primed
in this manner gave signiﬁcantly more money in a sub-
sequent (anonymous, one-shot) economic game (the Dic-
tator Game; see Camerer 2003) than control participants.
In discussing these results, Shariff and Norenzayan made
appeal to a “supernatural watcher” interpretation of their
ﬁndings, suggesting that their religious primes “aroused
an imagined presence of supernatural watchers, and that
McKay & Dennett: The evolution of misbelief
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (2009) 32:6
503

this perception then increased prosocial behavior” (p.
807).
As
Randolph-Seng
and
Nielsen
(2008)
note,
however, this interpretation may be less parsimonious
than a behavioural-priming or ideomotor-action account
(which Shariff and Norenzayan also considered), in
which the activation of speciﬁc perceptual-conceptual rep-
resentations increases the likelihood of behaviour consist-
ent with those representations (see Dijksterhuis et al.
2007). Thus, much as people walk more slowly when the
concept “elderly” is primed (Bargh et al. 1996), priming
words that are semantically associated with prosocial be-
haviour (including words such as “God” and “prophet,”
both of which were utilised as “religious primes” by
Shariff and Norenzayan) may lead to such behaviour
simply by virtue of that association.
The behavioural-priming or ideomotor-action expla-
nation is buttressed by the results of Shariff and Norenza-
yan’s second study, which showed that implicitly primed
“secular” concepts were comparable to implicitly primed
“God” concepts in terms of their effect on giving in a sub-
sequent Dictator Game. As Randolph-Seng and Nielsen
(2008) point out, it is not clear why secular primes such
as “civic” and “contract,” that contain no reference to
God, should enhance prosocial behaviour if such behav-
iour results from the activation of “supernatural watcher”
concepts. Nevertheless, we feel that the research design
of Shariff and Norenzayan (and that of comparable
recent studies; see Pichon et al. 2007; Randolph-Seng &
Nielsen 2007) is insufﬁcient to adequately discriminate
between the supernatural watcher and behavioural-
priming interpretations. What is needed is a study that
clearly separates the inﬂuence of an “agency” dimension
(whether natural or supernatural) from a “prosociality”
dimension. The appeal of the supernatural punishment
hypothesis is that it shows how reputational concerns
might inﬂuence behaviour in situations that preclude
actual reputation formation. It is true that both the “reli-
gious prime” and the “secular prime” categories utilized
by Shariff and Norenzayan included words potentially
associated semantically with prosocial behaviour. We
note, however, that both word categories also include
words potentially associated with agency (“God” and
“prophet” in the former category, “jury” and “police” in
the latter). It may be that the surveillance connotations
of a word such as “police” may mean that priming with
this word enhances prosocial behaviour by activating
reputational concerns – not by semantic association with
prosociality! Future studies would do well to tease these
factors apart.
Recent research by Bering et al. (2005) employed a
different paradigm to elicit causal evidence regarding the
effect of a supernatural watcher (albeit a supernatural
watcher without obvious moral interests). In one condition
of their third study, undergraduate students were casually
informed that the ghost of a dead graduate student had
recently been noticed in the testing room. These partici-
pants were subsequently less willing than control partici-
pants to cheat on a competitive computer task, despite a
low apparent risk of social detection. This result is intri-
guing, and not obviously susceptible to explanation in
terms of behavioural-priming effects (cf. Randolph-Seng
& Nielsen 2007). As the relevant information was not col-
lected, however, it is not clear to what extent the effect of
the ghost prime in this study was mediated by participants’
belief in ghosts. This is an important point, as it raises the
possibility that if behavioural effects are reliably elicited by
supernatural primes, they may be elicited not by belief but
by alief(!) (Gendler 2008). Perhaps suitably primed par-
ticipants alieve that a supernatural agent is watching, but
believe no such thing. If this is the case, then such
effects, although interesting, will have little bearing on
the question of whether misbelief can be systematically
adaptive.
It turns out that the evidence is mixed regarding
whether supernatural belief mediates the effect of super-
natural primes on behaviour. In the ﬁrst of Shariff and
Norenzayan’s (2007) studies, the religious prime increased
generosity for both theists and atheists. In their second
study, however, the effect of the religious prime was stron-
ger for theists than atheists (and in fact non-signiﬁcant for
atheists). It may be that this difference is attributable
to the more stringent atheist criterion employed in the
latter study, in which case belief may be crucial. Recent
work by Bushman et al. (2007), which found that scriptural
violence
sanctioned
by
God
increased
aggression,
especially in religious participants, is consistent with this
proposition.
However,
Randolph-Seng
and
Nielsen
(2007) found that whereas participants primed with reli-
gious words cheated signiﬁcantly less on a subsequent
task than control participants, the intrinsic religiosity of
participants did not interact with the prime factor.
At present, therefore, there is no strong evidence that
religious belief is important for the efﬁcacy of religious
primes, nor any strong evidence that such primes exert
their effects by activating reputational concerns involving
supernatural agents. Other approaches notwithstanding
(e.g., Dawkins 2006a; Sosis 2004; Wilson 2002), the
currently dominant evolutionary perspective on religion
remains a by-product perspective (Atran 2004; Atran &
Norenzayan 2004; Bloom 2004; 2005; 2007; Boyer 2001;
2003; 2008b; Hinde 1999). On this view, supernatural
(mis)beliefs are side-effects of a suite of cognitive mechan-
isms adapted for other purposes. Such mechanisms render
us hyperactive agency detectors (Barrett 2000; Guthrie
1993), promiscuous teleologists (Kelemen 2004), and
intuitive dualists (Bloom 2004); collectively (and inciden-
tally), they predispose us to develop religious beliefs – or
at least they facilitate the acquisition of such beliefs
(Bloom 2007). Meanwhile, advocates of “strong recipro-
city” (Fehr et al. 2002; Gintis 2000) argue that the
puzzle of large-scale human cooperation may be solved
by invoking cultural group selection (Boyd et al. 2003;
Henrich & Boyd 2001) or gene-culture coevolution
(Bowles et al. 2003; also see Fehr & Fischbacher 2003;
Gintis 2003).
12. Self-deception
When a person cannot deceive himself the chances are against his being
able to deceive other people.
—Mark Twain
[T]he ﬁrst and best unconscious move of a dedicated liar is to persuade
himself he’s sincere.
—Ian McEwan, “Saturday”
Arguments that systematic misbelief may have been
selected
for
its
ability
to
facilitate
the
successful
McKay & Dennett: The evolution of misbelief
504
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (2009) 32:6

negotiation of social exchange scenarios are not conﬁned
to the domain of religion. In his foreword to the ﬁrst
edition of Richard Dawkins’ book The Selﬁsh Gene, for
example, the evolutionary biologist Robert Trivers out-
lined an inﬂuential theory of the evolution of self-
deception:
[I]f (as Dawkins argues) deceit is fundamental in animal com-
munication, then there must be strong selection to spot decep-
tion and this ought, in turn, to select for a degree of self-
deception, rendering some facts and motives unconscious so
as not to betray – by the subtle signs of self-knowledge – the
deception being practiced. Thus, the conventional view that
natural selection favors nervous systems which produce ever
more accurate images of the world must be a very naı¨ve view
of mental evolution. (Trivers 2006, p. xx; see also Alexander
1979; 1987; Lockard 1978; 1980; Lockard & Paulhus 1988;
Trivers 1985; 2000)
In the intervening years the notion that self-deception
has
evolved
because
it
facilitates
other-deception
appears to have become something of a received view
in evolutionary circles. The notion is not without its
critics, however. Both Ramachandran and Blakeslee
(1998) and Van Leeuwen (2007) have pointed out that
deceivers who believe their own lies (regarding, say,
the whereabouts of a food source) will not themselves
be able to take advantage of the truth. Deception is
thus
clearly
possible
without
self-deception.
Van
Leeuwen (2007) also claims the converse – that self-
deception frequently occurs in the absence of any inten-
tion to deceive. On the basis of such considerations, Van
Leeuwen argues that self-deception is not an adaptation
but a by-product of other features of human cognitive
architecture.
In any case, Trivers’ theory has received surprisingly
little empirical attention, and we know of no direct empiri-
cal evidence that the theory is valid. Indeed, a recent study
by McKay et al. (in preparation) found preliminary evi-
dence that high self-deceivers were, if anything, less
likely to be trusted in a cooperative exchange situation
than low self-deceivers. These authors recruited groups
of previously unacquainted participants, had them interact
brieﬂy with one another, and then invited each participant
to play an anonymous, one-shot Prisoner’s Dilemma game
with each other participant. Participants were sub-
sequently told that they could double the stakes for one
of these games. Individuals higher in self-deception
(measured
using
the
Self-Deceptive
Enhancement
[SDE] scale of the Balanced Inventory of Desirable
Responding [BIDR; Paulhus 1988]) were less likely to
be
nominated
for
such
double-stakes
exchanges,
suggesting that such individuals appeared less trustworthy
than individuals lower in self-deception.
In a variant of Trivers’ dictum, Krebs and Denton
(1997) state that “Illusions about one’s worth are adaptive
because they help people deceive others about their
worth” (p. 37; see also Smith 2006). Given the lack of evi-
dence that others are deceived about the worth of self-
deceptive individuals, it is questionable whether “illusions
about one’s worth” do in fact serve this function. Might
such illusions serve other adaptive functions, however?
Having peeled the onion down, and set aside a variety of
inconclusive candidates for adaptive misbelief, we turn
ﬁnally to an investigation of this question.
13. Positive illusions
The perception of reality is called mentally healthy when what the indi-
vidual sees corresponds to what is actually there.
— Marie Jahoda (1958, p. 6)
[T]he healthy mind is a self-deceptive one.
— Shelley Taylor (1989, p. 126)
In parallel with the prevailing evolutionary view of adap-
tive belief, a number of psychological traditions have
regarded close contact with reality as a cornerstone of
mental health (Jahoda 1953; 1958; Maslow 1950; Peck
1978; Vaillant 1977). A substantial body of research in
recent decades, however, has challenged this view,
suggesting instead that optimal mental health is associated
with unrealistically positive self-appraisals and beliefs.12
Taylor and colleagues (e.g., Taylor 1989; Taylor &
Brown 1988) refer to such biased perceptions as “positive
illusions,” where an illusion is “a belief that departs from
reality” (Taylor & Brown 1988, p. 194). Such illusions
include unrealistically positive self-evaluations, exagger-
ated perceptions of personal control or mastery, and
unrealistic optimism about the future.
For example, evidence indicates that there is a wide-
spread tendency for most people to see themselves as
better than most others on a range of dimensions. This is
the “better-than-average effect” (Alicke 1985) – individ-
uals, on the average, judge themselves to be more intelli-
gent, honest, persistent, original, friendly, and reliable
than the average person. Most college students tend to
believe that they will have a longer-than-average lifespan,
while most college instructors believe that they are better-
than-average teachers (Cross 1977). Most people also tend
to believe that their driving skills are better than average –
even those who have been hospitalised for accidents (see,
e.g., McKenna et al. 1991; Williams 2003). In fact, most
people view themselves as better than average on almost
any dimension that is both subjective and socially desirable
(Myers 2002). Indeed, with exquisite irony, most people
even see themselves as less prone to such self-serving dis-
tortions than others (Friedrich 1996; Pronin et al. 2002;
Pronin 2004).
Positive illusions may well be pervasive, but are they
adaptive, evolutionarily speaking? For example, do such
misbeliefs sustain and enhance physical health? Our
positive illusions may “feel good” and yet contribute
nothing to – or even be a tolerable burden upon – our
genetic ﬁtness, a side effect that evolution has not found
worth blocking. On the other hand, they may be ﬁtness-
enhancing, in either of two quite different ways. They
may lead us to undertake adaptive actions; or they may
more directly sustain and enhance health, or physical
ﬁtness in the everyday sense. We consider each of these
prospects in turn.
First, let’s look at what happens when positive illusions
affect the decisions we make in the course of deliberate,
intentional action. Do these rosy visions actually lead
people to engage in more adaptive behaviours? According
to Taylor and Brown (1994b), they do. These authors note
that individuals with strong positive perceptions – and in
particular, inﬂated perceptions – of their abilities are
more likely to attain success than those with more
modest self-perceptions. In this connection they quote
Bandura:
McKay & Dennett: The evolution of misbelief
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (2009) 32:6
505

It is widely believed that misjudgment produces dysfunction.
Certainly,
gross
miscalculation
can
create
problems.
However, optimistic self-appraisals of capability that are not
unduly disparate from what is possible can be advantageous,
whereas veridical judgments can be self-limiting. When
people err in their self-appraisals, they tend to overestimate
their capabilities. This is a beneﬁt rather than a cognitive
failing to be eradicated. If self-efﬁcacy beliefs always reﬂected
only what people could do routinely, they would rarely fail but
they would not mount the extra effort needed to surpass their
ordinary performances. (Bandura 1989, p. 1177)
Haselton and Nettle (2006) note the tacit error manage-
ment perspective in Taylor and Brown’s conception of
positive illusions:
[I]f the [evolutionary] cost of trying and failing is low relative to
the potential [evolutionary] beneﬁt of succeeding, then an
illusional positive belief is not just better than an illusional
negative one, but also better than an unbiased belief. . . .
(Haselton & Nettle 2006, p. 58; see also Nettle 2004)
Although the link here with error management is interest-
ing and relevant, it is worth pausing to consider the precise
wording of this quote. Haselton and Nettle speak of an illu-
sional positive belief as being better than an unbiased belief,
when presumably what they mean is that a belief system
geared toward forming illusional positive beliefs – assuming
that such beliefs are consistently less detrimental to ﬁtness
than illusional negative beliefs – may be more adaptive
than an unbiased belief system. Even if the misbeliefs
arising through the operation of the former system arise
through the normal operation of that system, the misbe-
liefs themselves must surely count as abnormal (Millikan
2004). After all, it’s not clear that there is anything adaptive
about trying and failing (but see Dennett 1995b). Smoke
detectors biased toward false alarms are no doubt prefer-
able to those biased toward the more costly errors (failures
to detect actual ﬁres); but that doesn’t mean that a false
alarm is a cause for celebration. If a smoke detector
came onto the market that detected every actual ﬁre
without ever sounding a false alarm, that would be the
one to purchase. Even if they spring from adaptively
biased misbelief-producing systems, therefore, individual
misbeliefs about success are arguably more of a tolerable
by-product than an adaptation. (Possible exceptions to
this might be cases where individuals falsely believe that
they will attain great success, yet where the conﬁdent striv-
ing engendered by such misbelief leads to greater success
than would have been attained had they not falsely
believed. Perhaps it is sometimes necessary to believe
that you will win gold in order to have any chance of
winning silver or bronze; see Benabou & Tirole 2002;
Krebs & Denton 1997).
Might there be evidence, however, that misbeliefs
themselves can propel adaptive actions? Here we note
that positive illusions need not be merely about oneself.
Perhaps the most compelling indication that positively
biased beliefs lead people to engage in biologically adap-
tive behaviours is when such beliefs concern other
people – in particular, those we love. Gagne´ and Lydon
(2004; see also Fowers et al. 1996; Fowers et al. 2001;
Murray et al. 1996) have found that the better-than-
average effect applies for people’s appraisals not just of
themselves but also of their partners: 95% judge their part-
ners more positively than the average partner with respect
to intelligence, attractiveness, warmth, and sense of
humour. Such biased appraisal mechanisms may be
crucial to ensure the completion of species-speciﬁc par-
ental duties: “The primary function of love is to cement
sexual relationships for a period of several years, in order
to ensure that the vulnerable human infant receives care
from its mother, resources from its father, and protection
from both” (Tallis 2005, p. 194; see also Fisher 2006).
Note, in this connection, that biased appraisals of one’s
children may also facilitate parental care: “[T]he ability
of parents to deny the faults of their children sometimes
seems to border on delusion” (Krebs & Denton 1997,
p. 34). Wenger and Fowers (2008) have recently provided
systematic evidence of positive illusions in parenting. Most
participants in their study rated their own children as
possessing more positive (86%) and fewer negative
(82%) attributes than the average child. This better-
than-average effect, moreover, was a signiﬁcant predictor
of general parenting satisfaction.
Finally, we consider evidence that positive illusions can
directly sustain and enhance health. Research has indi-
cated that unrealistically positive views of one’s medical
condition and of one’s ability to inﬂuence it are associated
with increased health and longevity (Taylor et al. 2003).
For example, in studies with HIV-positive and AIDS
patients, those with unrealistically positive views of their
likely course of illness showed a slower illness course
(Reed et al. 1999) and a longer survival time (Reed et al.
1994; for a review, see Taylor et al. 2000).
Taylor et al. (2000) conjectured that positive illusions
might work their medical magic by regulating physiologi-
cal and neuroendocrine responses to stressful circum-
stances.
Stress-induced
activation
of
the
autonomic
nervous system and the hypothalamic-pituitary-adreno-
cortical (HPA) axis facilitates “ﬁght or ﬂight” responses
and is thus adaptive in the short-term. Chronic or recur-
rent activation of these systems, however, may be detri-
mental to health (see McEwen 1998), so psychological
mechanisms that constrain the activation of such systems
(perhaps doxastic shear pins that break – or even just
bend a little – in situations of heightened stress) may be
beneﬁcial. Consistent with the above hypothesis, Taylor
et al. (2003) found that self-enhancing cognitions in
healthy adults were associated with lower cardiovascular
responses to stress, more rapid cardiovascular recovery,
and lower baseline cortisol levels.
Results linking positive illusions to health beneﬁts are
consistent with earlier ﬁndings that patients who deny
the risks of imminent surgery suffer fewer medical compli-
cations and are discharged more quickly than other
patients (Goleman 1987), and that women who cope
with breast cancer by employing a denial strategy are
more likely to remain recurrence-free than those utilising
other coping strategies (Dean & Surtees 1989). In such
cases the expectation of recovery appears to facilitate
recovery itself, even if that expectation is unrealistic.
This dynamic may be at work in cases of the ubiquitous
placebo effect, whereby the administration of a medical
intervention instigates recovery before the treatment
could have had any direct effect and even when the inter-
vention itself is completely bogus (Benedetti et al. 2003;
Humphrey 2004).
Placebos have been acclaimed, ironically, as “the most
adaptable, protean, effective, safe and cheap drugs in the
world’s pharmacopoeia” (Buckman & Sabbagh 1993,
McKay & Dennett: The evolution of misbelief
506
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (2009) 32:6

p. 246). They have proven effective in the treatment of
pain and inﬂammation, stomach ulcers, angina, heart
disease, cancer, and depression, among other conditions
(Humphrey 2002; 2004). From an evolutionary perspec-
tive, however, the placebo effect presents something of a
paradox:
When people recover from illness as a result of placebo treat-
ments, it is of course their own healing systems that are doing
the job. Placebo cure is self-cure. But if the capacity for self-
cure is latent, then why is it not used immediately? If people
can get better by their own efforts, why don’t they just get
on with it as soon as they get sick – without having to wait,
as it were, for outside permission? (Humphrey 2004, p. 736,
emphasis in original)
Humphrey (2002; 2004) considers the placebo effect in an
evolutionary context and suggests an ingenious solution to
this paradox. Noting that immune system functioning can
be very costly, Humphrey construes the human immune
response as under the regulation of an evolved administra-
tive system that must manage resources as efﬁciently as
possible. Because resources are limited, there is adaptive
value to limiting resource expenditure just as there is
value in the expenditure itself.
Sound economic management requires forecasting the
future, and thus the health management system would
need to take into account any available information rel-
evant to future prospects. Such data would include infor-
mation about the nature of the threat itself (including
the likelihood of spontaneous remission), the costs of
mounting an appropriate defence, and evidence relating
to the course of the illness in other victims. Paramount
among such sources of information, however, would be
information
about
the
availability
of
medical
care:
“People have learned . . . that nothing is a better predictor
of how things will turn out when they are sick . . . than the
presence of doctors, medicines, and so on” (Humphrey
2004, p. 736). To put a military gloss on Humphrey’s econ-
omic resource management metaphor, there is less need
for caution and conservation of resources once reinforce-
ments arrive. Only then can one “spare no expense in
hopes of a quick cure” (Dennett 2006a, p. 138, emphasis
in original).
The placebo effect seems at ﬁrst to be a case where mis-
belief in the efﬁcacy of a particular treatment regimen
(which, after all, may be a sham with zero direct efﬁcacy)
facilitates health and physical ﬁtness. Is this, however, a
case of evolved misbelief? If Humphrey’s account of the
placebo effect is along the right lines, what evolved was
a bias to attend to and wait for signs of security before trig-
gering a full-bore immune response, and these signs
would, in the main, have been true harbingers of security
(otherwise the bias would not have been adaptive and
would not have evolved). As drug trials and placebos did
not ﬁgure in our evolutionary history, they represent a
later, artiﬁcial “tricking” of this evolved system, similar to
the way calorie-free saccharine tricks our sweet tooth or
pornography tricks our libido. Placebo misbelief, there-
fore, is not adaptive misbelief – it is a by-product of an
adaptation. In Humphrey’s words, the “human capacity
for responding to placebos is . . . an emergent property
of something else that is genuinely adaptive: namely, a
specially designed procedure for ‘economic resource man-
agement’. . .. Unjustiﬁed placebo responses, triggered by
invalid hopes, must be counted a biological mistake”
(Humphrey 2002, pp. 261 and 279, emphasis in original).
Do similar remarks apply to the instances of positive
illusion and health discussed above? Are the “unjustiﬁed”
expectations and “invalid hopes” of some AIDS and cancer
patients biologically mistaken? One might argue that if
“unrealistic” optimism facilitates happy outcomes, then –
in retrospect – such optimism was not so unrealistic
after all! However, it seems clear that optimism in the rel-
evant studies is not realistic optimism (even allowing that
this is not an oxymoronic concept). For example, Reed
et al. (1994) recruited gay men, who had been diagnosed
with AIDS for about a year, for an investigation into the
effect of positive illusions on physical health. As the data
for this particular study were collected in the late 1980s,
life expectancy for these men was not long, and two-
thirds of the men had died by the time of completion of
the study. Realistic acceptance of death (measured by
items including the reverse-scored item “I refuse to
believe that this problem has happened”) was found to
be a signiﬁcant negative predictor of longevity, with high
scorers on this measure typically dying nine months
earlier than low scorers. This relationship remained sig-
niﬁcant when a variety of potential predictors of death
were controlled for, including age, time since diagnosis,
self-reported health status, and number of AIDS-related
symptoms. It does seem, therefore, that the relevant
beliefs
here
were
unrealistically
positive.
“Foxhole”
beliefs of a sort.
In positive-illusions situations such as those outlined
above, the beneﬁts accrue from misbelief directly – not
merely from the systems that produce it. To return to
the terminology we introduced earlier, such doxastic
departures from reality – such apparent limitations of ver-
idicality – are not culpable but entirely forgivable: design
features, even. These beliefs are “Normal” in the capita-
lised, Millikanian sense. In such situations, we claim, we
have our best candidates for evolved misbelief.
14. Ungrounded beliefs
Although “natural selection does not care about truth; it
cares only about reproductive success” (Stich 1990,
p. 62), true beliefs can have instrumental value for
natural selection – insofar as they facilitate reproductive
success. In many cases (perhaps most), beliefs will be
adaptive by virtue of their veridicality. The adaptiveness
of such beliefs is not independent of their truth or
falsity. On the other hand, the adaptiveness (or otherwise)
of some beliefs is quite independent of their truth or
falsity. Consider, again, supernatural belief: If belief in
an omniscient, omnipotent deity is adaptive because it
inhibits detectable selﬁsh behaviour (as per the Johnson
& Bering theory that we discussed in section 11), this
will be the case whether or not such a being actually
exists. If such a being does not exist, then we have adaptive
misbelief. However, were such a being to suddenly pop
into existence, the beliefs of a heretofore false believer
would not become maladaptive – they would remain
adaptive.
The misbeliefs that we have identiﬁed as sound candi-
dates for adaptive misbelief are like the supernatural
(mis)beliefs in the example above – although we claim
McKay & Dennett: The evolution of misbelief
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (2009) 32:6
507

that they were adaptive in themselves (not merely by-pro-
ducts of adaptively biased misbelief-producing systems),
we do not claim that they were adaptive by virtue of
their falsity: “Falseness itself could not be the point”
(Millikan 2004, p. 86). It may be adaptive to believe that
one’s partner and one’s children are more attractive
(. . .etc.) than the average, but such adaptive beliefs are
only adaptive misbeliefs, on our deﬁnition, if they
happen to be false. Good grounds may arise for believing
these things (success in beauty pageants, excessive atten-
tion from rivals, etc.), but such grounds will not render
these beliefs any less adaptive. Their adaptiveness is inde-
pendent of their truth or falsity. Any given adaptive misbe-
liever
is
thus
an
adaptive
misbeliever
because
of
contingent facts about the world – because her children
are not actually as intelligent as she believes they are;
because his prospects for recovery are not as good as he
believes they are; and so forth. The upshot is that we do
not expect adaptive misbeliefs to be generated by mechan-
isms specialised for the production of beliefs that are false
per se. Instead, there will be evolved tendencies for
forming speciﬁc ungrounded beliefs in certain domains.
Where these beliefs are (contingently) false, we will see
adaptive misbelief.
Dweck and colleagues (Dweck 1999; Blackwell et al.
2007) have shown a subtle instance of ungrounded belief
(not necessarily false) that propels seemingly adaptive
action. These authors distinguish two different “self-the-
ories” of intelligence as part of the implicit “core beliefs”
of adolescents: an “entity” theory (intelligence is a thing
that you have a little or a lot of) and an “incremental”
theory (intelligence is a malleable property that can
develop). Those who hold an incremental theory are
better motivated, work harder, and get better grades;
and if students are taught an incremental theory in an
intervention, they show signiﬁcant improvement – and
signiﬁcantly more than that of a control group that is
also given extra help but without the incremental theory.
In fact, if students are told (truly or falsely) that they are
particularly intelligent (intelligence is an entity and they
have quite a lot of it), they actually do worse than if not
told this. Note that these results are independent of the
issue of whether or not an entity theory or an incremental
theory is closer to the truth (or the truth about particular
students). So regardless of whether one’s intelligence is
malleable, a belief that one’s intelligence is malleable
seems to have a strong positive effect on one’s motivation
and performance. It is tempting to conjecture that evol-
ution has discovered this general tendency and exploited
it: Whenever a belief about a desirable trait is “subjective”
(Myers 2002) and not likely to be rudely contradicted by
experience, evolution should favour a disposition to err
on the benign side, whatever it is, as this will pay dividends
at little or no cost. Such an evolved bias could have the
effect of instilling a host of unrealistically positive beliefs
about oneself or about the vicissitudes to be encountered
in the environment. What would hold this tendency in
check, preventing people from living in fantasy worlds of
prowess and paradise? As usual, the tendency should be
self-limiting, with rash overconﬁdence leading to extinc-
tion in the not very long run (see Baumeister [1989]
regarding the “optimal margin of illusion”).
If psychologists like Dweck can discover and manipulate
these core beliefs today, our ancestors, with little or no
theory or foresight, could have stumbled onto manipula-
tions of the same factors and been amply rewarded by
the effects achieved, turning their children into braver,
more conﬁdent warriors, more trustworthy allies, more
effective agents in many dimensions. Cultural evolution
can have played the same shaping and pruning role as
genetic evolution, yielding adaptations that pay for them-
selves – as all adaptations must – in the differential repli-
cation of those who adopt the cultural items, or in the
differential replication of the cultural items themselves
(Dawkins 2006b; Dennett 1995a), or both. This in turn
would open the door to gene-culture co-evolution, such
as has been demonstrated with lactose tolerance in
human lineages with a tradition of dairy herding (Beja-
Pereira et al. 2003; Feldman & Cavalli-Sforza 1989;
Holden & Mace 1997). Culturally evolved practices of
inculcation could then create selective forces favouring
those genetic variants that most readily responded to the
inculcation, creating a genetically transmitted bias, a
heightened
susceptibility
to
those
very
practices
(Dennett 2006a; McClenon 2002).
15. Conclusion
The driving force behind natural selection is survival and reproduction,
not truth. All other things being equal, it is better for an animal to
believe true things than false things; accurate perception is better
than hallucination. But sometimes all other things are not equal.
— Paul Bloom (2004, pp. 222–23)
[S]ystematic bias does not preclude a tether to reality.
— Martie Haselton and Daniel Nettle (2006, p. 62)
Simple folk psychology tells us that since people use their
beliefs to select and guide their actions, true beliefs are
always better than false beliefs – aside from occasional
unsystematic lucky falsehoods. But because our belief
states have complex effects beyond simply informing our
deliberations – they ﬂavour our attitudes and feed our
self-images – and
complex
causes
that
can
create
additional ancillary effects, such as triggering emotional
adjustments and immune reactions, the dynamics of
actual belief generation and maintenance create a variety
of phenomena that might be interpreted as evolved misbe-
liefs. In many cases these phenomena are better seen as
prudent policies or subpersonal biases or quasi-beliefs
(Gendler’s “aliefs”). Of the categories we consider, one
survives: positive illusions.
What is striking about these phenomena, from the point
of view of the theorist of beliefs as representations, is that
they highlight the implicit holism in any system of belief-
attribution. To whom do the relevant functional states rep-
resent the unrealistic assessment? If only to the autonomic
nervous system and the HPA, then theorists would have no
reason to call the states misbeliefs at all, since the more
parsimonious interpretation would be an adaptive but
localized tuning of the error management systems within
the modules that control these functions. But sometimes,
the apparently benign and adaptive effect has been
achieved by the maintenance of a more global state of fal-
sehood (as revealed in the subjects’ responses to question-
naires, etc.) and this phenomenon is itself, probably, an
instance of evolution as a tinkerer: in order to achieve
this effect, evolution has to misinform the whole organism.
McKay & Dennett: The evolution of misbelief
508
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (2009) 32:6

We began this article with a default presumption – that
true beliefs are adaptive and misbeliefs maladaptive. This
led naturally to the question of how to account for
instances of misbelief. The answer to this question is
twofold: First, the Panglossian assumption that evolution
is a perfect designer – and thus that natural selection
will weed out each and every instance of a generally mala-
daptive characteristic – must be discarded. Evolution, as
we have seen, is not a perfect design process, but is
subject to economic, historical, and topographical con-
straints. We must therefore expect that the machinery
evolution has equipped us with for forming and testing
beliefs will be less than “optimal” – and that sometimes
it will break. Moreover, we have seen a variety of ways
in which these suboptimal systems may generate misbe-
liefs not by malfunctioning but by functioning normally,
creating families of errors that are, if not themselves adap-
tive, apparently tolerable. But beyond that, we have
explored special circumstances where, as Bloom writes,
“things are not equal”; where the truth hurts so systemati-
cally that we are actually better off with falsehood. We
have seen that in such circumstances falsehood can be sus-
tained by evolved systems of misbelief. So, in certain rar-
eﬁed contexts, misbelief itself can actually be adaptive.
Nevertheless, the truism that misinformation leads in
general to costly missteps has not been seriously under-
mined: Although survival is the only hard currency of
natural selection, the exchange rate with truth is likely to
be fair in most circumstances.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The ﬁrst author, Ryan McKay, was supported by a research
fellowship as part of a large collaborative project coordinated from
the Centre for Anthropology and Mind (http://www.cam.ox.ac.uk)
at the University of Oxford and funded by the European
Commission’s
Sixth
Framework
Programme
(“Explaining
Religion”). Thanks to Tim Bayne, Fabrizio Benedetti, Max
Coltheart, Zoltan Dienes, Charles Efferson, Ernst Fehr, Philip
Gerrans, Nick Humphrey, Robyn Langdon, Genevieve McArthur,
Fabio Paglieri, Martha Turner, and Harvey Whitehouse for useful
input and interesting discussions. We also thank Paul Bloom,
Stephen Stich, three anonymous reviewers, Jesse Bering, Ben
Bradley, Mitch Hodge, David Hugh-Jones, Josh Sadlier, Konrad
Talmont-Kaminski, Neil van Leeuwen, and the participants in the
Lyon
Institute
for
Cognitive
Sciences
virtual
conference
“Adaptation and Representation”(http://www.interdisciplines.org/
adaptation), for valuable comments on earlier drafts of this paper.
NOTES
1. Doxastic ¼ of or pertaining to belief.
2. We set aside, on this occasion, the important distinction
between probabilistic and all-or-nothing conceptions of belief
(e.g., Dennett’s [1978] distinction between belief and opinion),
as the issues explored here apply ingenerate to both conceptions.
3. For ease of exposition, we tend to conﬂate “adaptive” and
“adapted” throughout this target article. Because ecological
niches change over time, these categories are overlapping but
not equal: Although all adapted traits must have been adaptive
in the evolutionary past, they need not be adaptive in modern
environments; likewise, traits that are currently adaptive are
not necessarily adapted (they are not necessarily adaptations).
This is, of course, an important distinction, but not much will
turn on it for our purposes.
4. Naturally, manufacturers and consumers do not always see
eye to eye. Limitations that appear culpable from a consumer
perspective
will
frequently
be
judged
forgivable
by
the
manufacturer. They may even be deliberate features, as in the
case of DVD region codes. Conversely, some instances of culp-
able misdesign from the manufacturer’s perspective may actually
be welcomed by consumers. One thinks of the popular myth of
the super-long-lasting incandescent light bulb. According to
this myth, the technology exists to manufacture light bulbs that
last thousands of times longer than regular bulbs – but to
produce such bulbs would kill the light bulb industry, so
nobody does! From the perspective of this (mythical) manufac-
turer, bulbs that last too long evidence culpable misdesign
(though no consumer would complain).
5. Stephen Stich, in a personal communication, provides
another imaginary example: “Suppose there were a culture . . .
for whom one speciﬁc number is regarded as particularly
unlucky, the number 88888888. Designers of calculators know
this. So they start with an ordinary calculator and build in a
special small program which displays a random number when-
ever the rest of the calculator says that the answer is 88888888.
They advertise this as a special selling point of their calculator.
When the answer is really ‘that horrible unlucky number’ the
calculator will tell you it is something else. It will lie to you.
Sales of the ‘lucky calculator’ get a big boost.”
6. Note that narrow-or-broad construals of function are also
possible with respect to artifacts. To cite an example analogous
to the immune system case, an electric sabre saw will cut right
through its own power cord if the operator lets it. Is this a mal-
function? The saw is designed to saw through whatever is put
in its way, and so it does! The difference is that we can consult
the designers for their intentions where artifacts are concerned.
Most likely the designers will say, “Of course the sabre saw hasn’t
malfunctioned – no artifact need be idiot-proof!” But we can still
solicit the information, whereas that option is closed to us for
evolved systems. See section 10 for a related point.
7. Fodor (2007) has vigorously challenged not just Millikan’s
claim, but also the family of related claims made by evolutionary
theorists. According to Fodor, the historical facts of evolution,
even if we knew them, could not distinguish function from
merely accompanying by-product. Fodor’s position has been
just as vigorously rebutted (see, e.g., Coyne & Kitcher 2007;
Dennett 1990b; 2007; 2008). It is perhaps worth noting that an
implication of Fodor’s position, resolutely endorsed by Fodor,
is that biologists are not entitled to say that eyes are for seeing,
or bird wings for ﬂying – though airplane wings, having intelli-
gent human designers, are known to be for ﬂying.
8. Other animals may have evolved methods of compensating
for this distortion. For instance, Casperson (1999) suggests that
in a certain class of birds that plan underwater foraging from
wading or perched positions above the water, a characteristic ver-
tical bobbing motion of the head may allow them to compensate
for refraction: “the refraction angles change as a bird moves its
head vertically, and with suitable interpretation these angular
variations can yield unambiguous information about water-
surface and prey locations” (p. 45). See also Katzir and
Howland (2003), Katzir and Intrator (1987), and Lotem et al.
(1991).
9. Nevertheless, evolved cognitive systems are remarkably
supple, as researchers in Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AI) are forever dis-
covering. Among the holy grails of AI are systems that are “robust”
under perturbation and assault, and that will at least “degrade
gracefully” – like so many naturally evolved systems – instead of
producing fatal nonsense when the going gets tough.
10. In some cases these “other parties” may potentially be our
close kin. This is not to suggest, however, that misbeliefs evolve
via kin selection (Hamilton 1964). Voland and Voland (1995)
have suggested that the human “conscience” is an extended phe-
notype (Dawkins 1982) of parental genes that evolved in the
context of parent/offspring conﬂict (Trivers 1974) over altruistic
tendencies. In a particular “tax scenario” of this conﬂict (Voland
2008; see also Simon 1990), it may be adaptive for parents to
raise some of their offspring to be martyrs (perhaps by instilling
McKay & Dennett: The evolution of misbelief
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (2009) 32:6
509

in them certain beliefs about the heavenly rewards that await
martyrs). In this scenario the martyrdom of the offspring increases
the inclusive ﬁtness of the parents (perhaps via a boost in the social
status of the family). The martyrs themselves, however, are evol-
utionary losers – hapless victims of the generally adaptive rule of
thumb “believe, without question, whatever your grown-ups tell
you” (Dawkins 2006a, p. 174; see again Simon 1990).
11. The
breakage
itself
would
be
normatively
normal
(Normal) yet statistically abnormal. But what about the belief
system as a whole? Surely it would cease its Normal functioning
when a doxastic shear pin broke? Here we return to the overlaps
encountered in section 5, and may again invoke Millikan (1993)
for an alternative construal: Perhaps the belief system would be
made to labour (Normally?) under external conditions not
Normal for performance of its proper function.
12. The claim that mentally healthy individuals hold unrealis-
tically positive beliefs is related to – but logically distinct from –
the contested claim that depressed individuals exhibit accurate
perceptions and beliefs (a phenomenon known as “depressive
realism”; see Alloy & Abramson 1988; Colvin & Block 1994).
Open Peer Commentary
When is it good to believe bad things?
doi:10.1017/S0140525X09991142
Joshua M. Ackermana, Jenessa R. Shapirob, and
Jon K. Manerc
aSloan School of Management, Massachusetts Institute of Technology,
Cambridge, MA 02142; bDepartment of Psychology, University of California,
Los Angeles, Los Angeles, CA 90095-1563; cDepartment of Psychology,
Florida State University, Tallahassee, FL 32306-4301.
joshack@mit.edu
http://web.mit.edu/joshack/www/
jshapiro@psych.ucla.edu
maner@psy.fsu.edu
http://www.psy.fsu.edu/faculty/maner.dp.html
Abstract: Positive and negative misbeliefs both may have evolved to
serve important adaptive functions. Here, we focus on the role of
negative misbeliefs in promoting adaptive outcomes within the contexts
of romantic relationships and intergroup interactions. Believing bad
things can paradoxically encourage romantic ﬁdelity, personal safety,
competitive
success,
and
group
solidarity,
among
other
positive
outcomes.
In their article, McKay & Dennett (M&D) deﬁne evolved misbe-
liefs, or illusions, as those that are adaptively superior to fully
accurate beliefs. The authors focus their discussion on the
value of positive misbeliefs, but there are also reasons to
believe that negative misbeliefs can serve adaptive functions as
well. In this commentary, we consider negative misbeliefs
within two important social contexts: (1) close relationships and
(2) intergroup interactions.
Misbeliefs related to close relationships. The formation and
maintenance of close relationships are fundamental human pur-
suits (Ackerman & Kenrick 2008; Kenrick et al., in press).
Romantic relationships are particularly important because
mating represents the sine qua non of evolutionary success.
Positive misbeliefs may aid these romantic pursuits, as in
M&D’s example of the over-perception of positive spousal attri-
butes. However, close relationships may also beneﬁt from nega-
tive illusions. For example, women tend to believe that men are
less interested in romantic commitment than those men actually
are (Haselton & Buss 2000), especially prior to the onset of sexual
activity in relationships (Ackerman et al., submitted). M&D
suggest that, although the system that generates such misbeliefs
is probably adaptive, the misbeliefs themselves are not (because
accurate beliefs would be equally protective without suffering
from false positive errors). However, underestimating male com-
mitment could lead women to set higher thresholds for suitors to
overcome, leading men to expend greater effort and investment
in courtship (see Ackerman & Kenrick 2009), and ultimately
boosting the romantic returns that women receive (e.g., mate
quality, economic resources, actual commitment). Compara-
tively, accurate beliefs about potential romantic partners might
facilitate accurate decision making, but would be unlikely to
garner these additional beneﬁts.
Another example pertains to misbeliefs about alternative
relationship partners. People in committed relationships tend
to display cognitive biases that inhibit straying from those
relationships (e.g., Maner et al. 2008; 2009), such as believing
that attractive relationship alternatives are less appealing than
they actually are (Johnson & Rusbult 1989; Simpson et al.
1990). These negative illusions down-regulate threats posed by
romantic alternatives, increasing the long-term success of one’s
current relationship. Long-term romantic relationships serve
important functions linked to social afﬁliation and offspring
care, as well as providing more obvious reproductive beneﬁts,
and thus negative misbeliefs about relationship alternatives can
promote a range of adaptive outcomes. Accurate beliefs about
attractive alternatives, however, could promote inﬁdelity and
destabilize one’s relationship.
Misbeliefs related to intergroup interactions. In addition to
romantic relationships, group-level relationships are also funda-
mental components of human evolutionary success (Kenrick
et al., in press; Neuberg & Cottrell 2006). Throughout human
evolutionary history, hostile outgroups have posed threats to per-
sonal safety and group resources. Many of these threats were
transient, with periods of conﬂict interspersed with periods of
relative peace (e.g., Baer & McEachron 1982). Accurate beliefs
acknowledging that outgroups were not always threatening
could have supported increased intergroup contact. However,
the potential for threat in intergroup interactions would likely
remain high, as initially peaceful or cooperative encounters
between unfamiliar parties can quickly turn dangerous (e.g.,
through simple misunderstandings or signals of vulnerability).
Negative outgroup illusions could have enhanced ﬁtness to the
extent that they led people to be wary, reducing the probability
of loss or harm from a hostile outgroup member (see Ackerman
et al. 2006; 2009).
In fact, negative misbeliefs can strengthen the drive to
compete with other groups for status and resources (Campbell
1965; Sherif et al. 1961). For example, sports teams may
perform better because of the misbeliefs they hold about the
motivation and skill of their rivals. Similarly, religions may facili-
tate conversion by asserting the falsity and profaneness of other
gods. In the political realm, nations are frequently in conﬂict
with one another over natural and social resources, and exhibit
extreme ideological and ethnocentric beliefs as a result (Camp-
bell 1965). Governments that construe other nations as “Evil
Empires” may be more motivated to economically out-produce
and even attack those nations (thereby attaining resources, if
they win). In contrast, accurate beliefs about opposing groups
would provide no extra incentive to compete and might even
de-motivate groups with relatively lower standing and abilities.
Much of the work on negative misbeliefs and intergroup threat
has explored the role of race as a heuristic cue to group member-
ship. People tend to associate particular racial groups with
speciﬁc threats (e.g., Black males with physical danger; Cottrell
& Neuberg 2005), and these biases become especially strong in
the
presence
of
other
threat-relevant
cues
(e.g.,
angry
expressions). For example, people believe that neutrally expres-
sive outgroup men are more threatening when seen in the
context of other, angry outgroup men (Shapiro et al. 2009);
Commentary/McKay & Dennett: The evolution of misbelief
510
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (2009) 32:6

frightened people believe that outgroup men are more angry
than they truly are (Maner et al. 2005); and pregnant women,
whose fetuses are especially vulnerable early in development,
exhibit greater ethnocentric beliefs during their ﬁrst trimester
(Navarrete et al. 2007). Such negative illusions could promote
outgroup avoidance (see also Mortensen et al., in press) which,
in evolutionary contexts, could have served important self-pro-
tective functions.
Finally, misbeliefs about outgroup threat elicit not only out-
group avoidance, but also ingroup solidarity (Becker et al., sub-
mitted; Coser 1956; Tajfel & Turner 1986). This solidarity
provides a number of advantages. Consider that the pursuit of
economic and physical resources is often a zero-sum game, and
thus groups must manage their resources by discouraging exploi-
tation from selﬁsh members. Cooperation is one solution to
potential intragroup conﬂict, and negative illusions about the
dangers of other groups may improve cooperation by providing
a
common
threat
and
promoting
intragroup
unity
(e.g.,
Hammond & Axelrod 2006; Van Vugt et al. 2007).
Conclusion. Many negative misbeliefs continue to provide
adaptive beneﬁts in modern times, and yet may also result in det-
rimental social outcomes such as the perpetration of problematic
stereotypes and prejudices. Despite such modern troubles, there
is reason to believe that, as with positive misbeliefs, negative mis-
beliefs evolved to meet recurrent challenges in the ancestral
world.
Non-instrumental belief is largely founded
on singularity1
doi:10.1017/S0140525X09991154
George Ainslie
151 Coatesville VA Medical Center, Coatesville, PA 19320.
george.ainslie@va.gov
www.picoeconomics.org
Abstract: The radical evolutionary step that divides human decision-
making from that of nonhumans is the ability to excite the reward
process for its own sake, in imagination. Combined with hyperbolic
over-valuation of the present, this ability is a potential threat to both
the individual’s long term survival and the natural selection of high
intelligence. Human belief is intrinsically “unfounded” or under-
founded, which may or may not be adaptive.
McKay & Dennett (M&D) depict the category of adaptive
groundless beliefs as a small, albeit fascinating, exception to
their “default presumption – that true beliefs are adaptive and
misbeliefs maladaptive” (target article, sect. 15, para. 3). They
review many kinds of examples, such as self-conﬁrming beliefs
(placebos), beliefs that by their nature cannot be tested (faiths),
and beliefs that could be tested but are not (delusions). The strik-
ing feature of these cases is that they are not sharply demarcated
from grounded beliefs, and thus represent not a small cabinet of
curiosities but demonstrations of a basic inadequacy in the con-
ventional understanding of belief. The authors start toward
repairing this inadequacy by pointing out that in many cases,
“[beliefs’] adaptiveness is independent of their truth or falsity”
(sect. 14, para. 2). This implies that beliefs are ultimately selected
for functionality, but it raises the question exempliﬁed by M&D’s
quote from Humphrey: “If people can get better by their own
efforts, why don’t they just get on with it as soon as they get
sick – without having to wait, as it were, for outside permission?”
(Humphrey 2004, p. 736, cited in sect. 13). The authors analyze
the problem in terms of adaptiveness, but really cannot do
without a key intervening variable, reward.
It is certainly true that “the driving force behind natural selec-
tion is survival and reproduction, not truth” (from Bloom [2004],
quoted in sect. 15). However, evolution has developed the
reward process as a proxy for survival and reproduction, out-
comes that are too global and usually too distant to select the
behaviors of individual organisms. Although “survival is the
only hard currency of natural selection” (sect. 15. last para.), it
affects choice only by backing the token currency of reward; to
the extent that organisms are engineered to learn at all, they
are engineered to maximize prospective reward, which is the
quantity that must have an “exchange rate with truth” (sect. 15,
concluding para.). A further constraint is that the valuation of
prospective reward seems to be fundamentally tied to the
Weber-Fechner law by which most psychophysical quantities
are perceived (Gibbon 1977), causing it to be discounted for
delay in a hyperbolic curve rather than a “rational,” exponential
curve (Green & Myerson 2004; Kirby 1997). The exchange rate
of reward with truth is necessarily close to parity when animals
have only “aliefs,” not beliefs (sect. 8), and the hyperbolic over-
valuation
of
imminent
rewards
should
not
matter
when
animals’ long-term interests are served by instincts that make
long-term preparations such as hoarding, dam building, and
migrating rewarding in the short term. However, with selection
for increasing intelligence has come increasing imagination,
and with imagination the unhitching of reward from adaptive-
ness, of short-term from long-term interests, and of belief from
truth.
Imagination is governed by reward. It discovers short cuts that
detach reward contingencies from the adaptive functions that
originally selected for them. People have learned to mate
without reproducing, ﬁght without needing to, and commit them-
selves to costly hobbies that do not contribute to surviving off-
spring. Furthermore, we have learned to rob future welfare for
present pleasure, not just with addictive substances but also
with socially accepted activities ranging in excitement level
from death-defying adventure to simple procrastination (Ainslie
2010). Most important for the present discussion, we have
learned to make occasions for current emotional reward from
events that are not currently happening, in the form of memories,
fantasies – and beliefs (as opposed to aliefs). Intelligence
obviously has many adaptive features, but its ongoing evolution
must be limited – probably has already been limited – by the
availability of constraints on the urge for diverting long-term
resources to current consumption. This is the context in which
we need to address the question of why people cannot get well,
or get conﬁdent, or get happy, “without having to wait . . . for
outside permission.”
Where reward is strongly bound to survival resources – food,
warmth, avoidance of injury – the cost of misbelief will be depri-
vation or pain, so instrumental beliefs will be constrained mostly
by their predictiveness, as the authors also note. Where hard-
wired sensations are not involved, or even where they are signiﬁ-
cantly delayed, the prospective beneﬁts and costs of belief
obviously depend on the reward that can be expected from
imagination. Sources of this reward vary widely; for instance:
sublime fantasy, puzzle-solving, vicarious adventure, or gratiﬁca-
tion of urges to obey compulsions or entertain anxiety or disgust.
We learn to imagine various scenarios on various occasions based
on the patterns of reward that ensue, cultivating some feelings
and avoiding or resisting the urges for others. Belief might be
best deﬁned as the faculty that directs imagination so as to
improve long-term outcomes, relative to the results of spon-
taneous immersion in the moment; but this improvement is
measured in reward, which corresponds to adaptiveness only to
the extent that evolution has had time to modify the proxy func-
tion of reward to keep up with increasing Homo intelligence. And
there remains motivational pressure for belief to serve spon-
taneous immersion, in the form of wishful thinking.
I have described elsewhere how hyperbolic discounting of
reward predicts regularities in the competition of reward-
seeking processes (Ainslie 2001, pp. 48–104, 161–97; 2005).
Here the important aspect is that imagination ad lib exhausts
itself in premature payoffs. When one occasion for reward is as
Commentary/McKay & Dennett: The evolution of misbelief
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (2009) 32:6
511

good as another, they will replace each other randomly, and the
imagining will have the quality of a daydream. Conversely, if
there is a single, relatively rare occasion that stands out from
the others, it will make the corresponding imagination robust.
The experience of such singularity may be much like that of
having solved a puzzle or detected a fact of nature. The occasion
in question will stand out from the common ruck of imaginings
just as a fact stands out from a fantasy.
Where information about the natural world is absent or ambig-
uous, singularity may be the best clue about how it functions –
parsimony is a decent starting place for theories. But a belief
that distinctly delivers good news and bad news will be productive
of reward in its own right, regardless of its eventual accuracy. The
emotional effectiveness of singular occasions may be experienced
as a kind of factuality, more or less confounded with the factuality
that comes from physical observation. In the most conspicuous
cases, remembered events are experienced again on their anniver-
saries, especially when the anniversary is a round number; original
works of art are felt to be more “real” than exact copies; and pla-
cebos (as in sect. 13) are effective in proportion to the expensive-
ness of the ingredients or the prestige of the healer. Even realistic
beliefs get additional value by serving as occasions for emotional
reward, as in the “drug effect” of money (Lea & Webley 2006).
Conversely, faced with unwelcome urges such as hypochondria,
phobic anxiety, or a sense of being dirty, a person searches for a
favorable interpretation of the situation – whether she can feel
well, or safe, or clean. This interpretation cannot be arbitrary;
wishes have little impact. She must choose her belief on the
basis of “facts” that she discerns in events beyond her control –
a pill given by a doctor, a lucky charm or safety signal, or a
“scientiﬁc” disinfectant. The belief may even become stabilized
as a personal rule: in effect, “I will not give in to panic or disgust
when this signal is present.” The same role of singularity can be
seen in many other misbeliefs. For instance, delusions (sect. 9)
tend to be based on a logical deduction or a remarkable coinci-
dence, and religious faiths (sect. 11) depend on the singularity
that comes from having had long histories of consensual agree-
ment – hence their fear of heresies. It would be fruitless to try
to decide whether such hedonically based beliefs are more or
less adaptive than veridicality; evolution veered away from veridi-
cality with the apes.
NOTE
1. The author of this commentary is employed by a government
agency, and as such this commentary is considered a work of the U. S.
government and not subject to copyright within the United States.
False beliefs and naive beliefs: They can be
good for you
doi:10.1017/S0140525X09991178
Marco Bertaminia and Roberto Casatib
aSchool of Psychology, University of Liverpool, Liverpool L69 7ZA, United
Kingdom; bCNRS Institut Nicod, Ecole Normale Supe´rieure, 75005 Paris,
France.
m.bertamini@liv.ac.uk
http://www.liv.ac.uk/vp/
casati@ehess.fr
http://www.institutnicod.org
Abstract: Naive physics beliefs can be systematically mistaken. They
provide a useful test-bed because they are common, and also because
their existence must rely on some adaptive advantage, within a given
context. In the second part of the commentary we also ask questions
about when a whole family of misbeliefs should be considered together
as a single phenomenon.
If humans are biologically engineered to appraise the world accu-
rately, how can we explain misbeliefs? After asking this question,
McKay & Dennett (M&D) analyse various misbeliefs. Those
resulting from a breakdown in the system, and those that are
by-products, do not threaten the claim of adaptiveness of the
belief system. Positive illusions are the only bona ﬁde example
of misbeliefs. We shall integrate this account by ﬁrst making a
case for the adaptiveness of some mistakes in the conception of
the physical world, and by discussing the possibility of a
general egocentric bias in generating positive illusions.
The grand aim of Naive physics (NP) is to fully describe
common beliefs about the physical world. Naive physics can be
traced back to Gestalt psychologists such as Ko¨hler, and to the
seminal work by Lipmann and Bogen (1923). The term is also
used in artiﬁcial intelligence and robotics (Hayes 1978).
Despite its grand aim, interest in NP has focused on the discov-
ery that people make some systematic mistakes about everyday
phenomena. Examples include judgements about the pendulum
motion (Bozzi 1958); predictions of motion of an object in terms
of direction, path of motion, and acceleration (Hecht & Berta-
mini 2000; McCloskey et al. 1980); and predictions about what
is visible in a mirror (Bertamini & Parks 2005). In the case of
the pendulum, people consider as “natural” a movement that is
actually artiﬁcially contrived. We can be sure that some mistakes
are not cultural whims because they match scientiﬁc theories of
the past (i.e., Aristotelian mechanics). NP beliefs are not necess-
arily approximations or simpliﬁed representations of the physical
world (Cavanagh 2005). In some cases the implied physics is
complex, for instance, when subjects deem as correct cast
shadows that require light to bend around corners or to be pro-
jected from physically impossible locations (Casati 2008).
Even if these mistakes are the manifestation of (implicit)
mental models (McCloskey 1983), where do these models
come from? Typically NP beliefs are resilient and non-revisable,
thus pointing to some modular underlying mechanism. Some NP
beliefs are grounded on evidence provided by the visual system.
The belief that a pendulum looks unnatural when it moves, for
example, originates from how people perceive motion (Bozzi
1958; Pittenger 1989). Aspects of how people reason are also
important, as exempliﬁed by the reliance on prototypes of
actions (Yates et al. 1988) and heuristics (Profﬁtt 1999). Mistaken
beliefs that originate from properties of perceptual or reasoning
mechanisms could be classiﬁed as evolutionary by-products. On
the other hand, one can ask the question of why these as opposed
to other by-products occur. System limitations should also be
considered from an evolutionary standpoint. For example, if
waitresses make larger mistakes than housewives in the water-
level task (the orientation of water in a tilted glass) this may be
because the glass as a frame of reference is more important to
them in their job than it is to other people (Hecht & Profﬁtt
1995). This may seem paradoxical but it suggests that attention
to a local frame of reference, which is crucial for a task, makes
it harder to learn about more abstract frames of reference.
Context is, therefore, critical here. At least some NP beliefs,
we surmise, are examples of systematically mistaken adaptive
beliefs. In spite of their wrongness they provide contextually
useful representations.
We are not claiming that each speciﬁc NP belief is an adap-
tation. Our perceptual system and our thoughts may lead us to
them as a response to a situation. This brings us to the second
point of our commentary.
Adaptiveness itself is hard to assess. Veridicality is not sufﬁ-
cient as a criterion. Just like percepts, most beliefs are prima
facie veridical (they do not interfere with our interactions with
the world) but compliance with logic or the laws of physics is
not what they (beliefs as well as percepts) have evolved
towards. An adapted organism is one that has accumulated
characteristics that maximise ﬁtness, not knowledge per se. Posi-
tive illusions are adaptive because they lead people to engage in
adaptive behaviours. Whatever the mechanism, positive views of
one’s medical condition and of one’s ability to inﬂuence it lead to
increased health. Quite possibly the effects are not directly in
terms of guiding deliberation and choice, rather they are ancillary
Commentary/McKay & Dennett: The evolution of misbelief
512
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (2009) 32:6

effects, such as triggering emotional adjustments and immune
reactions. The evidence about biased responses concerning the
self is vast, and controversial. It spans items as diverse as: self-
serving biases and positive illusions (Taylor & Brown 1994b),
implicit egotism (Pelham et al. 2005), narcissism (Nuttin 1985),
self-enhancement (Sedikides & Gregg 2008), and self-resem-
blance and trust (DeBruine 2002), among others.
But are these beliefs speciﬁc adaptations or are they facets of a
powerful but unspeciﬁc underlying mechanism, which we may call
“looking after number one”? We think the jury is still out. If speciﬁc
beliefs originate from speciﬁc adaptations, then it should be poss-
ible to ﬁnd not only examples of “positive” illusions about oneself,
but also of “negative” illusions about oneself that are, under differ-
ent circumstances, adaptive. We would, therefore, need an
example of a trait that is both generally perceived as positive
(e.g., height) and yet such that people tend to see themselves as
lacking because the resulting underestimation has a speciﬁc adap-
tive effect. If, on the contrary, we only have examples of overesti-
mations (i.e., errors in the direction perceived as positive) then
the most economical hypothesis is that they are all related, and
originate from the same generic bias in favour of the self.
Another problem with the idea that speciﬁc beliefs are speciﬁc
adaptations is the fact that biases in favour of the self exist also
for neutral or non-beneﬁcial aspects. For instance, preferences
are inﬂuenced by presence in their formulation of the ﬁrst letter
of the name of the person expressing the preference (Nuttin
1985); compliance with a request increases when someone is told
that they share a birthday with the requester (Burger et al.
2004); and people overestimate the size of their own head (more
than other people’s heads) (Bianchi et al. 2008). It is unclear
what the beneﬁts are for these effects, and it seems more likely
that they all originate from a generic (and adaptive) egocentric bias.
Extending the range of adaptive misbelief:
Memory “distortions” as functional features
doi:10.1017/S0140525X09991397
Pascal Boyer
Department of Psychology, Washington University in St. Louis, St. Louis,
MO 63130.
pboyer@artsci.wustl.edu
http://artsci.wustl.edu/pboyer
Abstract: A large amount of research in cognitive psychology is focused on
memory distortions, understood as deviations from various (largely implicit)
standards. Many alleged distortions actually suggest a highly functional
system that balances the cost of acquiring new information with the
beneﬁt of relevant, contextually appropriate decision-making. In this
sense many memories may be examples of functionally adaptive misbelief.
Memory illusions or distortions are a major area of recent
research (Brainerd & Reyna 2005; Roediger 1996; Schacter &
Coyle 1995). They are very diverse, ranging from intrusions in
word-list recall to therapy-inﬂuenced imaginings of previous
lives or systematic abuse.
Dramatic memory distortions seem to inﬂuence belief-ﬁxation.
For instance, in the illusory truth effect, statements read several
times are more likely rated as true than statements read only
once. People who repeatedly imagine performing a particular
action may end up believing they actually performed it (imagin-
ation inﬂation). Misinformation paradigms show that most
people are vulnerable to memory revision when plausible infor-
mation is implied by experimenters. In social contagion proto-
cols, people tend to believe they actually saw what is in fact
suggested by the confederate with whom they watched a video.
Another major type of distortion is revision of prior mental
states under the inﬂuence of newly received information or
changed contexts. People modify their autobiographical mem-
ories to ﬁt implicit “theories of change.” They, for instance,
think that one gets better at a particular task with practice and
therefore revise their memories of past performance to ﬁt the
predicted performance curve (Ross & Wilson 2003). In a
similar way, in hindsight protocols people revise memories of
their own prior guesses (e.g., that London has 10 million inhabi-
tants) after receiving feedback information. Most familiar is
attitude-revision, in which subjects routinely mis-remember
previously held and subsequently changed attitudes.
These distortions seem to result from the normal standard
operation of memory systems. Yet they result in misbelief. Why
is that the case?
Distortion is a normative notion, so what is the standard
against which memory systems are failing? Surprisingly, this is
generally left implicit in memory research. In contrast to, say,
decision-making, in which human “biases” are described as devi-
ations from normative models, there are no explicit standards in
memory research. That is because an explicit standard for
memory performance would require a description of memory
functions, and traditionally memory researchers have not been
overly preoccupied by functional considerations, with a few
exceptions (Anderson & Schooler 2000; Nairne et al. 2008).
As a consequence, memory performance is evaluated against
generally tacit, apparently self-evident commonsense assump-
tions – we can infer those assumptions from the very fact that
some memory processes are treated as “distortions.” As men-
tioned above, it seems that they constitute deviations from a
tacit and largely implausible view of memory systems. One
assumption seems to be that memory as storage of information
is not subject to the same cost-beneﬁt constraints as the rest of
cognition, so that information acquired should be stored rather
than transformed, pace Bartlett (1932). Another assumption is
that memory retrieval has its own function, independent from
decision-making, so that one should, for instance, expect
people to recall attitudes that did not lead to particular decisions.
But both assumptions are biologically odd. It makes obvious
sense to consider memory retrieval as a biological function that
comes at a cost and is therefore designed to maximize return
on that cost (Dukas 1999). Also, it makes evolutionary sense to
keep in mind that organisms do not develop cognitive abilities
(e.g., retrieval of past experience) for abstract epistemic beneﬁts
(knowing what used to be the case). They retrieve information
inasmuch as it helps ﬁtness-enhancing decision-making in the
present (Suddendorf & Corballis 2007).
Seen in this perspective, many cases of “distortion” appear
highly functional. Consider misinformation and other situations
in which memories are inﬂuenced by confederates’ suggestions.
The possibility and need of acquiring vast information from con-
speciﬁcs also creates the possibility of error and deception. For
each
item
of
information,
memory
and
decision-making
systems must, implicitly or explicitly, assess the costs and beneﬁts
of including information in a belief-box or, alternatively, of
keeping track of the information’s “source-tag.” It is certainly
plausible that, in some circumstances, it is too costly to keep
the source-tags for many items of information if they are all
used to build a coherent, usable account of one’s own experience.
In the same way, repetition effects show that internal judgments
of familiarity and ﬂuency play an important role in decision-
making. Intuitive epistemics here uses the external world
regularity that in some circumstances true information is more
frequent than false information. What matters for adaptive
design is that the circumstances in question be such that this
sort of decision-making does not lead to excessive vulnerability.
Now turn to attitude revision. In a functional perspective,
accurate memory of past attitudes would be an odd proposition
for a well-designed memory system. To preserve traces of past,
now-irrelevant attitudes without compromising its computations,
the system would need to quarantine them from on-line motiv-
ation and decision-making (Cosmides & Tooby 2000). The
Commentary/McKay & Dennett: The evolution of misbelief
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (2009) 32:6
513

extra cost of such computational “cordoning off” of memories
may not be offset by the advantages, if any, of maintaining a
record of past attitudes. In the same way, schema-based biased
reconstruction of autobiographical memories, as occurs when
people hold a particular, often implicit “theory of change” for
a particular domain, may also contribute to efﬁcient here-and-
now decision-making by saving costs on speciﬁc but irrelevant
episodic traces (Klein et al. 2002). Finally, a hindsight bias may
constitute the most efﬁcient way of making updated information
more accessible than wrong information (Hoffrage et al. 2000). In
such a perspective, the study of memory “distortions” could be
part of a functional account of the systems involved, as is the
case for perceptual illusions (Roediger 1996).
Is all this adaptive? An evolutionary perspective on memory
cannot maintain the assumption of a frictionless, cost-free
recording of experience that seems to be the implicit standard
in memory research. Memory need be only as “good” as the
advantage in decision-making it affords, measured against the
cost of its operation (Nairne et al. 2008). This is why we go
around assuming that we always knew what we now know, and
believed the same beliefs; and we often construe as direct experi-
ence what we only know from others’ reports – but all this is part
and parcel of having a highly efﬁcient memory system. If that is
the case, it may well be that a great number of our memories,
as beliefs about past occurrences, are instances of adaptive
misbeliefs.
Positive illusions and positive collusions:
How social life abets self-enhancing beliefs
doi:10.1017/S0140525X0999118X
Jonathon D. Brown
Department of Psychology, University of Washington, Seattle, WA 98195-
1525.
jdb@uw.edu
http://faculty.washington.edu/jdb
Abstract: Most people hold overly (though not excessively) positive self-
views of themselves, their ability to shape environmental events, and their
future. These positive illusions are generally (though not always)
beneﬁcial,
promoting
achievement,
psychological
adjustment,
and
physical
well-being.
Social
processes
conspire
to
produce
these
illusions, suggesting that afﬁliation patterns may have evolved to
nurture and sustain them.
In a classic scene from the Woody Allen movie, Everything You
Wanted to Know About Sex (But Were Afraid To Ask), sperm con-
gregate in a holding area awaiting ejaculation. One sperm, played
by Allen, is gripped by existential doubt as he contemplates his
impending odyssey into the great unknown. As humorous as
Allen’s dilemma is, imagine his character’s distress if he had
paused to consider his odds of successfully fertilizing an egg
(roughly 1 in 40,000,000, assuming ovulation). These odds
would surely shake the conﬁdence of even the most Panglossian
spermatozoon, let alone Allen’s anxiety-ridden schlemiel.
Of course, sperm do not calculate probabilities. But had nature
endowed them with the ability to do so, she would have needed
to similarly endow them with the ability to inﬂate their own like-
lihood of success. Otherwise, they, like Allen, would be paralyzed
by the reality they were about to confront.
Extrapolating from Hollywood cinema is obviously hazardous,
and spermatozoa are not people (although both function to pass
their genetic material to the next generation), but Allen’s scene
touches on two important questions: Are people positively
biased in their beliefs, and are these beliefs ultimately beneﬁcial?
In 1988, Shelley Taylor and I examined research relevant to these
questions and offered two conclusions. First, when it comes to
self-relevant beliefs and appraisals (e.g., “How kind am I?”
“How capable am I?” “How bright is my future likely to be?”),
people are positively biased (Taylor & Brown 1988; see also
Brown 1986; 1991; 2007; Taylor 1989; Taylor & Brown 1994a;
1994b). On virtually all positively valued attributes, most
people view themselves in unrealistically (though not excessively)
positive terms. Second, we argued that these positive illusions are
ordinarily beneﬁcial. Under normal circumstances, people who
entertain moderately (though not excessively) positive self-
beliefs fare better on measures of achievement, adjustment,
and physical well-being than those who are less positively
biased. Certainly, there are limits to the beneﬁts positive illusions
provide (Baumeister 1989; Dunning et al. 2004), and we never
claimed that the more biased one is, the better off one is going
to be (see also, Marshall & Brown 2007). Instead, our claim
was simply that (a) most people view themselves in overly positive
terms and (b) under many – if not most – conditions, these
beliefs are beneﬁcial.
In their target article, McKay & Dennett (M&D) echo these
arguments,
concluding
that
positive
illusions
provide
the
ﬁrmest evidence for evolved misbelief. From this perspective,
natural selection favored those whose self-perceptions were posi-
tively biased. In sympathy with this conclusion, my colleagues
and I have found consistent evidence that positively biased
self-perceptions are a pervasive, cross-cultural phenomena
(Brown 2003; Brown et al. 2009; Brown & Kobayashi 2002;
2003; Cai et al. 2007; 2009; Kobayashi & Brown 2003).
At the same time, I think the target article would have bene-
ﬁted by taking a broader view of positive illusions. An exclusive
focus on people’s self-enhancing beliefs (e.g., “My commentary
is more insightful than most other commentaries”) ignores the
myriad processes that conspire to produce and sustain them
(Brown 1991). In most instances, positive illusions are the down-
stream product of an extensive system of information-processing
biases and selective afﬁliation patterns. Insofar as these biases
and patterns generate and perpetuate adaptive illusions, they
may also be products of natural selection.
Numerous cognitive processes, such as self-serving attribu-
tions, idiosyncratic trait deﬁnitions, and biased judgments of a
trait’s importance sustain positive illusions (for a review, see
Brown 1998), but interpersonal processes ordinarily produce
them. For the most part, people believe positive things about
themselves because they receive mostly positive feedback from
the people they spend most of their lives with (Murray et al.
1996). In this sense, positive collusions produce positive illusions.
Positive collusions rely on two interrelated processes. First,
people’s self-enhancing biases include aspects of what William
James (1890) called the “extracorporeal material self.” The extra-
corporeal material self refers to everyone and everything we call
“mine” or “my.” With respect to positive illusions, we exaggerate
not only our own virtues, but also those of our friends, neighbors,
colleagues, family members, and loved ones (Brown 1986; 1991;
Brown & Kobayashi 2002). Positive collusions begin the moment
we are born. Most (though certainly not all) parents view their
infants in overly positive terms, believing their offspring are
cuter, smarter, and more socially advanced than are most other
infants. As children grow, they internalize these biased evalu-
ations, producing the well-known “better than average” effect
(Alicke 1985; Brown 1986).
It is hardly surprising that parents view their infants through
rose-colored glasses; what is surprising, however, is just how
tenuous the self-other connection can be in order for this positiv-
ity bias to emerge. Research on in-group favoritism in the
minimal group paradigm (Billig & Tajfel 1973; Tajfel et al.
1971) makes this point most graphically. In these studies,
people are arbitrarily divided into groups on some patently
trivial basis (e.g., they drew a blue marble from a bag instead
of a red one). Despite the meaninglessness and obviously
arbitrary nature of this designation, people view their fellow in-
group
members
in
more
positive
terms
than
out-group
Commentary/McKay & Dennett: The evolution of misbelief
514
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (2009) 32:6

members (Brewer 1979). In short, anything or anyone that is part
of “me” is viewed in more positive terms than anything or anyone
that is “not me.”
How do these effects sustain people’s beliefs in their own
capacities? Once we forge an association with someone (e.g.,
make a friend; join a club; select a mate), we become part of
that person’s extracorporeal self and reap the self-enhancing
beneﬁts the association provides (i.e., we receive feedback that
we are more likable, capable, and charming than are most
other people). In this fashion, mutual admiration begets mutual
beneﬁts.
Ideology as cooperative affordance
doi:10.1017/S0140525X09991403
Joseph Bulbuliaa and Richard Sosisb
aFaculty of Humanities and Social Sciences, Victoria University, Wellington,
New Zealand; bDepartment of Anthropology, U-2176, University of
Connecticut, Storrs, CT 06269-2176.
joseph.bulbulia@vuw.ac.nz
www.victoria.ac.nz/religion/staff/joseph_bulbulia/
richard.sosis@uconn.edu
www.anth.uconn.edu/faculty/sosis/
Abstract: McKay & Dennett (M&D) observe that beliefs need not be
true in order to evolve. We connect this insight with Schelling’s work
on cooperative commitment to suggest that some beliefs – ideologies –
are best approached as social goals. We explain why a social-interactive
perspective is important to explaining the dynamics of belief formation
and revision among situated partners.
Legend holds that on arriving at Veracruz, Corte´s burned his
ships so that his armies could not retreat. His men became
predictably committed to ﬁghting. Similarly, our contracts,
emotions, afﬁliations, markings, gifts, punishments, and other
costly acts anticipate our future responses. These factors trans-
form partner options, enabling reliable forecasting of cooperative
behaviors. Such predictability enhances cooperation’s prospects
for success. Schelling called these expressions “commitment
devices” (Schelling 1960). His concept helps to explain otherwise
perplexing behavior, but can it help explain belief? To think so
might seem strange. Corte´s allegedly burned his ships to motiv-
ate action, irrespective of belief. To generalize: If beliefs rep-
resent environments, the faculties that generate belief appear
poorly equipped for predicting social commitment. Environ-
ments constantly change. Yet, a commitment device must
anchor cooperative futures against these sea tides.
Nevertheless, certain beliefs – that the ship is burning, for
example – proximately motivate social responses. The effect is
well illustrated by religious commitment. Peter believes his
God abides. From this conviction, Peter receives strong motiv-
ations, for example, to stand this holy ground, come what may.
Like a boat on ﬁre, his belief in God narrows Peter’s strategic
options, by overdetermining one. Where religious beliefs are
shared, a universe of possible interactions strongly contracts,
affording cooperation’s success. Where religious commitment
motives actions by sacred rewards, religious partners will suffer
fewer distractions from personal risks. Corte´s’ sabotage does
not promote cooperation through intrinsic reward; rather, it
sets a trap. As such, it remains a poor instrument by which to
disable anxiety, as slings and arrows rain down. Furthermore,
where religious beliefs can be reliably recognized, fellow believ-
ers may ﬁnd a common inspiration that they know to be common.
The affective and symbolic cues of religious culture give what
Schelling calls “salience” for otherwise risky coordination
points. Notice, religious culture supports coordinated action for
collective problems whose nature cannot be anticipated. At
best, Corte´s’ act is only useful for the ﬁght. Finally, religious
beliefs can be evoked and assessed by ordeals that appear
“crazy” without such beliefs (Irons 2008). Where opportunists
threaten religious cooperation, evidence for commitment can
be discerned from our deeds. To generalize: While actions are
important to social commitment, beliefs intricately interact
with actions and motivations to support effective social prediction
(Bulbulia 2009). Such prediction requires shared epistemic
habits that maintain common social goals as the world changes.
We call the products of these habits “ideologies.”
Ideologies function as commitment devices, though they func-
tion differently to burning boats. Indeed, commitment devices
function best when we are unaware of their existence. In the
Corte´s legend, commitment arises through explicit means –
removing the antisocial option: Run away! However, because
motivations are affected by conﬁdence, commitment theory pre-
dicts tendencies to strongly deny ideology’s social causes. To
think that ideology is believed for commitment, rather than as
simple truth, enables one to second-guess one’s ideology, and
with it, the social commitments ideology inspries. This second-
guessing may impair the social prediction so fundamental to
cooperation’s success. In their discussion of “alief,” McKay &
Dennett (M&D) observe how discrepancies sometimes arise
between explicit knowledge (the bridge is safe) and implicit
response (vertigo) (also explored in McKay & Cipolotti 2007;
Dennett 1991). Commitment theory predicts the opposite
relationship will hold too: consciousness will obscure motivations
arising from collective goals (epistemic boat burning). For again,
it is belief as true that motivates. We notice, however, that incor-
rigible persistence in believing, come what may, is unlikely to
afford cooperative outcomes. Commitment theory predicts that
ideologies will instead shift to meet strategic demands: Beliefs
are subtle beasts.
There is much evidence for such subtlety. For example, Fes-
tinger et al. describe a UFO cult dealing with the pathos occa-
sioned by the failure of a predicted doomsday (Festinger et al.
1956). While some cult members packed up and left, most
remained, updating their beliefs to explain the persistence of
life as the effect of the group’s piety and prayer. Such intellectual
leger de main, however striking, is not restricted to UFO-
spotters. The dissonance literature shows that we often revise
peripheral beliefs to meet our goals, not Bayesian demands.
Such results are important to commitment models because
they reveal that motivations shape our conscious beliefs, and
so, that the link between belief and motivation is a two-way
street. Moreover, commitment theory enriches dissonance
models by focusing to the dynamics of goal maintenance for
interactions whose success depends on reliable social prediction.
Organizations of the environments in which we interact (devel-
opmental and local) powerfully affect our cooperative commit-
ments; their functional elaboration is critical to the explanation
of ideology. While our understanding of these mind/world
systems remains obscure, initial results reveal a fascinatingly
strong capacity for sacred traditions (core elements of which
have been conserved for centuries) to promote cooperative beha-
viors in large social worlds (Bulbulia, in press; Sosis 2000). For
example, the neuroscience of charismatic authority suggests
that neural circuits supporting ideological commitments are
similar to those recruited during hypnotic suggestion (Deeley
et al. 2003; Schjødt et al., submitted; Taves 2009). Charismatic
authority appears to work like a trance. Other research shows
that impersonal elements of culture – its music, symbolic dis-
plays, and large-scale ritual events – dramatically affect social
sensibility and emotions, suggesting that charismatic enchant-
ment
extends
to
impersonal
culture
and
its
instruments
(Alcorta & Sosis 2005; Baumgartner et al. 2006; Bulbulia, in
press). Among these instruments, synchronous body practices
appear especially effective at evoking and maintaining coopera-
tive orbits (Hove & Risen, in press; Wiltermuth & Heath
Commentary/McKay & Dennett: The evolution of misbelief
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (2009) 32:6
515

2008). In other works we suggest that ritual, music, and symbolic
practices are fundamental to establishing the informational and
motivational settings that maintaining cooperative behaviors at
small and large scales (Bulbulia 2004a; Bulbulia & Mahoney
2008; Sosis 2003; 2005).
To summarize, commitment theory is important to naturalistic
study of belief because it reveals that a core subset of positive illu-
sions are better approached as social goals, masquerading as
beliefs. These ideologies interact with our social and cultural cir-
cumstances to promote accuracy, not in representing the world
as it is, but rather in forecasting what we will do next.
Adaptive diversity and misbelief1
doi:10.1017/S0140525X09991415
Edward T. Cokelya and Adam Feltzb
aMax Planck Institute for Human Development, Center for Adaptive Behavior
and Cognition, 14195 Berlin, Germany; bDepartments of Philosophy and
Interdisciplinary Studies, Schreiner University, CMB 6208, Kerrville, TX 78028.
cokely@mpib-berlin.mpg.de
ADFeltz@schreiner.edu
http://faculty.schreiner.edu/adfeltz/Lab/adam_feltz.html
Abstract: Although it makes some progress, McKay & Dennett’s
(M&D’s) proposal is limited because (1) the argument for adaptive
misbelief is not new, (2) arguments overextend the evidence provided,
and (3) the alleged sufﬁcient conditions are not as prohibitive as
suggested. We offer alternative perspectives and evidence, including
individual differences research, indicating that adaptive misbeliefs are
likely much more widespread than implied.
Evolutionary perspectives on adaptive misbelief are not new
(Byrne & Kurland 2001; Haselton & Buss 2000; Trivers 1985;
2000; see also, Gigerenzer & Brighton 2009; Gigerenzer et al.
1999). What is new, however, is the precise analysis of the con-
ditions of adaptive misbelief presented in the target article.
Unfortunately, the target article’s impact is limited by its reliance
on controversial “better than average” effects and the relatively
non-restrictive nature of the proposed sufﬁcient conditions.
Here, we brieﬂy document these concerns and discuss some rel-
evant phenomena in individual differences research. Ultimately,
we argue that adaptive misbeliefs are likely much more wide-
spread than is implied.
McKay & Dennett (M&D) suggest that adaptive misbeliefs
are reﬂected in better-than-average and similar overconﬁdence
type effects. However, there are concerns about the stability,
universality, and reality of such illusions (Gigerenzer et al.
2008; Larrick et al. 2007; Moore & Healy 2008; see also,
Juslin & Olsson 1997; Juslin et al. 2000). To illustrate, when
most people report that they are better than average drivers
they are not wrong or biased. Instead, data indicate that only
a very small number of people are responsible for the vast
majority of motor vehicle accidents. Thus, driving ability is
not normally distributed and so most people are technically
correct when they believe they are better than average
drivers. This kind of example is not uncommon. Better-than-
average and overconﬁdence type effects are often complicated
by
statistical
artifacts
and
non-ecological
task
contexts
(Gigerenzer et al. 1999; Krueger & Mueller 2002).
More problematic than the quality of the proposed evidence,
however, are the following set of alleged sufﬁcient conditions
offered for systematic adaptive misbelief: (a) the belief is the
result of “design” (where design is appropriately deﬁned);
(b) the belief misrepresents information to the possessor of
the belief; (c) the misrepresentation of information is beneﬁcial
to the possessor of the belief (sect. 2, para. 5); and (d) the
misbelief is systematic (sect. 4). If these conditions are only
sufﬁcient, then in contrast to what is implied, M&D have not
captured a unique way in which misbelief can be adaptive.
Rather, they have only pointed out one of many possible
ways. This worry results in interpretative issues with M&D’s
general argument.
Assuming that many beliefs could satisfy (a), it is unclear what
degree of misrepresentation or beneﬁt is sufﬁcient for a belief to
satisfy conditions (b) and (c). According to M&D, a misbelief is
one that is “false,” or “to some degree departs from actuality,”
or “to some extent wide of the mark” (sect. 1, para. 1). These
comments indicate that any belief that departs from reality in
any way satisﬁes condition (b). The only way a belief could fail
to satisfy (b) is if the content of the belief does not even in part
misrepresent reality. If that is correct, then it is likely many (if
not most) of our beliefs satisfy condition (b) (something M&D
realize, sect. 1). It is also unclear how and in what ways the mis-
belief must be beneﬁcial in order to satisfy condition (c). We can
grant that positive illusions may be adaptively beneﬁcial to the
possessors of those beliefs in a number of profoundly interesting
ways. But again, it is a very modest and easily satisﬁed condition if
the misbelief only needs to provide some adaptive beneﬁt to the
possessor.
Condition (d) also is satisﬁable in a number of ways. M&D
appear to endorse a “one size ﬁts all” model of misbelief that
would be adaptive for whoever holds such misbeliefs (condition
[d]). But there is more than one way that misbeliefs can be sys-
tematic. For instance, there can be misbeliefs that are systemati-
cally related to stable individual differences among groups of
people. There is evidence that personality traits (e.g., the Big
Five) are related to individual differences in beliefs about the
nature of the world (Langston & Sykes 1997) and to fundamental
philosophical beliefs regarding moral objectivism, compatibilism,
and intentional action (Cokely & Feltz 2009a; 2009b; Feltz &
Cokely 2008; 2009).
To take just one example, those who are neurotic are likely to
think that the world is dangerous. Those who are not neurotic
tend not to have this belief (particularly so for extraverts and
those who are agreeable) (Langston & Sykes 1997, p. 154). On
the face of it, these are contrary beliefs. So, either neurotic indi-
viduals have a misbelief or non-neurotic individuals have a mis-
belief – and perhaps both have misbeliefs. Evidence also
indicates that some personality types are related to beneﬁcial
life outcomes and that personality traits are partially genetic in
origin (Bouchard 1994). Hence, it appears that at least some sys-
tematic individual differences in beliefs are likely to be excellent
candidates to satisfy (a)–(d).
Given that it is likely that quite a few of our beliefs satisfy
(a)–(d), M&D underestimate the number of misbeliefs that
are adaptive. Moreover, it may be that individual differences
in misbeliefs are adaptive for both the speciﬁc misbelieving
actor and for other non-misbelieving members of their group.
That is, differences in belief might enable more effective allo-
cation of limited resources in groups, beneﬁting both accurate
and misbelievers alike (Wolf et al. 2007). In summary, we argue
that although the proposed parameters offered by M&D do
provide substantive increases to theoretical speciﬁcation, they
do not support bold claims such as “the exchange rate with
truth is likely to be fair in most circumstances” (sect. 15, ﬁnal
para.). It is possible that adaptive misbeliefs are in the minority;
however, this has yet to be adequately evaluated and does
not follow from the evidence or argument provided. In con-
trast, we suspect that there are many relatively unexplored
opportunities for theoretical and translational progress at
these frontiers (e.g., the modeling of decisions and design of
better choice environments; Johnson & Goldstein 2003; Todd
& Gigerenzer 2007; Weber & Johnson 2009).
NOTE
1. Authorship of this commentary is equal.
Commentary/McKay & Dennett: The evolution of misbelief
516
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (2009) 32:6

Delusions and misbeliefs
doi:10.1017/S0140525X09991191
Max Coltheart
Macquarie Centre for Cognitive Science, Macquarie University, Sydney,
NSW 2109, Australia.
max@maccs.mq.edu.au
www.maccs.mq.edu.au/max
Abstract: Beliefs may be true or false, and grounded or ungrounded.
McKay
&
Dennett
(M&D)
treat
these
properties
of
belief
as
independent. What, then, do they mean by misbelief? They state that
misbeliefs are “simply false beliefs.” So would they consider a very
well-grounded belief that is false a misbelief? And why can’t beliefs
that are very poorly grounded be considered delusions, even when they
are true?
Suppose a man goes to see his psychiatrist complaining of anxiety
and depression and, when asked what was making him anxious and
depressed, replies that it was because his wife was having an affair
with a man in the ofﬁce where she worked. Suppose there follows a
discussion between clinician and patient about the patient’s reasons
for believing that his wife was being unfaithful to him. Suppose the
reasons the patient offers include such things as “She wears a
different dress every day, and she always puts on makeup very care-
fully each morning” and “Sometimes she phones me to say she has
a deadline to meet at work and has to stay behind for an hour, and
then she does come home an hour later than usual.”
These don’t seem to be very convincing reasons, and the other
reasons the patient proffers are no more convincing, so the clin-
ician begins to doubt the reasonableness of the patient’s belief.
Hence the clinician follows this up by asking the patient
whether he has taken any steps to verify his belief. The patient
says that he has; that on various occasions he has hidden
outside his wife’s place of work to see whether she ever leaves
in the company of a man. Asked whether he had ever seen her
do this, he says “No, she has always left by herself,” but then vol-
unteers the comment that he must have been unlucky in his
choice of days; indeed, he mentions, he once performed this sta-
keout every day for a week, with negative results, which, he adds,
must have meant that the male coworker concerned had been
away from work that week. The patient also mentions that he
has conﬁded his worries about his wife’s inﬁdelity to his children,
who pointed out to him that his reasons for the inﬁdelity belief
are ﬂimsy in the extreme, and urged him to abandon the belief;
but this has made no difference to the strength of his belief.
Given that this man cannot produce a single piece of evidence
that plausibly supports his belief, and given that, even though the
results of his investigations have been uniformly negative, this has
not shaken him in the belief, does it not seem natural to regard
this belief as a delusion? Similarly, might we not expect the clin-
ician to conclude that this patient needs treatment? If we answer
both of these questions in the afﬁrmative, what is our reason for
this? The answer is obvious: it’s because this man has a belief that
is held (a) with strong conviction regardless of the counterevi-
dence and (b) despite the efforts of others to dissuade him.
Now suppose that, some years later, the clinician discovers that
the man’s belief was true after all: His wife had been having an
affair at that time, and indeed it was with that particular male co-
worker. Does that mean that it had been a mistake to consider the
patient’s belief as a delusion? If the essence of the concept of
delusional beliefs is that they are beliefs that are strongly and
incorrigibly held in the absence of adequate grounds for doing
so, then no mistake was made. It would have been very strange
if at that time the clinician had mentally noted: “Before I
decide whether this man needs treatment, I will have to ﬁnd
out whether or not his wife really is having an affair.”
I consider that this example shows that, when one is classifying
a particular belief as a delusion or not a delusion, whether the
belief is true is irrelevant. What is relevant is whether the
grounds for the belief are good enough. They weren’t good
enough in the case of our delusionally jealous patient (even
though his belief, as it happened, was true).
What are the implications of this conception of delusion for the
target article? First of all, the inﬁdelity scenario is a speciﬁc
example of a general possibility accepted by McKay & Dennett
(M&D): that “ungrounded beliefs [can] be serendipitously
true” (sect 1, para. 2; though the positive connotation of “seren-
dipitously” is not quite right here; something like “accidentally” is
needed). But, importantly, they note that they will not consider
such ungrounded beliefs as misbeliefs. So our patient’s belief
about his wife’s unfaithfulness does not count as a misbelief for
M&D. If so, it isn’t clear what they mean by “misbelief.” The
ﬁrst sentence of their article says, “A misbelief is simply a false
belief.” Later they acknowledge that false beliefs can be well-
grounded and true beliefs can be held with no grounds, so that
truth and groundedness are independent. Which of these two
is critical for characterizing their concept of misbelief? Is a
belief that is very well-grounded but false a misbelief?
Later on in the introduction of their article the authors offer a
tentative taxonomy of misbelief: “those that result from some
kind of break in the normal functioning of the belief formation
system and those that arise in the normal course of that
system’s operations” (sect. 1, para. 4). But in neither case does
the method via which the belief is generated guarantee that the
belief is false; it might be true – in which case it doesn’t count
as a misbelief.
What, then, is the difference between misbelief and false
belief? If all misbeliefs are false beliefs, and if “misbelief” and
“false belief” are not synonymous, then there must be false
beliefs that are not misbeliefs. What criterion classiﬁes false
beliefs into those that are misbeliefs and those that are not?
At the beginning of section 4, “Doxastic dysfunction,” the
authors write: “delusions are misbeliefs par excellence – false
beliefs that are held with strong conviction regardless of counter-
evidence and despite the efforts of others to dissuade the deluded
individual” (sect. 4, para. 2). The example with which I began this
commentary was of a belief held with strong conviction regard-
less of the counterevidence and despite the efforts of others to
dissuade the individual holding this belief. Do M&D want to
say that, in the scenario that I outlined, the patient’s belief
about his wife’s ﬁdelity doesn’t count as a delusion – just
because it happened to be true? The requirement always to
establish the objective falsity of a belief before offering a diagno-
sis of delusion would wreak havoc in the profession of psychiatry.
Misbelief and the neglect of environmental
context
doi:10.1017/S0140525X09991208
David Dunning
Department of Psychology, Cornell University, Ithaca, NY 14853.
dad6@cornell.edu
http://cornellpsych.org/sasi/index.php
Abstract: Focusing on the individual’s internal cognitive architecture,
McKay & Dennett (M&D) provide an incomplete analysis because
they neglect the crucial role played by the external environment in
producing misbeliefs and determining whether those misbeliefs are
adaptive. In some environments, positive illusions are not adaptive.
Further, misbeliefs often arise because the environment commonly fails
to provide crucial information needed to form accurate judgments.
The thoughtful and stimulating analysis provided by McKay &
Dennett (M&D) on human misbelief is incomplete. Assuming
that misbeliefs are products of faulty design features internal to
the human organism, M&D have unduly ignored the important
Commentary/McKay & Dennett: The evolution of misbelief
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (2009) 32:6
517

role played by the external environment in shaping human action
and outcome. This neglect of environmental context holds two
crucial implications for their analysis.
First, M&D conclude that positive illusions are adaptive, and
thus, the best candidates to be misbeliefs engineered by evol-
ution. In particular, they point to the established, albeit conten-
tious, literature suggesting that positive illusions aid people in
their resilience against some of the most extreme challenges
of life, such as terminal illness or the aftermath of civil war
(cf. Armor & Taylor 1998).
Those studies, however, exist in only one constrained environ-
mental context. Elsewhere, the literature is ﬁlled with numerous
counterexamples, strewn across business, education, and policy
worlds, in which positive illusions prove costly or even disastrous
(for reviews, see Dunning 2005; Dunning et al. 2004). Some of
them even come from the health domain. People treat their own
high blood pressure based on mistaken ideas about their compe-
tence to do so, setting aside their doctor’s orders (Meyer et al.
1985). They smoke, at least in part, because of mistaken beliefs
about their ability to avoid serious illness (Dillard et al. 2006).
Teenage girls who rate their knowledge about birth control
highly, independent of actual knowledge, are more likely to get
pregnant within a year relative to their less self-ﬂattering peers
(Jaccard et al. 2005). Just as a thought experiment, it is easy to
come up with numerous contexts in which positive illusions
might be the opposite of adaptive. Answer yes or no to the follow-
ing thought question: When ﬂying, I prefer my pilot to have an
overconﬁdent view of his or her ability to handle rough weather.
The point here is that the extant evidence connecting positive
illusions to adaptive outcomes is mixed, at best, and depends cru-
cially on the speciﬁc environmental context under study. This is
not to dismiss those important areas where a positive connection
exists; but much more work is necessary to see just how the
environmental context, systematically, turns on and off the con-
nection between positive illusion and adaptive outcomes. It
may turn out that positive illusions, in the end, bring more
sorrow than pleasure. At least it is worthwhile discerning more
precisely the circumstances in which that is so.
Such an analysis of environmental context is crucial also to
assess M&D’s tentative assertion that positive illusions are
speciﬁcally a product of human evolution. If they are, then
they should be more consistently evident in tasks with evolution-
ary signiﬁcance (e.g., getting a full belly, achieving reproductive
success) than those without. But, to date, that careful analysis
across environmental contexts has not been done.
Second, M&D take misbeliefs to be direct evidence of faulty
design features in the human organism. That may be the case,
but there is an equally compelling case emerging in the psychologi-
cal literature that it is the environment, not human ﬂaw, that makes
these biases unavoidable. Even a perfectly rational human organ-
ism could come to hold the types of misbeliefs that M&D
discuss, because the environment much more frequently provides
people with incomplete or misleading data than M&D anticipate.
In my own work, I have discussed how people might come to
hold overly inﬂated self-views because the environment fails to
furnish all the data they need to form accurate self-impressions.
In the course of their lives, for example, people decide on actions
that they believe are the most reasonable among the choices
available. However, when they choose unwisely, they do so
because the environment fails to provide the data that would
inform them of just how ill-advised their choices are (Dunning
2005). Give them that data and they snap quickly to a more accu-
rate view of themselves (Caputo & Dunning 2005; Kruger &
Dunning 1999).
As another example, take the observation that people tend to
view others with suspicion, anticipating much more harm from
others than actually is the case (e.g., Duntley & Buss 1998).
M&D speculate that this bias evolved because it protected
people from injury, whether physical or psychic. Recent work,
however, suggests that the real potential culprit producing this
bias is the environment, not a design feature of the human
organism.
For example, people tend to be overly cynical about how trust-
worthy other people are (Fetchenhauer & Dunning 2009). We
have recently demonstrated that this cynicism is produced by
environmental factors, in that the environment furnishes people
with incomplete feedback about their decisions to trust others.
When people trust others, their trust is occasionally violated,
and people quite rationally move toward a more cynical view of
human nature. However, when they mistakenly decide to withhold
trust from a person who actually would have honored that trust,
they receive no equivalent corrective feedback. Thus, they are
left with a unduly wary view of the other individual and of human-
ity in general. We have shown how furnishing people with com-
plete feedback, including letting people know when their
withheld trust would have been honored, rids them quickly of
their cynical misbeliefs – and leads them to make trust decisions
that
provide
greater
tangible
beneﬁts
(Fetchenhauer
&
Dunning, in press; see also Denrell 2005; Smith & Collins 2009).
In sum, M&D have taken ﬁrst intelligent and careful steps
toward an evolutionary treatment of human misbelief, but they
need to consider the crucial role played by environmental
context before their evolutionary analysis potentially veers into
misbelief itself. Social psychologists often chide laypeople in
their everyday lives for neglecting the impact of environmental
forces on human behavior and outcomes (Nisbett & Ross 1980).
Thus, as theorists, we should commit to giving environmental
forces their due in our own thinking about the human condition.
Why we don’t need built-in misbeliefs
doi:10.1017/S0140525X09991427
Carol S. Dweck
Department of Psychology, Stanford University, Stanford, CA 94305.
dweck@stanford.edu
Abstract: In this commentary, I question the idea that positive illusions
are evolved misbeliefs on the grounds that positive illusions are often
maladaptive, are not universal, and may be by-products of existing
mechanisms. Further, because different beliefs are adaptive in different
situations and cultures, it makes sense to build in a readiness to form
beliefs rather than the beliefs themselves.
McKay & Dennett (M&D), in their fascinating and thought-pro-
voking article, conclude that positive illusions meet the criteria
for evolved misbeliefs. I propose that the case is not made for
the status of positive illusions or indeed for the idea of evolved
misbeliefs.
The target article suggests that positive illusions are clearly
adaptive, are universal, and are not by-products of other
beliefs. Each of these suggestions can be questioned. First, a
closer look at the psychological literature shows the pitfalls of
positive illusions – how an inability to see their own weaknesses
can prevent people from reaching important goals and can
endanger their health and safety (Dunning et al. 2004).
Looking back, one can easily see how hunters who overestimated
their abilities vis-a`-vis predators might not have survived to
reproduce; people who had overoptimistic views about food for
the winter might have starved; and parents who overestimated
their children’s skills might have put them in jeopardy.
Second, a closer look at the literature in cultural psychology
casts doubt on the universality of positive illusions. Positive illu-
sions are found to be a feature of Western societies, which focus
on individuals and their personal prowess, but these illusions are
absent or considerably weaker in Eastern cultures that focus on
self-criticism, self-improvement, and adjusting to others (Heine
& Lehman 1995; Kitayama et al. 1997).
Commentary/McKay & Dennett: The evolution of misbelief
518
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (2009) 32:6

Third, the authors argue that religion is not a candidate for
an evolved misbelief in part because religious beliefs are by-
products of other more fundamental mechanisms, such as
heightened perceptions of agency. However, they do not seem
to hold positive illusions to the same rigorous standard. Are
not positive illusions the very embodiment of a heightened
sense of one’s own agency? Thus, the case that positive illusions
are singular candidates for evolved misbeliefs is still open.
However, an even more fundamental suggestion in the target
article is that shared, adaptive misbeliefs need to be built in. Is
this so? The psychological literature is replete with evidence
for innate or very early core knowledge (e.g., knowledge about
objects and number; Spelke & Kinzler 2007), as well as for
such things as (a) attentional biases (e.g., to human voices: Vou-
loumanos & Werker 2007; to top-heavy forms like faces: Cassia
et al. 2004; to negative affect: Vaish et al. 2008), (b) sensitivity
to contingencies and transitional probabilities (Saffran et al.
1996; Watson 1985; see also, Johnson et al. 2007), and (c) con-
siderable inferential capabilities (Woodward & Needham 2009).
These very basic infant attributes – core knowledge, atten-
tional biases, sensitivities to the statistical properties of input,
inferential abilities – all set infants up to learn about their
worlds. Now, it makes sense to build in knowledge about
things like object and number that are invariant across centuries
and cultures, but, after that, it makes sense to equip infants with
the apparatus to learn from their input. Indeed, it may be impera-
tive for them to remain open to different misbeliefs, since par-
ticular misbeliefs may vary greatly in their adaptiveness across
situations and cultures. In this way, Western babies can
develop positive illusions, but Eastern babies can develop more
self-critical and cautious stances.
In my decades of research, I have been struck by one thing more
than any other: the rapidity with which children and adults alike
key into the rules, beliefs, and values in a new environment. In a
series of studies (Kamins & Dweck 1999; Mueller & Dweck
1998; see also Cimpian et al. 2007), we have shown how children
are affected in dramatically different ways when, after a successful
performance, they are praised once for their intelligence as
opposed to their effort. After praise for intelligence, they adopt a
belief in ﬁxed intelligence and act in accordance with it. For
example, they choose to work on tasks that will validate their intel-
ligence and, after a failure, will make negative inferences about
their intelligence, resulting in impaired performance. After
praise for effort, children adopt a belief that ability can be
increased through effort and act in accordance with that belief.
They choose to work on challenging tasks that will increase their
ability, and after a failure, will continue to apply effort, resulting
in increased performance. We have repeated this study or variants
of it eight times, with the same results.
Other recent research shows how readily people can adopt
prevailing beliefs, without worrying whether they are true or
false (Murphy & Dweck 2009). In one study, we had people
read minutes from a meeting of an organization, with the idea
that they would later apply to work at that organization. The
minutes implied that members of the organization believed
either that intelligence was ﬁxed or that intelligence could be
developed.
Before
people
applied
to
the
organization,
however, they went to a different room with a different exper-
imenter to engage in a completely different task. Here, they
completed a self-concept questionnaire that listed personal
characteristics and asked them to rate “how much each charac-
teristic is at the core of who you are.” What happened was strik-
ing. People who had simply read about the ﬁxed-intelligence
organization said that being brilliant was more central to who
they were, but those who had read about the malleable-intelli-
gence organization said that being passionate [about learning]
was more central to who they were. They had internalized the
beliefs and values of the organization and this was true
even when people did not like the organization they had read
about!
In fact, the science of social psychology can be seen as the
science of how small changes in situations can lead to large
changes in beliefs and behavior (Ross & Nisbett 1991).
Humans are social animals. We need to feel out and respond ﬂex-
ibly to new situations and this includes inferring or absorbing the
(mis)beliefs that go with the new situations. If anything, it is our
readiness to adopt prevalent beliefs or misbeliefs that is built into
us, rather than the beliefs or misbeliefs themselves.
“Can do” attitudes: Some positive illusions
are not misbeliefs
doi:10.1017/S0140525X09991439
Owen Flanagan
Department of Philosophy, Duke University, Durham, NC 27708-0743.
ojf@duke.edu
http://www.duke.edu/ ojf
Abstract: McKay & Dennett (M&D) argue that positive illusions are a
plausible candidate for a class of evolutionarily “selected for” misbeliefs.
I argue (Flanagan 1991; 2007) that the class of alleged positive illusions
is a hodge-podge, and that some of its members are best understood as
positive attitudes, hopes, and the like, not as beliefs at all.
Since positive illusions are the one example McKay & Dennett
(M&D) ﬁnd of a bona ﬁde contender for an adaptive evolutionary
favored epistemic disability, my view (Flanagan 1991; 2007) that
positive illusions may not be a class of well-behaved misbeliefs at
all should matter.
Start with this conditional: If there are positive illusions and if
they are, as the psychologists say they are, (a) common, plus cor-
related with (b) moral decency and (c) happiness, positive affect,
optimism, as well as with (d) the capacity to engage in proﬁtable,
creative, productive work, then there is a problem with the view
that ﬂourishing requires, or demands, overcoming the tendency
to harbor false beliefs. The reason is simple: The normative
claim that contemporary people ﬂourish truly only if they live
in the light of the true, is in competition with the psychologist’s
claim that the capacities to love, work, and be happy are
enhanced by false belief.
The conditional that causes the latter problem – competition
between the ends of ﬂourishing and ﬁtness – and that also,
albeit independently, warrants M&D’s ingenious explanation
for why there are positive illusions, involves accepting that
there are positive illusions. But we can challenge sensibly the
antecedent of the conditional.
Accept that “positive illusions” are states of mind that beneﬁt
the consumer, but reject the claim that they (all, most, many)
are best interpreted as involving false beliefs, as opposed to
having positive expectations and hopes – in other words, a posi-
tive attitude. Hopes and a “can do” attitude need not require false
belief. “Exaggerated” and “unrealistic” are adjectives used to
describe the whole set of allegedly questionable epistemic
states of mind in Taylor and Brown’s famous meta-analysis
(Taylor & Brown 1988), which include unrealistic positive evalu-
ations, exaggerated perceptions of control and mastery, and
unrealistic optimism. One ought to worry about inferring false
beliefs from (even) correct ascriptions of lack of realism or exag-
gerated views about one’s powers and abilities.
When Muhammad Ali famously remarked before his ﬁnal ﬁght
with Smokin’ Joe Frazier – the “Thrilla in Manila” – that “It will
be a killa . . . and a chilla . . . and a thrilla . . . when I get the gorilla
in Manila,” did he believe that he would kick Smokin’ Joe’s ass? Or
is he best understood as doing something, performing an action
that was, in effect, part of the ﬁght before the ﬁrst bell sounded?
Both boxers presumably believed that they could win and hoped
that they would win. So far there is no epistemic mistake regardless
of outcome. “Can” does not entail “will.” The epistemic standards
Commentary/McKay & Dennett: The evolution of misbelief
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (2009) 32:6
519

governing hopes, desires, and the like, are different from those that
govern beliefs. It would be very odd to say that the losers in zero-
sum games always have false beliefs. In fact, Ali might have
believed that he could not win unless he made Smokin’ Joe
worry that he might know how to beat him. Furthermore,
Smokin’ Joe need not have believed he would lose after Ali’s pro-
vocation. The effect might work this way: Ali knows how to do
things with words. He speaks with the intention of undermining
Smokin’ Joe’s conﬁdence, and does so. In this case, the mechan-
isms at work do not operate via beliefs at all, although they
might commonly be assimilated to that class of states speciﬁed
as folk psychologically. The point is that many things we do with
words and thoughts can be viewed as strategic – engendering
self-conﬁdence, undermining the competitor’s abilities – and not
as straightforwardly epistemic.
Consider this from Aristotle:
We ought not to follow the proverb-writers, and “think human, since
you are human.” Or “think mortal, since you are mortal.” Rather, as
far as we can go, we ought to be pro-immortal, and go to all lengths
to live a life that expresses our supreme element; for however this
element may lack in bulk, by much more it surpasses everything in
power and value. (Aristotle 1985, Nichomachean Ethics, X: 13.37)
Interpreted one way Aristotle can be read as encouraging two
false beliefs; interpreted another way he can be read as encoura-
ging an attitude that one can achieve something excellent if one
sets one’s eyes on the goal. Coaches often speak this way to their
charges. A professional tennis match always produces one winner
and one loser. Both players, if they are any good, go into the
match believing that they can win, indeed that they will win.
Believing one can win is a true belief. Hoping that one will win
is a sensible expectation. In neither case is there a mistake.
A sensible counterfactual test for whether a person in fact holds
a belief or is in some associated epistemic state in a strong and
objectionable way would be: Does the state-in-question yield,
and if so how quickly, easily, and so on, when there is strong coun-
tervailing evidence? If I get prostate cancer, or divorced, or in a
motorcycle accident despite saying that I think I won’t, I will
quickly yield my initial thought or claim that these calamities
will not befall me. Taylor and Brown (1988, p. 197) write that
“the extreme optimism individuals display [about such probabil-
ities] appears to be illusory.” This is not obvious. Optimism can
be unrealistic, perhaps – illusory is a different matter.
The overall point is that the positive illusion literature conﬂates
and assimilates systematically such states as hopes, expectations,
and positive attitudes with states of false belief, when the charita-
ble analysis need not involve attributing any belief at all, let alone a
false one. One ﬁnal point: There is reason to believe that one class
of alleged “positive illusions,” self-serving ones, is not common
outside of the West (Flanagan 1991; 2007; Heine et al. 1999). If
so, this might cause trouble for M&D since there is no common
phenotypic trait to explain it as an adaptation.
Adaptive misbelief or judicious
pragmatic acceptance?
doi:10.1017/S0140525X0999121X
Keith Frankish
Department of Philosophy, The Open University, Milton Keynes,
Buckinghamshire MK7 6AA, United Kingdom.
k.frankish@open.ac.uk
http://www.open.ac.uk/Arts/philos/frankish.htm
Abstract: This commentary highlights the distinction between belief and
pragmatic acceptance, and asks whether the positive illusions discussed in
section 13 of the target article may be judicious pragmatic acceptances
rather than
adaptive
misbeliefs. I
discuss the
characteristics
of
pragmatic acceptance and make suggestions about how to determine
whether positive illusions are attitudes of this type.
McKay & Dennett (M&D) ask if there are adaptive misbeliefs.
The positive illusions they discuss in section 13 of the target
article are plausible candidates for propositional attitudes that
are adaptive irrespective of their truth, but I want to question
whether they are really beliefs. The authors adopt a broad deﬁ-
nition of belief as a functional state that “implements or embo-
dies” (sect. 1, para. 1) the endorsement of a state of affairs as
actual. However, this glosses over a distinction often made
between belief and acceptance (e.g., Bratman 1992; Cohen
1989; 1992; Engel 1998; 2000; Frankish 2004; Stalnaker 1984),
and it may be that some putative adaptive misbeliefs are better
classiﬁed as judicious pragmatic acceptances.
The belief/acceptance distinction is drawn in slightly different
ways by different writers, but a central claim is that belief is invo-
luntary and acceptance voluntary. To accept a proposition is to
adopt a policy of treating it as true (taking it as a premise) for
the purposes of reasoning and decision making. Now acceptance
can be motivated by epistemic reasons, and when it is it can be
regarded as a form of belief. (I would argue that all-or-nothing
belief, mentioned by the authors in note 2, is a truth-directed
form of acceptance; see Frankish 2004; 2009.) However, we
can also accept things for non-epistemic reasons – ethical, pro-
fessional, religious, and so on. For example, loyalty may require
a person to accept that their friend is telling the truth, and pro-
fessional ethics may oblige a lawyer to accept that their client is
innocent, even if they do not believe these things (Cohen
1992). Acceptance can also be prudential, designed to simplify
complex deliberations or handle error-management consider-
ations of the sort discussed in section 9 of the target article
(Bratman 1992). (M&D suggest that such considerations need
not motivate belief, but only a cautious action policy. The
present suggestion, however, is that they may prompt the for-
mation of a deliberative policy, which constitutes a type of prop-
ositional attitude.) I shall refer to acceptance that is motivated by
non-epistemic concerns as pragmatic acceptance.
With the notion of pragmatic acceptance in place, what should
we say about the unrealistically positive self-appraisals identiﬁed
by Taylor and her colleagues (e.g., Taylor 1989; Taylor & Brown
1988)? Are these genuine misbeliefs or pragmatic acceptances,
motivated perhaps by a sense of their therapeutic value or a
desire to maintain a comforting self-image? The distinction
between belief and acceptance is often overlooked, so it is not
enough to note that these attitudes are typically classiﬁed as
beliefs. Nor would it be sufﬁcient to detect the inﬂuence of prag-
matic motives in their formation, since these may be operative in
both cases – illicitly in one case, legitimately in the other. In
short, how can we tell the difference between beneﬁcial misbelief
and judicious pragmatic acceptance?
One way is by considering subjects’ attitudes to their self-
appraisals. In particular, do they feel they have control over
these judgements and do they think it is legitimate to allow
non-epistemic factors to inﬂuence them? If so, this would
suggest that their attitude is one of pragmatic acceptance
rather than belief. There is some evidence that this is the case.
Everyday wisdom says it is beneﬁcial to adopt a positive
outlook – to think positively, be optimistic, and have conﬁdence
in oneself – and we often strive to take this advice to heart.
Moreover, we do so without feeling that we are thereby violating
epistemic norms, even if we have no evidence to support the
views adopted. This is not decisive, however. Our control here
may be only indirect, and some self-deception may be involved.
A second consideration is the deliberative context in which our
positive illusions are active. Pragmatic acceptance, unlike belief,
is context-dependent. More speciﬁcally, our beliefs (including
truth-directed acceptances) guide us in an open-ended range
of deliberations, including, crucially, ones where we want to be
guided only by the truth – truth-critical deliberations (Frankish
2004). Our beliefs are our best bets at truth, and they are what we
Commentary/McKay & Dennett: The evolution of misbelief
520
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (2009) 32:6

rely on when we want to rely on the truth. Pragmatic accep-
tances, on the other hand, are operative only in contexts where
non-epistemic values, such as loyalty or professional ethics,
matter to us more than truth, or where we prefer to err on the
side of caution. (Note that this means that pragmatic acceptance
requires the ability to classify deliberations as truth-critical or
not, and hence requires metacognitive abilities.)
The question, then, is whether we rely on our optimistic self-
appraisals in truth-critical contexts. Is there evidence for this?
It might be replied that people report their self-appraisals with
apparent sincerity, and that sincere reports are the product of
truth-critical deliberation. This is too swift, however. If positive
self-appraisals have considerable therapeutic value, then that
would be a reason for us to treat deliberations about ourselves
as not truth-critical, unless there is a lot at stake. Moreover,
this may go for what we tell ourselves as much as for what we
tell others; there need not be any conscious insincerity involved.
Experiment should help here. For example, we might ask sub-
jects to form assessments of their own abilities and attributes,
offering varying rewards for accuracy. (It would not matter if
accuracy could not easily be determined, provided subjects
thought it could.) If a subject revised or abandoned an assess-
ment as the rewards – and thus the truth-criticality of the
context – increased, this would suggest it was an object of prag-
matic acceptance rather than belief.1 Some pragmatic accep-
tances, however, will be hard to detect. Truth-criticality is
determined by the subject’s priorities; and, in general, the stron-
ger a person’s pragmatic reasons for accepting a certain claim,
the harder it will be to create conditions under which they will
treat deliberations involving it as truth-critical. Indeed, at the
extreme, they may treat none as such, rendering their attitude
functionally equivalent to belief.
Despite these practical difﬁculties in applying the distinction
between belief and pragmatic acceptance, it is important to
keep the distinction in mind when theorizing about adaptive mis-
representations. For one thing, it suggests there are distinct
routes to the formation of such attitudes – one involving the
overriding of barriers to the inﬂuence of motivational processes
on belief formation (the breaking of what M&D call “doxastic
shear pins”), the other involving mechanisms of pragmatic accep-
tance in which such barriers are not present. There may also be
differences in the psychological and physiological effects of opti-
mistic self-appraisals depending on whether they are pragmati-
cally accepted or genuinely believed. This again may be a
matter for experiment.
NOTE
1. Thanks to Ryan McKay for this suggestion.
On the adaptive advantage of always being
right (even when one is not)
doi:10.1017/S0140525X09991221
Nathalia L. Gjersoe and Bruce M. Hood
Department of Experimental Psychology, University of Bristol,
Bristol BS8 1TU, United Kingdom.
N.L.Gjersoe@bristol.ac.uk
B.M.Hood@bristol.ac.uk
http://psychology.psy.bris.ac.uk/people/nathaliagjersoe.html
http://brucemhood.wordpress.com
Abstract: We propose another positive illusion – overconﬁdence in the
generalisability of one’s theory – that ﬁts with McKay & Dennett’s
(M&D’s) criteria for adaptive misbeliefs. This illusion is pervasive in
adult reasoning but we focus on its prevalence in children’s developing
theories.
It
is
a
strongly
held
conviction
arising
from
normal
functioning of the doxastic system that confers adaptive advantage on
the individual.
McKay & Dennett (M&D) address a wide variety of misbeliefs
and whittle the range down to conclude that one type of misbe-
lief – positive illusions – remains as viable evidence for the exist-
ence of adaptive misbeliefs. We concur with M&D’s line of
reasoning and propose an additional form of positive illusion
that may serve as an example of an adaptive misbelief – overcon-
ﬁdence in the veracity and generalisability of one’s theories. This
positive illusion is common across a range of domains in adult
reasoning (e.g., Klahr & Dunbar 1988; Rozinblit & Keil 2002),
but we will focus on its prevalence in theory formation in the
developing mind as an incidence that is naturally occurring, per-
vasive, and seemingly robust. M&D are clear about the qualities
that a possible candidate for adaptive misbelief must have: It
must be a belief, it must arise in the normal course of the doxastic
system’s proper functioning and, most important, it must confer
adaptive advantage on the individual. We address each of these
points in turn.
Karmiloff-Smith (1992), in her outline of the representational
redescription model, suggests that all children go through three
phases in theory formation. Brieﬂy, in Phase 1 children collect
data from the world, treating each experience as an independent
event with little or no generalisation between occurrences. In
Phase 2 they consolidate independent representations into a
uniﬁed theory, rejecting contrary external evidence while the
theory is strengthened. And in Phase 3 they test the theory on
a range of external examples, adjusting and broadening it to
account for a variety of anomalies. The theoretical entrenchment
exhibited in Phase 2 can result in errors and inﬂexibilities not
evident in Phases 1 and 3 that lead to the characteristic
U-shaped curve of behavioural success on a variety of tasks
(e.g., Karmiloff-Smith 1986; Newport 1981). The classic demon-
stration of this developmental pattern is Karmiloff-Smith and
Inhelder’s (1974) block-balancing task. When asked to balance
a series of blocks, some of which had been covertly weighted
such that their balancing point was off-centre, 4- and 8-year-
olds consistently passed while 6-year-olds consistently failed.
Karmiloff-Smith suggests that the 4-year-olds succeed by treating
each block as an independent task but the 6-year-olds have a
theory that blocks balance in their symmetric centre and they
overgeneralise this to apply to all blocks, even when this strategy
consistently fails. Eight-year-olds, by contrast, hold the same
theory but are ﬂexible enough to also take into account the
extra dimension, asymmetric weight, and adapt their strategy.
To what extent can children’s experience of theoretical
entrenchment in Phase 2 be referred to as a “belief”? M&D
dismiss aliefs and judicious psychological biases as candidates
for adaptive misbelief because, they argue, the consumers don’t
really believe the bias, they just respond as though they were in
danger or in case danger might be lurking. Conversely, in many
ways children’s overconﬁdent belief in their theory is akin to
M&D’s description of delusions as examples of misbeliefs par
excellence in that they are “held with strong conviction regardless
of counterevidence and despite the efforts of others to dissuade
the deluded individual” (sect. 4, para. 2). To test whether
3-year-olds had a perseverative theory that all objects fall straight
down, Hood (1995) presented an array in which objects fell down
a curved tube to a displaced location. All 3-year-olds searched
directly below the dropping point even if there was only one
tube (and thus no physical connection between the dropping
point and the favoured target), repeatedly in the face of counter-
evidence (up to 20 consecutive trials) and persistently regardless
of how many times the experimenter explained the role of the
tubes to them. This persistence implies that children really
believe that their theory is correct. M&D dismiss delusions as
examples of adaptive misbelief because they arise from an impro-
perly functioning doxastic system. Conversely, Phase 2 theoreti-
cal perseveration occurs in all children across a range of domains
and seems to be a built-in feature of a properly functioning
theory-formation mechanism. Indeed, children often make up
observables in support of their theory when the perceptual
Commentary/McKay & Dennett: The evolution of misbelief
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (2009) 32:6
521

experience lets them down (e.g., Baker et al. 2009; Massey &
Gelman 1988).
Last, it is necessary that a proposed adaptive misbelief should
convey adaptive advantage to the individual. Overconﬁdence in
one’s theories conveys adaptive advantage insofar as it enables
them to creatively simplify a problem by ignoring some of the
complicating factors. “[I]t seems possible for the child to experi-
ence surprise and question his theory only if the prediction he
makes emanates from an already powerful theory expressed in
action” (Karmiloff-Smith & Inhelder 1974, p. 209). Thus, Phase
2 enables children to unify representations into coherent (but
overgeneralised) theories that in turn lead to new, broader the-
ories and greater behavioural mastery. Second, overconﬁdence
in one’s theories sustains and enhances health in an everyday
sense by decreasing exposure to cognitive dissonance, which
has been shown to lead to feelings of anxiety and stress
(Aronson 1969), which in turn result in negative physiological
effects. Consequently, overconﬁdence in one’s theories may
also result in exaggerated feeling of control, a positive illusion
that M&D list as adaptive in its own right.
Thus, overconﬁdence in the veracity and generalisability of
one’s theory ﬁts the criteria laid out by M&D as necessary to
be considered as an adaptive misbelief. Children certainly
believe that they are right; this belief is systematic and misinforms
the organism as a whole, occurs for all children across a range of
microdomains, and persists into adulthood. Therefore, it can be
considered a naturally occurring feature of a properly functioning
doxastic system. It can also be construed as adaptive in leading
the individual to undertake adaptive actions and by enhancing
health and ﬁtness. In children, this tendency is evident not
only in subjective self-evaluation, but also in objective theories
about how the world works that, in turn, guide their behaviour.
A phase in which this is especially prominent occurs across a
variety of microdomains and may be a fundamental and impor-
tant feature of properly functioning theory-building doxastic
systems.
Error management theory and the evolution
of misbeliefs
doi:10.1017/S0140525X09991440
Martie G. Haseltona and David M. Bussb
aDepartments of Communication and Psychology, University of California,
Los Angeles, Los Angeles, CA 90095; bDepartment of Psychology,
University of Texas, Austin, TX 78712.
haselton@ucla.edu
dbuss@psy.utexas.edu
http://www.sscnet.ucla.edu/comm/haselton/home.html
http://www.davidbuss.com
Abstract: We argue that many evolved biases produced through selective
forces described by error management theory are likely to entail
misbeliefs.
We
illustrate
our
argument
with
the
male
sexual
overperception bias. A misbelief could create motivational impetus for
courtship, overcome the inhibiting effects of anxiety about rejection,
and in some cases transform an initially sexually uninterested woman
into an interested one.
McKay & Dennett (M&D) provide a useful analysis of the evol-
ution of misbelief, making a number of important distinctions,
including one between misbeliefs that are tolerable byproducts
of evolved psychological adaptations and those that would have
been adaptive in and of themselves. A reasonable primary
hypothesis is that selection has shaped the human mind to
form true beliefs about the world. The ultimate criterion of evol-
utionary selection, as M&D rightly point out, is reproductive
success, not the accurate detection or preservation of truth.
We, and others, have argued that selection has favored
psychological adaptations that do not always maximize truthful
beliefs; these adaptations instead can result in misbeliefs (e.g.,
Haselton & Buss 2000; Haselton & Nettle 2006).
Humans appear to possess cognitive biases which lead to sys-
tematic misbeliefs and require scientiﬁc explanation. These
include the positive illusions that compel us to have a rosy
outlook on the future (Taylor & Brown 1988), sex-linked biases
such as men’s tendency to overestimate women’s sexual interest
(e.g., Abbey 1982), and perceptual biases such as auditory
looming, the tendency to overestimate the proximity to self of
approaching objects compared to receding objects that are in
fact equally distant (Neuhoff 2001). We articulated error man-
agement theory (EMT; Haselton & Buss 2000) as a theory to
explain how evolution could lead to adaptive biases, some of
which entail misbeliefs. Many problems of judgment under con-
ditions of uncertainty can be framed as having two possible
errors – false positive and false negative errors. According to
EMT, in forming judgments under uncertainty, if there were
recurrent asymmetries in the costs of these errors over evolution-
ary history, selection should produce a system that errs in the less
costly direction. For example, for men estimating a woman’s
sexual interest, we hypothesized that the reproductively more
costly error would have been to underestimate her interest and
miss a reproductive opportunity. Thus, EMT predicts that men
possess an adaptive bias toward overestimating women’s sexual
interest.
M&D afﬁrm the logic of EMT, but argue that selection can
solve adaptive problems of the sort explained by EMT in ways
other than creating misbeliefs. They argue that humans do not
need to possess biased beliefs if biased actions can accomplish
the same ends while preserving true beliefs. We agree entirely
with this point. It is possible, for example, that selection could
design an adaptation in which men acted as if a larger number
of women were sexually interested in them than actually were,
in order for them not to miss a potential sexual opportunity,
while not truly believing that those women are sexually inter-
ested. Similarly, it might be possible for selection to fashion an
adaptation in which people act as though more people harbor
homicidal intent than they actually do, in order to avoid the
costly cases in which people actually do harbor such thoughts,
without actually believing that those individual do harbor homi-
cidal intent.
Just because selection can solve these adaptive problems
without misbelief does not mean that selection has solved these
problems without misbelief. The argument that selection could
craft an adaptation for thermoregulation other than sweat
glands (e.g., dogs thermoregulate through evaporation from a
protruding tongue) is not an argument that selection has not
fashioned sweat glands in humans.
Ultimately, the question of whether misbeliefs are part of the
design of EMT biases is an open issue that must be decided on a
case-by-case basis with empirical research. However, we suggest
that there are no compelling reasons to discount the possibility
that misbeliefs, including functional misbeliefs, are part of the
evolved design of EMT biases. Consider the male sexual overper-
ception bias. A misbelief that a woman is sexually interested
could facilitate access to sexual opportunities in at least three
ways. First, it could provide the motivational impetus for court-
ship behavior. Second, it could allay a man’s anxiety about
being rejected, eliminating a common cognitive barrier to initiat-
ing courtship (Kugeares 2002). If it turns out that his belief was
indeed incorrect, it is not terribly costly for him to revise his
beliefs about a particular woman after being rebuffed (e.g.,
“I thought she was sending me sexual signals, but it turns out
I was wrong”). Third, a man’s misbelief, by motivating attraction
tactics or elevating conﬁdence, could transform a woman who is
initially sexually uninterested in him into one who is sexually
interested – an outcome showing that the initial misbelief itself
can sometimes provide functional beneﬁts. Hence, the EMT-
generated misbelief can, in principle, solve the adaptive
Commentary/McKay & Dennett: The evolution of misbelief
522
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (2009) 32:6

problem of maximizing sexual opportunities more effectively
than an adaptation lacking the misbelief design feature.
Although we advanced the theory to explain cognitive biases,
the core logic of EMT is neutral in predicting where in the per-
ception-belief-action chain selection will shape a bias. All that is
required is that, ultimately, humans behave so that they minimize
the more costly of the two errors in question, even if this cost
minimization ends up producing a larger number of overall
errors. To discover where in this chain a bias exists must be
empirically adjudicated. On the basis of the existing empirical
evidence, however, we suggest that biasing action is unlikely to
be the sole outcome of selection in which there has been recur-
rent cost asymmetries associated with errors.
M&D’s analysis will stimulate empirical research about par-
ticular EMT biases. Some biases may be instances of biased
action without involving misbelief. Others may entail misbeliefs.
A subset of these may be cases in which the misbelief is not
simply a tolerable byproduct of an adaptively biased cognitive
system but is itself adaptive. M&D make a compelling argument
that positive illusions qualify as adaptive misbeliefs because they
positively affect an individual’s ﬁtness by motivating striving for
favorable outcomes. We suggest that that some EMT biases,
such as the male sexual overperception bias, also can motivate
adaptive action through misbeliefs by providing motivational
impetus for action, overcoming inhibitions associated with
action, and transforming the psychological states of others in
ways beneﬁcial to the holder of misbeliefs.
God would be a costly accident: Supernatural
beliefs as adaptive
doi:10.1017/S0140525X09991245
Dominic D. P. Johnson
Department of Politics and International Relations, University of Edinburgh,
Edinburgh, EH8 9LD Scotland, United Kingdom.
dominic.johnson@ed.ac.uk
http://dominicdpjohnson.com/
Abstract: I take up the challenge of why false beliefs are better than
“cautious action policies” (target article, sect. 9) in navigating adaptive
problems with asymmetric errors. I then suggest that there are
interactions between supernatural beliefs, self-deception, and positive
illusions, rendering elements of all such misbeliefs adaptive. Finally,
I argue that supernatural beliefs cannot be rejected as adaptive simply
because recent experiments are inconclusive. The great costs of
religion betray its even greater adaptive beneﬁts – we just have not yet
nailed down exactly what they are.
The greatest challenge to McKay & Dennett’s (M&D’s) argu-
ment is why false beliefs are necessary to achieve adaptive behav-
ior – why not (as M&D note in sect. 9, para. 2) just have
“cautious action policies” instead? I don’t believe this problem
was completely resolved in the target article, so I tackle it with
reference
to
the
“supernatural
punishment
hypothesis”
(Johnson 2009; Johnson & Bering 2006; Johnson & Kru¨ger
2004), since the same problem haunts that hypothesis as well.
The argument is that the costs of selﬁshness increased when
humans evolved language and Theory of Mind (ToM), because
social transgressions became much more likely to be detected
and punished. Supernatural punishment offered a cautionary
mind-guard to reduce selﬁshness and avoid real-world costs.
But why bring God into it? A Darwinian perspective suggests
that atheists could simply develop a “cautious action policy” –
becoming more prudent about when to be selﬁsh. A ﬁrst line
of defense comes from M&D’s categories of evolutionary limit-
ations: (1) economics – a fear of supernatural agency may have
been biologically cheaper or more efﬁcient; (2) history – a
capacity for supernatural beliefs may have been more readily
available, given the prior evolution of ToM; (3) adaptive land-
scape – fear of detection and punishment by supernatural
agents may have been a small step up the local ﬁtness peak
from fear of detection and punishment by human agents.
A stronger line of defense is that, while a cautious action policy
might work in principle, the whole point of error management
theory is that it pays to overestimate the probability of detection,
not to get it right or to weigh up the costs and beneﬁts “rationally”
(Haselton & Buss 2000; Haselton & Nettle 2006; Nettle 2004).
Believing (irrationally) that supernatural agents are watching is
a good way to ensure systematic overestimation of the actual
risk of detection and punishment (by other human beings;
Johnson 2009). The power of religion appears to stem precisely
from its irrational and non-falsiﬁable features (Rappaport
1999), and empirical data suggest that religious beliefs are
more effective at promoting group survival than similar but
non-religious beliefs (Sosis & Bressler 2003). Cautious action
policies might work in reducing selﬁshness, but they may not
be as effective as God.
My next concern is that supernatural agency, self-deception,
and positive illusions are treated as independent phenomena,
with only positive illusions making the cut for an adaptive misbe-
lief. However, there are important interactions between these
three phenomena that make elements of all of them adaptive.
First, self-deception is essential to many supernatural beliefs.
If supernatural punishment is to affect people’s behavior, they
must believe in it – despite lacking any direct evidence whatso-
ever and despite having to ignore counter-evidence. This is
classic
self-deception
(Trivers
2000).
Interestingly,
this
self-deception can be reinforced by the belief itself – in many
religions, it is common for someone’s misfortune to be treated
as evidence of wrongdoing, since gods or spirits “evidently”
punished the victim (Bering & Johnson 2005).
Second, self-deception is essential to many positive illusions.
For example, positive illusions have been suggested to be adap-
tive in conﬂict, blufﬁng superior power or skill to deter opponents
(Johnson 2004; Trivers 2000; Wrangham 1999). Self-deception is
essential here to avoid “behavioural leakage” that would other-
wise give the game away (nervous Nellies are less convincing
bluffers than cool-hand Lukes). This may be why, as Daniel
Kahneman notes, “all the biases in judgment that have been
identiﬁed in the last 15 years tend to bias decision-making
toward the hawkish side” (quoted in Shea 2004). Positive illusions
appear to be advantageous enough that numerous psychological
biases converge to promote them despite the evidence.
Third, supernatural beliefs may be an example of positive
illusions. As M&D note, people often cite God as giving them
“the strength to go on.” If health or ﬁtness advantages derive
from such beliefs, then religious beliefs are adaptive according
to M&D’s own criteria. Religious beliefs may involve all three
types of positive illusions: positive self-evaluations (God chose
me/us), illusions of control (God will help me/us in difﬁcult
times), and optimism about the future (God has a plan; Heaven
awaits). Similar beliefs are common among the world’s numerous
religions.
My ﬁnal concern is M&D’s rejection of supernatural beliefs as
adaptive, which hinges on a perceived lack of empirical evidence.
This is problematic for three reasons. First, in the literature
M&D focus on, researchers tend to use religious primes
derived from Western Judeo-Christian traditions (e.g., “divine,”
“God,” and “prophet” in Shariff & Norenzayan 2007), whereas
the relevant supernatural concepts in our evolutionary history
could be anything from dead ancestors, spirits, ghosts, witches,
inanimate objects, and so forth. Similarly, modern religious
agents are only one possible type of supernatural agency,
whereas subjects’ behavior may also be inﬂuenced by other
sources such as superstition, folklore, karma, Just World beliefs
(the belief that victims of tragedy somehow deserved it), or every-
day “comeuppence” and “just deserts.” Given this diversity of
possible supernatural agents and sources, personal religious
Commentary/McKay & Dennett: The evolution of misbelief
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (2009) 32:6
523

afﬁliations and devoutness among experimental subjects may be
somewhat
independent
of
how
supernatural
beliefs – in
general – inﬂuence people’s behavior (M&D predict an inter-
action of personal religious devoutness and behavior). Current
experiments may not, therefore, be able to differentiate the be-
havior of “believers” and “non-believers” – Joe Bloggs may be
an avowed atheist who, on his way to Las Vegas, is nevertheless
very concerned about seeing a black cat or wearing his lucky
jacket or what his grandmother would have said.
Second, even if we had incontrovertible evidence that super-
natural cues (e.g., via experimental primes) promoted higher
donations in economic games, this is far from evidence that reli-
gious beliefs are biologically adaptive. On the contrary, it could
be evidence that religious primes turn people into suckers who
give away precious resources. Such behavior, on its own, would
not survive natural selection – without additional ﬁeld exper-
iments measuring ﬁtness consequences, evidence for altruism
is hardly evidence of an adaptive trait. Therefore, the (excellent)
current laboratory experiments that M&D focus on cannot yet be
used as deal-breakers as to whether (mis)belief is adaptive or not.
Third, having rejected supernatural beliefs as adaptive, M&D’s
null hypothesis is that religious beliefs are a non-adaptive
byproduct of cognitive mechanisms adapted for other purposes –
evolutionary accidents, in other words. However, if religious
beliefs are accidental byproducts, we might expect natural selection
to have eradicated them because (as M&D note) they impose sig-
niﬁcant ﬁtness costs in terms of time, effort, and resources (Sosis &
Alcorta 2003). So why do they persist?
Even if some religious beliefs persist as “sticky” cultural para-
sites, it does not preclude them from also promoting individual or
group ﬁtness at certain times or contexts (in which case they may
not be “parasites”). The universality and power of religious
beliefs of some form or other – despite their costs – to billions
of people around the world, every culture in history, and every
hunter-gatherer society, strongly suggests that religion confers
adaptive ﬁtness beneﬁts, for individuals and/or groups (at least
in some contexts, for some people, and for some periods of
human history). Of course, universality need not imply adap-
tation: other non-adaptive traits such as chins and male nipples
are also globally and historically universal. However, they do
not impose signiﬁcant costs. Religion does.
The only theories that solve this paradox are religion-as-adaptive
hypotheses that propose how costly (mis)beliefs beget even greater
beneﬁts for individuals and/or groups (Johnson 2008; Norenzayan
& Shariff 2008; Sosis & Alcorta 2003; Wilson 2002), or are
outweighed by the costs of non-belief (Cronk 1994; Johnson
2009; Johnson & Bering 2006). Byproduct theories of religion
offer no solution to its greatest puzzle, for God would be a costly
accident.
A positive illusion about “positive illusions”?
doi:10.1017/S0140525X09991257
Vladimir J. Konecˇni
Department of Psychology, University of California, San Diego, La Jolla, CA
92093-0109.
vkonecni@ucsd.edu
http://psychology.ucsd.edu/people/faculty/vkonecni.php
Abstract: Rather than being a genuine adaptation, “positive illusions” are
examples of doxastically uncommitted policies implemented at both the
individual and societal levels. Even when they are genuine misbeliefs,
most positive illusions are not evolved but ephemeral – a phenomenon
limited to a particular social and economic moment. They are
essentially a consumer response to messages from the pop-psychology
industry in the recently terminated era of easy credit.
The article by McKay & Dennett (M&D) presents a thoughtful
classiﬁcation and analysis of the evolutionary issues involved in
misbelief. The notion that certain misbeliefs may arise through
the normal functioning of the belief-formation system (as
opposed to its breakdown), by virtue of relying on incomplete
or inaccurate information, is clearly acceptable (and not new).
What is debatable, however, is the authors’ key proposition,
that a subclass of such misbeliefs has been systematically adap-
tive in the evolutionary past. The usefulness of this suggestion
depends to a large extent on ﬁnding an example that meets the
authors’ commendably sound and strict criteria, yet the sole
example of adaptive, evolved misbelief that is proposed by
M&D, “positive illusions,” is not convincing.
One should ﬁrst note that the concept of positive illusions, as
well as the term itself and psychologists’ (mis?)beliefs about the
positive consequences of self-serving distortions of reality, are
all of quite recent vintage (e.g., Taylor 1989). M&D helpfully
contrast this view of mental health with Jahoda’s (1958) earlier
and more measured one. Whether or not one wishes to engage
in culture-theorizing about the contrast between the fear of
social ridicule and the self-restraint evident in the Eisenhower
era (demonstrated, for example, in Asch’s [1956] “social confor-
mity” experiments), on one hand, and the less-disguised greed
and self-promotion of the more recent I-want-it-all-now gener-
ations, on the other, the fact is that the content of many positive
illusions is a quite recent phenomenon and that the results of
many of the studies are likely to be ephemeral and support
Gergen’s (1973) “social psychology as history” view. It is there-
fore risky (if not unwarranted) to be talking about the creation
and
implementation
of
misbelief
as
adaptive – let
alone
adapted – selection-driven behaviors (see the authors’ Note 3).
There are also questions about the empirical evidence mar-
shaled by M&D (all of it dating from after about 1985). A
number of studies purporting that “most people . . . see them-
selves as better than most others on a range of dimensions”
(target article, sect. 13, para. 2) appear to be methodologically
unsound. M&D should have more closely examined the presence
of problems and alternative explanations related to the framing of
questions, the differential social desirability of various response
alternatives, and the Pygmalion effect before implying that posi-
tive illusions were present and favored in the ancestral environ-
ment. In addition, quotes from psychologists ﬁrmly committed
to the environmentalist position – such as the social-learning
theory, with its (mis?)beliefs about the teachability and ready
amelioration of just about every personal shortcoming – cannot
be considered an entirely unbiased source.
Other studies have tended to ignore the participants’ referen-
tial framework and may not have dealt with misbeliefs. For
example, people who claim that their current partner is better
than most are likely to be referring to their past partners’ failings
and the undesirable traits and behaviors of people in all those
failed marriages that they know and read about. Even with
regard to an inﬂated opinion of one’s children, studies have pre-
sumably not polled the opinions of the parents (including poten-
tial ones) who terminated pregnancies – or who committed
infanticide,
physical
and/or
sexual
abuse,
and
the
more
common acts of neglect. If even such parents, as is possible
and even likely, were to have an inﬂated idea of the merits of
their offspring and potential offspring, this would raise interest-
ing questions about the meaningfulness of using the question-
naire-retrospective
research
approach
to
probe
matters
relevant to evolutionary adaptation.
To the extent that positive illusions can, in fact, be adequately
documented (regardless of whether or not they are evolved,
adaptive misbeliefs), it is of interest to try to place them in a
broader contemporary context. If people’s positive illusions
about their personal worth and ability are translated into behav-
ior evident to others, all sorts of negative consequences are likely
to ensue, from mild ridicule to severe ostracism. Unless, that
is, the unbridled expression of positive illusions has been
Commentary/McKay & Dennett: The evolution of misbelief
524
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (2009) 32:6

proclaimed a desirable social norm. It is clear that there is no
shortage, perhaps especially in the United States, of change
agents, and socio-cultural, economic, and even legal factors,
involved in the encouragement of positive illusions: the generally
prevailing environmentalist (“nurture”) bias in the educational
system and mass culture; the politico-legal doctrine of universal
entitlement and reduced personal responsibility (including exag-
gerated emotivist explanations of both legal and illegal behavior);
and the broad societal push toward spending on credit, embodied
in the “optimistic” (something for nothing, “no money down”)
consumption-based policies for one’s alleged betterment and
advancement. The empirical ﬁndings, to the extent that they
are reliable and valid in the ﬁrst place, document what is essen-
tially a consumer response to the ubiquitous messages from the
pop-psychology and advertising industries, which make wildly
unrealistic promises and encourage an assertive expression of
self-worth. Most of these are American homegrown products,
but they have been distributed widely, especially in the
Western world.
However, the present ﬁnancial crisis may have already pro-
vided a corrective to positive illusions at both the personal and
societal levels. The crisis has certainly led to a dramatic drop in
the previously inﬂated average self-image, for example, by
people in countries as different as Iceland and Latvia. Predicta-
bly, Western politicians and bankers will resist this trend.
Quite recently, in the Financial Times, the executive chairman
of the giant international banking concern HSBC declared:
“About 80 per cent of this country [United Kingdom] considers
itself middle class. I doubt that was true then [a generation
ago]” (Barber 2009). Yet, on the same date and in the same
news source, it was reported that McDonald’s is the largest
private employer in France (Morrison 2009).
One is left with the conclusion that rather than being a
genuine adaptation, most positive illusions are examples of
doxastically uncommitted action policies implemented at both
the individual and societal levels; and even when they are dox-
astically relevant, genuine misbeliefs, they are unlikely to be
evolved and adaptive – and are instead an ephemeral pheno-
menon limited to the present social and economic moment.
Or perhaps limited to the recent past, for there are already
signs of a reduction of positive illusions as a function of the
current ﬁnancial crisis.
Benign folie a` deux: The social construction
of positive illusions
doi:10.1017/S0140525X09991269
Dennis L. Krebsa and Kathy Dentonb
aDepartment of Psychology, Simon Fraser University, Burnaby, BC, V5A 1S6,
Canada; bPsychology Department, Douglas College, New Westminster, BC,
V3L 5B2, Canada.
krebs@sfu.ca
dentonk@douglas.bc.ca
http://www.sfu.ca/psyc/faculty/krebs/publications.htm
Abstract: McKay & Dennett (M&D) have done an admirable job of
distinguishing among various forms of misbelief and evaluating the idea
that they stem from evolved mental mechanisms. We argue that a
complete account of misbeliefs must attend to the role that others play
in creating and maintaining positive illusions.
In their analysis of the sources of misbeliefs, McKay & Dennett
(M&D) focus on how belief-producing mental mechanisms are
designed. Although people may develop beliefs on their own
and cherish them in private, they acquire many of their beliefs
from others, and they use other people to evaluate them.
Often, these beliefs pertain to ephemeral phenomena for
which there are no objective criteria, such as whether one is
likable or attractive. In contexts in which individuals stand to
beneﬁt from accurate representations of reality, they may
solicit reality checks from others and correct their beliefs accord-
ingly. However, when individuals stand to beneﬁt from misrepre-
sentations of reality, they may manipulate others into validating
them, which in turn may help the manipulators believe that the
misrepresentations are true.
Evolutionary theory leads us to expect people to be disposed to
seek the truth when truth-seeking is the most adaptive strategy.
However, truth-seeking is not always the most adaptive strategy,
and the evidence clearly establishes that people are not naturally
inclined to process all social information in objective or impartial
ways. As expressed by Haidt:
Research on social cognition . . . indicates that people often behave like
“intuitive lawyers” rather than like “intuitive scientists”. . . . Directional
goals (motivations to reach a preordained conclusion) work primarily
by causing a biased search in memory for supporting evidence
only. . . . Self-serving motives bias each stage of the hypothesis-
testing sequence, including the selection of initial hypotheses, the gen-
eration of inferences, the search for evidence, the evaluation of evi-
dence, and the amount of evidence needed before one is willing to
make an inference. (Haidt 2001, p. 821)
Strategies of social belief validation. People invoke several
strategies to maximize the probability that others will validate
their misbeliefs about themselves and others. First, they
express their misbeliefs selectively to those they consider most
likely to validate them – usually people who have a vested inter-
est in the misbeliefs or in pleasing the misbelief-holder. For
example, in conversations with in-group members, people
express beliefs that favor their in-groups and demean their out-
groups, and they express beliefs about their worth to their
friends and relatives. M&D give examples of positive illusions
that increase people’s chances of surviving by improving their
health. Because such beliefs also may beneﬁt those whose
ﬁtness is linked to sick people’s welfare, these people may have
a vested interest in adopting and supporting them. For
example, believing that a friend, mate, or relative will recover
from an illness may induce one to behave in ways that increase
the probability of him or her recovering, which in turn may
enhance one’s welfare.
Second, people buttress the misbeliefs they voice to others
with a biased sample of evidence. For example, people may
brag about their successes and hide their failures. And ﬁnally,
people turn to others to support their misbeliefs. For example,
Denton and Zarbatany (1996) found that when people made mis-
takes, they made excuses to their friends, who in turn supported
them. An interesting dynamic often occurs when people express a
biased sample of evidence to their friends in support of their mis-
beliefs: Their friends end up forming more extreme misbeliefs
than the people seeking validation are comfortable accepting.
For example, Krebs and Laird (1998) found that participants’
friends made more exculpating judgments for the transgressions
that the participants committed than the participants made
themselves.
Social conspiracies. Friends and relatives tend to engage in a
subtle form of reciprocity with respect to positive illusions about
one another – “You support my illusions, and I will support
yours” – which gives rise to benign folie a` deux: “You are won-
derful.” “So are you.” In some cases, this initiates a self-fulﬁlling
prophesy. If each of us thinks that the other is socially attractive,
funny, beautiful, of high worth, then our beliefs are at least
partially validated.
Adaptive functions of illusions about one’s worth. In an
earlier paper, we asserted that illusions about one’s own worth
are adaptive because they help people deceive others about
their worth (see Krebs & Denton 1997). M&D questioned this
assertion, because they questioned whether “others are deceived
about the worth of self-deceptive individuals” (target article, sect.
Commentary/McKay & Dennett: The evolution of misbelief
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (2009) 32:6
525

12, para. 4, emphasis theirs), and because the results of a study
revealed that people tend not to trust highly self-deceptive
people (emphasis added). However, our assertion pertained to
an adaptive
function of
species-speciﬁc
illusion-producing
mechanisms, not to the adaptive function of high levels of self-
deception. Extreme degrees of self-deception (high and low)
are probably maladaptive. Our claims can be understood in the
context of the social model of misbeliefs we have outlined in
this commentary. Everyone is self-deceptive in the sense that
everyone harbors positive illusions about their worth. Everyone
is disposed to propagate and reinforce these positive illusions
by deceiving others about their worth, and this process pays off
in a variety of ways.
Although people’s (mis)beliefs about their worth are bound to
affect others’ judgments, there are two important constraints on
the extent to which observers are fooled by invalidly high esti-
mates of people’s worth. First, observers inevitably evaluate
these beliefs on other criteria, such as their predictive ability
and the extent to which they are shared by others. We would
not expect high levels of self-deception that give rise to huge dis-
crepancies between evaluations of one’s self-worth and more
objective evidence to be persuasive to others.
Second, observers are sensitive to the costs and beneﬁts of mis-
reading signals of others’ worth. In general, observers are evolved
to be wary of deception in contexts in which it is more adaptive to
form accurate estimates of others’ worth than it is to form inac-
curate estimates. In the absence of other information, such as
when people are making a ﬁrst impression, people’s conceptions
of their worth may be relatively persuasive within an optimal
range. However, we would not expect others to support highly
exaggerated illusions except in rare cases in which they collabor-
ate in the illusions, such as pathological cases of folie a` deux. If
you are the King, I am the Queen.
(Not so) positive illusions
doi:10.1017/S0140525X09991270
Justin Krugera, Steven Chanb, and Neal Roesec
aStern School of Business, New York University, New York, NY 10012;
bDepartment of Marketing, Stern School of Business, New York University,
New York, NY 10012; cKellogg School of Management, Northwestern
University, Evanston, IL 60208.
jkruger@stern.nyu.edu
http://w4.stern.nyu.edu/faculty/facultyindex.cgi?id¼370
schan@stern.nyu.edu
http://w4.stern.nyu.edu/marketing/research.cfm?doc_id¼872
n-roese@kellogg.northwestern.edu
http://www.kellogg.northwestern.edu/Faculty/Directory/
Roese_Neal.aspx
Abstract: We question a central premise upon which the target article is
based. Namely, we point out that the evidence for “positive illusions” is in
fact quite mixed. As such, the question of whether positive illusions are
adaptive from an evolutionary standpoint may be premature in light of
the fact that their very existence may be an illusion.
It ain’t so much the things we don’t know that get us into trouble. It’s the
things we know that just ain’t so.
— Artemus Ward (as cited in Gilovich 1991)
When the Journal of Personality and Social Psychology (JPSP)
compiled a list of the papers most often cited in its pages, the
salutatorian was not a JPSP article (nor was the valedictorian,
but that is another story). Nor was it even a social psychology
article – at least not exclusively (Quinones-Vidal et al. 2004). It
was Taylor and Brown’s (1988) review of “Positive Illusions,”
the series of biases that McKay & Dennett (M&D) nominate
as one of the “best candidates for evolved misbelief” (target
article, sect. 13).
And for good reason (both the citation count and nomination).
Taylor and Brown (1988) not only advanced a compelling argu-
ment as to why some judgmental biases might actually be
healthy (an argument equally compellingly taken to its logical
extreme by the target article), but also provided an elegant
summary of the various ways in which people see themselves
and the world around them in an unrealistically favorable light.
People overestimate how their traits and abilities stack up
against those of others. They believe that their futures are rosier
than those of the average person. And they believe that they
control what they do not. Collectively, these “positive illusions”
instantly rang true for both psychologists and laypeople alike, cor-
roborating both common wisdom and an idea as old as psychology
itself (Freud 1920; Roese & Olson 2007). Indeed, so intuitive is the
insight that it is hard for most of us even to imagine a time in which
it could have been controversial, but indeed it once was (Festinger
1954). As we now know, “most people view themselves as better
than average on almost any dimension that is both subjective
and socially desirable” (sect. 13, para. 2).
The problem, to paraphrase the opening quote, is that some-
times what we know just ain’t so.
Consider what is perhaps the best-known illustration of the
“above-average effect,” from the College Board Survey (1976–
77). When 828,516 high-school students taking the SAT were
asked about their leadership ability, 70% claimed to be “above-
average” and only 2% “below-average.” When asked about
their “ability to get along with others,” 89% reported that they
were above-average, fewer than 0.5% admitted to being below-
average, and a full 25% reported being in the top ﬁrst percentile.
One could point out that the results are misleading, and they are
most certainly that. For one, the students may have felt pressured
to present themselves in a favorable light. The questions, after all,
were being asked by the same people determining their suitability
for college. For another, the colloquial deﬁnition of “average” is
considerably gloomier than the dictionary deﬁnition. Most of the
students, therefore, could very well have been above-average –
at least by their construal of the term. Even by the mathematical
deﬁnition the sample may have been above-average. The
sample, although large, was comprised exclusively of high-school
students taking the SAT, the majority of whom could have very
well been better leaders and more of the “get-along-with-others”
type than the average high-school student (this is even possible
with a representative sample if the distribution of performance
is sufﬁciently skewed, but never mind that).
All of these are reasons to question the results of the College
Board Survey and the many others like it. They are not the
reasons to doubt the existence of positive illusions such as the
“above-average effect,” however, because the effect replicates
even when the above factors are accounted for (e.g., Kruger &
Burrus 2004; Dunning et al. 1989). Nor even is the reason for
doubt the fact that the above-average effect and unrealistic opti-
mism often fail to replicate in “collectivist” cultures such as those
found in East Asia, South America, and the Middle East (Heine
et al. 1999; Henrich et al., in press).
Instead, the reasons for doubt are the many instances in which
healthy populations exhibit, not positive illusions, but systematic
negative ones. In the case of the above-average effect, although
people overestimate their ability relative to others on easy
tasks, such as using a computer mouse or riding a bicycle, they
tend to underestimate their ability on difﬁcult tasks, such as pro-
gramming a computer or telling a really good joke (Kruger 1999;
Moore 2007). Similarly, although college students believe that
they are more likely than the average student to experience
common desirable events such as getting a job with a starting
salary over $25,000 or living past 70, they believe that they are
less likely than the average person to land a salary over
$250,000 or live past 100 – despite the fact that the latter are
at least as desirable as the former (Kruger & Burrus 2004).1
Commentary/McKay & Dennett: The evolution of misbelief
526
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (2009) 32:6

Indeed, for virtually every social comparison bias one might
label “positive illusion” there appears to be a complementary
“negative illusion.” People overestimate their likelihood of
beating a competitor when the contest is simple (such as a
trivia contest involving easy categories), but underestimate
those odds when it is difﬁcult (such as a trivia contest involving
difﬁcult categories; Moore & Kim 2003; Windschitl et al. 2003).
Roommates overestimate their relative contribution to tasks
involving frequent contributions like cleaning the dishes, but
underestimate their relative contribution to tasks involving infre-
quent contributions like cleaning the oven (Kruger & Savitsky
2009). And preliminary work suggests that although people over-
estimate their degree of control over that which can be controlled
easily, they underestimate their degree of control of what cannot
(Kruger, unpublished data).
That said, it would be misleading to suggest that these results
imply that, ecologically speaking, negative illusions outnumber
positive ones. The above research does not speak to this question,
nor is it an easy – or perhaps even possible – question to answer.
What the research does suggest, however, is that there is reason
to question the assumption that positive illusions are the norm for
healthy individuals. It may be one of those “things we know that
just ain’t so” (Artemus Ward, as cited in Gilovich 1991). It is
perhaps worth noting that it was likely not Artemus Ward who
said those words, but instead the late humorist Josh Billings.2
NOTES
1. As the reader may have noticed, the examples are related. In each
case, people overestimate relative standing when absolute standing is
high and underestimate relative standing when absolute standing is low
(see Chambers & Windschitl 2004; Moore & Healy 2008).
2. Thomas Gilovich, personal communication.
Pathological and non-pathological factors in
delusional misbelief
doi:10.1017/S0140525X09991282
Robyn Langdon
Macquarie Centre for Cognitive Science, Macquarie University, Sydney,
NSW 2109, Australia.
rlangdon@maccs.mq.edu.au
http://www.maccs.mq.edu.au/members/proﬁle.html?memberID¼60
Abstract: In their pursuit of adaptively biased misbelief-making systems,
McKay & Dennett (M&D) describe a putative doxastic shear-pin system
which enables misbeliefs to form in situations of extreme psychological
stress. Rather than discussing their argument, I consider how this
shear-pin system might combine with both pathological belief-making
(“culpable” breakdowns caused by neuropathy) and normal belief-
making to explain a spectrum of delusions.
Textbook deﬁnitions of delusions (as, e.g., false beliefs) are
inadequate to capture the nature of pathologies that cause delu-
sions (see David 1999; see also McKay & Dennett’s [M&D’s]
comment that delusions might sometimes be “serendipitously
true” [sect. 1, para. 2]). The three signs that clinicians use to diag-
nose delusions (incorrigibility, subjective certainty, and incom-
prehensibility) are better pointers to the nature of these
pathologies than are textbook deﬁnitions. Incorrigibility refers
to the rigid persistence in the face of rational counter-argument.
Subjective certainty concerns the quality of self-evident truth
with which delusions are espoused. Incomprehensibility can be
“sheer” or “contextual” (Langdon & Bayne, in press). The sheer
content of some delusions is sufﬁcient as to render them incom-
prehensible; the belief that one is dead (Cotard delusion) is like
this. Mundane delusions, like delusional jealousy, are contex-
tually incomprehensible; patients with these delusions lack the
evidence, or lack the irrefutable evidence that would warrant
the subjective certainty with which the delusion is espoused
(e.g., a patient once vehemently justiﬁed her persecutory delu-
sion about a neighbour by referring to the provocative way in
which the neighbour had intentionally jingled her keys when
walking ahead of the patient).
In our original “two-deﬁcit” model, Langdon and Coltheart
(2000), we proposed two distinct, concurrent pathologies to
explain the incomprehensibility and the incorrigible, subjective
certainty of bizarre monothematic delusions. The ﬁrst break-
down explains why a delusional person generates a fantastic
thought with content so beyond the bounds of normal experi-
ence. This ﬁrst break also varies from patient to patient to
explain the variable delusional themes. First breaks to sensory/
somatosensory mechanisms were our primary focus; these
distort perceptual experience and so explain the sheer incompre-
hensibility of bizarre delusions. Since many non-delusional
people experience distorted perceptions (e.g., phantom-limb
sufferers), a second break was proposed to explain the failure
to reject the bizarre thought as implausible: the incorrigibility.
Current conceptions of this second break vary; see, for
example, M&D’s discussion of excessive biases towards either
observational adequacy or doxastic conservatism. Langdon and
Bayne (in press) propose that the second break in bizarre mono-
thematic delusions is an inability to inhibit a default setting to
upload and maintain the content of perceptual experience into
belief (see also, Davies et al. 2001). For example, the patient
with a mirrored-self misidentiﬁcation delusion misperceives a
stranger in the mirror, misbelieves that there is a stranger in
the mirror, and cannot reason as if there only seems to be a stran-
ger in the mirror. It is this inability to inhibit the misperceived
reality that explains the self-evident, subjective certainty.
In Langdon and Coltheart (2000), although we focused on
pathology, we also considered normal belief-making. Normal
processes, we suggested, might nuance speciﬁc elaborations of
a bizarre delusion: One Cotard patient with an internalising attri-
butional bias might believe that God is punishing her for her evil
ways, while another Cotard patient with an externalizing bias
might believe that evil doctors have stolen her “life essence.”
Normal processes might also feature in the generation of
mundane delusions by way of expectation-fuelled attentional
biases concerning, for example, a straying partner (delusional
jealousy) or health concerns (hypochondrial delusions). Even a
mundane grandiose delusion, like believing that one is a gifted
pianist despite poor playing skills and vocal audience criticism,
might begin with the positive illusions that interest M&D.
Combinations of pathological and normal belief-making explain:
normal beliefs about normal experiences (with no pathological
breaks present); normal beliefs about bizarre experiences (with
only a ﬁrst break present, as occurs, e.g., when an aberrant
signal of familiarity causes insightful de´ja` vu); mundane delusions
(with only a second break present); and bizarre delusions (with two
breaks present). Expanding the framework in this way prompts
two questions, though. The ﬁrst concerns the adoption of the
belief. The adoption of a bizarre delusion which has been triggered
by some disturbance of sensory/somatosensory processing is rela-
tively straightforward to explain by way of a default to believe our
senses, at least initially. The adoption of a mundane delusion is less
straightforward to explain; when and why does a worrying or a
fantasizing become a convicted believing? The second question
concerns the nature of the second break; is it the same in
mundane and bizarre delusions? This seems unlikely if the
second break in bizarre delusions is an inability to inhibit a
default setting to believe what our senses tell us.
In a recent review of persecutory delusions, which are often
mundane, Langdon et al. (2008) found no compelling evidence
for the involvement of right-frontal brain damage; we suspect
that brain damage of this type underpins the second break in
bizarre delusions. More recently, therefore, we have shifted to
a more general, “two-factor” approach (e.g., Coltheart 2007) to
ask two questions about each delusion: (1) What generates the
Commentary/McKay & Dennett: The evolution of misbelief
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (2009) 32:6
527

delusional content in the ﬁrst place? (2) Having once entertained
a particular thought, why does a deluded patient cling to it rather
than reject it? Sometimes the answers will be neuropsychological
and sometimes they will be motivational.
But, even if the aetiology of the second break is sometimes
motivational and sometimes neuropsychological, the second
break might still be similar at an on-line cognitive level. M&D’s
idea of “doxastic shear-pins” is relevant here. If belief-making
components shear in situations of extreme psychological stress
to permit beliefs that would ordinarily be rejected, I assume
that the shearing is localized and constrained by the context. I
also assume that the shearing involves some on-line neural/cog-
nitive “short-circuit,” as opposed to a stable neuropsychological
impairment. If so, then perhaps we might describe the second
break in all delusions, bizarre or mundane, as a “doxastic inhibi-
tory failure”: a failure to “demote” a belief so as to reason about it
as if it might not be true. In bizarre monothematic delusions, this
failure might only manifest via an inability to inhibit a default ten-
dency to upload and maintain (distorted) perceptual experience
into (mis)belief; in mundane motivated delusions this failure
might only manifest when the psychological cost of demoting
the belief into a “maybe-it’s-not-true” mental space is too great;
and in dementing patients with widespread bizarre and/or
mundane delusions this failure might reﬂect more general inhibi-
tory compromise.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
Thanks to Neralie Wise and Emily Connaughton for comments on an
earlier draft.
Are beliefs the proper targets of adaptationist
analyses?
doi:10.1017/S0140525X09991294
James R. Liddle and Todd K. Shackelford
Department of Psychology, Florida Atlantic University, Davie, FL 33314.
jliddle1@fau.edu
http://www.jamesrliddle.com
tshackel@fau.edu
http://www.toddkshackelford.com
Abstract: McKay & Dennett’s (M&D’s) description of beliefs, and
misbeliefs in particular, is a commendable contribution to the literature;
but we argue that referring to beliefs as adaptive or maladaptive can
cause conceptual confusion. “Adaptive” is inconsistently deﬁned in the
article, which adds to confusion and renders it difﬁcult to evaluate the
claims, particularly the possibility of “adaptive misbelief.”
McKay & Dennett (M&D) open their article by presenting what
they consider the “prevailing assumption” (sect. 1, para. 2) of
modern evolutionary analyses of belief, namely, that true beliefs
are adaptive and misbeliefs maladaptive. However, M&D also
present and appear to endorse the content of several quotations
(e.g., from Bloom 2004; Ghiselin 1974; Haselton & Nettle 2006;
Stich 1990) that showcase an alternative evolutionary perspective:
that beliefs are not relevant to natural selection unless they
contributed recurrently to differential reproduction, and, further-
more, that there is no reason to assume that only the true beliefs
of our ancestors met this criteria. These quotes suggest that what
M&D refer to as the “prevailing assumption” of evolutionary
analyses of belief is in fact not the prevailing assumption; but
this is a relatively minor issue that we do not explore further
in this commentary. Instead, we address a more pressing
concern: M&D’s analyses are not based on a coherent
deﬁnition of “adaptive.”
The aim of the target article is to evaluate the assumption that
misbeliefs
themselves
are
maladaptive,
and
to
examine
candidates for adaptive misbelief. Considering this aim, we ﬁnd
it surprising that M&D do not provide coherent deﬁnitions of
the
relevant
phenomena.
Adaptive
misbeliefs
are
loosely
deﬁned at various places in the article as beliefs that are
“normal” (sect. 5, last para.), “beneﬁcial” (sect. 6, ﬁrst para.),
that “aid survival” (sect. 6, ﬁrst para.), “maximize ﬁtness” (sect.
9, para. 5), “facilitate the negotiation of overwhelming circum-
stances” (sect. 10, para. 2), “facilitate the successful negotiation
of social exchange” (sect. 12, ﬁrst para.), promote “mental
health” (sect. 13, ﬁrst para.), and “sustain and enhance physical
health” (sect. 13, para. 3, emphasis in original). M&D do not
explicitly deﬁne “adaptive misbelief.” Rather, they pose several
questions throughout the article in the process of evaluating
the plausibility of adaptive misbelief, and these questions imply
the sundry deﬁnitions we noted. Because it does not provide a
speciﬁc deﬁnition of “adaptive,” the article lacks a consistent fra-
mework for evaluating the candidates for adaptive misbelief.
Although M&D acknowledge in a note (Note 3) that they con-
ﬂate conceptually “adaptive” and “adapted” throughout the
article, this acknowledgement does not diminish any confusion,
as the reader is left without a speciﬁc deﬁnition for either
term. M&D also highlight the distinction between psychological
adaptation and biological adaptation. These terms are loosely
deﬁned with reference to a distinction between “human happi-
ness and genetic ﬁtness” (sect. 10, para. 5) – with genetic
ﬁtness loosely deﬁned as “having more surviving grandoffspring”
(sect. 10, para. 5). The latter deﬁnition misses many of the con-
ceptual nuances associated with the concept of ﬁtness from an
evolutionary perspective (see Dawkins 1982). Such an oversim-
pliﬁcation is particularly problematic for an article whose argu-
ments hinge on whether beliefs have had an effect on ﬁtness
throughout our evolutionary history, which would ultimately
determine the status of beliefs as adaptations in and of
themselves.
M&D do avoid a potential confusion in their article by making
a clear distinction between beliefs themselves and the infor-
mation-processing mechanisms that generate beliefs (sect. 5,
last para.). M&D clearly state that they are interested in the
subset of misbeliefs that are generated by properly functioning
cognitive mechanisms, and that these are the candidates for
adaptive misbelief. However, M&D do not justify focusing on
beliefs themselves as opposed to the mechanisms that generate
beliefs, even though a proper adaptationist perspective (Tooby
& Cosmides 1992) focuses not on the output of adaptations
(e.g., beliefs), but on the design features of the adaptations
(e.g., the information-processing mechanisms that generate
beliefs). If the information-processing mechanisms of the mind
are sensitive to context (Buss et al. 1998), then it is plausible
that a belief-generating mechanism can generate true beliefs in
one environment and false beliefs in a different environment.
Our understanding of why speciﬁc beliefs are formed requires
an understanding of the mechanisms that generate the beliefs,
and referring to beliefs themselves as adaptations obfuscates
the importance of the actual adaptations (i.e., the underlying
mechanisms).
Despite some conceptual confusion, M&D present several
thought-provoking concepts in the target article. For example,
their categorization of misbeliefs in terms of the functioning
(or malfunctioning) of the belief formation systems provides an
important distinction, although we were surprised to see no
reference to Wakeﬁeld’s (1992) strikingly similar and pioneering
evolutionary analyses of dysfunction. We also appreciate the
concept of “doxastic shear pins” (sect. 10), which may offer a
solid foundation for future empirical and theoretical work on
belief formation in extraordinary, psychologically stressful situ-
ations. Finally, M&D’s analysis of beliefs suggests an alternative
to the proper adaptationist perspective by referring to the output
of psychological mechanisms as adaptations. However, the merit
of this alternative is difﬁcult to determine, due to the target
article’s many conceptual confusions.
Commentary/McKay & Dennett: The evolution of misbelief
528
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (2009) 32:6

10,000 Just so stories can’t all be wrong
doi:10.1017/S0140525X09991452
Gary F. Marcus
Department of Psychology, New York University, New York, NY 10012.
gary.marcus@nyu.edu
http://www.psych.nyu.edu/gary/
Abstract: The mere fact that a particular aspect of mind could offer an
adaptive advantage is not enough to show that that property was in fact
shaped by that adaptive advantage. Although it is possible that the
tendency towards positive illusion is an evolved misbelief, it it also
possible that positive illusions could be a by-product of a broader,
ﬂawed cognitive mechanism that itself was shaped by accidents of
evolutionary inertia.
In arguments about innateness, one often ﬁnds a bias towards
empiricist
perspectives.
It
is
widely,
though
erroneously,
believed that if some aspect of cognition could be learned, that
aspect of cognition must be the product of learning; evidence
for the possibility of learning is often taken as evidence against
possibility of innateness. Of course, in reality, some aspects of
cognition could be innate, even if they were in principle learn-
able. Humans might, in principle, be able to learn how to walk,
much as they can acquire other new motor skills (e.g., juggling
or skiing), but the fundamental alternating stepping reﬂex that
underlies walking appears to exist at birth, prior to any experi-
ence of actual walking.
In a similar way, in discussions about adaptive advantage, it
sometimes seems as if there is a bias towards adaptationist
accounts relative to by-product accounts, such that any putative
adaptive advantage apparently automatically trumps the possi-
bility of non-adaptive accounts. If something could have been
shaped by adaptive pressure, it is often assumed to have done
so; but it is again a logical error to assume that simply because
something could be explained as an adaptation then it could
not also be explained in another fashion.
McKay & Dennett (M&D) make a reasonably strong case for
the possibility that positive illusions, such as non-veridical beliefs
about one’s health, could have a history borne of direct adaptive
advantage; is there any reason to consider alternative accounts?
Quite possibly: Although positive illusions might inhere in
some sort of domain-speciﬁc cognitive substrate that could
have been speciﬁcally shaped via natural selection, I believe it
is at least equally plausible that positive illusions are simply one
manifestation among many of two considerably more general
phenomena that are pervasive throughout human cognition
(yet curiously absent from the target article): (1) conﬁrmation
bias (e.g., Nickerson 1998), in which people often tend to cling
to prior beliefs even in the light of contradictory evidence; and
(2) motivated reasoning, a tendency of people to subject beliefs
that are potentially ego-dystonic to greater levels of scrutiny
that are less likely to be ego-dystonic (Kunda 1990).
Cigarette-smokers, for example, tend to dismiss research on the
dangers of smoking not because they believe themselves to be
healthy, but because they work harder to deﬂate potentially dama-
ging beliefs. This could be seen as an instance of a cognitive mech-
anism that was dedicated towards yields positive self-illusion. But
much the same tendency towards motivated reasoning can be
seen in undergraduates’ evaluations of arguments about capital
punishment: As Lord et al. (1979) showed, students tend to work
harder to undermine arguments that conﬂict with their prior
beliefs. Dozens of subsequent studies, reviewed in Kunda (1990),
point in the same direction: We work harder to dismiss arguments
that we don’t like, whether or not those arguments pertain to our
own personal well-being. Positive illusion might in this way be
seen as an instantiation of motivated reasoning, rather than as the
product of a dedicated mechanism with a unique adaptive history.
A species-general tendency towards conﬁrmation bias might
also subserve positive illusions, even absent speciﬁc machinery
dedicated to positive illusion. Once one stumbles on a belief in
one’s own virtues (e.g., through the praise of one’s parent),
potentially disconﬁrming evidence may be ignored, under-
weighted, or simply harder to retrieve; but again, there may be
nothing special about personal self-interest. Conﬁrmation bias
is as apparent in people’s inferences about arbitrary rules in
concept learning tasks as it is in beliefs about self (again, see
Nickerson 1998, for a review).
Intriguingly, conﬁrmation bias itself may be a byproduct of the
organization of human memory (Marcus 2008; 2009). Human
memory, like that of all vertebrate creatures, is organized via
context rather than location. In a machine with location-addres-
sable memory, it as easy to search for matches to be a particular
criterion (data that ﬁts some theory) as data that does not match
said criteria (potentially disconﬁrming evidence). By contrast, in
a creature that can search only by contextual matches, there is no
clean way in which to access disconﬁrming evidence. Conﬁr-
mation bias itself may thus stem from inherited properties of
our memory mechanisms, rather than speciﬁc adaptive advan-
tage. Indeed, as M&D themselves argue, an across-the-board
bias towards misbelief per se is unlikely to be adaptive.
At the present time, we simply lack the tools to directly infer
evolutionary history. Some adaptationist theories are likely to
be correct – parental investment theory, for example, is sup-
ported by a vast range of supporting evidence; others, such as
the theory that depression serves to keep its bearers from
getting into trouble, seem rather more dubious. Advances in
understanding how cognitive machinery is instantiated in under-
lying brain matter may help, as may advances in relating genetic
material to neural structure; for now, we are mostly just guessing.
Are positive illusions in fact evolved misbeliefs or are they merely
by-products of more general mechanisms? We really can’t say.
My point is simply that we should be reluctant to take either
option at face value. Speciﬁc properties of cognitive machinery
may sometimes turn out to be by-products even when it superﬁ-
cially appears in principle that there is an adaptive pressure that
could explain them.
It is likely misbelief never has a function
doi:10.1017/S0140525X09991300
Ruth Garrett Millikan
Philosophy Department U-54, University of Connecticut, Storrs,
CT 06269-2054.
ruth.millikan@uconn.edu
Abstract: I highlight and amplify three central points that McKay &
Dennett (M&D) make about the origin of failures to perform
biologically proper functions. I question whether even positive illusions
meet criteria for evolved misbelief.
According to Stephen Stich, “natural selection does not care
about truth; it cares only about reproductive success” (Stich
1990, p. 62; quoted in the target article, sect. 9, epigram). Simi-
larly, I suppose, natural selection “does not care about” digesting
food, pumping blood, supplying oxygen to the blood, walking,
talking, attracting mates, and so forth. For each of these activities
can either be (biologically purposefully) set aside (the vomiting
reﬂex, holding one’s breath under water, sleeping) or simply
fails to occur in many living things. Nonetheless, surely the
main function for which the stomach was selected was the diges-
tion of food, the lungs for supplying oxygen, and so forth, and a
main function for which our cognitive systems were selected
was the acquisition and use of knowledge – that is, true belief.
As McKay & Dennett (M&D) observe, confusions about this
arise from failing to take into account any of three fundamental
facts about biological function, on each of which I would like,
very brieﬂy, to expand.
Commentary/McKay & Dennett: The evolution of misbelief
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (2009) 32:6
529

The ﬁrst is that recurrent failure to perform the functions for
which they were selected is completely normal for many biologi-
cal structures and activities. The barnacle waves its little fan foot
through the water once, twice, ten times, a hundred and ten
times, and the hundred and eleventh time it picks up a micro-
scopic lunch. One hundred ten failures for one success. (Bad stat-
istics characterize almost all hunting and ﬂeeing behaviors of
animals.) A job of the gazelle’s strong leg muscles is to allow it
to outrun the lion, a job of the protective eye blink reﬂex is to
keep sand out of the eye, and a job of various body membranes
is to keep pathogens from entering; but, of course, none of
these jobs always gets done. Our knowledge-making systems per-
formed their functions less and less reliably, up to very recent
times, I suppose, roughly as the objects of belief got further
and further from in front of our noses. But, of course, it is
getting straight about what is in front of our noses that is the
ﬁrst order of importance for us. Getting straight about things
further away can be very helpful too, when we can manage it;
and when we don’t manage, false belief about distant things
may, until recently, have been pretty much equivalent, in the
simple randomness of the results, to having no belief at all
about such matters. As with hunting, clearly it is better to try,
even though one fairly often fails, than not to try at all. This is
very different, of course, from saying that failures are helpful
or that the organism has been designed to produce them. Fail-
ures are by-products of design for success. (On the inconstancy
of Normal supporting conditions for proper operation of the cog-
nitive systems, see Millikan 1998.)
The second observation is that biological systems may some-
times be designed to suspend or override the functions of
certain of their parts, so as to avoid damage when Normal con-
ditions for successful operation – operative conditions that
helped account for past successes hence for selection of these
parts – are conspicuously absent. Numerous animal species
“play dead,” perhaps actually going unconscious, in circum-
stances where any manifestation of normal life will only raise
their chances of injury or death. The fuse blows, the shear pin
breaks, by design. Again, this does not imply that failures to func-
tion properly are helpful, but only that in some circumstances it is
best not to attempt to function at all.
The third observation is that structures kept in place by natural
selection primarily for one purpose are sometimes also utilized by
piggyback mechanisms to help serve different functions, perhaps
even interfering with their original functions on occasion. Certain
kinds of beliefs might be useful to us for purposes other than
their normal cognitive use regardless of truth or falsity (not,
however, because of their falsity, as M&D emphasize). This is
theoretically possible, but I do not think convincing evidence
for it has been offered. If certain kinds of errors are common
and also systematically useful, it does not follow that they are
common because they are useful (compare our ﬁrst observation
above). It is also very hard to tell, given not our own current con-
cerns but the concerns of natural selection itself, whether or not
an error is useful. Those more hopeful of continuing life than is
justiﬁed by the evidence may live a few months longer. But
Dawkins has claimed that “[a]s soon as a runt becomes so small
and weak that his expectation of life is reduced to the point
where beneﬁt to him due to parental investment is less than
half the beneﬁt that the same investment could potentially
confer on other babies, the runt should die gracefully and will-
ingly. He can beneﬁt his genes most by doing so” (Dawkins
1989, p.130). Something like this may also have been true,
most places and times, for terminally ill adults being cared for
by kin. People who are more conﬁdent that they can perform a
certain task than justiﬁed by the evidence succeed more fre-
quently as a result. Externally administered steroids – steroids
above what the normal body usually manufactures – have a
similar effect, but they are not good for you. Perhaps these
people should be turning their attention to other activities just
as rewarding but for them with a higher rate of success. The
hypothesis that we have systems that (purposefully) override
the normal belief-forming systems to create false beliefs that
will motivate us more and make us more successful implies
that our normal motivational systems are, for some reason, inade-
quately designed, hence need to be compensated for. Surely we
should wonder what got in the way of better design for our moti-
vational systems in the ﬁrst place?
Are delusions biologically adaptive?
Salvaging the doxastic shear pin
doi:10.1017/S0140525X09991464
Aaron L. Misharaa,b and Phil Corletta,c
aDepartment of Psychiatry, Brain Mapping Unit and Behavioural and Clinical
Neurosciences Institute, University of Cambridge, School of Clinical Medicine,
and Addenbrooke’s Hospital, Cambridge CB2 2QQ, United Kingdom;
bDepartment of Psychiatry, Clinical Neuroscience Research Unit, Yale
University School of Medicine, Connecticut Mental Health Center, New Haven,
CT 06519; cDepartment of Psychiatry, Abraham Ribicoff Research Facilities,
Yale University School of Medicine, Connecticut Mental Health Center,
New Haven, CT 06519.
aaron.mishara@yale.edu
philip.corlett@yale.edu
Abstract: In their target article, McKay & Dennett (M&D) conclude that
only “positive illusions” are adaptive misbeliefs. Relying on overly strict
conceptual schisms (deﬁcit vs. motivational, functional vs. organic,
perception
vs.
belief),
they
prematurely
discount
delusions
as
biologically adaptive. In contrast to their view that “motivation” plays a
psychological but not a biological function in a two-factor model of the
forming and maintenance of delusions, we propose a single impairment
in prediction-error–driven (i.e., motivational) learning in three stages
in which delusions play a biologically adaptive role.
By concluding that only “positive illusions” are adaptive misbe-
liefs, McKay & Dennett (M&D) prematurely discount delusions
as biologically adaptive. They do not pursue their argument that
delusions may resemble the doxastic shear pin, which breaks
down to preserve other “more expensive parts of the system”
(sect. 10, para. 1). Therefore, they overlook the possibility that
delusions may be tied to survival, and thus, by M&D’s own
criteria, natural selection.
In remaining alert to nourishment, danger, and reproductive
opportunities, humans maintain relatively steady contact with
their
environment
in
an
ongoing
perception-action
cycle
(Fuster 2006; von Weizsa¨cker 1950) and attendant action-
outcome learning (Dickinson & Shanks 1995). The neurobiologi-
cal changes in early schizophrenia, however, disrupt the
“binding” processes of perception, agency, and self (Haggard
et al. 2002), reﬂected in the patient’s experience (Mishara
2007b). How then are delusions adaptive by contributing to the
patient’s survival?
In making our case, we refer to an analysis of instrumental
learning that cleaves the processing of actions into two distinct
systems, one goal-directed, the other habitual (Daw et al.
2005). The goal-directed system involves learning ﬂexible
relationships between actions and outcomes instantiated in the
more computationally intensive prefrontal cortices. On the
other hand, habits involve more inﬂexible representations of
the relations between environmental stimuli and behavioral
actions; when a particular cue is perceived, a speciﬁc action is
elicited irrespective of the consequences. These two systems
compete to control behavior (Hitchcott et al. 2007). Delusions
are subserved by the striatal habit system because the computa-
tionally intensive goal-directed system is impaired – an argu-
ment that we feel has consilience with the authors’ view that
misbeliefs qualify as biologically adaptive to the extent that they
maintain the person’s functioning while preventing further
Commentary/McKay & Dennett: The evolution of misbelief
530
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (2009) 32:6

damage. (We do not comment on the interesting debate whether
delusions are beliefs. For one account, see Mishara, in press a).
M&D argue that brain dysfunction underlying delusions
involves “breakage” in the belief evaluation system which is
“adventitious, not designed” (sect. 10, para. 4). They advocate a
two-factor model: (1) a perceptual insult which engenders odd
experiences; (2) a deﬁcit in belief evaluation which enables the
entertainment and maintenance of bizarre and unlikely expla-
nations for the experience (Davies & Coltheart 2000). Dis-
tinguishing
deﬁcit
(organic-neural)
versus
motivational
(psychological/psychodynamic-defense) approaches to delusions
(McKay et al. 2007a), M&D conclude that “motivation” plays a
psychological but not a biological role in the two-factor model.
In contrast, we propose a single impairment in prediction-
error–driven (i.e., motivational) learning in three stages: (1)
delusional mood; (2) delusion as Aha-Erlebnis; (3) reconsolida-
tion. Our model indicates how delusions may be adaptive as a
shear pin function by enabling the patient to remain in vital con-
nection with his/her environment:
1. Prior to delusions, a prodromal delusional mood may last for
days, months, or even years (Conrad 1958; Jaspers 1946/1963).
The patient experiences increasingly oppressive tension, a
feeling of non-ﬁnality or expectation. Conrad (1958) calls this
Trema (stage-fright) as the patient has the feeling that something
very important is about to happen. Attention is drawn toward
irrelevant stimuli, thoughts, and associative connections which
are distressing and unpredictable (Kapur 2003; McGhie &
Chapman 1961; Uhlhaas & Mishara 2007). This reﬂects an
impairment in the brain’s predictive learning mechanisms, such
that unexpected events, prediction errors, are registered inappro-
priately (Corlett et al. 2007).
2. The delusions appear as an Aha-Erlebnis, or “revelation”
(Conrad 1958), concerning what had been perplexing during
delusional mood. In delusions of reference, harmless or acciden-
tal occurrences in the environment are taken as referring to the
self. Conrad (1958) calls this a reﬂexive turning back on the
self in which the universe is experienced as “revolving” around
the self as middle-point. The delusions are not primarily a defen-
sive reaction to protect the self, but involve a “reorganization” of
the patient’s experience to maintain behavioral interaction with
the environment despite the underlying disruption to perceptual
binding processes (Conrad 1958; Mishara 2010). At the Aha-
moment, the “shear pin” breaks, or as Conrad puts it,
the patient is unable to shift “reference-frame” to consider the
experience from another perspective. The delusion disables ﬂex-
ible, controlled conscious processing from continuing to monitor
the mounting distress of the wanton prediction error during delu-
sional mood and thus deters cascading toxicity. At the same time,
automatic habitual responses are preserved, possibly even
enhanced (Corlett et al. 2009b).
3. Reconsolidation. Forming the delusion is associated with
insight relief which stamps the delusion into memory (Miller
2008; Tsuang et al. 1988). Each time delusions are deployed,
they are reinforced further, through a process of recall, reacti-
vation, and reconsolidation, which strengthens them, conferring
resistance to contradiction rather like the formation of motor-
habits with overtraining (Adams & Dickinson 1981). When sub-
sequent prediction errors occur, they are explicable in terms of
the delusion and serve to reinforce it (Corlett et al. 2009b;
Eisenhardt & Menzel 2007). Hence the paradoxical observation
that challenging subjects delusions can actually strengthen their
conviction (Milton et al. 1978). In each rehearsal of the delusion
in the present instance, there is a “monotonous” spreading of
the delusion to new experience (Binswanger 1965; Conrad
1958; Mishara, in press b) and, as such, it is both ﬁxed and
elastic (Corlett et al. 2009b). For example, we interviewed a
middle-aged schizophrenia patient with the intractable eroto-
manic delusion that a college acquaintance had fallen in love
with her and now controls parts of her life. Whenever she
thinks of him, she hears a “car beep” or “trips while walking,”
i.e., signals intended to inform her that he knows she is thinking
about him.
Neurobiologically,
this
reconsolidation-based-strengthening
shifts control of behavior toward the striatal habit system.
However, the ceding of behavior from effortful, conscious
control is associated with a “mechanization” of experience. Schizo-
phrenia patients delusionally refer to themselves in inhuman
terms, for example as “machine,” “computer,” or “registering
apparatus” (Binswanger 1965; Kraus 1997; Mishara 2007a), as if
the delusion reﬂects its own disabling function of ﬂexible conscious
processing. Losing the experience as consistent intentional agent
(Wegner 2004), the patients nevertheless continue to respond
reﬂexively to the environmental cues incumbent upon them,
necessary for continued survival. As complement to such delusions
of alien control, however, the healthy individual has the converse
“everyday delusion”: She thinks that it is “I” who moves her own
limbs. She calls the movement mine although it has its own
momentum, automaticity, and ﬁnds its own way. That is, the
healthy individual “overlooks” the impersonal-mechanical side of
her movements in a “counter-delusion” to the patient who is
unable to access the personal contribution (von Weizsa¨cker
1956). We are no more free from the necessity of “delusions” in
our everyday functioning and its intermittent ceding to automatic
processes than is the patient with schizophrenia.
Finally, the authors outline Bayesian mechanisms of rational
belief formation. We propose that delusions form via the same
Bayesian learning mechanisms but we challenge the strict separ-
ation between perception and belief upon which two-factor
accounts are predicated (Corlett et al. 2009a; Fletcher & Frith
2009; Hemsley & Garety 1986; Uhlhaas & Mishara 2007). In
our account, delusions also depend on aberrations of perception
which occur when neuronal noise induces mismatches between
expectancy (Bayesian priors) and experience (sensory inputs/evi-
dence), but in terms of the single factor, prediction error.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
Both authors are recipients of the NARSAD Young Investigator Award.
Phil Corlett is supported by the University of Cambridge Parke-Davis
Exchange Fellowship in Biomedical Sciences.
The evolution of religious misbelief
doi:10.1017/S0140525X09991312
Ara Norenzayan, Azim F. Shariff, and Will M. Gervais
Department of Psychology, University of British Columbia, Vancouver,
BC V6T 1Z4, Canada.
ara@psych.ubc.ca
www.psych.ubc.ca/ara
azim@psych.ubc.ca
www.psych.ubc.ca/azim
will.gervais@gmail.com
Abstract: Inducing religious thoughts increases prosocial behavior
among strangers in anonymous contexts. These effects can be explained
both by behavioral priming processes as well as by reputational
mechanisms. We examine whether belief in moralizing supernatural
agents supplies a case for what McKay & Dennett (M&D) call evolved
misbelief, concluding that they might be more persuasively seen as an
example of culturally evolved misbelief.
Is belief in supernatural agency an example of evolved “misbe-
lief”? McKay & Dennett (M&D) consider recent psychological
experiments that have investigated whether religious beliefs
cause prosocial behavior such as generosity and honesty (for
reviews, see Norenzayan & Shariff 2008; Shariff et al. 2010). In
M&D’s philosophical analysis, whether or not religion supplies
a case of evolved misbelief turns out to depend on the psychologi-
cal mechanism that best accounts for these effects. We therefore
revisit the experimental evidence and discuss in some depth the
ideomotor and supernatural watcher accounts for these effects.
Commentary/McKay & Dennett: The evolution of misbelief
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (2009) 32:6
531

M&D cite Randolph-Seng and Nielsen (2008), who critiqued
Shariff and Norenzayan (2007), questioning the plausibility of
the supernatural watcher hypothesis because the data could
not conclusively distinguish between the ideomotor and superna-
tural watcher explanations. These two mechanisms gain plausi-
bility
given
two
distinct
but
well-supported
empirical
literatures. There is considerable evidence showing that prosocial
behavior can be facilitated both by activating nonconscious
altruistic thoughts (e.g., Bargh et al. 2001), and by heightened
reputational concerns (e.g., Fehr & Fischbacher 2003). These
two mechanisms are not mutually exclusive, however, and may
even reinforce each other in everyday life.
The interesting question therefore is: What kind of laboratory
evidence can provide support for the supernatural watcher
account above and beyond behavioral-priming processes? First,
if the priming effects of God concepts are weaker or nonexistent
for non-believers, then the effect could not be solely due to ideo-
motor processes, which are typically impervious to prior explicit
beliefs or attitudes. Second, if God primes make religious partici-
pants attribute actions to an external source of agency, these
effects could not be explained by ideomotor processes, as such
manipulations disambiguate the felt presence of supernatural
watchers from their alleged prosocial consequences. Finally, if
the supernatural watcher explanation is at play, religious
primes should arouse social evaluation of the self. Moreover,
such reputational awareness should moderate the magnitude of
the prime’s effect on prosocial behavior.
As M&D note, evidence on the ﬁrst point is currently mixed.
However, close examination of the ﬁndings betrays a revealing
pattern. All but one of these priming studies recruited student
samples, which can be problematic since beliefs, attitudes, and
social identity among students can be unstable, raising questions
about the reliability of chronic individual difference measures of
religious belief and identity measures for students who are still in
transition to adulthood (Sears 1986; Henrich et al., in press).
Thus, student atheists might be at best “soft atheists.” In the only
religious priming experiment we are aware of that recruited a
non-student adult sample (Shariff & Norenzayan 2007, Study 2),
the effect of the prime emerged again for theists, but disappeared
for these “hard” atheists (see Fig. 1). In addition, Henrich et al.
(2009) found that across 14 small-scale societies of varying group
size, where there is variability in whether supernatural agents are
morally concerned, belief in the moralizing Abrahamic God
(along with degree of market integration) predicted larger offers
in the dictator and ultimatum games. These initial ﬁndings speak
against an exclusively ideomotor account of the results, and
suggest that belief – not just alief – is involved in religious
prosociality.
Regarding the second question, one experiment clearly separ-
ates the felt presence of a supernatural agent from prosocial out-
comes.
Dijksterhuis
et al.
(2008) found that after
being
subliminally primed with the word “God,” believers (but not athe-
ists) were more likely to ascribe an outcome to an external source
of agency, rather than their own actions. In addition, religious
belief positively correlates with greater concern with social evalu-
ation of the self (Trimble 1997), and recent experimental evidence
points to this being a causal relationship. Gervais and Norenzayan
(2009) found that priming God concepts (using the same sentence
unscrambling task of Shariff and Norenzayan [2007]) increased
public self-awareness (Govern & Marsch 2001) – a measure that
taps into feelings of being the target of social evaluation. In con-
trast, and as predicted, the prime had no effect on private self-
awareness. Ongoing research is examining whether prosocial
effects of religious primes are moderated by measures of evalua-
tive concern, a key prediction of the supernatural watcher hypoth-
esis, which would be incompatible with a purely ideomotor
account. Thus, although M&D are right that more research is
needed to reach ﬁrm conclusions, the evidence regarding the
supernatural
watcher
hypothesis
is
more
compelling
than
M&D’s cautious approach suggests. But does that mean that
belief in supernatural agents is an example of adaptive misbelief?
M&D brieﬂy mention both by-product theories of religion and
cultural evolutionary explanations for cooperation. We have
argued elsewhere (Norenzayan & Shariff 2008; Norenzayan, in
press; Shariff et al. 2010) that integrating these two frameworks
yields a more cogent explanation for the rise and persistence of reli-
gious beliefs than theories which invoke a more direct genetic evol-
utionary argument (e.g., Bering et al. 2005; Johnson & Bering
2006). Once belief in supernatural agency emerged as a by-
product of mundane cognitive processes, cultural evolution
favored the spread of a special type of supernatural agent – mora-
lizing high Gods. Growing evidence is converging on the conclusion
that sincere belief in these omniscient supernatural watchers facili-
tated cooperation and trust among strangers (Norenzayan & Shariff
2008). Not surprisingly, this cultural spread coincided with the
expansion of human cooperation into ever larger groups over
the last 15 millenia (Cauvin 2000). This evolutionary scenario has
the virtue of explaining an otherwise puzzling feature of religious
prosociality – namely, the systematic cultural variability in the
prevalence of moralizing Gods across societies that correlates
with group size (e.g., Roes & Raymond 2003). Contrary to a
genetic adaptation account, the deities of most small-scale societies,
which more closely approximate ancestral conditions, are neither
fully omniscient nor morally concerned. It is the evolutionarily
recent anonymous social groups, facing the breakdown of reputa-
tional and kin selection mechanisms for cooperation, which most
strongly espouse belief in such Gods. Thus, beliefs in moralizing
supernatural agents may not qualify as genetically evolved misbe-
liefs. But they could instead be seen as examples of culturally
evolved ones that played a key historical (although not irreplace-
able) role in the rise and stability of large cooperative communities.
The (mis)management of agency: Conscious
belief and nonconscious self-control
doi:10.1017/S0140525X09991336
Brandon Randolph-Seng
Texas Tech University, Rawls College of Business, Area of Management,
Lubbock, TX 79409-2101.
b.randolph-seng@ttu.edu
www.webpages.ttu.edu/brandolp
Abstract: McKay & Dennett (M&D) identify positive illusions as
fulﬁlling the criteria for an adaptive misbelief, but could there be other
Figure 1 (Norenzayan et al.).
Results from the dictator game in
Shariff and Norenzayan (2007, Study 2) indicate that priming
God concepts increased generosity for religious believers but
not for atheists. Error bars represent standard error of the mean.
Commentary/McKay & Dennett: The evolution of misbelief
532
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (2009) 32:6

types of beliefs that may qualify as adaptive misbeliefs? My commentary
addresses this and other questions through identifying belief in free will
as a potential candidate as an adaptive misbelief.
To say that beliefs are untrue, or are “misbeliefs,” is to say that the
belief in question can be objectively veriﬁed; however, beliefs are
by deﬁnition subjective. Despite the subjective nature of human
beliefs, researchers have learned to use the reﬁning process of
the scientiﬁc method in order to partly uncover “reality.” Such is
the plight of the social scientist and the beauty of scientiﬁc
method. At what point, however, do the systematic replications
and validations go beyond an understanding of the underlying
factors giving rise to beliefs? If science, for example, reliably
demonstrates that the sun does not in reality move across the
sky, does this change one’s belief in how the sun is moving
throughout the day? It may do so (based on a faith in science),
but such change in belief does nothing to change perception.
One’s subjective perception of the sun’s movement is what is
real and is the only view that matters to normal functioning. There-
fore, there are times when it may be more adaptive and functional
to misperceive than correctly believe.
McKay & Dennet (M&D) suggest that in order to identify a
systematically adaptive misbelief, such belief may result from
processing “biases” in the sensory system itself. Such an assertion
assumes that perception gives rise to (mis)belief. Although this
assertion may at times be true, at other times perception and
belief may be disconnected (e.g., see above), or (mis)belief may
actually give rise to perception (e.g., New Look: Balcetis &
Dunning 2006; Bruner 1957). In fairness, disconnects between
perception and belief are discussed in M&D’s discussion of
“alief” and error management theory; nevertheless, their pro-
posed connection between perception and misbelief remains
unclear.
A similar point of confusion is found in the distinction M&D
make between psychological and biological adaption. It has
long been recognized that social psychological factors and bio-
logical factors are closely related (for a review see Cacioppo
et al. 2000). Because of the complementary nature of social
psychological and biological factors in human behavior, making
distinctions between the two becomes meaningless without spe-
cifying how the two may be connected for a given outcome (e.g.,
Gailliot et al. 2007).
The lack of clarity in distinguishing between perception and
belief, and psychological and biological adaption, becomes
apparent as M&D investigate whether religious belief might be
a good candidate for adaptive misbelief. If inferring the presence
of agents is adaptive, for example, is such adaptability psychologi-
cal or biological? If such agents cannot be seen and are not real,
then what role does perception play? In fact, most of the empiri-
cal research in the area cited by M&D (i.e., Pichon et al. 2007;
Randolph-Seng & Nielsen 2007; Shariff & Norenzayan 2007)
suggest that alief, rather than belief, is involved, and that percep-
tual priming of agency rather than religion per se may be at the
root of the behavioral effects found. M&D do acknowledge these
possibilities, but fail to extend these possibilities to the search for
adaptive misbelief (a point I return to later).
Where M&D’s search does take them is to conscious self-
deception. Considering their previously implied condition of
adaptive misbelief arising from nonconscious perceptual biases,
it is unclear why conscious self-deception is even considered,
but it does provide a nice segue into positive illusions (i.e., the
unrealistic optimism-type), fulﬁlling the stated requirements
for adaptive misbelief. But why stop there? Are there other
types of beliefs that could be considered adaptive misbeliefs
(e.g., antecedent misbeliefs giving rise to the positive illusions
described by M&D)?
One potential candidate may be gleaned from M&D’s discussion
of religious beliefs, namely a belief in personal agency. Recent
social psychological research suggests that one’s belief in free will
is (or can be) an illusion (for reviews, see Bargh 2008; Wegner
2005); however, other research suggests that the more one believes
in personal agency, the more prosocial and hardworking one tends
to be (Baumeister et al. 2009; Stillman et al., in press; Vohs &
Schooler 2008). Insofar as a belief in free will is a positive illusion
(see Bargh & Earp 2009), it may be considered a pre-existing belief
for the types of positive illusions discussed by M&D. For example,
if one did not believe that control over one’s actions was real, then
there may be less reason to believe that one has what it takes to
survive a life-threatening disease.
Proposing a belief in free will as a candidate for adaptive mis-
belief does bring to the forefront the previously discussed ques-
tion of the connection between perception and belief. Insofar as
the choices one makes are the result of nonconscious thinking
instigated by the environment and resulting from our evolution-
ary past (Bargh 2008), belief in free will and nonconscious per-
ception do not line up. Nevertheless, rational choice and
conscious self-regulation are also thought to be intricately
linked to the evolution of human cognition (Baumeister 2008),
in which case belief may be able to feed back into perception.
Such a possibility would help explain how humans, despite
being mostly unaware of the various messages presented to
them from the environment, can successfully navigate through
their environment in order to accomplish their personally acti-
vated goals. In fact, recent research has found that people can
go beyond nonconsciously regulating their responses to con-
sciously perceived stimuli, to preconsciously controlling the
impact of nonconsciously perceived stimuli on their responses
(i.e., being differently inﬂuenced by subliminal primes depend-
ing
on
current
nonconscious
motivations;
Randolph-Seng
2009). In this way, an adaptive misbelief, such as a belief in
free will, may actually become true as human cognition evolves.
You can’t always get what you want: Evolution
and true beliefs
doi:10.1017/S0140525X09991476
Jeffrey P. Schlossa and Michael J. Murrayb
aDepartment of Biology, Westmont College, Santa Barbara, CA 93108;
bDepartment of Philosophy, Franklin and Marshall College, Lancaster,
PA 17604.
schloss@westmont.edu
mmurray@fandm.edu
http://www.fandm.edu/x11310?id¼204
Abstract: McKay & Dennett (M&D) convincingly argue against many
proposals for adaptively functioning misbelief, but the conclusion that
true beliefs are generally adaptive does not follow. Adaptive misbeliefs
may be few in kind but many in number; maladaptive misbeliefs may
routinely elude selective pruning; reproductively neutral misbeliefs
may abound; and adaptively grounded beliefs may reliably covary with
but not truthfully represent reality.
In critiquing proposed examples of adaptive misbelief, McKay &
Dennett (M&D) aim to conﬁrm the assumption that, via evol-
ution, humans “have been biologically engineered to form true
beliefs” (sect. 1, para. 2), and conclude that the exchange rate
between ﬁtness and truth “is likely to be fair in most circum-
stances” (sect. 15, last para). We agree with their critiques
(Murray & Moore 2009; Schloss 2007), but the conclusion does
not follow.
First, even if many proposals for adaptive misbelief fail, this
does not tell us whether adaptive misbeliefs spawned in situations
M&D acknowledge as credible are common or, as they claim,
limited to “certain rareﬁed contexts” (sect. 15, last para). For
instance, the promiscuous attribution of agency and teleology, or
the manifold positive illusions that may be accounted for within
error management theory (Johnson 2009) are extraordinarily plen-
tiful, persistent, and inﬂuential. Other kinds of positive illusions,
from the placebo effect to magnifying the virtues of beloved
people, places, nations, and traditions – consistent with proposals
Commentary/McKay & Dennett: The evolution of misbelief
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (2009) 32:6
533

for resource commitment strategies – may be even more plentiful
and powerful. And contrary to M&D’s tempting suggestion, such
positive illusions are not restricted to subjective beliefs that are
“not likely to be rudely contradicted by experience” (sect. 14,
para. 3). Many of these widespread beliefs entail almost delusional
denials of repeated experience. Notions that Eros lasts forever, this
time it’s real, and (as the sappy song says) “When we’re hungry,
love will keep us alive” are effective and virtually ubiquitous cata-
lysts for reproductive pairbonding. But by non-reproductive
periods of the human life cycle, those Romeos whose romantic
illusions have not killed them, have oft’ yielded to the wisdom of
Friar Lawrence: “These violent delights have violent ends, and
in their triumph die. . .Therefore love moderatedly: long love
doth so. Too swift arrives as tardy as too slow.” Yet another cat-
egory altogether, unexamined by M&D, is selection for cognitive
extravagance independent of problem-solving utility (Miller
2000; 2001). But even granting M&D’s conclusion that there are
just a few families of adaptive misbelief, we don’t yet know
enough about their natural history to determine how many
species there are or what their carrying capacities and competitive
coefﬁcients are relative to true beliefs.
Second, even if reproductively beneﬁcent misbeliefs are rare
and most misbeliefs have costs, this does nothing to tell us how
well evolution ultimately avoids such costs. Indeed, M&D ele-
gantly acknowledge that functional normativity does not entail
statistical normality: In evolution, forgivable malfunctions may
be common and achieving proper function may be “positively
rare” (sect. 3, para. 5). Thus, even if truth is the evolutionary
target as M&D maintain, design constraints, by-product associ-
ations, and historical contingencies may make it one that cogni-
tion has a low probability of hitting.
Third, many kinds of beliefs – from debates over quantum
theory to discussions of metaphysics – have no clear reproduc-
tive relevance at all. How, and whether, such beliefs are
related to cognitive mechanisms that have been selected for vera-
city is uncertain (Cromer 1993; Wolpert 2000). What does not
seem uncertain is that manifold beliefs do not inﬂuence beha-
viors or the behaviors they do inﬂuence are not reproductively
salient. Belief-forming mechanisms generate variety that, analo-
gous to neutral polymorphisms (Kimura 1991), may be unpruned
by the adaptive consequences of their truth or falsity. Indeed, the
capacity for some degree of cognitive licentiousness may itself be
an adaptation to the “uncertain futures problem” (Plotkin 1997;
Wagner 2005).
Finally, M&D’s conclusion requires the falsity not only of the
above ways in which selection fails to exclude misbelief, but also
of the more global but controversial thesis that nothing at all
about the process of natural selection serves to favor truth-con-
ducive cognitive tools (Churchland 1987; Plantinga 2002; Stich
1990).
On selectionist accounts of the origin of mind, beliefs and
belief forming mechanisms are selected by virtue of their
capacity to support adaptive behavior or internal states. Thus,
belief forming mechanisms will be selected when they yield (i)
a representational model that orients organisms towards adaptive
behaviors, and/or (ii) a correlational source of arousal or inhi-
bition that serves to motivate adaptive (or inhibit maladaptive)
behavior. The question then becomes: Are models that are true
better at orienting organisms towards adaptive behaviors, or
are true beliefs better at arousing effective desires for adaptive
behaviors? From what we know about the action of natural selec-
tion, the most prudent answer may be: “There is no reason to
think so.”
Why is there no reason to think so? Because (in science, and in
belief generally) models need only to “save appearances” in order
to be successful. Consider the task of designing “thinking” robots
for a competition in which the winners were duplicated (with
minor program variations) for future competitions. While one
would surely seek to program competing robots to form beliefs
that provided an isomorphic “map” of the external environment,
would one further seek to program beliefs about that environ-
ment that were true? Not obviously. Indeed, there are numerous
ways of programming the robot to “conceptualize” its environ-
ment that, while representationally biased or even radically
false, are nonetheless (a) appropriately isomorphic and (b)
reliably adaptive behavior-inducing. Such programs would be
adaptive.
What is true of programmed learning robots is true of selec-
tion-designed cognition. Dennett has aptly commented, “Lying
behind, and distinct from, our reasons are evolutionary reasons,
free-ﬂoating rationales that have been endorsed by natural selec-
tion” (Dennett 2006a, p. 93). Our reasons (in better moments)
are truth-seeking; natural selection’s are ﬁtness seeking. We
cannot know if, in achieving its reasons, selection allows us also
to achieve ours.
Of course, one might respond that just because our belief-
forming mechanisms are liable to error in these domains does
not mean that they are routinely or irremediably unreliable
(after all, we often discover our errors, like the cognitive biases
mentioned above). But this offers little reassurance, since the
seeming discovery of error relies on comparing beliefs to other
beliefs which, for all we know, are comparably unreliable,
though perhaps for different reasons.
Richard Dawkins has commented that “however many ways
there are of being alive, it is certain that there are vastly more
ways of being dead” (Dawkins 1996, p. 9). The same is true of
being right and wrong. Natural selection is immensely effective
at weeding out ways of not being alive. It is unclear how well it
fares in culling ways of not believing truly.
Culturally transmitted misbeliefs
doi:10.1017/S0140525X09991348
Dan Sperber
Institut Jean Nicod, ENS, 75005 Paris, France.
dan.sperber@gmail.com
www.dan.sperber.fr
Abstract: Most human beliefs are acquired through communication, and
so are most misbeliefs. Just like the misbeliefs discussed by McKay &
Dennett (M&D), culturally transmitted misbeliefs tend to result from
limitations rather than malfunctions of the mechanisms that produce
them, and few if any can be argued to be adaptations. However, the
mechanisms involved, the contents, and the hypothetical adaptive value
tend to be speciﬁc to the cultural case.
Most of humans’ beliefs, or at least most of their general beliefs,
are acquired through communication. I owe my beliefs that I was
born in Cagnes-sur-mer, that Washington is the capital of the US,
that mercury is a metal, that dodos are extinct, that stagﬂation is
bad, and so on ad indeﬁnitum, not to my own perceptions and
inferences on those matters, but to the words of others. Are
these beliefs “grounded” in McKay & Dennett’s (M&D’s)
sense, that is, “appropriately founded on evidence and existing
beliefs” (target article, sect. 1, para. 2)? Not on relevant evidence
and beliefs available to me. I hold these beliefs because I trust
their sources (or, anyhow, trusted them at the time I formed
the beliefs). My trusting of sources may itself be founded on
appropriate evidence of their trustworthiness, but quite often it
is founded rather on my trust of yet other sources that have
vouched for them; for instance, I trusted the textbooks I read
because I trusted the teachers who vouched for them, and
I trusted the teachers because I trusted my parents who
vouched for them. Needless to say, the authors of the textbooks
themselves were just reporting information from yet other
sources.
Of course, however long the transmission chain, communi-
cated beliefs may be vicariously grounded in appropriate
Commentary/McKay & Dennett: The evolution of misbelief
534
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (2009) 32:6

evidence and background beliefs that had been available to the
initial communicators. Nevertheless, long chains of transmission
carry serious epistemic risks of two kinds. First, judgments of
trustworthiness are less than 100% reliable, so that, generally
speaking, the longer the chain, the lesser its compounded
reliability (and this even if, serendipitously, the initial source of
the transmitted belief happens to be have been trustworthy).
Second, information is typically transformed in the process of
transmission. As a result, a belief at the end of the chain is
quite often different in content from the one at the beginning
and therefore cannot vicariously beneﬁt from initial grounding.
This is particularly true of orally transmitted cultural beliefs,
notably religious beliefs of the kind studied by anthropologists.
One generation’s religious beliefs may undergo changes in its
lifetime and anyhow is a transformation of the beliefs of the pre-
vious generation. There is no initial religious belief at the dawn of
time, but rather, an increasing – and sometimes decreasing –
religious tenor in a variety of beliefs; later beliefs are not
copies of earlier ones.
The absence of appropriate grounding not just of religious
beliefs, but of so many others cultural beliefs concerning, for
example, food, health, or the moral traits of ethnic groups,
means that human population are inhabited by a host of poorly
grounded or ungrounded beliefs. Most of these are, in the
terms of M&D, misbeliefs. In fact, most of our misbeliefs are
culturally transmitted misbeliefs rather than individual mistakes,
distortions, or delusions.
Does this mean that the social and cognitive mechanisms
through which we come to hold cultural misbeliefs are malfunc-
tioning? Are humans irrationally gullible? No, the prevalence of
cultural misbeliefs is compatible with the view that the mental
mechanisms involved in epistemic trust (Origgi 2004) and episte-
mic vigilance (Mascaro & Sperber 2009; Sperber et al., forth-
coming) are calibrated to ﬁlter information in interpersonal
communication, if not optimally, at least reasonably well. They
do, however, create a susceptibility to misinformation that origi-
nated not in one’s direct interlocutors but long before in
extended chains of transmission. This vulnerability is enhanced
when it is well beyond the individual’s competence to assess
the truth or at least the plausibility of the contents transmitted.
This is particularly the case when the contents in questions are
too obscure to be open to epistemic assessment.
In the process of cultural transmission and transformation,
beliefs may lose not only their empirical grounding but also their
epistemic evaluability. For a belief to be evaluable, it must have
a propositional content, that is, be true-or-false. One may relax
the criterion so as to take into account the fact that many, possibly
most, of our beliefs are not sharply propositional and may, in a
range of limiting cases, lack a truth value. Still, for beliefs to be
informative and guide action, they had better, in most ordinary
situations, be such that their relevant consequences, practical con-
sequences in particular, can be inferred. Many culturally trans-
mitted beliefs do not satisfy this criterion. Their content is not
just vague; it is mysterious to the believers themselves and open
to an endless variety of exegeses. These are what I have called
semi-propositional or half-understood beliefs (Sperber 1982;
1997). The paradigmatic example of a semi-propositional belief is
the dogma of the Holy Trinity, which the believers themselves
insist is mysterious. Of course, philosophers who deﬁne a belief
as an attitude towards a proposition may dispute that “semi-prop-
ositional beliefs” are beliefs at all. But from a cognitive and social
science point of view, a deﬁnition of belief that excludes most reli-
gious beliefs renders itself irrelevant. In particular, it disposes by
deﬁnitional ﬁat of a wide class of cultural beliefs of which it can
be disputed whether they are false or lack truth value, but that
are deﬁnitely not true and hence are misbeliefs (even religious
believers would accept this of religious beliefs other than their
own, i.e., of the vast majority of religious beliefs).
I have long argued that cultural misbeliefs occur and propa-
gate as a by-product, a side-effect of our cognitive and
communicative dispositions (Sperber 1985; 1990). Still, it could
be that some of these misbeliefs or some classes of them contrib-
ute to the reproductive success of their carriers in a manner that
indirectly contributes to their own propagation. One possible
class of such adaptive cultural misbeliefs would be beliefs the
expression of which contributes to group identities and solidari-
ties that enhance the individual’s ﬁtness. Unlike the positive indi-
vidual illusions discussed by M&D, the adaptiveness of such
beliefs does not come from the manner in which their content
guides the believers’ actions. It is not the content of the beliefs
that matters; it is who you share them with. Yet not just any
content is equally appropriate to serve such an adaptive role.
In particular, a content unproblematically open to epistemic
evaluation might either raise objections within the relevant
social group, or, on the contrary, be too easily shared beyond
that group. So, semi-propositional contents are ceteris paribus
better contents for beliefs the adaptive value of which has to
do with cultural sharedness, not because these contents contrib-
ute to this adaptive value by guiding action, but because they do
not stand in the way of acceptance by the relevant group. Their
content may also have features that contribute positively to
their cultural success, for instance by rendering them more mem-
orable, but this is another story (see, e.g., Atran & Norenzayan
2004; Boyer 1994; Sperber 1985).
Adaptive misbeliefs and false memories
doi:10.1017/S0140525X09991488
John Sutton
Macquarie Centre for Cognitive Science, Macquarie University, Sydney,
NSW 2109, Australia.
jsutton@maccs.mq.edu.au
http://www.phil.mq.edu.au/staff/jsutton
Abstract: McKay & Dennett (M&D) suggest that some positive illusions
are adaptive. But there is a bidirectional link between memory and
positive illusions: Biased autobiographical memories ﬁlter incoming
information, and self-enhancing information is preferentially attended
and used to update memory. Extending M&D’s approach, I ask if
certain false memories might be adaptive, defending a broad view of
the psychosocial functions of remembering.
Positive illusions, including those that “propel adaptive actions”
(target article, sect. 13, para. 6) are maintained over time even
(within limits) in the face of recalcitrant evidence. So they
require sophisticated intertemporal accounting: Memory and
associated forms of mental time travel must be enlisted if positive
illusions are to be stable enough to enhance ﬁtness, to be “perva-
sive, enduring, and systematic” rather than mere temporary
errors (Taylor & Brown 1988, p. 194). So if McKay & Dennett
(M&D) are right that certain kinds of ungrounded belief are
adaptive, theories of memory are directly implicated. This link
extends M&D’s account of adaptive misbeliefs, suggesting new
questions for memory research.
The sparse literature on functional analyses of remembering
addresses the adaptive nature of forgetting and the puzzling
luxury of autobiographical memory (Bjork & Bjork 1988; Boyer
2008a; 2009; Glenberg 1997; Nairne 2005; Nairne et al. 2007;
Schacter 2001). But the possibility that false memories (or
ungrounded memories, which often contingently turn out false)
could themselves be adaptive is surprising. False memories are
usually seen as unfortunate outcomes of the constructive
nature of remembering (Bernstein & Loftus 2009, p. 373), just
as the manipulability of general belief-ﬁxation is seen as epis-
temological trouble. But this standard line of thought is too
quick, on two counts: reconstruction is not itself always distortion
Commentary/McKay & Dennett: The evolution of misbelief
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (2009) 32:6
535

(Barnier et al. 2008; Sutton 2009), and, as M&D suggest, falsity
need not always be maladaptive.
Biased contextual and autobiographical memories ﬁlter incom-
ing information, and, in turn, self-enhancing (or otherwise illu-
sory) information is preferentially attended and used to update
memory. This bidirectional link between memory and positive
illusions lies at the heart, for example, of temporal self-appraisal
theory (Wilson & Ross 2003). Memory directly supports positive
illusions: When unrealistic inﬂation of current self-image is difﬁ-
cult, people still “selectively recall and reconstruct evidence from
the past that makes them feel good about their current selves”
(Wilson & Ross 2001, p. 582). Conversely, the motivation to
maintain positive self-regard in the present motivates misplaced
or false memories, for example, as we subjectively move favour-
able past events forwards in time and unfavourable past events
backward (Ross & Wilson 2002, p. 800). These loops between
autobiography and the control of action, the self remembered
and the working self, exhibit considerable variation (Conway
2005). Some theorists stress strong reﬂexive feedback from
self-representation into behavior, with ongoing integration lived
out between actions and self-ascribed character, emotions, mem-
ories, and plans (Velleman 2006). Others note gulfs between the
story and the life, seeing narrative self-descriptions more like
public relations reports that ﬂoat free of the causal processes
behind the government’s or organization’s behavior (Clark
1994; Dennett 1991): This need not be morally or psychologically
suspect, due to deliberate suppression or self-deceit, for the nar-
rative and memory capacities – just like PR spokespersons –
often don’t have nor need the knowledge, or the contacts, or
the access, either to get the back-story right or to directly feed
in to future choices and actions.
Could false memories, as M&D might suggest, in some cir-
cumstances enhance affective, cognitive, and social well-being?
A broad positivity bias in autobiographical memory is linked to
enhanced emotion regulation: the tendency to accentuate the
positive in recalling experiences from the personal past drives
improvements in mood (Mather & Carstensen 2005). Such
memory biases are most securely demonstrated in older adults,
whose positive affect is increased when reminiscing about posi-
tive past experiences (Pasupathi & Carstensen 2003); but
younger adults get the same emotionally enhancing effects of
biased autobiographical remembering when they remember
while focussing speciﬁcally on their emotional state rather than
on accuracy (Kennedy et al. 2004). That this positivity bias
drives false memories, not just general selectivity in recall, is
suggested by a recent study in which older adults recall more
false positive memories than false negative memories across a
range of stimuli (Fernandes et al. 2008).
Narcissistic biases are thus not found only in subpersonal
sensory systems. Just as the “narcissistic encoding” of sensory
information is driven by our “sensory-motor projects” rather
than by any ontological project of correctly cataloguing the
world (Akins 1996, p. 370), so the range of past experiences to
which we are maximally sensitive in remembering are those rel-
evant to embedded action, or salient for current and future
decision-making. The gulf between design for ﬁtness maximiza-
tion and design for truth preservation (target article, sect. 9)
may be widest in relation to truths about the past, especially
about the distant past and about particular past events. As
Boyer notes, the human “capacity to store unique episodes” is
strange when “organisms learn about the past mostly to the
extent that they can extract from past situations what is not
unique about them, and what will be relevant in the future”
(Boyer 2009, p. 4). So, given the likely recent emergence of
mental time travel, its biological function may involve just the
broader self-related and social functions at work in the positive
illusions described by M&D. In remembering, correspondence
with reality is often trumped by coherence, truth by psychosocial
utility (Alea & Bluck 2003; Conway & Pleydell-Pearce 2000;
Wilson & Ross 2003). Evolved tendencies for forming memories
which lack perfectly secure grounds are useful computational
short-cuts, minimizing the heavy cognitive costs of precise
source monitoring, of tracking the diverse origins of our rep-
resentations of what is not present in the immediate environ-
ment. The idea parallels the suggestion that forgetting is an
adaptive response to the computational challenges of retrieval
access in context-sensitive systems (Anderson & Schooler 2000;
Michaelian, submitted). But M&D’s approach suggests the
extra thought that sometimes-false memories can themselves,
given the structure of the social and natural environment, be
intelligent errors. Not only are the costs of trusting and acting
on them in general less than those of strenuously applying foren-
sic standards of warrant and justiﬁcation, but (further) misre-
membering things in particular positive ways might have direct
personal, motivational, and social beneﬁts. Neither social nor
motivational inﬂuence on memory is intrinsically malign: M&D
remind memory researchers that cataloguing our susceptibility
to misinformation in non-standard, experimentally skewed
environments
may
blind
us
to
the
richer
functions
of
remembering.
Effective untestability and bounded rationality
help in seeing religion as adaptive misbelief
doi:10.1017/S0140525X0999135X
Konrad Talmont-Kaminski
Institute of Philosophy. Marie Curie-Sklodowska University, 20-031 Lublin,
Poland.
ktalmont@bacon.umcs.lublin.pl
http://bacon.umcs.lublin.pl/ktalmont
Abstract: McKay & Dennett (M&D) look for adaptive misbeliefs that
result from the normal, though fallible, functioning of human cognition.
Their account can be substantially improved by the addition of two
elements: (1) signiﬁcance of a belief’s testability for its functionality, and
(2)
an account of
reason appropriate
to understanding
systemic
misbelief. Together, these points show why religion probably is an
adaptive misbelief.
McKay & Dennett (M&D) think that systematically adaptive
misbeliefs are unstable – that over time they are revealed to be
false, much as in the case of the boy who cried wolf. This need
not be the case. Systematic falsehood can only be discounted
or accommodated if its truth can be investigated effectively.
Some claims are particularly difﬁcult to investigate in some con-
texts, however. The reasons are threefold (explored in Talmont-
Kaminski 2009). First, their content may be such as to impede
investigation.
Supernatural
claims,
for
example,
typically
involve entities that are invisible, shy, or just far, far away.
Second, there may be social taboos against investigating such
claims. Durkheim’s (1912) category of the sacred singles out pre-
cisely this kind of social barrier against investigation. Third,
which claims can be investigated depends upon which scientiﬁc
tools
are
available.
Opposition
to
scientiﬁc
development
ensures that some misbeliefs remain uninvestigated. If people
think the wolf is invisible, they won’t be surprised when they
don’t see it. Similarly, if looking for it would break some social
mores or would, for example, require heat-sensing cameras
they cannot access, people would probably be held back from
checking the boy’s claims.
Without the possibility of investigation, beliefs become unteth-
ered from their truth-value so their popularity and stability are
free to be determined by the idiosyncrasies of the human
belief-forming system (BFS) as well as any functions that they
might have – it is the untestable beliefs that can be most
readily moulded to best serve their function. The problem, there-
fore, is not belief that runs counter to evidence but belief without
Commentary/McKay & Dennett: The evolution of misbelief
536
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (2009) 32:6

evidence. Such ungrounded belief is deemed by M&D to fall
outside their compass, but their reasons for claiming this are
faulty. The ﬁrst problem is that M&D conﬂate grounded
beliefs with beliefs produced by a BFS that normally produces
grounded beliefs. Yet, a BFS that normally produces grounded
beliefs may (and in the human case, does) occasionally generate,
as a by-product, beliefs that are not properly grounded. The
second, and connected, problem is that M&D take Bayes’
Theorem to establish what it means for a belief to be grounded.
When I have unlimited time and resources available to update
beliefs, I’ll be sure to do so. In the meanwhile, it is more realistic
to use the same standard as that used by Gigerenzer (e.g.,
Gigerenzer et al. 1999), to whom M&D repeatedly refer.
Bounded rationality theory (Simon 1996; Wimsatt 2007) sets a
realistic standard because it works with the real limitations of
the BFS instead of abstracting away from them. Thanks to that,
it is also able to explain why the BFS leads to systematic misbelief,
that is, systematic bias – such misbelief being the necessary cost of
using cognitive heuristics that are fast enough and frugal enough
for humans. Indeed, the theory is robust enough to link particular
heuristics with particular kinds of systematic misbelief – this is
what Rozin & Nemeroff (2002) does in formulating the contagion
heuristic that is responsible for feelings of disgust associated with
clean objects. (M&D interpret Rozin in terms of alief instead of
belief, but the distinction is not relevant to this point nor does it
seem strong enough to carry the weight they place upon it.)
Bayes’ Theorem cannot cope with any of this except to make
post hoc allowances for it.
We now have almost all the tools to see why, despite M&D’s less
than clear stance, religion provides us with the paradigmatic case
of adaptive misbelief (full account to be presented in Talmont-
Kaminski, in preparation). Supernatural beliefs, in general, are
particularly hard to investigate. Ghosts, fairies, or even just luck
are not the kinds of things that would be easy to “catch in the
act.” The sacred status that such beliefs often have, as well as
the opposition to scientiﬁc development that holding them often
appears to be connected to, further impede investigation, render-
ing them effectively untestable. The cognitive science of religion,
as developed by Atran (2004), Boyer (2001) and others, provides
us with a plethora of examples such as Barrett’s (2000) hyperactive
agent detection device that can be best understood as cognitive
heuristics that lead to supernatural beliefs as a by-product. Signiﬁ-
cantly, this by-product approach seems to explain all manner of
supernatural beliefs, including superstitions, without necessarily
explaining the speciﬁcity of religious beliefs. Life has a habit of
putting by-products to work, however.
According to the account of religion put forward by D. S.
Wilson (2002), hardly mentioned by M&D even though it does
present religion as adaptive, the job of religious beliefs is to
improve group cohesion, thereby allowing religious groups to
compete more successfully against other groups. However, just
as the by-product account was unable to distinguish religion
from superstition, so Wilson is unable to distinguish religion
from other group-oriented ideologies. Both problems disappear
when we consider religion as a cultural phenomenon that
exapts the existing cognitive by-products – an ideology that
puts superstitions and the cognitive mechanisms underlying
them to work. The result is beliefs that, thanks to their content
as well as their social and scientiﬁc contexts, are well guarded
against falsiﬁcation and, therefore, relatively free to change as
their functions require; that, thanks to the bounded and system-
atically biased nature of human reason, seem highly plausible;
and that motivate people to act in ways adaptive for the group
as well as, in the best of times, even for its members – an
example of just the kind of gene-culture co-evolution that
M&D are looking for.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The research behind this commentary was carried out mostly while I was
on a fellowship at the Konrad Lorenz Institute for Evolution and
Cognition Research. Without my colleagues there it would not have
been possible.
Belief in evolved belief systems: Artifact of a
limited evolutionary model?
doi:10.1017/S0140525X09991361
Tyler J. Wereha and Timothy P. Racine
Department of Psychology, Simon Fraser University, Burnaby,
BC, V5A 1S6, Canada.
tjw4@sfu.ca
tracine@sfu.ca
Abstract: Belief in evolved belief systems stems from using a population-
genetic model of evolution that misconstrues the developmental
relationship
between
genes
and
behaviour,
confuses
notions
of
“adapted” and “adaptive,” and ignores the fundamental role of language
in the development of human beliefs. We suggest that theories about
the evolution of belief would be better grounded in a developmental
model of evolution.
McKay & Dennett (M&D) present a clever, substantive, and
thought-provoking analysis of the evolution of mistaken beliefs.
Unfortunately, we feel it falls short because it is based on a particu-
lar model of evolution that has limited applications for understand-
ing the development of beliefs. Given that M&D are not estimating
proportions of phenotypic variance attributable to genes versus
environments and are rather trying to account for the origin of a
system, the population genetic framework upon which they rely
is not helpful. Because the population-genetic (“pop-gen”) frame-
work does not speak to the development of organisms, it miscon-
strues the relationship between genes and behaviour (i.e., posits
a passive conception of development), views beliefs as adaptations
rather than as products of an organism’s adaptability, and is blind to
important epigenetic resources – most importantly in the case of
the human belief system, language. We now expand upon these
problems, and outline an alternative evolutionary developmental
(“evo-devo”) perspective which would better ground evolutionary
claims about beliefs.
We argue that belief in evolutionarily engineered, truth-aiming
belief systems is a product of an inadequate pop-gen model of
evolution that essentially ignores developmental processes (Call-
ebaut et al. 2007; Racine et al., forthcoming; Roberts 2002;
Wereha & Racine 2009). Stated simply, even if one considers
that we have evolutionarily derived belief systems, these
systems still have to emerge in ontogeny and are not fundamen-
tally separate from developmental processes. Such an uncontro-
versial statement belies the different conceptualizations of
development derived from the pop-gen and evo-devo models
of evolution. The overextension of the pop-gen model into the
organismic level of analysis leads to a passive characterization
of development. That is, development is viewed as directed by
a robust genetic system that uses the most minimal “environ-
mental” input as a trigger. Therefore, M&D forgo a developmen-
tal analysis of belief when they describe the features of an
“evolutionary belief system” by reverse-engineering the beliefs
of adult humans. From an evo-devo perspective, collapsing com-
plicated developmental processes to a genetic component terri-
bly
misconstrues
the
nature
of
development.
Such
a
commitment to a mechanistic, genocentric view of evolution
and a passive conception of development is inconsistent with a
developmental perspective that emphasizes the ubiquity of mul-
tiple levels of inﬂuence beyond simply the genetic level (e.g.,
Gottlieb & Lickliter 2007). We now elaborate on how a narrow
genocentric, non-developmental view has little use for under-
standing the formation of beliefs in humans, and demonstrate
how radically different a developmental approach conceptualizes
Commentary/McKay & Dennett: The evolution of misbelief
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (2009) 32:6
537

the issue. This difference is made explicit in describing the
importance of “adaptive” and “adapted” in these two models.
In the context of their paper and in light of how these terms are
used within the pop-gen model of evolution, it is understandable
that M&D conﬂate the terms “adapted” and “adaptive” (see the
target article’s Note 3). We argue, however, that these two
terms can actually characterize the difference between pop-gen
and the developmental models of evolution. What are taken to
be evolved belief systems or adaptations in the pop-gen model
(genocentric view) are actually the products of organismic adap-
tability in an evo-devo perspective (organismic view).
In the pop-gen model, evolved belief systems are adaptations.
Beliefs are “tools” derived from belief systems that were “engin-
eered” by evolution (sect. 1). These systems, then, are conceived
as features that organisms “acquire.” In this mechanistic, particu-
late, and additive genocentric conceptualization, belief systems are
features that are in a way fundamentally separate from the organ-
ism and “used” by them. These systems (originating at the genetic
level) were selected for because in our evolutionary past they con-
ferred a differential reproductive advantage to their bearers
(whether they led to the development of accurate representations
of the world or not). From an evo-devo perspective, however,
beliefs are viewed as products of organismic adaptability, not
evolved adaptations. Adaptability is a property of organisms, not
a property of any one part (adaptation). Further, beliefs are man-
ifested at the organismic level, not at the genetic level. From this
perspective, the ability to form beliefs may be conceived of as a
fundamental property of complex organisms. It is not something
that is “selected” for as something additional to the organism
itself. It is an emergent product of animal biological systems and
inherent in certain biological forms. It is based on a form of life
that requires successful interaction with one’s environment.
Thus, at least the basis for “beliefs” is an intrinsic property of
certain organisms, not a separate acquired adaptation.
The notion of evolved belief systems as adaptations, we argue,
rests on a limited genocentric model of evolution and overused
metaphor. “Belief systems” that exist as adaptations stem from
using a population level of analysis to understand properties at
the individual level. Because adaptability is an organismic prop-
erty, its crucial importance in the development of belief is invis-
ible to a genocentric view. An evo-devo conception of belief leads
to understanding beliefs through developmental analysis rather
than through genocentric, non-developmental “adaptational
analysis.” At the very most, what can be “selected for” are
perhaps particular reﬁnements (mechanisms) within a “belief
system,” not the belief system itself.
Elucidating the myriad factors that can affect development is
integral in understanding how an organismic trait such as
“beliefs” emerge. One obvious epigenetic resource is the complex
rearing environment afforded to the developing human child,
including human languages. Indeed, the forms of belief that
M&D review emerge as functions and uses of complex forms of
such languages. A developmental analysis of forms of belief along
with linguistic competence in children is a necessary step to under-
standing the emergence of more complicated forms of belief
through the lifespan. Further, if “language” itself is a crucial
resource in such a system, M&D’s postulation is strained by the
fact that evolutionary pressures are seen to act over a very lengthy
time period within a standard pop-gen framework.
Therefore, although we agree with M&D that accounting for the
evolution of mistaken beliefs is an important task, we believe, hope-
fully not mistakenly, that it requires a much broader developmental
conceptualization of evolution. In their response to commentaries,
we encourage M&D to attempt to integrate their theory with
recent work in evolutionary development psychology.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
Preparation of this commentary was supported by a Social Sciences and
Humanities Research Council of Canada (SSHRC) grant to the second
author, Timothy P. Racine.
Lamarck, Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AI), and belief
doi:10.1017/S0140525X09991385
Yorick Wilks
Oxford Internet Institute, University of Oxford, Oxford, OX1 3JS,
United Kingdom.
yorick@dcs.shef.ac.uk
http://www.dcs.shef.ac.uk/yorick
Abstract: Nothing in McKay & Dennett’s (M&D’s) target article deals
with the issue of how the adaptivity, or some other aspect, of beliefs
might become a biological adaptation; which is to say, how the
functions discussed might be coded in such a way in the brain that
their development was also coded in gametes or sex transmission cells.
There is much of interest in this article on misbeliefs and their
“adaptive” value in evolutionary terms, but I have a serious
problem in knowing how to assess the arguments: I cannot see
what all this has to do with evolution, understood as natural selec-
tion of traits inherited though the genome.
McKay & Dennett (M&D) are perfectly well aware of this
overall requirement: “To be sure, it might plausibly be argued
that delusions are psychologically adaptive in certain scenarios
(as the above reverse Othello case suggests). But this does not
establish a case for biological adaptation” (sect. 10, para. 5,
emphasis in original). The issue of whether beliefs or other
mental representations could affect gametes has surfaced in the
past in the Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AI) context: Longuet-Higgins
(in Kenny et al. 1972) discussed how such brain modiﬁcations
might conceivably affect the gametes, yielding a sort of post-
Lamarckianism (cf. Lamarck 1809/1914/1984) with a possible
underlying mechanism stated in genetic terms. I am not sure
how seriously that discussion was intended to be taken but,
unless some such discussion is set out, what can we make of
the arguments of M&D except seeing them as simple Lamarck-
ianism without any mechanism at all – that is, mere adaptivity of
traits transferred to a successor generation, such as a tendency to
create life-prolonging misbeliefs about, say, health (sect. 10) but
with no suggestion of how this could be done?
The only alternative account – and M&D do not give this
either – is to fall back on a long and honorable tradition of “cul-
tural transmission” from Lovejoy’s Great Chain of Being
(Lovejoy 1936) to Dawkins’ memes (Dawkins 1989) and
perhaps even Sheldrake’s morphic resonance (Sheldrake 1987).
The problem with all this is that it has no known empirical, bio-
logical, substrate and hence nothing to do with evolution as the
latter is normally understood.
Our authors’ dilemma is very like Chomsky’s in his lifelong
campaign to establish a notion of “universal grammar” that is
the biological and inherited substrate that allows humans, but
not other species, to develop languages of such and such a
type. Chomsky (1965) has never established clearly what features
constrain the class of languages we call human and which, if
found, would presumably correspond to the coding in gametes.
Chomsky had additional difﬁculties because of his distaste for
the whole idea of evolution as applied to languages, but the
problem is not far from Herb Simon’s closely related speculations
(Simon 1996) about the need for an inherited capacity to manip-
ulate hierarchically structured representations to explain the
mechanisms underlying vision, language, and reasoning. There
have also been comic diversions like the discussion following
Fodor’s Language of Thought (Fodor 1981) about the need for
concepts as complex as telephone to be innate, because they
could not be decomposed into simpler concepts without loss of
meaning. Again, it is not clear how serious the discussion of the
innateness, and inheritability, of the concept telephone was
intended to be.
But is the discussion of the target article any more ﬁrmly based
than Fodor’s? Can we imagine that special classes of helpful mis-
belief, and their associated concepts (e.g., “supreme being” in the
Commentary/McKay & Dennett: The evolution of misbelief
538
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (2009) 32:6

article), are any better candidates for heritability through genetic
representations than Fodor’s telephone? And if they are not heri-
table, why is this discussion taking place in the context of natural
selection and Darwinian evolution?
It may be said that the above criticism is unfair and beside the
point: If we accept that there is a heritable feature corresponding
to human languages, broadly conceived as a class, and that we
have the feature and other higher mammals do not, then we
can speculate about its content, as Chomsky and his school
have, without any knowledge of coding within organic matter
of the structures that heritable features require. Similarly, it
may be said, we can speculate about the features of a general
belief and reasoning system, in just the way that AI has for 50
years, without brain codings, but under general assumptions
about which aspects of such a system will aid survivability or
reproduction.
But Chomsky did realize that none of this could concern itself
with particular languages, since a new brain can learn any
language, but only with underlying representational features
common to all languages. It seems clear to me that the target
article does not observe that constraint for beliefs and therefore
has even less plausibility than Chomsky’s long-running campaign.
The article is largely about particular (mis)beliefs and their func-
tion: “I am sexually attractive,” “I will get better from this
disease,” “A supreme being watches my actions.” Is their
coding any more plausible than that of the concept telephone,
or some structural feature of Indo-European languages? Is it
not much more plausible that all this is learned within some
very general structure we can barely specify, though Simon
(1996) probably made the best attempt to guess it.
Suppose we stand a little further back, and accept the general
Quinean view (see Quine 1953) that we test not individual beliefs
against the world but whole belief systems: anthropological,
Newtonian, Einsteinian, religious, naive physics (Hayes 1978),
folk psychology, and so forth. These are accepted or not, give sat-
isfaction to individuals or not, but none can be completely right
or true as a whole; and no scientist thinks any such theory
complex is ﬁnal or correct, though some are plainly better than
others, and may have served our species well for millennia. It
can be very hard to separate out individual beliefs as misbeliefs,
without regard to the whole complex they come from; this is a
cliche´ of the philosophy of science as much as it is of anthropol-
ogy. It is also very hard to get any clear evidence on how much, if
at all, of these complexes could be hard-coded in genetic
material: Is jumping out of the way of rapidly approaching
large objects innate in humans, as it is in some insects?
I believe one needs to hear more about these issues, and above
all about the relationship to a biological substrate, before discus-
sions of the adaptivity of particular beliefs can be more than re-
warmed Lamarck – no matter how much fun the discussion is.
Adaptive misbeliefs are pervasive, but the
case for positive illusions is weak
doi:10.1017/S0140525X09991543
David Sloan Wilsona and Steven Jay Lynnb
aDepartments of Biology and Anthropology, Binghamton University,
Binghamton, NY 12902; bDepartment of Psychology, Binghamton University,
Binghamton, NY 13902.
dwilson@binghamton.edu
http://evolution.binghamton.edu/dswilson/
stevenlynn100@gmail.com
http://www2.binghamton.edu/psychology/people/faculty/steven-
lynn.html
Abstract: It is a foundational prediction of evolutionary theory that
human beliefs accurately approximate reality only insofar as accurate
beliefs enhance ﬁtness. Otherwise, adaptive misbeliefs will prevail.
Unlike McKay & Dennett (M&D), we think that adaptive belief
systems rely heavily upon misbeliefs. However, the case for positive
illusions as an example of adaptive misbelief is weak.
Dozens of evolutionists have observed that insofar as beliefs are
products of natural selection, either proximally or distally, then
they should be designed to enhance ﬁtness, not to perceive the
world as it really is. One of us (Wilson 1995; 2002; 2010) has
used the terms practical realism and factual realism to contrast
these two criteria for evaluating beliefs. At the most foundational
level, an evolutionary approach to epistemology predicts that the
mind is designed to apprehend reality only to the extent that
factual realism contributes to practical realism (Wilson 1990).
The gist of McKay & Dennett’s (M&D’s) argument is that a
positive tradeoff between factual and practical realism usually
does exist, with the exception of positive illusions. We admire
the way that M&D interpret various categories of belief from
an evolutionary perspective (e.g., by-products vs. adaptations)
but we disagree with their conclusions. We think that negative
tradeoffs are pervasive but that, ironically, the case for positive
illusions is weak.
To begin with genetic evolution, when it comes to misbeliefs,
deception begins with perception. All organisms perceive only
the environmental stimuli that matter to their ﬁtness. Our
species can see only a narrow slice of the sound and light spec-
trum, cannot sense electrical and gravitational ﬁelds at all, and
so on. We also distort what we can perceive, for example, by
turning the continuous light spectrum into discrete colors. Per-
ception might not qualify as belief, but if the former is so
prone to adaptive distortions, it would be surprising if the
latter was not prone as well.
Proceeding to cultural evolution, we disagree with M&D’s
assessment that by-product explanations of religion are prevailing
over adaptation explanations. The actual emerging consensus is
that the two interpretations are more compatible than previously
thought. In particular, when we examine by-products versus
adaptations separately for genetic and cultural evolution, the
by-product proponents could be largely right for genetic evol-
ution and the adaptationists could be largely right for cultural
evolution. All adaptations begin as exaptations, so it is possible
that cultural evolution has produced highly adaptive religions –
and other cultural systems – out of genetic adaptations that
evolved for other purposes (Wilson 2005; 2010).
Cultural evolution at the group level leads to a view of cultures
as highly adaptive systems that are designed to orchestrate action
for members of the culture. If most behaviors come directly from
one’s culture and only more distally from one’s genes, then cul-
tural systems must approach the sophistication of genomes as
far as the replication and expression of traits is concerned
(Wilson 2002; 2006).
Regardless of how plausible one regards this view of culture,
let’s explore its implications for adaptive misbeliefs. Somehow,
a culture must provide an elaborate guide for how to behave in
the many situations encountered by members of the culture.
When it comes to motivating behavior, there is nothing like a
putative fact. If I disapprove of what you are doing, I can call
you sick or immature. If I think that a woman’s place is in the
home, I can believe that women are mentally inferior and that
it is abnormal for them to become sexually aroused. If I
despise my enemy, I might think that an enemy lacks compassion
even among its members.
We trust that we don’t need to belabor the point. Cultures are
awash in putative facts that can be easily explained in terms of the
behaviors they motivate and clearly depart from factual reality.
People ﬁght to establish adaptive misbeliefs.
Some of the candidate misbeliefs considered by M&D are self-
limiting; for example, when lies are effective only when rare.
Useful ﬁctions as cultural instructions are different. They are
often in everyone’s interest, they are taught to young children
who have no basis for rejecting them, and disbelievers are
Commentary/McKay & Dennett: The evolution of misbelief
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (2009) 32:6
539

punished. Even those who try their best to disbelieve can be
overwhelmed by constant repetition and pressure to conform.
As Daniel Gilbert and his colleagues have shown (reviewed in
Gilbert 1991), the default assumption is to believe what one
hears, and disbelieving requires effort. Propaganda works
because the mind’s capacity to disbelieve can be overwhelmed
if you shovel in falsehoods fast enough.
Often apparent in cases of ideological extremism, marked by
strongly held and sometimes patently false beliefs, is the ubiqui-
tous conﬁrmation bias – the tendency to seek out consistent evi-
dence
and
to
ignore,
dismiss,
or
selectively
reinterpret
contradictory evidence (Lilienfeld et al. 2009). False beliefs can
become deeply entrenched when imbued with strong or “hot”
affect, reinforced by social interactions (i.e., people seek out
others with similar beliefs), and embedded in matrices of afﬁrming
consistent beliefs. To compound recalcitrance to challenging false
beliefs and allied actions: (a) people often lack both knowledge of
how they form beliefs about themselves (T. D. Wilson 2009) and
awareness of their own biases (yet they are quick to point out
the biases of others: Pronin et al. 2004); (b) people rationalize
their actions in terms of existing beliefs (Kermer et al. 2006);
and (c) people process information automatically, with minimal,
if any, conscious introspection or challenge (Kirsch & Lynn
1999). Even memory conspires to fortify the status quo: We
tend to remember events (whether conforming to historical facts
or false memories) that are plausible; that is, based on our
beliefs about ourselves and the world, as well as on our current
moods and action tendencies (see Lynn & McConkey 1998).
Theoretically, misbeliefs can be subjected to a cost-beneﬁt
analysis. The beneﬁts, which might accrue to either individuals
or groups, are the actions motivated by the putative facts. The
costs are the consequences of ignoring the real facts over the
long term. The belief that global warming isn’t caused by
people, for example, leads to short-term beneﬁts and potentially
disastrous long-term costs. The title of Al Gore’s movie, An
Inconvenient Truth, says it all.
In a given culture, the costs and beneﬁts can be expected to
weigh in favor of apprehending factual reality in some cases
and treating ﬁction as fact in others. According to anthropologists
such as Malinowski (1948), all cultures have a mode of thought
that can be recognized as rational and proto-scientiﬁc, but
which is expressed only some of the time. That is exactly what
we should expect from an evolutionary perspective, which also
explains why science has only a toehold in our own culture and
is ignored whenever convenient.
Ironically, while we think that M&D have underestimated the
importance of adaptive misbeliefs, we also think that the evi-
dence for the adaptive value of positive illusions is weak. For
instance, one survey of over 15,000 studies (Baumeister et al.
2003) revealed that self-esteem is minimally related to interper-
sonal success, and not consistently related to alcohol abuse, drug
abuse, and smoking. A subset of high–self-esteem individuals
who are narcissistic, with inﬂated yet unstable self-esteem, are
at highest risk for physical aggression (Baumeister 2001). Relat-
edly, bullies have inﬂated self-perceptions (Baumeister et al.
2003), and aggressive children overestimate their popularity
(relative to peer ratings) more than non-aggressive children, a
tendency especially marked among narcissistic children (Barry
et al. 2003). An inﬂated sense of self can have serious costs.
M&D cite research that denial as a coping strategy decreases
the risk of recurrence of breast cancer. Yet it is difﬁcult to com-
prehend how denial would promote cancer survival if it discour-
aged treatment-seeking or follow-through. Moreover, the lion’s
share of ﬁndings indicates that positive beliefs have no bearing
on cancer survival (Beyerstein et al. 2007; Phillips 2008). A
nine-year study (Coyne et al. 2007) of more than a thousand
patients with advanced head and neck cancer revealed that
hopeful patients were no more likely to live longer than patients
who believed they were “losing hope in my ﬁght against my
illness.”
The weak evidence for positive illusions notwithstanding,
adaptive misbeliefs are so pervasive that we wonder how two
smart people such as M&D could have missed them. One
reason might be that they take a predominately individual
approach to beliefs and say little about culture, much less cul-
tures as something comparable to a genome. We know from Den-
nett’s other work (Dennett 2006a) that he doesn’t deny the
possibility that memes can form into “memeplexes” in addition
to acting on their own, but M&D don’t explore the implications
in their target article. Our commentary, which points out the
obvious in retrospect, demonstrates the utility of thinking about
adaptation above the level of the individual.
Adaptive self-directed misbeliefs: More than
just a rareﬁed phenomenon?
doi:10.1017/S0140525X0999149X
Tadeusz W. Zawidzki
Department of Philosophy, George Washington University, Washington, DC
20052.
zawidzki@gwu.edu
http://www.gwu.edu/philosop/faculty/Zawidzki.cfm
Abstract: I argue that adaptive, self-directed misbeliefs are likely more
prevalent and important than McKay & Dennett (M&D) claim.
Humans often falsely interpret their own behavior in terms of
culturally
afforded
categories.
Despite
their
falsity,
such
self-
interpretations are often adaptive because of our disposition to behave
consistently with them. This makes us easier to interpret by similarly
enculturated interactants.
McKay & Dennett (M&D) argue that misbeliefs are adaptive
only “in certain rareﬁed contexts” (sect. 15, last para.). Only
certain “positive illusions” about one’s own capacities are adap-
tive. In the following, I argue that the authors seriously underes-
timate the prevalence and importance of adaptive self-directed
misbeliefs in human populations. One of the most important
tasks facing a human being is making oneself as interpretable
as possible to one’s fellows (Cash 2008). Behaving consistently
with self-interpretations afforded by one’s culture, even if they
are inaccurate, is an important means by which human beings
accomplish this task. Religious beliefs constitute an important
class of such culturally afforded self-interpretations.
It is surprising that M&D ignore certain prominent kinds of
adaptive, self-directed misbelief suggested by Dennett’s own
corpus. According to Dennett (1991), the widespread belief
that human cognition is under the control of a conscious self is,
in many respects, false – a “user illusion” (p. 216) – yet adaptive,
enabling cognitive “self-control” (pp. 417–18). Elsewhere,
Dennett suggests that all available evidence often fails to deter-
mine which of two competing interpretations of a person’s behav-
ior is correct: There may be no fact of the matter whether a
famous art critic really admires his son’s mediocre art or is actu-
ally a victim of self-deception (Dennett 1978, pp. 39–49). If
Dennett is right, then, to the extent that our self-interpretations
presume to settle such interpretive indeterminacies, our self-
interpretations are often false. If such self-directed misbeliefs
can nonetheless help our survival prospects, then they can be
adaptive.
Here is how this might work. We often form beliefs about what
we want and think based on the categories of interpretation
afforded by our language and culture. Such self-interpretations
are often false because, even if Dennett is wrong that all the evi-
dence fails to select between competing interpretations, in every-
day contexts, we often do not have the time to consult all relevant
evidence before settling on one. Do I really think an author I am
reading is pretentious, or is this self-deception concealing my
Commentary/McKay & Dennett: The evolution of misbelief
540
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (2009) 32:6

envy of her masterful prose? None of the subjectively or objec-
tively available data to which I realistically have access need
settle this question. Indeed, the available data might also fail to
rule out some third, incompatible and, perhaps, linguistically
inexpressible, self-interpretation. Yet, context often requires
that, even in the absence of determinative evidence, we express
self-interpretations employing categories familiar to likely inter-
actants. We also have a standing desire to behave consistently
with our publicly expressed self-interpretations (Carruthers
2009, p. 127). So, once we pick among such underdetermined
self-interpretations, we tend to act consistently with our choice.
Why is this adaptive? It makes us easier to interpret by our
likely
interactants,
enabling
complex
coordination
and
cooperation.
There is strong evidence for this mechanism from pathological
cases, such as split-brain patients. It is possible to induce behav-
ior in such subjects in ways that escape their awareness
(Carruthers 2009, p. 126; Gazzaniga 1995, p. 1393). For
example, it is possible to induce standing in a sitting split-brain
subject by ﬂashing the word “walk” in her left visual ﬁeld, to
which her left, complex-language-encoding hemisphere has no
access. The right hemisphere knows enough language to trigger
compliance with the one-word command. When such subjects
are asked why they stand up, they immediately confabulate a
self-interpretation, for example, “I’m going into the house to
get a Coke,” and proceed to comply with this completely false
self-interpretation. Presumably, when the subject’s left hemi-
sphere processes the question, it cannot access the correct
answer, and so, quickly confabulates a culturally afforded self-
interpretation, upon which the subject proceeds to act. My sug-
gestion is that, in dynamic, temporally constrained, quotidian
contexts, everyone’s access to their true motivations is incredibly
limited, so our self-interpretations are usually false – based on
quick and dirty motivation attributions afforded by our language
and culture. Thanks to the desire to act consistently with one’s
self-interpretations, however, such self-directed misbeliefs can
dramatically facilitate interpretation and coordination among
similarly enculturated interactants.
If this proposal is on the right track, then it is relatively easy to
see why many religious misbeliefs are adaptive, contrary to the
“by-product” theory of the evolution of religious belief endorsed
in the target article. The reason is that religious interpretive
frameworks are widespread in many populations – that is,
many cultures afford religious self-interpretations. Thus, for
many human beings, the only interpretive tools available in
quotidian, interactive contexts are saturated with religious self-
conceptions. So the mechanism described above ensures that
many human beings develop religious, self-directed misbeliefs
that are adaptive. Relative to some populations, coordination is
facilitated by self-interpretations such as “I am inspired by the
Holy Spirit!” This is not a defense of “belief in belief” (Dennett
2006a). Much as the capacity to learn English is adaptive only
relative to an environment that includes other English speakers,
the disposition to self-interpret in religious terms is adaptive only
relative to a social environment consisting of interpreters that
ﬁnd such interpretations intuitive. Religious self-interpretation
might be adaptive relative to the kinds of interpretive frameworks
that happen to have dominated human populations historically.
This does not mean that it is adaptive relative to any kind of inter-
pretive framework, or that only religious interpretive frameworks
are possible for human populations.
If I am right, adaptive, self-directed misbeliefs are much more
prevalent and important than M&D acknowledge. In order to
coordinate with our fellows, we need to make ourselves as
easily interpretable by them as possible. But, usually, we have
very poor access to our true motivations in dynamic, quotidian
contexts. One mechanism for dealing with this involves the cul-
tural affordance of ready-made self-interpretations with which
most members in a population are familiar. We interpret our
motivations using such culturally afforded resources, even
though such self-interpretations are likely false. Then we act in
ways that conﬁrm such self-interpretations, making interpret-
ation by and coordination with others familiar with such
interpretations much easier. As Dennett aptly puts it, we are
“creatures of our own attempts to make sense of ourselves”
(Dennett 1987, p. 91).
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
I am grateful to Mason Cash, Bryce Huebner, Dan Hutto, Robert Lurz,
Joe Paxton, Don Ross, Eric Saidel, Whit Schonbein, and Robert
Thompson for helpful comments. Any remaining ﬂaws are entirely my
fault.
Authors’ Response
Our evolving beliefs about evolved misbelief
doi:10.1017/S0140525X09991555
Ryan T. McKaya and Daniel C. Dennettb
aCentre for Anthropology and Mind, University of Oxford, Oxford OX2 6PE,
United Kingdom; bThe Center for Cognitive Studies, Tufts University, Medford,
MA 02155-7059.
ryantmckay@mac.com
http://homepage.mac.com/ryantmckay/
ddennett@tufts.edu
http://ase.tufts.edu/cogstud/incbios/dennettd/
dennettd.htm
Abstract: The commentaries raise a host of challenging issues and
reﬂect a broad range of views. Some commentators doubt that
there is any convincing evidence for adaptive misbelief, and
remain
(in
our
view,
unduly)
wedded
to
our
“default
presumption” that misbelief is maladaptive. Others think that the
evidence for adaptive misbelief is so obvious, and so widespread,
that the label “default presumption” is disingenuous. We try to
chart a careful course between these opposing perspectives.
R1. Introduction
We are very gratiﬁed by the thoughtful and temperate
responses to our target article. Our aims were ambitious,
and the commentaries reﬂect the broad scope of the
topic we tackled. In this response we will try to attend to
the most important themes that have emerged. We
cannot hope to address each and every substantive point
our commentators have raised, but we will try not to shy
away from the thorny issues.
We began with a “default presumption,” or “prevailing
assumption” – that veridical beliefs beget reproductive
ﬁtness. Simply put, true beliefs are adaptive, and misbe-
liefs maladaptive. Our aim was to investigate an alternative
possibility, the possibility of adaptive misbelief. Liddle &
Shackelford note that the epigraphs that introduce
certain sections of our manuscript showcase this alternate
perspective; the implication, they suggest, is that the possi-
bility we explore is already well established, in which case
our “prevailing assumption” is a straw man. A similar point
is made by Cokely & Feltz, who note that the argument
for adaptive misbelief is not new. We agree with Cokely
& Feltz – the argument is not a new one. Had it been
our intention to suggest otherwise, we would have been
rather unwise to incorporate the aforementioned quota-
tions. The fact that the argument is not new, however,
Response/McKay & Dennett: The evolution of misbelief
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (2009) 32:6
541

does not mean that it is accepted. One has only to glance
through the commentaries to see that the issue is far from
settled. We put forward a somewhat tentative claim about
adaptive misbelief – only positive illusions, we argued, ﬁt
the bill. Interestingly, while some of our commentators
(e.g.,
Dunning;
Dweck;
Flanagan;
Frankish;
Konecˇni; Kruger, Chan, & Roese [Kruger et al.];
Marcus; Millikan; Wilks) appear to think that we went
too far here, a slew of others seem to think that we
didn’t go far enough (e.g., Ackerman, Shapiro, &
Maner [Ackerman et al.]; Cokely & Feltz; Haselton &
Buss; Johnson; Mishara & Corlett; Randolph-Seng;
Schloss & Murray; Talmont-Kaminski; Zawidzki).
You can’t please everyone. As we see it, one of the main
contributions of our article is to reveal these striking differ-
ences of opinion and perspective. Our response is ordered
roughly as follows: After clarifying some points about evol-
ution that met with confusion or disagreement, we
respond ﬁrst to those who think our claim errs on the
generous side, and then turn to those who view our
claim as overly cautious and who seek, one way or
another, to extend our analysis.
R2. Oversimplify and self-monitor
As several commentators (e.g., Boyer; Sutton) point out,
cognitive systems are necessarily compromises that have to
honor competing demands in one way or another. Since
time is of the essence, the speed-accuracy tradeoff is criti-
cal; cost also matters so “fast and frugal” systems or
methods (Gigerenzer & Goldstein 1996; Gigerenzer
et al. 1999) are often the order of the day. But these can
generate errors in abundance, so if the animal can afford
it, it is good to have a meta-system of one kind or
another in place, monitoring the results, discarding bad
outputs when they arise, and shifting methods if possible.
Good advice, then, in both animal design and artifact
design, is oversimplify and self-monitor (Dennett 1984a).
The BBS format enables this strategy, and we followed it
in our target article. Our deliberately oversimpliﬁed deﬁ-
nition of belief set the table for a variety of useful com-
mentaries showing just how complicated these issues
truly are. We had a lot of ground to survey, so we
decided, pragmatically, to paint with broad strokes, and
to come back later (in this response to commentary)
with the called-for corrections. As several commentators
(e.g. Cokely & Feltz; Gjersoe & Hood; Liddle &
Shackelford; Wereha & Racine) point out, our hyper-
general deﬁnition of belief, as “a functional state of an
organism that implements or embodies that organism’s
endorsement of a particular state of affairs as actual”
(target article, sect. 1, para. 1), blurs the oft-proposed
boundaries between a range of arguably distinct types of
cognitive states. (It is also worth remembering that in
the working vocabularies of many people, the everyday
term “belief” is restricted to matters of great moment
only – religious belief, political creed, and other topics
of capital-b Belief – and would not be used to discuss
one’s current perceptual state or whether there was beer
in the fridge.) We did discuss, and approve of, Gendler’s
(2008) alief/belief distinction, and Ainslie puts it to good
use, also reminding us (in personal correspondence) of
Gendler’s useful mnemonic characterization, which we
should have quoted in the target article:
[A]lief is associative, automatic, and arational. As a class, aliefs
are states that we share with nonhuman animals; they are
developmentally and conceptually antecedent to other cogni-
tive attitudes that the creature may go on to develop. And
they are typically also affect-laden and action generating.
(Gendler 2008, p. 641; emphasis in original)
But we did not even mention, as Frankish points out,
the acceptance/belief distinction, which, he argues, may
turn out to play a key role: A pragmatic acceptance is
not, strictly speaking, a misbelief at all; and our prime can-
didates for adaptive misbeliefs, positive illusions, may be
voluntarily adopted policies, not involuntarily imposed
biases – in us, if not in other animals incapable of such
“metacognitive” evaluations. This leads Frankish to a
sketch of an experimental paradigm well worth pursuing.
Flanagan and Konecˇni raise similar objections. Flanagan
comments on the strategic role of statements of belief in
competitive contexts, but notes that there is nothing epis-
temically disreputable about believing that one can win:
“‘can’ does not entail ‘will.’” Further on, however, he
makes a telling slip: “Both players, if they are any good,
go into the match believing that they can win, indeed
that they will win” (our emphasis). Flanagan is right that
there is no mistake in believing that one can win, or in
hoping that one will win. But where both players believe
that they will win, we have misbelief (although not necess-
arily unreasonable misbelief; each may have compelling
reasons for expecting to win). Insofar as such misbelief
boosts conﬁdence and enables honest signaling of such
conﬁdence, it may be adaptive. Like Frankish and Flana-
gan, Konecˇni suggests that positive illusions may represent
doxastically uncommitted action policies. Haselton &
Buss and Johnson, however, take roughly the opposite
view, arguing that genuine (mis)beliefs may generate
adaptive behavior more effectively than cautious action
policies. We return to their commentaries further on.
It is tempting to re-baptize acceptance as c-lief, since
acceptance stands to belief roughly as belief stands to
alief, a more sophisticated and expensive state, reserved
now for just one species, humans. (Cf. Dennett’s 1978
belief/opinion distinction, which is explicitly modeled on
betting on the truth of a sentence which one believes
[not alieves] to be true.) But this won’t help resolve all
the confusions, since, as Krebs & Denton observe, colla-
borative positive illusions (e.g., “I’m OK, you’re OK”) may
begin as pragmatic policies or acceptances – we are, in
Haidt’s (2001) nice observation, intuitive lawyers, not
intuitive
[truth-seeking]
scientists – but
among
the
effects in us are unarticulated cognitive tendencies that
may be best seen as akin to aliefs – except for not being
antecedent to all other cognitive attitudes.
R3. Is our evolutionary thinking naı¨ve?
Several commentators challenge our frankly adaptationist
reasoning as naı¨ve, and our “reverse engineering” perspec-
tive on misbelief is seen as blinkered or distorting. The
points they raise are instructive, but serve rather to
expose the weaknesses of various standard objections to
adaptationism.
Wilks,
for
instance,
sees
ghosts
of
Lamarck and Sheldrake’s morphic resonances (!) in our
Response/McKay & Dennett: The evolution of misbelief
542
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (2009) 32:6

project, and suggests that even Chomsky’s curious views
on evolution have more plausibility than ours. Wilks
“cannot see what all this has to do with evolution, under-
stood as natural selection of traits inherited through the
genome,” and indeed, from that pinched perspective, it
is not surprising that he would miss the point. Natural
selection is not just about “traits inherited through the
genome.” Perhaps he was misled by the fact that we care-
fully distinguished – as some do not – between genetic
ﬁtness and human happiness; but we also went to some
lengths to note the role of gene-culture coevolution, and
nowhere did we restrict natural selection to genetic evol-
ution (see sects. R5 and R7). Wilks expresses doubts
about how “brain modiﬁcations might conceivably affect
the gametes,” ignoring the Baldwin Effect (Deacon
1997; Dennett 1991; 1995a; 2003b), a particularly clear
path by which surprisingly speciﬁc talents can migrate
from brain modiﬁcations into the genome. (Fear of
Lamarckian heresy has prevented many from taking the
Baldwin Effect seriously; it is not heretical biology.) His
comparison with Fodor’s notorious example of an innate
concept of telephone is simply a straw man. There are
plenty of well-proven cases in which ecologically signiﬁ-
cant contents of considerable speciﬁcity are genetically
transmitted. The fear of snakes exhibited by laboratory-
raised monkeys and small children who have never seen
a snake (Mineka et al. 1984; LoBue & DeLoache 2008),
for example, or the species-speciﬁc nest-building disposi-
tions of birds that have never seen such a nest being
built should temper his incredulity.
Especially in the case of behavior regulators, there is
typically an interplay, a coordination, between genetically
transmitted features and culturally (or “socially”) trans-
mitted elements. Marcus is right that it does not follow
that if something could be learned, it must be learned; it
might well be innate, but also vice versa, as Avital and
Jablonka
(2000)
show:
Many
long-presumed
innate
animal “instincts” turn out to be learned behaviors,
copied in one way or another from parents’ behavior, not
part of their genetic legacy, as a host of cross-fostering
studies demonstrate. The genes ﬁx the disposition to
attend to what the parents do, but the rest is up to environ-
mental transmission. What this fact brings to our attention
is that Mother Nature is not a gene-centrist! Where
genetic evolution leaves off and developmental and,
indeed,
“empiricist”
(Marcus)
psychological
learning
takes over, is an entirely open option, with large differ-
ences between fairly closely related species. (Consider
the wide variation in the extent to which species-typical
bird song is innate.) Marcus’s example of “learning to
walk” is useful, since, as he says, there is an innate stepping
reﬂex in humans that exists at birth. On top of this reﬂex
comes something we can still call learning to walk. His
point is not that walking is innate in humans – it isn’t,
when compared with, say, the walking (indeed, running)
skills found in a newborn antelope. Where innate instinct
leaves off and learning begins is not a line that can be, or
need be, sharply drawn. It goes without saying, we
thought, that belief-generating mechanisms depend criti-
cally on environmental input, but we should have said it
anyway,
as
several
commentators
(e.g.,
Dunning;
Dweck) chide us for underestimating the importance of
environmental variation. So we agree with Dweck,
Liddle & Shackelford, and Wilks that individual,
isolated beliefs are unlikely to be the target of genetic
selection, but that does not imply that quite speciﬁc
biases could not be incorporated into our genetically trans-
mitted equipment. We may in effect be primed to imprint
on whatever in the environment ﬁlls a certain fairly
speciﬁc doxastic role, much as newly hatched ducklings
imprint on the ﬁrst large moving thing they see and
follow it.
Similarly, as a number of commentators reveal, the line
between by-product and adaptation is not sharp at all.
Every adaptation, after all, must emerge from something
that varies “randomly” (under no selection) or from
some prior arrangement that persists for other reasons,
and what had heretofore been a by-product is brought
into focus and enhanced and exploited by selective
pressure. Showing that something is (likely) a by-product
does not rule out the possibility that there is (already, as
it were) opportunistic selective pressure on it. The bright
colors of autumn foliage of deciduous trees in New
England are probably just a by-product of the chemistry
of chlorophyll loss after leaf death (though this has
recently been challenged by evidence that it signals
either inhospitality or vigor to aphids looking for a
winter home; see Yamazaki 2008); but whether or not
aphids are attracted to, or repelled by, bright autumn
colors, assuredly there is now selective advantage to
having brilliant autumn color in New England. The econ-
omies of Vermont, New Hampshire, and Maine beneﬁt
signiﬁcantly from the autumn “leaf-peepers” (foliage
enthusiasts) that invade, and hence there is a pronounced
bias against cutting down handsome trees and for planting,
or encouraging the growth of, the most colorful variants.
Adaptationists know – or should know, since the classic
work of George Williams (1966) – that the evidential
demands for establishing an adaptation are greater than
the demands for discovering a mere by-product. As Milli-
kan says, “If certain kinds of errors are common and also
systematically useful, it does not follow that they are
common because they are useful.” It does not follow,
but fortunately there are ways of testing to see if and
when such adaptationist hypotheses are true. Sometimes,
however, the tests are too impractical to carry out (they
might require a few thousand years of observation of evol-
ution, for instance), and often the adaptation is so obvious,
once discovered, that nobody bothers challenging the
claim. It is interesting that the charge of “Just So Story”
leveled at adaptationists is almost entirely reserved for
hypotheses dealing with features of human evolution. A
brief canvassing of textbooks of biology will ﬁnd literally
thousands of examples of conﬁdently asserted adaptation-
ist claims that have never been challenged and never been
thoroughly
tested – claims
about
the
functions
of
enzymes, the functions of organs, the functions of beha-
viors (of protists, animals, plants. . .). People get touchy
when their own organs and behaviors are analyzed from
an adaptationist perspective, but unless they are prepared
to dismiss the mountains of insight to be found in the rest
of biology, they should stop treating “Just So Story” as a
handy-dandy wild-card refutation-device. It is no such
thing.
Critics of adaptationism are right, however, that there is
a perilous amount of free scope in the range of permissible
hypotheses. For instance, why does nature so often coun-
teract one bit of ﬂawed design with another, compensatory
Response/McKay & Dennett: The evolution of misbelief
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (2009) 32:6
543

one, instead of just “ﬁxing” the ﬁrst? Maybe there is a con-
straint – so far unknown – that renders the latter course
impossible or more expensive (see discussion of Haselton
& Buss further on, and see McKay & Efferson [under
review] for a discussion of constraints in the context of
error management theory). Such chains of reasoning are
not just ﬂights of fancy, since there are differential conse-
quences that can usually be tested for, but until such tests
are conducted, we are left with merely plausible conjec-
tures.
This
open-endedness
haunts
the
discussions
further on in this response – see, for example, our discus-
sion of Johnson – since the question to which commenta-
tors continually return is whether it is cheaper or easier for
the mind to deceive itself with misinformation than to
provide accurate information and adjust its prudential pol-
icies to ﬁt the risk. Until we can assess this by evaluating
known cognitive mechanisms and their evolutionary
costs, this question must remain unsettled.
Wereha & Racine chant the standard evo-devo
mantra, claiming that “by reverse engineering the beliefs
of adult humans” we forgo a developmental analysis –
which is true enough, but does it matter in this case?
They are right, of course, that environmental interactions,
especially those that engage language, are crucial, and for
that reason cultural-genetic interactions are necessary.
What we disagree with is their claim that evo-devo con-
siderations obviate or even blunt the effectiveness of
reverse-engineering approaches. One simply has to do
one’s reverse-engineering with more attention to the
myriad possibilities raised by developmental demands.
One way of putting Wereha & Racine’s main claim is
this: Because development, from embryo on, is a process
that has to protect the robustness of the organism at
every stage, later (e.g., “adult”) features could just as
easily be leftovers, fossil traces, of features that paid for
themselves in infancy as features that pay for themselves
in adulthood. That is, indeed, a distinct possibility that
needs to be considered. And Gjersoe & Hood provide
a possible example: the entrenchment phase in hypothesis
formation in childhood development. This oversimpliﬁca-
tion strategy has a huge payoff: Oversimplify and (even-
tually) self-monitor, but in those who are not particularly
reﬂective, a tendency to cling uncritically to one’s ﬁrst
hypothesis might be a residue of a particularly adaptive
bias in childhood that has outlived its usefulness.
R4. Adaptive oversimpliﬁcations
Oversimpliﬁcations that make cognitive life easier are also
proposed by Zawidzki, who notes that Dennett himself
(1991) has argued that the concept of a self is a benign
“user illusion.” Zawidzki also notes that much of the speci-
ﬁcity of self-interpretation may be an artifact of societal
demand, adaptive in the context of complex sociality. We
indeed overlooked the role of such oversimpliﬁcations as
instances of adaptive misbelief, probably because, like the
concept of a center of gravity, they can quite readily be
recast as something like strategic metaphors rather than fal-
sehoods (consider the widespread understanding that there
is nothing pejorative in the everyday understanding of the
“user illusion” that makes laptops so user-friendly). We
agree that they make an illuminating further category to
explore (see also the discussion of free will later).
In this light, Bertamini & Casati could be seen as
suggesting that naı¨ve physics is also an instance of oversim-
plify and self-monitor, on a hugely different time scale. We
are only in recent centuries beginning to discover the fal-
sehoods latent in our everyday conception of the world, a
conception that is, as they say, “prima facie veridical” in
that it does not “interfere with our interactions with the
world.” This pragmatic effectiveness, of course, is the evol-
utionary rationale for the default assumption that true
beliefs are adaptive and misbeliefs are not. As Millikan
observes, “it is getting straight about what is in front of
our noses that is the ﬁrst order of importance for us.”
(Boyer says that what matters for adaptive design is
“that
the
circumstances
in
question
be
such
that
decision-making does not lead to excessive vulnerability.”)
Not bumping into dangerous things, and ﬁnding food,
shelter, and mates requires a certain amount of effective
information-gathering – and not misinformation-gather-
ing. Wilson & Lynn view the fact that our senses give
us only a narrow window on the physical variation in the
available environmental stimuli as “deception,” but that
is unwarranted; sensory systems that provide a truncated
or edited message that informs may not give the whole
truth, while giving, normally, nothing but the truth. The
obvious norm for information-gathering is not to be
deﬂected by the motivational system, since wishful think-
ing is typically unrealistic and sometimes catastrophically
so (Ainslie). At the same time, as various commentators
note, there can be overriding reasons for editing the infor-
mation-gathering to accomplish various palliative ends. If
the truth hurts too much, it will disable, not enable, the
intentional agent.
R5. Illusions and collusions
Although a number of commentators (Ackerman et al.;
Brown; Gjersoe & Hood; Krebs & Denton) endorse
our claim that positive illusions represent sound candi-
dates for adaptive misbelief, others are skeptical. First,
there are methodological and statistical concerns. For
example, although Cokely & Feltz argue that adaptive
misbeliefs are in general much more widespread than
we allowed, they point out that better-than-average
effects can represent statistical artifacts. The fact that
driving ability has a negatively skewed distribution
means that most drivers simply are better-than-average;
the mean is clearly an inappropriate measure of central
tendency in this case. We do not dispute this, but we
note that better-than-average effects are also documented
for normally distributed traits, and (as Kruger et al. note)
the effects replicate when other, similar methodological
points are taken into consideration.
A different sort of concern has to do with the contexts in
which positive illusions are observed. Some commentators
(Dweck, Flanagan, Konecˇni, and Kruger et al.) appear
to suggest that if such illusions are a product of genetic
evolution, they should not be conﬁned to a particular
culture or to a particular historical epoch. Moreover, as
Dunning observes, they should be particularly evident
in tasks with adaptive signiﬁcance. No one has performed
the latter analysis across task contexts, as Dunning notes,
but there are data about the cross-cultural replicability
of positive illusions. Unfortunately, however, there does
Response/McKay & Dennett: The evolution of misbelief
544
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (2009) 32:6

not appear to be consensus on this issue: Brown states
that “positively-biased self-perceptions are a pervasive,
cross-cultural phenomenon,” but Dweck, Flanagan, and
Kruger et al. express doubts about the cultural universality
of positive illusions, noting that they are more reliably
documented in Western societies. In any case, we note
here that cultural variability is by no means a decisive
datum against the evolutionary claim: if cultural evolution
plays a coevolutionary role, there may be, in effect, cul-
tural subspecies of evolved misbelief.
Konecˇni claims that positive illusions are a feature of a
particular historical period: “the recently terminated era of
easy credit.” We enjoyed his commentary, and await
empirical substantiation of this claim. We are confused,
however, by his methodological critique of studies that
purport to demonstrate positive illusions regarding partici-
pants’ children. On the one hand, Konecˇni complains that
such “studies have presumably not polled the opinions of
the parents (including potential ones) who terminated
pregnancies – or committed infanticide, physical and/or
sexual abuse.” His implication at this point seems to be
that offspring-directed positive illusions are an artifact of
biased sampling. He goes on, however, to suggest that
had such parents been polled, they would have demon-
strated positive illusions regarding their children; this, he
suggests, would undermine the suggestion that biased off-
spring
appraisals
facilitate
parental care. We
think
Konecˇni is trying to have his cake and eat it too. Leaving
aside pregnancy terminations (which were presumably
uncommon in ancestral environments), we agree that
demonstrations of offspring-directed positive illusions in
abusive parents would undermine the evolutionary argu-
ment, but we doubt that such parents would harbor
these illusions. This doesn’t mean, however, that the
ﬁnding of widespread offspring-directed positive illusions
is a statistical artifact – that depends on whether parental
care is normally distributed (abusive parents may rep-
resent a “bump” at the lower end of the distribution),
and on how much of the distribution was sampled by the
relevant studies. But if it is an artifact, it’s nevertheless a
telling one, because it implicates a positive correlation
between offspring-directed positive illusions and parental
care, consistent with our evolutionary suggestion.
Kruger et al. raise more serious concerns in their
measured and informative commentary. They question
whether positive illusions are the norm for healthy individ-
uals, and they point out the many instances of systematic
negative (self) illusions. (Ackerman et al. also speak of
negative illusions, but they refer to illusions that are nega-
tive with respect to others.) We appreciate this point, but
we note that the existence of negative self illusions is not in
itself problematic for claims about the adaptive signiﬁ-
cance of positive self illusions – although it may, as Berta-
mini & Casati recognize, demonstrate that the relevant
mechanisms are domain-speciﬁc rather than domain-
general. As Haselton and colleagues have noted, a ten-
dency toward false positives may be adaptive in certain
adaptive contexts (as in the male sexual overperception
bias that Haselton & Buss describe; see sect. R7 for
further discussion), whereas a tendency toward false nega-
tives may be adaptive in others (as in the female commit-
ment underperception bias that Haselton & Buss report
elsewhere; see Haselton & Buss 2000; see also Ackerman
et al.’s comments about the beneﬁts of being “hard to
get”). Different domains will call for biases in different
directions. It is worth citing Hartung’s (1988) speculations
about the adaptive value of negative self illusions in certain
circumstances, what he calls “deceiving down.” It remains
to be demonstrated, of course, that the negative illusions
that
Kruger
et
al.
mention
are
domain-speciﬁc
adaptations.
Dunning also emphasizes the role of environmental
context (as does Dweck), noting that misbeliefs often
arise because the environment fails to furnish the infor-
mation needed to form accurate judgments. Illusions, on
this view, reﬂect forgivable design limitations rather than
design features. Pessimistic predictions about the trust-
worthiness of others may persist not because they are
ﬁtness-enhancing, as Ackerman et al. suggest, but
because they are liable to conﬁrmation but not to refu-
tation. Marcus makes a similar point, noting that illusions
may reﬂect the operation of a general conﬁrmation-bias
mechanism
rather
than
dedicated
domain-speciﬁc
machinery. We note that even if a general conﬁrmation-
bias mechanism generates illusions as a well-entrenched
subclass of outputs, the serendipitous beneﬁts that those
outputs provide might “protect” the conﬁrmation bias
mechanism (which does, after all, output a lot of mistaken
cognition) from counter-selection, helping to “pay for” its
persistence. If underestimations of others’ trustworthiness
are less costly than overestimations (Ackerman et al.), then
a mechanism that generates underestimations (initially) as
a by-product may be a candidate for exaptation.
Wilson & Lynn also mention the conﬁrmation bias,
linking it to the motive force of strong or “hot” affect.
Marcus suggests that positive illusions are potentially
underpinned by motivated reasoning, but we see this
possibility as a potential generalization of – rather than
necessarily an alternative to – the evolutionary claim we
defended. As Ainslie discusses, in an extraordinarily rich
and compressed commentary, motivational and affective
forces represent the proximal mechanisms by which
natural selection tethers belief to survival. Our abilities
to appraise evidence dispassionately may be selectively
sabotaged (motivationally biased) in adaptive domains,
yielding positive illusions. Motivated reasoning might not
be adapted, however – it might be largely a by-product
of the selection for increasing intelligence that Ainslie
describes, a process which enabled our ancestors to dis-
cover the intervening carrots and sticks of reward, and to
begin devising ways of getting the carrots without going
to the trouble of checking on the world. Human imagin-
ation was born, with all its costs and beneﬁts. The result
has been “the unhitching of reward from adaptiveness”
and in the ensuing holiday of imagination, we have had
to create methods of epistemic self-control to protect our-
selves from our own freedom. Exploring the further wrin-
kles Ainslie draws to our attention will have to wait for
another occasion.
Wilson & Lynn point out that inﬂated self-esteem can
come at a cost. We acknowledge that the connections
between
self-esteem
and
adaptive
behaviours
are
complex, but we didn’t suggest that unrestrained self-
esteem would be adaptive, and we cited Baumeister
(1989) on the “optimal margin of illusion.” In fact,
because self-esteem is such a heterogeneous concept we
avoided using the term at all in our target article. The
large survey that Wilson & Lynn cite points out that the
Response/McKay & Dennett: The evolution of misbelief
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (2009) 32:6
545

category “self-esteem” encompasses a range of subtypes. For
example, Jordan et al. (2003) characterized the defensive
subtype as involving a discrepancy between high explicit
(conscious) and low implicit (unconscious) self-esteem.
These authors found that individuals with this discrepancy
were signiﬁcantly more narcissistic than individuals high in
both
explicit
and
implicit
self-esteem.
Discrepancies
between implicit and explicit self-esteem have also been
implicated in the formation of persecutory delusions
(Bentall & Kaney 1996; Kinderman & Bentall 1996; 1997;
McKay et al. 2007b; Moritz et al. 2006). To the extent that
illusory positive self-views are adaptive, therefore, we
would predict them to be held at both conscious and uncon-
scious levels.
The above-discussed commentaries provide valuable
correctives to our enthusiasm for positive illusions and
the evolutionary implications thereof. We acknowledge
that more research is needed to clarify whether illusional
beliefs are reliably observed in speciﬁc adaptive contexts,
and whether they trend in the expected directions. We
also note, however, that a number of commentaries comp-
lement and extend our analysis of positive illusions. We
have already mentioned Gjersoe & Hood’s suggestion
that the developmental phase of theoretical entrenchment
involves an adaptive positive illusion – “overconﬁdence in
the generalisability of one’s theory.” Brown and Krebs &
Denton detail the important role that people play in vali-
dating and perpetuating the illusions of others (Wilson &
Lynn make this point about false beliefs more generally).
In our target article we noted how the positive illusions of
parents with respect to their co-parents and their children
could strengthen familial bonds and facilitate parental
care. Brown, however, notes that infants also beneﬁt by
internalizing the positive illusions of their parents with
respect to themselves. Krebs & Denton point out that indi-
viduals may manipulate others into validating their own
positive self illusions, but they also appreciate (as does
Brown) that this process can be collaborative and mutually
beneﬁcial.
Boyer and Sutton describe how our own memory
systems can be co-conspirators in the maintenance of
adaptive illusions. Both commentators note that selection
does not indulge abstract epistemic concerns – memories
need be accurate, therefore, only insofar as they are
ﬁtness-enhancing. Memories that are accurate for accu-
racy’s sake are a biological luxury, so adaptive consider-
ations may frequently trump epistemic considerations.
The result is that many of our memories, as beliefs about
past occurrences, may be examples of adaptive misbelief.
R6. Delusions and doxastic shear pins
To provide a framework for our discussion, we developed a
tentative taxonomy of misbelief. We began by distinguish-
ing two general types: misbeliefs arising in the course of
normal doxastic functioning, and misbeliefs resulting
from some kind of break in normal functioning. Liddle
& Shackelford draw our attention to a similar analysis
by Wakeﬁeld (1992). Wakeﬁeld’s (1992; see also 1999a;
1999b) concern is to provide a rigorous theoretical
grounding for the concept of (mental) disorder. His analy-
sis incorporates both a value component (disorders are
harmful, where “harm” is judged by the standards of the
relevant culture) and an evolutionary component (dis-
orders reﬂect the failures of internal mechanisms to
carry out their naturally selected functions). We endorse
Wakeﬁeld’s analysis – and regret not previously being
aware of it – but note that his project is wider and more
general than ours, distinguishing function from dysfunc-
tion in naturally selected mechanisms insofar as this
distinction can guide decisions about candidates for dis-
order, while we are interested in belief speciﬁcally.
As “disorders of belief,” delusions represent the key area
of overlap between Wakeﬁeld’s analysis and ours. Our
emphasis was on delusions as the output of belief-for-
mation mechanisms that have ceased to perform their
normal (naturally selected) functions – Wakeﬁeld’s evol-
utionary criterion. His value criterion, however, is clearly
also important: Delusions are harmful insofar as they
occasion distress and insofar as they jeopardize the social
and occupational functioning of individuals who hold
them (this is the “clinical signiﬁcance” criterion in the
DSM-IV-TR; American Psychiatric Association 2000). In
our target article we were wary of considering delusions
as adaptive, and indeed we labeled them instances of “dox-
astic dysfunction” (although we didn’t clearly discriminate
between biological and social conceptions of dysfunction).
We did, however, speculate about a class of misbeliefs
enabled by the action of system components designed to
break: doxastic shear pins. Several of our commentators
(Langdon; Liddle & Shackelford; Millikan; Mishara
& Corlett) pick up on this concept.
Langdon notes that if doxastic shear pins exist, their
shearing should involve some kind of neurocognitive
“short-circuit” rather than a stable neuropsychological
impairment. We agree with this point. She also dis-
tinguishes neuropsychological (deﬁcit) and motivational
answers to the question of why deluded individuals cling
to their delusions. Mishara & Corlett consider this dis-
tinction an “overly strict conceptual schism,” and it is
true that motivational and deﬁcit hypotheses need not be
mutually exclusive (Langdon is well aware of this).
Although we found it useful to distinguish between misbe-
liefs that represent functionless departures from normal
operation (“culpable design limitations”) and those that
incorporate some functional component, we did acknowl-
edge the porous nature of such conceptual boundaries.
Nevertheless, we remain open to the possibility of misbe-
liefs with purely “deﬁcit” aetiologies. Mishara & Corlett,
however, favor the doxastic shear pin perspective: delu-
sions accommodate aberrant prediction error signaling,
disabling ﬂexible conscious processing and enabling the
preservation of habitual responses in the context of
impaired predictive learning mechanisms. As such they
serve a functional, even biologically adaptive, role. We
appreciate this perspective, and we think that work on pre-
diction errors represents a key avenue of research into
delusions.
Inferences
about
biological
adaptiveness,
however, may be unjustiﬁed here: As Millikan notes,
the existence of doxastic shear pins “does not imply that
failures to function properly are helpful, but only that in
some circumstances it is best not to attempt to function
at all.”
Coltheart raises issues of truth and groundedness with
respect to delusions, and asks us to clarify whether we con-
sider well-grounded false beliefs to be misbeliefs. The
short answer to this is, Yes. Misbeliefs are simply false
Response/McKay & Dennett: The evolution of misbelief
546
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (2009) 32:6

beliefs – they
may
be
grounded
or
ungrounded.
Grounded misbeliefs reﬂect forgivable design limitations:
in contexts of imperfect information (we may be underin-
formed or even deliberately misinformed), misbeliefs are
inevitable. Ungrounded misbeliefs, on the other hand,
may result from culpable failures in naturally selected
belief mechanisms (delusions), but they might also
reﬂect designed features of such mechanisms (the adap-
tive misbeliefs we sought in the target article). Talmont-
Kaminski claims that ungrounded beliefs fall outside
our compass, but he seems to have misunderstood our
expository strategy. Ungrounded beliefs are within our
compass, but only insofar as such beliefs are false. This
was perhaps overly stipulative, but it made our discussion
manageable (for example, it allowed us to skirt moral
beliefs and beliefs about norms more generally). As we
stated in our target article, we do not expect adaptive mis-
beliefs to be generated by mechanisms designed to
produce beliefs that are false per se. Rather, we implicate
evolved
tendencies
for
forming
domain-speciﬁc
ungrounded beliefs. Where these beliefs are (contin-
gently) false, we will see adaptive misbelief. Where they
are (contingently) true, they fall outside our purview.
Not all ungrounded beliefs, of course, are adaptive:
once again, we argue that such beliefs often reﬂect break-
downs in belief formation machinery, and where such
beliefs are harmful (Wakeﬁeld’s value criterion), they con-
stitute delusions. But here, too, ungrounded beliefs can be
contingently true, as in the delusional jealousy example
that Coltheart elaborates. We are quite happy for such
cases of “serendipitously” true belief (or “accidentally”
true, as Coltheart prefers) to count as instances of delu-
sion; they are just not instances of misbelief. Where misbe-
lief is concerned, truth is the critical feature, simply by
(our) deﬁnition; where delusion is concerned, truth may
ultimately be irrelevant (see Leeser & O’Donohue 1999;
Spitzer 1990). In cases such as the delusional jealousy
scenario that Coltheart outlines, truth or falsity may be dif-
ﬁcult to establish – a feature that may contribute to the
incorrigibility of such beliefs (many religious beliefs also
have this feature; see discussion later). It is worth noting,
however, that delusions can resist the presentation of
manifestly contradictory evidence; indeed, as Mishara &
Corlett show, such evidence may even strengthen delu-
sional conviction through the process of reconsolidation
(see Corlett et al. 2009).
Sperber makes the interesting point that most human
beliefs are acquired via communication with others.
Because of this, he doubts that most human beliefs are
grounded in the sense of being “appropriately founded
on evidence and existing beliefs.” We appreciate Sperber’s
general point, but our view is that the testimony of others
(whether oral or written) is ultimately just another source
of evidence that should be weighed up when forming
beliefs. We look up at the sky and form a belief about
whether it will rain; later we listen to the weather forecast
and revise our belief accordingly. The evidence of testi-
mony may be easier to override than direct perceptual evi-
dence (Langdon discusses the idea that delusions involve
a loss of the ability to override the latter), but it is evidence
that can ground belief nevertheless. We don’t see any
reason to consider beliefs acquired via communication to
be ungrounded. Sperber notes that “from a cognitive
and social science point of view, a deﬁnition of ‘belief’
that excludes most religious beliefs renders itself irrele-
vant.” We agree with this, and we think the same of any
deﬁnition of “grounded” that excludes beliefs acquired
by communication. Such a deﬁnition would guarantee its
own irrelevance.
R7. Error management theory and religion
Haselton & Buss and Johnson pick up on our point
about how adaptive behavioral biases need not reﬂect
adaptive biases in belief. We do not doubt that when the
costs of relevant errors in a given domain are recurrently
asymmetric, selection should implement a bias toward
committing less costly errors (Haselton & Nettle 2006).
Our point was that such biases need not involve a systema-
tic departure from Bayesian belief revision, but merely
judiciously biased action policies (see McKay & Efferson
[under review] for a more thorough, technical treatment
of these issues). A second point we made was that even
when selection in accordance with the error management
principle plausibly results in biased belief-forming pro-
cesses, such processes may produce misbeliefs as tolerable
by-products rather than as adaptations (such biased
systems may be adaptive not by virtue of the misbeliefs
they produce, but by virtue of the fact that they minimize
misbeliefs of a certain type). Millikan endorses this point.
Haselton & Buss provide a valuable counterpoint to
our skepticism regarding whether certain error manage-
ment examples might qualify as examples of adaptive
misbelief. They observe that a demonstration that selec-
tion can solve such adaptive problems without misbelief
is not a demonstration that selection has solved such pro-
blems without misbelief. Selection might have followed
any number of design trajectories, subject to the physical,
economic, historical, and topographical constraints that we
mentioned; it is an empirical question which trajectory was
in fact followed. Haselton & Buss go on to suggest several
reasons why biased beliefs might have featured in the sol-
ution to such adaptive problems. We are not convinced by
their ﬁrst suggestion, that such beliefs “could provide the
motivational impetus for courtship behavior.” Judicious
action policies, after all, would also provide that. Their
next suggestion, that male misbeliefs about the sexual
intent of women might help allay fears of rejection, is
not obviously different from their ﬁrst: presumably this
is also a point about motivational impetus. It is not clear
why selection would go to the trouble of instilling fears
of rejection and then installing biased beliefs to allay
those fears, but again, it is an empirical matter which tra-
jectory was in fact followed. Haselton & Buss’s ﬁnal sug-
gestion seems more promising to us: The conﬁdence
boost that biased beliefs provide might be attractive to
females in and of itself. In a related analysis, Ackerman
et al. imply that female misbeliefs about the commitment
intentions of men might heighten the desires of potential
suitors,
leading
to
increased
male
investment
and
ultimately boosting the romantic returns to the females
concerned. We have already discussed the similar points
that Brown and Krebs & Denton make about how
misbeliefs can transform the psychological states of others.
Johnson takes an error management approach to
supernatural belief, and argues that such belief is adaptive.
His
claim is
that
selection
should
favor
belief
in
Response/McKay & Dennett: The evolution of misbelief
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (2009) 32:6
547

supernatural agents because such beliefs would yield exag-
gerated estimates of the risk of one’s social transgressions
being detected. In our target article we indicated that we
did not think there was strong evidence for this theory.
Johnson has several points to make about the priming evi-
dence we reviewed, but none of these points seem to help
his case. First, he notes that the religious primes used
by researchers tend to be culturally speciﬁc – typically
derived from Western Judeo-Christian traditions. The
issue of cultural speciﬁcity is important, especially as
regards genetic evolutionary claims (see our remarks
earlier concerning the cross-cultural validity of positive
illusions), but how should it apply here? We did not
contest the ﬁndings that religious primes increase proso-
cial behavior – instead we queried whether such primes
exert their effects by activating reputational concerns
involving supernatural agents, and we also queried
whether such effects are mediated by religious belief.
Johnson then states that experiments may not “differen-
tiate the behavior of ‘believers’ and ‘non-believers’ – Joe
Bloggs may be an avowed atheist who, on his way to Las
Vegas, is nevertheless very concerned about seeing a
black cat or wearing his lucky jacket or what his grand-
mother would have said.” We are not sure we follow this –
we don’t see the relevance of such superstitious beliefs to
the supernatural watcher hypothesis that Johnson advocates.
We do, however, acknowledge Johnson’s point that many
different belief systems might play the role of his “superna-
tural watcher” – karmic beliefs in comeuppance might
inhibit social transgressions just as effectively as beliefs in
personal punitive deities.
A further point that Johnson makes concerns the con-
clusions that can be drawn from priming studies. Evidence
that supernatural primes promote prosocial behavior does
not, he says, prove that supernatural beliefs are adaptive –
such effects “could be evidence that religious primes turn
people into suckers who give away precious resources.”
We are confused by this point. The supernatural watcher
hypothesis states that belief in supernatural agents inhibits
antisocial behavior and is adaptive by virtue of that fact.
Priming studies enable demonstrations of a causal link
between religious priming and prosocial behavior. What
kind of evidence would Johnson think relevant if not
this? He doesn’t specify. Perhaps the problem is that
Shariff and Norenzayan (2007) reported an increase in
prosocial behavior (Dictator Game donations) following
religious priming, whereas Johnson’s theory requires a
decrease in antisocial behavior. If so, we draw attention
to Randolph-Seng and Nielsen’s (2007) study, which
found that participants primed with religious words
cheated signiﬁcantly less than controls on a subsequent
task. The problem, from our perspective, is that this
study could not empirically adjudicate between the super-
natural watcher hypothesis and an alternative, behavioral
priming,
interpretation
(Randolph-Seng
does
not
appear to dispute this point). The same limitation, we
argued, applies to the studies of Pichon et al. (2007) and
Shariff and Norenzayan (2007).
Norenzayan, Shariff, & Gervais (Norenzayan et al.)
pick up on this point, noting that supernatural watcher and
behavioral priming mechanisms need not be mutually
exclusive; they might well operate in tandem, and could
even
be
mutually
reinforcing.
Nevertheless,
these
authors marshal evidence that provides support for the
supernatural watcher account and yet resists a behavior-
al-priming interpretation. We appreciate their reference
to the study of Dijksterhuis et al. (2008), although we
worry that the baby is discarded with the bathwater
here: This study disambiguates the felt presence of a
supernatural agent from prosocial outcomes, certainly,
but only by dispensing with a prosocial component
altogether (this is not a gripe about the study itself, but
about
its
interpretation
vis-a`-vis
the
supernatural
watcher hypothesis). In general, however, we ﬁnd the
arguments of Norenzayan et al. to be quite persuasive.
In particular, we are impressed by the results of the
Gervais and Norenzayan (2009) study that they mention.
The ﬁnding that religious primes activate public self-
awareness is exactly the kind of result that is needed to
substantiate the supernatural watcher hypothesis. We
are keen to learn whether such reputational awareness
moderates the magnitude of the primes’ effect on prosocial
behavior.
Norenzayan et al. attribute (mis)belief in supernatural
agents to cultural rather than genetic evolution. Although,
by their lights, religion does not therefore supply a case of
evolved misbelief, we did not intend to restrict our analysis
of adaptive misbelief to cases of genetic evolution. On the
contrary, we are open, at least in principle, to the possi-
bility that culturally selected religious beliefs constitute
adaptive
misbeliefs.
Talmont-Kaminski,
Wilson
&
Lynn, and Zawidzki provide related analyses. The
accounts of Talmont-Kaminski and Wilson & Lynn are
in fact almost identical – like Norenzayan et al., they
view “religion as a cultural phenomenon that exapts exist-
ing cognitive by-products” (Talmont-Kaminski). Wilson &
Lynn thus suggest that the tension between by-product
and adaptation explanations of religion can be defused:
Both camps might be right – the by-product proponents
where genetic evolution is concerned and the adaptation
proponents where cultural evolution is concerned.
Along with Johnson, Talmont-Kaminski remarks upon
the lack of falsiﬁability of religious beliefs, and outlines
several barriers, physical and social, to the exposure of reli-
gious belief as false. As Talmont-Kaminski notes, it is pre-
cisely
because
of
such
barriers
to
testability
that
supernatural beliefs are well suited to serving a functional
role. Sperber provides an indispensable analysis of an
additional class of barriers: barriers to comprehension. For
a belief to be open to epistemic evaluation, he notes, it
must have a propositional content, a truth value. Many
religious beliefs, however, have only “semi-propositional”
content – they are mysterious and obscure, permitting
manifold exegeses. (Sperber’s concept of semi-propositional
attitudes has not, alas, been inﬂuential among the philoso-
phers who have devoted their careers to elucidating “classi-
cal” propositional attitudes. We can hope that a new
generation of more empirically minded philosophers will
eventually see the utility, indeed the inescapability, of
acknowledging this set of at least belief-like phenomena.)
According to Sperber, such beliefs are better suited to
playing an adaptive role than many beliefs with ordinary
propositional content: “content unproblematically open to
epistemic evaluation might either raise objections within
the relevant social group, or, on the contrary, be too easily
shared beyond that group.”
Bulbulia & Sosis propose yet another variety of beliefs
(or belief-like states) whose function is not strictly to
Response/McKay & Dennett: The evolution of misbelief
548
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (2009) 32:6

inform (or misinform) the believers about the layout of
their world: cooperative commitments. Following Schel-
ling, they suggest that a certain sort of commitment
problem might be solved by something like a group
myth that gets everybody on the same page, as one says.
The commitment problem is this: Getting individuals to
cooperate can be like herding cats, but if the cats can be
transformed into something more like sheep, by inculcat-
ing a religious myth in them all, this may create points of
salience that engender the sorts of uniformity of attitude
and synchrony of response that make large scale coopera-
tive projects feasible. Once initiated, such a phenomenon
might become more or less self-sustaining without any
knowing supervision. Indeed, too much knowingness
might subvert the whole enterprise, breaking the spell
and tumbling everyone back into their feline individuality.
It is important to note that if such a phenomenon did
evolve (mainly by cultural evolution, one must suppose,
with perhaps some genetic predisposition favoring it),
individuals could be strongly motivated to resist any devel-
opments that threatened to undermine their obliviousness
to the motivational source of their “conviction” or “faith” –
without needing to know why they were so motivated. As
usual, those who were blessed (by natural selection) with
the disposition to behave in this way would be the beneﬁ-
ciaries of this clever arrangement without anybody
needing to understand the cleverness of it all – until
Schelling came along.
Wilson & Lynn give a vivid account of the ubiquity of
deception in human culture, but seem to forget the adap-
tiveness of deceiving others. In the target article we set this
topic aside as too obvious to need more than a brief review:
Of course, it is often “adaptive” for kings to deceive their
subjects, for generals to deceive their troops, for everyone
to deceive their enemies. Who beneﬁts – cui bono
(Dennett 1995a; 2006a) – from the false religious and
social propaganda that they describe? Wilson & Lynn
apparently assume that if it is not the individuals them-
selves whose ﬁtness is enhanced by believing these false-
hoods, it is the groups to which they belong – an
instance of group selection utilizing cultural, not genetic,
evolution. Again, we are open to this possibility – but we
note that these authors overlook the other possibility pro-
posed and defended by Dennett (1995a, 2006a): It may
be the memes’ own ﬁtness that is enhanced by these
adaptations, in which case these are instances of other-
deception or host-manipulation, not group selection at
all. One of the beneﬁts of the memetic perspective is
that it exposes the non sequitur in any argument that
claims that some features are ubiquitous among groups
and (hence) must be adaptive to those groups that have
them. In order to establish religion as a case of (culturally
selected) adaptive misbelief, one must show that individ-
uals or groups that acquire religious cultural variants
have an advantage over those not similarly “infected.”
We think the jury is still out, and await evidence of this
selective advantage.
R8. Truth or consequences
The ways in which the truth of beliefs can be divorced
from their consequences for survival may be myriad, but
they do not extend as far as Schloss & Murray propose.
Like some other commentators, they think the case for
adaptive (or ﬁtness-neutral) misbelief is stronger than we
allow. Our view, Schloss & Murray claim, “requires the
falsity of” the radical claims of Churchland, Plantinga,
and Stich, and we agree; we think those views are clearly
false, for reasons presented elsewhere (on Churchland
and Plantinga, see Dennett 2009 and forthcoming; on
Stich, see Dennett 1981; 1985). As Millikan notes, to
say – as Stich does – that natural selection does not care
about truth, is like saying that:
Natural selection “does not care about” digesting food,
pumping blood, supplying oxygen to the blood, walking,
talking, attracting mates, and so forth. For each of these activi-
ties can either be (biologically purposefully) set aside (the
vomiting reﬂex, holding one’s breath under water, sleeping)
or simply fails to occur in many living things. Nonetheless,
surely the main function for which the stomach was selected
was the digestion of food, the lungs for supplying oxygen,
and so forth, and a main function for which our cognitive
systems were selected was the acquisition and use of knowl-
edge – that is, true belief. (Millikan’s commentary, ﬁrst
paragraph)
Schloss & Murray also, we think, underestimate the
force of Quine’s observations on systematic falsehood dis-
cussed by us, and their thought experiment about the
robot competition can nicely expose the issue:
While one would surely seek to program competing robots to
form beliefs that provided an isomorphic “map” of the external
environment, would one further seek to program beliefs about
that environment that were true? Not obviously. Indeed, there
are numerous ways of programming the robot to “conceptual-
ize” its environment that, while representationally biased or
even radically false, are nonetheless (a) appropriately iso-
morphic and (b) reliably adaptive behavior-inducing. Such
programs would be adaptive. (Schloss & Murray’s commen-
tary, para. 7)
Schloss & Murray are apparently imagining something like
this: First the roboticist writes a program that captures all
the relevant information in a behavioral “map” – and, to
make the software development easier, all the nodes and
action-representations are given true labels (“cliff” means
cliff and “wall” means wall and “go left” means go left,
etc.); and then, once the system is up and running and
well tested, the roboticist goes back and systematically
replaces “cliff” with “street” and “go left” with “jump”
and so forth, for all the terms in the program. Now, it
seems, the robot believes that when it reaches the street
it should jump, where before it believed that when it
reached the cliff it should go left – but since the “iso-
morphism” is preserved, it actually turns left when
approaching the cliff, just as before – it is like the near-
sighted Mr. Magoo, only more so! All its “false beliefs”
conspire to keep it out of harm’s way. But, as Quine
(among others) observed, what the nodes mean, what
content they actually have, is not determined by their
labels, but by their myriad connections with each other
and the world. The robot still has mainly true beliefs,
but they are misleadingly “expressed” in the imagined
internal labels. We think it is failure to appreciate this
point that underlies much of the skepticism about the
force of our default presumption. The explanation of the
behavioral success of any successful organism must be in
terms of how its sense organs inform it about its behavioral
Response/McKay & Dennett: The evolution of misbelief
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (2009) 32:6
549

environment. Misinformation can only “work” against a
broad background of information.
A ﬁnal example: Suppose people started saying, to
everybody they encountered, “You’re the most wonderful
person I’ve met!” Perhaps initially this would have a
benign effect, perking everyone up a little, but of course
the effect would soon fade and the utterance would
become the one-word synonym for “hello”: “urthemos-
wunnerfulpersonimet.” Why? Because utterances can
only mean, in the long run, what their hearers take them
to mean, and when utterers can no longer reasonably
expect their hearers to take them to mean what their
words “literally” mean, they can no longer have the inten-
tion of communicating by those words what the words
used to mean, and then the words can no longer mean
what they used to mean (“literally”). There is no way of
divorcing what the subject believes, overall, from how
the subject acts, so if an internal “danger to the left!”
warning reliably leads the animal to jump left, not right,
then the meaning of “left” and “right” in the animal’s rep-
resentation system must have reversed – or it must have
inverted its “policies” somehow. So for evolution to dis-
cover a move, a design, that reliably misleads an organism
(in an adaptive direction) it must be that the organism for
one reason or another cannot make the Quinean adjust-
ment, or it is evolutionarily cheaper, more robust, for
the organism to actually lie to itself than to make the
policy adjustments that would do the adaptive thing,
given the truth about the situation.
R9. The “illusion of conscious will”?
We had initially hoped to devote space in the target article
to belief in free will as a candidate for adaptive misbelief,
but the topic is huge and space limitations obliged us to
postpone it altogether, so we are pleased that Mishara
& Corlett and Randolph-Seng raise the issue. As in
our treatment of the “user-illusion” (see earlier, on
Zawidzki), we think that there is a strong case to be
made that this is best seen not as a useful falsehood, an
enabling myth that we expose at our peril¸ but rather, as
simply an important true belief, once it is properly
unpacked and laundered of obsolete connotations.
Some (e.g., Blackmore 1999; Crick 1994; Wegner 2002)
have argued that science has shown that we don’t have free
will. Others are compatibilists (e.g., Dennett 1984b;
2003a; Fischer 1994; Fischer & Ravizza 1998; Frankfurt
1988; Mele 1995). Dennett, for instance, has argued that
although there are varieties of free will that science has
plausibly shown not to exist, there are others that are
unscathed, and they are the varieties that matter. Belief
in them is indeed crucial to our mental health (to put it
crudely) but these are true beliefs, compatible with what
science has discovered, and is likely to discover, about
the mechanisms of human choice. Does what one believes
about the reality of free will make a discernible difference?
Vohs and Schooler (2008) show that students who read a
passage (from Crick 1994) assuring them that free will is
a myth are more likely to cheat in a subsequent opportu-
nity to win money. Like Dweck’s results, this ﬁnding
might motivate a policy of deliberate myth-making – to
try to preserve whatever shreds of responsibility remain
in the wake of scientiﬁc self-knowledge – but since
myth-maintenance is probably a losing battle even in the
short run, for the reasons we have reviewed, a more
stable policy might be to wean ourselves from the brittle
traditional concepts; so that Crick’s message turns into a
socially bland observation about the emptiness of an obso-
lete concept, not a subversive blow to the integrity of our
self-image as responsible agents. The fact that this healthy
perspective is a hard sell, perennially challenged by the all
too obvious intuition that “real” free will requires some-
thing like a miracle, may be indirect evidence that we
are not just “natural-born dualists” (Bloom 2004) but
natural-born believers in incompatibilist versions of free
will as well. Such (false) beliefs may indeed have been
adaptive in the past, enabling our ancestors to face life’s
decisions unburdened by misbegotten worries about cau-
sation and fatalism, but that does not make them necessary
for mental health or effectiveness today.
R10. Conclusion
What is an adaptive misbelief? In essence, it is a false
belief that has a recurrently positive effect on the repro-
ductive ﬁtness of its consumers. (Of course, for better or
worse we conﬂated adaptive with adapted or “evolved” in
our target article; so false beliefs that were adaptive in
the evolutionary past, but are not so nowadays, were of
equal interest to us.) Let us brieﬂy recap each of these
features. First, an adaptive misbelief must be a bona ﬁde
belief. It cannot be merely an alief, and it cannot be
merely a pragmatic acceptance reﬂecting a judicious
policy for action. Second, an adaptive misbelief must be
false, at least in part (it must at least exaggerate the
truth). It cannot have morphed into a mere metaphor
that no longer means what it would have to mean to be
false (as in the case of free will, the self’s user illusion
and the cases of “content erosion” we have discussed).
Third, an adaptive misbelief must be adaptive (or have
been adaptive, in the case of adapted misbelief – that
pesky conﬂation again). Moreover, it must be adaptive
for its consumers – lies that are adaptive for misinfor-
mants but harmful to the misinformed don’t count, nor
do parasitic misbeliefs that evolve simply because they
can evolve (see Dennett & McKay 2006). Adaptive misbe-
liefs can’t just represent the tolerated outputs of adaptive
systems, by-products that are carried along for the ride
despite being useless or even harmless. And they can’t
reﬂect the wholesale failures of internal mechanisms to
carry out their naturally selected functions – at least not
directly (we leave open here the possibility of naturally
selected doxastic shear pins). Their effects must be recur-
rently positive – not lucky one-offs as in Stich’s (1990)
case of “Harry.” Finally, their positive effects must be bio-
logically beneﬁcial, not just (or not necessarily) psycholo-
gically beneﬁcial: they must enhance the reproductive
ﬁtness of their consumers. The mechanism of inheritance,
however, can be genetic or cultural (natural selection can
operate via either channel, as we remind Wilks).
We identiﬁed positive illusions as the best candidates
for adaptive misbelief. In doing so we did not seek to
undermine the “default presumption” that true belief is
adaptive. Although we remain open to the possibility of
adaptive misbelief, our position is that misbelief will, for
the most part, lead to costly missteps: Misbelief can be
Response/McKay & Dennett: The evolution of misbelief
550
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (2009) 32:6

adaptive only against a broad background of true belief.
Some commentators (e.g., Dweck, Wilson & Lynn)
suggest that we held religious beliefs to a stricter standard
than positive illusions, and we accept that, pending further
research, religious beliefs may represent an important cul-
tural subspecies of evolved misbelief. But as Ainslie notes,
we are the endlessly tinkering, self-prospecting species,
and such myths as we – or natural selection – may
devise for ourselves are vulnerable to our insatiable curios-
ity. The tragic abyss that now opens before us is familiar
from hundreds of tales, from Eve’s fatal apple and Pan-
dora’s box, through Faust’s bargain, Bluebeard’s Castle
and Dostoyevsky’s Grand Inquisitor: What price knowl-
edge? Are we better off not knowing the truth? This ques-
tion presupposes, implausibly, that we might have a
choice, but it is probably too late in the day to opt for bliss-
ful ignorance. Science has seen to that, letting the cat out
of the bag (to cite one more version of the tale). Now that
skepticism is ubiquitous, “practically realistic” myths
(Wilson & Lynn; see also Wilson 2002) are in danger of
losing whatever effectiveness accounts for their preser-
vation up to now. The frequency in the social world of
recursive meta-examinations (such as this article, along
with thousands of others) has changed the selective press-
ures acting on such myths, making their extinction more
likely, and not at all incidentally jeopardizing whatever
beneﬁts to us, their vectors, these myths may have
provided.
References
[The letters “a” and “r” before author’s initials stand for target article and
response references, respectively]
Abbey, A. (1982) Sex differences in attributions for friendly behavior: Do males
misperceive females’ friendliness? Journal of Personality and Social Psychol-
ogy 42:830–38.
[MGH, aRTM]
Ackerman, J. M., Becker, D. V., Mortensen, C. R., Sasaki, T., Neuberg, S. L. &
Kenrick, D. T. (2009) A pox on the mind: Disjunction of attention and memory
in processing physical disﬁgurement. Journal of Experimental Social Psychol-
ogy 45:478–85.
[JMA]
Ackerman, J. M., Griskevicius, V. & Li, N. (submitted) Let’s get serious: Commu-
nicating commitment in romantic relationship formation.
[JMA]
Ackerman, J. M. & Kenrick, D. T. (2008) The costs of beneﬁts: Help-refusals
highlight key trade-offs of social life. Personality and Social Psychology Review
12:118–40.
[JMA]
Ackerman, J. M. & Kenrick, D. T. (2009) Cooperative courtship: Helping friends
raise and raze relationship barriers. Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin
35:1285–300.
[JMA]
Ackerman, J. M., Shapiro, J. R., Neuberg, S. L., Kenrick, D. T., Becker, D. V.,
Griskevicius, V., Maner, J. K. & Schaller, M. (2006) They all look the same
to me (unless they’re angry): From out-group homogeneity to out-group
heterogeneity. Psychological Science 17:836–40.
[JMA]
Adams, C. D. & Dickinson, A. (1981) Actions and habits: Variations in associative
representations during instrumental learning. In: Information processing in
animals: Memory mechanisms, ed. N. E. Spear & R. R. Miller, pp. 143–66.
Erlbaum.
[ALM]
Ainslie, G. (2001) Breakdown of will. Cambridge University Press.
[GA]
Ainslie, G. (2005) Pre´cis of Breakdown of will. Behavioral and Brain Sciences
28(5):635–73.
[GA]
Ainslie, G. (2010) Procrastination, the basic impulse. In: The thief of time:
Philosophical essays on procrastination, ed. C. Andreou & M. White.
pp. 11–27. Oxford University Press.
[GA]
Akins, K. (1996) Of sensory systems and the “aboutness” of mental states. The
Journal of Philosophy 93(7):337–72.
[aRTM, JS]
Alcorta, C. S. & Sosis, R. (2005) Ritual, emotion, and sacred symbos. Human Nature
16(4):323–59.
[JB]
Alea, N. & Bluck, S. (2003) “Why are you telling me that?” A conceptual model
of the social function of autobiographical memory. Memory 11(2):165–78.
[JS]
Alexander, R. D. (1979) Darwinism and human affairs. University of Washington
Press.
[aRTM]
Alexander, R. D. (1987) The biology of moral systems. Aldine de Gruyter.
[aRTM]
Alicke, M. D. (1985) Global self-evaluation as determined by the desirability and
controllability of trait adjectives. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology
49:1621–30.
[JDB, aRTM]
Alloy, L. B. & Abramson, L. Y. (1988) Depressive realism: Four theoretical
perspectives. In: Cognitive processes in depression, ed. L. B. Alloy, pp.
223–65. Guilford Press.
[aRTM]
American Psychiatric Association (2000) Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of
Mental Disorders, Fourth Edition, Text Revision (DSM-IV-TR). American
Psychiatric Association.
[arRTM]
Anderson, J. R. & Schooler, L. J. (2000) The adaptive nature of memory. In: The
Oxford handbook of memory, ed. E. Tulving & F. I. M. Craik, pp. 557–70.
Oxford University Press.
[PB, JS]
Aristotle (1985) Nicomachean Ethics. trans. T. Irwin. Hackett.
[OF]
Armor, D. A. & Taylor, S. E. (1998) Situated optimism: Speciﬁc outcome expec-
tancies and self-regulation. In: Advances in experimental social psychology, vol.
30, ed. M. Zanna, pp. 309–79. Academic Press.
[DD]
Aronson, E. (1969) A theory of cognitive dissonance: A current perspective.
In: Advances in experimental social psychology, vol. 4, ed. L. Berkowitz,
pp. 1–34. Academic Press.
[NLG]
Asch, S. E. (1956) Studies of independence and conformity: A minority of one
against a unanimous majority. Psychological Monographs 70 (Whole
No. 416).
[VJK]
Atran, S. (2004) In Gods we trust: The evolutionary landscape of religion. Oxford
University Press.
[aRTM, KT-K]
Atran, S. & Norenzayan, A. (2004) Religion’s evolutionary landscape: Counterin-
tuition, commitment, compassion, communion. Behavioral and Brain Sciences
27:713–70.
[aRTM, DS]
Avital, E. & Jablonka, E. (2000) Animal traditions: Behavioural inheritance in
evolution. Cambridge University Press.
[rRTM]
Baer, D. & McEachron, D. L. (1982) A review of selected sociobiological principles:
Application to hominid evolution I: The development of group structure.
Journal of Social and Biological Structures 5:69–90.
[JMA]
Baker, S. T., Murray, K. & Hood, B. M. (2009) Children’s expectations about weight
and speed of falling objects; the younger the judge the better? Poster
presented at the Society for Research into Children’s Development
meeting, Denver, CO, April 2–4, 2009.
[NLG]
Balcetis, E. & Dunning, D. (2006) See what you want to see: Motivational
inﬂuences on visual perception. Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology 91:612–25.
[BR-S]
Bandura, A. (1989) Human agency in social cognitive theory. American Psychologist
44:1175–84.
[aRTM]
Barber, L. (2009) God’s banker: Interview of Stephen Green. In: The Financial
Times, June 27/28, 2009, “Life and Arts” section, p. 3. (Online posting June 26,
2009. Available at: http://www.ft.com/cms/s/2/224b507c-61de-9e03-
00144feabdc0.html)
[VJK]
Bargh, J. A. (2008) Free will is un-natural. In: Are we free? The psychology of free
will, ed. J. Baer, J. Kaufman & R. Baumeister, pp. 128–54. Oxford University
Press.
[BR-S]
Bargh, J. A., Chen, M. & Burrows, L. (1996) Automaticity of social behavior: Direct
effects of trait construct and stereotype activation on action. Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology 71:230–44.
[aRTM]
Bargh, J. A. & Earp, B. (2009) The will is caused, not “free.” Dialogue: Newsletter of
the Society for Personality and Social Psychology 24:13, 15.
[BR-S]
Bargh, J. A., Gollwitzer, P. M., Lee-Chai, A., Barndollar, K. & Troetschel, R. (2001)
Automating the will: Nonconscious activation and pursuit of
behavioral goals. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 81:1014–27.
[AN]
Barnier, A. J., Sutton, J., Harris, C. B. & Wilson, R. A. (2008) A conceptual
and empirical framework for the social distribution of cognition: the case
of memory. Cognitive Systems Research 9(1):33–51.
[JS]
Barrett, J. L. (2000) Exploring the natural foundations of religion. Trends in
Cognitive Sciences 4(1):29–34.
[aRTM, KT-K]
Barry, C. T., Frick, P. J. & Killian, A. L. (2003) The relation of narcissism and
self-esteem to conduct problems in children: A preliminary investigation.
Journal of Clinical and Adolescent Psychology 32:139–52.
[DSW]
Bartlett, F. C. (1932) Remembering. A study in experimental and social psychology.
Cambridge University Press.
[PB]
Baumeister, R. F. (1989) The optimal margin of illusion. Journal of Social and
Clinical Psychology 8:176–89.
[JDB, arRTM]
Baumeister, R. F. (2001) Violent pride: Do people turn violent because of self
hate or self love? Scientiﬁc American 284(4):96–101.
[DSW]
References/McKay & Dennett: The evolution of misbelief
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (2009) 32:6
551

Baumeister, R. F. (2008) Free will in scientiﬁc psychology. Perspectives on
Psychological Science 3:14–19.
[BR-S]
Baumeister, R. F., Campbell, J. D., Krueger, J. I. & Vohs, K. D. (2003) Does high
self-esteem cause better performance, interpersonal success, happiness,
or healthier life styles? Psychological Science in the Public Interest 4:1–44.
[DSW]
Baumeister, R. F., Masicampo, E. J. & DeWall, C. N. (2009) Prosocial beneﬁts of
feeling free: Disbelief in free will increases aggression and reduces helpfulness.
Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin 35:260–68.
[BR-S]
Baumgartner, T., Lutz, K., Schmidt, C. F. & Ja¨ncke, L. (2006) The emotional
power of music: How music enhances the feeling of affective pictures. Brain
Research 1075(1):151–64.
[JB]
Bayes, T. R. (1763) An essay towards solving a problem in the doctrine of chances.
Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society of London 53:370–418.
[aRTM]
Bayne, T. & Ferna´ndez, J. (2009) Delusion and self-deception: Mapping the terrain.
In: Delusion and self-deception: Affective and motivational inﬂuences on belief
formation, ed. T. Bayne & J. Ferna´ndez, pp. 1–21. Psychology Press.
[aRTM]
Bayne, T. & Pacherie, E. (2005) In defence of the doxastic conception of delusions.
Mind and Language 20(2):163–88.
[aRTM]
Becker, D. V., Mortensen, C. R., Ackerman, J. M., Shapiro, J. R., Anderson, U. S.,
Sasaki, T., Maner, J. K., Neuberg, S. L. & Kenrick, D. T. (submitted) Self-
protection and revenge-mindedness modulate detection of enemy insignia.
[JMA]
Beja-Pereira, A., Luikart, G., England, P. R., Bradley, D. G., Jann, O. C.,
Bertorelle, G., Chamberlain, A. T., Nunes, T. P., Metodiev, S., Ferrand, N. &
Erhardt, G. (2003) Gene-culture coevolution between cattle milk
protein genes and human lactase genes. Nature Genetics 35:311–13.
[aRTM]
Benabou, R. & Tirole, J. (2002) Self-conﬁdence and personal motivation. The
Quarterly Journal of Economics 117(3):871–915.
[aRTM]
Benedetti, F., Pollo, A., Lopiano, L., Lanotte, M., Vighetti, S. & Rainero, I. (2003)
Conscious expectation and unconscious conditioning in analgesic, motor, and
hormonal placebo/nocebo responses. The Journal of Neuroscience
23(10):4315–23.
[aRTM]
Bentall, R. P. & Kaney, S. (1996) Abnormalities of self-representation and per-
secutory delusions: A test of a cognitive model of paranoia. Psychological
Medicine 26:1231–37.
[arRTM]
Bering, J. M. (2002) The existential theory of mind. Review of General Psychology
6:3–24.
[aRTM]
Bering, J. M. (2006) The folk psychology of souls. Behavioral and Brain Sciences
29:453–98.
[aRTM]
Bering, J. M. & Johnson, D. D. P. (2005) “O Lord . . . you perceive my thoughts
from afar”: Recursiveness and the evolution of supernatural agency. Journal
of Cognition and Culture 5(1/2):118–42.
[aRTM, DDPJ]
Bering, J. M., McLeod, K. A. & Shackelford, T. K. (2005) Reasoning about
dead agents reveals possible adaptive trends. Human Nature 16:360–81.
[aRTM, AN]
Bernstein, D. M. & Loftus, E. F. (2009) How to tell if a particular memory is true or
false. Perspectives on Psychological Science 4:370–74.
[JS]
Berrios, G. E. (1991) Delusions as “wrong beliefs”: A conceptual history. British
Journal of Psychiatry 159:6–13.
[aRTM]
Bertamini, M. & Parks, T. E. (2005) On what people know about images on mirrors.
Cognition 98:85–104.
[MB]
Beyerstein, B., Sampson, W. I., Stojanovic, Z. & Handel, J. (2007) Can mind
conquer cancer? In: Tall tales about the mind and brain: Separating fact from
ﬁction, ed. S. Dallea Sala, pp. 440–60. Oxford University Press.
[DSW]
Bianchi, I. Savardi, U. & Bertamini, M. (2008) Estimation and representation
of head size (People overestimate their own head, evidence starting from the
15th century). British Journal of Psychology 99:513–31.
[MB]
Billig, M. & Tajfel, J. (1973) Social categorization and similarity in intergroup
behavior. European Journal of Social Psychology 3:27–52.
[JDB]
Binkofski, F., Buccino, G., Dohle, C., Seitz, R. J. & Freund, H.-J. (1999) Mirror
agnosia and mirror ataxia constitute different parietal lobe disorders. Annals
of Neurology 46:51–61.
[aRTM]
Binswanger, L. (1965) Wahn. Neske.
[ALM]
Bjork, E. L. & Bjork, R. A. (1988) On the adaptive aspects of retrieval failure
in autobiographical memory. In: Practical aspects of memory: Current
research and issues, ed. M. Gruneberg, P. Morris & R. Sykes, pp. 283–88.
Wiley.
[JS]
Blackmore, S. (1999) The meme machine. Oxford University Press.
[rRTM]
Blackwell, L., Trzesniewski, K. & Dweck, C. S. (2007) Implicit theories of intelli-
gence predict achievement across an adolescent transition: A longitudinal
study and an intervention. Child Development 78:246–63.
[aRTM]
Bloom, P. (2004) Descartes’ baby: How child development explains what makes
us human. Arrow Books.
[GA, JRL, arRTM]
Bloom, P. (2005) Is God an accident? Atlantic Monthly 296:105–12.
[aRTM]
Bloom, P. (2007) Religion is natural. Developmental Science 10(1):147–51.
[aRTM]
Boden, M. (1984) Animal perception from an Artiﬁcial Intelligence viewpoint.
In: Minds, machines and evolution, ed. C. Hookway, pp. 153–74. Cambridge
University Press.
[aRTM]
Bouchard, T. J. (1994) Genes, environment, and personality. Science 264:1700–
701.
[ETC]
Bowles, S., Choi, J.-K. & Hopfensitz, A. (2003) The co-evolution of individual
behaviours and social institutions. Journal of Theoretical Biology
223(2):135–47.
[aRTM]
Boyd, R., Gintis, H., Bowles, S. & Richerson, P. J. (2003) The evolution of altruistic
punishment. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences USA
100(6):3531–35.
[aRTM]
Boyer, P. (1994) The naturalness of religious ideas: A cognitive theory of religion.
University of California Press.
[DS]
Boyer, P. (2001) Religion explained: The evolutionary origins of religious thought.
Basic Books.
[aRTM, KT-K]
Boyer, P. (2003) Religious thought and behaviour as by-products of brain function.
Trends in Cognitive Sciences 7(3):119–24.
[aRTM]
Boyer, P. (2008a) Evolutionary economics of mental time travel. Trends in
Cognitive Sciences 12(6):219–24.
[JS]
Boyer, P. (2008b) Religion: Bound to believe? Nature 455(23):1038–39.
[aRTM]
Boyer, P. (2009) What are memories for? Functions of recall in cognition and
culture. In: Memory in mind and culture, ed. P. Boyer & J. Wertsch, pp. 3–28.
Cambridge University Press.
[JS]
Bozzi, P. (1958) Analisi fenomenologica del moto pendolare armonico. Rivista di
Psicologia 52:281–302.
[MB]
Brainerd, C. J. & Reyna, V. F. (2005) The science of false memory. Oxford University
Press.
[PB]
Bratman, M. E. (1992) Practical reasoning and acceptance in a context. Mind
101(401):1–15.
[KF, aRTM]
Breen, N., Caine, D. & Coltheart, M. (2001) Mirrored-self misidentiﬁcation: Two
cases of focal onset dementia. Neurocase 7:239–54.
[aRTM]
Breen, N., Caine, D., Coltheart, M., Hendy, J. & Roberts, C. (2000) Towards
an understanding of delusions of misidentiﬁcation: Four case studies. Mind
and Language 15(1):74–110.
[aRTM]
Brewer, M. B. (1979) In-group bias in the minimal intergroup situation: A
cognitive-motivational analysis. Psychological Bulletin 86:307–24.
[JDB]
Brown, J. D. (1986) Evaluations of self and others: Self-enhancement biases in
social judgments. Social Cognition 4:353–76.
[JDB]
Brown, J. D. (1991) Accuracy and bias in self-knowledge. In: Handbook of social
and clinical psychology: The health perspective, ed. C. R. Snyder & D. F.
Forsyth, pp. 158–78. Pergamon Press.
[JDB]
Brown, J. D. (1998) The self. McGraw-Hill.
[JDB]
Brown, J. D. (2003) The self-enhancement motive in collectivistic cultures: The
rumors of my death have been greatly exaggerated. Journal of Cross-Cultural
Psychology 34:603–605.
[JDB]
Brown, J. D. (2007) Positive illusions. In: Encyclopedia of social psychology, ed.
R. Baumeister & K. Vohs, pp. 615–17. Sage.
[JDB]
Brown, J. D., Cai, H., Oakes, M. A. & Deng, C. (2009) Cultural similarities in self-
esteem functioning: East is East and West is West, but sometimes the twain do
meet. Journal of Cross-Cultural Psychology 40:140–57.
[JDB]
Brown, J. D. & Kobayashi, C. (2002) Self-enhancement in Japan and America.
Asian Journal of Social Psychology 5:145–67.
[JDB]
Brown, J. D. & Kobayashi, C. (2003) Motivation and manifestation: The cross-
cultural expression of the self-enhancement motive. Asian Journal of Social
Psychology 6:85–88.
[JDB]
Bru¨ne, M. (2001) De Clerambault’s syndrome (erotomania) in an
evolutionary perspective. Evolution and Human Behavior 22(6):409–15.
[aRTM]
Bru¨ne, M. (2003a) Erotomania (De Clerambault’s Syndrome) revisited – Clues to
its origin from evolutionary theory. In: Advances in psychology research, vol.
21, ed. S. P. Shohov, pp. 185–212. Nova Science.
[aRTM]
Bru¨ne, M. (2003b) Erotomanic stalking in evolutionary perspective. Behavioral
Sciences and the Law 21(1):83–88.
[aRTM]
Bruner, J. S. (1957) On perceptual readiness. Psychological Review 64:123–52.
[BR-S]
Buckman, R. & Sabbagh, K. (1993) Magic or medicine: An investigation of healing
and healers. MacMillan.
[aRTM]
Bulbulia, J. (2004a) Religious costs as adaptations that signal altruistic intention.
Evolution and Cognition 10(1):19–38.
[JB]
Bulbulia, J. (2004b) The cognitive and evolutionary psychology of religion. Biology
and Philosophy 19:655–86.
[aRTM]
Bulbulia, J. (2009) Religiosity as mental time travel: Cognitive adaptations for
religious behavior. In: The believing primate: Scientiﬁc, philosophical and
theological perspectives on the evolution of religion, ed. J. Schloss & M.
Murray, pp. 44–75. Oxford University Press.
[JB]
References/McKay & Dennett: The evolution of misbelief
552
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (2009) 32:6

Bulbulia, J. (in press) Coordination by sacred cues :j. Journal for the Study of
Religion, Nature, Culture.
[JB]
Bulbulia, J. & Mahoney, A. (2008) Religious solidarity: The hand grenade exper-
iment. Journal of Cognition and Culture 8:295–320.
[JB]
Burger, J. M., Messian, N., Patel, S., del Prado, A. & Anderson, C. (2004) What a
coincidence! The effects of incidental similarity on compliance. Personality
and Social Psychology Bulletin 30:35–43.
[MB]
Bushman, B. J., Ridge, R. D., Das, E., Key, C. W. & Busath, G. L. (2007) When
God sanctions killing: Effect of scriptural violence on aggression. Psychological
Science 18(3):204–207.
[aRTM]
Buss, D. M. & Haselton, M. G. (2005) The evolution of jealousy: A response to
Buller. Trends in Cognitive Sciences 9(11):506–507.
[aRTM]
Buss, D. M., Haselton, M. G., Shackelford, T. K., Bleske, A. L. & Wakeﬁeld, J. C.
(1998) Adaptations, exaptations, and spandrels. American Psychologist
53:533–48.
[JRL]
Butler, P. V. (2000) Reverse Othello syndrome subsequent to traumatic brain
injury. Psychiatry: Interpersonal and Biological Processes 63(1):85–92.
[aRTM]
Byrne, C. C. & Kurland, J. A. (2001) Self-deception in an evolutionary game.
Journal of Theoretical Biology 212:457–80.
[ETC]
Cacioppo, J. T., Berntson, G. G., Sheridan, J. F. & McClintock, M. K. (2000)
Multilevel integrative analyses of human behavior: Social neuroscience and
the complementing nature of social and biological approaches. Psychological
Bulletin 126:829–43.
[BR-S]
Cai, H., Brown, J. D., Deng, C. & Oakes, M. A. (2007) Self-esteem and culture:
Differences in cognitive self-evaluations or affective self-regard? Asian Journal
of Social Psychology 10:162–70.
[JDB]
Cai, H., Wu, Q. & Brown, J. D. (2009) Is self-esteem a universal need? Evidence
from the People’s Republic of China. Asian Journal of Social Psychology
12:104–20.
[JDB]
Callebaut, W., Mu¨ller, G. B. & Newman, S. A. (2007) The organismic systems
approach: Evo-devo and the streamlining of the naturalistic agenda. In:
Integrating evolution and development: From theory to practice, ed. R. Sansom
& R. N. Brandon, pp. 25–92. MIT Press.
[TJW]
Camerer, C. (2003) Behavioral game theory. Princeton University Press.
[aRTM]
Campbell, D. T. (1965) Ethnocentric and other altruistic motives. In: Nebraska
Symposium on Motivation, pp. 283–311, ed. D. Levine. University of
Nebraska Press.
[JMA]
Caputo, D. D. & Dunning, D. (2005) What you don’t know: The role played by
errors of omission in imperfect self-assessments. Journal of Experimental
Social Psychology 41:488–505.
[DD]
Carruthers, P. (2009) How we know our own minds: The relationship between
mindreading and metacognition. Behavioral and Brain Sciences
32(2):121–82.
[TWZ]
Casati, R. (2008) The copycat solution to the shadow correspondence problem.
Perception 37(4):495–503.
[MB]
Cash, M. (2008) Thoughts and oughts. Philosophical Explorations 11(2):93–119.
[TWZ]
Casperson, L. W. (1999) Head movement and vision in underwater-feeding birds
of stream, lake, and seashore. Bird Behavior 13:31–46.
[aRTM]
Cassia, V. M., Turati, C. & Simion, F. (2004) Can a non-speciﬁc preference for
top-heavy patterns explain newborns’ face preference? Psychological Science
15:379–83.
[CSD]
Cauvin, J. (2000) The birth of the Gods and the origins of agriculture. Cambridge
University Press.
[AN]
Cavanagh, P. (2005) The artist as neuroscientist. Nature 434:301–307.
[MB]
Chambers, J. R. & Windschitl, P. D. (2004) Biases in social comparison judgments:
The role of nonmotivated factors in above-average and comparative-optimism
effects. Psychological Bulletin 130:813–38.
[JK]
Chomsky, N. (1965) Aspects of the theory of syntax. MIT Press.
[YW]
Chow, Y. C., Dhillon, B., Chew, P. T. & Chew, S. J. (1990) Refractive errors
in Singapore medical students. Singapore Medical Journal 31:472–73.
[aRTM]
Churchland, P. (1987) Epistemology in the age of neuroscience. Journal of
Philosophy 84(10):544–53.
[JPS]
Cimpian, A., Arce, H., Markman, E. M. & Dweck, C. S. (2007) Subtle linguistic
cues impact children’s motivation. Psychological Science 18:314–16.
[CSD]
Clark, A. (1994) Beliefs and desires incorporated. Journal of Philosophy
91:404–25.
[JS]
Cohen, L. J. (1989) Belief and acceptance. Mind 98:367–89.
[KF]
Cohen, L. J. (1992) An essay on belief and acceptance. Oxford University Press.
[KF]
Cokely, E. T. & Feltz, A. (2009a) Adaptive variation in folk judgment and
philosophical intuition. Consciousness and Cognition 18:355–57.
[ETC]
Cokely, E. T. & Feltz, A. (2009b) Individual differences, judgment biases, and
Theory-of-Mind: Deconstructing the intentional action side effect asymmetry.
Journal of Research in Personality 43:18–24.
[ETC]
College Board (1976–1977) Student descriptive questionnaire. Educational Testing
Service, College Board.
[JK]
Coltheart, M. (1996) Are dyslexics different? Dyslexia 2:79–81.
[aRTM]
Coltheart, M. (2002) Cognitive neuropsychology. In: Stevens’ handbook of
experimental psychology, vol. 4: Methodology in experimental psychology,
3rd edition, ed. H. Pashler & J. Wixted, pp. 139–74. Wiley.
[aRTM]
Coltheart, M. (2007) Cognitive neuropsychiatry and delusional belief. Quarterly
Journal of Experimental Psychology 60:1041–1062.
[RL]
Coltheart, M., Menzies, P. & Sutton, J. (in press) Abductive inference and delu-
sional belief. In: Delusion and confabulation: Overlapping or distinct psycho-
pathologies of reality distortion, ed. R. Langdon & M. Turner. Macquarie
Monographs in Cognitive Science Series. Series editor: M. Coltheart. Psy-
chology Press.
[aRTM]
Colvin, C. R. & Block, J. (1994) Do positive illusions foster mental health? An
examination of the Taylor and Brown formulation. Psychological Bulletin
116(1):3–20.
[aRTM]
Conrad, K. (1958) Die beginnende Schizophrenie. Versuch einer Gestaltanalyse
des Wahns. Thieme.
[ALM]
Conway, M. A. (2005) Memory and the self. Journal of Memory and Language
53:594–628.
[JS]
Conway, M. A. & Pleydell-Pearce, C. W. (2000) The construction of
autobiographical memories in the self-memory system. Psychological
Review 107(2):261–88.
[JS]
Corlett, P. R., Frith, C. D. & Fletcher, P. C. (2009a) From drugs to deprivation:
A Bayesian framework for understanding models of psychosis.
Psychopharmacology 206(4):515–30.
[ALM]
Corlett, P. R., Honey, G. D. & Fletcher, P. C. (2007) From prediction error to
psychosis: Ketamine as a pharmacological model of delusions. Journal
of Psychopharmacology 21(3):238–52.
[ALM]
Corlett, P. R., Krystal, J. K., Taylor, J. R. & Fletcher, P. C. (2009b) Why do
delusions persist? Frontiers in Human Neuroscience 3. Available at: http://
www.frontiersin.org/humanneuroscience/paper/10.3389/neuro.09/012.2009/
html/
[rRTM, ALM]
Coser, L. A. (1956) The functions of social conﬂict. Free Press.
[JMA]
Cosmides, L. & Tooby, J. (2000) Consider the source: The evolution of adaptations
for decoupling and metarepresentation. In Metarepresentations: A multidis-
ciplinary perspective, ed. D. Sperber, pp. 53–115. Oxford University Press.
[PB]
Cottrell, C. A. & Neuberg, S. L. (2005) Different emotional reactions to different
groups: A sociofunctional threat-based approach to “prejudice.” Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology 88:770–89.
[JMA]
Coyne, J. C. & Kitcher, P. (2007) Letter to the editor re: Fodor. London Review
of Books, November 15, p. 29.
[aRTM]
Coyne, J. C., Pajak, T. F., Harris, J., Konski, A., Movsas, B. & Ang, K. (2007)
Emotional well-being does not predict survival in head and neck cancer
patients: A radiation therapy oncology group study. Cancer 110:2568–75.
[DSW]
Crick, F. (1994) The astonishing hypothesis: The scientiﬁc search for the soul.
Scribner.
[rRTM]
Cromer, A. (1993) Uncommon sense: The heretical nature of science. Oxford
University Press.
[JPS]
Cronk, L. (1994) Evolutionary theories of morality and the manipulative use of
signals. Zygon 4:117–35.
[DDPJ]
Cross, P. (1977) Not can but will college teaching be improved? New Directions
for Higher Education 17:1–15.
[aRTM]
Currie, G. (2000) Imagination, delusion and hallucinations. Mind and Language
15:168–83.
[aRTM]
Currie, G. & Jureidini, J. (2001) Delusion, rationality, empathy: Commentary on
Davies et al. Philosophy, Psychiatry, and Psychology 8(2–3):159–62.
[aRTM]
David, A. S. (1999) On the impossibility of deﬁning delusions. Philosophy,
Psychiatry, and Psychology 6(1):17–20.
[RL, aRTM]
David, A. S. & Halligan, P. W. (1996) Editorial. Cognitive Neuropsychiatry
1:1–3.
[aRTM]
Davidson, D. (1994) Radical interpretation interpreted. In: Philosophical
perspectives, vol. 8: Logic and Language, ed. J. E. Tomberlin, pp. 121–28.
Ridgeview.
[aRTM]
Davidson, D. (2001) Inquiries into truth and interpretation, 2nd edition. Clarendon
Press.
[aRTM]
Davies, M. & Coltheart, M. (2000) Introduction: Pathologies of belief. In:
Pathologies of belief, ed. M. Coltheart & M. Davies, pp. 1–46. Blackwell.
[aRTM, ALM]
Davies, M., Coltheart, M., Langdon, R. & Breen, N. (2001) Monothematic
delusions: Towards a two-factor account. Philosophy, Psychiatry, and
Psychology 8(2–3): 133–58.
[RL, aRTM]
Daw, N. D., Niv, Y. & Dayan, P. (2005) Uncertainty-based competition between
prefrontal and dorsolateral striatal systems for behavioral control. Nature
Neuroscience 8(12):1704–11.
[ALM]
References/McKay & Dennett: The evolution of misbelief
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (2009) 32:6
553

Dawkins, R. (1982) The extended phenotype. Freeman/Oxford University Press.
[JRL, aRTM]
Dawkins, R. (1986) The blind watchmaker. W. W. Norton.
[aRTM]
Dawkins, R. (1989) The selﬁsh gene, second edition. Oxford University Press.
[RGM, YW]
Dawkins, R. (1996) The blind watchmaker: Why the evidence of evolution reveals a
universe without design. W.W. Norton.
[JPS]
Dawkins, R. (2006a) The God delusion. Bantam Press.
[aRTM]
Dawkins, R. (2006b) The selﬁsh gene: 30th anniversary edition. Oxford University
Press.
[aRTM]
Deacon, T. (1997) The symbolic species: The coevolution of language and the brain.
Norton.
[rRTM]
Dean, C. & Surtees, P. G. (1989) Do psychological factors predict survival in breast
cancer? Journal of Psychosomatic Research 33(5):561–69.
[aRTM]
DeBruine, L. M. (2002) Facial resemblance enhances trust. Proceedings of the
Royal Society of London B 269:1307–12.
[MB]
Deeley, P. Q., Identity, D. & Identity, R. P. (2003) Social, cognitive, and neural
constraints on subjectivity and agency: Implications. Project Muse
10(2):161–67. Available at: muse.jhu.edu
[JB]
Dennett, D. C. (1971) Intentional systems. Journal of Philosophy 68(2):87–106.
[aRTM]
Dennett, D. C. (1978) Brainstorms: Philosophical essays on mind and psychology.
MIT Press/A Bradford Book.
[arRTM, TWZ]
Dennett, D. C. (1981) Making sense of ourselves (Reply to S. Stich, “Dennett on
Intentional Systems”). Philosophical Topics 12:63–81. Reprinted in: Mind,
brain, and function: Essays in the philosophy of mind, ed. J. I. Biro & R. W.
Shahan, pp. 63–81. University of Oklahoma Press, 1982.
[rRTM]
Dennett, D. C. (1982) Beyond belief. In: Thought and object: Essays on inten-
tionality, ed. A. Woodﬁeld, pp. 1–96. Clarendon Press.
[aRTM]
Dennett, D. C. (1984a) A route to intelligence: Oversimplify and self-monitor.
Available at: http://ase.tufts.edu/cogstud/papers/oversimplify.pdf.
[rRTM]
Dennett, D. C. (1984b) Elbow room. MIT Press.
[rRTM]
Dennett, D. C. (1985) Why believe in belief? (Review of S. Stich, From folk
psychology to cognitive science: The case against belief). Contemporary
Psychology 30:949.
[rRTM]
Dennett, D. C. (1987) The intentional stance. MIT Press.
[aRTM, TWZ]
Dennett, D. C. (1990a) Attitudes about ADHD: Some analogies and aspects.
In: ADHD: Attention Deﬁcit Hyperactivity Disorders, ed. K. Conners &
M. Kinsbourne, pp. 11–16. MMV Medizin Verlag.
[aRTM]
Dennett, D. C. (1990b) The interpretation of texts, people and other artifacts.
Philosophy and Phenomenological Research 50(Supplement):177–94.
[aRTM]
Dennett, D. (1991) Consciousness explained. Little, Brown.
[JB, rRTM, JS,
TWZ]
Dennett, D. C. (1995a) Darwin’s dangerous idea: Evolution and the meanings
of life. Simon & Schuster/Penguin.
[arRTM]
Dennett, D. C. (1995b) How to make mistakes. In: How things are, ed. J. Brockman
& K. Matson, pp. 137–44. William Morrow.
[aRTM]
Dennett, D. C. (1998) Brainchildren – Essays on designing minds. MIT Press/
Bradford Books and Penguin.
[aRTM]
Dennett, D. C. (2003a) Freedom evolves. Viking Press.
[rRTM]
Dennett, D. C. (2003b) The Baldwin Effect: A crane, not a skyhook. In: Evolution
and learning: The Baldwin Effect reconsidered, ed. B. H. Weber &
D. J. Depew, pp. 60–79. MIT Press/Bradford Books.
[rRTM]
Dennett, D. C. (2005) Show me the science. The New York Times, August 28,
p. 11.
[aRTM]
Dennett, D. C. (2006a) Breaking the spell: Religion as a natural phenomenon.
Viking/Penguin Press.
[arRTM, JPS, DSW, TWZ]
Dennett, D. C. (2006b) Thank Goodness! Edge: The Third Culture, November 3,
2006. http://edge.org/3rd_culture/dennett06/dennett06_index.html.
[aRTM]
Dennett, D. C. (2007) Letter to the Editor re Fodor. London Review of Books,
November 15, 2007, p. 29.
[aRTM]
Dennett, D. C. (2008) Fun and games in Fantasyland. Mind and Language
23(1):25–31.
[aRTM]
Dennett, D. C. (2009) Darwin’s “strange inversion of reasoning.” Proceedings of the
National Academy of Sciences USA 106 (Suppl. 1):10061–65.
[rRTM]
Dennett, D. C. (forthcoming) Science and religion: Are they compatible? A debate
with Alvin Plantinga. Oxford University Press.
[rRTM]
Dennett, D. C. & McKay, R. T. (2006) A continuum of mindfulness
(Commentary on Mesoudi et al). Behavioral and Brain Sciences
29(4):353–54.
[rRTM]
Denrell, J. (2005) Why most people disapprove of me: Experience sampling in
impression formation. Psychological Review 112:951–78.
[DD]
Denton, K. & Zarbatany, L. (1996) Age differences in support processes in
conversations between friends. Child Development 67:1360–73. [DLK]
Dickinson, A. & Shanks, D. (1995) Instrumental action and causal representation.
In: Causal cognition: A multidisciplinary debate, ed. D. Sperber, D. Premack
& A. J. Premack, pp. 5–25. Oxford University Press.
[ALM]
Dijksterhuis, A., Chartrand, T. L. & Aarts, H. (2007) Effects of priming and
perception on social behavior and goal pursuit. In: Social psychology and the
unconscious: The automaticity of higher mental processes, ed. J. A. Bargh, pp.
51–131. Psychology Press.
[aRTM]
Dijksterhuis, A., Preston, J., Wegner, D. M. & Aarts, H. (2008) Effects of subliminal
priming of self and God on self-attribution of authorship for events. Journal of
Experimental Social Psychology 44:2–9.
[rRTM, AN]
Dillard, A. J., McCaul, K. D. & Klein, W. M. P. (2006) Unrealistic optimism in
smokers: Implications for smoking myth endorsement and self-protective
motivation. Journal of Health Communication 11:93–102.
[DD]
Dukas, R. (1999) Costs of memory: ideas and predictions. Journal of theoretical
biology 197(1):41–50.
[PB]
Dunning, D. (2005) Self-insight: Roadblocks and detours on the path to knowing
thyself. Psychology Press.
[DD]
Dunning, D., Heath, C. & Suls, J. M. (2004) Flawed self-assessment: Implications
for health, education, and the workplace. Psychological Science in the Public
Interest 5:69–106.
[JDB, DD, CSD]
Dunning, D., Meyerowitz, J. A. & Holzberg, A. D. (1989) Ambiguity and
self-evaluation: The role of idiosyncratic trait deﬁnitions in self-serving
assessments of ability. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology
57:1082–90.
[JK]
Duntley, J. & Buss, D. M. (1998) Evolved anti-homicide modules. Paper presented
at the Human Behavior and Evolution Society Conference, Davis, CA, July
1998.
[DD, aRTM]
Durkheim, E. (1912/1995) The elementary forms of religious life. Free Press.
(Original work published in 1912).
[KT-K]
Dweck, C. S. (1999) Self-theories: Their role in motivation, personality and devel-
opment. Psychology Press.
[aRTM]
Easton, J. A., Schipper, L. D. & Shackelford, T. K. (2007) Morbid jealousy from an
evolutionary psychological perspective. Evolution and Human Behavior
28:399–402.
[aRTM]
Eisenhardt, D. & Menzel, R. (2007) Extinction learning, reconsolidation and the
internal reinforcement hypothesis. Neurobiology of Learning and Memory
87(2):167–73.
[ALM]
Ellis, A. W. & Young, A. W. (1988) Human cognitive neuropsychology. Erlbaum.
[aRTM]
Ellis, H. D. (2003) Book review: Uncommon psychiatric syndromes. Cognitive
Neuropsychiatry 8(1):77–79.
[aRTM]
Engel, P. (1998) Believing, holding true, and accepting. Philosophical Explorations
1:140–51.
[KF]
Engel, P., ed. (2000) Believing and accepting. Kluwer Academic.
[KF]
Enoch, M. D. & Ball, H. N. (2001) Uncommon psychiatric syndromes, 4th edition.
Arnold.
[aRTM]
Fehr, E. & Fischbacher, U. (2003) The nature of human altruism. Nature
425:785–91.
[aRTM, AN]
Fehr, E. & Fischbacher, U. (2004) Social norms and human cooperation. Trends in
Cognitive Sciences 8(4):185–90.
[aRTM]
Fehr, E., Fischbacher, U. & Gaechter, S. (2002) Strong reciprocity, human
cooperation, and the enforcement of social norms. Human Nature 13:1–25.
[aRTM]
Fehr, E. & Gaechter, S. (2002) Altruistic punishment in humans. Nature
415:137–40.
[aRTM]
Feinberg, T. E. (2001) Altered egos: How the brain creates the self. Oxford
University Press.
[aRTM]
Feinberg, T. E. & Shapiro, R. M. (1989) Misidentiﬁcation-reduplication and the
right hemisphere. Neuropsychiatry, Neuropsychology, and Behavioral
Neurology 2(1):39–48.
[aRTM]
Feldman, M. W. & Cavalli-Sforza, L. L. (1989) On the theory of evolution under
genetic and cultural transmission with application to the lactose absorption
problem. In: Mathematical evolutionary theory, ed. M. W. Feldman,
pp. 145–73. Princeton University Press.
[aRTM]
Feltz, A. & Cokely, E. T. (2008) The fragmented folk: More evidence of stable
individual differences in moral judgments and folk intuitions. In: Proceedings
of the 30th Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science Society, ed.
B. C. Love, K. McRae & V. M. Sloutsky, pp. 1771–76. Cognitive Science
Society.
[ETC]
Feltz, A. & Cokely, E. T. (2009) Do judgments about freedom and responsibility
depend on who you are? Personality differences intuitions about
compatibilism and incompatibilism. Consciousness and Cognition
24:342–50.
[ETC]
Fernandes, M., Ross, M., Wiegand, M. & Schryer, E. (2008) Are the memories of
older adults positively biased? Psychology and Aging 23(2):297–306.
[JS]
Festinger, L. (1954) A theory of social comparison processes. Human Relations
7:117–40.
[JK]
Festinger, L., Reicken, H. & Schachter, S. (1956) When prophecy fails. New York
Press.
[JB]
Fetchenhauer, D. & Dunning, D. (2009) Do people trust too much or too little?
Journal of Economic Psychology 30:263–76.
[DD]
References/McKay & Dennett: The evolution of misbelief
554
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (2009) 32:6

Fetchenhauer, D. & Dunning, D. (in press) Why so cynical? Asymmetric feedback
underlies misguided skepticism in the trustworthiness of others. Psychological
Science.
[DD]
Fischer, J. M. (1994) The metaphysics of free will. Blackwell.
[rRTM]
Fischer, J. M. & Ravizza, M. (1998) Responsibility and control: An essay on moral
responsibility. Cambridge University Press.
[rRTM]
Fisher, H. (2006) The drive to love: The neural mechanism for mate selection.
In: The new psychology of love, 2nd edition, ed. R. J. Sternberg & K. Weis,
pp. 87–115. Yale University Press.
[aRTM]
Flanagan, O. (1991) Varieties of moral personality: Ethics and psychological
realism. Harvard University Press.
[OF]
Flanagan, O. (2007) The really hard problem: Meaning and the material world. MIT
Press.
[OF]
Fletcher, P. C. & Frith, C. D. (2009) Perceiving is believing: A Bayesian approach.
Nature Reviews Neuroscience 10(1):48–58.
[ALM]
Fodor, J. A. (1981) Representations: Philosophical essays on the foundations of
cognitive science. MIT Press.
[YW]
Fodor, J. A. (1983) The modularity of mind. MIT Press.
[aRTM]
Fodor, J. A. (1986) Pre´cis of The modularity of mind. Meaning and cognitive
structure. Behavioral and Brain Sciences 8(1):1–42.
[aRTM]
Fodor, J. A. (2007) Why pigs don’t have wings. London Review of Books, October
18, 2007.
[aRTM]
Fowers, B. J., Lyons, E. M. & Montel, K. H. (1996) Positive marital illusions:
Self-enhancement or relationship enhancement? Journal of Family Psychology
10:192–208.
[aRTM]
Fowers, B. J., Lyons, E., Montel, K. H. & Shaked, N. (2001) Positive illusions
about marriage among the married, engaged, and single. Journal of Family
Psychology 15:95–109.
[aRTM]
Frankfurt, H. (1988) The importance of what we care about. Cambridge University
Press.
[rRTM]
Frankish, K. (2004) Mind and supermind. Cambridge University Press.
[KF]
Frankish, K. (2009) Partial belief and ﬂat-out belief. In: Degrees of belief, ed.
F. Huber & C. Schmidt-Petri, pp. 75–93. Springer.
[KF]
Freud, S. (1920) On metapsychology: The theory of psychoanalysis, trans.
J. Strachey. Penguin Books.
[JK]
Friedrich, J. (1996) On seeing oneself as less self-serving than others: The ultimate
self-serving bias? Teaching of Psychology 23(2):107–109.
[aRTM]
Fuster, J. M. (2006) The cognit: A network model of cortical representation.
International Journal of Psychophysiology 60(2):125–32.
[ALM]
Gagne´, F. M. & Lydon, J. E. (2004) Bias and accuracy in close relationships:
An integrative review. Personality and Social Psychology Review
8(4):322–38.
[aRTM]
Gailliot, M. T., Baumeister, R. F., DeWall, C. N., Maner, J. K., Plant, E. A., Tice,
D. M., Brewer, L. E. & Schmeichel, B. J. (2007) Self-control relies on glucose
as a limited energy source: Willpower is more than a metaphor. Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology 92:325–36.
[BR-S]
Gazzaniga, M. (1995) Consciousness and the cerebral hemispheres. In: The cog-
nitive neurosciences, ﬁrst edition, ed. M. Gazzaniga, pp. 1391–400. MIT
Press.
[TWZ]
Gendler, T. S. (2008) Alief and belief. Journal of Philosophy 105(10):634–63.
[arRTM]
Gergen, K. J. (1973) Social psychology as history. Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology 26(2):309–20.
[VJK]
Gervais, W. & Norenzayan, A. (2009) Priming God increases public self-awareness.
Unpublished raw data, University of British Columbia. [Author’s note: The
data are available upon request from Ara Norenzayan at: ara@psych.ubc.ca ]
[rRTM, AN]
Ghiselin, M. T. (1974) The economy of nature and the evolution of sex. University
of California Press.
[JRL, aRTM]
Gibbon, J. (1977) Scalar expectancy theory and Weber’s law in animal timing.
Psychological Review 84:279–325.
[GA]
Gigerenzer, G. & Brighton, H. J. (2009) Homo heuristicus: Why biased minds make
better inferences. Topics in Cognitive Science 1:107–43.
[ETC]
Gigerenzer, G. & Goldstein, D. G. (1996) Reasoning the fast and frugal way:
Models of bounded rationality Psychological Review 103(4):650–69.
[arRTM]
Gigerenzer, G. & Goldstein, D. G. (1999) Betting on one good reason: The take the
best heuristic. In: Simple heuristics that make us smart, ed. G. Gigerenzer, P.
M. Todd, & the ABC Research Group, pp. 75–95. Oxford University Press.
[aRTM]
Gigerenzer, G., Hertwig, R., Hoffrage, U. & Sedlmeier, P. (2008) Cognitive illu-
sions reconsidered. In: Handbook of experimental economics results: Vol. 1
(Handbooks in Economics, No. 28), ed. C. R. Plott & V. L. Smith, pp. 1018–34.
North-Holland.
[ETC]
Gigerenzer, G., Todd, P. M. & the ABC Research Group (1999) Simple heuristics
that make us smart. Oxford University Press.
[ETC, arRTM, KT-K]
Gilbert, D. T. (1991) How mental systems believe. American Psychologist 46:107–
19.
[DSW]
Gilovich, T. (1991) How we know what isn’t so: The fallibility of human reason in
everyday life. Free Press.
[JK]
Gintis, H. (2000) Strong reciprocity and human sociality. Journal of Theoretical
Biology 206:169–79.
[aRTM]
Gintis, H. (2003) The hitchhiker’s guide to altruism: Gene-culture co-evolution and
the internalization of norms. Journal of Theoretical Biology 220:407–18.
[aRTM]
Gintis, H., Bowles, S., Boyd, R. & Fehr, E. (2003) Explaining altruistic behavior in
humans. Evolution and Human Behavior 24(3):153–72.
[aRTM]
Gintis, H., Smith, E. & Bowles, S. (2001) Costly signalling and cooperation. Journal
of Theoretical Biology 213:103–19.
[aRTM]
Glenberg, A. M. (1997) What memory is for. Behavioral and Brain Sciences
20(1):1–55.
[JS]
Goldstein, D. G. & Gigerenzer, G. (2002) Models of ecological rationality:
The recognition heuristic. Psychological Review 109(1):75–90.
[aRTM]
Goleman, D. (1987) Who are you kidding? Psychology Today 21(3):24–30.
[aRTM]
Gottlieb, G. & Lickliter, R. (2007) Probabilistic epigenesis. Developmental Science
10:1–11.
[TJW]
Gould, S. J. & Lewontin, R. C. (1979) The spandrels of San Marco and the Pan-
glossian paradigm: A critique of the adaptationist programme. Proceedings of
the Royal Society of London, Series B 205(1161):581–98.
[aRTM]
Gould, S. J. & Vrba, E. S. (1982) Exaptation: A missing term in the science of form.
Paleobiology 8(1):4–15.
[aRTM]
Govern, J. M. & Marsch, L. A. (2001) Development and validation of the Situational
Self-Awareness Scale. Consciousness and Cognition 10:366–78.
[AN]
Green, L. & Myerson, J. (2004) A discounting framework for choice with delayed
and probabilistic rewards. Psychological Bulletin 130:769–92.
[GA]
Guthrie, S. E. (1993) Faces in the clouds: A new theory of religion. Oxford Uni-
versity Press.
[aRTM]
Haggard, P., Aschersleben, G., Gehrke J. & Prinz, W. (2002) Action, binding and
awareness. In Attention and performance XIX: Common mechanisms in
perception and action, ed. B. Hommel & W. Prinz, pp. 266–85. Oxford
University Press.
[ALM]
Haidt, J. (2001) The emotional dog and its rational tail: A social intuitionist approach
to moral judgment. Psychological Review 108:814–34.
[DLK, rRTM]
Hamilton, A. (2007) Against the belief model of delusion. In: Reconceiving
schizophrenia, ed. M. C. Chung, K. W. M. Fulford & G. Graham, pp. 217–34.
Oxford University Press.
[aRTM]
Hamilton, W. D. (1964) Genetical evolution of social behavior, I and II. Journal of
Theoretical Biology 7:1–52.
[aRTM]
Hammond, R. A. & Axelrod, R. (2006) The evolution of ethnocentrism. Journal of
Conﬂict Resolution 50:926–36.
[JMA]
Hartung, J. (1988) Deceiving down: Conjectures on the management of subordi-
nate status. In: Self-deception: An adaptive mechanism?, ed. J. S. Lockard &
D. L. Paulhus, pp. 170–85. Prentice Hall.
[rRTM]
Haselton, M. G. (2003) The sexual overperception bias: Evidence of a systematic
bias in men from a survey of naturally occurring events. Journal of Research in
Personality 37(1):34–47.
[aRTM]
Haselton, M. G. (2007) Error management theory. In: Encyclopedia of social
psychology, vol. 1, ed. R. F. Baumeister & K. D. Vohs, pp. 311–12. Sage.
[aRTM]
Haselton, M. G. & Buss, D. M. (2000) Error Management Theory: A new
perspective on biases in cross-sex mind reading. Journal of Personality and
Social Psychology 78(1):81–91.
[JMA, ETC, MGH, DDPJ, arRTM]
Haselton, M. G. & Buss, D. M. (2003) Biases in social judgment: Design ﬂaws or
design features? In: Responding to the social world: Implicit and explicit
processes in social judgments and decisions, ed. J. P. Forgas, K. D. Williams &
W. von Hippel, pp. 23–43. Cambridge University Press.
[aRTM]
Haselton, M. G. & Nettle, D. (2006) The paranoid optimist: An integrative
evolutionary model of cognitive biases. Personality and Social Psychology
Review 10(1):47–66.
[MGH, DDPJ, JRL, arRTM]
Hayes, P. J. (1978) The Naive Physics manifesto. In: Expert systems in the
micro-electronic age, ed. D. Michie, pp. 242–70. Edinburgh University
Press.
[MB, YW]
Hecht, H. H. & Bertamini, M. (2000) Understanding projectile acceleration.
Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human Perception and Performance
26:730–46.
[MB]
Hecht, H. H. & Profﬁtt, D. R. (1995) The price of expertise: Effects of experience
on the water-level task. Psychological Science 6:90–95.
[MB]
Heine, S. J. & Lehman, D. R. (1995) Cultural variation in unrealistic optimism:
Does the West feel more vulnerable than the East? Journal of Personality and
Social Psychology 68:595–607.
[CSD]
Heine, S. J., Lehman, D. R., Marcus, H. R. & Kitayama, S. (1999) Is there a uni-
versal need for positive self-regard? Psychological Review 106(4):766–94.
[OF, JK]
Hemsley, D. R. & Garety, P. A. (1986) The formation of maintenance of delusions:
A Bayesian analysis. British Journal of Psychiatry 149(July):51–56.
[ALM]
References/McKay & Dennett: The evolution of misbelief
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (2009) 32:6
555

Henrich, J. & Boyd, R. (2001) Why people punish defectors – weak conformist
transmission can stabilize costly enforcement of norms in cooperative dilem-
mas. Journal of Theoretical Biology 208:79–89.
[aRTM]
Henrich, J., Ensminger, J., McElreath, R., Barr, A., Barrett, C., Bolyanatz, A.,
Cardenas, J. C., Gurven, M., Gwako, E., Henrich, N., Lesorogol, C., Marlowe,
F., Tracer, D. & Ziker, J. (2009) Markets, religion, community size and the
evolution of fairness and punishment. Unpublished manuscript, University of
British Columbia. (Not available online; available upon request from Joseph
Henrich at: joseph.henrich@gmail.com)
[AN]
Henrich, J. & Fehr, E. (2003) Is strong reciprocity a maladaptation? On the evol-
utionary foundations of human altruism. In: Genetic and cultural evolution of
cooperation, ed. P. Hammerstein, pp. 55–82. MIT Press.
[aRTM]
Henrich, J., Heine, S. J. & Norenzayan, A. (in press) The weirdest people in the
world? Behavioral and Brain Sciences.
[JK, AN]
Hinde, R. A. (1999) Why gods persist: A scientiﬁc approach to religion. Routle-
dge.
[aRTM]
Hitchcott, P. K., Quinn, J. J. & Taylor, J. R. (2007) Bidirectional modulation of goal
directed actions by prefrontal cortical dopamine. Cerebral Cortex
17(12):2820–27.
[ALM]
Hoffrage, U., Hertwig, R. & Gigerenzer, G. (2000) Hindsight bias: A by-product of
knowledge updating? Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory,
and Cognition 26(3):566–81.
[PB]
Holden, C. & Mace, R. (1997) Phylogenetic analysis of the evolution of lactose
digestion in adults. Human Biology 69:605–628.
[aRTM]
Hood, B. M. (1995) Gravity rules for 2- to 4-year olds? Cognitive Development
10:577–98.
[NLG]
Hove, M. & Risen, L. (in press) The in-synch effect: Interpersonal synchrony
increases afﬁliation. Social Cognition.
[JB]
Humphrey, N. (2002) The mind made ﬂesh. Oxford University Press. Available at:
www.humphrey.org.uk.
[aRTM]
Humphrey, N. (2004) The placebo effect. In: Oxford companion to the mind, 2nd
edition, ed. R. L. Gregory, pp. 735–36. Oxford University Press. Available at:
www.humphrey.org.uk
[GA, aRTM]
Huq, S. F., Garety, P. A. & Hemsley, D. R. (1988) Probabilistic judgements in
deluded and non-deluded subjects. Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psy-
chology A 40(4):801–12.
[aRTM]
Irons, W. (2008) Why people believe (what other people see as) crazy ideas. In: The
evolution of religion: Studies, theories, and critiques, ed. J. Bulbulia, R. Sosis,
R. Genet, E. Harris, K. Wyman & C. Genet, pp. 51–60. Collins Foundation
Press.
[JB]
Jaccard, J., Dodge, T. & Guilamo-Ramos, V. (2005) Metacognition, risk behavior,
and risk outcomes: The role of intelligence and perceived knowledge. Health
Psychology 24:161–70.
[DD]
Jahoda, M. (1953) The meaning of psychological health. Social Casework
34:349–54.
[aRTM]
Jahoda, M. (1958) Current concepts of positive mental health. Basic Books.
[VJK, aRTM]
James, W. (1890) The principles of psychology, vol. 1. Holt.
[JDB]
Jaspers, K. (1963) General psychopathology, 7th edition, trans. J. Hoenig &
M. W. Hamilton. The Johns Hopkins University Press. (Originally published in
1946.)
[aRTM, ALM]
Johnson, D. D. P. (2004) Overconﬁdence and war: The havoc and glory of positive
illusions. Harvard University Press.
[DDPJ]
Johnson, D. D. P. (2005) God’s punishment and public goods: A test of the
supernatural punishment hypothesis in 186 world cultures. Human Nature
16(4):410–46.
[aRTM]
Johnson, D. D. P. (2008) Gods of war: The adaptive logic of religious conﬂict. In:
The evolution of religion: Studies, theories, and critiques, ed. J. Bulbulia, R.
Sosis, C. Genet, R. Genet, E. Harris & K. Wyman, pp. 111–117. Collins
Foundation Press.
[DDPJ]
Johnson, D. D. P. (2009) The error of God: Error management theory, religion, and
the evolution of cooperation. In: Games, groups, and the global good, ed. S. A.
Levin, pp. 169–180. Springer.
[DDPJ, JPS]
Johnson, D. D. P. & Bering, J. M. (2006) Hand of God, mind of man: Punishment
and cognition in the evolution of cooperation. Evolutionary Psychology
4:219–33.
[DDPJ, aRTM, AN]
Johnson, D. D. P. & Kru¨ger, O. (2004) The good of wrath: Supernatural punish-
ment and the evolution of cooperation. Political Theology 5(2):159–76.
[DDPJ, aRTM]
Johnson, D. D. P., Stopka, P. & Knights, S. (2003) The puzzle of human
cooperation. Nature 421:911–12.
[aRTM]
Johnson, D. J. & Rusbult, C. E. (1989) Resisting temptation: Devaluation of alterna-
tive partners as a means of maintaining commitment in close relationships.
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 57:967–80.
[JMA]
Johnson, E. J. & Goldstein, D. G. (2003) Do defaults save lives? Science
302:1338–39.
[ETC]
Johnson, S., Dweck, C. S. & Chen, F. (2007) Evidence for infants’ internal working
models of attachment. Psychological Science 18:501–502.
[CSD]
Jordan, C. H., Spencer, S. J., Zanna, M. P., Hoshino-Browne, E. & Correll, J. (2003)
Secure and defensive high self-esteem. Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology 85(5):969–78.
[rRTM]
Juslin, P. & Olsson, H. (1997) Thurstonian and Brunswikian origins of uncertainty
in judgment: A sampling model of conﬁdence in sensory discrimination.
Psychological Review 104:344–66.
[ETC]
Juslin, P., Winman, A. & Olsson, H. (2000) Naive empiricism and dogmatism in
conﬁdence research: A critical examination of the hard-easy effect.
Psychological Review 107:384–96.
[ETC]
Kamins, M. & Dweck, C. S. (1999) Person vs. process praise and criticism:
Implications for contingent self-worth and coping. Developmental Psychology
35:835–47.
[CSD]
Kapur, S. (2003) Psychosis as a state of aberrant salience: A framework linking
biology, phenomenology, and pharmacology in schizophrenia. American
Journal of Psychiatry 160(1):13–23.
[ALM]
Karmiloff-Smith, A. (1986) From meta-processes to conscious access:
Evidence from children’s metalinguistic and repair data. Cognition
23:95–147.
[NLG]
Karmiloff-Smith, A. (1992) Beyond modularity: A developmental perspective in
cognitive science. MIT Press.
[NLG]
Karmiloff-Smith, A. & Inhelder, B. (1974) If you want to get ahead, get a theory.
Cognition 3:195–212.
[NLG]
Katzir, G. & Howland, H. C. (2003) Corneal power and underwater accommo-
dation in great cormorants (Phalacrocorax carbo sinensis). The Journal of
Experimental Biology 206:833–41.
[aRTM]
Katzir, G. & Intrator, N. (1987) Striking of underwater prey by a reef heron, Egretta
gularis schistacea. Journal of Comparative Physiology A 160:517–23.
[aRTM]
Kelemen, D. (2004) Are children “intuitive theists”? Psychological Science
15:295–301.
[aRTM]
Kennedy, Q., Mather, M. & Carstensen, L. L. (2004) The role of motivation in the
age-related positivity effect in autobiographical memory. Psychological Science
15(3):208–14.
[JS]
Kenny, A. J. P., Wadding, C. H., Longuet-Higgins, H. C. & Lucas, J. R. (1972) The
nature of mind. Edinburgh University Press.
[YW]
Kenrick, D. T., Griskevicius, V., Neuberg, S. L. & Schaller, M. (in press) Renovating
the pyramid of needs: Contemporary extensions built upon ancient foun-
dations. Perspectives on Psychological Science.
[JMA]
Kermer, D. A., Driver-Linn, E., Wilson, T. D. & Gilbert, D. T. (2006) Loss
aversion is an affective forecasting error. Psychological Science 17:649–53.
[DSW]
Kimura, M. (1991) The neutral theory of molecular evolution: A review of recent
evidence. Japanese Journal of Genetics 66:367–86.
[JPS]
Kinderman, P. & Bentall, R. P. (1996) Self-discrepancies and persecutory
delusions: Evidence for a model of paranoid ideation. Journal of Abnormal
Psychology 105(1):106–13.
[arRTM]
Kinderman, P. & Bentall, R. P. (1997) Causal attributions in paranoia and
depression: Internal, personal, and situational attributions for negative events.
Journal of Abnormal Psychology 106(2):341–45.
[arRTM]
Kirby, K. N. (1997) Bidding on the future: Evidence against normative discounting
of delayed rewards. Journal of Experimental Psychology: General
126:54–70.
[GA]
Kirsch, I. & Lynn, S. J. (1999) The automaticity of behaviour and clinical
psychology. American Psychologist 54:504–15.
[DSW]
Kitayama, S., Markus, H. R., Matsumoto, H. & Norasakkunkit, V. (1997) Individual
and collective process in the construction of the self: Self-enhancement in the
U.S. and self-criticism in Japan. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology
72:1245–67.
[CSD]
Klahr, D. & Dunbar, K. (1988) Dual search space during scientiﬁc reasoning.
Cognitive Science 12:1–48.
[NLG]
Klein, S. B., Cosmides, L., Tooby, J. & Chance, S. (2002) Decisions and the evol-
ution of memory: Multiple systems, multiple functions. Psychological Review
109(2):306–29.
[PB]
Kobayashi, C. & Brown, J. D. (2003) Self-esteem and self-enhancement
in Japan and America. Journal of Cross-Cultural Psychology 34:567–80.
[JDB]
Kraus, A. (1997) Technical delusions as form of stabilisation [Le Delire technique
comme forme de stabilisation]. Evolution Psychiatrique 62(2):381–99.
[ALM]
Krebs, D. L. & Denton, K. (1997) Social illusions and self-deception: The evolution
of biases in person perception. In: Evolutionary social psychology, ed.
J. A. Simpson & D. T. Kenrick, pp. 21–47. Erlbaum.
[DLK, aRTM]
Krebs, D. L. & Laird, P. (1998) Judging yourself as you judge others: Perspective-
taking moral development, and exculpation. Journal of Adult Development
5:1–12.
[DLK]
Krueger, J. & Mueller, R. A. (2002) Unskilled, unaware, or both? The contribution
of social-perceptual skills and statistical regression to self-enhancement biases.
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 82:180–88.
[ETC]
References/McKay & Dennett: The evolution of misbelief
556
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (2009) 32:6

Kruger, J. (1999) Lake Wobegon be gone! The “below-average effect” and the
egocentric nature of comparative ability judgments. Journal of Personality and
Social Psychology 77:221–232.
[JK]
Kruger, J. & Burrus, J. (2004) Egocentrism and focalism in unrealistic
optimism (and pessimism). Journal of Experimental Social Psychology
40:332–40.
[JK]
Kruger, J. & Dunning, D. (1999) Unskilled and unaware of it: How difﬁculties in
recognizing one’s own incompetence lead to inﬂated self-assessments. Journal
of Personality and Social Psychology 77:1121–34.
[DD]
Kruger, J. & Savitsky, K. (2009) On the genesis of inﬂated (and deﬂated) judgments
of responsibility: Egocentrism revisited. Organizational Behavior and Human
Decision Processes 108:143–52.
[JK]
Kugeares, S. (2002) Social anxiety in dating initiation: An experimental investigation
of an evolved mating-speciﬁc anxiety mechanism. Unpublished doctoral
dissertation, Department of Psychology, University of Texas, Austin, Texas.
Available at: http://dspace.lib.utexas.edu/bitstream/2152/100/1/kugear-
esj029.pdf
[MGH]
Kunda, Z. (1990) The case for motivated reasoning. Psychological Bulletin
108(3):480–98.
[GFM]
Lamarck, J.-B. (1809/1914/1984) Philosophie zoologique, ou Exposition des
considerations relatives a l’histoire naturelle des animaux. . . Paris. Published in
English (trans. Hugh Eliot) Macmillan, London, 1914. Reprinted: University
of Chicago Press, 1984. (Original work written in 1809).
[YW]
Langdon, R. & Bayne, T. (in press) Delusion and confabulation: Mistakes of
perceiving, remembering and believing. Cognitive Neuropsychiatry.
[RL]
Langdon, R. & Coltheart, M. (2000) The cognitive neuropsychology of delusions.
Mind and Language 15(1):183–216.
[RL, aRTM]
Langdon, R., Cooper, S., Connaughton, E. & Martin, K. (2006) A variant of
misidentiﬁcation delusion in a patient with right frontal and temporal brain
injury. Abstracts of the 6th International Congress of Neuropsychiatry,
Sydney, Australia. Neuropsychiatric Disease and Treatment 2(3, Suppl.):S8.
[aRTM]
Langdon, R., McKay, R. & Coltheart, M. (2008) The cognitive neuropsychological
understanding of persecutory delusions. In: Persecutory delusions: Assessment,
theory, and treatment, ed. D. Freeman, R. Bentall & P. Garety, pp. 221–36.
Oxford University Press.
[RL, aRTM]
Langston, C. & Sykes, W. (1997) Beliefs and the Big Five: Cognitive bases of broad
individual differences in personality. Journal of Research in Personality
31:141–65.
[ETC]
Larrick, R. P., Burson, K. A. & Soll, J. B. (2007) Social comparison and conﬁdence:
When thinking you’re better than average predicts overconﬁdence (and when
it does not). Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes
102:76–94.
[ETC]
Lea, S. E. G. & Webley, P. (2006) Money as tool, money as drug: The biological
psychology of a strong incentive. Behavioral and Brain Sciences
29:161–209.
[GA]
Leeser, J. & O’Donohue, W. (1999) What is a delusion? Epistemological dimen-
sions. Journal of Abnormal Psychology 108:687–94.
[rRTM]
Lilienfeld, S. O., Ammirati, R. & Landﬁeld, K. (2009) Giving debiasing away: Can
psychological research on correcting cognitive errors promote human welfare?
Perspectives on Psychological Science 4:390–99.
[DSW]
Lipmann, O. & Bogen, H. (1923) Naive Physik. Arbeiten aus dem Institut fu¨r
angewandte Psychologie in Berlin. Theoretische und experimentelle Untersu-
chungen U¨ ber die Fa¨higkeit zu intelligentem Handeln. Johann Ambrosius
Barth.
[MB]
LoBue, V. & DeLoache, J. S. (2008) Detecting the snake in the grass: Attention to
fear-relevant stimuli by adults and young children. Psychological Science
19(3):284–89.
[rRTM]
Lockard, J. S. (1978) On the adaptive signiﬁcance of self-deception. Human
Ethology Newsletter 21:4–7.
[aRTM]
Lockard, J. S. (1980) Speculations on the adaptive signiﬁcance of self-deception.
In: The evolution of human social behavior, ed. J. S. Lockard, pp. 257–76.
Elsevier.
[aRTM]
Lockard, J. S. & Paulhus, D. L., ed. (1988) Self-deception: An adaptive mechanism?
Prentice Hall.
[aRTM]
Lord, C. G., Ross, L. & Lepper, M. R. (1979) Biased assimilation and attitude
polarization: The effects of prior theories on subsequently considered
evidence. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 37(11):2098–109.
[GFM]
Lotem, A., Schechtman, E. & Katzir, G. (1991) Capture of submerged prey by little
egrets, Egretta garzetta garzetta: Strike depth, strike angle and the problem of
light refraction. Animal Behaviour 42:341–46.
[aRTM]
Lovejoy, A. O. (1936) The great chain of being: A study of the history of an idea.
Harvard University Press.
[YW]
Lynn, S. J. & McConkey, K. eds. (1998) Truth in memory. Guilford Press.
[DSW]
Malinowski, B. (1948) Magic, science and religion and other essays. Beacon.
[DSW]
Maner, J. K., Gailliot, M. T. & Miller, S. L. (2009) The implicit cognition of
relationship maintenance: Inattention to attractive alternatives. Journal of
Experimental Social Psychology 45:174–79.
[JMA]
Maner, J. K., Kenrick, D. T., Neuberg, S. L., Becker, D. V., Robertson, T., Hofer,
B., Delton, A., Butner, J. & Schaller, M. (2005) Functional projection: How
fundamental social motives can bias interpersonal perception. Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology 88:63–78.
[JMA]
Maner, J. K., Rouby, D. A. & Gonzaga, G. (2008) Automatic inattention to attractive
alternatives: The evolved psychology of relationship maintenance. Evolution
and Human Behavior 29:343–49.
[JMA]
Marcus, G. F. (2008) Kluge: The haphazard construction of the human mind.
Houghton Mifﬂin.
[GFM]
Marcus, G. F. (2009) How does the mind work? Insights from biology. Topics in
Cognitive Science 1:145–72.
[GFM]
Marshall, M. A. & Brown, J. D. (2007) On the psychological beneﬁts of
self-enhancement. In: Self-enhancement and self-criticism: Theory, research,
and clinical implications, ed. E. Chang, pp. 19–35. American Psychological
Association.
[JDB]
Mascaro, O. & Sperber, D. (2009) The moral, epistemic, and mindreading
components of children’s vigilance towards deception. Cognition
112(3):367–80.
[DS]
Maslow, A. H. (1950) Self-actualizing people: A study of psychological health.
Personality Symposium 1:11–34.
[aRTM]
Massey, C. & Gelman, R. (1988) Preschoolers’ ability to decide whether pictured or
unfamiliar objects can move themselves. Developmental Psychology
24:307–17.
[NLG]
Mather, M. & Carstensen, L. L. (2005) Aging and motivated cognition: The posi-
tivity effect in attention and memory. Trends in Cognitive Sciences
9(10):496–502.
[JS]
McClenon, J. (2002) Wondrous healing: Shamanism, human evolution and the
origin of religion. Northern Illinois University Press.
[aRTM]
McCloskey, M. (1983) Intuitive physics. Scientiﬁc American 248(4):114–22.
[MB]
McCloskey, M., Caramazza, A. & Green, B. (1980) Curvilinear motion in the
absence of external forces: Naive beliefs about the motion of objects. Science
210(5):1139–41.
[MB]
McEwen, B. S. (1998) Protective and damaging effects of stress mediators. New
England Journal of Medicine 338:171–179.
[aRTM]
McGhie, A. & Chapman, J. (1961) Disorders of attention and perception in
early schizophrenia. British Journal of Medical Psychology 34:103–16.
[ALM]
McKay, R. & Cipolotti, L. (2007) Attributional style in a case of Cotard delusion.
Consciousness and Cognition 16(2):349–59.
[JB]
McKay, R. & Efferson, C. (under review) The subtleties of error management.
[rRTM]
McKay, R. & Kinsbourne, M. (in press) Confabulation, delusion, and anosognosia:
Motivational factors and false claims. Cognitive Neuropsychiatry. [Also to
appear in: Delusion and confabulation: Overlapping or distinct psycho-
pathologies of reality distortion, ed. R. Langdon & M. Turner. Macquarie
Monographs in Cognitive Science series. (Series editor, M. Coltheart.)
Psychology Press.
[aRTM]
McKay, R., Langdon, R. & Coltheart, M. (2007a) Models of misbelief: Integrating
motivational and deﬁcit theories of delusions. Consciousness and Cognition
16:932–41.
[aRTM, ALM]
McKay, R., Langdon, R. & Coltheart, M. (2007b) The defensive function of
persecutory delusions: An investigation using the Implicit Association Test.
Cognitive Neuropsychiatry 12(1):1–24.
[arRTM]
McKay, R., Langdon, R. & Coltheart, M. (2009) “Sleights of mind”: Delusions and
self-deception. In: Delusion and self-deception: Affective and motivational
inﬂuences on belief formation, ed. T. Bayne & J. Ferna´ndez, pp. 165–85.
Psychology Press.
[aRTM]
McKay, R., Novello, D. & Taylor, A. (in preparation) The adaptive value of
self-deception.
[aRTM]
McKenna, F. P., Stanier, R. A. & Lewis, C. (1991) Factors underlying illusory
self-assessment of driving skill in males and females. Accident Analysis and
Prevention 23(1):45–52.
[aRTM]
Mele, A. R. (1995) Autonomous agents. Oxford University Press.
[rRTM]
Meyer, D., Leventhal, H. & Gutmann, M. (1985) Common-sense models of illness:
The example of hypertension. Health Psychology 4:115–35.
[DD]
Michaelian, K. (submitted) The epistemology of forgetting.
[JS]
Miller, G. (2000) Mental traits as ﬁtness indicators: Expanding evolutionary
psychology’s adaptationism. Annals of the New York Academy of Sciences
907:62–74.
[JPS]
Miller, G. (2001) The mating mind: How sexual choice shaped the evolution of
human nature. Anchor Press.
[JPS]
Miller, R. (2008) A neurodynamic theory of schizophrenia (and related disorders).
Lulu.
[ALM]
Millikan, R. G. (1984a) Language, thought and other biological categories. MIT
Press.
[aRTM]
References/McKay & Dennett: The evolution of misbelief
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (2009) 32:6
557

Millikan, R. G. (1984b) Naturalistic reﬂections on knowledge. Paciﬁc Philosophical
Quarterly 65(4):315–34.
[aRTM]
Millikan, R. G. (1993) White queen psychology and other essays for Alice. MIT
Press.
[aRTM]
Millikan, R. G. (1998) Cognitive luck: Externalism in an evolutionary frame. In:
Philosophy and the sciences of mind, ed. P. Machamer & M. Carrier, pp. 207–19.
[Pittsburgh-Konstanz Series in the Philosophy and History of Science]. Pittsburgh
University Press and Universita¨tsverlag Konstanz.
[RGM]
Millikan, R. G. (2004) Varieties of meaning: The 2002 Jean Nicod lectures. MIT
Press/A Bradford Book.
[aRTM]
Milton, F., Patwa, V. K. & Hafner, R. J. (1978) Confrontation vs. belief modiﬁcation
in persistently deluded patients. British Journal of Medical Psychology
51(2):127–30.
[ALM]
Mineka, S., Davidson, M., Cook, M. & Keir, R. (1984) Observational conditioning of
snake fear in rhesus monkeys. Journal of Abnormal Psychology 93:355–72.
[rRTM]
Mishara, A. L. (2007a) Is minimal self preserved in schizophrenia? A subcompo-
nents view. Consciousness and Cognition 16(3):715–21.
[ALM]
Mishara, A. L. (2007b) Missing links in phenomenological clinical neuroscience?
Why we are still not there yet. Current Opinion in Psychiatry
60(20):559–69.
[ALM]
Mishara, A. L. (in press a) Kafka’s doubles, paranoia and the brain: Hypnagogic vs.
hyper-reﬂexive models of disruption of self in neuropsychiatric disorders and
anomalous conscious states. Philosophy, Ethics, and Humanities in Medicine
(PEHM), PubMed Central Open Access Journal. Available at: http://www.
peh-med.com/
[ALM]
Mishara, A. L. (in press b) The unconscious in paranoid delusional psychosis?
Phenomenology, nuroscience, psychoanalysis. In: Founding psychoanalysis,
ed. D. Lohmar & J. Bruzinska. Springer.
[ALM]
Mishara, A. L. (2010) Klaus Conrad (1905–1961): Delusional mood, psychosis and
beginning schizophrenia. Schizophrenia Bulletin 36(1):9–13.
[ALM]
Moore, D. A. (2007) Not so above average after all: When people believe they are
worse than average and its implications for theories of bias in social compari-
son. Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes 102:42–58.
[JK]
Moore, D. A. & Healy, P. J. (2008) The trouble with overconﬁdence. Psychological
Review 115:502–17.
[ETC, JK]
Moore, D. A. & Kim, T. G. (2003) Myopic social prediction and the solo
comparison paradox. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology
85:1121–35.
[JK]
Moritz, S., Werner, R. & von Collani, G. (2006) The inferiority complex in paranoia
readdressed: A study with the Implicit Association Test. Cognitive Neuro-
psychiatry 11(4):402–15.
[arRTM]
Morrison, D. (2009) Cordon blues: Review of Au revoir to all that: The rise and fall
of French cuisine, by M. Steinberger. In: The Financial Times, June 27/28,
2009, “Life and Arts” section, p. 16.
[VJK]
Mortensen, C. R., Becker, D. V., Ackerman, J. M., Neuberg, S. L. & Kenrick, D. T.
(in press) Infection breeds reticence: The effects of disease salience on self-
perceptions of personality and behavioral avoidance tendencies. Psychological
Science.
[JMA]
Mowat, R. R. (1966) Morbid jealousy and murder. Tavistock.
[aRTM]
Mueller, C. M. & Dweck, C. S. (1998) Intelligence praise can undermine motiv-
ation and performance. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology
75:33–52.
[CSD]
Murdock, G. P. & White, D. R. (1969) Standard cross-cultural sample. Ethnology
8:329–69.
[aRTM]
Murphy, M. C. & Dweck, C. S. (2009, in press) A culture of genius: How an
organization’s lay theories shape people’s cognition, affect, and behavior.
Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin.
[CSD]
Murray, M. & Moore, L. (2009) Costly signaling and the origin of religion. Journal
of Cognition and Culture 9:225–45.
[JPS]
Murray, S. L., Holmes, J. G. & Grifﬁn, D. W. (1996) The beneﬁts of positive
illusions: Idealization and the construction of satisfaction in close
relationships. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 70:79–98.
[JDB, aRTM]
Myers, D. (2002) Social psychology, 7th edition. McGraw-Hill.
[aRTM]
Nairne, J. S., Pandeirada, J. N. S. & Thompson, S. G. (2008) Adaptive memory. The
comparative value of survival processing. Psychological Science
19(2):176–80.
[PB]
Nairne, J. S., Thompson, S. R. & Pandeirada, J. N. S. (2007) Adaptive memory:
Survival processing enhances retention. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Learning, Memory, and Cognition 33(2):263–73.
[JS]
Navarrete, C. D., Fessler, D. M. T. & Eng, S. J. (2007) Increased ethnocentrism in
the ﬁrst trimester of pregnancy. Evolution and Human Behavior 28:60–65.
[JMA]
Nettle, D. (2004) Adaptive illusions: Optimism, control and human rationality. In:
Emotion, evolution and rationality, ed. D. Evans & P. Cruse, pp. 193–208.
Oxford University Press.
[DDPJ, aRTM]
Neuberg, S. L. & Cottrell, C. A. (2006) Evolutionary bases of prejudices. In:
Evolution and social psychology, pp. 163–87, ed. M. Schaller, J. A. Simpson &
D. T. Kenrick. Psychology Press.
[JMA]
Neuhoff, J. G. (1998) A perceptual bias for rising tones. Nature 395:123–24.
[MGH]
Neuhoff, J. G. (2001) An adaptive bias in the perception of looming auditory
motion. Ecological Psychology 13:87–110.
[aRTM]
Newport, E. L. (1981) Constraints on structure: Evidence from American Sign
Language and language learning. In: Aspects of development of competence:
Minnesota Symposium on Child Psychology, vol. 14, ed. W. A. Collins, pp.
93–258. Erlbaum.
[NLG]
Nickerson, R. S. (1998) Conﬁrmation bias: A ubiquitous phenomenon in many
guises. Review of General Psychology 2:175–220.
[GFM]
Nisbett, R. E. & Ross, L. (1980) Human inference: Strategies and shortcomings of
social judgment. Prentice-Hall.
[DD]
Noe¨, A. (2004) Action in perception. MIT Press.
[aRTM]
Norenzayan, A. (in press) Why we believe: Religion as a human universal.
In: Human morality and sociality: Evolutionary and comparative perspectives,
ed. H. Hogh-Oleson. Palgrave/Macmillan.
[AN]
Norenzayan, A. & Shariff, A. F. (2008) The origin and evolution of religious
prosociality. Science 322:58–62.
[DDPJ, aRTM, AN]
Nuttin, J. M. J. R. (1985) Narcissism beyond Gestalt and awareness: The name
letter effect. European Journal of Social Psychology 15(3):353–61.
[MB]
Origgi, G. (2004) Is trust an epistemological notion? Episteme 1(1):61–72.
[DS]
Pascal, B. (1670/1995) Pense´es, trans. H. Levi. (Original work published in 1670;
H. Levi. English translation, 1995). Oxford University Press.
[aRTM]
Pasupathi, M. & Carstensen, L. L. (2003) Age and emotional experience during
mutual reminiscing. Psychology and Aging 18(3):430–42.
[JS]
Paulhus, D. L. (1988) Manual for the balanced inventory of desirable responding.
Multi-Health Systems.
[aRTM]
Peck, M. S. (1978) The road less traveled. Simon & Schuster.
[aRTM]
Pelham, B. W., Carvallo, M. & Jones, J. T. (2005) Implicit egotism. Current
Directions in Psychological Science 14:106–10.
[MB]
Phillips, K.-A. (2008) Psychosocial factors and survival of young women with breast
cancer. Paper presented at the Annual Meeting of the American Society of
Clinical Oncology, Chicago, IL, June 2008.
[DSW]
Pichon, I., Boccato, G. & Saroglou, V. (2007) Nonconscious inﬂuences of religion on
prosociality: A priming study. European Journal of Social Psychology
37:1032–45.
[arRTM, BR-S]
Pinker, S. (1997) How the mind works. W. W. Norton.
[aRTM]
Pittenger, J. B. (1989) Detection of violation of the law of pendulum motion:
Observers’ sensitivity to the relation between period and length. Ecological
Psychology 2:55–81.
[MB]
Plantinga, A. (2002) Evolutionary argument against naturalism. In: Naturalism
defeated?, ed. J. Beilby, pp. 1–12. Cornell University Press.
[JPS]
Plotkin, H. (1997) Darwin machines and the nature of knowledge. Harvard Uni-
versity Press.
[JPS]
Povinelli, D. J. & Bering, J. M. (2002) The mentality of apes revisited. Current
Directions in Psychological Science 11:115–19.
[aRTM]
Premack, D. & Woodruff, G. (1978) Does the chimpanzee have a theory of mind?
Behavioral and Brain Sciences 1(4):515–26.
[aRTM]
Profﬁtt, D. R. (1999) Naive physics. In: The MIT encyclopedia of the cognitive
sciences, ed. R. Wilson & F. Keil, pp. 577–79. MIT Press.
[MB]
Pronin, E., Gilovich, T. & Ross, L. (2004) Objectivity in the eye of the beholder:
Divergent perceptions of bias in self versus others. Psychological Review
111(3):781–99.
[aRTM, DSW]
Pronin, E., Lin, D. Y. & Ross, L. (2002) The bias blind spot: Perceptions of bias in
self versus others. Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin 28(3):369–81.
[aRTM]
Quillian, L. & Pager, D. (2001) Black neighbors, higher crime? The role of racial
stereotypes in evaluations of neighborhood crime. American Journal of
Sociology 107(3):717–67.
[aRTM]
Quine, W. V. O. (1953) From a logical point of view. Harvard University Press.
[YW]
Quine, W. V. O. (1960) Word and object. MIT Press.
[aRTM]
Quine, W. V. O. & Ullian, J. S. (1978) The web of belief, 2nd edition. Random
House.
[aRTM]
Quinones-Vidal, E., Lopez-Garcia, J. J., Penaranda-Ortega, M. & Tortosa-Gil, F.
(2004) The nature of social and personality psychology as reﬂected in JPSP,
1965–2000. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 86:435–52.
[JK]
Racine, T. P., Wereha, T. J. & Leavens, D. A. (forthcoming) To what extent non-
human primates are intersubjective and why. In: Moving ourselves, moving
others: The role of (e)motion in intersubjectivity, ed. A. Foolen, U. Lu¨dtke,
J. Zlatev & T. P. Racine. John Benjamins.
[TJW]
Ramachandran, V. S. (1994a) Phantom limbs, neglect syndromes, repressed
memories, and Freudian psychology. International Review of Neurobiology
37:291–333.
[aRTM]
Ramachandran, V. S. (1994b) Phantom limbs, somatoparaphrenic delusions,
neglect syndromes, repressed memories and Freudian psychology.
References/McKay & Dennett: The evolution of misbelief
558
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (2009) 32:6

In: Neuronal group selection, ed. O. Sporns & G. Tononi. Academic Press.
[aRTM]
Ramachandran, V. S. (1995) Anosognosia in parietal lobe syndrome. Consciousness
and Cognition 4(1):22–51.
[aRTM]
Ramachandran, V. S. (1996a) The evolutionary biology of self-deception, laughter,
dreaming and depression: Some clues from anosognosia. Medical Hypotheses
47(5):347–62.
[aRTM]
Ramachandran, V. S. (1996b) What neurological syndromes can tell us about
human nature: Some lessons from phantom limbs, Capgras syndrome,
and anosognosia. Cold Spring Harbor Symposia on Quantitative Biology
61:115–34.
[aRTM]
Ramachandran, V. S., Altschuler, E. L. & Hillyer, S. (1997) Mirror agnosia.
Proceedings of the Royal Society of London B: Biological Sciences
264:645–47.
[aRTM]
Ramachandran, V. S. & Blakeslee, S. (1998) Phantoms in the brain: Human nature
and the architecture of the mind. Fourth Estate.
[aRTM]
Randolph-Seng, B. (2009) Nonconscious vigilance: Preconscious control over the
inﬂuence of subliminal priming. Unpublished doctoral dissertation, Texas
Tech University.
[BR-S]
Randolph-Seng, B. & Nielsen, M. E. (2007) Honesty: One effect of primed religious
representations. The International Journal for the Psychology of Religion
17(4):303–15.
[arRTM, BR-S]
Randolph-Seng, B. & Nielsen, M. E. (2008) Is God really watching you? A response
to Shariff and Norenzayan (2007). The International Journal for the Psychology
of Religion 18(2):119–22.
[aRTM, AN]
Rappaport, R. A. (1999) Ritual and religion in the making of humanity. Cambridge
University Press.
[DDPJ]
Reed, G. M., Kemeny, M. E., Taylor, S. E. & Visscher, B. R. (1999) Negative
HIV-speciﬁc expectancies and AIDS-related bereavement as predictors of
symptom onset in asymptomatic HIV-positive gay men. Health Psychology
18:354–63.
[aRTM]
Reed, G. M., Kemeny, M. E., Taylor, S. E., Wang, H.-Y. J. & Visscher, B. R. (1994)
“Realistic acceptance” as a predictor of decreased survival time in gay men with
AIDS. Health Psychology 13:299–307.
[aRTM]
Robert, J. S. (2002) How developmental is evolutionary developmental biology?
Biology and Philosophy 17:591–611.
[TJW]
Roediger, H. L. I. (1996) Memory illusions. Journal of Memory and Language
35:76–100.
[PB]
Roes, F. L. & Raymond, M. (2003) Belief in moralizing gods. Evolution and Human
Behavior 24(2):126–35.
[aRTM, AN]
Roese, N. J. & Olson, J. M. (2007) Better, stronger, faster: Self-serving judgment,
affect regulation, and the optimal vigilance hypothesis. Perspectives on
Psychological Science 2:124–41.
[JK]
Ross, L. & Nisbett, R. E. (1991) The person and the situation. McGraw-Hill.
[CSD]
Ross, M. & Wilson, A. E. (2002) It feels like yesterday: Self-esteem, valence of
personal past experiences, and judgments of subjective distance. Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology 82(5):792–803.
[JS]
Ross, M. & Wilson, A. E. (2003) Autobiographical memory and conceptions of self:
Getting better all the time. Current Directions in Psychological Science
12(2):66–69.
[PB]
Rossano, M. J. (2007) Supernaturalizing social life: Religion and the evolution of
human cooperation. Human Nature 18:272–94.
[aRTM]
Rozin, P. & Fallon, A. E. (1987) A perspective on disgust. Psychological Review
94:23–41.
[aRTM]
Rozin, P., Markwith, M. & Ross, B. (1990) The sympathetic magical law of simi-
larity, nominal realism, and neglect of negatives in response to negative labels.
Psychological Science 1(6):383–84.
[aRTM]
Rozin, P., Millman, L. & Nemeroff, C. (1986) Operation of the laws of systematic
magic in disgust and other domains. Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology 50(4):703–12.
[aRTM]
Rozin, P. & Nemeroff, C. (2002) Sympathetic magical thinking: The contagion
and similarity “heuristics.” In: Heuristics and biases. The psychology of
intuitive judgment, ed. T. Gilovich, D. Grifﬁn & D. Kahneman, pp. 201–16.
Cambridge University Press.
[KT-K]
Rozinblit, L. & Keil, F. (2002) The misunderstood limits of folk science: An illusion
of explanatory depth. Cognitive Science 26(216):521–62.
[NLG]
Rufﬂe, B. J. & Sosis, R. (2007) Does it pay to pray? Costly ritual and cooperation.
The B.E. Journal of Economic Analysis and Policy 7(1) (Contributions):Article
18.
[aRTM]
Saffran, J. R., Aslin, R. N. & Newport, E. L. (1996) Statistical learning in 8-month-
old infants. Science 274:1926–28.
[CSD]
Schacter, D. L. (2001) The seven sins of memory. Houghton Mifﬂin.
[JS]
Schacter, D. L. & Coyle, J. T. (1995) Memory distortion: How minds, brains, and
societies reconstruct the past. Harvard University Press.
[PB]
Schelling, T. (1960) The strategy of conﬂict. Oxford University Press.
[JB]
Schipper, L. D., Easton, J. A. & Shackelford, T. K. (2007) Morbid jealousy as a
function of ﬁtness-related life-cycle dimensions. Behavioral and Brain Sciences
29(6):630.
[aRTM]
Schjødt, U., Stødkilde-Jørgensen, H., Geertz, A. & Roepstorff, A. (submitted) The
power of charisma: Perceived charisma inhibits the attentional and excecutive
systems of believers in intercessory prayer.
[JB]
Schloss, J. P. (2007) He who laughs best: Religious affect as a solution to recursive
cooperative defection. In: The evolution of religion: Studies, theories, critiques,
ed. J. Bubulia, R. Sosis, E. Harris, R. Genet, C. Genet & K. Wyman,
pp. 205–15. Collins Foundation Press.
[JPS]
Sears, D. (1986) College sophomores in the laboratory: Inﬂuences of a narrow data
base on social psychology’s view of human nature. Journal of Personality
and Social Psychology 51:515–30.
[AN]
Sedikides, C. & Gregg, A. P. (2008) Self-enhancement: Food for thought.
Perspectives on Psychological Science 3(2):102–16.
[MB]
Shapiro, J. R., Ackerman, J. M., Neuberg, S. L., Maner, J. K., Becker, D. V. &
Kenrick, D. T. (2009) Following in the wake of anger: When not discriminating
is discriminating. Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin 35:1356–67.
[JMA]
Shariff, A. F. & Norenzayan, A. (2007) God is watching you: Priming God concepts
increases prosocial behavior in an anonymous economic game. Psychological
Science 18(9):803–809.
[DDPJ, arRTM, AN, BR-S]
Shariff, A. F., Norenzayan, A. & Henrich, J. (2010) The birth of high gods. In:
Evolution, culture, and the human mind, ed. M. Schaller, A. Norenzayan, S. J.,
Heine, T. Yamagishi & T. Kameda, pp. 119–36. Psychology Press/Taylor &
Francis.
[AN]
Shea, C. (2004) The power of positive illusions. The Boston Globe, September 26,
2004.
[DDPJ]
Sheldrake, R. (1987) Mind, memory, and archetype morphic resonance and the
collective unconscious – Part I. Psychological Perspectives 18(1):9–25.
[YW]
Sherif, M., Harvey, O. J., White, B. J., Hood, W. R. & Sherif, C. W. (1961) Inter-
group conﬂict and cooperation: The Robbers Cave experiment. Institute of
Group Relations, University of Oklahoma.
[JMA]
Silva, J. A., Ferrari, M. M., Leong, G. B. & Penny, G. (1998) The dangerousness of
persons with delusional jealousy. Journal of the American Academy of
Psychiatry and the Law 26:607–23.
[aRTM]
Simon, H. (1996) The sciences of the artiﬁcial, third edition. MIT Press.
[KT-K, YW]
Simon, H. A. (1990) A mechanism for social selection and successful altruism.
Science 250(4988):1665–68.
[aRTM]
Simpson, J. A., Gangestad, S. W. & Lerma, M. (1990) Perception of physical
attractiveness: Mechanisms involved in the maintenance of romantic
relationships. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 59:1192–201.
[JMA]
Smith, D. L. (2006) In praise of self-deception. Entelechy: Mind and Culture 7.
(Online publication, available at: http://www.entelechyjournal.com/davidli-
vingstonesmith.htm)
[aRTM]
Smith, E. R. & Collins, E. C. (2009) Contextualizing person perception: Distributed
social cognition. Psychological Review 116:343–64.
[DD]
Smullyan, R. (1983) 5000 B.C. and other philosophical fantasies. St. Martin’s
Press.
[aRTM]
Sosis, R. (2000) Religion and intragroup cooperation: Preliminary results of a
comparative analysis of utopian communities. Cross-Cultural Research
34(1):77–88.
[JB]
Sosis, R. (2003) Why aren’t we all Hutterites? Human Nature 14(2):91–127.
[JB]
Sosis, R. (2004) The adaptive value of religious ritual. American Scientist
92:166–72.
[aRTM]
Sosis, R. (2005) Does religion promote trust? The role of signaling, reputation, and
punishment. Interdisciplinary Journal of Research on Religion 1(1):1–30.
[JB]
Sosis, R. & Alcorta, C. (2003) Signaling, solidarity, and the sacred: The evolution of
religious behavior. Evolutionary Anthropology 12:264–74.
[DDPJ]
Sosis, R. & Bressler, E. R. (2003) Cooperation and commune longevity: A test of the
costly signaling theory of religion. Cross-Cultural Research 37(2):211–39.
[DDPJ]
Spangenberg, K. B., Wagner, M. T. & Bachman, D. L. (1998) Neuropsychological
analysis of a case of abrupt onset mirror sign following a hypotensive crisis in a
patient with vascular dementia. Neurocase 4:149–154.
[aRTM]
Spelke, E. S. & Kinzler, K. D. (2007) Core knowledge. Developmental Science
10:89–96.
[CSD]
Sperber, D. (1982) Apparently irrational beliefs. In: Rationality and relativism, ed.
S. Lukes & M. Hollis, pp. 149–80. Blackwell.
[DS]
Sperber, D. (1985) Anthropology and psychology: Towards an epidemiology of
representations. (The Malinowski Memorial Lecture, 1984). Man (New Series)
20:73–89.
[DS]
Sperber, D. (1990) The epidemiology of beliefs. In: The social psychological study
of widespread beliefs, ed. C. Fraser & G. Gaskell, pp 25–44. Clarendon
Press.
[DS]
Sperber, D. (1997) Intuitive and reﬂexive beliefs. Mind and Language
12(1):67–83.
[DS]
Sperber, D., Cle´ment, F., Heintz, C., Mascaro, O., Mercier, H., Origgi, G. & Wilson
D. (forthcoming) Epistemic vigilance. Mind and Language.
[DS]
References/McKay & Dennett: The evolution of misbelief
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (2009) 32:6
559

Spitzer, M. (1990) On deﬁning delusions. Comprehensive Psychiatry
31(5):377–97.
[rRTM]
Stalnaker, R. C. (1984) Inquiry. MIT Press.
[KF]
Stephens, G. L. & Graham, G. (2004) Reconceiving delusion. International Review
of Psychiatry 16(3):236–41.
[aRTM]
Stich, S. (1990) The fragmentation of reason. MIT Press.
[JRL, arRTM, RGM,
JPS]
Stillman, T. F., Baumeister, R. F., Vohs, K. D., Lambert, N. M., Fincham, F. D. &
Brewer, L. E. (in press) Personal philosophy and personal achievement: Belief
in free will predicts better job performance. Social Psychological and Person-
ality Science.
[BR-S]
Stone, T. & Young, A. W. (1997) Delusions and brain injury: The philosophy and
psychology of belief. Mind and Language 12:327–64.
[aRTM]
Suddendorf, T. & Corballis, M. C. (2007) The evolution of foresight: What is mental
time travel, and is it unique to humans? Behavioral and Brain Sciences
30(3):299–313.
[PB]
Sutton, J. (2009) Remembering. In: The Cambridge handbook of situated
cognition, ed. P. Robbins & M. Aydede, pp. 217–35. Cambridge University
Press.
[JS]
Tajfel, H., Billig, M. G., Bundy, R. F. & Flament, C. (1971) Social categorization
and intergroup behavior. European Journal of Social Psychology 1:149–77.
[JDB]
Tajfel, H. & Turner, J. (1986) The social identity theory of intergroup behavior. In:
Psychology of intergroup relations, ed. S. Worchel & W. G. Austin, pp. 7–24.
Nelson-Hall.
[JMA]
Tallis, F. (2005) Love sick. Arrow Books.
[aRTM]
Talmont-Kaminski, K. (2009) The ﬁxation of superstitious beliefs. Teorema
28(3):81–95.
[KT-K]
Talmont-Kaminski, K. (in preparation) In a mirror, darkly: How superstition and
religion reﬂect rationality.
[KT-K]
Taves, A. (2009) Religious experience reconsidered: A building block approach to
the study of religion and other special things. Princeton University Press.
[JB]
Taylor, S. E. (1989) Positive illusions: Creative self-deception and the healthy mind.
Basic Books.
[JDB, KF, VJK, aRTM]
Taylor, S. E. & Brown, J. D. (1988) Illusion and well-being: A social psychological
perspective on mental health. Psychological Bulletin 103(2):193–210.
[JDB,
OF, KF, MGH, JK, aRTM, JS]
Taylor, S. E. & Brown, J. D. (1994a) Illusion of mental health does not explain
positive illusions. American Psychologist 49:972–73.
[JDB]
Taylor, S. E. & Brown, J. D. (1994b) Positive illusions and well-being revisited:
Separating fact from ﬁction. Psychological Bulletin 116(1):21–27.
[MB,
JDB, aRTM]
Taylor, S. E., Kemeny, M. E., Reed, G. M., Bower, J. E. & Gruenewald, T. L. (2000)
Psychological resources, positive illusions, and health. American Psychologist
55:99–109.
[aRTM]
Taylor, S. E., Lerner, J. S., Sherman, D. K., Sage, R. M. & McDowell, N. K. (2003)
Are self-enhancing cognitions associated with healthy or unhealthy biological
proﬁles? Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 85(4):605–15.
[aRTM]
Todd, P. M. & Gigerenzer, G. (2007) Environments that make us smart: Ecological
rationality. Current Directions in Psychological Science 16:167–71.
[ETC]
Tooby, J. & Cosmides, L. (1992) The psychological foundations of culture. In:
The adapted mind: Evolutionary psychology and the generation of culture,
ed. J. Barkow, L. Cosmides & J. Tooby, pp. 19–136. Oxford University
Press.
[JRL]
Trimble, D. E. (1997) The religious orientation scale: Review and meta-analysis
of social desirability effects. Educational and Psychological Measurement
57:970–86.
[AN]
Trivers, R. L. (1971) The evolution of reciprocal altruism. The Quarterly Review
of Biology 46:35–57.
[aRTM]
Trivers, R. L. (1974) Parent-offspring conﬂict. American Zoologist 14:249–64.
[aRTM]
Trivers, R. L. (1985) Social evolution. Benjamin-Cummings.
[ETC, aRTM]
Trivers, R. L. (2000) The elements of a scientiﬁc theory of self-deception. In:
Evolutionary perspectives on human reproductive behavior. Annals of the
New York Academy of Sciences, vol. 907, ed. D. LeCroy & P. Moller, pp.
114–31. New York Academy of Sciences.
[ETC, DDPJ, aRTM]
Trivers, R. L. (2006) Foreword to Richard Dawkins’ The selﬁsh gene. In: The
selﬁsh gene: 30th anniversary edition, pp. xix–xx. Oxford University Press.
[aRTM]
Tsuang, M. T., Faraone, S. V. & Day, M. (1988) Schizophrenic disorders. In: The
new Harvard guide to psychiatry, ed. A. Nicholi, Jr., pp. 259–95. Belknap
Press.
[ALM]
Uhlhaas, P. J. & Mishara A. L. (2007) Perceptual anomalies in schizophrenia:
Integrating phenomenology and cognitive neuroscience. Schizophrenia
Bulletin 33(1):142–56.
[ALM]
Vaillant, G. (1977) Adaptation to life. Little, Brown.
[aRTM]
Vaish, A., Grossmann, T. & Woodward, A. (2008) Not all emotions are created
equal: The negativity bias in early development. Psychological Bulletin
134:383–403.
[CSD]
Van Leeuwen, D. S. N. (2007) The spandrels of self-deception: Prospects for a
biological theory of a mental phenomenon. Philosophical Psychology
20(3):329–48.
[aRTM]
Van Vugt, M., De Cremer, D. & Janssen, D. (2007) Gender differences in com-
petition and cooperation: The male warrior hypothesis. Psychological Science
18:19–23.
[JMA]
Vazquez, C., Diez-Alegria, C., Hernandez-Lloreda, M. J. & Moreno, M. N. (2008)
Implicit and explicit self-schema in active deluded, remitted deluded, and
depressed patients. Journal of Behavior Therapy and Experimental Psychiatry
39:587–99.
[aRTM]
Velleman, J. D. (2006) The self as narrator. In: Self to self: Selected essays, by J. D.
Velleman, pp. 203–23. Cambridge University Press.
[JS]
Vohs, K. D. & Schooler, J. (2008) The value of believing in free will: Encouraging a
belief in determinism increases cheating. Psychological Science
19(1):49–54.
[rRTM, BR-S]
Voland, E. (2008) The evolution of morality – What is conscience good for? How
cooperative breeding might pave another route to altruism. Paper presented at
the plenary session of the XIX Biennial Conference of the International Society
for Human Ethology (ISHE08), Bologna, Italy, July 13–18, 2008. Conference
website: http://www.ishe08.org/
[aRTM]
Voland, E. & Voland, R. (1995) Parent-offspring conﬂict, the extended phenotype,
and the evolution of conscience. Journal of Social and Evolutionary Systems
18(4):397–412.
[aRTM]
Voltaire, F. M. A. (1759/1962) Candide, trans. T. G. Smollett. Washington Square
Press.
[aRTM]
von Weizsa¨cker, V. (1950) Der Gestaltkreis. Theorie der Einheit von Wahrnnehmen
und Bewegen 4. Auﬂ. (4th edition). Georg Thieme Verlag.
[ALM]
von Weizsa¨cker, V. (1956) Pathosophie. Vandenhoeck & Ruprecht.
[ALM]
Vouloumanos, A. & Werker, J. F. (2007) Listening to language at birth: Evidence
for a bias for speech in neonates. Developmental Science 10:159–64.
[CSD]
Wagner, A. (2005) Robustness, evolvability, and neutrality. FEBS Letters
579(8):1772–78.
[JPS]
Wakeﬁeld, J. C. (1992) The concept of mental disorder: On the boundary between
biological facts and social values. American Psychologist 47:373–88.
[JRL,
rRTM]
Wakeﬁeld, J. C. (1999a) Evolutionary versus prototype analyses of the concept of
disorder. Journal of Abnormal Psychology 108(3):374–99.
[rRTM]
Wakeﬁeld, J. C. (1999b) Mental disorder as a black box essentialist concept. Journal
of Abnormal Psychology 108(3):465–72.
[rRTM]
Wallace, B. (1973) Misinformation, ﬁtness and selection. American Naturalist
107:1–7.
[aRTM]
Watson, J. S. (1985) Contingency perception in early social development. In: Social
perception in infants, ed. T. M. Field & N. A. Fox, pp. 157–76. Ablex.
[CSD]
Weber, E. U. & Johnson, E. J. (2009) Mindful judgment and decision making.
Annual Review of Psychology 60:53–85.
[ETC]
Wegner, D. M. (2002) The illusion of conscious will. Bradford Books/MIT Press.
[rRTM]
Wegner, D. M. (2004) Pre´cis of The illusion of conscious will. Behavioral and Brain
Sciences 27(5):649–59; discussion 660–92.
[ALM]
Wegner, D. M. (2005) Who is the controller of controlled processes? In: The new
unconscious, ed. R. Hassin, J. Uleman & J. A. Bargh, pp. 19–58. Oxford
University Press.
[BR-S]
Wenger, A. & Fowers, B. J. (2008) Positive illusions in parenting: Every child is
above average. Journal of Applied Social Psychology 38(3):611–34.
[aRTM]
Wereha, T. J. & Racine, T. P. (2009) Evolutionary psychology at a crossroads? A
review of Moral psychology, volume 1: The evolution of morality: Adaptations
and innateness. Journal of Research on Character Education 6:95–99.
[TJW]
Williams, A. F. (2003) Views of U.S. drivers about driving safety. Journal of Safety
Research 34(5):491–94.
[aRTM]
Williams, G. C. (1966) Adaptation and natural selection. Princeton University
Press.
[rRTM]
Wilson, A. E. & Ross, M. (2001) From chump to champ: People’s appraisals of their
earlier and current selves. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology
80(4):572–84.
[JS]
Wilson, A. E. & Ross, M. (2003) The identity function of autobiographical memory:
Time is on our side. Memory 11(2):137–49.
[JS]
Wilson, D. S. (1990) Species of thought: A comment on evolutionary epistomology.
Biology and Philosophy 5:37–62.
[DSW]
Wilson, D. S. (1995) Language as a community of interacting belief systems: A case
study involving conduct toward self and others. Biology and Philosophy
10:77–97.
[DSW]
Wilson, D. S. (2002) Darwin’s cathedral: Evolution, religion and the nature of
society. University of Chicago Press.
[DDPJ, arRTM, KT-K, DSW]
Wilson, D. S. (2005) Testing major evolutionary hypotheses about religion with a
random sample. Human Nature 16(4):382–409.
[DSW]
References/McKay & Dennett: The evolution of misbelief
560
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (2009) 32:6

Wilson, D. S. (2006) Human groups as adaptive units: Toward a permanent
consensus. In: The innate mind: Culture and cognition, ed. P. Carruthers,
S. Laurence & S. Stich, pp. 78–90. Oxford University Press.
[DSW]
Wilson, D. S. (2010) Rational and irrational beliefs from an evolutionary perspec-
tive. In: Rational and irrational beliefs, ed. D. David, S. J. Lynn & A. Ellis,
pp. 63–74. Oxford University Press.
[DSW]
Wilson, T. D. (2009) Know thyself. Perspectives on Psychological Science
384–89.
[DSW]
Wiltermuth, S. S. & Heath, C. (2008) Synchrony and cooperation. Psychological
Science 20:1–5.
[JB]
Wimsatt, W. (2007) Re-engineering philosophy for limited beings. Harvard
University Press.
[KT-K]
Windschitl, P. D., Kruger, J. & Simms, E. N. (2003) The inﬂuence of egocentrism
and focalism on people’s optimism in competitions: When what affects us
equally affects me more. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 85:389–
408.
[JK]
Wolf, M., van Doorn, G. S., Leimar, O. & Weissing, F. J. (2007) Life-history trade-
offs favour the evolution of animal personalities. Nature 447:581–84.
[ETC]
Wolpert, L. (2000) The unnatural nature of science. Harvard University Press.
[JPS]
Wong, T. Y., Foster, P. J., Hee, J., Ng, T. P., Tielsch, J. M., Chew S. J., Johnson, G. J.
& Seah, S. K. L. (2000) Prevalence and risk factors for refractive errors in adult
Chinese in Singapore. Investigative Ophthalmology and Visual Science
41:2486–94.
[aRTM]
Woodward, A. & Needham, A. (Ed.) (2009) Learning and the infant mind. Oxford
University Press.
[CSD]
Wrangham, R. W. (1999) Is military incompetence adaptive? Evolution and Human
Behaviour 20:3–17.
[DDPJ]
Yamagishi, T., Terai, S., Kiyonari, T., Mifune, N. & Kanazawa, S. (2007) The social
exchange heuristic: Managing errors in social exchange. Rationality and
Society 19(3):259–91.
[aRTM]
Yamazaki, K. (2008) Colors of young and old spring leaves as a potential signal for
ant-tended hemipterans. Plant Signaling and Behavior 3(11):984–85.
[rRTM]
Yates, J., Bessman, M., Dunne, M., Jertson, D., Sly, K. & Wendelboe, B. (1988) Are
conceptions of motion based on a naive theory or on prototypes? Cognition
29:251–75.
[MB]
Young, A. W. (1999) Delusions. The Monist 82(4):571–89.
[aRTM]
Young, A. W. (2000) Wondrous strange: The neuropsychology of abnormal beliefs.
Mind and Language 15(1):47–73.
[aRTM]
Young, A. W., Robertson, I. H., Hellawell, D. J., de Pauw, K. W. & Pentland, B.
(1992) Cotard delusion after brain injury. Psychological Medicine 22:799–
804.
[aRTM]
Zahavi, A. (1995) Altruism as a handicap – the limitations of kin selection and
reciprocity. Journal of Avian Biology 26:1–3.
[aRTM]
Zolotova, J. & Bru¨ne, M. (2006) Persecutory delusions: Reminiscence of
ancestral hostile threats? Evolution and Human Behavior 27(3):185–92.
[aRTM]
References/McKay & Dennett: The evolution of misbelief
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (2009) 32:6
561

