BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1988) 11, 495-546
Printed in the United States of America
Precis of The Intentional Stance
Daniel C. Dennett
Center for Cognitive Studies, Tufts University, Medford, Mass. 02155
Abstract: The intentional stance is the strategy of prediction and explanation that attributes beliefs, desires, and other "intentional"
states to systems - living and nonliving - and predicts future behavior from what it would be rational for an agent to do, given those
beliefs and desires. Any system whose performance can be thus predicted and explained is an intentional system, whatever its
innards. The strategy of treating parts of the world as intentional systems is the foundation of "folk psychology," but is also exploited
(and is virtually unavoidable) in artificial intelligence and cognitive science more generally, as well as in evolutionary theory. An
analysis of the role of the intentional stance and its presuppositions supports a naturalistic theory of mental states and events, their
content or intentionality, and the relation between "mentalistic" levels of explanation and neurophysiological or mechanistic levels of
explanation. As such, the analysis of the intentional stance grounds a theory of the mind and its relation to the body.
Keywords: artificial intelligence; belief attribution; cognition; evolution; explanation; intentionality; materialism; mental representa-
tion; mental states; rationality
The Intentional Stance gathers together, reorganizes,
and extends my essays on intentional systems (and the
intentional stance from which they are visible), present-
ing the first comprehensive and uniform expression of my
theory, together with detailed replies to the criticisms it
has provoked. After an introductory chapter, six pre-
viously published essays are reprinted, detailing various
parts and implications of the theory of intentional sys-
tems, each followed by an essay of "Reflections," recon-
sidering and extending the claims and arguments of the
earlier work. The next two chapters further develop the
theory, and the final chapter traces the history of philo-
sophical theorizing on these topics during the last thirty
years, placing my view in the context of the views of
Quine, Sellars, Chisholm, Putnam, Davidson, Fodor,
Bennett, Stich, and others, and showing that there has in
fact been a growing consensus about a number of funda-
mental points. Philosophy does make progress, and the
progress discerned is on issues of concern to theorists in
other disciplines working on the nature of the mind. The
chapters and reflections are here summarized in the
order in which they appear.
1. Setting off on the right foot
Although some theorists would rather not talk about the
mind - would prefer to avoid all "mentalistic" theorizing
- the various abstemious alternatives in the social sci-
ences and biology have now shown their futility, so there
is a need for an account - a philosopher's account - of the
presuppositions and implications of mentalistic talk.
Not everything has a mind, but the dividing line is
obscure: Do insects have minds? Do any nonhuman
animals? Could a robot have a mind? The "common
sense" answers to these questions are unreliable; even
the most compelling intuitions may be swept aside by a
successful, broadly supported theory, so there is little to
be gained from a search for indubitable first principles.
One must start somewhere, however, and my tactical
choice is to begin with the objective, materialistic, third-
person world of the physical sciences, and see what can be
made from that perspective of the traditional (and deeply
intuitive) notions of mind.
Others would insist that this is already to make a
fundamental error -an error of scientism, roughly. Nagel
(1986), for instance, has claimed that anyone who starts
with the objective, third-person point of view is doomed
to leave out or distort something essential about our
minds, our subjective experience. There is no way to join
debate between these two perspectives; Nagel's argu-
ments beg the question against mine by accepting as
simply obvious and in need of no support various intui-
tions I am prepared to dismiss from my theoretical van-
tage point. In the end, since these are tactical choices, the
proof must be in the results: Does my third-person
perspective fail to do justice to the phenomena (as we
think we understand them), or does it provide explana-
tions not only for the primary phenomena, but also for the
presence and potency of the contrary intuitions that it
dismisses?
Starting, then, from the third-person point of view,
what first strikes us is that the predictive strategies and
methods that work relatively well when the topic is
germination or magnetism fail to yield much when ap-
plied to the behavior of people and other higher animals.
For these phenomena, we all rely on what may be called
folk psychology, which can best be understood in a
parallel with folk physics, the everyday, largely sub-
liminal lore we rely on to guide our expectations about
spilled liquids, garden swings, and other nonliving mac-
roscopic objects and events. It may well be that parts of
both folk physics and folk psychology are innate, or at
least aided by innate perceptual or dispositional biases,
but much of both must be learned from experience. The
expectations generated by these folk theories are for the
most part effortless, uniform, and reliable. When a blind
person fails to react to something right before his eyes, for
instance, this can startle us, so compelling is our normal
© 1988 Cambridge University Press
0140-525X188 S5.00+.00
495

Dennett: The intentional stance
expectation that people come to believe the truth about
what is happening right in front of their eyes.
The intuitions of folk physics are not all to be trusted;
gyroscopes and siphons, for instance, are counterin-
tuitive. Similarly, the intuitions of folk psychology should
not be deemed immune to revision or dismissal by the-
oretical advances, no matter how obvious they may now
seem to us. Until recently, however, philosophers (and
other theorists) have tended to endow our everyday
intuitions about our minds with an implausible certainty
or incontrovertibility. This invulnerable status must be
denied to the putative truths of folk psychology, while at
the same time we acknowledge the very great powers of
organization and expectation we derive from it. The task
that lies ahead is to describe accurately and then explain
the power of folk psychology.
2. True believers: The intentional strategy and
why it works
Sometimes attributions of belief appear entirely objective
and unproblematic, and sometimes they appear beset
with subjectivity and infected with cultural relativism.
Catering to these two families of cases are two apparently
antithetical theoretical options: realism, the view that
beliefs are objective things in the head which could be
discovered and whose identities could be confirmed, in
principle, by physiological psychology; and interpreta-
tionism, the view that attributing a belief is a highly
relativistic undertaking, more like asserting that someone
is immoral, or has style, or talent, or would make a good
wife - "it all depends on what you're interested in."
It is a common mistake to see these alternatives as
mutually exclusive and exhaustive. Warding off the en-
thusiastic proponents of this mistake is a recurrent task in
the book. My thesis is that while belief is a perfectly
objective phenomenon (which apparently makes me a
realist), it can be discerned only from the point of view of
someone who adopts a certain predictive strategy, the
intentional stance (which apparently makes me an in-
terpretationist). In order to demonstrate this stance-
dependent realism I first describe the stance, and then
argue that any object - whatever its innards - that is
reliably and voluminously predictable from the stance is
in the fullest sense of the word a believer. What it is to be
a true believer, to have beliefs and desires, is to be an
intentional system. How the stance works: Suppose as-
trology actually worked. Then we would have the dual
task of first describing how the astrological stance worked
in action (predicting the futures of astrological systems)
and then explaining why the astrological stance or strat-
egy worked when it did. Other strategies of prediction
have better credentials. In the physical stance, one pre-
dicts the behavior of a physical system (of stars, tides,
volcanoes, DNA molecules) by exploiting information
about the physical constitution of the system, and the
laws of physics. (Laplace's omniscient calculator is the
ultimate adopter of the physical stance.) In the design
stance, one predicts the behavior of a system by assuming
that it has a certain design (is composed of elements with
functions) and that it will behave as it is designed to
behave under various circumstances. The design stance
can often safely ignore details of the physical implementa-
tion of the various imputed functions; there are many
levels of design stance, from highly detailed to highly
abstract. (Predicting the behavior of a computer from an
analysis of the source code of its program is more abstract
than predicting its behavior from an analysis of the states
of its flip-flops, but both are design stance predictions
dependent on assumptions that every element, however
physically implemented, will perform its proper
function.)
Finally, there is the intentional stance, in which one
treats the system whose behavior is to be predicted as a
rational agent; one attributes to the system the beliefs and
desires it ought to have, given its place in the world and
its purpose, and then predicts that it will act to further its
goals in the light of its beliefs.
Generally, the beliefs any system ought to have are
true beliefs about its circumstances, and the desires any
system ought to have are those that directly or instrumen-
tally aim to secure whatever the system needs to preserve
itself and further any other projects it has. We all strive to
believe the True and desire the Good, but the rules for
belief and desire attribution must allow for the deflective
effects of engineering shortcuts, design approximations,
uncorrected malfunctions, and in particular the distorting
effects of the verbal expression of belief and desire by
those intentional systems capable of language.
The intentional stance is ubiquitous; we all adopt it
every day to make sense of the behavior of our con-
specifics, but also that of other animals, some artifacts
(e.g., chess-playing computers), and even plants, on
occasion. The definition of an intentional system is so
forgiving that some have wondered whether it is vacuous.
Consider a lectern. What prevents its being construed as
an intentional system with the belief that it is currently
located at the center of the civilized world and the desire
to remain at that center? Given that belief and desire, it is
rational for it to stay put; it does, so apparently it is
predictable from the intentional stance, and hence it is an
intentional system. If it is, everything is. But the lectern
is disqualified because, first, there is no predictive lever-
age gained by adopting the intentional stance, and sec-
ond, there is no principle governing the ad hoc attribu-
tion of the belief and desire.
The power of the intentional strategy is often concealed
by theorists' concentration on cases which yield dubious
results. Consider predicting moves in a chess game.
What makes chess interesting is the unpredictability of
one's opponent's moves, it seems, but in fact even when
the intentional stance fails to distinguish a single move as
best (and hence predicted), it can narrow down the set of
legal (and hence equipossible) moves to a typically much
smaller subset of relatively likely moves, a large predic-
tive edge not otherwise readily obtainable. Similarly,
although the intentional stance does not permit such fine-
grained predictions as the exact purchase and sell deci-
sions of stock traders, or the exact sequence of words a
politician will utter, it can yield reliable and high-proba-
bility expectations regarding more generic action types:
The trader will not buy utilities today and the politician
will side with the unions against his party. It is this
neutrality with regard to fine-grained details of imple-
mentation that permits the intentional stance to be ex-
ploited in complex cases involving chaining predictions.
The example of the Martian predictor using the phys-
ical stance in a prediction contest with an Earthling using
496
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1988) 11:3

Dennett: The intentional stance
the intentional stance shows that the objective pattern
viewed from the intentional stance is indiscernible to the
Martian, who might be able to make laborious and accu-
rate predictions, a la Laplace, but would have no explana-
tion of how the Earthling was caused to make the same
true predictions without access to the same microcausal
information. The objective presence of the pattern relied
on by the Earthling (with whatever imperfections) does
not rule out the presence of other patterns, each discern-
ible from a different stance.
The example of the thermostat shows that it is the-
oretically perspicuous to include even the simplest home-
ostats as intentional systems, since there are no sharp
discontinuities between them, lower animals, and fully
fledged (human) believers. In particular, it gets matters
backwards to attempt to make a divide between inten-
tional systems that harbor internal (mental) representa-
tions and those that do not: It is not that we attribute (or
should attribute) beliefs and desires only to things in
which we find internal representations, but rather that
when we discover some object for which the intentional
strategy works, we endeavor to interpret some of its
internal states or processes as internal representations.
What makes some internal feature of a thing a representa-
tion could only be its role in regulating the behavior of an
intentional system.
Finally, why does the intentional strategy work? First,
because we are close enough approximations of optimal
cognitive design (i.e., rationality). This says nothing,
however, about what the ultimately mechanical details of
that design are, which is an independent question. We
should not jump to the conclusion that the internal
machinery of an intentional system and the strategy that
predicts its behavior coincide - that is, we should not
conclude that the language-of-thought hypothesis is true
(a topic that is discussed further in later chapters).
In the "Reflections," the example of Conway's "Life
world" (Gardiner 1970) illustrates and reinforces the
claim that my view is both a mild form of "realism" and
stance-dependent. There are patterns of "behavior" de-
finable in the state transitions of configuration in the Life
world that are describable only from the intentional
stance. Further, when there are imperfections in these
intentional stance patterns, there are no "deeper facts" to
resolve the outstanding questions of belief attribution.
This claim is related to Quine's (1960) thesis of the
indeterminacy of radical translation and to Parfit's (1984)
account of "empty questions" about personal identity.
3. Three kinds of intentional psychology
This chapter extends the analysis of the role of the
intentional stance in folk psychology and in cognitive
psychology.
What do we have in common if we both believe that
cats eat fish? Such a question can call for two different
kinds of answers: a conceptual answer (giving the es-
sence, in effect) or a causal answer (the "reductive,"
"scientific" answer). What do all magnets have in com-
mon? The conceptual answer is that all magnets attract
iron; the causal answer goes on to give the microphysical
account of what underlies that capacity. Some philoso-
phers, in their eagerness to ground a proper scientific
theory of belief, have confounded the parallel questions
about what believers have in common. To answer the first
question, we must analyze the concept of belief in its
source context: folk psychology. What we discover is that
folk psychology is best seen not as a sketch of internal
processes, but as an idealized, abstract, instrumentalistic
calculus of prediction.
At the heart of folk psychology is the intentional stance.
There is some evidence that we are not as rational as we
have thought we are, but however rational we are, the
myth of our rational agenthood structures and organizes
our attributions of belief and desire. [See also Cohen:
"Can Human Irrationality Be Experimentally Demon-
strated? BBS 4(3) 1981. ] So folk psychology is idealized in
that it produces its predictions by calculating in a nor-
mative system. It is abstract in that the beliefs and desires
it attributes need not be presumed to be independent,
distinguishable intervening states of an internal behavior-
causing system. It is instrumentalistic in a way the most
ardent realist should permit: People have beliefs in the
same way they and all other physical objects have centers
of gravity. Reichenbach (1938) distinguished two sorts of
referents for theoretical terms: illata - posited theoretical
entities - and abstracta - calculation-bound entities or
logical constructs (such as the center of gravity or the
equator). Beliefs and desires are properly seen as abstrac-
ta. This view contrasts most sharply with views such as
Fodor's (1975; 1981; 1987).
The example of how various people come to learn about
Jacques shooting his uncle in Trafalgar Square shows that
what is in common in such cases need not be anything
describable at any less abstract and instrumentalistic
level than the intentional stance. Other examples show
that beliefs make poor illata in any case - rather like
Anaxagoras's "seeds," they have problematic identity
conditions and are prone to create infinite regresses. But
we have reason to want to cite beliefs in causal explana-
tions (as many philosophers have insisted), and we can do
this without their being viewed as illata, but only by
doing some violence to folk psychology.
The ordinary notion of belief is pulled in two direc-
tions. If we want to have good theoretical entities, good
illata, or good logical constructs, good abstracta, we will
have to jettison some of the ordinary freight of the
concepts of belief and desire. So I propose a divorce of
two theories from their source in folk psychology: (1) pure
intentional system theory (idealizing, holistic, abstract,
instrumentalistic) and (2) sub-personal cognitive psychol-
ogy (a concrete, microlevel theory of the realization of the
intentional systems whose behavior is specified by the
first theory).
Intentional system theory is thus a competence theory.
Like kinematics, and unlike dynamics, it proceeds via
assumptions of perfection (no friction, no stretching or
bending), and is useful in providing an abstract and
relatively noncommittal set of specs for the design of the
concrete mechanism. Subpersonal cognitive psychology
is then a performance theory. In particular, its task is to
show how brains, which as physical mechanisms can only
be syntactic engines, nevertheless succeed in imple-
menting (or better: approximating) the semantic engines
specified by intentional system theory. This task cannot
be executed within the strictures of what Putnam (1975)
has called methodological solipsism.
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1988) 11:3
497

Dennett: The intentional stance
Thus the best way to view the relation of psychology
and its phenomena to the rest of science is not, as
philosophical tradition would have it, to try to find a
reducing vocabulary in a lower, microtheoretical science
(such as neuroscience), so that we can complete the
formulae:
x believes that p iff Px
where "P' is some predicate of neuroscience or other
physical science. The best way to view the relation is as
analogous to the relation of a Turing machine specifica-
tion to the underlying concrete mechanism. One cannot
say what two realizations of Turing machine k have in
common in any vocabulary "lower" than Turing machine
talk, but one can have an engineering theory of how
Turing machines can be realized in mechanisms.
Thus the claim that all mental phenomena exhibit
intentionality, which is traditionally taken as an irre-
ducibility thesis (Brentano's Thesis), can be viewed,
through the lens of the intentional stance, as a sort of
reductionist thesis, in exactly the same way Church's
Thesis is viewed as reductionist: Church's Thesis reduces
the irremediably intuitive and informal concept of effec-
tive procedure to the crisply defined concept of Turing-
computability. Analogously, my claim that every mental
phenomenon alluded to in folk psychology is intentional-
system-characterizable would reduce a domain whose
boundaries are fixed (at best) by mutual intuition to a
clearly defined domain of entities whose principles of
organization are relatively formal and systematic, and
entirely general.
In the "Reflections," after brief comments on Searle's
(1980; 1982) version of my claim that "you can't get the
semantics from the syntax," operationalism, and "core
beliefs, ' I address the problems occasioned by my calling
my view "instrumentalist," which has proven in some
regards a misnomer. One can consider the intentional
stance to be a special variety of design stance, positing
homunculi pro tempore. This makes intentional system
theory literally a black box theory, but it is not thereby a
behaviorist theory. In fact, it is consonant with Marr's
(1982) strategic vision of three levels in cognitive theory:
the computational level (which is roughly equivalent to
the intentional stance and to Newell's (1982) "knowledge
level"), the algorithmic level, and the hardware level.
The role of the intentional stance in specifying a com-
petence is illustrated by the example of the Newfie-joke-
getter, which requires a mechanism-independent, but
still counterfactual-supporting, description from the in-
tentional stance. The example of the hand calculator
illustrates the way an idealized competence model yields
to a partial specification of a performance model as imper-
fections and shortcuts are discovered. Finally, in re-
sponse to various objections, there is a discussion of the
use of the intentional stance to predict chess moves, and
particularly to predict errors by one's opponent.
4. Making sense of ourselves
Nominally a reply to Stich (1981) this chapter concen-
trates on the rationality assumption of the intentional
stance, which has been the target of considerable crit-
icism.
First, according to Stich (and others), the intentional
stance cannot account for (predict, explain) mistakes or
failures of rationality. This claim is examined via Stich's
example (1981) of the lemonade seller who gives the
wrong change; I claim that the indeterminacy of attribu-
tion encountered by the intentional stance is real and
ineliminable, even in such mundane cases.
Second, Stich (and others) have criticized me for not
giving a specific definition of rationality, but this is a
misguided objection; the concept of rationality exploited
in the intentional stance is, and should be, the pre-
theoretical concept of cognitive excellence (whatever that
comes to in particular circumstances), rather than any one
fixed canon such as deductive closure, and whatever-
evolution-has-given-us. We must allow for the discovery
that deductive consistency or completeness is not always
a cognitive virtue, and that evolution does not always
provide us with the best, most rational equipment or
habits of thought.
Third, Stich contrasts my theory of belief attribution
(roughly: x believes what x ought to believe) with his own
(roughly; x believes what I would believe in x's circum-
stances), but this contrast is shown to be evanescent; it is
not clear that these methods would ever yield different
predictions, given what Stich must acknowledge in the
specification of circumstances.
In the "Reflections," the example of the lemonade
seller is explored in more depth to show that the advance
of subpersonal cognitive psychology would not eliminate
the indeterminacy of the intentional stance, would not be
capable of rendering objective verdicts about those belief
attributions that Stich supposes would have to be true or
false.
A section on "frog psychology" shows how two well-
known positions tug at mine in opposite directions, while
agreeing about something I reject. Critics on both sides
see a wide gulf between frogs (for instance) and human
beings: Fodor (1975; 1986), Dretske (1985; 1986) and
other "Realists" insist that we human beings, unlike
frogs, really have beliefs and desires; Stich (1983),
Churchland & Churchland (1981) and other "elim-
inativists" accept the implied contrast between us and
frogs, and with it they accept the Realists' vision of what
really having a belief would be. Strictly speaking, they
agree, frogs have no beliefs; but, strictly speaking, nei-
ther do we! There are no such things as beliefs. I agree
that if beliefs had to be what the Realists think they are,
there wouldn't be any beliefs, for frogs or any of us. I am
not tempted, as both groups of critics are, by the contrast
between us and frogs.
The illusions of Realism are engendered in the liter-
ature by a misplaced concentration on verbalized beliefs,
or what I call (in a special technical sense) opinions. An
examination of Quine's (1956) famous example of Ralph
believing Ortcutt to be a spy exhibits the misbegotten
reliance on linguistic forms, which lends spurious support
to the language-of-thought hypothesis, the view that is
analogous to the idea that a head cold is composed of a
large set of sneezes, some of which escape. A confusion
between thinking (in the sense of thinking specific, ver-
balized, or partly verbalized thoughts) and believing is
one of the prime sources of this illusion.
498
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1988) 11:3

Dennett: The intentional stance
5. Beyond belief
This chapter is a demolitional tour of that philosophical
black hole: propositional attitude psychology. CAU-
TION: Reading this chapter, and the literature discussed
in it, may be hazardous to your health.
Philosophical tradition views beliefs as propositional
attitudes, but this tradition has less secure foundations
than its orthodoxy would suggest. In the first section, the
traditional doctrines of propositional attitudes are pre-
sented, and the persistent difficulties noted. It is standard
to suppose that belief attributions and their kin are
analyzable into three variable components:
x [subject] believes [attitude] that p [proposition]
but there has been no uniformity on the nature of the
third component, propositions. There are three distinct
views defended in the literature. Propositions are:
(1) like sentences (composed of something like sym-
bols, with a syntax)
(2) sets of possible worlds
(3) ordered collections of objects and properties in the
world.
This disunity is due to the fact that, by tradition,
propositions are supposed to meet three conditions.
Propositions are:
(a) truth-value bearers
(b) intensions (in Carnap's sense, as extension-
determiners)
(c) "graspable" by the mind
Nothing can meet all three of these conditions simul-
taneously, as a number of arguments (by Kaplan 1980,
Perry 1977; 1979, Putnam 1975, Stich 1983, and others)
purport to show.
The more or less standard retreat in the face of these
arguments is to what I call sentential attitude psychology,
one version or another of the language-of-thought hy-
pothesis. Four routes to this destination are described:
(1) Sentences in the head are what are physically
"grasped" when a proposition (an abstract object) is
entertained.
(2) Beliefs about dogs and cats must be composed of
something - not dogs and cats, of course, but symbols for
dogs and cats; these symbols must be arranged in sen-
tence-like structures.
(3) Sentences in the head can account for the phe-
nomenon of referential opacity1 in a straightforward way.
(4) Following Kaplan (1980) a distinction between con-
tent and character can be drawn, but then sentences in
the head are needed to be the entities with character.
One hopes, via this strategy, to specify the organismic
contribution to the determination of an organism's propo-
sitional attitudes, but the language-of-thought hypothesis
runs into difficulties. First, it distinguishes too fine-
grainedly between psychological states; two individuals
with somewhat different languages of thought could nev-
er be counted as having the same belief, for instance.
Second, it presupposes that one could in principle dis-
cover the "syntax" of a language of thought (the system
governing the composition of representations from basic
elements or terms) prior to discovering any of its "seman-
tic" properties (what the representations were about),
and this presupposition is shown to be dubious on several
counts. Third, and most important, it presupposes that
semantic contributions to a system can always be cast in
"verbal" form, as a message or premise added to the
system, but there is good reason to believe that some
important varieties of contentful effect cannot be cap-
tured as things "said", in effect, to the system.
What is needed is an intermediate specification of
psychological traits, independent of any hypotheses
about the medium of internal representation, and at the
same time independent of the particular facts of the
external environment of the organism. This can be pro-
vided by what I call notional attitude psychology. Notional
attitudes are indirectly characterizable via a theorist's
fiction - the "notional world" which is the environment for
which the organism, as currently constituted, is ideally
suited. Various versions of this idea of notional worlds are
seen to operate in disparate schools of thought: Husserlian
(1931) Phenomenology, artificial intelligence, Quine's
(1960) doctrine of indeterminacy of radical translation, and
the interpretation of fiction by literary theorists.
One of the implications of notional attitude psychology
that many philosophers find strongly counterintuitive can
be expressed in terms of Putnam's (1975) Twin Earth
thought experiment: If I and my Doppelganger switch
places, I would immediately have beliefs (and other
propositional attitudes) about the things on Twin Earth -
in advance of any particular causal commerce with them,
contrary to the various versions of the causal theory of
reference.
The issues raised by such wildly unrealistic philosoph-
ical thought experiments are better explored in a mun-
dane, if unlikely, scenario: the practical joke described in
the Ballad of Shakey's Pizza Parlor. Tom, while eating a
pizza in one Shakey's Pizza Parlor, is drugged by his
friends and moved to another, practically indistinguisha-
ble Shakey's Pizza Parlor some miles away, where he
awakes, unaware of the switch. He makes a wager about
the existence of his initials carved in the men's room door,
and loses the wager, of course. But which door did he
"have in mind"? The difficulties encountered in trying to
give a proper description of Tom's psychological state at
the time of the wager expose the problem with several
technical concepts traditionally honored by philosophers.
First, Tom must be seen as having had a dual set of
propositional attitudes (double entry bookkeeping, one
might say) in spite of the presumably unitary nature of his
internal psychological state. And worse, even if we grant
the dual set of propositional attitudes, there is an unre-
solved problem about how to impose another technical
distinction on the case: the putative distinction between
de re and de dicto propositional attitudes.
This distinction has so far defied uncontroversial defini-
tion, in spite of much attention, but it can be illustrated by
an example. Bill believes that the captain of the Soviet ice
hockey team (whoever he is) is a man; Bill also believes that
his own father is a man. The latter belief, arising as it does
out of a relatively intimate experiential acquaintance, is
said to be de re (literally: of or about the thing) whereas the
former belief, arising presumably as a highly probable
inference from some general beliefs and not from any
direct experience of that stalwart Russian is said to be de
dicto (literally: of or about the dictum or proposition).
Intuitively compelling as many examples make this dis-
tinction appear, it has engendered a host of problems and
should not be assumed to be either safe or salvageable.
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1988) 11:3
499

Dennett: The intentional stance
The history of the distinction is traced from the work of
Chisholm (1956; 1966) and Quine (1956; 1960) and others,
and it is shown that there has been a confounding of
several independent factors. There is on the one hand a
distinction between relational and notional attribution-
claims, and on the other hand, between general and
specific beliefs. Once these are properly distinguished,
the various attempts to isolate criteria for de re belief can
be seen to fail: Kaplan's (1968) vividness, the lifting of
substitution-restrictions, the availability of direct osten-
sion or demonstrative reference, the putative failure of
definite descriptions to capture a putative special mode of
reference.
The conclusion drawn is that although it is possible to
isolate and individuate a subset of beliefs meeting one or
another causal or metaphysical condition, it will not be a
theoretically interesting subset from the point of view of
psychology. Alternatively, one can draw a distinction
within the confines of notional attitude psychology that is
psychologically perspicuous, but which fails to line up
with the tradition on de re and de dicto - so much the
worse for that tradition.
Viewed from another perspective, the conclusion is
that we must abandon what Evans (1980) calls Russell's
Principle: It is not possible to make a judgment about an
object without knowing what object you are making a
judgment about. Once this is done, one can discern a host
of interesting, but largely ignored, distinctions in need of
further analysis: different ways of thinking of things; the
difference between episodic thinking and believing; the
difference between explicit and virtual representation;
the difference between linguistically infected beliefs
(opinions) and what we might call animal beliefs; the
difference between artifactual or transparently notional
objects and other notional objects. Once good philosoph-
ical accounts of these are at hand, the artifactual (and
dismissible) status of the doctrine oide re and de dicto will
be clearer.
In the "Reflections," I summarize and expand on the
four major conclusions of the chapter:
(1) At this time there is no stable, received view of
propositions or propositional attitudes on which one can
rely.
(2) The well-trodden path to "language-of-thought
psychology" is a route to fantasyland.
(3) Russell's Principle must be abandoned.
(4) There is no stable, coherent view of the so-called de
relde dicto distinction.
This leaves something of a vacuum, since if there is one
thing cognitive science seems to need from philosophers,
it is a theory of propositions to provide the foundation for
the ubiquitous use of propositional attitude talk. After all,
statements of propositional attitude are central to the
intentional stance. One may continue to rely on such talk,
I argue, so long as one gives up a certain misguided hope
of realism with regard to propositions. Propositions are
abstract objects, but they are more like dollars than
numbers. There are no real, natural, universal units of
either economic value or semantic information.
6. Styles of mental representation
In The Concept of Mind (1949), Ryle attacked a vision he
called the intellectualist myth, which bears a strong
resemblance to the currently applauded cognitivist pro-
gram. Contemporary cognitivists have been right to
shrug off much of Ryle's celebrated attack as misguided,
but there remains a central Rylean criticism that has been
underappreciated. Ryle saw that at bottom all cognition
(all knowledge, belief, thinking, inference, etc.) had to be
grounded in varieties of know-how that are only tacit -
present not in virtue of any explicitly represented rules.
The open empirical question is how much explicit repre-
sentation rests on this tacit foundation. The issue has
been confused in the literature because of a failure to
distinguish between several different styles of represen-
tation.
I distinguish explicit representation from implicit rep-
resentation as follows: Something is represented im-
plicitly if it is implied by something that is represented
explicitly by the system. Some, but not all, that is im-
plicitly represented by a system may be potentially ex-
plicitly represented. So implicit representation depends
on explicit representation. But explicit representation
depends (as Ryle saw) on what we may call tacit represen-
tation. Otherwise we would be faced with an infinite
regress of explicit representations being "understood" in
virtue of the system's consultation of further explicit
rules, and so forth. These various distinctions are all
independent of any distinction between conscious and
unconscious representation. For instance, Chomsky
(1980) has claimed that the rules of grammar are explicitly
but entirely unconsciously represented in speakers. [See
also Chomsky: "Rules and Representations" BBS 3(1)
1980; and Stabler: "How Are Grammars Represented"
BBS 6(3) 1983.]
This idea of explicit unconscious representation of rules
is ubiquitous in theoretical discussions in cognitive sci-
ence, but it is neither as clear nor as inevitable as its
orthodoxy would suggest. The idea can be clarified, and
alternatives discerned, by considering a parallel distinc-
tion between three relations bridge players might have to
the rule of thumb, "third hand high." The first, dim-
witted player has memorized the rule, and consciously
and deliberately consults it during play, first determining
by a serial inspection that its conditions are met and then
letting his action be dictated by it; the second, "intuitive"
player typically plays third hand high (when this is appro-
priate) but has never entertained, considered, heard, or
formulated the rule explicitly; the third player is both
intuitively and explicitly aware of the rule, but unlike the
first, understands the rule and when and why its use is
appropriate. The first player, the stupid, uncomprehend-
ing rule-follower, is the best model for the subpersonal
explicit rule-following of cognitive science, since the
threatened homuncular regress must be terminated by
the cumulative diminution to zero of "understanding " in
the subsystems.
But we know a priori that any such regress must be
terminated by subsystems with merely tacitly repre-
sented know-how, so the empirical question that remains
is whether the design principle of unconscious-but-ex-
plicit-rule-following ever gets used. Could Ryle turn out
to be right about the "size" of the largest merely tacit
knowers: whole people? Could virtually all the backstage
know-how be merely tacit in the organization of the
system?
This question is explored via the example of the hand
500
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1988) 11:3

Dennett: The intentional stance
calculator, which is designed to honor the rules of arith-
metic, but explicitly represents no general arithmetical
rules or facts of arithmetic. The design process that
creates such things as hand calculators and automatic
elevators begins, no doubt, with an explicit representa-
tion of the rules to be obeyed, but terminates, typically,
in a "hard-wired" design which guarantees the desired
behavior without in any way representing the rules or
principles that specify that behavior. Moreover, such
purely tacit systems need not be fixed or hard-wired. An
elevator, for instance, can operate according to one set of
rules on weekdays and a different set of rules on the
weekends without either set of rules being explicitly
represented. All that is needed is a clock that will switch
control between two different tacit systems.
This transient tacit representation is a design option of
open-ended power. But as the number of possible differ-
ent states (each with its distinctive set of tacitly repre-
sented rules) grows, this profligacy demands that the
design rely in one way or another on economies achieved
via multiple use of resources. Changing state by editing
rather than replacing leads to the creation of functional
roles that are analogous to variables with different sub-
stitution instances - and we are headed back in the
direction of a language of thought. But there is a dif-
ference: The "semantics" of such a system are entirely
internal, "referring", if you like, to memory addresses,
internal operations, and so forth. The external, or real-
world, semantics of a state in such a system is still
determinable only by the globally defined role of the
state.
In the "Reflections," the language-of-thought hypoth-
esis is reconsidered. After more than ten years of being at
the center of attention in cognitive science, it has been
neither vindicated nor utterly discredited. It would have
been vindicated if sententialist models of central thinking
had been developed and partially confirmed, but instead,
such models that have been proposed appear hopelessly
brittle, inefficient, and unversatile. As Fodor (1983) him-
self acknowledges, the language-of-thought hypothesis
has provided us with no good account of nonperipheral
cognition.
The idea of a language of thought would have been
entirely discredited if a clear alternative to it had been
formulated and confirmed, but although connectionism
(McClelland & Rumelhart 1986) has been offered in this
role, it has not yet been shown to live up to its promise.
Connectionist networks are characterized, typically,
by the following factors:
(1) distributed memory and processing
(2) no central control or highest level executive
(3) no complex message-passing
(4) a reliance on statistical properties of ensembles
(5) relatively mindless making and unmaking of con-
nections or solutions
Perhaps most important, from the point of view of the
philosophical theory of meaning, is the fact that the level
at which connectionist models are computational is not
the level of their real-world, or external, semantics. This
is what most sharply distinguishes them as an alternative
to the language-of-thought hypothesis. But we have yet to
see just what can be constructed using these new and
surprisingly powerful connectionist fabrics. At present all
the demonstrations are made possible by (oversimplify-
ing assumptions, and serious grounds for skepticism
abound.
But suppose connectionism triumphed; what would be
the implications for folk psychology? According to the
eliminativists (Stich 1983; Churchland 1981), the triumph
of connectionism would show that there are no such
things as beliefs at all. Stich would replace folk psychol-
ogy with his "syntactic psychology" whereas Churchland
would do just the opposite: cling to the contentfulness or
intentionality of inner something-or-others but drop the
presupposition that these inner vehicles of meaning be-
haved, syntactically, the way Realists have supposed
beliefs to behave. Belief dis-contented versus content
dis-believed. There is something to be said for both
options, but something more to be said for their combina-
tion: Stich, with his syntactic theory, can be recommend-
ing more or less the right way to go with opinions
(linguistically infected states) whereas Churchland can be
recommending the right course to take about animal
belief (the internal, behavior-guiding states that are not
"sentential" at all).
But I recommend yet another, less radical approach:
The vindication of connectionism would not undercut the
modest "instrumentalistic" objectivism of the intentional
stance. Are there beliefs? Of course. We already know
that there are robust, reliable patterns in which all behav-
iorally normal people participate - the patterns we tradi-
tionally describe in terms of belief and desire and the
other terms of folk psychology. What spread around the
world on July 20, 1969? The belief that a man had stepped
on the moon. In no two people was the effect causally or
syntactically the same, and yet the claim that they all had
nothing in common is false and obviously so. There are
indefinitely many ways of reliably distinguishing those
who have the belief in question from those who have not,
and there would be a high correlation among the meth-
ods. This is something science should not and could not
turn its back on.
This completes the presentation of the basic theory of
intentional systems and its defense against rival philo-
sophical positions, and sets the stage for the application of
these ideas to further domains.
7. Intentional systems in cognitive ethology: The
"Panglossian paradigm" defended
Because this chapter first appeared in BBS (Dennett
1983a), it will not be summarized here. The following
abstract appeared with the original article:
Ethologists and others studying animal behavior in a
"cognitive" spirit are in need of a descriptive language
and method that are neither anachronistically bound
by behaviorist scruples nor prematurely committed to
particular "information-processing models." Just such
an interim descriptive method can be found in inten-
tional system theory. The use of intentional system
theory is illustrated with the case of the apparently
communicative behavior of vervet monkeys. A way of
using the theory to generate data - including usable,
testable "anecdotal" data - is sketched. The underly-
ing assumptions of this approach can be seen to ally it
directly with "adaptationist" theorizing in evolutionary
biology, which has recently come under attack from
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1988) 11:3
501

Dennett: The intentional stance
Stephen Gould and Richard Lewontin, who castigate it
as the "Panglossian paradigm." Their arguments,
which are strongly analogous to B. F. Skinner's argu-
ments against "mentalism," point to certain pitfalls that
attend the careless exercise of such "Panglossian"
thinking (and rival varieties of thinking as well), but do
not constitute a fundamental objection to either adap-
tationist theorizing or its cousin, intentional system
theory.
In the "Reflections," I first give an account of my own
later observation of Robert Seyfarth and Dorothy Cheney
observing the vervet monkeys in Kenya. I think the most
important thing I learned from actually watching the
vervets is that they live in a world in which secrets are
virtually impossible. So it is a rare occasion indeed when
one vervet is in a position to learn something that it alone
knows and knows that it alone knows, and the oppor-
tunity for such secrets is, I claim, a necessary condition
for the development of a sophisticated (truly Gricean)
capacity for communication. But even if this killjoy ver-
dict is correct - the vervets are further from having a
human language than one might have thought - the
intentional stance is still the best strategy to adopt to
describe (and eventually explain) their behavior.
My defense of the Panglossian paradigm against Gould
and Lewontin (1979) in the original BBS target article
struck some commentators as a digression, but in fact it
introduced a central theme in my analysis of the inten-
tional stance. The most important parallel I wished to
draw was this: Psychologists can't do their work without
the rationality assumption of the intentional stance, and
biologists can't do their work without the optimality
assumptions of adaptationist thinking. The suspicion
aroused among both psychologists and biologists by the
use of these assumptions suggests a common source: the
underestimation of the role of functional interpretation
(and its underlying assumptions) in these sciences. This
came out clearly in Ghiselin's (1983) commentary. He
recommended rejecting "such teleology altogether. In-
stead of asking, What is good? we ask, What has hap-
pened? The new question does everything we could
expect the old one to do, and a lot more besides" (p. 363).
But I show that this is an illusion exactly parallel to
Skinner's (1964; 1971) familiar claim that the question,
What is the history of reinforcement? is a vast improve-
ment over What does this person believe, want, intend?
We cannot hope to answer either sort of historical ques-
tion with a "pure' investigation. [See also BBS special
issue on the work of B. F. Skinner, BBS 7(4) 1984]
The use of optimality assumptions leads theorists in
both fields to striking discoveries largely by yielding
predictions that are (surprisingly) false. Kahneman and
Tversky's (1983) discovery of a curious local irrationality
in the way people tend to think about money provides a
good illustration in psychology. It is only the contrast
between what people do and what one would pre-
theoretically assume to be the rational course that opens
up testable hypotheses about heretofore ignored design
factors, hidden costs of cognition.
I think I have shown my alignment of ideologues to
yield a harvest of insight, but several authors have cham-
pioned roughly the opposite match-up: Gould and
Lewontin should be placed not with Skinner but with
Chomsky! They have a point: Chomsky's extreme
nativism, tantamount to the denial that there is any such
thing as learning, can be lined up with the extreme
structuralism of some evolutionary theorists, tantamount
to the denial that there is any such thing as adaptation.
(This is not so much the best of all possible worlds; it is the
only possible world.) As I argued in a commentary on
Chomsky in BBS (1980), when asked how the innate,
constraining structures got there, Chomsky can pass the
buck to biology, but to whom can the "structuralist"
evolutionary theorists pass the buck? What accounts for
the constraining Bauplane relative to which adaptations
are only so much fine tuning? One can say that the
biosphere is just built that way: end of explanation. But
one can always resist this and go on to ask, one more time,
why? It is these "why" questions that are asked by both
adaptationists and adopters of the intentional stance, and
it is the puritanical distaste for this teleological and
functional thinking that unites - in this regard - Skinner
and Chomsky, Lewontin and Ghiselin.
So I stick to my guns:
(1) Adaptationist thinking in biology is precisely as
unavoidable, as wise, as fruitful - and as risky - as
mentalist thinking in psychology and cognitive science
generally.
(2) Proper adaptationist thinking just is adopting the
intentional stance in evolutionary thinking - uncovering
the "free-floating rationales" of designs in nature.
The role of the intentional stance in interpreting evolu-
tionary history is brought out more clearly by the explora-
tion of a question that has typically been ignored by
Darwinians. The theory of natural selection shows how
every feature of the natural world can be the product of a
blind, unforesightful, nonteleological process of differen-
tial reproduction, but it could not show that all features of
the natural world are such products, since some of them
aren't: The short legs of dachshunds and the thick skins of
tomatoes (to say nothing of the more recent and spec-
tacular products of genetic engineering) were the deliber-
ately and foresightedly sought outcomes of conscious
design processes. Now can such special cases be dis-
tinguished in retrospective analysis? Are there any tell-
tale signs of artificial selection or conscious design? I
argue that there are no such foolproof marks of either
natural or artificial selection but that this is no "threat" to
orthodox neo-Darwinian theory. We can see that the
most extreme cases - suppose conscious designers "sign"
their creations by including trademark messages or user's
manuals in the junk DNA of their created species - reveal
the kinship between psychology and biology most strik-
ingly: Reading those messages, like the less radical, more
familiar task of giving functional interpretations of the
designs found in organisms, is always an exercise in
radical interpretation.
8. Evolution, error, and intentionality
This chapter reveals a heretofore unrecognized division
among theorists into two camps: those who believe in one
form or another of original intentionality (the Bad Guys)
and those who don't (the Good Guys). In the former camp
belong Fodor, Searle (1980), Kripke (1982), Dretske
(1985; 1986), Burge (1979; 1986), Chisholm (1976), Nagel
(1974; 1986), Popper and Eccles (1977). In the latter:
502 
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1988) 11:3

Dennett: The intentional stance
myself, the Churchlands, Haugeland (1981), Millikan
(1984), Rorty (1982), Stalnaker (1984), our distinguished
predecessors in philosophy, Quine (1960) and Sellars
(1954; 1963; 1974), and just about everyone in AI.
The doctrine of original intentionality is the claim that
whereas some of our artifacts may have intentionality
derived from us, we have original (or intrinsic) inten-
tionality, utterly underived. Aristotle said that God is the
Unmoved Mover, and this doctrine announces that we
are Unmeant Meaners. The curious implications of this
doctrine can be brought out via a series of thought
experiments.
Consider an encyclopedia. It has derived inten-
tionality. It contains information, but only insofar as it is a
device designed and intended for our use. If we "auto-
mate" it on a computer, and equip it with a natural-
language-processing front end so that it "answers" our
questions it is still just a tool, and whatever meaning or
aboutness we vest in it is still derived. A chess-playing
computer has slightly more autonomy (since it is designed
to try to defeat us), but still - according to this line of
reasoning - since it is our tool or toy, its intentionality is
just derived. The principle that emerges for those who
believe in original intentionality is that no artifact, no
computer or robot, could ever be a truly autonomous
agent with the sort of original intentionality we enjoy.
See where this doctrine leads when we confront the
problem of error, a central theme in recent theoretical
explorations of meaning in cognitive science. Consider
the device on vending machines that detects United
States quarters (I shall call it a two-bitser). Not being
foolproof, the two-bitser can be provoked into "errors" -
accepting slugs and rejecting legal quarters. That a two-
bitser will be reliably fooled by a particular kind of slug is
just as much a matter of the laws of physics and the
principles of its design as that it will reliably accept
genuine quarters, but the former incidents count as
errors only because of the intentions of the two-bitser's
creators and designers. This relativity to the user's inten-
tions is the hallmark of derived intentionality. And it
follows that if we transport the two-bitser to Panama and
use it to detect Panamanian quarter-balboas, what counts
as an error will shift accordingly; when it accepts a United
States quarter in Panama, that will count as an error, a
"misperception' or misrepresentation. This shift is
harmless, say the believers in original intentionality,
since states of artifacts like the two-bitser don't really
mean anything at all.
Now everyone agrees that moving the two-bitser to
Panama does not change anything intrinsic about its
internal states, but it does change the external context,
and hence changes the (derived) meaning of those inter-
nal states. There are no "deeper facts" about what those
states mean. I want to insist, however, that the same
principle applies to us and all other cognitive creatures,
and it is just here that we part company. To focus the
disagreement, consider a parallel case, which echoes
much of the recent discussion by philosophers. Suppose
some human being, Jones, looks out the window and
thereupon goes into the state of thinking he sees a horse
(the example follows Fodor, 1987). According to believers
in original or intrinsic intentionality, it is not just a matter
of interpretation that this is the meaning of his internal
state, as can be seen if we imagine the planet Twin Earth,
where there are schmorses (which are well-nigh indis-
tinguishable from horses) in place of horses. If we whisk
Jones to Twin Earth and confront him with a schmorse,
what state does he go into? Does he think he sees a horse
or does he think he sees a schmorse? Anyone who thinks
that, however hard it may be to determine exactly which
state he is in, he is really in one or the other believes in
original intentionality.
Another thought experiment provides grounds for
abandoning the idea of original intentionality. Suppose
you decided to build a robot to preserve your body
(suspended in a cryogenic life-support capsule) for hun-
dreds of years. Such a survival machine, being an artifact,
would have only derived intentionality: Its raison d'etre is
to preserve you indefinitely, and the design of all its
machinery is to be interpreted relative to that purpose.
Anything that counts as a blunder or mistake or error or
malfunction can only do so relative to this interpretation.
But then the conclusion forced upon us is that our own
intentionality is of the same sort, for, as Dawkins (1976)
has put it, we (and all organisms) are survival machines
designed to prolong the futures of our genes. Our in-
terests as we conceive them and the interests of our genes
may well diverge, even though were it not for our genes'
interests, we would not exist. So our intentionality is
derived from the intentionality of our "selfish" genes;
they are the Unmeant Meaners, not us!
This vision provides a satisfying answer to the question
of whence came our own intentionality, but it seems to
leave us with a problem: Our genes, it seems, are at best
only metaphorically intentional. How could the literal
depend in this fashion on the metaphorical?
The answer lies in seeing that the process of natural
selection is the source of all functional design, and hence,
when considered from the intentional stance, the ulti-
mate source of meaning. There is no representation
("mental" or otherwise) in the process of natural selec-
tion, but that process is nevertheless amenable to prin-
cipled explanation from the intentional stance, in terms of
the ("free-floating") rationales of the designs "selected."
There is nothing unorthodox about this interpretation
of the theory of natural selection, but it is resisted rather
subliminally by theorists who believe in original inten-
tionality. Tracing the recent discussions of the problem of
error (or the disjunction problem) by Dretske (1986),
Fodor (1987), Burge (1986), and Kripke (1982) reveals
that all of them are tempted by, but ultimately reject, the
appeal to the theory of natural selection (what Fodor
disarmingly calls "vulgar Darwinism"), because they
dimly recognize that if they accept the Darwinian pic-
ture, they must abandon something they find irresistible:
the intuition that, in our case, unlike that of artifacts (and
perhaps, lower animals), there always are "deeper facts"
about what our innermost thoughts really mean - and (at
least some of them also hold) we each have "privileged
access" to these deeper facts.
This clash of intuitions is not restricted to philosophers.
We can see the uneasiness, for instance, in the micro-
biologists' frank use on the one hand of intentional terms
to describe and explain the activity of macromolecules,
while feeling the puritanical urge to renounce all talk of
function and purpose on the other. Unless there can be
perfect determinacy of function, they suspect, they had
better not appeal to function at all. In Gould's (1980)
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1988) 11:3
503

Dennett: The intentional stance
recent discussions (e.g., of the panda's thumb), we find
the same resistance to the moral that was welcome in the
case of the two-bitser: Just as it can change its function,
and hence the meaning of its internal states, by changing
contexts, so the panda's wrist bone can be pressed into
service as a thumb. But is there no answer to the question
of what it really is for, what it really means? Gould sees a
"paradox" here, for he refuses to accept the adaptationist
(and intentional stance) methodology of using optimality
assumptions ("reading function off prowess") as the
touchstone of functional interpretation. He still hankers,
like the believers in original intentionality, for some
deeper facts, but there are none. There is no ultimate
user's manual in which the real functions and real mean-
ings of biological artifacts are officially represented.
There is no more bedrock for what we might call original
functionality than there is for its cognitivistic scion, origi-
nal intentionality. You can't have realism about meanings
without realism about functions.
9. Fast thinking
The ever-compelling idea of intrinsic or original inten-
tionality has one final prop holding it up, which is re-
moved in this chapter. Searle's (1980) Chinese-room
argument originally appeared in BBS and has provoked
much debate. There is no point in reviewing one more
time the story of the Chinese room and its competing
diagnoses, since, as Searle (forthcoming) himself ac-
knowledges, the story is not itself the argument, but just
an intuition pump designed to "remind us" of the obvious
truth of the following argument:
1. Programs are purely formal (i.e., syntactical).
2. Syntax is neither equivalent to nor sufficient by
itself for semantics.
3. Minds have mental contents (i.e., semantic con-
tents).
Conclusion: Having a program - any program at all - is
neither sufficient for nor equivalent to having a mind.
Searle challenges his opponents to show explicitly what
is wrong with this argument and I do just that, concentrat-
ing on the conclusion, which, for all its apparent sim-
plicity and straightforwardness, is subtly ambiguous. (I
eventually show that all three premises contain errors,
but I have learned from my long exposure to the debate
about the Chinese room that those who side with Searle
are not really interested in the argument; they are so sure
the conclusion is correct that dispute about Searle's path
to it strikes them as mere academic caviling.) My diag-
nosis of this extreme and intensely felt confidence in
Searle's conclusion is that it is due partly to the fervent
desire that it be true, and partly to an illusion: They are
mistaking Searle's conclusion for a much more defensible
near neighbor. Compare the following claims:
(S) No computer program by itself could ever be suffi-
cient to produce what an organic human brain, with its
particular causal powers, demonstrably can produce:
mental phenomena with intentional content.
(D) There is no way an electronic digital computer
could be programmed so that it could produce what an
organic human brain, with its particular causal powers,
demonstrably can produce: control of the swift, intel-
ligent, intentional activity exhibited by normal human
beings.
As the initials suggest, Searle endorses (S) as a version
of his conclusion, whereas I offer an argument for (D).
The two may seem at first to be equivalent, but when we
see how my argument for (D) runs, we see that (S), given
what Searle means by it, is incoherent. I am not con-
vinced that (D) is true, but I take it to be a coherent
empirical claim for which there is something interesting
to be said.
My argument for (D) involves repeated exploitation of
the trade-off between speed and architectural simplicity.
(1) In principle, any computable function can be com-
puted by a two-dimensional universal Turing machine,
but in practice, three dimensions provides much greater
computational speed. (2) In the same spirit, a von Neu-
mann machine can compute anything computable, but
massively parallel architectures can compute some func-
tions with huge time savings. Is it possible that an organic
parallel architecture can compute some functions faster
than any inorganic realization of the same architecture?
Yes, if — a big "if' — the function each neuronal node
computes is a hard-to-compute function involving atom-
ic-level information-processing by macromolecules. For,
as Monod (1971) once observed, individual macromole-
cules can in principle compute functions, and the speed at
which they exercise their "cybernetic power" cannot be
duplicated in any larger assemblage of atoms (such as an
electronic microchip circuit!) There are some serious
objections to this proposal - for which no good positive
evidence has yet been adduced, to my knowledge - but if
we grant that this is even a remote physical possibility,
then it could indeed turn out that (D) was true, for the
entirely unmysterious reason that no electronic computer
could reproduce an organic brain's real-time virtuosity.
And speed is of the essence, contrary to the impression
typically created by Searle's intuition pumps (especially
his imagined computer made of beer cans tied together
with string). Actual AI models typically run too slowly, on
their von Neumann machines, to compete with brains as
real-time controllers in the real world, but that is of only
practical - as opposed to theoretical - import. We must
be careful here to distinguish between the genuine the-
oretical issue dividing the connectionists from the tradi-
tional AI theorists, and Searle's issue. Connectionism is
still what Searle would call "strong AI," since it supposes
that some connectionist program, in virtue of its en-
hanced computational power (which boils down to speed,
since any connectionist program can be inefficiently com-
puted by a von Neumann machine), is the "right pro-
gram" - the program that is sufficient for mentality. [See
also Smolensky: "The Proper Treatment of Connec-
tionism" BBS 11(1) 1988.]
Searle, then, cannot adopt (D) as what he has been
claiming. What, in contrast, can he be asserting in (S)?
The "causal powers" Searle has invoked are sharply
distinguished by him (as "bottom-up causal powers")
from the "control powers" of a program. According to
Searle, "control powers by themselves are irrelevant"
(personal communication, p. 334 Stance). This doctrine
then has a peculiar implication. Searle insists that it is an
empirical question whether anything other than organic
brains have these "bottom-up causal powers": "Simply
imagine right now that your head is opened up and inside
is found not neurons but something else, say, silicon
chips. There are no purely logical constraints that exclude
504
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1988) 11:3

any particular type of substance in advance" (forthcom-
ing, see Stance, p. 333). But although such a discovery
would settle the empirical question for you, Searle must
admit that it would not settle it for any other observer!
It is just a very obvious empirical fact, Searle claims,
that organic brains can produce intentionality, but one
wonders how he can have established this empirical fact.
Perhaps left-handers' brains, for instance, only mimic the
control powers of brains that produce genuine inten-
tionality! Asking the left-handers if they have minds is no
help, of course, since their brains may be just Chinese
rooms.
This reveals that the causal powers Searle champions
are mysterious indeed. Searle proclaims that somehow -
and he has nothing to say about the details - the bio-
chemistry of the human brain ensures that no human
beings are zombies. This is reassuring but mystifying.
How does the biochemistry create such a happy effect?
By a wondrous causal power indeed; it is the very same
causal power Descartes imputed to immaterial souls, and
Searle has made it no less wondrous or mysterious - or
incoherent in the end - by assuring us that it is all
somehow a matter of biochemistry.
10. Midterm examination: Compare and contrast
The final chapter of The Intentional Stance leaves the
close-quarters trench warfare of analysis, criticism, and
rebuttal, and attempts a third-person, bird's-eye view of
what has happened to theories of intentionality during
the last quarter century. Happily, this perspective re-
veals that in spite of ongoing controversy about some
matters, agreement has predominated about the most
important points, and progress can be discerned. In fact,
many of the most salient disagreements appear to be the
amplified products of minor differences of judgment or
taste, or tactical overstatement. Philosophers have been
gradually homing in on a temperate, intermediate posi-
tion, first outlined by Sellars (1954) and Quine (1960),
with details added by Davidson, (1970; 1973; 1975) Den-
nett (1969; 1978), Stich (1981), Bennett (1976), and Put-
nam (1974; 1975; 1978; 1981). Fodor is the most notable
iconoclast, but his valiant attempt to resist the gravita-
tional attractions of this community of thinkers has led
him to defend an increasingly narrow and inhospitable
terrain. The potential consensus resisted by Fodor (and
some others) agrees with Quine that the "dramatic idiom "
of intentional attribution must be taken seriously, but not
too seriously, treating it always as what I call a "heuristic
overlay" (Dennett 1969) or a "stance. "
NOTE
1. A context in a sentence is referentially opaque if replacing
a term within it by another term that refers to exactly the same
thing can turn the sentence from true to false. Sentences that
attribute beliefs or other propositional attitudes to people are
typically referentially opaque.
Commentary/ Dennett: The intentional stance
Open Peer Commentary
Commentaries submitted by the qualified professional readership of
this journal will be considered for publication in a later issue as
Continuing Commentary on this article. Integrative overviews and
syntheses are especially encouraged. All page references are to Den-
nett's The Intentional Stance unless otherwise indicated.
Logical adaptationism
Ron Amundson
Department of Philosophy, University of Hawaii at Hilo, Hilo, Hawaii
96720-4091
Logical behaviorism is a philosophical theory. It implies that the
mentalistic terms of folk psychology are fully meaningful even
though they do not refer to causally active, internal, mental
states. Mental terms are holistically interdefined, and mental
statements are warranted in virtue of holistic patterns of behav-
ior. Unlike psychological behaviorists, who embraced causal
theories of behavior while rejecting mentalistic vocabulary,
logical behaviorists embraced the vocabulary while denying the
relevance of causal theories intended to explain the patterns of
behavior addressed by mentalism. Logical behaviorism has had
more influence on current philosophy of mind than most philos-
ophers care to admit. Dennett is less bashful than most, and
gives us nice discussions of the virtues and shortcomings of
Cilbert Ryle (in Ch. 3, Ch. 6). The Intentional Stance shows that
many of the positions advocated by logical behaviorists still have
considerable force, and keeps alive their tradition of witty and
stimulating prose.
The views on evolutionary biology, however, puzzle me.
According to Dennett, evolutionary adaptationism just is the
intentional stance as applied to biology. Little time is spent
actually arguing for adaptationism and its intentional-stance
interpretation. His views on mentality are defended by careful
examinations of the arguments and opinions of adversaries. But
the ringing defense of adaptationism is presented without se-
rious competition. He does briefly discuss the criticisms of
adaptationism raised by Gould and Lewontin (1979). But the
only real "biological" alternative to adaptationism is the hypoth-
esis that terrestrial creatures have been genetically manipulated
by extraterrestrial intelligence, not a topic of lively debate
among terrestrial evolutionary scientists. Support for inten-
tional-stance adaptationism seems to be a sort of proof by
example - Dennett shows us that adaptations can be treated as
intentions and purposes by simply treating them in that way.
Discussions of evolution are filled with scare-quoted men-
talisms, and there are long passages on the psychology of
Mother Nature.
The most puzzling aspect of Dennett's adaptationism is his
deemphasis of the causal mechanism of natural selection. Bio-
logical adaptationists are firmly committed to actual, specific,
selective histories for any character truly called an "adaptation."
But Dennett considers the desire for "mechanical history of
actual selection" to be a fetish of anttadaptationists (1985, p.
764). On roughly this basis he (scornfully) aligns the critics of
adaptationism with behaviorist critics of psychological men-
talism. This analogy conflicts with a similarity in causal theories
which Dennett himself has pointed out - the similarity between
natural selection and the behaviorist law of effect (Dennett 1975;
for a defense of the behaviorism/adaptationism analogy and
documentation of the causal commitments of adaptationists see
Amundson, forthcoming).
Dennett is quite open about his nonmechanistic views on
Darwinian selection. "The power of the theory of natural selec-
tion is not the power to prove exactly how (pre-)history was, but
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1988) 11:3
505

Commentary/Dennett: The intentional stance
only the power to prove how it could have been, given what we
know about how things are" (p. 286). "The chief beauty of the
theory of natural selection is that it shows us how to eliminate
this intelligent Artificer from our account of origins" (p. 299).
Natural selection is not expected to yield specific causal histories
of the origins of biological traits. It is more like a license not to be
a creationist. A similarly nonrealistic physicist might say that
what gravitational theory shows is not what does explain the
planets' present paths around the sun, but what could do so: It
shows how to eliminate the intelligent Mover.
What could explain Dennett's affection for mentalistically
described evolution, and his disaffection for historical causes?
There is a clue in the discussion of Kitcher (p. 279n). Speaking of
adaptationism, Kitcher had asked, "To what extent are descrip-
tions that are backed by optimality analyses more likely to be
true, in virtue of that fact alone?" Dennett says that this is,
subtly, the wrong question to ask. "Its dual in psychology would
be: To what extent is ao intentional attribution backed by a
rational justification more likely to be true, in virtue of that fact
alone? — as if there were the prospect of keeping the issues of
attribution and rational justification separate. " In psychology, it
is impossible to characterize a belief in isolation from other
beliefs, and the web of all beliefs can be interpreted only
holistically, via rationality assumptions. Dennett merely applies
this point to biology; "without answers to [evolutionary] 'why'
questions, we cannot begin to categorize what has happened
into the right sorts of parts. . . . we must be interpreters, if we
are to make any progress at all" (p. 278).
Dennett may well be right about psychology. But the point
loses a great deal in its translation into biology. Evolutionary
biologists are committed to the possibility of teleologically
agnostic descriptions of biological characters. A central distinc-
tion is between homologous and analogous characters. Homolo-
gies are traits shared by two species because of common inheri-
tance from an ancestor species. Analogies are traits which are
similar, but of separate ancestral origin - the structural sim-
ilarity arises from the functional similarity, presumably as a
result of natural selection. Homologies may themselves be
adaptations (having arisen in an ancestral species and persisted
with their functionality intact), but biologists need know noth-
ing about a trait's function in order to identify it as homologous.
What we describe functionality (analogically) as a panda's
"thumb" is structurally (homologously) identifiable as a radial
sesamod bone - a "wrist bone" in the vernacular. The identifica-
tion requires no functional assessment, and so no optimality
assumptions. It is possible to "keep the issues of attribution and
rational justification separate." Dennett is simply mistaken that
"The panda's thumb was no more really a wrist bone than a
thumb," due to the indeterminacy of Mother Natures func-
tional attributions (p. 320). Not every evolutionarily important
characterization is functional. This is lucky for historical realists
like me, since homologies (not analogies) are the objective
evidence of common ancestry between species. To paraphrase
Einstein, "Mother Nature" is subtle, but "she" is not malicious.
Admittedly Dennett is assuming (mistakenly I think) that
functional ascriptions are the only ones at issue. But even an
assessment of current function does not determine a trait s
evolutionary origin. Adaptationists believe themselves able to
identify preadaptations as preadaptations. This requires identi-
fying functions independently of labelling them as adaptations.
"What is good" must show up somewhere in these analyses. In
his most cautious moments this is all Dennett asks, and no one
has denied this modest point. If adaptationists are conscien-
tious, the dose of "goodness" will be heavily constrained by the
facts of natural history. Adaptationism is not only a functional
theory, but also an evolutionary theory.
Applied to evolution, the intentional stance yields something
quite different from modern adaptationism. Dennett's stance
had its origin in discussions of mentalistic psychology. It fits
poorly into its new evolutionary environment for one reason:
There is no mentalistic analogfor the causal principle of natural
selection. Most of The Intentional Stance is a forceful argument
against the possibility of causal accounts of mental attribution,
and in favor of nonetheless accepting mentalism on interpreta-
tionist grounds. The semantic ascent to mentalism from non-
teleological ascriptions is argued to be impossible. But Dennett
seems not to notice that in Darwinian biology the principle of
natural selection provides just what was missing in psychology.
Natural selection gives not only a conceptual excuse but a
historical, causal explanation in support of the semantic ascent
from physical to teleological ascriptions.
On this interpretation I can see why Dennett is so willing to
mentalize evolutionary processes, and why he shows so little
interest in the realistic historical and causal aspects of natural
selection. On his view, mentalistic ascriptions are holistic and
interpretational. So it is with adaptationist ascriptions. Neither
refers to, or semantically relies upon, underlying causes. Their
meaning is a result of our own ability holistically to interpret
"patterns " (of behavior or of function), not to discover hidden
causes. These are the features which show Dennett's intellec-
tual affinity to logical behaviorism. When applied to evolution-
ary biology they emerge as a completely new view, which might
be called "logical adaptationism." Like logical behaviorism,
logical adaptationism shows only a "family resemblance" (for-
give the term) to science as it is practiced.
Another "Just So" story: How the leopard-
guarders spot
Dorothy Cheneya and Robert Seyfarthb
Departments of Psychology' and Anthropology6, University of
Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pa. 19104
One tends to evaluate others' work primarily in terms of how it
contributes to or detracts from one's own, and no doubt the
majority of shots aimed at Dennett's views will assume this
form, including our own. Thus, although we have in fact read
(and benefitted from) Dennett's entire book, we will restrict our
comments to discussion related to our own work: "inten-
tionality" in animals, particularly nonhuman primates.
We hope that Dennett will not take umbrage if we charac-
terize his most useful contribution to animal behavior as meth-
odological in aim and effect. "Cognitive ethology" is a very
trendy and impetuous field at the moment, and it has been
accompanied by a great deal of woolly thinking. Dennett's
intentional stance is important because it prompts one to step
back and reconsider some of the claims we would make of
animals. Is a vervet monkey's leopard alarm call obligatory, in
the sense that it cannot be suppressed or modified (zero-order
intentionality)? If not, can we think of an experiment that would
allow us to distinguish between a vervet who calls only to alert
others of danger (first order) and one who calls because he wants
others to believe that there is danger nearby (second order)?
There is now both observational and experimental evidence
from species as diverse as chickens and chimpanzees that ani-
mals can not only modify signal production but are also capable
of using their signals selectively, to inform some, but not others,
of danger or the presence of food (e.g. Cheney & Seyfarth 1985;
Gyger et al. 1986; Marler et al. 1986; de Waal 1986).
Most of the controversy surrounding animal communication
centers on what Dennett calls "third-order intentionality' -
whether animals are capable of acting as if they wanted others to
believe that they knew something. It is at this level that the most
intriguing anecdotes surface, if only to be offered as sacrifices to
Occam's razor; and it is at this level that experiments must
eventually focus.
Third-order intentionality involves the ability to attribute
knowledge, beliefs, or emotions toothers. Attribution demands
that an individual recognize that he has knowledge, that others
have knowledge, and that there can be a discrepancy between
506
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1988) 11:3

Commentaryl'Dennett: The intentional stance
his knowledge and the knowledge of others. In children, this
ability does not seem to emerge before about four years of age
(Wimmer & Permer 1983). In animals other than primates there
is little evidence of attribution. In nonhuman primates, evi-
dence for attribution is, as Dennett predicts, mixed.
Some of the most tantalizing suggestions of attribution (and
hence higher order intentionality) in animals come from de-
scriptions of apparent deception. Since successful deception
requires that the signaller hide or falsify information that he has
but others don't possess, it provides indirect evidence of higher
order intentionality. Although many animal species, including
insects, do occasionally falsify signals, most examples of signal
falsification can be explained without recourse to attribution.
This is at least partly because deceptive signals in most nonpri-
mate species appear to be relatively inflexible and occur in only
a narrow range of contexts (Cheney & Seyfarth, in press). An
growing number of anecdotes, however, suggests that non-
human primates do sometimes falsify signals in a way that
implies higher order intentionality. Whiten and Byrne (1988),
for example, provide evidence that monkeys and apes are
capable of falsifying or concealing vocal signals, facial ex-
pressions, and gestures in contexts as diverse as courtship,
aggressive interactions, and feeding competition.
Too often, however, closer scrutiny of the monkeys' behavior
just before or after the apparently deceptive behavior reveals
just the sort of gaps and foggy places that Dennett predicts. To
cite an example that strikes close to home, Dennett repeats an
anecdote of ours in which two vervet groups were involved in an
aggressive skirmish on the boundary of their territories. A male
member of the losing group suddenly ran up into a nearby tree
and began to give leopard alarm calls, thus causing all partici-
pants to race for the trees. This ended the skirmish, restored the
border to its former position and avoided a loss of territory by
the male's group. Since then, we have observed a handful of
similar instances (far outweighed by the frequency of "true " or
reliable alarm calls), in which a male has given apparently false
leopard alarm calls when a new male was attempting to transfer
into his group. In the majority of the approximately ten occa-
sions when this behavior has been observed in the last decade,
the caller has been one perpetually low-ranking individual
named Kitui, who could reasonably expect to be subordinate to
the interloper if he transferred successfully into the group. Kitui
has been second-ranking of two males, third-ranking of three
males, and so on throughout his career. So far so good. The
alarm calls appear deceitful because they signal danger which
Kitui, but not the interloper, knows to be false, and they keep
the interloper temporarily at bay. We are tempted to describe
this behavior as a rare example of third-order intentionality in
primates.
But to what extent does Kitui's behavior really suggest that he
can attribute knowledge different from his own to others and
predict the consequences of his own behavior on other animals'
knowledge and beliefs? At this point, we should really move on
to another anecdote, because (unfortunately for those eager to
attribute higher order intentionality to Kitui) his subsequent
behavior is rather "deflating." As if to convince his rival of the
full import of his calls, Kitui has on three occasions left his own
tree, walked across the open plains, and entered a tree adjacent
to the interloper's, alarm-calling all the while. These alarm calls
couldn't be meant as threats, because alarm calls are not given in
agonistic interactions and they are not accompanied by any
other threat displays. Instead, it is as if Kitui has got only half the
story right; he knows that his alarm calls cause others to believe
that there is a leopard nearby, but he doesn't seem to realize that
other aspects of his behavior must be consistent with his calls.
To leave his own tree and to walk toward the other male simply
betrays his own lack of belief in the leopard. He cannot keep up
his end of the story. Numerous similar examples abound for the
imperfectly rational (that is deceitful) minds of children. A child
of three denies having been to the cookie jar when there are
crumbs on his face; only at older ages does deception become
sufficiently refined that the telltale crumbs are removed. Just as
Kitui's theory of mind (cf. Premack & Woodruff 1978) is in-
complete, so the child is not fully able to discriminate between
his own knowledge and the knowledge of others.
To date, those of us interested in the natural behavior of
primates have been so concerned with describing the clever
things our subjects can do that we have too often failed to
address the more interesting question of what they cannot do.
This requires more systematic investigation than is possible
through the accumulation of anecdotes. If higher order inten-
tionality in monkeys and apes is indeed piecemeal, the chal-
lenge now is to pick up and describe these pieces and ask why we
find certain pieces but not others.
Dennett's stance is (biologically speaking) functional as well as
intentional. He argues that our ability to attribute ideas to
ourselves and others has evolved, and evolved because it serves
a function. Although Dennett doesn't ever really describe what
selective pressures might favor the evolution of higher order
intentionality, he joins others in implying that one crucial
pressure may be the complex social network in which we find
ourselves ensnared. He suggests that vervets (and other ani-
mals) probably couldn't make use of most of the features of
human language (including the intentional stance) because their
world is so much simpler than ours. Because they travel and live
together as a group, they live such a relentlessly public exis-
tence that there is not much novel information to impart, no
secrets to reveal or withhold.
If it is true that the selective pressures favoring higher order
intentionality are to some extent absent in group-living
monkeys and require some private moments, we are more likely
to find evidence of such abilities in species that live in fission-
fusion societies, like chimpanzees. Chimpanzees are indeed
smarter than monkeys, but to conclude that they are so because
they can, if they want to, be alone, begs a lot of interesting
questions before they have ever been asked. Gorillas are also
smart, even though their cohesive groups rarely allow them to
leave the public spotlight. Moreover, as human politics so
vividly demonstrate, the lack of privacy seldom prevents self-
justifying explanations of one's own behavior from reaching
Byzantine levels of intentionality, even if they are transparently
incredible. Monkeys do regularly, if unsuccessfully, attempt to
hide information (e.g. copulation, food) from others. There are
also countless examples of monkeys using others as social
"tools"; for example, in faking a fight in order to enlist the
support of a third party (Whiten & Byrne 1988). To argue that
they do it badly primarily because they lack privacy may elevate
a correlation prematurely to the status of cause.
It is no criticism of Dennett to argue that we must make more
systematic attempts to investigate the function (if any) of higher
order intentionality. If an organism has the brain to comprehend
third-order intentionality, do the fourth and fifth orders simply
follow, even if these higher orders have no real biological
function? Dennett's book will doubtless engender an onslaught
of sometimes impassioned (and to the nonphilosopher, arcane)
commentary. But what possible increments to reproductive
success can there be in a debate in BBS about the nature of
representation? What joy is there, after all, in philosophical
sects?
The ontological status of intentional states:
Nailing folk psychology to its perch
Paul M. Churchland
Department of Philosophy, University of California, San Diego, La Mia,
Calif. 92093
I focus here on one of the relatively few issues that still divide
Dennett and me: the ontological status of intentional states. We
both accept the premise that neuroscience is unlikely to find
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1988) 11:3
507

Commentary /Dennett: The intentional stance
"sentences in the head," or anything else that answers to the
structure of individual beliefs and desires. On the strength of
this shared assumption, I am willing to infer that folk psychology
is false, and that its ontology is chimerical. Beliefs and desires
are of a piece with phlogiston, caloric, and the alchemical
essences. We therefore need entirely new kinematics and dy-
namics with which to comprehend human cognitive activity,
one drawn, perhaps, from computational neuroscience and
connectionist AI. Folk psychology could then be put aside in
favor of this descriptively more accurate and explanatorily more
powerful portrayal of the reality within. Certainly it will be put
aside in the lab and in the clinic, and eventually, perhaps, in the
marketplace as well. '
But Dennett declines to draw this eliminativist conclusion,
despite his firm acceptance of the premise cited, and despite his
willingness to contemplate unorthodox forms of cognitive theo-
ry. He prefers to claim a special status for the various intentional
states, a status that will permit us to be "realists" about beliefs
and desires despite their projected absence from our strict
scientific ontology.
This impulse in Dennett continues to strike me as arbitrary
protectionism, as ill-motivated special pleading on behalf of the
old and familiar. His initial rationale for exempting folk psychol-
ogy from the usual scientific standards involved assigning it a
purely instrumental status, but this swiftly brought him all kinds
of grief, as he himself explains (Stance, pp. 71-72). Instrumen-
talism is first and foremost an anftrealist position, hardly a
welcome port given Dennett's aims, a fact Dennett now appre-
ciates in more detail. Accordingly, his current rationale draws a
much more narrowly focused analogy between intentional states
and what he calls abstracta such as the centers of gravity, axes of
rotation, equators, and so on, which are postulated to such good
effect in mechanics. As Dennett sees it, the latter are not real in
the same sense that concreta like bricks and trees are real (you
can't trip over them, for example), but they can reasonably be
said to be real even so. Intentional states are real in this same
sense, claims Dennett.
The reality of equators, centers, and rotational axes I am
happy to grant. They are all places or loci of some sort that are
decisively specifiable by reference to the shape or behavior of
the relevant concrete object. But the alleged similarity of these
items to beliefs, desires, and other intentional states escapes me
entirely. In what respects are they similar, and why should they
be grouped together in advance of the issue here at stake? That
is, in advance of any hopes of finding an exculpatory status for
intentional states?
Dennett is quick to point out that folk psychology has some
nontrivial predictive power, especially in its central domain of
normal human behavior, despite the lack of any neural concreta
answering to the propositional attitudes. He emphasizes, quite
correctly, that it is an objective fact about humans that a
significant amount of their behavior is accurately predictable in
intentional terms.
But I think he overvalues this fact wildly. We must not forget
that all sorts of false theories, with wholly chimerical ontologies,
can boast very impressive predictive power in various proprie-
tary domains. But this buys their ontology no special status. It is
an objective fact that much of the behavior of metals and ores is
predictable in terms of the alchemical essences, that most of the
behavior of the visible heavens is predictable in terms of nested
crystal spheres, that much of the behavior of moving bodies is
predictable in terms of impetus, and so forth. And yet there are
no alchemical essences, nor any crystal spheres, nor any impe-
tus. We could of course set about insisting that these three
"things" are real and genuine after all, though mere abstracta of
some kind, to be sure. But none of us is tempted to salvage their
reality by such a tortured and transparent ploy. Why should we
be tempted in the case of the propositional attitudes?
This disagreement between us on the status of folk psychology
dates from several letters now a full decade old. However, one
point on which we then agreed was that neither of us could
clearly imagine a systematic alternative to folk psychology. At
the time, I ascribed this inability to the natural poverty of our
imaginations. Dennett was inclined to suspect a deeper reason.
Since then the materials available to imagination have improved
dramatically. The micro-structure of the brain and the recent
successes of connectionist AI both suggest that our principal
form of representation is the high-dimensional activation vec-
tor, and that our principal form of computation is the vector-to-
vector transformation, effected by a matrix of differently weight-
ed synapses. In place of propositional attitudes and logical
inferences from one to another, therefore, we can conceive of
persons as the seat of vectorial attitudes and various nonlinear
transformations from one vector to another. We can already see
how such a vectorial system can do many of the things that
humans and other animals do swiftly and easily, such as recog-
nize faces and other highly complex stimuli, or control a com-
plex body with both relevance and grace. The possibility of a real
alternative now seems beyond dispute: We are already build-
ing it.
What remains an issue is how our familiar folk psychology will
fare in light of what the new conception will reveal. Retention
through reduction remains a real possibility, though the char-
acter of the theoretical developments just cited makes this seem
increasingly unlikely. If we do give up hope of a reduction, then
elimination emerges as the only coherent alternative, Dennett's
resistance notwithstanding.
In the end, Dennett's steadfast insistence that folk psychology
is not just another false theory, but rather an "abstract stance" of
some kind, one with striking predictive powers, reminds me of
the shopkeeper in the Monty Python sketch about the dis-
traught customer trying to return a recently purchased but very
dead parrot. Python fans will remember the shopkeeper's deli-
ciously shifty-eyed insistence, "Naw, naw, it's not dead. It's just
restiri. It's just pining for the fiords. . . . Lovely plumage, the
Norwegian Blue. "
Dennett's realisation theory of the relation
between folk and scientific psychology
Adrian Cussins
Xerox PARC Intelligent Systems Laboratory, Center tor the Study of
Language and Information, Palo Alto, Calif. 94304
One old naive view of the disagreement between Fodor and
Dennett was that Fodor was a realist about intentional states and
that Dennett wasn't. That seemed a clear disagreement, and
evidently philosophical. Under the assumptions of their debate
(third person, physical science perspective, separation of issues
of content from issues of consciousness), being a realist entailed
believing in the language of thought, and rejecting the language
of thought entailed denying the reality of intentional states. But
the development of Dennett's position, as it is captured in his
new book, makes it clear that this old naive view is old and naive.
Dennett tells us that he believes there are objective truths
about intentional states; that people really do have beliefs and
desires. He also tells us that the language-of-thought theory
might be true; whether it is or not is an empirical matter to be
determined by cognitive science. Even though he guesses that
it will turn out not to be true, that is just informed speculation
about the future history of science, and couldn't constitute a
philosophical position. So what do Fodor and Dennett really
disagree about, and why is it philosophy?
In fact their debate is deeply philosophical, because it has to
do with the philosophical status of scientific psychology and
cognitive science in the following sense: What is constitutive of
(essential to) being in intentional states? Is it our folk under-
standing of each other as persons, or is it the facts of some
scientific theory? Nothing less than the Two Cultures Divide is
involved: Do scientists have the ultimate authority about what it
508
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1988) 11:3

Commentary /Dennett: The intentional stance
is to be a person (an intentional system), or does this authority
rest with us all as persons; a social, cultural, anthropological
phenomenon? Is being an intentional system in this sense like
being good architecture, or is it like the phenomenon of heat?
The most important philosophical disagreement between
Fodor and Dennett, then, is that Fodor takes the scientists to
have this authority, whereas Dennett denies this. There are, of
course, many different ways in which one could accept or deny
this position. One way in which science could supersede our folk
vision would be if the adoption of the science of intentional
systems involved the rejection of our folk psychology. This is the
way of the eliminativists, but it is not Fodor's way. Similarly,
one way to deny science this authority would be deny that there
could be a scientific psychology at all. As far as a science of
human behaviour went, there could be only neurophysiology.
But this is not Dennett's way: He thinks there is an important
role for (subpersonal) scientific psychology. The reliable and
voluminous predictability from the intentional stance entails
that there couldn't be just sawdust in the brain. For Dennett,
the role of scientific psychology is to explain how folk psychology
can so successfully predict the behaviour of merely physical
creatures. The issue between Fodor and Dennett is not whether
there can be a scientific psychology, or even what scientific
psychology looks like (from the inside); rather, it has to do with
the status of scientific psychology: Are the objects of its study
natural kinds, or not?
This philosophical disagreement about status spawns a scien-
tific-looking disagreement about the language of thought. Be-
cause Fodor thinks that scientific psychology must supersede
folk psychology by explaining what it explains only even better
(a scientific glorification of folk psychology), he supposes that the
structure of scientific psychological facts must mirror quite
closely the structure of folk psychological facts. Because the
units of folk-psychological explanation are individual beliefs and
desires, the units of scientific psychological explanation (the
core representations) must be belief- and desire-like. But for
Dennett scientific psychology has a less glorious role; it has the
status of an implementation (realisation) theory. Sometimes
algorithmic structure matches the structure of the competence
it implements, sometimes it doesn't. Whether or not it does is
an empirical matter depending on contingencies such as hard-
ware, speed, or efficiency which are irrelevant to the character
of the competence. Even if Homo sapiens turned out to have a
language of thought, other true believers (lower animals,
robots, or extraterrestrials) might not. They could still be true
believers because, according to this view, the scientific facts are
not constitutive of being an intentional system.
The issue of realism, as it has evolved in their debate, has
sometimes seemed to be little more than future speculation:
How close to a language-of-thought theory will the millennial
psychology be? How closely will the millennial scientific psy-
chological structure match folk-psychological structure? But
this appearance is misleading. Fodor believes (incorrectly, I
think) that the language of thought is entailed by his view of the
status of scientific psychology, so he thinks the language-of-
thought theory must be true. Dennett rejects this status, so he
thinks that the truth of the language of thought is contingent.
Thus the philosophical issue of realism is not grounded in the
language-of-thought debate, which should be seen as philosoph-
ically secondary. Rather, realism, like authority, depends on
which of two models of the relationship between a folk theory
and its scientific counterpart is correct for folk psychology.
Fodor upholds a real essence model of this relation, while
Dennett favours a realisation model.
According to the real essence model, facts from the scientific
theory of some phenomenon provide the real essence of the
phenomenon, whereas the folk facts merely provide a con-
tingent means of identification of the phenomenon. The scien-
tific facts are constitutive, the folk facts are not. The folk and
scientific accounts of gold provide the paradigmatic example of
this model. Fodor applies this model to psychology: Although
we discover empirically whether or not Homo sapiens has a
language of thought (we discover empirically what gold's atomic
number is), nothing could be an intentional system unless it had
a language of thought. Our folk psychology merely provides a
contingent means of identification of intentional systems
(yellow, malleable, shiny . . . ).
According to the realisation model of the folk/scientific rela-
tion, the scientific theory does not go beyond the empirical role
of explaining why the folk predictive stance works when it does.
The folk account shows what is constitutive of the phenomenon;
the scientific account shows how the phenomenon is realised in
the physical world. The properties of being a book, or a chair, or
a car (or a magnet?) provide examples. Our folk understanding of
books, chairs, and cars is sufficient for an identification of them
as such, and is predictive of their behaviour. But these folk
means of identification, unlike our folk account of gold, do not
pick out scientifically salient properties of the world. There
ought to be no departments of chair science, or departments of
automotive science. Take any instance of these artificial kinds,
or certain subsets, and there is a scientific account for the
instance or subset which shows how they are realised in the
physical world and why our folk predictions of them work as well
as they do. But even if all chairs had the same physical structure,
possession of that structure would not have been constitutive of
being a chair.
Dennett adopts a realisation model of the relation between
folk and scientific psychology. The folk intentional stance does
not merely provide a means of identification of intentional
systems, but shows us what is constitutive of being an inten-
tional system. There are scientific truths about subsets of inten-
tional systems, and these subsets may be divided in different
ways: humans or chimpanzees or dogs . . ., or else terrestrially
evolved creatures or artificial robots or alpha centauri evolved
creatures, and so on. The science of each subset would explain
how the intentional life of its members was realised in the
physical world, and why the intentional predictions worked
when they did. But there could be no science of intentionality as
such.
Strictly speaking, then, there is, for Dennett, no such thing as
the science of psychology, as there is a unique science of
physics. It is this difference between the character of psychology
and the character of physics which explains Dennett's less realist
attitude to the truths of psychology than to the truths of physics.
There must be a universal physics, but there could not be a
universal psychology. There can be no science of persons, only
the sciences of the realisation of subpersonal facts in physical
hardware.
The notional world of D. C. Dennett
Arthur C. Danto
Department of Philosophy, Columbia University, New York, N. Y. 10027
Quot homines, tot sententiae; suo quoque mos.
[As many sentences as humans - his own a law to each.]
Terence
The philosophy of mind was shaken from the slumber of cen-
turies by the appearance, in 1949, of Gilbert Ryle's The Concept
of Mind, as much a rhetorical as a philosophical masterpiece.
Ryle's overall thesis was that we apply the predicates of what a
later generation was to designate "folk psychology" easily,
naturally, and unmysteriously, merely in virtue of our compe-
tence as ordinary speakers of ordinary language. This feat should
be unintelligible if what Ryle derisively called "The Official
Theory" were true, namely, that mental predicates refer essen-
tially to logically private states and episodes to which outsiders
can have no cognitive access. Or better, since we cannot gain
access to what the Official Theory countenanced as minds (save
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1988) 11:3
509

Commentary/Dennett The intentional stance
our own), our psychological discourse has nothing to do with
that ghostly X, but only with publicly scrutable patterns and
performances. There may be "minds," but nothing in our
concept of mind requires their existence; and it was Ryle's
brilliant strategy to underscore the metaphysical isolation from
the rest of life to which the Official Theory had condemned the
mind, leaving it to wither into irrelevancy so far as day-to-day
description of mental conduct is concerned.
What D.C. Dennett singles out as "the intentional stance"
consists in applying a segment of our folk-psychological lan-
guage to one another (and to animals and machines, as well as to
philosophical visitors from other planets and galaxies), de-
scribed as driven by desires and, in our case at least, guided by
beliefs. This stance contrasts with other stances in which psy-
chological or protopsychological predicates have no role to play,
and perhaps for this reason Dennett is extremely doubtful as to
whether there are purposes and beliefs resident in those toward
which we adopt it. Nothing in the intentional stance in any case
commits us to so Realist a thesis, and we ought, in view of grave
difficulties, to be reticent in giving what may be airy nothings a
local habitation and a name. The desire-belief idiom of the
intentional stance is too descriptively useful for us to consider
abandoning it in favor of some austere behaviorist mode of
description, but we may at least concede the behaviorist's point
that nothing about internal psychological states is called for by
schemata which suffice all our descriptive needs. Such is the
proto-Ryleian stance of The Intentional Stance, a densely argu-
mentative text in which the author, once a student and still in
deep ways a disciple of Ryle, engages in thrust and parry with
the insufficiently chastened descendants of something like The
Official Theory. Their common enemy, the behaviorist, lies
flayed and bleeding in the polemical distance. Simply because
the behaviorist is wrong gives no reason to eat lotus, as Quine
would say, with those who believe in beliefs.
Psychological Realists, to be sure, have long since discarded
the metaphysical and epistemological vestments of Carte-
sianism: The psychological reality of (for example) belief-states is
compatible with their being materially embodied; and those
who are in such states need enjoy no greater immediate access to
these than to their metabolic states. But Realists do suppose that
such states are indispensable to the explanation of just those
features of conduct which the intentional stance makes salient.
Dennett, opposed, sees no reason to ground the intentional
stance in some internal psychic structure which may be but a
shadow cast by the discourse we have adopted. So he emerges as
an Anti-Realist in regard to beliefs and other such tenuous
matters, much, I suppose, as someone might be an anti-realist in
regard to latitudes and longitudes which he will concede are
useful for situating ourselves on the surface of the globe without
the globe itself having to be scored with real meridians and
parallels.
Now Realists are such because they favor less an intentional
than a representationalist stance in regard to beings, organic or
mechanical, for which psychology is a possible science. They
suppose such beings behave as they do because they represent
things as they represent them, and that representations, if
effective explanantiae of conduct, must be housed somewhere
in those whose conduct they explain. They may agree with
Dennett that when one talks about beliefs (as real representa-
tional states) "one implicates oneself in a tangle of philosophical
problems from which there may be no escape" (p. 117). But they
accept this as coming with the territory rather than as a reason
for "giving up talking about beliefs" (ibid.), as Dennett urges
them to do. Some of these problems have to do with how belief-
states, construed as psychologically real, are to be specified, and
this requires a position on propositions, inasmuch as it is com-
monly accepted that propositions are what is believed. The
leading contender is that propositions are to be treated as
sentences, and that believers are accordingly in real sentential
states, the content of which is given by the expressions with
which we ascribe beliefs to them. So believers are, quite
literally, made up of language.
When, two decades ago, I began to advance a theory of beliefs
as sentential states of persons, the logician George Boolos said to
me that mine would be a good theory if we could open peoples'
heads up like fortune cookies and find little inscriptions inside.
This is less an objection than an agenda for research, inasmuch
as such a claim must finally be empirical. It must be admitted
that very few of the legions of sententialists have gotten their
hands dirty apart from what might leak onto their fingers from
the faulty ball-point pens with which they argue with antisen-
tentialists. Dennett's posture is that there would be no point in
any case to opening up heads, and a main theme in his book
consists in advancing arguments and objections designed to get
us to abandon our Realist ways and simply live within our
perfectly adequate descriptive means.
A great many of Dennett's arguments are of a kind that, were
one to meet them, one would have made a considerable contri-
bution to semantical theory, inasmuch as they arise over ques-
tions of truth, meaning, indexicality, and reference which Real-
ists inevitably inherit when they move sentences from dis-
course, written and spoken, into the language of thought. No
one, I think, since Cratylus, has given up language because of
perplexities in the theory of naming, and inasmuch as few will
foreswear sentences because of vexations in semantical analysis,
the latter give us little reason for foreswearing mental sen-
tences. And the sententialist will wisely leave these energet-
ically marshalled questions to semantical experts, who them-
selves appear not to have achieved consensus. In addition,
Dennett raises flocks of questions that arise through assigning
content to mental sentences, many of them having to do with
what other sentences we must believe if we believe a given
sentence. But if the issue is empirical, it really is empirical, and
one has to proceed case by case. The best one could do would be
to work out what believers ought ideally to believe in a nor-
matively characterized language of thought.
Dennett places great stress on such cases as "Mike has a thing
about redheads" which "defied sententialist interpretation" (p.
148), inasmuch as "no linguification of it could be more than a
mnemonic label for its role" (ibid). I am uncertain how the
intentional stance would itself deal with such cases, but I would
wager that any description it licenses would be matched by an
appropriate sententionalization of Mike's mind. One grants that
more than beliefs that redheads are obnoxious is involved in
having a thing - or "notion" - about them, but it is no part of
Realism to restrict internal representations to beliefs or even
sententially characterized internal states. I am unclear whether
Dennett himself has gone Realist on the topic of notions, or
whether there is merely a notional stance, but my overall sense
is that the semantics of notions is too weakly defined to know
whether notions slip past the objections beliefs are supposed to
be heir to. My sense is that if I and my Doppelgdnger on Twin
Earth can have identical notional worlds without this raising
difficulties, so might we have identical doxastic worlds, that is,
worlds as defined by sets of sentences my counterpart and I both
believe. Whether through sentential or notional representa-
tions, man remains the measure in Dennett's neo-Protagorian
psychologism.
Whatever the case, it is plain that Dennett has a thing about
sententialists in particular and representationalists in general.
The book thus makes public the notional world of its author, and
it must be admitted that no linguification exhausts what this
means. Beyond the arguments, beyond the positions taken,
there is a philosopher "with a thing," a deeply held attitude
toward what makes sense. His is a world which partially overlaps
mine, though given my Realist proclivities, the world notionally
specified in the book is not one I can live in comfortably. That
does not prevent me from having enjoyed the book - a razzle of
jokes and witticisms, of thought experiments and screwball
examples, of raised eyebrows, sighs of exasperation, of mock
510
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1988) 11:3

Commentary/ Dennett: The intentional stance
despair, and batteries of polemical darts the Realist will take
pleasure in watching pass harmlessly overhead. It gives us a nice
peek into enemy headquarters, and the reassuring thought that
if this is the worst we have to face, sententialism is here for a long
time.
The stance stance
Fred Dretske
Philosophy Department, University of Wisconsin, Madison, Wis. 53706
Since I am a realist about almost everything (including centers of
gravity) I have always been puzzled by Dennett's stance on the
intentional stance. Why does he keep harping about how well
the intentional strategy works, how predictively useful it is to
describe some things as having a rationally ordered set of beliefs
and desires? Isn't this obvious? Isn't it obvious that some things
(you and me, for instance) do things because they want to do
them? It is also useful - for what appears to be exactly the same
reasons - to describe some things as having an electrical charge.
Does this mean that our descriptions of electrical phenomena,
our predictions of what motors and light bulbs will do, are also
part of some stance? If so, is the electrical stance merely a stance
- a stance in the same sense in which the intentional stance is a
stance?
Depending on just how useful it is to talk a certain way, most
of us conclude that just as some things have an electrical charge
that is independent of the stance we adopt toward them, other
things have beliefs that are independent of how, or even
whether, we acknowledge this fact. Most of us conclude, in
other words, that a predictively successful stance is a reason, the
best possible reason, for supposing that the things toward which
we adopt that stance have a reality independent of the stance.
All this is elementary philosophy of science. At least it is
elementary for a realist like myself. But instrumentalists, ide-
alists, positivists, and other advanced thinkers have never had
much sympathy for the difference between epistemology and
ontology. Give or take a bit, what exists is what can be known or,
if not known (for most advanced thinkers are also skeptics - i.e.,
nonrealists - about knowledge), what is useful for various
practical purposes. But Dennett is not that advanced in his
thinking. Despite a tendency to compare epistemological apples
with ontological oranges (p. 15), he knows the difference be-
tween the subjective, interest-relative character of the (discern-
ing and confirming) stances we adopt and the objective, in-
terest-independent character of the things toward which we
adopt these stances. At least he is aware of this difference with
what he, following Reichenbach (p. 53), calls illata. This, pre-
sumably, is why he isn't an instrumentalist - a "sort of realist
(pp. 37, 40) - about electricity. Dennett, in fact, doesn't have a
uniform stance on stances. Some stances (the electrical stance,
for instance) enjoy continued success because the properties we
attribute to radios and motors are properties that - quite
independently of our explanatory and predictive efforts - radios
and motors really have. From within the stance we talk about
stance-independent properties. In other stances (the inten-
tional stance, for instance) it's different: Things have the proper-
ties we attribute to them only because of our predictive success
in attributing them (pp. 15, 29). These properties - call them
stance properties - only exist by grace of our success in talking
about them. Shades of Berkeley! In the intentional stance we
play God to objects in the quad.
Why is Dennett so skittish about belief? Why is he willing to
be a realist about electricity but only a "sort of realist about
belief? Despite an opaque reference (p. 39) to patterns that are
there (to be detected) but not out there (independent of us), he
happily affirms that there is a complex web of real patterns (p.
34), perfectly objective facts (p. 24), in human affairs that our
talk of beliefs, desires, and intentions is meant to describe. If
belief-talk is meant to describe something perfectly objective
and real, why aren't beliefs perfectly objective and real?
It is true, of course, that descriptions of what a person
believes and wants are not fully determined by the sensory
input and behavioral output or by the observable data on which
we base our intentional attributions. There are always available
other theoretical (in this case intentional) interpretations. Den-
nett sometimes (p. 40) makes a fuss about this point, but it is
hard to see why this fact should lead him to treat beliefs
differently from other scientific illata. Does he think that there
is only one theoretical condition consistent with our observa-
tions of electrical phenomena? If so, what is "theoretical" about
it?
It is also true that in some case there is no determinate
answer, no fact of the matter, about exactly what (if anything)
someone believes. I think this is probably true of children as
they acquire concepts, mentally deranged people who are losing
concepts, and, perhaps, animals operating on the margins of
conceptual life. Does this mean, as Dennett suggests (pp. 28,
41-42), that one cannot be a strong realist about belief? Why?
Must a strong realist about weight (a perfectly respectable
relational property, as far as I can see) think there is a fact of the
matter about whether I weigh 162.0000001 pounds? Why?
People don't have weights at that level of precision any more
than mountains have heights measurable in Angstroms. Why
can't the beliefs of children and animals be like this? I am a
realist about pain - sometimes it really hurts - but this doesn't
mean that I think there is a fact of the matter about every
sensation I feel - that it either is or isn't a pain. Some tickles sit,
quite comfortably, on the fence.
A more charitable interpretation of Dennett's reluctance to
treat beliefs like other reputable scientific illata comes from his
revealing comparison of belief talk with center-of-gravity talk (p.
72). I said, at the beginning, that I am a realist about centers of
gravity. Dennett is too - in a way. He and I both think the moon
has a center of gravity. Dennett (I assume) doesn't think its
having (versus our attributing to it) a center of gravity is
dependent on our predictive and explanatory interests and
purposes. Why, then, is he a "sort of realist about the moon's
center of gravity? The answer is that Dennett thinks there is
something "arguably false" - at least something that has to be
taken with "a grain of salt" - implied by statements about an
object's center of gravity. If one says that the moon, quite
literally, has a center of gravity, one is committed to the idea
that gravitational forces act on a single lunar point - the moon's
center of gravity. And this, if not false, should be taken with a
grain of salt.
And so it should. But why must a realist about centers of
gravity, someone who thinks that the moon literally has a center
of gravity, think anything of this kind? The earth obviously
exerts a gravitational attraction on all parts of the moon - not just
its center of gravity. The resultant force, a vector sum, acts
through a point, but this is something quite different. One
should be very clear about what centers of gravity are before
deciding whether to be literal about them, before deciding
whether or not to be a center-of-gravity realist. J. L. Austin
(1962) was surely right: It would be silly to hedge one's realism
about dreams, numbers, and thoughts simply because they lack
the properties of ordinary dry goods.
What, exactly, am I, as a realist about belief, forced to think
about human beings that Dennett thinks is false (or should be
taken with a "grain of salt")? Most of what I think is what
Dennett thinks: that there are internal information-carrying
elements to which our intentional interpretations are anchored
(p. 70); that these internal, semantically interpreted structures
give rise to objective patterns of behavior; that (via evolution
and individual learning) these internal processes serve to coor-
dinate behavior with the external conditions on which its suc-
cess (in satisfying biological needs) depends; that one is better
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1988) 11:3
511

Commentary /Dennett: The intentional stance
able to discern patterns in behavior by thinking of it as the
expression of intelligent thought and purpose; and, finally, that
the more deeply embedded a system becomes in the world, the
more numerous and variegated are its causal and informational
links to the world, the easier it is to specify the semantic
interpretation (the what-it-is we believe and desire) used in
predicting behavior (p. 32).
The argument isn't over these facts. The argument between
Dennett and realists like myself is - or should be - whether
these facts, taken together, constitute the having of beliefs. If, as
the above points of agreement suggest, beliefs literally are
information-carrying states that derive a content (and hence
their identity as beliefs) from the network of informational and
causal relationships in which they enter - Dennett's "perfectly
objective patterns " - then it is hard to see how to deny their
active (and, hence, very real) participation in human and animal
affairs. Beliefs are in the head (like a virus is in the body), but
what makes them beliefs, what gives them the content they
have, is (partly) outside the head - in those "perfectly objective
patterns " on which we all rely to figure out what someone wants
and believes. That is why, as Dennett correctly observes (p. 60),
we can have the same beliefs without having the same machine-
ry in the head, and (p. 48) why knowing what a person believes is
not knowing what is happening in his skull.
Dennett briefly considers this construal of belief (p. 81), a
construal that would allow him to be a realist about belief, but
dismisses it (in light, he says, of arguments appearing later in the
book) as not very promising. While acknowledging his deep and
penetrating challenge (especially in Chapter 8, "Evolution,
Error, and Intentionality") to this approach, I obviously dis-
agree about its promise. Keeping that promise, though, is
something that must be done elsewhere (see Dretske 1988).
Dennett on belief
Michael Dummett
New College, Oxford University, Oxford OX 1 4AL, England
Dennett contrasts two philosophical views concerning beliefs,
realism, and interpretationism, but denies that we have to
choose between them. Full-fledged realists hold, in words he
quotes from Fodor, that two people's sharing a belief consists in
"some structurally similar internal condition" (p. 53), presum-
ably in their brains. Eliminativists, concurring in this concep-
tion of what a belief would be, if there were such a thing, deny
that we have any beliefs. Interpretationists allow that we do, but
claim that the attribution of beliefs is a subjective judgement,
true only from a certain perspective or given certain attitudes or
evaluations. Against the realists, Dennett invokes a distinction
of Reichenbach's (1938) between illata and abstracta, appar-
ently congruent with Frege's distinction between objects that
are actual and those, like the equator, which are not. Beliefs are
abstracta, but none the less objective for that. But the in-
terpretationists are right to the extent that the possession of a
belief by a subject is discernible only to one who has adopted a
certain attitude or stance - the intentional stance - towards that
subject. Once these two features of the concept of belief have
been grasped, we shall no longer be compelled to deny their
existence.
The distinction between illata and abstracta is readily applied
if we conceive of the philosophy of mind as armchair neu-
rophysiology, but not so easily otherwise: It might be remarked
that, whatever we take as being items in the stream of con-
sciousness, beliefs are not among them, but I doubt if this is
what Dennett has in mind. His notion of a "stance" appears to
me somewhat vague, but may possibly be explained as follows.
We ought not to ask for criteria for whether a creature has a
certain belief, either behavioural or physiological: No such set of
general criteria can distinguish the cases when the belief ought
to be ascribed to it and when it ought not. Rather, given that it
has already been found illuminating to view the creature as an
intentional agent, an ascription of that belief is justified if it
proves to be helpful, and required, in interpreting and predict-
ing its actions.
I suppose that, among those not disposed to discuss beliefs in
terms of "words of Mentalese written in the relevant places in
the brain," a similarly "holistic" account of belief attribution
would be rather widely accepted. As stated by Dennett, it will
surely do very well for our attributions of belief and intention to
creatures with which we do not communicate (at least, to those
between which and ourselves there is not even that degree of
communication that occurs between human beings and dogs or
horses). No doubt it is in somewhat similar terms that we must
account for our attribution to other people of beliefs and motives
which they would disavow. But Dennett's emphasis is wholly on
predictive power: The fact that we avow our beliefs, intentions,
and desires interests him very little. This is what enables him to
say, after discussing the beliefs and desires of frogs, that (our)
"belief and desire are like froggy belief and desire all the way
up." He acknowledges, indeed, that unlike other creatures "we
are bathed in words;" but he does not consider that this makes
any difference between the way in which the concept of belief
applies to us and to creatures without language. "When we are
asked what we . . . believe, . . . sentences . . . arise in us as
candidates for our endorsement and possible public ex-
pression; " but this process need not reveal "any psychologically
important individuation . . . but be just an artifact of the en-
vironmental demand for a particular sort of act."
Unfortunately, the argument then becomes entangled in a
discussion of the "language of thought" theory, but its thrust is
as follows. The belief was not already stored, in verbal or
unverbalised form, to be taken out on request and uttered
aloud or put into words: The utterance was just one response
prompted by the belief. Beliefs are much vaguer, less articu-
late than sentences; their content cannot be faithfully rendered
in sentences. There are two distinct points here: the
vagueness, and the peripheral character of linguistic activity. It
is true, and frequently overlooked, that the concept of belief is
ineradicably vague (as is that of knowledge, for the same rea-
son). With exceptions for the cases in which someone fails to
acknowledge what he "really" believes, a person believes what
he will, with suitable prompting, assert or assent to; but the
vagueness lies in the degree of prompting admissible (in the
Meno, the degree is very high). There are various types of
reply to "Do you think . . . ?" questions, ranging from "Of
course" through "I've never thought of it in just those terms"
to "I've never considered the matter, but I suppose I do. ' But
even the reply "Of course" does not certify that the speaker
had ever put just that question to himself; and there are other
variations of context besides formulation. Many years ago, I
realised with horror as I left my house one morning that I had
three conflicting engagements for that evening. I had thought
of each of them several times during the previous few days, but
always in different connections, since they had to do with very
different matters. If I had had only one of those engagements,
there would have been no question of denying that I knew that
that was what I should be doing that evening: But this was the
first occasion on which the thought of all three (or any two) had
occurred to me at the same time.
The contention that our being "bathed in words" makes no
important difference between the attribution of beliefs to us and
to frogs is grossly implausible; and it is not rendered less so by
Dennett's treating the only serious alternative as being that
beliefs are sentences in Mentalese. We constantly revise our
picture of the world, not only in the light of incoming informa-
tion (much of which reaches us in verbal form), but also in the
night of reflection, most of which is carried on in a linguistic
medium. The question is not, as Dennett thinks, in what form
our beliefs are stored; in so far as that makes sense, it is not a
question for the philosopher in his role as philosopher. What
512
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1988) 11:3

Commentary/ Dennett: The intentional stance
matters, rather, is how our beliefs are brought to bear on our
actions; and they are brought to bear, not only by being "taken
for granted," but also by being explicitly adverted to. That is to
say, our beliefs operate both as background to our actions and as
invoked in our processes of thought. It is to be regretted that
The Intentional Stance treats so largely of belief, but not at all of
the process of thinking (which is not, indeed, always verbalised),
because that process is one of the ways in which beliefs influence
behaviour.
A frog or a chimpanzee neither knows what it believes nor has
any beliefs about what it believes, because it does not have the
concept of belief; but the case in which a human being's actions
are contrary to what, without lying, he professes to believe, and
in which he may be said wrongly to believe that he believes what
he says he does, is not a mere instance of what is usually the best
evidence being overridden by stronger evidence. Rather, it is a
quite special kind of case, to describe which we need to modify
our normal modes of expression. Likewise, the fact that an
action was involuntary normally blocks the request for its
motive: The Freudian suggestion that it may have had a motive
again compels us to modify our concepts, but should not lead us
to repudiate the special status of an honest avowal of a motive for
a voluntary act.
One motivation - not mentioned by Dennett - for thinking
that, when taken towards a machine, the intentional stance
(however successful) can only be a fagon de parler, is an
incompatibilist view of free will. On such a view, the machine
can at best be mimicking the behaviour of a rational agent, since
it cannot really be one; and it then requires explanation how the
mechanism has been devised so that the apparently rational
behaviour supervenes upon the operation of the deterministic
system. Dennett is a compatibilist; and he makes the common
compatibilist mistake of thinking that the success of the inten-
tional stance must always depend upon the possibility of a
parallel explanation. Indeed, he takes it as part of the intentional
stance that it hypothesises such an explanation, even though we
may not know it; he therefore naturally indulges in the current
jargon about "folk psychology, " erroneously labelling our every-
day use of terms like "belief and "intention" a rudimentary
scientific theory. But this is to get things the wrong way round.
It is at issue between the compatibilist and the incompatibilist
whether a rational agent may also be a deterministic system: But
it ought to be common ground between them that an explana-
tion of the actions of such an agent in terms of motives, inten-
tions, desires, and beliefs is intelligible of itself, independently
of any hypotheses about an underlying causal mechanism. That
is why the intentional stance, when we are able to take it,
renders the behaviour of a creature comprehensible to us. The
currently prevailing idea that motives are causes appears to me
mistaken: An explanation in terms of motive is different in kind
from one in terms of causation. It is because the normal cases of
beliefs and motives of which trustworthy avowals can be made
provide our model for explanations given from the intentional
stance that they should be taken as central for an account of
these concepts, and the others as derived from them, rather
than conversely, as Dennett proposes.
Having argued briefly that sentences are not suited to express
the contents of beliefs, on his conception of what beliefs are,
Dennett develops the theme in his long Chapter 5: Neither
sentences nor propositions serve this purpose. He declares that
Frege's "notion of a Thought is the backbone of the currently
orthodox understanding of propositions," and lists certain con-
stitutive properties of Fregean thoughts. Strangely lacking from
this list is a principle which Frege never ceased to reiterate,
namely that thoughts are not mental contents. This principle
was a declaration of the independence of semantics and, more
generally, of the philosophy of thought, from psychology: It
formed the basis of Frege's attack upon psychologism. It was this
declaration of independence that made it possible for Frege to
make the first substantial advance towards a credible theory of
meaning. Dennett's argument against propositions as contents
of beliefs is essentially Putnam's (1975), namely, that what is "in
the head" is not, in general, enough to determine extensions.
This may be a valid criticism of current orthodoxy; in view of the
Fregean principle he fails to mention, it can hardly be an
objection to Frege's conception of thoughts.
Dennett's reply would surely be that a second Fregean
principle, which he renders in psychologistic fashion as "A
thought is 'graspable' by the mind," leaves Frege's theory
vulnerable to such criticism: When someone grasps a thought,
even if the thought itself is not among the contents of his mind,
there must be, among those contents, something that repre-
sents that thought. On the contrary: The first principle implies
that just as when I grasp an apple, examination of my hand will
not reveal what I am holding, so when I grasp a thought, nothing
in my mind determines which thought it is that I grasp. If so,
nothing in my mind, still less in my brain, is required to
determine what object or objects I am thinking about. From
Frege's standpoint, Dennett's enquiry appears quite miscon-
ceived. He is concerned to criticise, and find some substitute
for, what he calls "propositional-attitude psychology." But
Frege's theory of sense, embracing in particular his theory of
thoughts, was not meant as a contribution to psychology. On the
contrary, he declared psychology to be irrelevant to it.
This is not a quibble about the word "psychology." Two
salient questions need to be answered if a philosophical account
of belief is to be given: (1) How, in general, can the content of a
belief be precisely characterised, and (2) when is an ascription of
a belief to a person or other creature justified? I agree with
Dennett, though not for the same reasons, that Fregean
thoughts do not provide the answer to (1). Dennett criticises
those who would replace thoughts or propositions by "sentences
in the head." It is plain that they interpret the question to mean,
"What internal objects supply the contents of beliefs?" Frege
took a belief to be an attitude to an object, namely a thought, but
one external to the mind: To ask how the content of a belief is to
be characterised, however, does not presuppose that the con-
tent is any kind of independently existing object. It is not only
those he criticises, but Dennett himself who understands the
question in this way: Although he does not conceive of the
content of the belief as a discrete object, he too desires to
discover the "organismic contribution" to a belief, that is, the
state of an organism that goes to determine that it has that belief;
he too wants to engage in armchair physiology of the brain, if
only at an abstract level.
His answer is to propose a conception of a subject's "notional
world," namely the world as he supposes it to be. Such a world
will, he remarks, contain intentional objects, some of which are
not matched by any objects in the real world: The observation
suggests that his rejection of traditional accounts is not so
thoroughgoing as his earlier polemic would lead one to suppose.
The conception of a notional world is not unhelpful. It has the
merit of recognising that we each have a general picture of the
world - highly incomplete, in part mistaken, in part confused -
on which we rely, rather than always on particular beliefs taken
one by one: But as my example of the conflicting engagements
illustrated we also often fail to integrate our different beliefs
with one another, a fact the conception fails to allow for. The fact
that the world is notional is certainly sound. At least when
someone's belief is radically confused, I cannot express it by
means of a sentence to be understood as I should mean it: I have
to explain the confusion. There is an analogy with translation
from one language to another. If a sentence of Chinese contains
a word that expresses a concept we do not have, or involves an
ambiguity of construction not reproducible in English, its mean-
ing can be accurately rendered only by a paragraph explaining
the concept or the construction.
Nevertheless, as a resolution of the problems, real and spu-
rious, that Dennett has raised, the notional world conception is
singularly unsatisfying. It does nothing to help with the problem
of vagueness. The thesis was that underlying and prompting
both our actions and our utterances, including avowals of a given
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1988) 11:3
513

Commentary /Dennett: The intentional stance
belief, is a mental state of belief that is not accessible to
introspection and cannot be faithfully captured by linguistic
formulation, being too unspecific and unarticulated. Such be-
liefs are of the same general kind as those ascribable to animals,
save that, although not verbalised, they may involve concepts
attainable only by language-users. This thesis might most natu-
rally be understood as an empirical hypothesis: If it is meant as a
piece of philosophy, the claim must be that we are compelled to
assume such underlying states if we are to make coherent sense
of our ordinary vocabulary of beliefs, etc. But until we know how
these states are to be characterised - say by means of a hazy
cluster of not quite synonymous sentences - if is hard to know
what the thesis is, at least if it is a philosphical one. We are,
however, left in the dark about this and about how the notional
worlds, to which the totality of underlying belief-states contrib-
ute, are to be characterised. And so it seems to me, although we
have been given a considerable amount of good sense, we do not
in the end arrive at anything classifiable as a theory or even as a
clear account.
Derived intentionality?
Alvin I. Goldman
Department of Philosophy, University of Arizona, Tucson, Ariz. 85721
Perhaps the most revealing and yet puzzling chapter of Daniel
Dennett's The Intentional Stance is Chapter 8, "Evolution,
Error, and Intentionality." Here Dennett contrasts writers in
two camps: Those who believe that human beings have original,
or intrinsic, intentionality and those like himself who dispute
this thesis. On Dennett's view, human intentionality is just as
derivative as that of quarter-recognizing devices: "two-bitsers."
Artifacts like two-bitsers derive their intentionality from their
designers or users; and similarly, according to the proposed
account, humans derive their intentionality from natural
selection.
There seems to me a major difficulty for this proposal. The
theory implies that the contentfulness of human thought strictly
depends on the nature of its genesis. But this does not stand up
to appropriate thought experiments. We can hypothetically
vary the origins of human nature without intuitively depriving
people of intentionality. Suppose that human beings (at least
human-like creatures) were the product not of evolution but of
some cosmic accident; they just pop into existence without
undergoing natural selection. Nonetheless, they have the same
mental processes and patterns of verbal communication that we
do. Isn't it appropriate to say of this counterfactual situation that
the creatures have precisely as much contentfulness as we do in
the actual world? This result conflicts with Dennett's theory,
which claims that human intentionality derives only from the
intentionality of its generator: natural selection.
In a second counterfactual scenario, let human creatures be
produced by a purposeful but bungling designer. This designer
plans to create mere dolls, with no purposes of their own and no
information-processing capacities. But he also decides to endow
them with a sophisticated chemistry and complex circuitry. Like
one of David Hume's imagined deities, he is an apprentice
designer who doesn't realize that the chemistry he chooses and
the complex neurocircuitry will yield purposive, conscious,
verbal creatures like us. On Dennett's theory, it looks as if the
resulting creatures should not qualify for intentionality; but
surely these artifacts will possess intentionality.
In fairness we should notice that Dennett does not regard
derived intentionality as hingeing exclusively on a system's
origins. A two-bitser can assume different contents from those
initially intended by its designer. But if I understand Dennett
correctly, content changes in artifacts can result only from
changes in the practices of the artifact's users. In my scenarios
there are no "users" at all. So Dennett cannot appeal to users to
accommodate the vivid intuition that the creatures do have
intentionality.
I turn next to a second difficulty with the derived inten-
tionality thesis. What precisely is the originating source? Den-
nett apparently answers: our genes. As he acknowledges, how-
ever, this candidate source is problematic, because it isn't clear
how our robust level of intentionality could derive from the
marginal grade possessed by genes. Elsewhere, however, Den-
nett says that the source is "Mother Nature, ' or the process of
evolution. This is evidently a different answer, with its own
special problems. On Dennett's theory, intentionality is only
possessed by intentional systems, and it isn't clear how a process
can qualify as such a system (a system whose behavior is
predictable on the basis of desire and belief attributions). So I
am puzzled about which answer Dennett intends, and whether
either can be right.
Why is Dennett driven to the derived intentionality thesis?
Even if Dawkins (1976) is right that we are "survival machines"
created by our genes, it does not follow that our intentionality
derives from that of our genes. An artifact can have properties
that differ from, and transcend, those of its artificer. Some
textual evidence suggests that Dennett feels driven to deriva-
tionalism because he equates intrinsic intentionality with both
original intentionality and determinacy of content. (For exam-
ple, he writes in his BBS Pre'cis that any philosopher who thinks
that Jones, in the horse-schmorse case, really is in one belief
state rather than the other believes the doctrine of original
intentionality.) Since Dennett himself rejects determinacy of
content, he also feels obliged to reject original intentionality.
The confusion here obviously arises from an ambiguity in the
term "intrinsic." It can mean either determinate or nonderived.
But determinacy and nonderivativeness are independent traits,
so Dennett could preserve his nondeterminacy thesis without
embracing derivationalism. This seems advisable given the
implausibility of derivationalism. It is far easier to argue that we
confer intentionality on Mother Nature than that she confers it
on us. Indeed, such a reversal in the direction of derivation
seems to be required by Dennett's own interpretative stance
point of view. As Dennett himself writes in the book: "Mother
Nature doesn't commit herself... to . . . functional attribu-
tions; all such attributions depend on the mind-set of the
intentional stance . . . " (page 320).
Real intentions?
Donald R. Griffin
The Rockefeller University, New York, N. Y. 10021-6399; Department of
Biology, Princeton University, Princeton, N. J. 08544
Dennett is admirably unique among the philosophers con-
cerned with both human and nonhuman mental states in observ-
ing natural animal behavior at first hand, as described on pp.
272-77. Like other scientists and philosophers pondering these
questions, he finds himself in a sort of intellectual conflict
between two motivations: (1) the urge to consider only ideas that
we can see clearly to be rigorously testable by objective data,
and (2) the hope of accounting for mental states, including the
heterogeneous complex we call conscious awareness. The first
impulse entails a sort of physics envy, akin to positivism and
behaviorism, whereas the second is an effort to evaluate the
intuitively compelling belief that we, and perhaps some other
animals, do think consciously, and furthermore, that such think-
ing is one important factor (though of course not the only factor)
influencing our behavior.
Dennett emphasizes the practical utility of the intentional
stance in understanding and predicting the behavior of men and
animals, comparing it to folk psychology, "the family of 'men-
talistic' concepts, such as belief, desire, knowledge, fear, pain,
expectation, intention, understanding, dreaming, imagination,
514
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1988) 11:3

Commentary/ Dennett: The intentional stance
self-consciousness, and so on" (p. 7). He recognizes that both
folk psychology and the intentional stance are far too useful to
give up: "If we discard folk psychology as a theory, we would
have to replace it with another theory, which, while it did
violence to many ordinary intuitions, would explain the predic-
tive power of the residual folk craft" (p. 47). Lacking something
better to replace it, we would be foolish to equate folk psychol-
ogy with Ptolemaic astronomy, for which Copernicus and Ga-
lileo did have a superior replacement. Both folk psychology and
Dennett's intentional stance may encompass facts about mental
states that are so basic that their eventual, neurophysiological
explanation will no more eliminate them than molecular genet-
ics has abolished heredity.
Motivation (1), however, leads Dennett to emphasize the
effectiveness of the intentional stance in understanding comput-
er systems and even thermostats. He is often candidly positiv-
istic: "Folk psychology can best be viewed as a sort of logical
behaviorism: what it means to say that someone believes that p,
is that that person is disposed to behave in certain ways under
certain conditions" (pp. 50-51). Yet he sometimes appears to be
groping for a satisfactory way to distinguish unconscious mecha-
nisms that can usefully be viewed as intentional systems from
those living organisms that actually do think about their inten-
tions. But motivation (1) seems to rule out what may be the best
criterion of intention (despite the difficulties of applying it),
namely, whether the organism thinks consciously about what it
is doing and about the choices it makes among the alternative
actions available to it.
In our 1983 discussion (Griffin 1983) of Dennett's (1983a) BBS
target article (reprinted as Chapter 7 in Stance) Dennett (1983b)
agreed that the interpretation of animal messages can tell at least
part of what animals are thinking and feeling. But he went on to
argue that the lives of animals are too simple to require con-
scious thinking, and that we can learn almost all there is to know
about them by observing their behavior. Although disagreeing
with Wittgenstein's "If a lion could talk, we could not under-
stand him," Dennett felt that a lion would have "much less to say
about its life than we could already say about it from our own
observation," and that consciousness "arises when there is work
for it to do, and the preeminent work of consciousness is
dependent on sophisticated language-using activities." I am
inclined to suppose, on the contrary, that simple types of
conscious thinking may be useful and efficient ways of using a
central nervous system to solve novel and challenging problems
(Griffin 1984).
The analysis of communicative signals provides cognitive
ethologists with one of the most promising sources of relevant
data that can help to reduce our currently enormous ignorance
about what, if anything, animals actually think. Although we
cannot rigorously prove that even the most versatile commu-
nicative exchanges among animals are expressions of even the
simplest conscious thoughts, it is at least a heuristically produc-
tive "stance" to consider that they sometimes are. Significant
examples of animal cognition would not have been discovered,
or perhaps even suspected, without interpreting animal com-
munication as evidence of cognitive processes that had pre-
viously been held to be beyond the capabilities of the animals in
question. We cannot be certain that these cognitive processes
never entail conscious thinking on the animal's part; for proving
such a global negative is notoriously difficult.
Like many other philosophers, Dennett seems disappointed
by the lack of evidence for the human level of linguistic complex-
ity in animal communication or thinking. But in one sense it is
anthropomorphic to restrict one's definitions of thinking or
consciousness to our sorts of mental experiences. While any
animal thinking is doubtless much simpler than our more
complex mental gymnastics, it is sometimes more versatile than
most philosophers seem to appreciate. Many animals lead chal-
lenging lives, and they must often solve novel problems, as
reviewed in the symposium edited by Roitblat et al. (1984).
Learning is widespread among multiceilular animals. Frogs do
much more than catch bugs. The symbolic waggle dances of
honeybees are only one aspect of a complex nexus of social
communication most of which is less well understood because it
involves primarily chemical and tactile signals (Lindauer 1971).
Whiten and Byrne (1988) have assembled an impressive
number of what would generally be dismissed as unpublishable
anecdotes about deceptive behavior which strongly indicate
that primates take into account the psychological states of their
companions.
In short, I suggest that Dennett's general approach is even
more significant than he claims. Animals sometimes behave in
ways that can be explained most parsimoniously by assuming
that they are not only intentional systems, but are also con-
sciously aware of their own beliefs, desires, and intentions.
Dennett's advocacy of the intentional stance is a step toward
emancipation from what he has aptly called "the straightjacket
of behaviorism" (Dennett 1983a). I hope it will be not an end but
a beginning.
What is the intentional stance?
Gilbert Harman
Department of Philosophy, Princeton University, Princeton, N.J. 08544
Dennett's initial views about the intentional stance can be
summarized in the following theses:
Thesis I: to attribute beliefs, desires, and other
psychological states to S is to view S from the intentional
stance.
Thesis II: To view S from the intentional stance is to
attribute to S the beliefs S ought to have and the desires S
ought to have.
Thesis III: There is a calculus of rationality and other
principles that determine what beliefs and desires S ought
to have apart from prior psychological theory.
Dennett abandons Thesis III in Chapter 4 when he responds to
Stich (1981) and replaces it with something like this:
Thesis Ilia: The desires and beliefs that S ought to have
are those desires and beliefs that S would have in the
absence of malfunction. One way to discover this is to
consider what beliefs and desires you would have if" you
were in S's position. Further empirical study can also shed
light on this.
As far as I can see, theses II and Ilia amount to this.
Thesis IV: to view S from the intentional stance is to
attribute beliefs, desires, and other psychological states to
S.
But thesis I and IV taken together are tautological.
Thesis I: to attribute beliefs, desires, and other
psychological states to S is to view S from the intentional
stance.
Thesis IV: to view S from the intentional stance is to attri-
bute beliefs, desires, and other psychological states to S.
Competence models are causal
David Kirsh
Artificial Intelligence Laboratory, Massachusetts Institute of Technology,
Cambridge, Mass. 02139
As I understand Dennett's position it has four theses:
(1) The part of folk psychology worth caring about reduces
conceptually to intentional systems theory.
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1988) 11:3
515

Commentary /Dennett: The intentional stance
(2) The key idioms of intentional systems theory, Bp and Dq,
do not designate causally efficacious states of an intentional
system; they are structured place holders in a rational calculus
which applies to systems as a whole, and which predict and
explain most of a system's actions.
(3) Attributions from the intentional stance produce compe-
tence-like theories which somehow constrain the space of possi-
ble system designs - hence they are of scientific value.
(4) These constraints are nonetheless sufficiently loose or
general so that nothing a priori follows about the actual structure
of an implementation, or about the organization of causal states;
although given an actual system made out of particular widgets
and wires it may be possible to label processes and events as
"bearing [certain] information, signaling this and ordering that"
(p. 63).
The beauty of this position is that it saves humanists their
valued psychological distinctions, it secures for decision theo-
rists, linguists, and social psychologists an irreducible place in
the scientific hierarchy, and it lets neurophysiologists and AI
types get on with their job of discovering process models.
I like this position, particularly theses (3) and (4). But I
question (2) — that beliefs, or competence theories are not
causally efficacious. If competence theories do not describe the
causal structure of the systems that implement them, then (a)
knowledge of underlying hardware must be irrelevant in decid-
ing between empirically equivalent competence theories; and
(b) competence theories must tell us nothing about the design of
process models - they are specifications but say nothing about
intermediate states. I believe that both (a) and (b) are false.
Hardware affects how we pose a problem. The standard
justification for ignoring hardware in determining a competence
is the old dogma that software is multiply realizable, and hence
totally independent of the capacities of hardware. This is mis-
leading. Every architecture has its cost function: Some opera-
tions are easy or natural to implement, others are relatively
expensive and unnatural - e.g., recursion in Parallel Dis-
tributed Processing (PDP) systems. Because efficiency matters,
different architectures encourage us to think of problems in
different ways; we look for different methods of problem-solving
or different ways of structuring the initial problem. This alters
our characterization of competence.
Consider the problem of finding a stable grasp. Intuitively,
the problem is to calculate a reasonable trajectory of knuckle
changes so that the final position of the hand secures a stable
opposition of its fingers on the object's surface. Using this
definition of the problem, a system must know the precise shape
of the object it is trying to grasp. In specifying the competence
we define the end position of the fingers as a function of the
object's shape. Is this a reasonable specification of human
grasping competence?
Much work on grasp planning accepted this way of posing the
problem, and many man years were lost in the effort to find an
algorithm for quick and general shape recognition. Yet this
ignored important assumptions about the hand. Hands are
compliant and can sense force. Accordingly, competent agents
needn't represent particular shapes in detail; they need only
move their hands to contact the target object, then instruct their
fingers to close. To handle hard cases where, for instance, the
object has an uncharacteristic center of mass, humans can use
force feedback to rearrange their grasp.
Now this sort of misstatement, or false idealization, of a
cognitive problem is endemic in cognitive science and repre-
sents the greatest threat to the top down or competence ap-
proach. We have to know the information that a system could
acquire through its senses, and the actions it could perform. We
then choose a subset of these possible inputs and actions as the
inputs and outputs. Which subsets we choose will depend on
how we set up the problem. To be correct, a competence theory
must correctly identify the informational states of a system that
causally affect behavior. Discovering which of the possible
informational states are causally real, in general, will require
some knowledge of the underlying mechanisms of the system.
This view is not heretical. We make assumptions about
hardware, for instance, by treating as relevant the computa-
tional complexity of problem formulations. Yet if we were
suddenly to discover an architecture that had an oracle which
could give instantaneous answers to certain types of questions
the standard conclusions of complexity theory would be irrele-
vant. Evidently, in choosing a description of a competence we
are tacitly mindful of the cost function of the architecture we
think instantiates the competence. In complexity theory these
assumptions are extremely general.
Moreover, this idea is consistent with Dennett's own require-
ment that the intentional stance exploit an assumption of ra-
tionality. Rationality is not architecture independent, for what a
person should believe or should do depends on what he can
believe or do. Ought implies can. It is rational to perform a
suboptimal act rather than perform no act at all. Hence ra-
tionality is not identical with optimality. It is, in part, an
empirical question what the correct norms of rationality are for a
creature. The empirical element concerns processing abilities.
Competence as design constraint. The line I am pressing is
that competence models serve an important function in cog-
nitive science and this function is only plausible if we assume
that intentional states are causally robust. A competence theory
is not just a generative engine for producing a specification of
input/output (Dennett's view, p. 255); it is meant to serve as a
structure-revealing specification. Accordingly, a competence
theory helps cognitive scientists both verify the adequacy of a
process model and conjecture plausible designs in the first
place.
Design is a problem, much like code-cracking, where the test
phase is easier than the generate phase. With a good specifica-
tion, testing is relatively easy - at least it is well-defined. But a
spec doesn't tell us how to discover a plausible conjecture. It
tells us nothing of intermediate states. We need a structure-
revealing specification to reduce the complexity of the genera-
tion problem.
I think Dennett agrees. It is true that he states "intentional
stance characterization, for all its predictive and even explanato-
ry power, sheds virtually no light on the underlying mecha-
nisms" (p. 77). But I do not think he means that here compe-
tence theories set no constraints on mechanical design; rather
he means they tell us nothing about the style of computation
involved. Relative to a chosen technology only certain sorts of
mechanisms could do the job. But I suspect his point is that
there is no easy way of stating what all workable designs in all
workable technologies have in common.
Anyone who disagrees with Dennett bears the burden of
proof. We currently know little about the space of possible
mechanisms and therefore have little theory to support general
claims. To be sure, there is McCarthy's (1979) reminder that the
larger the corpus of cipher text, the smaller the chance of finding
more than one radically different deciphering algorithm. By
analogy, the more cognitive skills displayed by a creature the
fewer designs there are that might realize them all. But, in
principle, the set of different ciphers remains infinite, and the
set of successful designs is unbounded.
There is, alternatively, Pylyshyn and Fodor's (1988) claim
that we have a priori reasons for preferring one genus of
functional architecture for language-using systems, hence a
reason for biasing the class of designs of language users. But
their argument relies on accepting a characterization of lin-
guistic and rational competence that idealizes in a suspect
manner. Pylyshyn (1988), for instance, assumes the ability to
recognize infinite strings.
Yet wouldn't Pylyshyn and Fodor be right if we really did
have such abilities? I have been arguing that we cannot discover
a true account of our abilities unless we accommodate the gross
features of our underlying computational architecture. We must
516
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1988) 11:3

Commentary/ Dennett: The intentional stance
solve the competence/architecture problem simultaneously.
For as we understand more about the cost function of an
architecture, we may discover more cost effective ways of
performing a task, and possibly very different ways of conceiving
of our competence.
I believe that this dialectical approach to competence and
process theories makes good methodological sense. It pre-
sumes, however, that competence theories identify causally real
states. Whether humans have a language of thought (LOT) will
depend on the competences we believe hold true of us. It is hard
to measure these. It seems conceivable to me that English-
speaking humans may use a LOT, whereas Martians who con-
verse reasonably well with us may have no LOT. One explana-
tion would be that their competences are only superficially the
same as ours. When agents are imperfectly competent it is hard
to decide whether they imperfectly instantiate perfect con-
straint systems, perfectly instantiate imperfect constraint sys-
tems, or some measure of both. If we are realists about beliefs
we accept that there is a fact of the matter - although to discover
this fact we may have to dig below behavior. Another explana-
tion might be that Martians have very similar competences but
such extraordinary memories and analogical mapping abilities
that they need no LOT. It is often faster to store than compute.
We need the extra constraint about how the language was
learned.
There are knotty problems here about what it means to call an
informational state a cause. For in accepting a competence
theory as true nothing follows about which beliefs are encoded
explicitly in processes in the causal foreground of the system and
which beliefs are built into the system's structure, and hence act
as part of the causal background. But the basic issues of causa-
tion are no worse in cognitive science than they are in physics or
chemistry where we recognize that a causes b only against a
background field of causally relevant conditions.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This paper describes research done at the Artificial Intelligence labora-
tory at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, supported in part by
the Advanced Research Project Agency of the Department of Defence
under Office of Naval Research contract N00014-25K124.
The devil, the details, and Dr. Dennett
Patricia Kitcher and Philip Kitcher
Department of Philosophy, University of California, San Diego, La Jolla,
Calif. 92093
The Intentional Stance serves the valuable functions of articulat-
ing Dennett's subtle and influential views in philosophy of
psychology, filling in gaps and redeeming promissory notes, as
well as providing a reflective account of the contemporary
landscape in this area of philosophy. It is also a work of high
drama. Dennett seems to find himself on a narrow seashore. On
one side lies the blue (western) ocean. From it arise the siren
voices of eliminativists: "Join us," they sing, "you're so close!"
On the other is the jungle, where there are natives (or possibly
nativists), chanting about languages of thought and systems of
internal representation. Although our hero appears to believe
that these incantations invoke the devil, he is not yet ready to
take the plunge into the deep blue sea. But the tide is coming in.
How did Dennett arrive in this predicament? Two "big
principles" lead him to doubt strong realist claims about belief,
content, and mental representation. Yet, unlike the elim-
inativists, he wants to find some enduring role for intentional
psychology. Explicitly rejecting instrumentalism (a favorite in-
terpretation of his past views), Dennett concludes that belief
states have the same ontological status as the abstracta of
physics. But this is a tenuous resting place, and it is easy to
suspect that the eliminativist current will soon sweep him away.
We think that Dennett's positive sentiments for intentional
psychology could be strengthened by looking more carefully at
the big principles. One of these, the optimality principle,
declares that the assumption of optimal design is fundamental to
evolutionary thinking. The other, the rationality principle,
maintains that the assumption of rationality is fundamental to
the attribution of content. Dennett appears to believe that,
strictly speaking, both principles are false, so that attributions of
optimality and of content are ultimately a sophisticated - and
useful - game of "let's pretend. "He further claims that there is
an indeterminacy of functional ascription that underlies the
indeterminacy of content. Darwin emerges as the spiritual
grandfather of Quine's famous indeterminacy argument.
Oddly enough, neither big principle ever receives a clear
formulation in Stance. Once one presses beyond global claims
about optimality or rationality, looking at the details of evolu-
tionary analysis and of content ascription, some of Dennett's
more sweeping claims - the claims that lead him to his pre-
carious predicament - begin to seem dubious. We'll begin with
the evolutionary issues.
Dennett remarks that "We take on optimality assumptions
not because we naively think that evolution has made this the
best of all possible worlds, but because we must be interpreters,
if we are to make any progress at all, and interpretation requires
the invocation of optimality " (pp. 278-79). What exactly are
"we" (evolutionarily sophisticated naturalists?) invoking? The
principle is notoriously hard to state. Even if we waive the point
that not all evolution is driven by natural selection (forces like
drift and meiotic drive might play an important role), there are
plenty of examples in which evolution under natural selection
can't fix the fittest available phenotype. Instances of hetero-
zygote superiority are only the tip of the iceberg - there are
even examples in which natural selection drives the fittest
available phenotype out of the population! If naturalists are to
invoke one principle of optimality, the only one they could find
to cover all cases would be the crushingly trivial thesis that
evolution under natural selection does what it does, and that is
hardly a candidate for a principle without which our in-
terpretative projects could make no headway. Sophisticated
naturalists recognize that the constraints on selection vary
enormously from case to case, and we see no reason to think that
they must (or that they do) pretend that we live in a Panglossian
world.1
Although Dennett is happy to license naturalists to find (or
impute) adaptation everywhere, he seems to think that they will
never find determinate answers to the questions they pose.
Allegedly, indeterminacy of function is omnipresent. The point
is illustrated at length in the tale of the hapless two-bitser - or is
it a q-balber? - that goes into states at the drop of a quarter
(chapter 8). Dennett is a master of the telling philosophical
anecdote, but we believe that his account of functional ascrip-
tion would have been different had he concentrated on the real
examples that confront naturalists.
Male freshwater guppies have spots on their sides; the spots
vary in size and color. There is considerable variation both
within and between populations; different populations occupy
different ecological conditions (the streambeds contain rocks of
different sizes and colors, the lighting conditions are different,
there are different predators). Thanks to the patience and
imagination of John Endler (1983) and his students, we know
that females respond differentially to males, apparently prefer-
ring those with larger spots. So the function of the spots is to
attract females? Not quite. If the spots are too large or too
bright, males become vulnerable to predators. Selection has
had to strike one of its typical compromises, favoring males who
are flashy - but not too flashy. One can explore, as Endler has
done, the way in which the selection pressure varies with the
character of the substrate and with the lighting conditions; one
can even look, as Endler is now doing, at the visual acuities of
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1988) 11:3
517

Commentary /Dennett: The intentional stance
predators and their role in the selection process. When studies
of natural selection are as careful and as detailed as this, it is, we
think, legitimate to challenge those who contend that there is
always functional indeterminacy.2
Dennett's account of evolutionary analysis is, we think, dou-
bly flawed, uncritical in its attitude to causal optimization and
simultaneously unappreciative of the power of evolutionary
analysis when it is done well. We turn now to the other big
principle, the assumption of rationality.
Dennett draws two connections between evolutionary biolo-
gy and psychology that are crucial to his foreswearing the
possibility of realism about beliefs. First he argues by analogy.
Like the optimality principle, the rationality principle is both
indispensable to interpretation (of human behavior) and
straightforwardly false. People do not invariably act with good
reason. The second connection is more subtle. In explaining
human behavior in terms of beliefs and desires, we attribute
content to inner states. Dennett holds, as do we and many
others, that content can be attributed to a state only by virtue of
its function in the mental economy of the organism. To take a
familiar example, it seems to be a necessary condition for
attributing the content "fly" to some state of a frog's brain that
that state covary with a canonically described stimulus condition
and that the objects in the frog's environment that meet that
description be flies. Since the ascription of content requires that
we be able to assign particular functions to particular states of
organisms, if the assignment of functions is standardly under-
determined by the evidence, so too will be the ascription of
content. But belief without determinate content is belief
manque\
Discovering that Quine's (1960) indeterminacy principle can
be derived from a sophisticated understanding of evolutionary
biology would be a heartening convergence for the principle's
many fans. We deny the confirmation, because we believe that
the lesson from biology is not functional indeterminacy but the
multiplicity of nature's ways. If mental states are like other
organic conditions, then sometimes careful study will enable us
to assign function, sometimes it will not. Mixed results will not
support the general condemnation of belief that was Quine's
goal, however. Dennett notes that Quine's own arguments for
indeterminacy are unlikely to be embraced by cognitive scien-
tists, since they depend on eschewing inner states (pp. 238,
340). However, if Quine's own arguments are not persuasive in
this context, and if the attempt to shore up the argument by
appealing to biology is mistaken, then we are not compelled to
acquiesce in Dennett's conclusion that the only kind of belief we
can have is "as-if' belief - and neither is he.
Dennett follows the current political wisdom of bold an-
nouncement rather than reluctant admission in facing up to the
lack of any precise statement of the rationality principle (p. 4 ff).
Although the rationality assumption cannot be made explicit,
Dennett thinks it is clear enough how it works in particular cases
to demonstrate both that it is indispensable to interpreting
behavior and literally false.
Dennett will not be pinned down on rationality because he
rejects three clear but troubling options: Rationality is captured
by logic-cum-decision-theory, rationality is the way we and our
friends think, rationality is whatever inferential tools evolution
has provided us with to aid in thought and action. Despite its
clarity and naturalism, Dennett refuses the last option, because
he thinks it would make the principle trivial. We think his
rejection of this option rests on a confusion, indeed the same
confusion that was manifest in his approach to optimality. In
both cases, the attempt to reduce these ideas to a simple maxim
will produce principles that are either blatantly false or com-
pletely trivial. Although nature may try, ceteris paribus, to
produce optimal design, including true belief and appropriate
action, conditions are (almost) never neutral, but exigent and
enormously variable from case to case. So the evolutionary
biologist must try to figure out how a particular trait arose, given
certain pre-existing (but often hard to identify) constraints.
Similarly, psychologists have to figure out what patterns of
thought characterize humans and animals and why, given what-
ever else is known about the actual system (often precious little).
In both cases we adapt ideas about optimality or rationality to
specific local circumstances. Furthermore, under these circum-
stances, we will still be able to charge people with irrationality
when their behavior fails to exemplify particular principles that
are normal for them, their species, or their subgroup. It may
sometimes also happen that the evidence is so confused that we
simply cannot tell what patterns of thought, if any, are instanti-
ated by a particular group. Thus, in some cases specific claims
about rationality will be false and even the assumption that we
can explain behavior by appealing to some specific principles of
rationality will be false. But here, as in the assignment of
function, the existence of recalcitrant cases docs not reduce the
practice to pretense. Sometimes we can determine function;
sometimes we can determine the patterns of thought that, given
certain circumstances, will tend to produce true beliefs.
We left our hero on the seashore with the tide coming in. The
burden of our arguments is that he need not be afraid to venture
inland, and that his fears result from intoning the big principles
rather than confronting them with the complex phenomena to
which they are supposed to prescribe. There's no substitute for
looking at details. As true believers have always supposed, it is
God, not the Devil, who dwells in the details.
NOTES
1. For elaboration of the claims made in this paragraph, see Chapter
7 of Philip Kitcher 1985, and Philip Kitcher 1987. [See also BBS
multiple book review of Kitcher 1985 in BBS 10(1) 1987.]
2. A thorough review of the many ways in which one can identify
selection pressures can be found in Endler 1986. We note that the
example of the guppies presupposes no general optimality assumption.
When naturalists are immersed in a complex problem, they are, typ-
ically and rightly, sensitive to the possibilities of constraint. In the case
of the guppies, it's quite possible that there should not only be ecological
constraints of the kinds already identified, but also developmental
constraints: We doubt that anyone would be surprised to learn that the
variation in spot patterning is developmentally constrained.
Dennett's instrumentalism
William G. Lycan
Department of Philosophy, University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill, N.C.
27599-3125
Dennett does not like being called a relativist or an "interpreta-
tionist" about the ascription of thoughts and beliefs and desires
because he does not like the traditional choice between in-
terpretationism and intentional realism (the view that thoughts
and beliefs and desires are real, objective attributes of human
beings). He regards that choice in its customary conception as a
false dichotomy. Dennett denies that beliefs and the rest are
causally active inner states of people, as common sense and
some cognitive psychology take them to be. But, he says, belief
ascriptions are nonetheless often objectively true, in virtue of
the predictive usefulness of taking the "intentional stance"
toward the subject. Belief ascriptions are calculated devices, not
descriptions of inner mechanisms, and beliefs are abstracta
rather than illata.
Thus Dennett is an instrumentalist, and does not mind being
called one (Stance, p. 15). He reckons that his own version of
instrumentalism about the propositional attitudes avoids both
sophomoric relativism and the quixotic excesses of the stronger,
inner-cause versions of intentional realism.
As I read him, Dennett has basically three grounds for his
rejection of the stronger, inner-cause versions: (i) He thinks it
quite unlikely that any science will ever turn up any distinctive
inner-causal mechanism that would be shared by all the possible
subjects that had a particular belief, (ii) He offers numerous
objections to "language-of-thought psychology," the most popu-
lar going inner-cause theory (particularly in essays 5 and 6 of
518
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1988) 11:3

Commentary /Dennett: The intentional stance
Stance, which add to the mass of criticism already collected in
Brainstorms [Dennett 1978]). (iii) Dennett argues from the
verification conditions of belief and desire ascriptions - basically
a matter of extrapolating rationally from what a subject ought to
believe and want in the circumstances - and then he boldly
identifies the truth-makers of those ascriptions with their ver-
ification-conditions, challenging inner-cause theorists to show
why instrumentalism does not accommodate all the actual
evidence.
I cannot go through the arguments here.11 shall only record a
few ontological objections to Dennett's instrumentalism itself,
and leave posterity or Dennett to adjudicate them.
(1) I am not a verificationist, and urge everyone else not to be
one. I think the explanatory utility and the practical indispen-
sability of belief ascription are themselves powerful reasons for
accepting the verification-transcending, literal truth of the as-
criptions made. Instrumentalism in science is almost always
neologism, in that it wantonly reinterprets the semantics of
ordinary statements for nonsemantic purposes. There is no
logical or semantical reason to join the logical positivists in
thinking that statements about electrons are really abbrevia-
tions of unbelievably complicated conjunctions of conditionals
about pointer readings and vapor trials. No more is there logical
or semantical reason to think that belief ascriptions are really
about the utility of certain epistemic practices, or about any-
thing else that is out in the open air.
(2) Dennett's instrumentalism seems to collapse into analyti-
cal behaviorism. This is suggested in part by his third, verifica-
tionist argument, which verificationism would lead right to
analytical behaviorism in any case, but also by his susceptibility
to a characteristic sort of objection to analytical behaviorism: the
"zombie" example.2 Dennett himself avers in the accompany-
ing Precis that "any object - whatever its innards - that is
reliably and voluminously predictable from the [intentional]
stance is in the fullest sense of the word a believer." But under
suitably contrived circumstances involving external manipula-
tion by puppeteers, hollow anthropoid tinfoil shells and the like
are reliably and voluminously predictable from the intentional
stance; yet no one who was not simply giving up on the concept
of belief would call them believers, and certainly not "in the
fullest sense of the word."
(3) Churchland (1970, p. 234) points out that there are true
subjunctive conditionals whose antecedents concern mental
states of agents and whose consequents predicate actions, as in
"Had S wanted (or thought) so-and-so, S would have done such-
and-such." But if the clause "S wants (or thinks) so-and-so"
merely said something about the usefulness of our predictive
practices, the resulting instrumentalist translation of our sub-
junctive conditional might well come out false though the
original was true: "Had our predictive practices displayed fea-
ture F, S would have done such-and-such." There are other
translation problems of this sort as well.
(4) A threat of circularity. If beliefs are characterized in terms
of what subjects ought to be believing, and desires are charac-
terized in terms of what subjects ought to be wanting, what is a
belief or a desire in the first place? Dennett's view is complex,
and I am far from insisting that the apparent circularity is real,
vicious, and decisive; but I would like to hear exactly why it is
not vicious.
(5) Finally, I would note the conceptual continuity of beliefs
as conceived by folk psychology with content-bearing states of
the type that Dennett admits will be posited by foreseeable
cognitive psychology. As Dennett has sometimes also admitted,
folk-theoretic descriptions of people and empirical psychology
augment and correct each other. I do not see how this mutual
augmentation and correction would be possible on a strictly
instrumentalistic construal of the folk-theoretical states, so long
as the new psychological states are taken to be genuinely
intentional at all. Why would the two only polysemously inten-
tional phenomena have anything to do with each other? And if
the main reason why beliefs are not real inner-causal states is
that they are only normatively characterized (i.e., only in terms
of what subjects ought to be thinking), then we should be
surprised that belief-and-desire-based behavioral predictions
succeed as well as they do; you would think we would constantly
be getting the wrong predictions.3
NOTES
1. For rebuttals to many of the arguments, see Lycan (1988) and
Lycan (in press).
2. Bradley (1964); Campbell (1970); Kirk (1974); Lycan (1987). Stich
(1981) wields a related example against Dennett.
3. However, Dennett argues that the predictions succeed as well as
they do only because natural selection has seen to it that we are very,
very close to being ideally rational; he responds to similar criticisms by
Fodor and Stich in essays 2 and 4 of Stance.
Causes and intentions
Bruce J. MacLennan
Computer Science Department, The University of Tennessee, Knoxville,
Tenn. 37996-1301
Daniel Dennett's theory of intentionality has much to recom-
mend it. Nevertheless, it could be significantly strengthened by
addressing the causes of intentionality, that is, the mechanisms
underlying intentional behavior. I will discuss three problems
that a causal theory of intentionality could clarify: attribution of
rationality (or optimality), alternatives to sentential representa-
tion, and directedness of consciousness.
According to Dennett (p. 15), intentionality is the charac-
teristic property of intentional systems, which are systems
whose behavior can be accurately predicted by adopting the
intentional stance. The intentional stance makes its predictions
by assuming the system is "rational" or "optimal." There are
several difficulties with this assumption, as Dennett is aware
(pp. 53-54, 98, 255, 259, 295-97). First, rationality is in the eye
of the beholder: The meaning of intentional states is relative to
their interpreter. In an attempt to establish an objective basis
for such meanings, Dennett appeals to the "eye" of a special
interpreter: Mother Nature (pp. 298-300). Dennett is on the
right track here, but had he gone a little further (as described
below) he could have avoided the dubious practice of treating
nature as an intentional agent. The second problem with the
required attributions of rationality and optimality is that they
make it difficult to account for the many observed irrational and
suboptimal intentional systems. Many (most?) organisms, be-
liefs, behaviors, customs, species, practices, theories, and so
forth, are neither fully rational nor optimal. Yet they survive and
even spread. Why?
This question is answered by the theory of nonequilibrium
thermodynamics (Nicolis & Prigogine 1977; Prigogine & Sten-
gers 1984). Briefly, the second law of thermodynamics says that
in the absence of a flow of matter or energy, structure decreases
(i.e., entropy increases). Thus, when structure persists or in-
creases, there must be some mechanism that causes a flow of
matter or energy and hence a local decrease in entropy. A
nonequilibrium system must be structured in such a way that it
can draw matter or energy from its environment and thereby
postpone its approach to equilibrium. The key point is that
intentional systems, such as animals, plants, species, societies,
customs, and behavioral patterns, are all nonequilibrium sys-
tems. The intentional stance is really a very simplified and
idealized nonequilibrium thermodynamics.
There are several advantages to the thermodynamic ap-
proach. First, the notion of a nonequilibrium system is as
objective as thermodynamics itself (cf. pp. 32-33). Second,
maintenance of the nonequilibrium state provides a more objec-
tive basis for "natural functional meaning" than does trying to
"read Mother Nature's mind" (cf. pp. 298-300). Third, the
thermodynamic approach is more fruitful, since it provides a
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1988) 11:3
519

Commentary/Dennett: The intentional stance
basis for identifying the mechanism that keeps the system from
equilibrium. Science prefers causal explanations to behavioral
descriptions because knowledge of causes gives a deeper under-
standing of the phenomena (Aristotle Posterior Analytics,
71b9-13; see also Cartwright 1983). Finally, the over-idealizing
assumptions of rationality and optimality are replaced by a
(causally explicable) tendency to avoid equilibrium (cf. pp. 53-
54, 255, 259).
Dennett discusses (pp. 217-55) tacit knowledge, but does not
give it its due. His analysis, like most in the literature, is
hampered by an inability to imagine any mental representation
that is not in essence linguistic (pp. 35, 232). This is hardly
surprising in view of the Anglo-American tradition's neglect of
ready-to-hand experience (Heidegger 1962, p. 98). But the
linguistic paradigm is no longer "the only game in town ' (p. 35).
The rapidly developing theory of neural networks has the
potential of providing a nonlinguistic account of knowledge (see
for example Rumelhart et al. 1986). What is most exciting is that
it may explain the mechanisms underlying tacit knowledge,
including those presupposed by linguistic behavior (MacLen-
nan 1988).
Will neural network theory, or any form of eliminative mate-
rialism (Churchland 1979, p. 5; 1984, pp. 43-49), better "folk
psychology' in its ability to make concrete behavioral predic-
tions? Probably not. A more reasonable expectation is that
neural network theory may explain the causal mechanisms
underlying important mental phenomena (such as concepts and
beliefs). We shouldn't be disappointed at this outcome, since
causal explanations give a deeper understanding than predictive
calculi. For concrete predictions it will be hard to improve on
our ready-to-hand understanding of other people. (See Church-
land, 1986, for more on the potential contributions of neuro-
science to philosophical problems.)
To Brentano (1925) intentionality was "at direction upon a
content"; Husserl (1931, sect. 84) understood it as "the unique
peculiarity of experiences 'to be the consciousness of some-
thing. ' " Over the years the study of this important phenomenon
has been replaced, at least in the Anglo-American tradition, by
an emphasis on linguistic issues (such as referential opacity).
This emphasis may prove to have been misplaced if in fact tacit
knowledge is presupposed by sentential knowledge (MacLen-
nan 1988). Although Dennett acknowledges this possibility (pp.
100-101, 201, 220-23), he never completely breaks free of his
sentential biases (pp. 35, 56, 100-101, 224).
This brings me to my final criticism of Dennett's instrumen-
talist theory. Because it treats intentional systems as "black
boxes," it cannot even address what is perhaps the central
problem of intentionality: How is it possible for a mass of neural
tissue to be aware of something? Answering this question
requires a causal theory of intentionality, that is, an explanation
of the mechanism by which brains produce the phenomenon of
directed consciousness. I do not see how this can be accom-
plished except through some form of eliminative materialism.
The benefits of a causal theory of intentionality would be
many. Once we understand the mechanism by which con-
sciousness is produced, the question of whether this or that
animal is conscious reduces to seeing whether it has the requi-
site structure (cf. pp. 254, 272-76). Consideration of the mecha-
nism will also establish whether computers can be conscious (cf.
pp. 323-37; Searle 1980). Questions of levels of intentionality
(pp. 243-50) and privileged access (pp. 312-13) are similarly
answerable with a causal theory.
Is there any hope for a causal theory of intentionality? It is
certainly a long way off. But, in the meantime, instead of
replacing the hard but interesting causal questions with more
tractable but less interesting instrumentalist questions, perhaps
we should simply say "Ignoramus."
The intentional stance and the knowledge
level
Allen Newell
Departments of Computer Science and Psychology, Carnegie-Mellon
University, Pittsburgh, Pa. 15213
Dan Dennett has finally provided in one place an extended and
definitive treatment of the motion of the intentional stance
(Dennett 1987a). It is a twenty-year development, whose first
significant statement occurred in Dennett (1969) and which is
already widely known throughout cognitive science due to the
publication of Brainstorms (Dennett 1978). It is good to have its
mature statement.
I have only good things to say about the intentional stance. It
seems to me that it has much of the story right about the nature
of intentionality - about how humans and other systems can
have their behavior be about their external environment.
I likewise have only good things to say about the book itself.
Its core is Dennett's main previously published post-Brainstorm
papers on intentionality. But his reflections on each of the
earlier papers and the very recent chapters at the end make the
book an integrated treatment. I even found myself welcoming
somewhat the redundancy that inevitably arises from collecting
separate papers - the variation of statement had the effect of
helping me be sure I understood what Dennett was saying.
I especially appreciated the final chapter in which Dennett
lays out the larger historical context of scholarly effort surround-
ing this problem. The philosopher's practice of citation and
acknowledment has always seemed to me somewhat sparse.
This final chapter goes some way toward making the effort
within philosophy seem like a coherent and cumulative one - at
least cumulative to the extent of alternative solutions being
explored and the issues in each being laid bare. Less apparent is
cumulation in terms of joint efforts to improve an approximate
conceptual structure, bit by bit, so as to preserve what is good in
each contribution. The dominant flavor of objection and refuta-
tion remains. Nevertheless, the picture did seem to be one of
progress - a picture which could, of course, be shattered by the
reactions of the other participants in this story. I hope not. I
rather like the story the way Dennett tells it.
It is quite understandable, but a little sad to me, that the book
is still a book by a philosopher for philosophers. Dennett's
delightful style, which makes the book accessible and attractive
to a wide audience, conceals this somewhat. (It should be noted
that a bright, witty, pungent, and direct style, full of outrageous
but entertaining examples, has become a trailmark of the philo-
sophical territory within which Dennett roams; he is just an
exceptionally fine practitioner of the style.) But the problems
that the book addresses are philosopher's problems (see es-
pecially the chapter "Beyond Belief) and the scholarly trail that
Dennett recognizes is the one trodden by philosophers.
What else could it be? Well, the center of gravity could have
been cognitive science. I even hoped it would be. Dennett has,
in fact, moved a long way toward recentering himself in cog-
nitive science. Among philosophers, perhaps only Fodor has
gone farther. [See Fodor: "Methodological Solipsism Consid-
ered as a Research Strategy in Cognitive Psychology" BBS 3(1)
1980 and multiple of Fodor The Modularity of Mind, BBS 8(1)
1985.] And Dennett brings to the concerns of the book a
substantial knowledge of cognitive science and (to a lesser
extent) ethology. But these are resources for him. They are used
to address the problems of the intentional stance as formulated
by philosophers and as cared about by philosophers. The book is
certainly of interest to all cognitive scientists, because it is a
substantial contribution to a central problem of their science.
But those cognitive scientists whose base is not in philosophy -
those of us from cognitive psychology, psycholinguistics, ar-
tificial intelligence, linguistics, and cognitive anthropology -
must ourselves still translate the issue of intentionality and its
proposed solution into what it means for cognitive science. I
520
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1988) 11:3

Commentary/ Dennett: The intentional stance
don't want to tax Dennett with this especially. It is a regret, not a
criticism. If I consider the books in which I myself have partici-
pated, they seem on reflection to be subject to the same
judgment. But it does stand as evidence of what a short way we
have come that so few of the books that belong on that mythical
short list for cognitive science - and I count The Intentional
Stance as one - are still so much grounded in their own
disciplinary fields.
I do not wish to pursue the issue of potential recentering and
what it might mean. Perhaps it will be right for some other
occasion. Instead, I want to pursue a narrower question, one to
which I really want an answer.
At about the time that Brainstorms was published, I dis-
cussed a construct that I called the knowledge level (Newell
1982). I did this in the context of a AAAI presidential address, as
part of my general view that computer science and AI, by their
practice, have homed in on essentially correct notions of several
central concepts in cognitive science, in particular symbols
(Newell & Simon 1976; Newell 1980) and knowledge (Newell
1982; Newell 1986), but perhaps others as well, such as the
architecture. Before I finished preparing that address, I found
and read Brainstorms. It was instantly clear that the knowledge
level and the intentional stance are fundamentally the same, and
I indicated as much in the talk. Dennett's assessment seems to
agree (Dennett 1986a). Thus, there is no question about the
basic relationship between the two; they are formulations of the
same solution.
My question concerns the details. Dennett continues to
pursue the intentional stance, but the "knowledge level" plays
no role in The Intentional Stance. Equally, I continue to pursue
the knowledge level, but the "intentional stance" plays no role
in my own efforts (Newell 1987). Potential explanations for this
exist on both the personal and the social level. Indeed, given the
broad use of "intentionality' (an old term) within the philosophy
community, and the modest use of "knowledge level" (a new
term) within the artificial intelligence (AI) community, our
separatist tendencies might serve to illustrate the discipline-
centric state of cognitive science, noted above. However, before
I let myself be satisfied with such externalist characterizations, I
want to explore whether reasons of substance might play a role.
I believe there remains a real difference between the "inten-
tional stance" and the "knowledge level" (using quotes to
indicate that what is under scrutiny is our respective under-
standings and intentions). My general question to Dennett is
whether he believes there is a difference and what he takes this
difference to be. I will try to indicate some dimensions along
which I think differences might lie, but I have no stake in laying
on a particular view of these differences. I would be happy for
Dennett to address this issue in whatever terms strike him as
appropriate.
Here is the knowledge level in a nutshell. It is a level in a
systems hierarchy. For current computer technology, this hier-
archy starts with electron physics devices and works up through
electrical circuit and logic levels to the register-transfer level,
whence to the symbol (or program) level and finally (at the top)
the knowledge level. (The lower part of the hierarchy is different
for biological systems.) Each level consists of primitive systems
with inputs and outputs, which can be interconnected to com-
prise larger systems, also with inputs and outputs. Each level
has a medium, which is processed by the systems and which
flows between them via the interconnections. The systems
operate according to fixed laws in terms of their constitution and
the medium they contain and receive via their inputs. The levels
form a hierarchy, with the entities at one level realized by
systems at the next lower level. It is always the same system,
under different descriptions. I take all this to be sufficiently
familiar that we can skip the details and complexities.
The focus here is the knowledge level. Knowledge is the
medium. Each primitive system consists of a body of knowl-
edge, including knowledge of the system's goals. If knowledge is
input at some time, then it becomes a permanent part of the
body of knowledge of the system. The law of behavior is that
each system acts (within its physical constraints) to use its
knowledge to attain its goals (a simple form of rationality).
Primitive knowledge-level systems and their interconnections
are realized by symbol-level systems.
Much more can be said. Much of it can be learned by reading
Dennett's book, after observing the apparent equivalence of a
knowledge-level system and a system seen from the intentional
stance. Let me suppose this has been done, and move toward
raising some possible contrasts.
First is the matter of stance versus system. These are ob-
viously different aspects of situations where analysts, who take
stances, describe parts of reality as systems of various types. The
interesting question for me is why Dennett chooses to use
stance rather than system, in analyzing these situations. In other
sciences we do not talk of the physicist's stance when he deals
with reality as a collection of atoms. We could, of course, and it is
sometimes appropriate. But we tend to focus on whether the
theory of atomic structure is a correct theory and what the
evidence says, and take it for granted that anyone who wants to
use atomic theory will obviously take the atomic-theoratic
stance. Using the knowledge level corresponds, in my view, to
using atomic theory (or any other scheme for describing parts of
reality as systems). Why is it the right thing to focus on the
stance of the analyst? Is there something special about the
knowledge level that makes it something that is more in the
head of the analyst than atomic physics is in the head of the
physicist?
Second is the matter of folk psychology. There may be a
substantive difference here. Let me accept the notion of folk
psychology, although it seems to me problematic, more so than
folk medicine or folk botany. For instance, I know of no em-
pirical research that actually establishes for a particular folk what
their folk psychology is. Throughout the book, Dennett often
speaks as if the potentional stance explicates folk psychology. I
believe the knowledge level accounts for part of folk psychology,
namely, where some folk predict, explain, and describe the
behavior of other folk by viewing them as having knowledge and
goals and behaving accordingly, as set out in Dennett's book.
But I believe there is lots more to folk psychology. For instance,
some folk view others as having limited memories and being
forgetful, of being quick or slow in their thinking, and so on.
These are all views of the folk as processors of information.
Other parts of folk psychology do not even seem to be informa-
tional, such as people being phlegmatic, melancholy, sanguine,
or bilious, although these notions also lend themselves to
predicting and explaining behavior. Neither of these two types
of notions are part of the knowledge level. The knowledge level
is a systems level of a specific sort, analogous to the logic level or
the neural-circuit level. So I am actually confused about what
Dennett wants the intentional stance to cover. I think it makes
quite a difference to what the concept ends up meaning.
Third is the matter of mystery. Here I need to start with the
knowledge level, where I think I am clear. The knowledge level
is just another system level. It has no special status, philosophi-
cally, scientifically, epistemologically, methodologically, or
whatever, compared to the atomic level, the electrical circuit
level, the symbol level, or any other scheme for describing a
part of reality as a system. All such descriptive schemes are
unique. The circuit level posits things called resistors, capaci-
tors, wires, Kirchoffs laws, etc.; no other level posits these
particular things, which therefore makes the circuit level what it
is. But nothing special is going on. Every other level is likewise
unique. When I turn to the intentional stance, it is difficult for
me to state what the alternative might be. But I get the feeling
that the semantic relation, or intentionality in the sense of
Brentano, or something else, is still felt to make the intentional
stance special. As if there were still some mystery. Thus, I need
to be educated here.
Fourth is the matter of technical development. I ended my
knowledge-level talk (Newell 1982) by asserting that the knowl-
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1988) 11:3
521

Commentary /Dennett: The intentional stance
edge level would become more than just engineering know-how
in AI and computer science only if the concept were developed
technically. Indeed, one motivation for the talk was to help
launch AI and computer science along this road. In my view,
what I had provided (at best) was the direction of a vector,
without any magnitude to speak of. Since then, although some
people have found it useful to talk in terms of the knowledge
level, there has still been only a little technical development of
the concept. The two most important have been by Hector
Levesque (1984) and Tom Dietterich (1986), although we have
contributed a bit ourselves (Rosenbloom et al. 1987). The talk is
only a modest advance, since after all our practice has been
essentially on the mark all these years. There has been a
flourishing development within AI in logic and knowledge
representation, which bears on many aspects of the knowledge
level. However, in my own view it does not serve directly to
produce the technical developments that are needed. Still,
despite only slow progress, I think I see a quickening on the part
of the AI technical community. Turning to the intentional
stance, I see increased conceptual clarity over the years, which
is well in evidence in Dennett's book. But I see no technical
development at all, nor even detect any desire for there to be
any. The two scientists I mentioned above, Levesque and
Dietterich, are neither cited nor discussed in the book. Since
the book is more than adequately scholarly, the inference I draw
is that there is either no interest in such technical development
or (what seems more likely) the intentional stance is viewed as
something that does not lend itself to technical development.
This is probably the biggest puzzlement of all for me. How can
this be? If science teaches us any meta-lesson, it is that without
the development of technique there is ultimately no progress,
only writing and talk. I really need enlightenment.
Fifth is the matter of propositional attitudes. I believe I know
what these are. I also think I understand the historical role they
have played in philosophy in defining the issue of intentionality.
I also intuit that they are, in a sense, proprietary - they are
philosophy's very own phenomena. But they seem to me much
too vague to be the central defining data for solidifying the
intentional stance. They are lousy as primitive data, because
they themselves evoke no clear behavior except in the simplest
cases. It seems like trying to take the base data for clinical
psychology as being anxious, paranoid, manic, and depressed.
Certainly any theory of mental derangements needs ultimately
to explain these. But must it thereby take them as paradigmatic
and the starting place? That is what I observe the book doing,
just as so much of the philosophical literature does. Will this
central role of the propositional attitudes go on forever? Is it a
good thing? What will emancipate philosophy? I have provided
no contrast with the knowledge level here, because I see no
corresponding problem (though, as always, I could be blind).
Sixth is the matter of the cognitive science interest. I acknowl-
edge that my focus is on understanding the mind scientifically,
although with a side interest in intelligent systems for practical
purposes. Thus I see the knowledge level as a central construct
for understanding intelligent systems, to be used in concert with
lower-level descriptions, especially the symbol level, but also
(for humans) the neural level. I see the knowledge level as part
of a comprehensive theoretical apparatus for cognitive science.
How does Dennett see the intentional stance? The same way
(i.e., as a construct for theoretical cognitive science)? Does this
imply that it is a living question whether the intentional stance
or the knowledge level will play the role? Or is it Dennett's view
that there is room for both? If so, will they occupy functionally
separate niches? Perhaps one is for philosophy and the other for
cognitive science - or perhaps the other is for AI and neither is
for cognitive science! I admit, most of these alternatives seem
odd to me.
Lots of questions. But since Dennett has just written a whole
book on the topic and since I could not, in fact, get the answers
to these questions out of the book, I thought I'd ask. Thank you.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This research was supported by the Information Sciences Division of the
Office of Naval Research under Contract N00014-K-0678. Reproduction
in whole or in part is permitted for any purpose of the United States
government. Approved for public release; distribution unlimited.
Intentionality: How to tell Mae West from a
crocodile
David Premack
Department of Psychology, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pa.
19104-61
Mae West: You are the world's oldest living PS.
Crocodile: PS?
MW: Phallic symbol.
C: And you are the world s oldest nonliving SS (sex symbol).
MW: We are an ancient pair.
Crocodile: What are you doing!!?
Mae: I'm assuming the intentional stance.
C: For me?
Mae: Right.
C: Really?
MW: No . . . pretend.
The expectations with which one opens Dennett's The Inten-
tional Stance are not foiled. The clarity one associates with
Dennett - language that befriends the reader - becomes, as one
proceeds, philosophy which, though written for the philoso-
pher, can be understood by the nonphilosopher. Parts of the
book are of special value for the psychologist - 'Beyond Belief
and "Styles of Mental Representation " are particular favorites of
mine - and I recommend them highly. Dennett is at his best
when pointing up difficulties. He wonders, for instance,
whether psychologists have not assumed that in propositional
attitudes they had a neat little system (roughly akin to predicate
logic) that they could "plug in" as needed. He then suggests that
"Beyond Belief is a "demolitionary tour' that should leave the
psychologist who made this assumption gasping; I not only
gasped but also wriggled. As informative as are his guided tours
of difficulties in rival positions, for example Fodor's (1975)
language of thought, he is less successful in formulating a
position of his own, one that evades the difficulties he describes
for others. Is this any wonder? Consider the problems that must
be solved: mental representation and intentionality! When a
position is formulated that does solve these problems, cognitive
science will be challenging physics, and epistemology will be
not merely naturalized, but the first naturalized president of the
ball!
The "intentional stance, ' as readers will quickly see, is a
strategy one adopts to explain and predict the behavior of
others. One attributes beliefs, desires, and the like to the entity
in question and then computes what it would be rational for such
an entity to do given that it held these beliefs and desires. Any
entity toward which one adopts this stance is an "intentional
system." These systems are not in short supply for, according to
Dennett, people are hardly squeamish about taking this stance,
cockroaches and thermostats being among the entities with
respect to which they take it.
Upon reading of this profligate disposition one asks, Is there
not some pretending going on here? Aren't people serious in
some cases, not so serious in others? To say of an onion kept in
the dark that it sprouts because it thinks it's in the ground, and
so on, is surely but a manner of speaking! On the contrary, says
Dennett, who is to be congratulated for not mincing his opera-
tionism, some intentional systems are not more real than others.
Frogs do not have unreal beliefs while people have real ones for,
"if truth be known, there are no real beliefs. "In other words, it's
all pretend: The beliefs attributed to a human are no less a
522
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1988) 11:3

Commentary/ Dennett: The intentional stance
computational device (an abstractum) than are those attributed
to a frog. Among the virtues that may recommend Dennett's
position to some is its frankness, its almost primitive honesty.
It is, however, an instructive matter, and a reasonably
straightforward one, to distinguish real intentional systems from
not so real ones, that is, to tell Mae West from a crocodile, and in
the rest of this commentary I shall do just that. What is instruc-
tive about attempting to clarify this distinction goes beyond
doing justice to intentionality, though that is no minor point. In
the long run, to clarify this distinction is to work toward a theory
of intelligence, of differential intelligence, a theory that will
permit contrasting the human mind with lesser or different
minds.
Given the extraordinary thinness of my knowledge of the
history of philosophy, I naturally make this charge with the
utmost trepidation. Nevertheless, it is my impression that
philosophy of mind has been exceedingly noncomparative, that
it has entertained only one model of mind, naturally the human
one, and on top of that (rather than developing different models
for different species) has been astonishingly generous in hand-
ing over the human mind to other species, in particular species
with which philosophers have a layman's familiarity, dogs, cats,
and the like. Is Descartes an exception to this claim? If he
appears to be, appearance is deceptive, for he admitted only one
mind, the human one; to all nonhumans he gave no mind at all.
But we can distinguish among kinds of minds.
Three grounds on which to distinguish real Intentional systems
from ones that are not so real. First, it is indeed a characteristic
of people to attribute states of mind - belief, desire, and the like
- to others; but it is not a characteristic of frogs or crocodiles.
One can immediately distinguish humans from most non-
humans on just these grounds. All humans seek to understand
others by attributing states of mind to them; but most non-
humans do not. Where exactly the division falls (e:g., Do apes
have a theory of mind? [Premack & Woodruff 1978; Premack
1988]) is a lively question, under experimental and theoretical
attack. But we need not know the exact answer to this question
to recognize that Dennett's question - What system does the
human use in explaining the human, in explaining the frog, and
aren't these the same system? - is not particularly informative.
One should ask instead, What system does the frog use in
explaining others, and how does this compare with the system
the human uses? Dennetts question leads to a kind of fuzzy
reply (from which one might easily concoct the kind of distinc-
tion-blurring operationism that Dennett proposes); my question
leads to a distinctly sharper answer.
Second, although laymen may attribute states of mind (take
the intentional stance) with respect to frogs, crocodiles, and the
like, they are in considerable measure mistaken in doing so.
Technical tests will show that at least some of these creatures are
not intentional systems. (Thus, at least some creatures are
entirely free of intentionality: they neither instantiate nor at-
tribute it.)
Third, crocodiles and frogs instantiate some of the informa-
tional states of people, but not all of them. For instance,
crocodiles perceive and engage in certain kinds of learning
(largely classical conditioning) and therefore instantiate the
informational states to which these processes lead. Since people
too perceive and engage in classical conditioning, they share
with the crocodile the elementary informational states to which
these processes lead; but people have additional informational
states produced by kinds of central processing that are highly
unlikely to be found in the crocodile. Accounting for the dif-
ferences in the informational states of the various species is a
major challenge to, and responsibility of, any theory of intel-
ligence. To say that the beliefs of frogs and people do not differ,
that they are both unreal, is not merely dubious ontology; it is
bad operationism. A proper operational analysis will show prin-
cipled differences between the informational states that pass for
beliefs in people and in frogs.
I should like now to expand at length on each of these points,
so as to show how even the sketch we presently have of a
differential theory of intelligence will enable one to distinguish
real intentional systems from not so real ones. But, hobbled by
space restrictions, I'll skip the first point altogether - with
regret, for we now have instructive new data on whether apes
have a theory of mind (Premack 1988) - and consider only the
last two. Consider, then, the inability of some species to pass a
technical test for intentionality.
In looking at this point, it is of interest to contemplate
Dennett's curiosity about commonsense and folk psychology.
He wonders when the hold of commonsense will finally be
broken. When will we see that folk psychology is no more an
accurate account of the animal world than is folk physics of the
inanimate world. We are all waiting, of course, for devices that
go beyond belief and desire, quarks of the mind as it were,
devices proving that psychology may yet achieve some of the
imaginative sizzle of physics (may it be so!). In the meantime,
however, while keeping an ear cocked for the sizzle, we should
not forget that psychology has already broken free of inten-
tionality (and commonsense), albeit in the opposite direction.
That is, we have found systems which, though noncommonsen-
sical, are not supra-intentional; rather, they are subintentional.
What is meant by subintentional system is nicely illustrated
by the "omission schedule." Some years ago, Brown and Jenkins
(1968) found that if a light were shone each time the food hopper
was opened in a Skinner box, the untrained pigeon would soon
learn to go to the light and peck vigorously at it. Naturally, it was
assumed that this peculiar though robust behavior could be
given an intentional interpretation, for example, "the pigeon
thinks that pecking the light causes the food hopper to open."
Something to that effect is what a layman might say, and while
animal psychologists do not permit themselves so open an
intentional idiom, the content of instrumental learning accounts
is hardly any less intentional. Classical or Pavlovian condition-
ing, on the other hand, has always resisted the intentional
account, substituting for it an account that is strictly associa-
tionistic. Which account is correct? Did the animal peck be-
cause it believed in the causal efficacy of its behavior; or rather
was there neither belief nor reward of this belief, but simply
behavior produced and maintained by certain associations? A
simple test served to distinguish the two accounts. Each time
the bird pecked the light, food was withheld (hence "omission
schedule"). The results were a surprise both to the official and
unofficial versions of intentionality. Though denied food when it
pecked the light, the bird continued to peck (the long-term
results were a bit more complex though this simplification will
do for our purposes; Williams & Williams 1969).
In the case of pigeons (rats and other mammalian species in
which this outcome has since been shown), this subintentional
form of learning is found alongside other forms for which an
intentional or instrumental learning account can be defended.
In more primitive creatures, however, it is possible that we will
find only the subintentional form of learning. For example,
although classical conditioning has been demonstrated in Ap-
lysia, instrumental learning has not.
Consider the third point, that informational states covary with
intelligence, for example, what passes for belief in humans and
in frogs is not the same. Here one example will have to serve for
many. Belief is not a completely unitary state; in the simplest of
its several forms, belief concerns the reliability of sensory states;
it is a judgment on that reliability. Ordinarily, sensory states
lead directly to action. But once a species achieves sufficient
intelligence it discovers that its own sensory states are not
infallible. At this stage of development, rather than acting
directly on each and every sensory state, it calls some of them
into question. "Do I really see X?" "Do I really want Y?" "Are
my expectations of G well founded?" (see, want, and expect
being chosen deliberately as examples of relatively simple
informational states that are found widely). The discovery that
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1988) 11:3
523

Commentary /Dennett: The intentional stance
one's own sensory states are subject to unreliability is likely to
have a social parallel: The information communicated by a
second party is subject to unreliability. Both cases can have the
same outcome: Action to which the sensory state would nor-
mally lead is suspended, and the state itself is examined in the
light of available evidence.
Have any nonhuman species reached a stage of development
that rather than act directly on the information given them, they
sometimes "call into question" the information itself? For most
nonhumans the answer is "no." Bees, for instance, do not
debate the reliability of the information encoded in the dances of
their conspecifics, distinguishing dancers they believe from
those they doubt. Bees do not occupy this boat alone; they have
the company of frogs, crocodiles, most nonhuman species. What
is the point? We cannot, as Dennett recommends, lump to-
gether the beliefs of frogs and people on the grounds that
neither are real. Real schmeal is not entirely the issue, (i) Belief,
on any proper analysis, is not a state we find in frogs; (ii) belief as
an examination of sensory evidence, culminating in a confidence
rating, which then becomes the warrant for action, is not a
computational device (an abstractum); it is a real process - as
real, at least, as any mental process - subject to the several kinds
of experimental inquiry to which real processes are subject.
Multiple levels of control. In failing to distinguish intentional
and subintentional systems, Dennett makes no provision for
multiple levels of control - the fact that in higher organisms, acts
are controlled on several levels - and this same error reappears
in his '"Panglossian Paradigm' Defended", where levels of
intentionality are presented as mutually exclusive. No doubt,
presenting them in this fashion adds to the drama, and may even
be good pedagogy; but if so, the skillful pedagogy is regrettable
for the lesson that it teaches is wrong. In higher creatures, acts
are controlled on many levels; only in primitive forms - thor-
oughgoing subintentional systems, if there are such - is behav-
ior controlled on only one level. Here, too, one example will
have to do the work of many.
Young chimpanzees, in an experiment concerned with the
development of deception, surprised everyone by spon-
taneously developing pointing, an act which chimpanzees do
not carry out in the wild (Woodruff & Premack 1979). Though
the act of pointing was not shaped or trained in any fashion, it
replaced all the more reflexive reactions - looking, orienting,
rocking, freezing - which had been the original forms of re-
sponse. Now, rather than, say, rock nervously when the baited
container was approached by the trainer, the animal pointed to
the baited container, in this way directing the good trainer to the
right container (who then shared the food with the chimpanzee).
When the bad trainer replaced the good one, the animals
withheld their pointing (the bad trainer kept the food for
himself), though one animal went further, pointing for both
trainers, to the right container for the good trainer, the wrong
container for the bad one. In this way and others, the animals
appeared to use pointing as humans do, as an act of intentional
social communication. Is this interpretation correct? To find out
we made a small change.
We took away the trainers, leaving nothing before the animal
but the two containers (one which it knew to be baited and one
which it knew to be empty). They still pointed! Despite the
absence of an audience, each animal in turn stuck out its arm or
leg (apes use them interchangeably) in the direction of the
baited container. Does this not prove that the act only looked
like social pointing; that actually it was nothing but a condi-
tioned response?
Let us answer by doing the same study with a human adult.
Now, when we remove the audience, the human will not point -
I've not done the experiment, but I think we can be confident of
this prediction. Suppose, however, we measure the action
potential in the human adult's arm; I suspect we will find an
electrical discharge characteristic of extension or pointing. Ape
and human will differ when the audience is removed only in that
what the ape does overtly the human will do covertly; suppres-
sion is more successful in the human.
Both species point - the one overtly, the other covertly -
because pointing is not only an expression of intentional social
communication; it is also a conditioned response (these are not
mutually exclusive alternatives); and even though the audience
is gone, as long as enough of the original training environment
remains, the conditioned response will continue to occur.
Rationality. For Dennett, the notion of rationality is central;
he distinguishes his position from that of, for example, Stich
(1978), for whom intentionality hinges not on assigning beliefs
and desires that it would be rational to have in the circumstance,
but simply beliefs and desires that you yourself would have in
the circumstance. To decide between these alternatives - in-
deed, to decide whether they are alternatives - we must first
decide what is meant by rational.
We can divide rationality into two components, the first
concerning the values to be assigned various options. For
example, which is the better way to exit a building: stairs,
elevator, or jumping out the window? But rationality does not
consist simply in knowledge. The young child who does not
appreciate that earthquakes incapacitate elevators is ignorant
not irrational. To be rational the child must know the, let us say,
simple cases and: (i) assign the right values to the options and (ii)
always choose the option to which he assigns the higher value.
A more demanding component deals not with evaluation but
with identification. One looks into a field and decides whether
the crop is wheat or rice, whether the object is a car or an
elephant, etc. Here, too, the issue is not amount of knowledge
but, given minimal knowledge, whether proper use is made of
the knowledge. If the child knows that rice cannot grow without
water, openly declares that there is no water, and yet decides
that the crop is rice, he fails; he is not rational.
The question we must answer, of course, is not merely
whether children are themselves rational, but whether they
recognize rationality and attribute it to others. Moreover, chil-
dren no older than four must fulfill this condition. For by this
age, children pass the highly demanding "false belief paradigm
(Wimmer & Perner 1985), incontrovertibly assigning states of
mind to others. Even 3£-year-old children (and apes as well) pass
some tests of social attribution, tests weaker than that of "false
belief," but defensible tests nonetheless (Premack 1988); so they
too must meet the condition, that is, recognize rationality and
attribute it to others.
In one sense, Dennett would appear to be right: Children do
reach a stage at which they consider "funny" those individuals
who grossly violate normal canons of rationality. But shall we
consider possession and attribution of a concept of rationality a
prerequisite for attributing states of mind to another individual?
I suspect, on the contrary, that well before children (and apes)
attribute rationality, they attribute more immediately ap-
prehendible states, such as belief and desire. In other words,
the original states with which children begin the business of
attribution - beliefs and desires - are the beliefs and desires
they would have under the same circumstances; similarily, the
rationality they get around to attributing at a later stage is the
rationality they would themselves have under the same
circumstances.
'Theory of mind" or training effect? Each time Dennett dis-
cusses certain experiments of mine, he repeats the same mis-
take; it would be uncharitable of me not to correct him at this
time and spare him further error. In discussing my work (with
Woodruff), Dennett urges that we swap experiments for anec-
dotes to escape the problem that
has bedeviled Premack and Woodruff(1978) . . . in their attempts to
demonstrate that chimps "have a theory of mind'; their . . . efforts to
force [emphasis mine] their chimps into . . . behavior that manifests
the intelligence they believe them to have engenders the frustrating
side effect of providing prolonged training histories for the behav-
iorists to point to in developing their rival. . . hypotheses as putative
explanations of the observed behavior. (Stance, p. 250)
524
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1988) 11:3

Commentary/Dennett: The intentional stance
These comments are, in view of the experiment indicated,
"strange" - how strange I can best indicate by sketching the
experiment.
Briefly, then, here is an account of the "forcing" to which
Dennett refers, first in the pretraining that may be deemed
relevant to the experiment, and then in the experiment itself.
The animal was taught match-to-sample as an infant, that is, she
was forced to accept the opportunity of matching one object with
another. Next, when she was a juvenile, a TV monitor was
installed in her home cage and she was forced to accept the
opportunity of turning the set on and off. Finally, in the experi-
ment itself she was shown videotapes of a human actor in the
throes of different problems (e.g., jumping up and down to
obtain bananas overhead), and then given photographic alter-
natives, one of which constituted a solution to the problem (e.g.,
the actor stepping up onto a chair). Here, too, the animal was
forced to accept the opportunity of choosing between the
alternatives.
Because the animal chose the correct alternative on the first
trial in nearly every case, we can rule out that she learned to do
this by trial and error. We can also observe that for an individual
to consistently choose "solutions," it must, given certain con-
trols, first detect "problems," and that a creditable interpreta-
tion of "problem" lies exactly in the states of mind that the
individual attributes to the actor. Knowing the history of the
animal's behavior, as we do in the case of an experiment, we are
in a position to identify its probable cause. This is what we
cannot do in the case of anecdotes. For instance, adult chim-
panzees are reported to respond differently to the food calls of
young and old conspecifics. When approaching a tree to which
they are led by the calls of an adult, they climb directly up; but
when led by the calls of the young, they pause, inspecting the
tree for themselves before ascending. What is the origin of this
interesting difference? Did the adult say to itself "youngsters
are unreliable, I'd better have a look for myself? Or did the
animal simply experience a number of good outcomes with older
animals, not so good with younger, and on the basis of this
differential experience, respond as it does? From anecdotal
observations of the kind Dennett recommends, we cannot
decide. In recommending field observations over experiments,
Dennett has it exactly turned around.
How to build a mind
H. L. Roitblat
Department of Psychology, University of Hawaii at Manoa, Honolulu,
Hawaii 96822
Two issues that Dennett raises in his book are the strategic issue
- what approach should we adopt to understanding behavior? -
and the representational issue - how does one build an intel-
ligent mind out of stupid, mindless elements? These two issues
are interrelated, but they are not identical. Presumably, the
strategic answer is to adopt the stance that maximizes our ability
to discover and interpret what is important in behavior. The
second issue is much more central to the success of cognitive
science, and its resolution will aid greatly in handling the first
because it will tell us (i.e., it will be a theory of) what is
important.
Issues parallel to these have been tackled in comparative
psychology and a brief reminder of this history may be instruc-
tive (see Roitblat 1987; Roitblat & Herman, in press, for more
details). Based on Darwin's (1874) conjectures about the con-
tinuity of mental life, various groups of comparative psychol-
ogists sought to develop a "cognitive evolutionary tree." At first,
the issue concerned whether investigations of animal minds
could support Darwin's thesis. As the doctrine of evolution by
natural selection became more firmly established, the focus
switched to attempts to discover where in evolution the mind
first appeared, where to draw the line between those animals
that had minds and those that did not. Three camps can be
discerned: Romanes (1863), Jennings (1906), and other so-called
vitalists (those advocating that behavior is in part self-deter-
mined rather than solely mechanistically determined) argued
for a separation "far down the evolutionary scale,' suggesting in
essence that all animals had minds. Loeb, Sechenov, and other
so-called mechanists, on the other hand, placed the separation
"at a higher level." They suggested that few animals, if any, had
any mental functioning. Some, such as Sechenov (1863), took an
extreme mechanistic position, arguing that human cognition
was an artifact, not causally related to behavior at all. Rather,
consciousness or awareness was nothing more than the reflexive
activity of the brain in response to often minute environmental
stimuli. In between these two camps was a compromise position
articulated by Morgan (1894). Although his canon (interpret
behavior as the product of high-level mechanisms only if it
cannot be explained by low-level mechanisms) is often in-
terpreted as a call-to-arms for the mechanistic position, in fact,
Morgan argued for a compromise between the vitalist and
mechanist positions (see Roitblat 1987). Morgan freely at-
tributed consciousness to his animal subjects because he be-
lieved that the modification of behavior by experience was
impossible without consciousness of the behavior and of its
consequences (Morgan 1894).
These three positions in the history of comparative psychol-
ogy correspond to three reductionist positions in current cog-
nitive science. The first position has few strong advocates, so far
as I am aware, at least among academics. It is strongly antireduc-
tionist. Mind cannot be reduced to mindless elements because
either there are no mindless elements (e. g., a vitalist monism) or
because mind is separate fom anything we might think of as
elements (e.g., a dualist position that the mind is separate from
the brain). Other less radical antireductionist positions are
certainly possible. The second position, corresponding to the
mechanists, has many strong advocates (e.g., Churchland 1986;
in press). According to this position, there may be no such thing
as a mind. The position calls for eliminative reduction of cog-
nitive science to neuroscience. The categories that appear to
demand the use of intentional or even cognitive terms are mere
category errors, like phlogiston, to be replaced by appropriate
neurobiological categories. Dennett seems to play the role of
Morgan in advocating a compromise position. As I understand
his intentional stance, he argues that there may be occasional
benefits from relaxing our standards of parsimony and attempt-
ing to interpret an animal's behavior in the context of its possible
intentions rather than in terms of mechanical responses to
stimulation. Simply put, there may be benefits in analysis of
animal behavior from erring in the direction of attributing too
much intelligence to animals rather than in the direction of
attributing too much stupidity (cf. Bever 1984).
I would like to offer a fourth alternative strategy that holds the
possibility of resolving both the strategic and the representa-
tional issue (see Roitblat, in preparation, for more details).
According to the hierarchical cognitive action theory, (see also
Gallistel 1980; Norman 1981), the mind consists of hier-
archically organized networks of highly interconnected units.
Levels in the hierarchy correspond roughly to levels of abstrac-
tion. Nodes at the lowest level directly control patterns of
muscular and neuroendocrine activity. Nodes at somewhat
higher levels represent abstractions of these actions. Nodes at
the highest levels represent intentions, thoughts, expectancies,
goals, and motivations. For example, a node at one level may
represent the action of raising a fork from a plate. A node at this
level does not specify which of the various muscles will move or
the specific pattern in which they will move;1 these variables are
specified by lower level nodes that are influenced by this node.
Nodes at a still higher level may represent the action of taking
food from a plate. There are many ways that food can be moved
from plate to lips; using a fork, using a spoon, lifting the plate,
and so on. Again, the particulars are left to the power levels. A
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1988) 11:3 
525

Commentary/Dennett. The intentional stance
node at a still higher level might represent a motivation to obtain
food. When this node is active it may influence a whole host of
lower level nodes, including, perhaps, one that represents
going to a restaurant, one that represents preparing dinner, or
one that represents moving toward the kitchen.
To say that a node represents an action means that there is a
correspondence between the activation of this node and the
performance of a certain action. The node controls the action by
influencing the activation of nodes lower in the hierarchy that
are increasingly specific about the behavioral form of that action.
This system resolves the reductionist dilemma (how intel-
ligent behavior can come from stupid elements) by proposing
that elements higher in the network gain their intelligence
through their flexible control of lower elements in the network.
Intelligence, creativity, and even productivity can emerge from
this network because the higher levels represent increasingly
abstract representations of the action. The particular form the
action will take when it is performed is the product of influences
from higher-level nodes and from the environment. Because the
modes can all be constructed from structured collections of
neurons, they are computational and physically realizable. They
require no mysterious components, homunculi, or executives to
operate. They are cooperative (under coordinating control) and
competitive.
These hierarchical networks also suggest a means by which
elements with only syntax can represent semantics. Dennett
hints at part of this solution. He argues that brain/mind ele-
ments represent semantics by virtue of the correspondence
between environmental events and computational elements. It
happens that there is a regular, reliable relationship between
certain neural patterns and certain external environmental
events. One can caricature this position as the "meaning by
reference" position. Brain/mind elements define a set of mean-
ing elements ostensively by reference to external states. Mean-
ing-by-reference is surely part of the solution to the problem of
semantics, but not the whole solution. Dennett also argues that
the mind takes short-cuts or emulates meaning. It seems to me
that this is only a hint at the solution to the problem, because if
the mind cannot actually have meaning but can only emulate it,
then there is no meaning to be had. The concept of meaning is
thereby rendered meaningless. The hint is translated into a
solution by sacrificing certainty. The nonjustificational approach
(e.g., Lakatos 1970) to science can equally well be applied to
meaning and the mind. The nonjustificational approach to
science abandons certainty as a criterion for knowledge. One
can have knowledge without a guarantee that the knowledge is
infallibly correct. Similarly, one can have meaning without a
guarantee that the meaning is infallibly correct. Just as theories
transcend data (e.g., in being universal extensions of limited
experience), so meaning can transcend reference, once one
abandons the criterion of certainty. According to this view, the
brain does not emulate meaning in syntax; it builds in the
connections and nodes of the network fallible theories of mean-
ing. These theories are constrained by the biology of the orga-
nism (including the correspondence between environmental
and neural events) and by regularities in experience.
NOTE
1. These variables are controlled by such factors as the weight, size,
and viscosity of the food (see McClelland et al. 1986).
Will the argument for abstracta please stand
up?
Alexander Rosenberg
Department of Philosophy, University of California, Riverside, Calif. 92521
The Intentional Stance (hereafter Stance) offers a meth-
odological prescription, an imperative which dictates how folk
psychology ought to be interpreted. It is a matter of indifference
to Dennett what the actual interpretation of the theory in
everyday life comes to. He says clearly that the variables of folk
psychology ought to be treated as abstracta, calculating devices
that are part of the best, most rational story that can be told
about behavior. Since this dictum is not a categorical imper-
ative, Dennett needs to identify some distinctive end which is
attainable (only?) by treating intentional states as abstracta. At
least, it must be an end that cannot be served by treating desires
and beliefs as illata.
This requirement seems to rule out one argument that Den-
nett advances: Desires and beliefs are best viewed as valuable
abstracta because they are indispensable for making the best
and most precise predictions about behavior. But this is just as
good an argument for treating them as illata, on a par with the
theoretical entities of physics. Moreover, the claim that folk
psychology is a successful predictive device is controversial;
indeed in the past Dennett has explicitly denied it such powers:
"The intentional level of explanation can itself have no predic-
tive capacity" (Dennett 1969, pp. 85f). Compare Stance, p. 79:
"I have always stressed the actual predictive power of the pure
intentional stance." The well-known limitations on the predic-
tive power of folk psychology are in fact good grounds for
treating its explanatory variables as illata in a "degenerating
research program," and, following eliminative materialists,
deny their existence altogether. Avoiding this conclusion is a
motive for treating such states as abstracta, but not a reason.
The only other argument Dennett advances to show that
desire, belief, and the like should be treated as abstracta turns
on the role intentional psychology is to play with respect to
subpersonal cognitive psychology: It is the task of the latter
theory to provide models of "pattern recognition or stimulus
generalization, concept learning, expectation, learning, goal-
directed behavior, problem-solving - that. . . produce a sim-
ulacrum of genuine content-sensitivity. . . . It is here (at the
subpersonal level) that we will find our good theoretical entities,
our useful illata (p. 63)." A subpersonal cognitive theory that
ignores the guidance of the intentional stance abandons psychol-
ogy in favor of "abstract neurophysiology - pure internal syntax"
(p. 64). It is unable to explain "the reliability with which
'intelligent' organisms can cope with their environments and
thus prolong their lives (p. 64)."
But this too is an argument that does not discriminate be-
tween treating intentional states as illata and abstracta. What is
more, the argument does not show we need to take desires and
beliefs seriously either as abstracta or illata, if our aim is a
science that explains how organisms cope with their environ-
ments "intelligently." To see this we need only refer to the
analysis of "neural content" that Dennett provided in Content
and Consciousness (Dennett 1969), and that Bennett un-
knowningly updated in Linguistic Behavior (Bennett 1976).
Such a theory substitutes extensional "registrations" for in-
tentional beliefs, where "registration" is defined as "a the-
oretical term, standing for whatever it is about an organism
which validates predictions of its behavior from facts about its
environment" (Bennett 1976, p. 52), given its biologically iden-
tifiable goals and needs. In Dennett's version of the theory, we
can read content into neural states and processes by identifying
their "environmental appropriateness." The content of a neural
state is given by the appropriateness of the behavior it causes to
the environmental facts that produce the neural process. Den-
nett says, speaking metaphorically, that the environmentally
appropriate behavior gives the meaning of the neural state and
the environmental facts that cause it give its reference (Dennett
1969, p. 76). But this is only metaphor used for reasons neither
Dennett nor Bennett recognized.
The content of a neural state, and what an organism registers,
turn out to be describable in terms that permit free substitution
of coreferring terms and co-extensive predicates. On Dennett
and Bennett's account of content, we cannot discriminate be-
tween logically equivalent statements describing the content of
526
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1988) 11:3

Commentary /Dennett: The intentional stance
a neural state or a registration. To use Dennett's own example
(Dennett 1969, pp. 85), when Fido lunges at a piece of steak, we
cannot say exactly what the content of his neural states is, and
the content we attribute to him is transparent for substitutions:
He registers the presence of a piece of beef, butchered animal
part, high-protein nutrition, hemoglobin rich material, and so
on. But he does not recognize the steak as any one of these, and
there is no term in a human language we can use to identify
exactly the description under which the dog brings the meat.
But for purposes of explaining his behavior we don't need to:
The extensional characterization of what he registers at the time
and place of his behavior will suffice. It will guide a subcanine
cognitive psychological inquiry into how Fido copes with his
environment and thus prolongs his life, and it will do so without
intentionality.
This thoroughly naturalistic approach to content has other
advantages: For example, an extensional treatment of content
avoids the problems raised by Fodor (1980). Fodor's argument
for a computational approach to psychological theorizing, and
against a "naturalistic" one, turned on showing that the inten-
tionality of psychological states makes it impossible to secure
useful generalizations about them when intentionality is ana-
lyzed in terms of environmental appropriateness. But an exten-
sional sort of content does not face the difficulties that lead
Fodor to recommend "methodological solipsism." On the other
hand, it is hardly a vindication of the intentional stance as the
touchstone of subpersonal cognitive psychology, for naturalized
neural contents and registrations are not beliefs at all. Psycho-
logical states, Dennett has long insisted (see Dennett 1983a),
have to be intentional to merit the title of "beliefs. " (This
argument is developed in Rosenberg 1986a and 1986b).
For purposes of infrahuman psychology, such nonintentional
content is all we need to attribute to organisms in order to set
what phenomenon need to be explained by subpersonal cog-
nitive psychology. For important components of human psycho-
logical processes (e.g. perceptual discrimination, organized
purposive behavior) we need no more than extensional registra-
tions and biological drives - no more than what Dennett calls
"the design stance. " Thus, the second argument for the meth-
odological necessity of intentional abtracta (or illata, for that
matter) seems to fall short.
Where such naturalistic devices do not seem to suffice is in
the explanation of speech, or rather in the identification of
vocalizations as speech, so that subpersonal psychology can take
on the task of explaining how the brain and the rest of the body
can produce the simulacrum of language. Perhaps this is the
point at which abstracta come in. For as Dennett has long
argued (see "Beyond Belief especially, Stance, Chapter 5),
prepositional attitudes, or their syntactical realizations in the
brain, when treated as illata, constitute a mare's nest of philo-
sophical and psychological difficulties. There seem to be many
good reasons why propositional attitudes or mental sentences
cannot be illata. Stich (1983) provides a powerful argument for
this conclusion. So perhaps the only role such attitudes can play
is that of abstracta, which set out the explanatory domain of the
subpersonal cognitive psychology of verbal behavior.
But there is a crucial disanalogy between intentional states
and the abstracta of physics to which Dennett likens them. It is
a disanalogy strong enough to cast considerable doubt on Den-
nett's claim that "attributions of belief and desire under the
adoption of the intentional stance can be true" (p. 72, emphasis
in original). Dennett argues that people have intentional states
in the same sense that bodies have centers of gravity. Both
beliefs and centers of gravity are abstrata, and both are "objec-
tive" properties, not just useful fictions. But notice that al-
though "center of gravity" is indeed an abstractum, it has a
definition in terms of mass, moment of force, acceleration, and
so on, that assure it of an unmysterious ontological status in
mechanics, and a precise calculational value that hinges on the
mechanical values that define it. This is characteristic of the
abstracta of physics. And it is just what is missing from the alleged
abstracta of intentional psychology. Beliefs are not abstracta in
this sense - their whole problem is that we cannot understand
how the purely physical composition of the brain can realize
intentional content. This is the overriding mystery of the
philosophy of psychology. To call intentional states abstracta
does not answer this question. And unless it is answered, there
seem compelling reasons to deny that beliefs are like centers of
gravity. For we know exactly how centers of gravity are related to
the illata of physics, we know how the attribution of centers of
gravity could be true. We materialists (including Dennett) don't
even know in principle how intentional states could be related to
the illata of a neuroscience. We don't how the attribution of
intentional states could be true. And because of this, it is difficult
to see why such abstracta should set the agenda of a subpersonal
cognitive psychology of verbal behavior.
Unless Dennett has a stronger argument for his thesis that
intentional states are abstracta, the real conclusions of Stance
will turn out to be more congenial to eliminative materialists like
Churchland (1981) than Dennett is willing to concede.
The realistic stance
John R. Searle
Department of Philosophy, University of California, Berkeley, Calif. 94720
The implausibility of Dennett's approach to the mind is often
concealed in his book. I want to bring it out into the open.
At first sight, the idea of the intentional stance seems quite
harmless: One can treat a system as if it had intentional mental
states without worrying whether it really does. So construed,
the intentional stance would be compatible with the realistic
stance, that is, the idea that some systems - ourselves, for
example - really have mental states regardless of what stance
anybody adopts. But that's not Dennett's view. He thinks that
the intentional stance tells us the only true story about inten-
tionality; and so he rejects realism. That is where the im-
plausibility comes in.
Consider the differences between the sorts of facts reported
by:
(1) I am thirsty.
(2) "J'ai soif means I am thirsty.
(3) I have a thirsty lawn.
The first reports truly a certain mental state now present in
me. The second reports a conventional meaning imposed by
French speakers on a certain syntactic sequence. The third
gives a metaphorical way of describing my lawn's capacity to
absorb water. The first and second are both literal ascriptions of
intentionality; however, the intentionality ascribed in the sec-
ond is not an intrinsic feature of the sentence to which it is
ascribed, but is derived from the intentionality of human
beings. The same French sentence might have meant some-
thing else. Hence, I call this sort "derived intentionality" and
contrast it with the first sort which I call "intrinsic." My present
state of thirst has intrinsic intentionality because there is no way
I could be in exactly this state and not be thirsty, and the thirst is
independent of anyone else's attitude about it. The third doesn't
report any intentionality at all, but is only metaphorical. The
"intentionality" is all observer relative or as if. My lawn behaves
in certain ways as if it were a thirsty organism, but of course it
doesn't literally have thirst or any other intentional state.
Now if your theory of the mind forces you to deny these rather
obvious distinctions, you have produced a reductio ad absur-
dum of the theory and shown it to be false. That seems to be
exactly the situation Dennett is in, because the whole point of
his theory of The Intentional Stance is to deny that there is any
genuine, real, or intrinsic intentionality at all. On Dennett's
view there is only as if intentionality, and hence there is no
difference in principle between the sort of facts reported by (1)
and those reported by (3).1
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1988) 11:3
527

Commentary/Dennett: The intentional stance
Now what exactly is wrong with Dennett's view? Well, the
first thing is that he actually gives no argument for his conclu-
sion. Even when the intentional stance can be made to work
independently of whether or not a system has intrinsic inten-
tionality, it does not show that intrinsic intentionality does not
exist. From the fact that we can describe, for example, the
process of evolution in an as if intentionalistic vocabulary, it
does not follow that individual organisms (e.g., us) lack intrinsic
intentionality. It is an oddity of Dennett's case against intrinsic
intentionality that he never actually seems to try to make a case
against intrinsic intentionality.
A second defect of Dennett's denial of intrinsic intentionality
is that the claim seems obviously and plainly false. To see this
you only have to ask yourself what facts in the real world
correspond to the three statements above. What real world facts
make it literally the case that I am now thirsty and how do they
differ from the facts that correspond to my metaphorical ascrip-
tion of thirst to my lawn? One fact that makes it true that I am
now literally thirsty is that there is present in me now a certain
mental state with a certain mental content. Among other things,
this mental content involves a desire to drink. My present thirst
is conscious; but it might not have been, for I am sometimes
thirsty without being consciously so. To the extent that we know
anything about it, this present mental state of thirst is caused by
patterns of neuron firings in my hypothalamus, which in turn are
caused by the action of a peptide called "angiotensin II."
Nothing remotely like that exists in the lawn. The organic
structure of the individual plants enables them to absorb water;
and during dry periods, like the present one in California, they
absorb rather a lot of it. So my as-if ascriptions are in Dennett's
sense both "predictive" and in a sense also "explanatory," but
there are no intentional states whatever in the lawn, and it
contains no nervous systems or other physical substructures
capable of causing and sustaining intrnsic intentionality. In-
deed, it is singularly devoid of mental life. The "intentional
stance" is simply hopeless as a guide to the reality of the mental.
Why can't Dennett grant these rather obvious points? He
gives us the answer at the very beginning of his Pr6cis. He is
adopting entirely a "third-person" point of view. He is consider-
ing only the "objective, materialistic, third-person world of the
physical sciences." But the third-person point of view compels
him to look only at external behavior to see whether or not the
intentional stance is predictively justified. It makes it impossi-
ble to ask what mental states are actually going on inside the
system; and that in turn makes it impossible for him to dis-
tinguish between intrinsic and as-i/intentionality. The behavior
of the system and the predictive power of the intentional stance
may give the same result for both the intrnsic and the as if. But
what that shows is that the third-person point of view is inade-
quate to the mind. Dennett has, to repeat, produced a reductio
ad absurdum of his methodology.
Now when I say these things I am assuming that certain
epistemic problems have been solved. I am assuming that I
know that people like you and me really have mental states, and
that lawns (as well as, for example, thermostats and genes, etc.) do
not. But of course: The fact is that, this far at least, the epistemic
problems have been solved. There are also lots of problems that
have not been solved. For example, are snails conscious?
Grasshoppers? I don't know, and I will leave it to the neuro-
scientists to tell me. But for people and lawns, there is not really
an epistemic problem. I would be happy to explain, in more
detail than BBS can now allow, exactly how they have been
solved (the solution has rather little to do with "behavior"); but
does anyone really doubt it? Is there someone so totally inno-
cent of knowledge of how the world works that he does not know
that human beings literally have mental states and that lawns,
thermostats, and genes do not?
Dennett claims that he does not know any such thing and that
there is no difference in principle between humans and things
such as lawns, thermostats, and genes to which it is appropriate
to adopt the intentional stance. So let us proceed further.
Another way to see the implausibility of Dennett's view is to
see that it seems to lead to absurd results. Some of these results
Dennett himself has inadvertently pointed out. For example,
the great merit of Darwinian evolutionary theory is that what
appears to be intentionality in the design of species is entirely
eliminated in favor of natural selection. There is no inten-
tionality in the process of evolution, and thus the as-if inten-
tionality of evolutionary processes contrasts with the genuine
intentionality of a designer. But this contrast is entirely lost in
Dennett's account. His talk of "Mother Nature" as the "orga-
nism's designer" (p. 301) blurs precisely the distinction be-
tween, for example, an architect designing a house and natural
selection "designing" an organism. Another reductio ad absur-
dum is that Dennett can no longer make the distinction between
mental states produced by the brain and as-if forms of behavior
of other organs. For example, the stomach behaves as if it were
an intentional system. It "believes" that certain sorts of food
have been taken in, so it "wants" to begin breaking them down
with enzymes, and so on. But if you can't make the distinction
between this and, say, the emotions in my limbic system, you
have lost the distinction between bodily functions which are
psychologically irrelevant and genuine mental processes going
on in the brain.
The worst reductio ad absurdum seems to be this: If you try to
take seriously what Dennett says, it turns out that the inten-
tional stance is genuinely vacuous. For, given the constraints
that everything behaves with some regularity (because every-
thing falls under laws of nature) and that all attributions of
intentionality are "from the point of view of someone who
adopts a certain predictive strategy," there is nothing to prevent
someone with an ingenious enough predictive strategy from
making the intentional stance work for anything. Dennett says it
won't work for example, for lecterns, but they are in fact rather
an easy case. My lectern wants to assist me in giving my lectures
and it believes it can best do this by supporting my books and
papers. This has plenty of "predictive leverage" (in fact, I will
now make a prediction that I can check in tomorrow's lecture);
and there is nothing ad hoc about the attributions of inten-
tionality because they are based on observation of rational and
consistent lectern behavior. But, as Dennett concedes, if a
lectern is an intentional system, "everything is."
Finally a word about Dennett's remarks on the Chinese Room
(Searle 1980). Most of what he says seems to be irrelevant to the
issues. For example, consider his argument to the effect that no
man-made computer in real time can duplicate the input/output
speed of the human brain. This is quite possible but irrelevant to
the issues. He also makes some remarks about the distinction
between a computer program on the shelf and one that is up and
running. But again, this time he concedes, irrelevant to my
position. Dennett raises various epistemic issues about how we
know that brains produce intrinsic intentionality or about how
we know that left-handed people have mental states. Again, all
irrelevant. I am simply assuming that I know that some people,
for example, understand Chinese and that I do not. I am happy
to explain how I know such things, but for present purposes it is
important to emphasize: None of the issues about the Chinese
room or about the nature of mental states hinge on the epis-
temology of the other mind's problem. It is simply irrelevant.
Several of the views Dennett attributes to me I do not hold:
Specifically, he thinks, mistakenly, but I am committed to the
view that "semanticity" (his word, not mine) must be conscious,
and that the Chinese room is just an "intuition pump." He also
mistakenly believes that I think that in principle no artifact
could have intrinsic intentionality. This is a view I have repeat-
edly denied.
The only actual argument Dennett presents is to deny again
the existence of intrinsic intentionality. But this just begs the
question by denying that there is a distinction between the
person who literally understands Chinese and the person who
has only a syntax but behaves as if he were understanding even
though he does not know the meanings of any of the words and
528
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1988) 11:3

Commentary /Dennett: The intentional stance
sentences. This, however, is no help to supporters of strong AI.
They thought they were creating minds with a semantics.
Dennett is denying the very possibility of the existence of such
things; hence he is putting strong AI out of business from the
start.
How did Dennett ever come to adopt this implausible posi-
tion? Actually, the assumptions that led him down this path are
so widespread and seem to him so obvious that they hardly
appear worth stating: He thinks there really is a meaningful view
called "materialism" and that it is opposed to something called
"dualism"; that something called "science" is "objective and
materialistic"; and that the alternative is to sink into some kind
of antiscientific subjectivism which would commit one to some
things he quaintly calls "privileged access," "immaterial souls,"
and "introspection." He thinks there is some really important
connection between how we know about mental states and what
those mental states really are. And he thinks that unless we can
know about other people's mental states with complete certain-
ty we are in for some kind of trouble. He also thinks we have
something called "intuitions"; that they have "pumps"; and that
maybe in the name of science we will have to give up some of our
"intuitions." My own view is this: As long as Dennett accepts
these ancient Cartesian notions, with their accompanying meta-
physic, his effort to explain intentionality is doomed from the
start. Within these categories it is impossible to give a coherent
account of the nature of mental phenomena.
NOTE
1. Dennett sometimes confuses as i/and derived intentionality, but
the confusion is not really important for this part of the argument. The
important thing is that he is trying to deny the existence of intrinsic
intentionality.
Why philosophers should be designers
Aaron Sloman
School of Cognitive Sciences, University of Sussex, Brighton BN1 9QN,
England
I agree with most of what Dennett says: Most of the views he
attacks are seriously flawed, often being either mere armchair
pontifications about empirical and design issues or else ethical
injunctions disguised as factual assertions.
Alas, there is also a subtle flaw in Dennett's own position
which, if remedied, would enable his work to be more fruitful
for the task of finding principles relevant to both the scientific
study of existing intelligent systems (e.g. mice and men) and the
design of new ones. This search for general principles is the
central goal of AI: Those who construe it as merely a branch of
engineering ignore the content of much of the work in AI
departments, journals, and conferences.
Dennett's mistake is to separate the intentional from the
design stance. He wants the intentional stance to focus entirely
on rational behaviour and how to predict it, without regard to
how the agent is designed, whether by evolution or engineers.
This resembles the attempt of "phenomentalist" philosophers to
construe physical objects solely in terms of their actual and
possible perceptual manifestations. That failed because it is
impossible to produce an adequate finite account of physical
objects without using theory-laden concepts going beyond per-
cepts. For example, if only observables are allowed, but no
reference to internal explanatory structures, then being made of
iron has to be analysed in terms of infintely many
'if <condition> then <consequence>'
statements. A similar pitfall awaits design-free intentionalism.
If concepts of mental states like "desire" and "belief are to
have the explanatory and predictive power required to cope
with ordinary human creativity (and cussedness) then they must
refer to states with generative power. In order to predict, or
retrospectively explain, novel occurrences such as Fred's clever
new tactics in a game of chess, Freda's diagnosis of the car
engine failure, or Fido's ingenious method of opening the larder
door, we must assume a collection of interacting internal states
with recombinant causal powers. For example, Freda noticed
the similarity between the way this engine failed and an older
one that had a fault in its distributor, and used her grasp of the
similarities and differences to focus her search.
So new mental states are produced by the interaction of old
ones, like understanding or producing a new sentence by
recombining old abilities to handle noun phrases, verb phrases,
and so on. We don't yet know much about how people do these
things, apart from such general requirements as generativeness
and such specific requirements as knowing the rules of chess or
grammar, or facts about arithmetic. (Whether such knowledge
is conscious and accessible or not is irrelevant.)
We have only a few sketchy ideas about possible mechanisms.
For example, AI textbooks describe programs that parse sen-
tences, analyse images, and make plans, demonstrating the
possibility of computational mechanisms with seminal forms of
the required recombinant powers. These mechanisms possess,
albeit in limited ways, indefinitely rich generative powers,
enabling ever new states and interactions based on old ones to
occur. The set of sentences an AI program can in principle
parse, the set of images a (good) AI program can in principle
interpret, is infinite. Machine memory sizes and quantisation of
measurements limit the sets, but the range of comptence re-
mains infinite in principle (though the kind of variation is
limited, e.g. by the grammar rules).
Ordinary predictions and explanations of intelligent be-
haviour, including the attribution of rationality, assume a kind of
design capable of supporting this infinite (though not un-
bounded) generative capacity. The precise nature of human
mental states and their causal interactions remains unknown,
but the requirement for generative mechanisms is clear. There
are limits due to the finite size or speed of the brain, but those
are different from limits based on nongenerative designs. More-
over, the existence of a culture, with memory extensions such as
books and computer files, extends the limits inherent in indi-
vidual human brains.
Dennett suggests that this sort of thing is "a relatively non-
commital set of specs" (Precis, Sect. 2). However, it is crucially
committal. Not all computational mechanisms can meet the
design requirement. So it is a matter of fact whether people do
or do not, not just a matter of taking up a stance that happens to
be useful. For instance, a finite state machine with N states, K
acceptable patterns of sensory input, and a decision table map-
ping current state (determined by previous history) and current
input into next state and next output would lack the required
generative power. Unlike a memory-limited recursive parser,
this machine would not itself be able to use additional memory
were it provided (though its designer could then extend the
decision table). The limitations of the finite state machine are
connected with the fact that at any one time it is an indivisible
state (state number 5996 for instance). An explicit decision table
doesn't have causally interacting substates, as we do and AI
programs do. It doesn't have the ability to create a novel state by
building a new data-structure, as AI programs do.
The N-state K-input machine could function as a precompiled
emulation of a truly intelligent system constructed to function
efficiently in a particular carefully limited environment, giving
all the appearance of a machine with beliefs, desires, planning
abilities, and so on, but totally lacking the ability to cope with
any input not explicitly anticipated in the compilation process.
Because of its design origins, though not its actual design,
adopting the intentional stance will be a fruitful way to predict
its behaviour in situations compatible with its decision table. If
input pattern P turns up while it is in a state S and the table
contains no entry for the pair (P,S) then its behaviour is un-
defined: It might just go mute. If by luck no such situation turns
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1988) 11:3
529

Commentary /Dennett: The intentional stance
up, the intentional stance will work. But that doesn't make it
correct, only useful, up to a point.
Apart from the requirement of genetic foresight, I suspect it
would be physically impossible to provide the storage capacity
required for a finite state table-driven human infant to cope as
humans do for seventy or more years in any culture and almost
any physical environment over a whole lifetime. The precom-
piled table has to support all the counterfactual conditional
statements about what the person would have done had she
grown up in a Tibetan temple, a soviet spaceship or a kibbutz on
Mars.
I suspect that many other animals (birds, mice, dogs, etc.) also
have too much flexibility to be based on such finite state
machines. Some of the simpler organisms may, like finite state
machines, be lacking in generative capacity. Certainly not
humans and chimps: Evolution does not have sufficient fore-
sight for such precompilation except for special reflexes. Most
situations are dealt with by an economical and powerful gener-
ative mechanism based on separate substates involving motives,
beliefs, preferences, stored skills, systems of concepts for de-
scribing new situations, a host of learning abilities, and so on.
The generative mechanisms include the ability to create task-
specific decision tables (e.g. trained reflexes, memorised
dances, and poems, etc.).
Exactly what internal states and causal powers are assumed
when we use mentalistic language depends on the sophistication
attributed to the agent. It's not always the same. Compare (a) an
animal (or infant) whose every desire always tends to produce
actions with (b) an agent who is able to notice conflicts of desires,
or conflicts between desires and ethical principles, and choose
between them. Case (b) requires a richer computational archi-
tecture supporting a wider variety of internal processes, with
more kinds of temporary information stores, priority measures,
and so on.
Yet more architectural complexity is required if, instead of
being fixed, the desires, "desire generators," and "desire com-
parators ' are themselves all modifiable and extendable by high-
er level generators and comparators, as happens during moral
and aesthetic education for example (Sloman 1987).
Desire-like states as such therefore do not have a fixed set of
causal powers: It all depends on the total architecture of the
system in question. The same goes for every other type of
mental state describable in ordinary language. Each different
computational architecture is capable of supporting a different
array of mental states. However, they can all be compiled into
one architecture: a finite state machine, if the machine is big
enough and the set of inputs arbitrarily limited. But that doesn't
mean the latter machine has the same set of states, despite
behavioural indistinguishability over many lifetimes.
Because computational designs do not vary smoothly (you
can't smoothly introduce a new subroutine, or a metalevel
desire comparator), there are sharp discontinuities in the space
of possible designs (see Sloman 1985); and some of those discon-
tinuities are to be found in evolution, contrary to Dennett's
claim that "there are no sharp discontinuities" (Precis, sect. 2).
(Actually, Darwinian evolution, unlike Lamarckian, requires
discontinuities: Only a finite number of discrete generations
separates stages in evolution.) Probably many discontinuities
occur in individual development too. A study of all these design
discontinuities will enable us to make new distinctions between
different kinds of mental capabilities.
Ordinary language will probably then evolve to track devel-
opments in scientific theory, as so often happens. For instance,
before the advance of mathematics and physics, people could
conceive of something speeding up or slowing down, but not the
same thing increasing its velocity and decreasing its acceleration
at the same time. Even now some people find that hard to grasp.
Similarly, different types of mental states not currently dis-
tinguished become describable as a result of new understanding
of design possibilities. For example, philosophers (including
Dennett - Precis, sect. 6) easily imagine a distinction between
explicit and implicit stored information, but not nearly as many
distinctions between types of implicit store as computer scien-
tists have been forced to invent in addressing design trade-offs
between space, time, flexibility, generality, modularity, learn-
ability, modifiability, debuggability, etc.
Some who attack (and some who defend) computational de-
signs postulate a fixed innate "language of thought" into which
everything is to be translated (e.g. Fodor 1975). Dennett's
critique of this view (Precis, sect. 6) needs supplementing. If
any kind of internal symbolism capable of being reasoned with is
available, then translation into a language of thought is simply
not needed because Carnapian meaning postulates (or a gener-
alisation thereof) can extend a language with new untranslatable
yet meaningful primitives. They have meaning insofar as the
class of admissible models for the total set of "sentences" is
limited. But the meaning is never totally determinate. (For
more on this see Sloman 1985 and 1986.) A related point is that
programs in high level programming languages need not be
compiled into machine code in advance of being run: e.g. LISP
and BASIC programs are often stored in their original form and
interpreted by other programs. Interpreted programs offer
greater semantic flexibility since they don't require everything
to be well defined in advance. Indeed, if the interpreter is itself
interpreted it can be modified during execution according to
need.
The semantic properties of an interpreter-driven machine can
therefore be indeterminate in important ways; likewise the
mental states of human beings, if desires, hopes, beliefs, abili-
ties, and so on are stored in forms that are interpreted as
required in context rather than compiled in advance to some
brain-language with a fixed semantics. This indeterminacy of
intentional states is part of the basis of human creativity as
shown in both science and art. For example, it allows new
concepts to crystallise: the core of all major scientific advance
and human learning.
By skilful use of philosophical techniques of analysis to further
the more detailed and systematic study of design requirements
for various kinds of intentional abilities, Dennett could make a
major contribution to our understanding of the mechanisms
underlying intelligence, leaving less gifted philosophers to play
with all those amusing puzzles about twin earthers, emigrating
slot machines, and the like. The design stance makes some of the
philosophical puzzles evaporate, because they are based on an
oversimple view of the space of possible designs.
Styles of computational representation
M. P. Smith
Department of Computer Science, Duke University, Durham, N.C. 27706
In my comments I limit myself to "Styles of Mental Representa-
tion" (Dennett 1987a), principally because in the space allotted I
can only say a small part of what I'd like to about that one article,
much less the rest of the book.
Dennett's taxonomy of explicit, implicit, and potentially ex-
plicit knowledge is most easily explained within a production
system or logic programming paradigm with a structure of facts
and rules (Nilsson 1980, p. 48). His distinctions are sharper and
more useful if we identify implicit knowledge with (semantic)
logical consequence and potentially explicit knowledge with
what can be derived syntactically. Facts in the database would
be explicit knowledge; implicit knowledge would include all the
logical implications (according to the logic of the interpreter) of
the database under the rules. Potentially explicit knowledge is
actually derivable by the interpreter from the database and
rules. Dennett proposes hardware limitations as a reason every-
thing implicit is not potentially explicit (p. 217). There are more
interesting limitations, however. For example, even though the
logical basis of the programming language Prolog, SLD (Linear
530
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1988) 11:3

Commentary /Dennett: The intentional stance
resolution with a Selection function restricted to Definite claus-
es) resolution, is (refutation) complete for Horn clauses, stan-
dard Prolog implementations are incomplete due to the choice
of a depth-first control strategy (Lloyd 1987). Going the other
direction, more may be derivable than is implied logically by the
database and rules using procedural attachment (as arithmetic is
handled in Prolog), so not everything potentially explicit need
be implicit either.
Logical consequence need not be determined by standard
first-order logic; any variant for which logical consequence is
definable will do. We may choose the logic to fit the epistemic
subject. Given a choice of logic, the derivational powers as-
cribed to the knower may be further limited, say, by limiting the
length of claims of inference (Konolige 1986, p. 24). In this way,
the gap between implicit and potentially explicit reflects design
in light of space/time limitations (as in Prolog), but it is not an
implementational artifact.
Dennett's exposition of tacit knowledge seems to me ambigu-
ous. There is a sense of "representation" that does not require
representations: for example, the sense in which I am repre-
sented in Washington. The laws of arithmetic and Boolean
algebra are "represented' in arithmetic-logical units (ALU's) in
that ALU's are designed so that their input-output behavior
conforms to these laws, but an ALU in operation no more
contains their representations than a paper airplane in flight
contains representations of the laws of aerodynamics.
Representation without representations might be all that
Dennett means by tacit representation. If so, an important
mode of representation has been omitted: what is in computer
science called "procedural," as opposed to "declarative," repre-
sentations. Winograd calls this distinction "an artificial intel-
ligence incarnation of the old philosophical distinction between
'knowing that' and 'knowing how' " (Winograd 1975, p. 186). In
terms of our model, the declarative knowledge of a program is
contained in its database (closed under logical consequence/
derivation to include implicit and potentially explicit knowl-
edge), and the procedural knowledge is contained in the rules.
Dennett often refers to explicit representations of rules,
however, suggesting that the rules of logic programs and pro-
duction systems are just the sorts of things he would call explicit
representations. In our model, however, the only representa-
tions of rules are the rules themselves. Just to have a separate
term for what these rules are representations of, let's say that
rules are procedural representations of procedures. They are
explicit from the programmer's point of view, but, since the
rules are not in the database, nor entailed by or derivable from
the database using the rules, the procedures they represent are
not explicitly, implicitly, or potentially explicitly known by the
program. Were the rules not explicit from the programmer's
point of view, that is, if the rules did not appear as more-or-less
separable components at some level of implementation, then,
although their procedures might be represented in the weak
sense described above, there would be no representations of
them.
Unless, of course, we represented the procedures de-
claratively in the database. Just as whatever can be declaratively
represented can be represented through procedural attach-
ment, so whatever can be represented as a rule can also be
represented in the database as what we shall call a plan.
Dennett's categories could be extended to appropriate plan
representations, but it is more interesting to consider their
procedural analogues. For example, in the case where a rule is
replaced by a plan and a matching metalevel rule, might we call
the original rule implicit or potentially explicit?
The primacy of tacit knowledge, a point Dennett credits to
Ryle (p. 217), comes to this: Plans by themselves are inert; only
rules can put them into action. Ultimately, despite the in-
terchangeability of procedures and data from the programmer's
perspective, from the machine's point of view only procedures
run. I should not say that my Sun computer knows how to
execute compiled C programs except metaphorically, however,
because this ability is built in at a level where, if it is legitimate to
speak of representation at all, it is only register locations and
memory addresses that are represented.
Dennett describes how "transient tacit representations"
might yield to explicit representations to handle increased
complexity (pp. 223-24). As an example of the former, Dennett
offers an automatic elevator that can switch between workday
and night/weekend programs. (The reading of tacit representa-
tion as representationless seems dictated here.) Dennett next
imagines a bundle of routines driven by perceptual cues, remi-
niscent of those in Dennett 1973 (cf. Smith 1986). These are like
production systems without an internal database. So under-
stood, their problem is obvious: There is no way to connect the
various productions. The insertion of a declarative element
between rules allows for what Ryle (1949) calls "multitrack
dispositions," like belief.
Dennett's evolutionary account fits the received wisdom that
a declarative component provides flexibility and economy in
complex systems (cf. Winograd 1975, pp. 187-88). But, he
claims, such a component would be limited to an "internal
semantics" of memory addresses, internal operations, and so
forth (p. 224). If this means that a program inherits the semantics
of the microcode executing it, then this just seems to be a
confusion of levels, or a Rylean category mistake (Ryle 1949, p.
16; cf. Dennett 1984a, pp. 74-75). More likely, Dennett intends
a substitutional semantics, where terms in a program refer only
to other parts of the program. I don't understand this claim, and
wonder whether Dennett would say that the words in this
commentary have a merely internal semantics too, until sup-
plied with a "globally defined role" (p. 224).
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This research was supported in part by the National Science Foundation
under grant DCR-8516243. The author is indebted to Bruce T. Smith for
helpful discussion.
Connectionism, Realism, and realism
Stephen P. Stich
Department of Philosophy, University ol California, San Diego, La Jolla,
Calif. 92093
About ten years ago, Dennett began using the term "instrumen-
talism" in describing his account of intentional descriptions and
explanations. He now considers the choice of that term to have
been "a tactical error" (p. 72). For, he tells us, he has always
been a sort of realist about intentional states, though he is not a
full-blooded Fodorian "Realist with a capital R" (p. 71) (for the
most recent version of Fodorian Realism, see Fodor 1987). The
latter view is that the actual internal states that cause behavior
will be functionally individuated in roughly the way that be-
lief/desire psychology carves things up. And Dennett, true to
his Rylean roots, has always insisted that this sort of Realism
about belief/desire psychology is singularly implausible. It is my
view that there is an argument against Dennett's stand to which,
until recently, there was no good reply. However, recent
achievements in connectionist modeling of cognitive processes
have made Dennett's skepticism about the Realist interpreta-
tion of common sense psychology significantly more plausible
than it was earlier. In the first part of this review I will give a
brief sketch of the role I think connectionist research plays in the
debate between Dennett and the Realists. In the second part,
the focus will shift to Dennett's version of realism - realism with
a little r. My theme there will be that the connectionist models
that lend support to Dennett's anti-Realism seem to leave no
room for his (little r) realism. As I see it, there is no logical space
between a full-blooded (big R) Realism and an unequivocal
Eliminativism.
1. Connectionism and antl-Reallsm. It is agreed on all sides
that folk psychology is a useful, powerful predictive tool.
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1988) 11:3
531

Commentary/Dennett: The intentional stance
Though exactly how we do it is far from obvious, we are clearly
very good at attributing beliefs and desires to people, and at
deriving predictions about their behavior based on these at-
tributions. Although far from flawless, the predictions are often
correct, and in our day-to-day lives we could hardly get on
without them. But why does this folk psychological strategy of
prediction work so well? The answer urged by the Fodorian
Realist is that it works because the beliefs and desires are Real,
functionally individuated states of the brain, and that the princi-
ples we tacitly invoke in extracting our predictions are good
approximations to the principles that actually govern the causal
interactions among perceptions, beliefs, desires, and behavior.
One very natural way to elaborate on this suggestion, as Fodor
has long argued, is to build models of human cognition that posit
more or less sentence-like representations to play the role of
beliefs and desires. The models also posit formal processes that
manipulate representations along the lines presupposed by folk
psychology. Dennett, like Ryle before him, has consistently
resisted the suggestion that the internal workings of the brain
are functionally organized in a way that mirrors the posits and
processes of folk psychology. But to the Realists, this resistance
seemed perversely unscientific, since neither Dennett nor any-
one else was prepared to offer any serious suggestions about
alternative mechanisms that might account for the success of
folk psychology in predicting behavior. In the absence of serious
alternatives, the Realist hypothesis was "the only straw afloat."
And, as Fodor often reminded us, in other sciences, when there
is only one plausible hypothesis that can explain a phenomenon,
the inference standardly drawn is that the hypothesis describes
the way the world Really is.
It is at this point that connectionist models become relevant to
the argument. For, as Dennett notes in his Reflection, "The
Language of Thought Reconsidered," these models have had
some remarkable success in simulating behavior that, prior to
connectionism, no one had any idea how to stimulate without
invoking a set of sentence-like representations and a system of
formal rules for manipulating them. Moreover, the connec-
tionist models exhibit some properties (like graceful degrada-
tion) which natural cognitive systems exhibit, and which rule-
and-representation simulations notoriously do not. I agree with
Dennett that "it is too early for verdicts" (p. 229) about the
ultimate success of connectionism in modeling the mechanisms
underlying the behavior that folk psychology predicts. But for
opponents of Realism about folk psychology, the importance of
connectionist research is that it suggests there are lots of power-
ful computational architectures whose properties and limita-
tions we have not yet even begun to explore, which might be
used in modeling human cognition and behavior. There are lots
of straws afloat. Since models in the folk psychological mold now
have lots of serious competition, no methodological injunction
entails that we should be Realists about the posits of folk
psychology.
2. Connectionism and (little r) realism. Let me turn now to the
prospects for Dennett's (little r) realism, which holds that while
(big R) Realism is false, claims invoking beliefs and desires are
perfectly true and scientifically respectable simply because folk
psychology's "intentional stance" does a decent job at predicting
behavior. As I see it, there are three possibilities that we might
have to contend with. The first is that connectionist theories and
their kin will turn out to be inferior to the older rules-and-
representations theories inspired by folk psychology. If this
should happen, then (little r) realism will lose out to (big R)
Realism, not because theories based on folk psychology are the
only game in town, but because they are the best game in town.
A second alternative is that the best theories for explaining
human behavior are connectionist theories, but that theories in
the folk psychological paradigm can be more or less smoothly
reduced to these connectionist theories, much as certain theo-
ries in chemistry can be reduced to theories in physics. This is
the scenario favored by those who urge that connectionism
should be viewed as a theory aimed at explaining how rules-and-
representations models are implemented. On this alternative
too, (little r) realism will lose out to (big R) Realism, since
reduction renders the states and processes reduced no less Real.
The third alternative is that the best theories will be connec-
tionist theories (or some variation on that theme), and that no
plausible way can be found to reduce folk theories to connec-
tionist theories. In this case, it seems to me that there is no
alternative but to bite the Eliminativist bullet, and concede that
the ontology of folk psychology is just mistaken: There are no
such things as beliefs and desires.
As I read Dennett's most recent writings, this third alter-
native is the one he considers most likely. Yet he is reluctant to
endorse the "extreme eliminativism" (p. 233) that it seems to
entail. The two reasons he offers for his reluctance strike me as
unconvincing. The first is that "until the rest of the world
catches up with [the eliminativists] and shares their world view"
there will be no alternative but to continue using the language of
folk psychology in the law courts and in everyday life. This is
right, of course, but seems irrelevant to the eliminativist's
thesis. Even in these secular times, the law continues to speak of
certain events being "acts of God." But surely those of us who
are atheists do not compromise our convictions when we choose
to talk in this way. If Dennett's realism about beliefs and desires
is like the atheist's "realism" about God, then it is a view I find
difficult to distinguish from Eliminativism. Dennett's second
reason is that folk psychology has "tremendous - if flawed -
predictive power" (p. 234). Here too the relevance of the point is
unclear, since as Churchland notes in his accompanying BBS
review, discredited theories with discredited ontologies typ-
ically have considerable - though flawed - predictive power. If
they didn't, they would probably never have been accepted in
the first place. Perhaps the best way to end this review is to
invite Dennett to say a bit more about how realism (with a little
r) differs from Eliminativism (with a big E).
What really matters
Charles Taylor
Department of Political Science, McGill University, Montreal, Quebec,
Canada N3A 1G5
"This book is about how to talk about the mind," says Dan
Dennett on page 1. But among many interesting subjects in this
excellent book, this is one he never quite gets around to talking
about. The central issues are all elided, glided by. Just how this
happens is very important to understand. Dennett writes from
within a complex of interlocking philosophical doctrines which
have the effect of interpreting away the central phenomena of
mind. So what emerges from the laborious dialectic is another
demonstration of the quasitautology: If you can't see something,
you probably won't know when you've failed to explain it.
One of the interlocking pieces of the screen is the stance
announced on page 7: "I propose to see . . . just what the mind
looks like from the third-person, materialistic perspective of
contemporary science." This is the stance which was specifically
designed to exclude the crucial phenomena of "mind."
What are these phenomena? Not primarily those of "con-
sciousness," but what I want to call "mattering": the fact that
things matter to ourselves and animals in a way they don't to
your calculator or word-processor. The class of matterings is
broader than and includes that of intentional states. States in
this class include not only my belief that it's snowing or my hope
that the ski-lift will run, but also the pain in my tooth and the
butterflies in my stomach.
Now mattering is what the screen of interlocking doctrines
interprets away, or what is the same thing, the distinction
between beings for whom things matter and the others. Den-
nett does this by treating mattering states nonrealistically. This
echoes the move of earlier positivist writers in relation to the
532
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1988) 11:3

Commentary I Dennett: The intentional stance
terms for unobservables invoked in scientific explanation. To
treat a term like "atom" or "electron" nonrealistically is to say
that there is nothing more to the term's having application than
the fact that the laws or regularities in which it figures apply to
the domain of phenomena it is invoked to explain. We may
falsely think there is a further issue, once we see that the laws
hold, whether the thing really exists; but this is an illusion: The
regularity applying is a sufficient condition of the term's
holding.
This kind of thing goes back to Hume on causation, and was
very popular among the early positivists. Mach was nonrealistic
about atoms. No one would be today. We now treat them as real
entities, that is, as capable of figuring in an indefinite number of
other regularities and explanations. For a given predictate F,
understood realistically, there may be a strong evidential con-
nection with certain laws L. But there is no logical connection. It
may be that the laws map the behavior of the system, but that F
does not really hold; or vice versa. The connection is contingent.
But if F is interpreted nonrealistically, this would be an absurd
supposition. You have to have missed the point.
Dennett treats mattering nonrealistically in my sense. Truly
to have beliefs is to be "a system whose behaviour is reliably and
voluminously predictable via the intentional strategy" (p. 15). It
is all a matter of what pattern of inputs and outputs holds.
Dennett wants to rebut the suggestion that this puts belief
merely in the eye of the beholder, because it is an objective fact
that the regularities apply. "There are patterns in human affairs
that impose themselves" (p. 27). True, but if everything de-
pends on the pattern, then the crucial step has been made to
nonrealism about particular belief ascriptions. Dennett ac-
knowledges "the interest relativity of belief attributions": differ-
ent schemes of intentional interpretation would yield different
imputations of belief and desire (p. 29). And he naturally invokes
Quine's indeterminacy thesis (p. 40).
Now there is a set of predicates we apply to calculating
devices, like "computing pi," which imply no genuine inten-
tionality. It seems perfectly appropriate to understand these
nonrealistically, because we apply them derivatively, on the
basis of observer's or designer's or user's purposes. But Dennett
wants to wipe out the distinction between these and real matter-
ing states (as he argues in chapter 8, and the same stance
underlies his discussion of the "beliefs" of thermostats on pp.
29-33). There are too many reasons why this is a catastrophic
mistake to state them all here. It might help, however, to move
from the usual range of examples to a nonintentional mattering
state. We might be bamboozled into thinking that the machine
and the human both "calculate" in the same sense. But it is
harder to treat pain nonrealistically. That would be to make the
issue whether someone is in pain equivalent to the question
whether the "system" exhibits a certain input-output pattern
which "pain " can be invoked to explain/predict. "Pain" figures
in explanations. But this is not all there is to it. The moral
significance of pain depends on its being a condition the subject
is actually undergoing, something real and urgent and distress-
ing which (sometimes) gets expressed in behaviour. It is no
answer to the question, "Is she really in pain?" to say: "Well, she
exhibits pattern P; what more do you want?" About pain, there
is a "fact of the matter," beyond all interest relativity, and
immune to any supposed "indeterminacy of radical translation, "
no matter how many rival schemes can predict the behaviour of
the "system." In other words, people and animals suffer pain not
at all in the way that thermostats can be described as having
"beliefs." And if we did decide to predicate "pain " on the basis
of the general explanatory laws' holding of the system, what
kinds of explanation would license it? That the system, after
experience of certain things, took "evasive action"? But we take
evasive action for a number of reasons, and not always because of
the threat of pain. What exactly could count as a machine's being
in pain, anyway? Or is it just a matter of which of its states we
want to call pain? Dennett has raised this issue elsewhere
(Dennett 1978, p. 195), but then sidestepped it.
What allows Dennett and others to block this distinction out?
Part of the screen is the very third-person stance mentioned
above. But there are a number of ancillary arguments which
interlock. One is the general principle that "science upsets
common sense, " which ends up being applied in a knee-jerk
fashion. Of course, some of our cherished conceptions about our
own beliefs and motivations will turn out false. This comes as a
surprise only to those who believe in Cartesian incorrigibility
(widely thought by mechanists to be the only other game in
town). But this is different from the proposal to treat all matter-
ing attributions nonrealistically. A good part of the human form
of life is bound up with our doing the opposite, as the case of pain
illustrates. But we could have considered any love relationship
where the meaning of things to the partners is a matter of central
concern and could not be treated with the same cavalier stand-
point-dependence as the beliefs of thermostats.
But all this is screened out in turn by another belief: that we
are all in the observer's stance to each other; that some muddled
version of the observer's stance allows us to attribute beliefs and
desires to each other, on the basis of which we then "relate" to
each other as lovers, sufferers, and so forth. This is what
underlies the view that our ordinary understanding of ourselves
and others constitutes a "folk psychology, " a kind of embryonic
and unselfconscious theory. This plunges us back in the murky
waters of the "other minds" problem, familiar from the em-
piricist tradition, and invites nonrealist treatment.
What needs to be seen at this point is how much human
mattering is bound up with our not being mutual observers,
with a sharing of experience which is shaped and realized in
language. Mind is largely in public space; but not after the
fashion of explanatory variables invoked by a theory. This crucial
insight, which the late Wittgenstein among others articulated, is
what is needed to break down the screen which renders the
interesting and problematic phenomena of human psychology
invisible to the "third-person" perspective which Dennett
adopts here.
Intentional system theory and experimental
psychology
Michael H. Van Kleeck
Department of Psychology, Harvard University, Cambridge, Mass. 02138
This review focuses on the intentional system theory proposed
by Dennett in his third chapter, "Three Kinds of Intentional
Psychology," and in the subsequent reflections, "Instrumen-
talism Reconsidered." Philosophers will read with interest Den-
nett's well-written, imaginative presentation of intentional sys-
tem theory, which incorporates helpful refinements of concepts
such as "belief and "desire." In addition, because the theory
deals with the prediction and explanation of behavior and is
discussed in relation to folk psychology and cognitive psychol-
ogy, it would seem to be of potential interest not only to
philosophers but also to experimental psychologists. Nonethe-
less, in its present state of devlopment, the theory has little to
offer to experimental psychology.
What is intentional system theory, and what are its goals?
Dennett writes that the theory concerns "the prediction and
explanation from belief-desire profiles of the actions of whole
systems " (p. 58). Is the theory intended to be a better predictor
of behavior than the folk psychology from which it is derived?
Dennett presents no evidence that this is the case. Although he
emphasizes the "predictive power of the pure intentional
stance" (p. 79), the predictions he derives from that stance are
easily available to folk psychologists who are innocent of formal
intentional system theory. For example, naive folk psychol-
ogists can predict just as well as intentional system theorists that
(to use Dennett's example) in this age of wash-and-wear clothes,
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1988) 11:3
533

Commentary /Dennett: The intentional stance
there may be some children who do not understand jokes
involving irons.
If intentional system theory does not augment the predictive
power of folk psychology, what other uses might it have?
Perhaps it could provide a way to reduce folk psychology to a
more organized system. Dennett writes, "the claim that every
mental phenomenon alluded to in folk psychology is intentional-
system-characterizable 
would, if true, provide a reduction of
the mental as ordinarily understood - a domain whose bound-
aries are at best fixed by mutual acknowledgment and shared
intuition - to a clearly defined domain of entities whose princi-
ples of organization are familiar, relatively formal and systemat-
ic, and entirely general" (p. 68). Dennett says he has attempted
to make this claim compelling in Brainstorms (Dennett 1978),
but I find little conclusive evidence for it in that book, much less
any comprehensive presentation of the actual reduction. A
systematic reduction of folk psychology may indeed be possible
and could be a useful conceptual tool in the experimental
investigation of psychological phenomena, but at present we are
left primarily with a promissory note.
So intentional system theory does not provide better predic-
tions than folk psychology; nor does it, in its present form,
provide a systematic reduction of folk psychology. What other
relevance might it have to experimental psychologists? Could it
organize their investigations by providing an abstract compe-
tence theory of the empirical phenomena that psychologists are
supposed to be investigating? Dennett does describe inten-
tional system theory as a competence theory that deals with "the
performance specifications of believers" (p. 59) or "the nor-
mative demands on the design of a believer" (p. 59), but these
characterizations by themselves are too vague to be useful.
More explicit specifications seem to be in the offing when he
writes that in a competence model, "one attempts to specify
formally and rigorously the system's proper competence" (p. 75)
and that this can be done by filling in the details in a formula
such as "given an element in the set of x's as input, it yields an
element in the set of y's as output according to the following
formal rules" (p. 75). But intentional system theory never
delivers the goods. A rigorous, nontrivial specification of the
formal rules governing the mappings from one set of beliefs and
desires to another could be useful to psychologists as constraints
on what performance models must do, but Dennett does not
provide a rigorous specification of this sort. Instead, he offers
only occasional examples involving intuitive characterizations
that any folk psychologist could make - for example, charac-
terizations of what one must know in order to understand a
particular joke. Dennett has told us what kind of theory inten-
tional system theory should be (a competence theory), but he
never gives us the theory itself in any rigorous, detailed, and
explicit form, nor does he provide convincing evidence that if
such a theory were constructed, it would yield substantial new
insights.
Thus intentional system theory fails to recommend itself to
psychologists as a superior predictor of behavior, a systematic
reduction of folk psychology, or a competence theory for psy-
chological phenomena. Does the theory accomplish more mod-
est goals of interest to psychologists? Perhaps it is simply meant
to include the best of folk psychology and "eliminate all that is
false or ill founded" (p. 47), while including those elements of
folk psychology that "account for whatever predictive or explan-
atory success it seems to have in ordinary use" (p. 47). Con-
structed in this way, intentional system theory would be not a
reduction but simply a slightly streamlined version of folk
psychology - more parsimonious than folk psychology, though
no more predictive. As a leaner, cleaner version of folk psychol-
ogy, intentional system theory could provide a useful minimum
standard of parsimonious prediction, against which more am-
bitious psychological theories could be compared.
If this is one of Dennett's goals, it would seem that he is not
pursuing it in the best possible way. In examining folk psychol-
ogy to ascertain which portions of it deserve to be incorporated
into a scientific philosophy of mind, he writes that he is con-
cerned not with "what folk psychology as found in the field truly
is, but what it is at its best" (p. 54). But the best of folk
psychology cannot be selected with confidence until the full
range of folk psychology has been mapped - mapped not by
armchair analysis but by the same type of careful, empirical
investigation that has been applied to folk physics (e. g. Clement
1982; McCloskey 1983) and folk biology (e.g. Carey 1985; Piaget
1929). If folk psychology were completely innate, such empirical
investigation might seem less necessary - the intuitions of all
investigators of folk psychology might be more likely to coincide
- but Dennett agrees that folk psychology is at least partly
learned. Given the difference in learning histories among indi-
viduals, reliance on intuition can be hazardous, and empirical
studies of the principles and presuppositions of folk psychology
become all the more necessary.
Dennett cites only a few such studies, and only in passing;
those few and many others could be profitably exploited in his
endeavors as reliable sources of folk psychological material for
possible incorporation into intentional system theory. For ex-
ample, interpersonal experience verbs such as "astonish" and
"trust" express complex mixes of the beliefs and desires that are
Dennetts concern. Psycholinguistic studies of such verbs have
revealed causal schemas underlying the attributions and predic-
tions that people habitually make on the basis of such verbs (Au
1986; Brown & Fish 1983; Gilovich & Regan 1986; Van Kleeck et
al. in press). If intentional system theory seeks to incorporate
the best of folk psychology, schemas such as these are legitimate
candidates for incorporation.
In summary, does intentional system theory offer any sub-
stantial help to research in experimental psychology - any
surprising behavioral predictions, new research questions,
fruitful organizational concepts, powerful analytic frameworks?
Despite its virtues as a philosophical theory, at present inten-
tional system theory offers little to psychology but promises.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
I thank John Gabrieli, Peter Gordon, Kris Kirby, Stephen Kosslyn, and
Jay Rueckl for helpful discussion of this review, preparation of which was
supported by a National Science Foundation Graduate Fellowship held
by the author.
Editorial commentary
It is not clear whether or not Dennett believes that he would
differ in any (concrete) way from a device that behaved exactly as
if it had pain (and beliefs, and desires) but did not in reality have
pain (beliefs, desires). Both equally amenable to the intentional
stance, would there (or could there) be no illatum distinguishing
him from it? Or would the difference merely be nothing impor-
tant? This problem (the mind/body problem) does not seem to
have a homologue in biological evolution, where the intentions
seem merely "as-if' intentions through-and-through - any more
than it has a homologue in physics (where one does not worry,
apart from concerns about completeness and fallibility, whether
the universe really obeys Newton's laws or merely behaves
exactly as if it did).
534
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1988) 11:3

Author's Response
Science, philosophy, and interpretation
Daniel C. Dennett
Center for Cognitive Studies, Tufts University, Medford, Mass. 02155
Kitcher & Kitcher see "high drama" in the tug of war
between the realists and eliminativists trying to lure me
into their camps, but a more important drama plays in the
commentaries: the tug of war between cognitive science
and, shall we say, "pure" philosophy. Here the clash of
Two Cultures can indeed be seen, as Cussins suggests.
Instead of joining either camp, I will try to play peace-
maker, explaining, as I see it, the strengths and weak-
nesses of each camp to the other, alternating back and
forth between them. Along the way, this will permit me
to respond to most of the questions and objections raised;
I will try to respond to the balance in the last section.
1. The siren song of science. The Intentional 
Stance
(henceforth Stance) is, as Newell notes with mild regret, a
book primarily for philosophers. It offers "increased con-
ceptual clarity," he says, but virtually no "technical
development." Sloman joins Newell in urging me to get
with the program and stop frittering away my time on
philosophers' puzzles. Van Kleeck observes, correctly,
that intentional system theory, as I have drawn it, offers
nothing to the cognitive psychologist beyond "a slightly
streamlined version of folk psychology - more par-
simonious than folk psychology, though no more predic-
tive."
I endorse Newell's aims, and hope to contribute to the
project of constructing a more testable, empirical, scien-
tific theory, but the purpose of this book is to establish the
philosophical foundations for such a theory. I agree with
just about everything Sloman says, and, as comments
below will show, I have indeed aspired to a theory that
makes the sorts of novel predictions that Van Kleeck calls
for. Why then didn't I get on with it, and abandon
philosophy for empirical theory construction? In part,
because as a philosopher I felt obliged to respond to the
prevailing perplexities of my discipline, but, more impor-
tant, because I thought, and still think, that most cog-
nitive scientists are underestimating the conceptual
problems inherent in their projects. This is nothing to
quarrel over; they run the risk of investing their careers in
mainly hopeless research paradigms that get off slightly
on the wrong foot (consider the debris of twentieth-
century psychology and neuroscience for many exam-
Table 1. Table of commentators
1. Science, not philosophy: Kirsh, Newell, Sloman, Van
Kleeck, Dummett, Smith
2. Realism and instrumentalism: Churchland, Cussins,
Dretske, Stich, Lycan, Newell, Rosenberg, Taylor
3. Ethology: Cheney & Seyfarth, Griffin, Premack, Dum-
mett
4. Evolution: Amundson, Goldman, Kitcher & Kitcher,
MacLennan, Roitblat, Rosenberg
5. Other issues: Amundson, Danto, Dummett, Harman,
Lycan, Newell, Searle, Taylor, EDITORIAL COMMENTARY
Response/ Dennett: The intentional stance
pies), whereas I run the risk of wasting mine on quibbles
that will turn out to be easily resolved in hindsight, once
the millennial empirical theory is in place (and there are
enough examples of that to give a philosopher pause).
A point on which we should all agree, I think, is that
"principled" isolation of disciplines is a recipe for fantasy.
Kirsh provides a clear statement of this point in his
valuable corrective of some overstatements in my posi-
tion. Note that when Kirsh says we must solve the
competence/architecture 
problem simultaneously (I
agree entirely), he is making a major claim not only about
why philosophers should do AI but also about why AI
workers should take the brain seriously. And the best do.
Newell's William James lectures (1987) are a case in
point. I have argued for a similar thesis in Dennett
(1984a), in which I accuse some investigators in AI of
making what might be called the philosopher's mistake:
trying to do a completely "pure" competence theory.
It is instructive to compare Newell and Dummett, who
offer similar criticisms, but with a big difference. Dum-
mett thinks it is a mistake for me to search for the
organismic contribution to the determination of belief- a
task he characterizes as "armchair neurophysiology."
This is a striking instance of a philosopher taking a very
interesting conceptual problem - indeed, for me, the
interesting conceptual problem - and kicking it down-
stairs (to the neurophysiologists!), leaving philosophers
with precious little to do. Dummett goes on to suggest
that if my account is "meant as a piece of philosophy" (as
opposed to an empirical proposal) it is not satisfying.
Dummett wants something "classifiable as a theory" just
the way Newell does, but he wants it to be responsive to
nothing but the intuitions of philosophers and the de-
mands of logic. It would be a formalization of "philoso-
phy's very own phenomena" as Newell calls them: propo-
sitional attitudes.
Newell asks: "Will this central role of the propositional
attitudes go on forever? Is it a good thing?" and these are
the right questions to ask. My answer is that we can't yet
see whether an empirical theory of belief (or whatever is
closest to belief in a mature cognitive theory) will have
any use for classical or close-to-classical propositional
attitudes, but that Newell himself, in his description of
the knowledge level, seems to me to presuppose that
something very like propositions (and hence proposi-
tional attitudes?) are the elements from which the knowl-
edge level is composed: "Knowledge is the medium.
Each primitive system consists of a body of knowledge,
including knowledge of the system's goals. If knowledge
is input at some time, then it becomes a permanent part of
the body of knowledge of the system." In Newell 1981 he
says: "There are no structural constraints to the knowl-
edge in a body, either in capacity (i.e., the amount of
knowledge) or in how the knowledge is held in the body.
Indeed, there is no notion of how knowledge is held
(encoding is a notion at the symbol level, not knowledge
level)." What is the smallest unit of knowledge that can be
"input at some time"? A proposition? When a "body" of
knowledge includes knowledge "of the system's goals,
does this mean that the body consists of a collection of
units (propositions) that are about (that compose knowl-
edge of) those goals? Newell intends to keep this level as
neutral as possible with regard to alternative schemes of
implementation (the symbol level), while still constrain-
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1988) 11:3
535

Response/Dennett: The intentional stance
ing it as tightly as possible by considerations of the sort
Kirsh mentions. In the meantime, he models these units
of knowledge in what is essentially the predicate calculus,
and it is far from clear (to me) whether this partitioning of
knowledge is innocent temporizing or a subliminal com-
mitment to suspect sententialist mechanisms after all.
One thing is clear: Only a careful examination of the
actual technical proposals, their implications and their
alternatives, will answer this question.
For instance, Newell cites Levesque (1984) and Diet-
terich (1986) as examples of the sort of technical develop-
ment he hopes to see from me. Dietterich's work has not
yet reached me, but Levesque's essay is a good example
of what can happen when you turn your back on the
philosophical complications and get on with your science.
First, the good news: He proves a distinctly nontrivial
Representation Theorem showing the correctness of a
first-order symbolic realization of an interestingly power-
ful knowledge base with knowledge about its own knowl-
edge (so it can be queried about what it knows and doesn't
know). He also offers a tempting formal model of knowing
who or what something is, in terms of knowledge about
equivalence classes of coreferring expressions (his treat-
ment is consonant, I think, with Millikan's 1984 discus-
sion of reference and "protoreference," ch. 12). But (the
bad news) all this depends on several philosophically
controversial choices of idealization or oversimplification.
All increments to the knowledge base are modeled by a
single operation, TELL, and all utilizations of that knowl-
edge are funneled through a single operation, ASK.
(Levesque is very clear about the difficulties of advancing
anything "concrete" about the knowledge level without
descending prematurely to the symbol level [p. 157ff],
and explicitly draws attention to the oversimplifications
he is adopting.) Thus the only way for perceptual experi-
ence to augment knowledge is by its TELLing the knowl-
edge base various things (couched in first-order ex-
pressions) - what the frog's eye TELLs the frog's brain,
with a vengeance. And ASKing the right questions at the
right time - which some see as the very heart of the
problem of intelligent use of knowledge - is left to the
wisdom of external interlocutors and is not a part of the
model. So, for various reasons given in Stance and my
other writings, I think Levesque has (probably) made the
wrong choices for oversimplifications, but I do not yet
have any better ones to propose. Cognitive science is
difficult.
I must make a similar disclaimer about Smith's pro-
posed recasting of my distinctions between styles of
mental representation into standard distinctions in com-
puter science. I endorse his translations, right down the
line, but note that they involve a slight narrowing of
focus. In a digital computer (running Prolog, say), my
distinctions come to exactly what he says they do. In a
brain, they come to something at least strongly analogous;
but it is not possible to say just what they come to in
advance of achieving the degree of comprehension of the
levels with regard to the brain that we have with regard
to the computer. Particularly important is the business
about rules and representations.
As Smith notes, rules are explicit from the program-
mer's point of view (thank goodness, since otherwise
programming would be well-nigh impossible), but since
the rules are not in the database, the procedures they
represent are not explicitly, implicitly, or potentially
explicitly known by the program. Moreover, to say that
these rules are explicit from the programmer's perspec-
tive is to say that there is actually a syntax of rules. What a
computer can be programmed to do can be thought of as
selecting a (typically branching and looping) path through
an astronomically large space of possible computer pro-
cedures. Getting the computer to do one's bidding is
accomplished by putting together huge molecules of
systematic, syntactic elements. It is not yet clear that
there is any analogous system to the constraining of
dispositional space in the brain. The brain is plastic, and it
is clear that various conditions shape and constrain its
"choice" of procedures; it is no clearer that there is a
systematic, additive, or "molecular" way these conditions
accumulate than there is in the case of selection pressures
in species evolution. That is, if the shaping is done by the
simultaneous and partly chaotic imposition of a multitude
of selection pressures (instead of the piecemeal, serial,
and strictly systematic contribution of lines of code), then
there will be no procedural language expressing the
procedures (except, uninformatively, at something like
the microcode level). If, on the other hand, there is a
"programmer's perspective" on the brain, then the
brain's merely tacit knowhow can be articulated, but that
is scarcely more than a fond hope at this point. "High
Church Computationalism" (Dennett 1986) then can be
seen as the "bean-bag genetics" of AI - a nice com-
parison, since one can be a card-carrying neo-Darwinian
without being "guilty" of bean-bag genetics, and a card-
carrying believer in strong AI without being "guilty " of
High Church computationalism - witness the connec-
tionists.
2. Realism, instrumentalism, eliminativism: The joy of
sects?An onslaught of "impassioned (and to the non-
philosopher arcane) commentary" is correctly anticipated
by Cheney & Seyfarth, who ask what joy there is, after
all, in philosophical sects. What joy indeed? Whose colors
shall I wear, which oath of allegiance shall I swear?
Eliminative materialism (Churchland, Stich), instrumen-
talism or analytical behaviorism or verificationism or
logical positivism (Lycan), or upper- or lower-case real-
ism (Dretske)? Does it matter?
Yes, but not in the way it seems to matter to some
philosophers. (I intend the ambiguity - it seems to some
philosophers to matter in ways it really doesn't, and it
seems to some observers to matter to some philosophers
in ways that it really doesn't matter to them.) What
matters is that everyone who thinks about the mind, in
whatever discipline, is guided in thought by rather sub-
liminal families of images, hunches, and analogies, and
these can be as blinding as any prejudice, or as illuminat-
ing as hints from God. In short, they are powerful and
they are typically unexamined - except by philosophers.
We philosophers are the ones who are not embarrassed to
expose these subliminal contents to explicit scrutiny, to
see what powers they have, thanks to logical implication,
to (mis-)lead the un-self-conscious thinker. When we call
what-is-implied-by-a-family-of-ideas a theory, we court
ridicule from empirical scientists, since our theories, our
variously named isms arrayed genealogically in logical
space, do not do the work of empirical theories. They are
meant merely to be globally and locally coherent ways of
536
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1988) 11:3

Response/Dennett: The intentional stance
understanding all the relevant terms at once, before
setting out to make substantive discoveries, predictions,
explanations. Thus they might better be called theory-
schemata, or theory-frameworks, or something like that.
The labels are useful, since once a body of more or less
received analyses, extrapolations, objections, and rebut-
tals to a particular family of ideas has been developed, this
body of work constitutes a genuine product of philosoph-
ical research that should be readily retrievable. The
trouble is that no sooner does a "position" get definitively
branded than someone thinks up a new variation on it that
preserves what was right about it while obviating the
standard objections. Thus refutation by labeling is usu-
ally an anachronistic and fruitless enterprise. To see this,
just note the difficulties I have gotten myself into by
letting my view be called instrumentalism, in spite of its
differences from "classical" - that is to say, refuted -
instrumentalism.
The debate over "choosing sides" that seems at first to
drive some of the philosophers' commentaries is better
seen, I think, as the exploration of analogies. I say that
attributing belief is like attributing a center of gravity, and
like interpreting an artifact as a realization of a particular
Turing machine, but several philosophers have doubts
about these analogies. What one always wants to know
about an analogy is where the points of similarity and
difference lie.
Dretske says he is a realist about centers of gravity, and
here the labels are really getting in the way, for he nicely
spells out the standard wisdom about centers of gravity,
and I agree. That is, we agree about centers of gravity; I
think beliefs are like that. Does he? If he does, then
whatever he wants to call us, we should be called the
same thing, but I think we still disagree. The key is what
he calls stance-independent properties. (See also New-
ell's first question, about stances versus systems.) There
is always more to learn about things we are realists about:
electricity or electrons, DNA molecules or chromosomes;
but there really isn't anything more to learn about centers
of gravity or Mendelian genes. It doesn't make sense to
wonder if they will turn out to be composed of microparti-
cles, for instance. They are abstracta, and what we can
learn about them is just whatever follows from their
combinatorial roles in our theories. That is not nothing,
but it is only stance-dependent facts.
Compare facts of chess. One can wonder whether or
not a particular board position is possible (= can be
arrived at by a legal series of moves) in chess, but not
(sanely) about whether rooks might be, as yet unbe-
knownst to us, chess-molecules made of bishops and
pawns. Facts of chess are not about little pieces of wood or
ivory. Facts about beliefs are not about transient states of
various nervous systems. Of course any particular ac-
count of a particular chess game has implications about
the spatiotemporal trajectory of various hunks of ivory (or
for that matter, transient states of some nervous systems,
if the game in question is being played by two experts
without a board, just telling each other their moves). And
any particular account of someone's beliefs will have some
rather indirect implications about the physical changes
occurring in various parts of their nervous systems, but
the two are best kept distinct.
Dretske says, "It is true, of course, that descriptions of
what a person believes and wants are not fully deter-
mined by . . . the observable data on which we base our
intentional attributions." Does his use of "observable"
here mean that he nevertheless thinks that these facts are
fully determined by internal, (relatively) unobservable
data? As I say in the final chapter, contrasting my views
with Fodor's (1975; 1987), it first appeared as if Fodor was
challenging Quine's (1960) indeterminacy thesis by
claiming that what is inside the skull settled the questions
(peripheral) behaviorism left unsettled. I have always
claimed that going inside leaves things only marginally
better: enough better to quell the intuitions of outrage
that rise up when faced with Quine's claim, but not all the
way better. Quine's fundamental point about indeter-
minacy survives. I can't tell from Dretske's commentary
whether he would agree.
Dretske says that beliefs "are in the head (like a virus is
in the body), but what makes them beliefs, what gives
them the content they have, is (partly) outside the head -
in those 'perfectly objective patterns' on which we all rely
to figure out what someone wants and believes." Change
"beliefs" to "rooks" and "in the head" to "on the board."
Rooks are on the board (like a cup of coffee on the table)
but what makes them rooks, what gives them their
identity, is (partly) outside the board.
I think it is best to consider beliefs, like chess pieces, to
be abstract objects, but this analogy escapes Churchland.
He wonders in what respects beliefs are abstracta. Here
are a few: There can be an infinity of beliefs in a finite
brain; between any two beliefs there can be another; the
question of exactly when one has acquired a particular
belief can have no objective, determinate (interpretation-
independent) answer (you weren't born believing that
lawyers typically wear shoes, and you have believed it for
some time - just when, exactly, did this belief get added
to your belief store?); the list of beliefs required to "get"
the Newfie-joke (Stance, p. 76) is not a list of salient,
individualizable states or objects in the brain.
Another reason for considering beliefs as abstracta
emerges in response to Lycan's fifth objection (I will deal
with the others later), which concerns the relation be-
tween beliefs "as conceived by folk psychology" and the
"content-bearing states" I claim as the province of cog-
nitive psychology. Why, he asks, would the two only
polysemously intentional phenomena (he means: phe-
nomena that are intentional in different senses) have
anything to do with each other? Answer: because we use
the folk notion, the normative notion, to label the dis-
covered states. This is an old point. Recall McDermott's
(1976) castigation of "wishful mnemonics" - overfacile
labeling by AI practitioners. He was just right: Calling
something in your model the belief that puts a very high
standard on its behavior - the standard drawn, with some
poetic license, from the folk notion in all its idealization,
which is not just the sort of idealization one finds in the
Ideal Gas Laws. (This is also my response to Newell's first
question about "stance vs. system" and to Rosenberg's
claim that while the center of gravity has a definition that
assures it of an unmysterious ontological status and a
precise calculational value hinging on the mechanical
values that define it, the relation of beliefs, as abstracta,
to their mechanical underpinnings "remains a mystery."
I think we do know in principle how such abstracta are
related to the appropriate illata. It is the relation of the
knowledge level to what Newell would call the symbol
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1988) 11:3
537

Response/Dennett: The intentional stance
level(s), but this is a relation with many possible variant
accounts. I don't endorse any particular account yet, as
Newell correctly laments, but I have a program.)
Churchland thinks beliefs as abstracta will eventually
be swept away (like the crystal spheres of Ptolemaic
astronomy - another analogy) once the exciting demon-
strations of connectionism yield a full-fledged alternative
to folk psychology. I think this is vastly premature,
however, in spite of my longtime connectionist leanings
(see ch. 3 of Dennett 1969).
Stich agrees with me on this point: The import of
connectionism in this argument is simply that it shows, as
he says, that there are lots of straws afloat. As for his
second point, he is right that I favor the third of his
proffered alternatives: "the best theories will be connec-
tionist [in some sense - at any rate, not sententialist], and
that no plausible way can be found to reduce folk theories
to connectionist theories." Stich finds my grounds for
"small r" realism in the face of this prospect unappealing,
but I am unmoved by his call to Eliminativism. The
standard example of vestigial folk theory not taken se-
riously in everyday talk is "the sun rises" - which we all
say and no one believes, taken literally. But I for one will
go on not just talking of, but believing in, sunrises and
sunsets, properly understood. My ontological stomach is
that strong. I will unblushingly acknowledge that my
ontology also includes such items as voices (Dennett
1969), haircuts, opportunities, home runs, and "Old
McDonald Had a Farm," in spite of the fact that no known
or anticipated scientific theory has a smooth reduction of
any of these. Eliminativists may try to tell us about the
brave new world to come in which all these outmoded
posits will be forgotten, but to me, this is just a tactical
decision about how to talk, and an undermotivated one.
There are still mountains of valuable things to discover
about the denizens of these "discredited ontologies."
(These Californians do expose my Rylean roots, don't
they?)
Are beliefs more like atoms (Taylor) than like Men-
delian genes or centers of gravity? Are they more like
viruses than songs or chess pieces? More like alchemical
essences than logical states of Turing machines? The
analogies do help; they alert us to oversimplifications and
overlooked avenues in our thought, but after a while,
diminishing returns set in. I recommend that all the
analogies be duly noted and mulled over, and then I
recommend that we move on to other topics. That means
leaving uncompleted a traditional philosophical task:
composing a counterexample-proof, deny-this-on-pain-
of-death "theory" of belief (in 25,000 words or less). Until
I learn of a large cash prize for such a production, I will
leave it to others.
Before leaving the issue of what, "strictly speaking,"
we should say, let me point out that although I am in
general agreement with Cussins's analysis of the issues
that divide Fodor and me, I wonder about the last step of
it, which strikes me as needlessly provocative. "Strictly
speaking, then, there is, for Dennett, no such thing as the
science of psychology, as there is a unique science of
physics." This is a possible, but remarkably strict, reading
of what a science is. It would raise an interesting question
about biology as a science, for instance. To ride a well-
worn science-fiction hobbyhorse: Suppose we find life on
another planet that is not carbon-based. When we do the
science of that life, will it be biology? Or is biology just the
so-called science of one (local) subset of realizations of the
type living thing? Maybe there cannot be any such
alternative realizations of living things, but I doubt if
biology should be seen as "committed" to that hypoth-
esis. Note, by the way, that some highly abstract parts of
biology might go over into the new science just about
intact: population genetics, for instance, or even some
relatively abstract "neural" net theory (but not neu-
rophysiology!). I would say that neurophysiology is just as
much a science as population genetics, even if the former
turns out to have "only" a local application on our planet.
I would similarly speak of various levels of psychology as
sciences - without worrying about whether they apply to
all intentional systems or only to the (organic, Earthly)
varieties.
3. Animals, anecdotes, and experiments. Back to Earthly
science. Stance claims to have something to offer to
researchers in various aspects of animal intelligence, and
three commentaries focus on this.
Cheney & Seyfarth suggest that my contribution is
"methodological." I do not take umbrage at all; that is
what I thought my contribution might be. I am happy to
get the evidence of Kitui's deflating performance, since it
offers a clear instance of using the leverage of the inten-
tional stance to interpret the data: What Kitui would have
to believe and do (if he were rational and if he truly did
have the higher-order intention to deceive) is not what
Kitui in fact does; so much the worse for the higher-order
attribution.
Cheney & Seyfarth correctly point out that my hypoth-
esis about the role of periods of privacy as a precondition
for full-fledged language needs testing. I did not mean to
suggest that I thought it was proven by my initial,
informal observations. But I find their politicians' exam-
ple unconvincing as grounds for doubt. It may be true
that "the lack of privacy seldom prevents self-justifying
explanations of one's own behavior from reaching Byzan-
tine levels of intentionality, even if they are transparently
incredible, " but this is probably true only of a species that
already has a highly developed language system. Once
language gets established, then of course all sorts of
intricate possibilities become opportunities, but the evo-
lutionary demands are more exiguous at the outset. I
agree that it would be premature to elevate the correla-
tion of lack of privacy into a cause, and it is hard for me to
imagine what experiments could shed even indirect light
on this, but let's try to think of some.
The issue between Griffin and me continues to be just
this: when to speak of consciousness. We agree on the
value of studies of animal communication (see my contri-
bution to Whiten and Byrne 1988, and my commentary
on their BBS article [Whiten & Byrne: "Tactical Decep-
tion in Primates" BBS 11(2) 1988], for instance), but
Griffin wants to elevate as the "best criterion of intention
(despite the difficulties of applying it), whether the orga-
nism thinks consciously about what it is doing and about
the choices it makes among the alternative actions avail-
able to it." The problem with this is perhaps best illus-
trated not in this BBS treatment, but in the BBS treat-
ment of Ewert ["Neuroethology of Releasing Mecha-
nisms" 10(3) 1987]. Griffin notes that "frogs do much
538
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1988) 11:3

more than catch bugs," but what does he make of Ewert's
analysis of prey-catching in toads? Does it show that toads
are conscious or that they are more like thermostats after
all? The virtue of my position on this is that one isn't
compelled to abandon one's intentional stance just be-
cause one has found a way of treating the whole toad as a
mechanism that does not in any compelling sense "think
consciously about what it is doing and about the choices it
makes among the available alternatives" (see Dennett
1987b, commentary on Ewert 1987).
Toad romantics (I do not mean to suggest that Griffin is
one of these), may be dismayed by Ewert's (1987) suc-
cesses, for they can be read as disproving (or at least
strongly undercutting) the hypothesis that a toad is con-
scious, and thus, on Griffin's proposal, that it has "real"
intentions. This is one way of parsing the phenomena, but
then real intentions are going to prove much rarer than
one might have thought, even in the explanation of quite
devious and intelligent mammalian - and even human -
behavior. I want to continue to consider toads real inten-
tional systems - just like monkeys, robots, and people -
because what they have in common is theoretically
important, despite the huge differences (see Dummett's
discussion of human thinking, for instance). By my lights,
the misguided anthropomorphism comes from imposing
our intuitions about (our kind of) consciousness on other
intentional systems.
Premack, similarly, claims it is "an instructive matter,
and a reasonably straightforward one, to distinguish real
intentional systems from not so real ones," and offers
three criteria. His first is what I call second-order inten-
tionality: A "real" intentional system is one that attributes
states of mind to others (has beliefs about their beliefs, for
instance). I have trouble interpreting his second criteri-
on, which seems at first to be circular, but I think what he
means is that it is a mistake to attribute beliefs and desires
to beings that do not themselves attribute beliefs and
desires: Hence there are no mere first-order intentional
systems. If you can't have a belief about a belief, you can't
have a belief at all. His third criterion expands on this:
Crocodiles and their ilk have "informational states" and
can benefit from some sorts of "learning" (and people
have similar states), but people - and some primates -
have in addition some other sorts of informational states
(beliefs, in his sense, for instance). Later in his commen-
tary, he points out the particular powers of these second-
order states in their self-attributive uses: having beliefs
about the reliability of one's own perceptual states, for
instance, and withholding action on the basis of doubts
(which are essentially second-order). So, if I have in-
terpreted Premack correctly, his disagreement with me
comes down to this: There is a theoretically important
subset of informational states, the real intentional states,
that are enjoyed only by those creatures that attribute
such states to others. These intentional states are differ-
ent enough from the other informational states that it is a
mistake to lump them together (as one does when one
adopts the intentional stance toward a crocodile or frog).
My reply is that the informational states of frog and
crocodile still are intentional in the "classic" sense (they
exhibit "aboutness'), and are robustly amenable to invo-
cation in intentional-stance prediction and explanation,
so I am not convinced that this is a mistake at all. I agree
completely that there are important theoretical reasons
Response/ Dennett: The intentional stance
for distinguishing the higher-order intentional systems,
and within them, their higher-order intentional states,
and more particularly still, their reflexive higher-order
states (their attitudes toward their own mental states),
and that the presence of such states is a central mark of
higher intelligence. I have myself made these points, not
only in Dennett 1976 and in chapter seven of Stance, but
also in my discussions of the importance of self-monitor-
ing (Dennett 1984b; 1986b; forthcoming a, b). But there
are also other theoretically important distinctions - such
as the distinction I mark between beliefs (of any order)
and opinions (language-infected "thinkings"). If the issue
is just which distinct class deserves the everyday label of
"belief ("on any proper analysis" as he puts it), we have a
terminological difference only, which would be nice to
believe, since I have no quarrel with Premack's catego-
ries as theoretically important ones. As for his discussion
of "subintentional systems," I think we also agree about
everything but terminology; I don't see that his demon-
strations of "subintentionality" are any different from my
demonstrations of "zero order intentionality" (p. 246); in
both cases, what had seemed at first to be explicable in
terms of belief and desire turns out to have a deflated
interpretation.
Premack claims that my version of things obscures the
possibility of multiple levels of control. This would be
most unfortunate, for Premack's example of the pointing
behavior in chimps, and his hunch about what would be
found in the analogous human case, are suggestive of
fruitful lines of further research. I think the experiment
with humans should be conducted to see whether any
action potential in the arm or characteristic "pointing"
motor strip activity occurs, as he predicts. [See also Libet:
"Unconscious Cerebral Initiative and the Role of Con-
scious Will in Voluntary Action" BBS 8(4) 1986.] I would
predict the same, but I would go further than Premack; I
don't think "conditioned response" is the only mecha-
nism that could produce such an inhibited near-act. I
think that other mechanisms of subpersonal cognitive
psychology (not beliefs in his reserved sense, but still
intentionally characterizable processes) could be invok-
ed. I view the intentional stance as an avenue for suggest-
ing such hypotheses for testing, not obscuring them, so I
hope Premack is in the minority in being misdirected on
this score.
Finally, Premack complains about my interpretation of
Premack and Woodruff (1978). I wish I hadn't used the
word "force," which understandably bothers Premack. I
wish I had written of their "scrupulous efforts to ensure
that their chimps engaged in nonanecdotal, repeatable
behavior." Then at least it would have been clear that I
was not objecting to anything like coercion in the experi-
mental design, but just to the repetition involved in the
training, which invariably provides a behavioristic alter-
native hypothesis - though not always a very plausible
one. The problem as it arises in Woodruff and Premack
(1979) is described in Stance, pp. 253-54, and apparently
Premack has no quarrel with my account of the shortcom-
ings of that experiment (Sadie, the deceiver). But he is
right that the videotape experiment with Sarah is differ-
ent. It has, in fact, just the right features, as he says: "For
an individual to consistently choose 'solutions' it must,
given certain controls, first detect 'problems,' and a
creditable interpretation of 'problem' lies exactly in the
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1988) 11:3
539

Response/Dennett: The intentional stance
states of mind that the individual attributes to the actor."
With ingenuity and persistence Premack and Woodruff
compiled a series of experiments that virtually ruled out
the boring behavioristic explanations of Sarah's choices -
but not quite.
As Premack says, Sarah had an enormous amount of
training in match-to-sample tasks, and can be presumed
to have become something of a virtuoso in finding the
"correct" (rewarded) answer to such problems. When
given a range of photographic alternatives as continua-
tions to the videotape sequences, she almost invariably
chose the right one first, but after the early round of
experiments, a case could be made that the right choices
were guided by mere association, not an appreciation of
the actor's "problem." A subsequent round quite prop-
erly sought to disconfirm this by presenting her with
alternatives that were all about equally associated with
the prelude material, so that she was apparently faced
with a much more exacting task of discrimination. For
instance, in the problem of the shivering actor and the
unplugged heater, the solution (a photo of the plugged-in
plug) had to be discriminated from a set of other photos of
the heater plug - not plugged in, or with the wire cut.
Still she chose the correct continuation, but since the
right answer in the more demanding test was the very
same photo that she had already been rewarded for
choosing in the earlier, less demanding test, there is a
good chance she simply remembered what the right,
rewarded, choice was.
The experiment would have been better had the more
demanding tests been performed with entirely novel
materials, and a further round of experiments more or
less met this requirement. It would have been better still
if the dependent behavior had been something of un-
forced environmental significance to Sarah, not perfor-
mance on a heavily trained type of task. Nevertheless,
Woodruff and Premack conducted just the sort of experi-
ment I applaud, and I was wrong to lump it with other,
less telling experiments. (Given my error, I suppose it is
understandable how Premack could have been mistaken
in thinking I recommend "field observations over experi-
ments " - the whole point of chapter seven, and its sequel,
is to recommend experiments that will tease out the
equivocations of field observations.)
4. Evolution, function, content. Does evolutionary theory
show that function is determinate? Can it show that
content is determinate? I say no, provoking rebuttals
from Amundson, Goldman, Kitcher & Kitcher, MacLen-
nan, Roitblat, and Rosenberg, who among themselves
reveal some telling disagreements, which I will attempt
to sort out.
MacLennan claims that the "central" problem of inten-
tionality is consciousness. He may be right, but for years I
have been proceeding on the plan that the best way to
make progress is to divide and conquer thus: first a theory
of content (intentionality) and then (on its shoulders) a
theory of consciousness. Having fashioned a new set of
shoulders, I am now hard at work on the head again. Time
will tell if this is the right order of business.
He also thinks a "causal theory of intentionality" will
permit one to be objective about "natural functional
meaning" after all, and I am ready to rebut this idea right
now. He is right that an intentional system is a none-
quilibrium thermodynamic system (see Dennett 1984,
ch. 2). But he is wrong that this observation can settle the
problems of interpretation. To see why, just imagine
setting a contest among engineers to build artificial none-
quilibrium systems. Each such product will resist en-
tropy increases more or less well, under various condi-
tions. Which of its moves are mistakes, which are good
bets that happen not to pay off, which are short-term
winners that are long-term losers? Knowing that these
things are (whether or not they are supposed to be)
nonequilibrium systems, with a causally explicable "ten-
dency to avoid equilibrium," leaves all these questions of
their design (their design rationales) unanswered, and
without answers to these questions, the promised "func-
tional meaning" will still elude the observer. The situa-
tion is no different with "natural" nonequilibrium
systems.
Kitcher & Kitcher demonstrate this with their gup-
pies, in spite of their intentions. The guppy example is
supposed to exhibit a case in which careful biological
research yields determinate (but complex) attributions of
function. Why then do they refrain from concluding their
tale by telling us exactly what the function (or functions) of
those guppy spots is and is not? I do not doubt a word of
what they say, but find it does not disagree with anything
I hold dear. Let us look, as they recommend, at the
details: Suppose that Endler (1983) has shown that the
guppy spots' function is not simply to attract females; it is
tempered by the simultaneous constraint that the spots
not be too large, thereby attracting predators. Fine so far.
And presumably even more patient exploration could
reveal still further benefits (and costs) derivable by the
guppies from their spots. In particular, what of the
selective benefits derived by some guppies of attracting
Endler's attention sufficiently to come under his protec-
tion as worthy experimental subjects? At what point
would it become part of the function (presumably an
entirely objective, determinate function) of guppy spots
to appeal to Endler? I suspect that Endler would take
steps to prevent any looming environmental innovation
that would threaten the populations he studies; so, thanks
to their spots, some subpopulations of guppies have
already won a tremendous - if perhaps not yet manifest -
advantage over their less interesting or less accessible
cousins. The Kitchers will agree then, I gather, that in
virtue of this detail, it is beyond interpretation that
among the functions of some guppy spots is Endler-
attraction?
More generally, I fail to see that I have been unap-
preciative of the power of evolutionary analysis when it is
done well (as Kitcher & Kitcher charge), any more than I
am unappreciative of literary analyses when they are
done well. I just don't think that either sort, however well
done, discovers some fully determinate truth about what
things mean, or what their functions really, truly are. It is
no argument against Quine's (1960) indeterminacy thesis
that some translations are obviously wrong, and it is no
argument in favor of functional determinacy that some
functional attributions are obviously right (the eagle's
wing is obviously for flying, and the eye for seeing).
Similarly, in response to Kitcher & Kitchers proposed
fixing of rationality, I agree that under many (local)
circumstances we can agree on what patterns of thought
"will tend to produce true beliefs," but this leaves ra-
540
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1988) 11:3

Response/Dennett: The intentional stance
tionality quite unfixed. While we're on details, what do
the Kitchers make of the Kahnemann and Tversky (1983)
example I used as my parallel with the biologist? They
claim that in their view "we will still be able to charge
people with irrationality when their behavior fails to
exemplify particular principles that are normal for them,
their species, or their subgroup.' But what Kahnemann
and Tversky show, presumably, is that it is normal for
people to make these irrational moves. So it is rational,
because it is normal? I doubt that this is what the Kitchers
mean.
The point of Kitcher & Kitchers defense of determin-
acy of function is presumably to help support their real-
ism about beliefs: Is belief without determinate content
"belief manqu£"? I don't think so. And I don't think
Quine's goal was the general "condemnation" of belief,
but rather, as I say in the last chapter of "Stance," the
characterization of it as an indispensable dramatic idiom.
Goldman is another, though, who resists this slide from
objectivity, and who thinks that a proper understanding
of biology and evolution will restore determinacy of both
function and content. He focuses on my argument in
chapter 8, which he rightly sees as the heart of my case,
but he fails to see how the parts of my case fit together.
First he offers two "scenarios" that purport to argue
against me, but in fact argue against the view I reject (p.
319) as an analogue of the Intentional Fallacy. Then he
notices this, and in "fairness" notes that I claim that
content in artifacts depends on the artifact's users (which
is close enough for our purposes here). He then claims
that in his scenarios, "there are no users at all." But this
begs the question against my position, for I claim that
there are users: the genes themselves are the benefici-
aries relative to which, in the end, all functional questions
must be adjudicated, and there are genes (one gathers) in
each of his scenarios. These genes, inhabiting their sur-
vival machines, rely on these artifacts to preserve them
even into the next second. By the time such a "cosmic
accident" has lived a second, it has had all the users it
needs.
I do wish, by the way, that philosophers would stop
conjuring up intuition pumps based on cosmic accidents.
They don't show anything reliable, so far as I can see.
Suppose, by cosmic accident, the words "Drink Pepsi"
were to emerge from the alignment of a trillion comets in
the sky (I'm trying to keep a straight face as I write this).
Would it be an advertisement for Pepsi? The Pepsi
people would be delighted, and no doubt would put the
Coca Cola people out of business. So what? There is no
tooth fairy. In the real world, complicated structures
don't just happen by cosmic accident, and so, when one
wonders about their function (or meaning) their geneal-
ogy is obviously highly relevant - but it settles nothing (to
suppose otherwise is to commit the Intentional Fallacy).
Amundson misunderstands me on this point. He is
most puzzled by my "deemphasis of the causal mecha-
nism of natural selection." But, as just noted, I don't
"deny the relevance" of causal theories; I just deny their
sufficiency. Some antiadaptationists think they can get by
with just the causal facts ("Instead of asking 'What is
good?' we ask, 'What has happened?' The new question
does everything we could expect the old question to do,
and a lot more besides. " Ghiselin (1983), quoted in
"Stance" p. 278). This, I hold, is a big mistake. The facts
about causal mechanisms permit one neither to do with-
out functional interpretation (the behaviorists' and
Ghiselin's mistake) nor to make determinate functional
interpretations (the mistake made by MacLennan, Kitch-
er & Kitcher, and Goldman). Of course adaptationists are
committed to there being actual, specific causal histories
that support their interpretations of characters as adapta-
tions, but their commitment is only to there being the
"right sort" of selective history, and they don't have to
cash that out nonteleologically (fortunately, since it is
impossible).
Like Kitcher & Kitcher, Amundson attempts to say
how the details of scientific practice in evolutionary
biology refute my analysis, but I think he underestimates
my position. I am quite willing to grant the biologists
their capacity to identify and reidentify homologies. I am
also willing to grant the psychologists the capacity to
identify and reidentify tracts of nervous system, eyes,
lips, phones (in the linguists' sense), stimuli (subject to
the usual problems of stimulus definition and generaliza-
tion that bedevil behaviorists) and behaviors (subject to
the same problems). But what one behavior means from
one occasion to the next is a problem, and so is what one
homologous trait's function is - as my discussion above of
Endler's guppies shows.
There is causation to be taken into account at all times
by the psychologist, and by the biologist. Neither, how-
ever, has succeeded in telling a watertight causal story
that licenses functional, or referential, interpretations.
The "right sort" of causal relations sought in the various
causal theories of reference is now beginning to reveal
itself as transparently teleological - and none the worse
for that. (Witness Fodor's 1987 Laocoon-like toilings to
avoid this conclusion.) And the "right sort" of causal
history to settle a functional attribution in evolutionary
theory is equally elusive to evolutionary theorists. (Wit-
ness Gould and Vrba's 1982 toilings to say when adapta-
tion differs from "exaptation.")
So I think Amundson is mistaken when he concludes
that there is no mentalistic analog for the causal principle
of natural selection. There are causal principles on all
sides: "choices" and "decisions" and other little triggers
and transductions and the like. Causation is everywhere
to be seen in cognitive psychology, and it is generally
"relevant" - but just what does it show? Does it give a
"historical, causal explanation in support of the semantic
ascent from physical to teleological ascriptions"? Cer-
tainly, but such ascent stops short of determinacy.
This was the point I argued for in the passage in
Dennett (1969) that Rosenberg discusses, where the
issue is the interpretation of Fido's internal states vis a vis
a certain steak thrown out onto thin ice. I supposed the
scientist examining Fido to have historical, causal knowl-
edge of the sources of the events he wished to endow with
content. "He has the following information: an afferent
event of type A, previously associated with visual presen-
tations of steaks, has continuations which trigger sali-
vation and also activate a control system normally operat-
ing when Fido is about to approach or attack something,"
Rosenberg gets the gloss on my early account slightly
askew. I don't say that we don't need to identify the
description under which Fido views the steak. I say that
there is no fact of the matter as to exactly which descrip-
tion Fido is laboring under, but we do in fact need to
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1988) 11:3
541

Response/Dennett: The intentional stance
settle on some such description in order to make sense of
the behavior. It provides the rationale to give one rather
than another reading - in an entirely familiar way. It is
analogous to our use of raised-eyebrow quotes in explain-
ing each other's activities: "The Senator dismissed the
allegations of the 'Communist dupe' without further
investigation." Perhaps the Senator never used those
words, to himself or others, but we have categorized the
sort of attitude he had, an attitude that explains his
dismissal - or rather alludes to an explanation that we can
all readily conjure up. This is a particularly efficient way
of drawing attention (rightly or wrongly, of course) to a
large family of attitudes, expectations, beliefs, discrimi-
native abilities and inabilities, foibles, obsessions, and
fears that can be seen to color the Senator's actions. The
extensional characterization will "suffice" in one sense: It
identifies the victim of the Senator's action, but it does
.not in itself "guide" the psychology in the way Rosenberg
suggests. Or at least not sufficiently.
I agree that in principle one can go lightly on in-
terpretation and speak rather abstemiously just of regis-
trations, where substitution ad lib is the rule. But one
pays a heavier price for this than Rosenberg acknowl-
edges. What the tendentious labels do for you is just to
allude (without specifying) to the sorts of contexts in
which results can be expected. This comes out particu-
larly clearly in the sort of weird puzzle case I discuss in
Chapter 5, "Beyond Belief: Suppose Tom registers a
heavily armed fugitive mass murderer shaking hands with
him (p. 199). Whether anything interesting follows de-
pends entirely on what Tom registers this agent as. The
same goes for Fido, of course; if Fido registers the steak as
a mere clump of debris, he will no doubt pass it by.
I think this is consonant with Roitblat's remarks about
abandoning certainty: If we view the registration mecha-
nisms, the syntactic engines, as making unjustified leaps
of "inference" to meanings, then we can say what those
states mean, but not what they certainly mean. That is,
"good enough" is the standard for meaning attribution,
both for theorists peering in, and for the organisms
themselves. I think then that what Roitblat calls abandon-
ing certainty of meaning is what I call abandoning deter-
minacy of content. When Roitblat says his hierarchical
accounts "require no mysterious components, homun-
culi, or executives to operate" he is missing a point of
mine. His higher-level structures are homunculi, and
there is nothing more mysterious about homunculi than
that. Finally, although he is right that my view is inter-
mediate between the vitalists and the eliminativists, he
seems to think I view the intentional stance as erring in
attributing "too much" intelligence to species; I do not,
however, view this as a useful error, but as the truth,
properly understood.
5. Other issues, alphabetically by author. There is an
abrupt dismissal by Amundson of my claim that the
theory of natural selection is quite unable to discriminate
natural from artificial selection by an examination of the
products. I take this to be a little-noted but incontroverti-
ble fact, and I would like to see Amundson show just how
a biologist would make this determination.
Some twenty years ago Danto suggested that beliefs
were sentences in the head, and today he thinks "sen-
tentialism is here for a long time," despite my criticisms
(and those of others), which "pass harmlessly overhead."
He misses the point of my example of the "thing about
redheads"; he says that it is no part of Realism to restrict
internal representations to beliefs or even sententially
characterized internal states. Quite true; that is why I
myself am a Realist about representations, as I often say.
My point is that many Realists about belief are commit-
ted to the view that all content must be packaged in
propositions (read: sentences) that can make the sort of
content-contribution to the whole that a well-formed-
formula can make if added as a new axiom to a set of
axioms. This is the issue that worries me about Newell
and Levesque (see above). What Danto's insouciance
shows is that if you leave the empirical questions to the
empirical researchers, as he advises, and the semantical
problems to "semantical experts" (who are they, if not
philosophers, by the way?) you are left with nothing
much to worry about.
Dummett raises several objections not treated above,
and also provides an excellent discussion of the ineradica-
ble vagueness of belief. He regrets my ignoring (human
type) thinking, and finds my view that human belief and
animal belief are on a par "grossly implausible." But, as
mentioned above in response to Premack, I reserve
another term, opinions, for the states Dummett correctly
points to as playing a critical role in human action and
psychology. I think, by the way, that Stance would
indeed have benefited from another chapter, a positive
account of opinions and the way they differ from beliefs, a
sequel to Brainstorms' "How to Change Your Mind," but
alas no such chapter has been written. The interanima-
tion of opinions and beliefs in the accounts we must give
of the distinctively human pathologies of self-deception
and akrasia, alluded to in Dummett's remarks, and also
the shaping role of explicit or nearly-explicit thinking in
the guidance of normal human behavior, is a topic for
further research by philosophers, and by me in particular
(in my account of the nature of conscious thought, a topic I
am currently working on).
Dummett also accuses me of making "the common
compatibilist mistake of thinking that the success of the
intentional stance must always depend upon the pos-
sibility of a parallel explanation," by which I think
Dummett means: a causal, mechanical explanation in
terms of inner goings-on, a subpersonal explanation. This
requires some unpacking. In "On Giving Libertarians
What They Say they Want" (Brainstorms, ch. 15), I
showed how an intentional stance explanation could go
through successfully even when it was known that no
deterministic mechanical explanation of the behavior
could be had. This denies one "common compatibilist
mistake," the mistake enshrined in Hobart's (1934) title
"Free Will as Involving Determination and Inconceiva-
ble Without It." But this is not the common compatibilist
mistake Dummett has in mind, I gather. What can it be?
If it is the belief that the success of an intentional stance
explanation is always in jeopardy of falsification by the
confirmation of a strikingly nonparallel mechanical expla-
nation, I don't think this is a mistake at all. I argue in
Brainstorms, ch. 12, "Mechanism and Responsibility,"
that if one gets confirmation of a much too simple me-
chanical explanation (e.g., our hero's brilliant "act" turns
out to have been the mechanical effect of a brain seizure -
cf. the demoting discoveries about vervet brilliance), this
542
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1988) 11:3

Response/ Dennett: The intentional stance
really does disconfirm the fancy intentional level account.
So I do not see what "common compatibilist mistake" is
left for me to have made.
Finally, Dummett, the premier interpreter of Frege,
says that Frege's view is quite antithetical to the positions
I discuss in Chapter 5.1 am in no position to disagree with
him. (Since I claim Frege's concept of a Thought as the
"backbone" of current orthodoxy about propositions, I
guess I am fair game if current orthodoxy turns out to be
not at all what Frege had in mind.) But I am puzzled by
one of Dummett's claims: Frege's principle that thoughts
are not mental contents "implies that . . . when I grasp a
thought, nothing in my mind determines which thought it
is that I grasp. If so, nothing in my mind, still less in my
brain, is required to determine what object or objects I
am thinking about." I had wondered if this could be an
implication of Frege's attack on psychologism, but dis-
missed the idea. If this is in fact what Frege held, then I
wonder why his brand of antipsychologism should be
taken seriously after all. I must be missing Dummett's
point.
Harman worries about whether there is a vicious
circularity in my definition of the intentional stance, a
worry shared by Lycan. I don't think there is, for the
following reason. First, I do not, as Harman claims,
"abandon" my earlier substantive claims about the nature
of belief and desire when I grant, in Chapter 4, that "one
way to discover" what someone else believes and desires
is to imagine yourself in that person's shoes and ask
yourself "what would I believe and desire under those
circumstances?" Stich's projectionist method of belief
attribution (see pp. 343-34) is, for all I can see, coexten-
sive with my rationalist method (it will yield the same
verdicts) if used by someone who already has a good idea
what beliefs and desires are. One can feign total igno-
rance on this score, and then claim to be baffled by the
circularity of Harman's Theses I and IV taken together.
But even for one who claims to be innocent of preconcep-
tions about what beliefs and desires might be, it seems to
me that I have said enough, in the course of the book,
about the principles governing attribution to brush aside
the suggestion that in the end my account fails to break
out of the circle Harman and Lycan have described.
Lycan's first three objections have not yet been treat-
ed. He begins with a fine summary of my position,
correctly identifying three major reasons for my instru-
mentalism, and then turns to objections, written in phi-
losophers' shorthand, warning me (and other philoso-
phers) by allusion of various presumed difficulties.
Herewith, then, my equally efficient but probably equal-
ly hermetical replies.
1. I share Lycan's low opinion of certain excesses of
logical positivism, but I am not an across-the-board in-
strumentalist, and do not advocate it (see pp. 71-72).
What label would Lycan place on automata theory? Is one
an instrumentalist in holding that to be a Turing machine
is to be robustly interpretable as a Turing machine?
2. Lycan's brief allusion to "the zombie example,"
which purportedly refutes analytical behaviorism, must
be baffling to the uninitiated: they can take it from him
that such examples "work" or they can take it from me
that they don't work, or they can check it out in the
literature. Lycan (1987) is a good instance on one side,
while Dennett (1982) is a good instance on the other.
The editor also seems to believe in zombies. According
to the EDITORIAL COMMENTARY, the mind/body prob-
lem is the problem of whether there is a difference
between (1) behaving exactly as if one were in pain and (2)
in reality having pain; it is suggested that there is no
counterpart in biology or physics. If the editor took his
own emphasized words seriously, I doubt if he'd find my
view that there is no difference all that puzzling. To say
that something (our putative zombie) behaved exactly as
if it had pain is to say that it responds to analgesics exactly
as if it had pain, begs for mercy exactly as if it had pain, is
distracted from pressing projects exactly as if it had pain,
is unable to perform up to snuff on various tests exactly as
if it had pain, and so forth. About such an entity (such a
putative zombie) I am unembarrassed to declare: Yes,
there is no important difference - indeed no discernible
difference - between such an entity and an entity that
genuinely has pain. The illusion of a difference here is
traceable to the tricky word "behavior," which can be
understood to mean something like "peripheral," "exter-
nal," "readily observable" behavior. I am not now and
have never been that kind of behaviorist. I am the kind of
behaviorist that every biologist and physicist is. The
biologist says that once the behavior of the pancreas or
the chromosome or the immune system is completely
accounted for, everything important is accounted for.
The physicist says the same about the behavior of the
electron.
Searle also makes this mistake about my behaviorism,
when he insists that my third-person point of view com-
pels me to "look only at external behavior," but re-
member that everything the neuroscientist can look at is
also external behavior by this criterion. See also my reply
to Dretske above.
3. I don't find Lycan's third objection, about instru-
mentalism and usefulness, compelling. I don't hold that
the antecedent clause merely says something about "the
usefulness of our predictive practices" any more than I
hold that the sentence "Had TMj gone into state k, it
would have . . . " says something about the usefulness of
our predictive practices when we call things Turing
machines.
Newell asks several questions that I haven't answered
directly or by implication above. He is right that there is a
lot more of folk psychology than the parts he and I attempt
to clarify, but I wonder if he isn't selling the knowledge
level short in saying that it concentrates only on the
"knowledge and goals" of agents. Surely he also aspires to
provide sound models of human wondering, anticipating,
learning, forgetting, perceiving, intending, and many
other phenomena familiar to folk psychology (and anath-
ema to old-line behaviorists). So do I.
Newell asks about the mystery philosophers still see
surrounding "the semantic relation" and I think the
reason he doesn't see it is that he has so far chosen to
sidestep it in his own work; for instance, when SOAR
solves a block-piling problem, there is no question of just
which blocks (in the world) SOAR is thinking about - for
SOAR is not thinking of any particular blocks in the world.
Once that issue arises, however, the sketchiness at best
and incoherence at worst of existing "procedural seman-
tics" accounts begins to be worrying. Here, by the way,
Dummett and Newell might meet on common ground.
I tried, in Chapter 9, to give a sympathetic, detailed
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1988) 11:3
543

Re/erences/Dennett: The intentional stance
analysis of Searle's (1980) various claims about the Chi-
nese room, and to say where I thought he had gone
wrong. In his present commentary, Searle's response to
specific objections to his position seems to be simply to
declare, with no argument or analysis whatever, that they
are "irrelevant." I have carefully considered Searle's
three specific claims of irrelevance, but found them all to
be invalid. Others are invited to confirm this finding. The
rest of the commentary seems to me to be an exercise in
refutation by caricature. (A student of mine once came
up with the marvelous malaprop: "by parody of reason-
ing" for "by parity of reasoning." The difference is admit-
tedly hard for many to discern, but mature students of
philosophy realize that any philosophical position worth
taking seriously can be made to appear utterly ridiculous
with a few deft strokes of deliberate oversimplification -
it's child's play, in fact.)
Taylor holds that to animals (clams? ants?) some things
really matter, and that my nonrealistic way with "matter-
ing states" means that I never really talk about the mind at
all. My view has the effect, he says, of "interpreting away
the central phenomena of mind." I think he is close to
being right about something important: A more properly
biological cognitive science would indeed pay more at-
tention to "affect" and "emotion," and would never let
the question hide in the shadows for long as to why some
things matter to various organisms (or artifactual sys-
tems). But I think Taylor's way of arguing for his claim is
indefensible. "There are too many reasons to state them
all here," he says, why my view is a "catastrophic mis-
take." A list would be appreciated. Taylor chooses to
focus on pain, presumably the most accessible example of
my catastrophic mistakes: "About pain, there is a 'fact of
the matter,' beyond all interest relativity, and immune to
any supposed 'indeterminacy of radical translation.'"
Now I deny this, and, as Taylor notes, I have written at
considerable length about it in Brainstorms, trying to
show how this is an illusion. Briefly, is it as obvious as
Taylor claims that there is (always) a fact of the matter
about pain? Do clams feel pain? Our sort of pain? The sort
that matters? Do we human beings feel pain under
various sorts of anesthesia and analgesia? In Brainstorms
I went to the details to show that what is "obvious" to the
armchair philosopher is not at all obvious when you start
looking at the strange and troubling empirical facts.
Anyone who thinks Taylor's brute assertion is obviously
right might read that chapter and then reconsider.
Does mattering matter to me? It certainly does. I have
written a whole book on it (Dennett 1984) - a book with
which Taylor has strenuously disagreed. He sometimes
strikes me as one of those who think that the only way to
protect humanity from the dead hand of science is to erect
an absolutist metaphysical Maginot Line. It won't work.
I'm already way into enemy territory with my own ac-
count of mattering. I do not "sidestep" the issues, nor do I
apply the "science upsets common sense" doctrine in a
"knee-jerk fashion." When I apply this doctrine (as for
example in my discussion of pain), I try to deliver the
goods.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
I am grateful to Kathleen Akins, Nicholas Humphrey, and Bill
de Vries for advice on this Response.
References
Amundson, R. (forthcoming) Doctor Dennett and Doctor Pangloss: Perfection
and selection in biology and psychology. Behavioral and Brain Sciences.
Au, T. K. (1986) A verb is worth a thousand words: The causes and
consequences of interpersonal events implicit in language. Journal of
Memory and Language 25:104-22.
Austin, J. L. (1962) Sense and sensibilia. Oxford University Press.
Bennett, J. (1976) Linguistic behavior. Cambridge University Press.
Bever, T. G. (1984) The road from behaviorism to rationalism. In: Animal
cognition, ed. H. L. Roitblat, T. G. Bever & H. S. Terrace.
Bradley, M. C. (1964) Critical notice of J. J. C. Smart's Philosophy and
scientific realism. Australasian Journal of Philosophy 42:262—83.
Brentano, F. (1925) Psychologic von empirischen Standpunkt. 
Meiner.
Brooks, R. (forthcoming) Intelligence without representation. In: Artificial
Intelligence Journal, special edition on Foundations of AI, ed. D. Kirsh.
Elsevier.
Brown, P. & Jenkins, H. M. (1968) Auto-shaping of the pigeon's key-pack.
Journal of the Experimental Analysis of Behavior 11:1-8.
Brown, R. or Fish, D. (1983) The psychological causality implicit in language.
Cognition 14:237-73.
Burge, T. (1979) Individualism and the mental. Midwest Studies in Philosophy
4:73-121.
(1986) Individualism and psychology. The Philosophical Review 95(l):3-46.
Byrne, R. W. & Whiten, A. (forthcoming) Machiavellian intelligence. Oxford
University Press.
Campbell, K. K. (1970) Body and mind. Doubleday Anchor.
Carey, S. (1985) Conceptual change in childhood. MIT Press.
Cartwright, N. (1983) How the laws of physics lie. Oxford University Press.
Cheney, D. L. & Seyfarth, R. M. (1985) Vervet monkey alarm calls:
Manipulation through shared information? Behaviour 94:150-65.
(in press) Truth and deception in animal communication. In: The minds of
other animals, ed. C. A. Ristau & P. Marler. Erlbaum.
Chisholm, R. (1956) Sentences about believing. Aristotelian Society
Proceedings 56:125-48.
(1966) On some psychological concepts and the "logic" of intentionality. In:
Intentionality, minds, and perception, ed. H. N. Castaneda. Wayne State
University Press.
(1976) Person and object. Open Court Press.
Chomsky, N. (1980) Rules and representation. Columbia University Press.
Churchland, P. M. (1970) The logical character of action-explanations.
Philosophical Review 79:214-36.
(1979) Scientific realism and the plasticity of mind. Cambridge University
Press.
(1981) Eliminative materialism and the propositional attitudes. Journal of
Philosophy 78:67-90.
(1984) Matter and consciousness: A contemporary introduction to the
philosophy of mind. MIT Press.
(1986) Neurophilosophy: Toward a unified theory of mind/brain. MIT
Press.
(in press) Reply to Corballis. Biology and Philosophy.
Churchland, P. S. & Churchland, P. M. (1981) Stalking the wild epistemic
engine. Nous 17:5-18.
Clement, J. (1982) Students' preconceptions in introductory mechanics.
American Journal of Physics 50:66-71.
Darwin, C. R. (1874) The descent of man, and selection in relation to sex.
Lovell, Coryell.
Davidson, D. (1970) Mental events. In: Experience and theory, ed. L. Foster
& J. Swanson. University of Massachusetts Press.
(1973) Radical interpretation. Dialectica 27:313-28. Reprinted in D.
Davidson (1984) Inquiries into truth and interpretation. Oxford
University Press.
(1975) Thought and talk. In: Mind and language: Wolfson College lectures,
1974. Clarendon Press.
Dawkins, R. (1976) The selfish gene. Oxford University Press.
Dennett, D. C. (1969) Content and consciousness. Routledge and Kegan Paul.
(1973) Mechanism and responsibility. In: Essays on freedom of action, cd.
T. Honderich. Routledge & Kegan Paul. Reprinted in Dennett (1978).
(1975) Why the law of effect will not go away. Journal of the Theory of
Social Behavior 5:169-87.
(1976) Conditions of personhood. In: The identities of persons, ed. A.
Rorty. University of California Press.
(1978) Brainstorms: Philosophical essays on mind and psychology. Bradford
Books.
(1980) Passing the buck to biology. Behavioral and Brain Sciences 3:19.
(1982) How to study human consciousness empirically: Or, nothing comes
to mind. Synthese 53:159-80.
544
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1988) 11:3

References/Dennett The intentional stance
(1983a) Intentional systems in cognitive ethology: The "Panglossian
paradigm" defended. Behavioral and Brain Sciences 6:343-90. (Reprinted
as chapter 7 of The Intentional Stance.)
(1983b) Taking the intentional stance seriously. (Response to Griffin).
Behavioral and Brain Sciences 6:384.
(1984a) Elbow room: The varieties of free will worth wanting. MIT
Press/Bradford Books.
(1984b) Cognitive wheels: The frame problem of AI. In: Minds, machines
and evolution, ed. C. Hookway. Cambridge University Press.
(1985) When does the intentional stance work? Behavioral and Brain
Sciences 8:763-66.
(1986a) Is there an autonomous 'knowledge level? In: Meaning and
cognitive structure: Issues in the computational theory of mind, ed. Z.
W. Pylyshyn & W. Demopoulos. Ablex. (Commentary on Newell, same
volume.)
(1986b) The logical geography of computational approaches: A view from the
east pole. In: The representation of knowledge and belief, ed. R. Harnish
& M. Brand. University of Arizona Press.
(1987a). The intentional stance. MIT Press/Bradford Books.
(1987b) Eliminate the middletoad! Behavioral and Brain Sciences 10:372-74.
(1988) The intentional stance in theory and practice. In: Machiavellian
intelligence, Ed. A. Whiten & R. W. Byrne. Oxford University Press,
(forthcoming a) A route to intelligence: Oversimplify and self-monitor. In:
Can intelligence be explained?, ed. J. Khalfa. Oxford University Press,
(forthcoming b) Cognitive ethology: Hunting for bargains or a wild goose
chase? In: Explanation of goal-seeking behavior, ed. A. Montefiore & D.
Noble. Hutchinsons.
Dietterich, T. G. (1986) Learning at the knowledge level. Machine Learning
1:287-316.
Dretske, F. (1985) Machines and the mental. Western Division APA
Presidential Address. In: The proceedings and addresses of the APA, vol.
59, no. 1.
(1986) Misrepresentation. In: Belief, ed. R. Bogdan. Oxford University
Press.
(1988) Explaining behavior: Reasons in a world of causes. MIT
Press/Bradford Books.
Endlcr, J. (1983) Natural and sexual selection on color patterns in poeciliid
fishes. Environmental Biology of Fishes 9:173-90.
(1986) Natural selection in the wild. Princeton University Press.
Evans, G. (1980) Understanding demonstratives. In: Meaning and
understanding, ed. H. Parret & J. Bouveresse. Walter de Gruyter.
Ewert, J.-P. (1987) Neuroethology of releasing mechanisms: Prey-catching in
toads. Behavioral and Brain Sciences 10:337-405.
Fodor, J. (1975) The language of thought. Harvester Press; Crowell.
(1980) Methodological solipsism considered as a research strategy in
cognitive psychology. Behavioral and Brain Sciences 3:63-110.
(1981) Representations. MIT Press/Bradford Books.
(1983) The modularity of mind. MIT Press/Bradford Books.
(1986) Why parameeia don't have mental representations. Midwest Studies
in Philosophy 10:3-23.
(1987) Psychosemantics. MIT Press/Bradford Books.
Fodor, J. A. & Pylyshyn, Z. W. (1988) Connectionism and cognitive
architecture: A critical analysis. Cognition 28.
Frege, G. Grundlagen dcr Arithmetik (Foundations of Arithmetic).
Gallistel, C. R. (1980) The organization of action. Erlbaum.
Gardiner, M. (1970) Mathematical games. Scientific American 223(4):120-23.
Ghiselin, M. T. (1983) Lloyd Morgan's canon in evolutionary context.
Behavioral and Brain Sciences 6:362-63.
Gilovich, T. & Regan, D. T. (1986) The actor and the experiencer: Divergent
patterns of causal attribution. Social Cognition 4:342—52.
Gould, S. J. (1980) The pandas thumb. W. W. Norton.
Gould, S. J. & Lewontin, R. (1979) The spandrels of San Marco and the
Panglossian paradigm: A critique of the adaptationist programme.
Proceedings of the Royal Society B205:581-98.
Gould, S. J. & Vrba, E. S. (1982) Exaptation - a missing term in the science
of form. Paleohiology 8:4-15.
Griffin, D. R. (1983) Thinking about animal thoughts. Behavioral and Brain
Sciences 6:364.
(1984) Animal thinking. Harvard University Press.
Grossberg, S. (forthcoming) Neural networks. MIT Press.
Gyger, M., Karakashian, S. J. & Marler, P. (1986) Avian alarm calling: Is
there an audience effect? Animal Behaviour 34:1570-72.
Haugeland, J. (1981) Mind design. MIT Press/Bradford Books.
Heidegger, M. (1962) Being and time (translated by J. Macquarrie & E.
Robinson). Harper & Row.
Hobart, R. B. (1934) Free will as involving determination and inconceivable
without it. Mind 43(169): 1-27.
Husserl, E. (1931) Ideas (translated by W. R. Boyce Gibson). Allen & Unwin:
Macmillan. (The German original, Ideen zu einer reinen Phdnomenologie
und phanomenologischen Philosophic, was published in 1913.)
Jennings, H. S. (1906/1923) Behavior of the lower organisms. Columbia
University Press.
Kahneman, D. & Tversky, A. (1983) Choices, values, and frames. American
Psychologist 39:341-50.
Kaplan, D. (1968) Quantifying in. Synthese 19:178-214. Reprinted in D.
Davidson & J. Hintikka, eds. (1969) Words and objections. Reidel.
(1980) Demonstratives. The John Locke Lectures, Oxford University.
Kirk, R. (1974) Zombies vs. materialists. Aristotelian Society Supplementary
Volume 48:135-52.
Kitcher, P. (1985) Vaulting ambition: Sociobiology and the quest for human
nature. MIT Press.
(1987) "Why Not The Best?" In: The latest on the best: Essays on
optimality and evolution, ed. J. Dupre. MIT Press.
Konolige, K. (1986) A deduction model of belief. Pitman/Morgan Kaufman.
Kripke, S. (1982) Wittgenstein on rules and private language. Harvard
University Press.
Lakatos, I. (1970) Falsification and the methodology of scientific research
programs. In: Criticism and the growth of knowledge, ed. I. Lakatos &
A. Musgrave. Cambridge University Press.
Levesque, H. J. (1984) Foundations of a functional approach to knowledge
representation. Artificial Intelligence 23:155-212.
Lindauer, M. (1971) Communication among social bees. Harvard University
Press.
Lloyd, J. W. (1987) Foundations of logic programming (2nd ed.). Springer-
Verlag.
Lycan, W. G. (1987) Consciousness. MIT Press/Bradford Books.
(1988) Judgment and justification. Cambridge University Press.
(in press) Ideas of representation. In: Mind, value and culture: Essays in
honor of E. M. Adams, ed. D. Weissbord. Rowman & Allanheld.
MacLennan, B. J. (1988) Logic for the new AI. In: Aspects of artificial
intelligence, ed. J. H. Fetzer. Kluwer.
Marler, P., Dufty, A. & Pickert, R. (1986) Vocal communication in the
domestic chicken: II. Is a sender sensitive to the presence and nature of
a receiver? Animal Behaviour 34:188-93.
Marr, D. (1982) Vision. MIT Press.
McCarthy, J. (1979) Ascribing mental qualities to machines. In: Philosophical
perspectives in artificial intelligence, ed. M. Ringle. Humanities Press.
McClelland, J. L., & Rumelhart, D. E., eds. (1986) Parallel distributed
processing: Explorations in the microstructure of cognition (2 vols). MIT
Press/Bradford Books.
McClelland, J. L., Rumelhart, D. E. & Hinton, G. E. (1986) The appeal of
parallel distributed processing. In: Parallel distributed processing:
Explorations in the microstructure of cognition, ed. D. E. Rumelhart &
J. L. McClelland. MIT Press/Bradford Books.
McCloskey, M. (1983) Intuitive physics. Scientific American 248:122-30.
MeDermott, D. (1976) Artificial intelligence meets natural stupidity. SICART
Newsletter No. 57. Reprinted in J. Haugeland, ed., (1981) Mind design.
MIT Press/Bradford Books.
Millikan, R. G. (1984) Language, thought and other biological categories.
MIT Press/Bradford Books.
Monod, J. (1971) Chance and necessity. Knopf. (Originally published in
France as Le Hasard et la Necessite, Editions du Sueil, 1970.)
Morgan, C. L. (1894) An introduction to comparative psychology. Walter
Scott.
Nagel, T. (1974) What is it like to be a bat? Philosophical Review 83:435-51.
(1986) The view from nowhere. Oxford University Press.
Newell, A. (1980) Physical symbol systems. Cognitive Science 4:135-83.
(1982) The knowledge level. Artificial Intelligence 18:81-132.
(1986) The knowledge level and the symbol level. In: Meaning and
cognitive structure: Issues in the computational theory of mind, ed. Z.
W. Pylyshyn & W. Demopoulos. Ablex.
(1987) Unified theories of cognition. The William James Lectures, Harvard
University. (Available on videocassette from Harvard Psychology
Department.)
Newell, A. & Simon, H. A. (1976) Computer science as empirical inquiry:
Symbols and search. Communications of the ACM 19(3):113-26.
Nicolis, G. 6: Prigogine, I. (1977) Self-organization in nonequilibrium systems:
From dissipative structures to order through fluctuations. 
Wiley.
Nilsson, N. J. (1980) Principles of artificial intelligence. Tioga.
Norman, D. A. (1981) Categorization of action slips. Psychological Review
88:1-15.
Parfit, D. (1984) Reasons and persons. Oxford University Press.
Perry, J. (1977) Frege on demonstratives. Philosophical Review 86:474-97.
(1979) The problem of the essential indexical. Nous 13:3-21.
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1988) 11:3
545

References/Dennett: The intentional stance
Piaget, J. (1929) The child's conception of the world. Routledge & Kegan
Paul.
Popper, K. & Eccles, J. (1977) The self and its brain. Springer-International.
Premack, D. (1988) Does the chimpanzee have a theory of mind? revisited.
In: Machiavellian intelligence, ed. A. Whiten & R. W. Byrne. Oxford
University Press.
Premack, D. & Woodruff, G. (1978) Does the chimpanzee have a theory of
mind? Behavioral and Brain Sciences 1:515-26.
Prigogine, I. & Stengers, I. (1984) Order out of chaos: Man's new dialogue
with nature. Bantam Books.
Putnam, H. (1974) Comment on Wilfred Sellars. Synthese 27:445-55.
(1975) The meaning of "meaning." In: Mind, language and reality
(Philosophical Papers, vol. 2), ed. H. Putnam. Cambridge University
Press.
(1978) Meaning and the moral sciences. Routledge and Kegan Paul.
(1981) Reason, truth and history. Cambridge University Press.
(1983) Computational psychology and interpretation theory. In: Realism and
reason (Philosophical Papers, vol. 3). Cambridge University Press.
(1986) Information and the mental. In: Truth and interpretation:
Perspectives on the philosophy of Donald Davidson, ed. E. Lepore.
Blackwell.
Quine, W. V. O. (1956) Quantifiers and propositional attitudes. Journal of
Philosophy 50:177-86. Reprinted in Quine (1966) The ways of paradox.
Random House.
(1960) Word and object. MIT Press.
Reichenbach, H. (1938) Experience and prediction. University of Chicago
Press.
Roitblat, H. L. (1987) Introduction to comparative cognition. Freeman,
(in press) A cognitive action theory of learning. In: Systems with learning
and memory abilities, ed. J. Delacour & J. C. S. Levy. Elsevier.
(in preparation) Monism, connectionism, and a hierarchical action theory of
learning. (Invited chapter in Systems that learn, ed. J. Delacour.)
Roitblat, H. L., Bever, T. G. & Terrace, H. S., eds. (1984) Animal cognition.
Erlbaum.
Roitblat, H. L. & Herman, L. M. (in press) Animal thinking. In: Proceedings
of the Third International Conference on Thinking, ed. D. M. Topping,
V. N. Kobayashi & D. C. Crowell. Erlbaum.
Romanes, G. J. (1883/1977) Animal intelligence. University Publications of
America.
Rorty, R. (1982) Contemporary philosophy of mind. Synthese 53:323-48.
Rosenberg, A. (1986a) Intentional psychology and evolutionary biology. Part 1:
The uneasy analogy. Behaviorism 14:15-27.
(1986b) Intentional psychology and evolutionary biology. Part 2: The crucial
disanalogy. Behaviorism 14:125-38.
Rosenbloom, P. S., Laird, J. E. & Newell, A. (1987) Knowledge-level
learning in Soar. In: Proceedings of the American Association of Artificial
Intelligence. Morgan Kaufman.
Rumelhart, D. E., McClelland, J. L. & the PDP Research Group (1986)
Parallel distributed processing: Explorations in the microstructure of
cognition. MIT Press.
Ryle, G. (1949) The concept of mind. Hutchinson.
Searle, J. (1980) Minds, brains, and programs. Behavioral and Brain Sciences
3:417-57.
(1982) The myth of the computer: An exchange. The New York Review of
Books June 24:56-57.
(forthcoming) Turing the Chinese Room. Artificial Intelligence.
Sechenov, I. M. (1863/1965) Reflcksy Golovnogo Nozga. St. Petersburg.
Translated: Reflexes of the brain. Originally published 1863. MIT Press.
Sellars, W. (1954) Some reflections on language games. Philosophy of Science
21:204-28. (Reprinted with revisions in Sellars 1963.)
(1956) Empiricism and the philosophy of mind. In: The foundations of
science and the concepts of psychology and psychoanalysis, Minnesota
Studies in the Philosophy of Science, vol. 1, cd. H. Feigl & M. Scriven.
University of Minnesota Press. (Reprinted in Sellars 1963.)
(1963) Science, perception and reality. Routledge and Kegan Paul.
(1974) Meaning as functional classification: A perspective on the relation of
syntax to semantics. Synthese 27:417-38.
Skinner, B. F. (1964) Behaviorism at fifty. In: Behaviorism and
phenomenology: Contrasting bases for modern psychology, ed. T. W.
Wann. University of Chicago Press.
(1971) Beyond freedom and dignity. Knopf.
Sloman, A. (1985) What enables a machine to understand? In: Proceedings of
the Ninth International Joint Conference on AI, ed. A. Joshi. Los
Angeles.
(1986) Reference without causal links. In: Proceedings of the Seventh
European Conference on AI, ed. L. Steels, B. Du Boulay & D. Hogg.
North-Holland.
(1987) Motives, mechanisms and emotions. Cognition and Emotion
l(3):217-33.
Smith, M. P. (1986) Sphexishness, epistemic bounds, and a priori psychology.
In: Proceedings of the Eighth Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science
Society. Elrbaum.
Stalnaker, R. (1984) Inquiry. MIT Press/Bradford Books.
Stieh, S. (1978) Beliefs and sub-doxastic states. Philosophy of Science 45:499-
518.
(1981) Dennett on intentional systems. Philosophical Topics 12:38-62.
(1983) From folk psychology to cognitive science: The case against belief.
MIT Press/Bradford Books.
Van Kleeck, M. H., Hillger, L. A. & Brown, R. (in press) Pitting verbal
schemas against information variables in attribution. Social Cognition.
de Waal, F. (1986) Deception in the natural communication of chimpanzees.
In: Deception: Perspectives on human and nonhuman deceit, ed. R. W.
Mitchell & N. S. Thompson. State University of New York Press.
Whiten, A. & Byrne, R. W. (1988) Tactical deception in primates. Behavioral
and Brain Sciences ll(2):233-73.
Williams, D. R. & Williams, H. (1969) Automaintenance in the pigeon:
Sustained pecking despite contingent nonreinforcement. Journal of the
Experimental Analysis of Behavior 12:511—20.
Wimmer, H. & Pemer, J. (1983) Beliefs about beliefs: Representation and
constraining function of wrong beliefs in young children's understanding
of deception. Cognition 13:103-28.
Winograd, T. (1975) Frame representations and the declarative/procedural
controversy. In: Representation and understanding: Studies in cognitive
science, ed. D. G. Bobrow & A. M. Collins. Academic Press.
Woodruff, G. & Premack, D. (1979) Intentional communication in the
chimpanzee: The development of deception. Cognition 7:333-62.
546
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1988) 11:3

