1
Toward a Science of Volition
Wolfgang Prinz, Daniel Dennett, and Natalie Sebanz
This book aims at improving our understanding of the processes supporting volun-
tary action by looking at conditions in which the will is impaired or even breaks down.
We use this introductory chapter to prepare the ground for contributions by philoso-
phers, psychologists, neuroscientists, and psychiatrists that tackle the experience of
acting intentionally, the ability to make decisions and implement one’s goals, and the
many ways in which the experience and the exertion of willful behavior can be dis-
turbed. In the ﬁrst part of this introduction, we describe the status of the will as we
see it in present and past thinking. In the second part of the chapter, we provide an
overview of the contributions in this book.
1.1
Studying the Will
When trying to decipher the forbidding complexity of the mind/brain, the standard
simplifying assumption is that it is an “input–output system” in which perception
goes in and (control of) action eventually comes out. We experimenters then work
from the outside in, ﬁrst getting control and understanding of the peripheral input
systems, and postponing difﬁcult questions about the center, which is shrouded in
fog and mystery. This makes sense but risks distorting our vision of the whole, since
we seldom if ever ﬁnd ways of even posing questions about the requirements for the
more central components that must eventually get transformed into the highest levels
of outbound or “inside-out” trafﬁc.
This potential for distortion is exacerbated by two further sources of distraction:
introspection and the demands of free will. Introspection seems at ﬁrst to be a
godsend: Just as our inbound journey through the brain gets hopelessly beset with
uncertainty and confusion, along comes introspection, the “ﬁrst-person point of
view,” a well-positioned insider who can cut through the fog with a near-miraculous
“access” to these central goings-on. The price we pay is that it is far from clear how
to translate the mind-talk of introspection into the language of cognitive neuro-
science. Nor is it clear when the deliverances of this embedded spy in terra incognita

are reliable. The other perhaps even more serious source of distortion is the ideologi-
cal conviction that we need to preserve, somewhere and somehow in this foggy center,
a radical disconnect of some sort that will leave elbow room for free will.
This is often described as a philosophical concern, but it is not just the preoccupa-
tion of philosophers. The undertaking of science itself apparently calls for it: When
investigators take themselves to be able to manipulate an input variable independent
of the phenomenon being studied, they presume, do they not, that they are the origin
of the manipulations or choices, not causally coupled with the phenomenon or a mere
way station being driven (by some other phenomenon) to choose the manipulations
they choose. Scientiﬁc investigation in any ﬁeld thus apparently depends on the
autonomy or freedom of the investigator, and this idea that some human actions have
to be causally insulated or privileged in some special way has motivated a variety of
speculative theories of how this might be accomplished, science-ﬁctional at best and
often simply incoherent. Inﬁnite regress threatens at every turn. As Gilbert Ryle (1949)
pointed out long ago, if what makes an action voluntary is that it is caused by an act
of will, we need to ask if that act of will was itself voluntary and, hence, the effect of
a prior act of will—and if not, how could an act of will that was not itself voluntary
endow the action it causes with voluntariness?
Beset by such high-stakes theoretical demands, and such experimental intractabil-
ity, it is small wonder that research on volition has lagged behind research on other
aspects of the mind. However, intrepid forays into this long-shunned territory are at
last under way, and as one might expect, even in advance of a clear theory, hard-won
empirical details have a way of illuminating the theoretical prospects so that the
imponderables do not look so unmanageable after all. When we look more closely at
what is going on, the “extensionless point” of the self (Nagel 1979) expands into a
spatially and temporally distributed self that can work its “miracles” with less than
miraculous means. Some philosophers will probably continue to prefer their fantasies
about “agent causation” and quantum ampliﬁers hiding in the convenient fog in the
center of the brain, but the science of volition is poised to march past them and secure
a theory that can ﬁnally make sense of the recursive, reﬂective control systems that
make voluntary human action so deserving of credit and blame.
1.2
Action
Throughout centuries, science has approached human action in two major contexts—
cognition and volition. In the context of cognition, researchers study how action is
planned, controlled, and modulated in response to conditions encountered in the envi-
ronment. Hence, cognitive approaches view actions from an outside-in perspective,
examining how they are formed and informed by external conditions. Conversely, in
the context of volition, researchers study how action is planned, controlled, and 
2
W. Prinz, D. Dennett, and N. Sebanz

modulated in the service of the agent’s needs, motives, desires, or goals. Hence, volitional
approaches view actions from an inside-out perspective, examining how they are
formed and informed by internal conditions.
Cognitive approaches to action have always been more elaborate and better devel-
oped than volitional approaches. Some reasons for this bias are rooted in the history,
methodology, and theory of cognitive studies. Historically, the scientiﬁc study of the
mind and the brain has emerged from epistemology, and epistemology has, of course,
always been a lot more concerned with the outside-in rather than the inside-out per-
spective. Yet, later on, when the sciences of the mind and the brain had long broken
away from philosophy and forgotten all about their epistemological roots, they still
continued to prefer the outside-in over the inside-out perspective. One of the reasons
why this bias was preserved, if not strengthened, is related to the methodology of
experimental research. In experimental settings, where external stimulus conditions
can be manipulated in a straightforward way, it is easy and natural to study action as
a consequence of foregoing stimulation. This is not true of internal conditions like
goals, or impulses of the will, which are, by their very nature, less accessible to such
manipulations. Furthermore, this difference in methodology goes along with a related
difference in theory: When it comes to theoretical accounts of action, external con-
ditions, such as stimuli, may take the innocent role of causa efﬁciens for the action to
follow, whereas internal conditions, such as goals, come close to the more precarious
role of causa ﬁnalis.
Yet, science has not only preferred cognition but also avoided volition. Ever since,
the will has been a sensitive subject. In some ages, it has been venerated as the incar-
nation of personhood and autonomy, whereas in other ages it has been disdained as
an indecent faculty of the mind. As concerns veneration, take a look at free will as it
appears illustrated in Cesare Ripa’s iconology (Ripa 1709; see ﬁg. 1.1). In this picture
volition appears to be closely intertwined with notions of personal autonomy and
freedom—notions that are deeply rooted in the ideological underpinnings of ethical,
legal, and political systems (at least in modern Western civilization). Some even believe
that these notions are too crucial for establishing these ideologies to be delivered to
scientiﬁc discourse and enquiry. For instance, philosophers often claim that science
has nothing to say about issues of personhood and autonomy: Addressing these issues
is just their business. And the guardians of law and jurisdiction often contend that
science may shake the legal system to its foundations and thus jeopardize our 
society altogether when it starts questioning free will, the Holy Grail of law and 
constitution.
As concerns disdain, take a look at the maid Volition as she appears illustrated in
Ripa’s iconology (see ﬁg. 1.2). In a somewhat rough exterior, we see a person with
loose hair, clothed in beggar’s garments. As she walks about, haunting the air with her
huge wings, in search of whatever high-ﬂying goal, she is blind to her surroundings,
Toward a Science of Volition
3

Figure 1.1
The notion of Free Will as illustrated in Cesare Ripa’s (1709) iconology. We see a young and 
active nobleman, a sovereign vested with the power to take decisions and to reign accordingly.
The tip of the scepter is split—a symbol for the option of having to choose between virtue 
versus vice. (Source: Ripa, C. [1709]. Iconologia or moral emblems. London. Online: http://
emblem.libraries.psu.edu/Ripa/Images/ripatoc.htm/.)
Figure 1.2
Maid Volition. Taken from the same source as ﬁgure 1.1.

always running the risk of losing grip of the ground. This picture suggests that voli-
tion may be a harmful malfunction of mental life that may indicate an inappropriate
power of the will. In any case we cannot fail to see that Maid Volition enjoys much
less esteem than Prince Free Will.
As these contrasting views suggest, the will is not just a neutral and innocent faculty
of the mind. Rather, discussions about the nature of volition have always been deeply
intertwined with discussions about ethical and political issues. Historically speaking,
the will started its career in theology and ethics, and then from there it made its way
into law and politics. Only very recently has it arrived in scientiﬁc theory as well, yet
leaving traces of its long nonscientiﬁc history. In medieval Christian theology and
philosophy, human will was considered a derivative of the Will of God—to the effect
that the will would never choose Evil, but always Good (i.e., resist desire and follow
reason; cf., e.g., Taylor 1989; Romano 2004). In postmedieval times, the will became
secularized and was now considered the faculty of making choices—choices that were
now no longer intrinsically directed toward the good. Accordingly, since the good was
no longer inherent in that faculty itself, that faculty now had to become the locus in
individual minds at which all sorts of external regulations of human conduct had to
be addressed. These could be regulations about Right and Wrong, or good and bad
choices, about ways of dealing with conﬂicts between incompatible choices, or even
about the inclusion/exclusion of individuals with respect to the right of making
choices. For instance, at certain ages, it may have been appropriate for priests and
princes to make choices and decisions of their own, but not for servants and slaves to
do so—appropriate for Prince Free Will, but not for Maid Volition. In this sense, the
will is the psychological counterpart of ethics, law, and politics. The will has two faces
to it. From the inside, it is a faculty of individual minds. From the outside, it serves
as a theater for the impact of external regulation of individuals’ conduct.
1.3
Volition
For the scientiﬁc study of volition we may, as a ﬁrst step, turn to William James’s trea-
tise on the will in chapter 26 of The Principles of Psychology, which appeared more than
a hundred years ago. James’s treatise, which is an elegant piece of armchair psychol-
ogy, is in fact a suitable starting point, because it absorbed, as it were, decades, if not
centuries, of foregoing philosophical discussion and cast it in a convenient concep-
tual framework. That framework can still be used today as a guideline for sorting out
major empirical issues that have to be addressed, as well as major theoretical prob-
lems that have to be resolved.
According to James’s account, voluntary actions require that two conditions be met:
(1) There must be an idea, or representation, of what is being willed, and (2) any con-
ﬂicting ideas must be absent or removed. When these two conditions are fulﬁlled,
Toward a Science of Volition
5

those ideas, or representations of intended goal states, have the power to generate the
action. On this account, cognitive representations are in their very nature impulsive—
to the effect that volition can be partly reduced to cognition. This is particularly true
of those representations that refer to movements and actions. To these representa-
tions, a principle applies that James christened the ideomotor principle of voluntary
action: “Every representation of a movement awakens in some degree the actual movement
which is its object; and awakens it in a maximum degree whenever it is not kept from doing
so by an antagonistic representation present simultaneously in the mind” (James 1890, 
vol. II, p. 526).
James believed that the volitional nature of cognition arises from learning. When-
ever a motor act is performed, it goes along with perceivable effects. Some are close
to the action in the sense of being accompaniments of the act itself, like kinesthetic
proprioception of ongoing movements. Some others may be more remote, like a bell
ringing at a distance when one’s ﬁnger operates a doorbell knob. Such regular con-
nections between motor acts and their ensuing effects can then be functional in two
ways. One is to generate forward models, that is, anticipate appropriate effects, given
certain acts. The other is to create inverse models, that is, select appropriate acts, given
intentions to achieve certain effects. This latter relationship, which leads from intended
effects to acts, forms the functional basis of the ideomotor principle: Any representa-
tion of an event of which individuals have learned that it follows from a particular
action will henceforward exhibit the power to call forth that action.
The ideomotor principle has received support from a great number of experimental
studies (see Hommel et al. 2001 for an overview). Nevertheless, the Jamesian frame-
work leaves us with a number of issues for empirical research. Major research issues
concern, for example, the content and realization of intentions, the relation between
processes of cognition and volition, the relation between making choices and imple-
menting decisions, and the role of the temporal aspects of intended goals. These issues
can be characterized in terms of distinctions like What/How, Mechanics/Dynamics,
Selection/Implementation, and Acting/Planning.
1.3.1
What/How
First, empirical research needs to address What issues and How issues. Research
directed at What issues tries to determine what people intend to do under given cir-
cumstances, how the contents of their intentions depend on internal and external
conditions, and how they may change over time (i.e., issues of motivation). Conversely,
research directed at How issues tries to determine how people realize given goals
through actions. How does internal goal-related information interact with external
environment-related information to generate appropriate action and bring forth
intended effects (i.e., issues of volition)?
6
W. Prinz, D. Dennett, and N. Sebanz

1.3.2
Mechanics/Dynamics
Second, one of the major dimensions on which volition differs from cognition refers
to what may be called temperature: We may distinguish between “hot volition” and
“cold cognition.” Entities like motives, goals, impulses of the will, desires, and temp-
tations are but insufﬁciently characterized by the mere contents they refer to. Rather,
they have to be characterized in energetic terms as well and require functional archi-
tectures specifying both the cold mechanics of cognitive operations and the hot
dynamics of volitional forces.
1.3.3
Selection/Implementation
A third aspect worthy of empirical investigation is the relation between volition as a
faculty for decision making and goal selection, and volition as a faculty for the 
implementation of previously made decisions. Given that the question of free will is
a central issue in the psychological and philosophical discussion of volition, it is not
surprising that these and other disciplines have mainly focused on the decision-
making role of volition. However, many disorders of volition are characterized by an
impairment related to the implementation of decisions. Investigating the relation
between the selective and the dynamic role of volition is thus an important issue for
scientiﬁc investigation.
1.3.4
Acting/Planning
Finally, it may be useful to distinguish between volition with versus without a direct
executional component. Processes underlying the will-in-action are often short-term
operations, whereas processes underlying the will-in-planning are long-term. The
processes underlying the will-in-action can be regarded as supporting action control,
whereas the processes underlying the will-in-planning are of particular importance to
self-control.
Yet, the Jamesian framework not only provides us with issues for empirical research
but also confronts us with theoretical puzzles and paradoxes that pose severe chal-
lenges—partly to commonsense intuitions, partly to scientiﬁc theories.
1.3.5
Agency and Authorship
One such puzzle refers to agency and authorship. Central to our commonsense intu-
itions about the workings of the will is the notion that voluntary action, whatever the
mechanics and dynamics of its underlying machinery may be, is ultimately directed,
controlled, and—for that matter—authored by a personal agent within, or perhaps behind,
that machinery. However, if one takes a closer look at it, the Jamesian framework has
no role whatsoever for personal agents and authors. Instead, voluntary action is thought
to emerge from, and be fully determined by, the mechanics and dynamics of a 
Toward a Science of Volition
7

subpersonal machinery. In a way, we lose the agent while trying to explain her actions.
Should we be concerned about this loss or should we perhaps be relieved about it?
1.3.6
Mental Causation
A further puzzle relates to mental causation—a notion the Jamesian framework shares
with folk psychology. Here the idea is that mental kinds such as intentions have the
power to cause physical kinds such as bodily movements. This notion seems to entail a
dualistic stance—at least as long as mental representations are considered as being
incommensurate with the physical entities to which they refer. In everyday life we
may be successful practitioners of such dualism, but in our scientiﬁc theories we
should perhaps be concerned about it. Here it may be useful to distinguish between
real and apparent mental causation (Wegner 2003).
1.4
Disorders of Volition
In this book we focus on ways in which volition can be impaired. Such impairments
can be observed in a number of psychiatric and neurological disorders. While some
of them—such as schizophrenia and prefrontal lobe damage—are clearly established
as disorders of volition, others, such as depression or substance abuse, are perhaps less
commonly regarded from this viewpoint. Still, we believe that investigating ways in
which the will can be impaired or break down across different pathologies is a promis-
ing means to gain a better understanding of the nature of voluntary action.
As always, there are two ways to approach impairments and disorders. One goes
from regular function to disorders. The other goes from disorders to regular function.
We have planned the conference that provided the basis for this book in an attempt
to go either way. These two approaches are reﬂected in the volume. On the one hand,
we discuss the will and its pathologies from a more general point of view across dif-
ferent disorders. In that part, we mainly explore what is known about the nature of
voluntary action in general, and how this knowledge can inform our understanding
of disorders of volition. On the other hand, we focus on speciﬁc neurological and psy-
chiatric disorders and discuss how they can be understood as disorders of volitional
functions. We have decided to focus on four speciﬁc disorders rather than covering
the neurological and psychiatric conditions that can be regarded as disorders of voli-
tion in an all-embracing way. We explore what is known about the nature of schizo-
phrenia, depression, prefrontal lobe damage, and substance abuse and discuss how
this knowledge can inform our understanding of the regular functioning of volition.
If it is true that the will is the psychological counterpart of ethics, law, and politics
and serves as the psychological theater for the impact of the social environment on
individuals’ conduct, it will even more be true that notions concerning “disorders”
and “regular functions” of volition will reﬂect moral, legal, and political conditions.
8
W. Prinz, D. Dennett, and N. Sebanz

This once more brings us back to Maid Volition. Her somewhat bizarre appearance
reminds us that the dividing line between regular function and malfunction is, at least
partially, a matter of cultural construction and may be subject to historical change.
What the picture suggests is that volition and agency—which are nowadays consid-
ered respected functions of healthy mental life—were in her time regarded as mal-
functions, indicating perhaps an indecent preponderance of self-governance over
compliance with the divine and worldly order.
Accordingly, talking about disorders may easily turn into talking about exclusion—
exclusion from those who are entitled to make choices of their own—and talking
about exclusion may eventually turn into practicing exclusion in one or the other
way. At this point, we should remind ourselves of the abhorrent examples of pushing
exclusion to its extremes that took place at Kloster Irsee, the site of the conference
from which this book emerged.1 The conclusion to be drawn from this is simple
enough: Since much of our intuitions about the divide between “good” and “bad”
functioning reﬂects cultural—and even political—constructs rather than natural facts,
we need to avoid any ontologizing of this divide—not only for the sake of prevent-
ing discriminations against those who suffer from bad functioning but also in the
interest of scientiﬁc theory. Therefore, it may perhaps be wiser to speak of varieties
rather than disorders of volition.
1.5
Approaches to Disorders of Volition
The contributions in this book are grouped into ﬁve parts. The ﬁrst part presents dif-
ferent conceptual frameworks that identify the experience of agency, decision making,
and goal pursuit as central components of volition (Metzinger; Bayne and Levy;
Haggard; Proust; Ainslie; Cohen and Gollwitzer). The remaining four parts explore the
question of how impairments in these and other aspects of volition manifest them-
selves as “disorders of volition.” The second part is concerned with the link between
volition and certain symptoms in schizophrenia (Jeannerod; Liddle; Spence and Parry;
Frith). The third part addresses impairments in the formation and implementation of
intentions in depression (Nitschke and Mackiewitz; Schneider; Jouvent, Dubal, and
Fossati). The fourth part deals with changes in action planning and decision making
following prefrontal lobe damage (Owen; Grafman and Krueger; Burgess, Gilbert,
Okuda, and Simons). The last part explores the relationship between decision making
and substance abuse (Bechara; Sayette; Hull and Slone). In the following, we provide
an overview of the contributions in each of the ﬁve parts.
1.5.1
Part I: Conceptual Foundations
The ﬁrst four chapters in this part analyze the experience of agency. The authors of
these chapters agree that the feeling of acting intentionally is “thin” and “evasive”
Toward a Science of Volition
9

but merits theoretical analysis as well as empirical study because it is a fundamental
component of volition.
In the opening chapter, Thomas Metzinger develops a model that accounts for the
phenomenology of agency and describes the transition from willing to acting inten-
tionally. Metzinger argues that for an understanding of volition, it is crucial to take
into account the self-representational character of agency. Individuals not only form
representations of goals but also form a representation of themselves as having goals.
Metzinger suggests that a phenomenal model of the self is the causal mediator con-
necting a goal representation to the motor system, enabling the transformation of
intentions into actions. In the ﬁnal part of the chapter, he discusses akinetic mutism,
a condition in which patients are awake but show no indication of intentionality in
terms of this model: Metzinger argues that what these patients are missing is a repre-
sentation of self in relation to action goals.
In the next chapter, Tim Bayne and Neil Levy “deconstruct” the phenomenology of
agency. They assume that “there is no single experience of agency” and analyze dif-
ferent representational contents that contribute to the feeling of acting intentionally.
In particular, Bayne and Levy discuss the phenomenology of mental causation, the
phenomenology of authorship, and the phenomenology of effort. They propose that
the experience of mental causation is neither necessary nor sufﬁcient for the experi-
ence of will and place a form of experienced authorship—agent causation—at the heart
of the experience of acting intentionally. The feeling of mental effort is assumed to
support the experience of authorship.
The following chapter, by Patrick Haggard, shows that the analysis of the experi-
ence of agency is not restricted to theoretical deliberation but can beneﬁt from ex-
perimental investigation. Haggard reviews laboratory studies in which he and his
colleagues investigated the effects of intentions on the perceived time of actions and
their effects. These studies demonstrate a strong temporal compression surrounding
intentional action. Subjects perceive their intentional actions and corresponding
action effects as closer in time than they really are, providing evidence for a strong
link between intention and agency. Haggard discusses these ﬁndings in terms of motor
control theory. He suggests that there is a speciﬁc conscious experience of preparing
an action, emerging as a consequence of preparatory brain activity, whose phenome-
nal content is the anticipated action effect. Thus, prediction lies at the heart of the
experience of conscious intention and agency.
In the contributions by Metzinger, Bayne and Levy, and Haggard, the experience of
agency is analyzed with respect to physical actions. The last contribution on the ex-
perience of agency, by Joëlle Proust, adds a new perspective by raising the question of
whether there is a sense of agency that is common to bodily and mental actions.
Drawing on principles of hierarchical control theories, Proust sketches a theory of voli-
10
W. Prinz, D. Dennett, and N. Sebanz

tion that accounts not only for willful bodily actions but also for willful thinking
processes. She proposes that simulation operates at different levels of control to allow
for the evaluation of actions from various perspectives. This theory allows her to
explain two ostensibly disparate symptoms in schizophrenia in a uniﬁed framework,
namely, the experience that one is not the author, or owner, of one’s actions 
(delusion of control) and the experience that thoughts are inserted in one’s mind and
are not one’s own (thought insertion).
Beside the experience of agency, another important component of volition is the
ability to choose between competing goals and the ability to pursue goals over longer
time spans. The last two contributions in the section on conceptual foundations are
dedicated to these issues. George Ainslie presents a conceptual framework that allows
him to explain principles of choice and to derive implications for self-control. Ainslie
argues that choice is shaped by reward and is the result of a competition between
behaviors that are associated with motivational states. He provides evidence that spon-
taneous choice in humans and animals is best described by a hyperbolic shape, where
value stands in inverse proportion to delay, rather than by hierarchies of preference
as proposed by traditional rational choice theory. Ainslie discusses how recursive self-
prediction can account both for a surge in willpower when a current choice is seen as
a decisive instance and for lapses in willpower when there is a one-time occasion to
indulge.
What happens once an intention is formed? In the following chapter, Anna-Lisa
Cohen and Peter Gollwitzer argue that the intention to achieve a certain goal is not
a good predictor for goal attainment, as assumed by traditional goal-striving theories.
They claim that “a second act of willing” is necessary, helping people to resume goals
in the presence of competing alternatives. Cohen and Gollwitzer review a wide range
of empirical ﬁndings to support the claim that forming a certain type of intention is
an efﬁcient means to forestall the second act of willing. They show that implemen-
tation intentions, which create a mental link between a speciﬁed future situation and
actions to be performed in this situation, effectively facilitate goal attainment. The
authors discuss the use of implementation intentions to ameliorate problems in goal
pursuit observed in patients with frontal lobe damage, schizophrenia, and depression,
thus providing a transition to the following parts of this volume that deal with spe-
ciﬁc disorders of volition.
1.5.2
Part II: Disorders of Volition in Schizophrenia
The contributions in part 2 discuss volitional impairments in schizophrenia from a
behavioral and a brain perspective. Impairments in agency, which have been con-
sidered from a more theoretical perspective in part 1, are discussed in detail in the
ﬁrst chapter in part 2. The next two chapters in this part are dedicated to two other
Toward a Science of Volition
11

categories of symptoms, disorganization and psychomotor poverty, and explore how
these symptoms are related to impairments in volition. The last chapter discusses some
new ways of thinking about volitional impairments in schizophrenia.
Following the conceptual approaches to agency in the ﬁrst part, Marc Jeannerod pro-
poses that feeling authorship of one’s actions is crucial for the experience of inten-
tional action. He reviews studies in which the origin of an observed action was rendered
ambiguous or a systematic mismatch between performed actions and observed actions
was introduced to investigate the cognitive and neural mechanisms involved in action
attribution. These studies indicate that the inferior parietal lobe plays an important
role in detecting discordance between observed and executed movements. In schizo-
phrenic patients who show impairments in action attribution, activation in this area
does not correlate with the amount of discrepancy between observed and performed
actions. This suggests that these patients lack the cues for recognizing their own actions
that are normally provided by changes in parietal activity. Jeannerod speculates that
the origin of the action attribution impairments may be found in prefrontal areas that
exert inhibitory control over areas involved in motor and sensorimotor processing.
In the following chapter, Peter Liddle present an account of symptoms of disorga-
nization, which may lead to serious impairments in volition. He proposes that the brain
engages in different states of activity that are associated with charateristic patterns of
distributed neural activities. Two of these brain states are the “default state,” a state of
introspective awareness of oneself, and the “motivated attention state,” a state in which
one is engaged in attending to salient information in order to perform a mental or
physical act. Liddle provides evidence from brain imaging studies to support the claim
that the recruitment of this motivated attention system is impaired in schizophrenia.
He suggests that the recruitment problem arises from an impairment of the mecha-
nism by which low-frequency oscillatory activity in the brain is generated.
Avolition, the lack of voluntary behavior, is in the focus in the following chapter
by Sean Spence and Chris Parry. They review brain imaging studies from their own
and other labs showing that the prefrontal cortex plays a key role in the generation
of actions that are chosen and executed spontaneously. Spence and Parry provide evi-
dence that psychomotor poverty, which incorporates avolition, not only exhibits a
correlation with reduced activity in prefrontal cortex but is also associated with struc-
tural changes in prefrontal cortex. Given the possibility that plastic changes over time
may modulate prefrontal function and structure, the authors discuss how certain ther-
apeutic interventions might ameliorate volitional impairments in schizophrenia.
In the ﬁnal chapter on schizophrenia, Chris Frith argues that some schizophrenic
symptoms, such as delusions of control, thought insertion, and psychomotor poverty
can only be understood by taking into account the social nature of cognition. In line
with other contributions on agency, Frith proposes that delusions of control and
thought insertion involve a failure in action attribution. However, he suggests that
12
W. Prinz, D. Dennett, and N. Sebanz

this failure not only may result from impaired forward models in the motor system
but could also be related to impairments in the intentional binding mechanism pro-
posed by Patrick Haggard in part I. Such an impairment implies that the ability to
understand others’ intentions may be reduced. A further novel idea is that poverty of
will and disorganization could result from difﬁculties in generating actions that are
appropriate in a given social context. The proposal that volition and its disorders can
only be fully understood when taking into account the social context also provides a
new way of thinking about top-down action control.
1.5.3
Part III: Disorders of Volition in Depression
Symptoms of avolition not only appear in schizophrenia but are an important char-
acteristic of impaired volition in depression. Accordingly, the three contributions in
part 3 all discuss how impairments in the formation and execution of action plans
lead to avolition.
Jack Nitschke and Kristen Mackiewicz propose that individuals suffering from
depression have a desire to act but lack the ability to form and implement an action
plan. They review ﬁndings showing that the dorsolateral prefrontal cortex plays a
major role in the formation and implementation of action plans. Nitschke and 
Mackiewicz suggest that the inability of patients with depression to override estab-
lished behaviors and initiate new goal-directed behaviors may be explained by reduced
activity in left dorsolateral prefrontal cortex. An asymmetric pattern of frontal activ-
ity with more activity on the right may be related to withdrawal, negative emotions,
and threat perception. Decreased activity in the anterior cingulate cortex is assumed
to lead to impaired conﬂict monitoring and the selection and implementation of
action plans. The authors discuss how treating volition as a central feature of depres-
sion may affect the understanding of volition as well as the treatment of depression.
In the following contribution by Werner Schneider, depression is also regarded as a
misregulation of action control. In the ﬁrst part of his chapter, Schneider outlines a
framework for action control, specifying how goals compete, how an action goal is
selected and implemented, and how the outcome of actions is monitored and evalu-
ated. In the second part, he proposes that in depression, a chronic stress response due
to repeated failures in pursuing action goals may lead to short-term and long-term
changes in the brain structures supporting action planning. Schneider argues that the
onset phase of depression is related to damage of the prefrontal cortex, with succes-
sive damage of the anterior cingulate cortex due to chronic stress leading to more
severe forms of depression.
In the last chapter of this part, Roland Jouvent, Stéphanie Dubal, and Philippe
Fossati focus on the role of cognitive ﬂexibility and the ability to mobilize cognitive
resources in volitional impairments observed in depression and anhedonia. They
present evidence that faced with tasks that require cognitive effort, depressed patients
Toward a Science of Volition
13

and anhedonics recruit more cognitive resources than controls. Jouvent, Dubal, and
Fossati suggest that volitional impairments in depression and the loss of pleasure in
anhedonia could reﬂect the exhaustion of cognitive resources.
1.5.4
Part IV: Disorders of Volition in Patients with Prefrontal Lobe Damage
The three contributions in this part analyze the volitional impairments observed in
patients with prefrontal lobe damage. Although differing in the approach taken to
identify the function of areas of the prefrontal lobe and the investigation of volitional
impairments, these contributions provide converging empirical evidence that the pre-
frontal cortex plays a crucial role in the formation and implementation of intentions,
as well as in decision making.
Adrian Owen reviews neuropsychological data to suggest that damage to the 
frontal lobes impairs the formation and implementation of conscious intention,
whereas more automatic, stimulus-driven processes remain unaffected. Drawing on
brain imaging and neurophysiological studies, Owen proposes that the midventrolat-
eral cortex is especially important for intentional action. He presents data suggesting
that activity in midventrolateral frontal cortex is associated with the intentional
encoding of stimuli. However, this area does not seem to be restricted to intentional
mnemonic processing, as it is also involved in other intentional processes such as the
shifting of stimulus–reward associations and inhibition.
The observation that patients with lesions in prefrontal cortex are impaired in their
ability to form and implement self-generated actions, whereas their ability to decide
to perform actions elicited by external cues remains relatively unimpaired, is also the
starting point of Jordan Grafman and Frank Krueger’s contribution. The patient studies
they report demonstrate that patients with lesions in prefrontal cortex have particu-
lar difﬁculty with planning problems that extend into the future, and they are
impaired at advice taking and using foresight. Furthermore, the authors describe a case
study showing that the ability to make rational decisions in personal and social
matters may be impaired while general cognitive decision-making abilities remain
intact. Grafman and Krueger interpret these ﬁndings within a framework based on the
assumption that aspects of episodic and semantic knowledge are represented in the
form of structured event complexes in prefrontal cortex.
Paul Burgess, Sam Gilbert, Jiro Okuda, and Jon Simons discuss the role of a speciﬁc
part of prefrontal cortex, the rostral prefrontal cortex, in supporting intentional 
behavior. They review brain imaging, neurophysiological, and patient studies to
suggest that rostral prefrontal cortex acts as a gateway that biases the relative inﬂu-
ence of stimulus-oriented and stimulus-independent thought. This account offers an
explanation of why patients with lesions in rostral prefrontal cortex have speciﬁc dif-
ﬁculties with situations requiring multitasking and carrying out intended actions after
a delay.
14
W. Prinz, D. Dennett, and N. Sebanz

1.5.5
Part V: Disorders of Volition in Substance Abuse
The last part is dedicated to volitional impairments that give rise to or accompany
addiction and substance abuse. The three contributions provide a multifaceted dis-
cussion of issues of willpower and self-control and relate closely to the conceptual
contributions by Ainslie and by Cohen and Gollwitzer in part 1.
Antoine Bechara argues that the ability to forego immediate rewards to obtain future
beneﬁts is the result of a balance between an impulsive system, signaling pain or plea-
sure of immediate events, and a reﬂective system, signaling positive or negative future
prospects. He suggests that the amygdala provides the neural basis for the ﬁrst system,
whereas orbitofrontal cortex plays an important role in the latter system. Bechara pro-
vides empirical evidence from patient studies to support his claim that addiction is
characterized by a dysfunctional reﬂective system, which does not provide necessary
control over the impulsive system, as well as a hyperactive impulsive system, which
biases the somatic signals associated with immediate prospects.
Michael Sayette addresses issues of self-control by reviewing ﬁndings on craving in
smokers. He demonstrates that craving is linked to changes in perception and deci-
sion making and presents studies suggesting that craving may take different forms
depending on individuals’ intentions. These ﬁndings shed light on the relationship
between craving and addiction.
Jay Hull and Laurie Slone discuss volitional impairments that arise as a result 
of alcohol intoxication. They review ﬁndings demonstrating that alcohol affects
processes crucial for supporting controlled actions, including conﬂict detection and
conﬂict resolution. These results inform their dynamic system model of volition, in
which disorders are conceptualized as a failure in overriding automatic behavior based
on the comparison of an action representation with an internal standard of behavior.
We hope that the collection of contributions in this book will inspire those interested
in understanding the processes underlying voluntary action and those striving to
explain and treat volitional impairments. The majority of the contributions originate
from the talks and discussions at the conference “Disorders of Volition” in Irsee,
Germany, in December 2003. A few chapters were invited later to complete the picture
emerging from the conference contributions. The conference was made possible by
the generous support of the Volkswagen-Stiftung and was part of an interdisciplin-
ary research project on the nature and culture of volition, also funded by the 
Volkswagen-Stiftung.
Notes
1. In Nazi times, the monastery was a psychiatric hospital and formed part of Nazi Germany’s
so-called euthanasia program. The ideology behind it was that psychiatric disorders serve as
Toward a Science of Volition
15

markers for genetic disorders that are immune to any treatment and threaten the integrity of the
gene pool. Through the killing of a vast number of hospitalized psychiatric patients, this program
in fact practiced exclusion-to-death (von Cranach 2003). Nowadays, the monastery serves as a
center for various scientiﬁc conferences, political meetings, and cultural events.
References
Hommel, B., J. Muesseler, G. Aschersleben, and W. Prinz. 2001. The Theory of Event Coding
(TEC): A framework for perception and action planning. Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 24,
849–937.
James, W. 1890. The Principles of Psychology. New York: Holt.
Nagel, T. 1979. Mortal Questions. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Ripa, C. 1709. Iconologia or Moral Emblems. London. Available online at http://emblem
.libraries.psu.edu/Ripa/Images/ripatoc.htm.
Romano, C. 2004. Volonté. In B. Cassin (dir.), Vocabulaire Européen des Philosophies, Dictionnaires
des Intraduisibles. Paris: Editions du Seuil/Editions Robert.
Ryle, G. 1949. The Concept of Mind. London: Hutchinson.
Taylor, C. 1989. Sources of the Self: The Making of the Modern Identity. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard
University Press.
von Cranach, M. 2003. The killing of psychiatric patients in Nazi Germany 1939–1945. Israel
Journal of Psychiatry, 40, 8–28.
Wegner, D. 2003. The Illusion of Conscious Will. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press.
16
W. Prinz, D. Dennett, and N. Sebanz

Disorders of Volition
edited by Natalie Sebanz and Wolfgang Prinz
A Bradford Book
The MIT Press
Cambridge, Massachusetts
London, England

© 2006 Massachusetts Institute of Technology
All rights reserved. No part of this book may be reproduced in any form by any electronic or
mechanical means (including photocopying, recording, or information storage and retrieval)
without permission in writing from the publisher.
MIT Press books may be purchased at special quantity discounts for business or sales promotional
use. For information, please email special_sales@mitpress.mit.edu or write to Special Sales Depart-
ment, The MIT Press, 55 Hayward Street, Cambridge, MA 02142.
This book was set in Stone sans and Stone serif by SNP Best-set Typesetter Ltd., Hong Kong, and
was printed and bound in the United States of America.
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Disorders of volition / edited by Natalie Sebanz and Wolfgang Prinz.
p. ;
cm.
“A Bradford book.”
Includes bibliographical references and index.
ISBN 0-262-19540-2 (hc : alk. paper)
1. Schizophrenia. 2. Will. 3. Mental illness. I. Sebanz, Natalie. II. Prinz, Wolfgang, 1942–.
[DNLM: 1. Mental Disorders. 2. Volition. 3. Depressive Disorder. 4. Prefrontal Cortex—
injuries. 5. Schizophrenia. 6. Substance-Related Disorders. WM 140 D612 2006]
RC514.D56
2006
616.89—dc22
2005056188
10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1

