 
 
Journal of Philosophy, Inc. is collaborating with JSTOR to digitize, preserve and extend access to The Journal of Philosophy.
http://www.jstor.org
Journal of Philosophy, Inc.
Review 
Author(s): Daniel C. Dennett 
Review by: Daniel C. Dennett 
Source: 
 
 
The Journal of Philosophy, Vol. 76, No. 2 (Feb., 1979), pp. 91-97
Published by: 
 
Journal of Philosophy, Inc.
Stable URL: 
 
http://www.jstor.org/stable/2025979
Accessed: 25-01-2016 19:20 UTC
Your use of the JSTOR archive indicates your acceptance of the Terms & Conditions of Use, available at http://www.jstor.org/page/
 
info/about/policies/terms.jsp
JSTOR is a not-for-profit service that helps scholars, researchers, and students discover, use, and build upon a wide range of content 
in a trusted digital archive. We use information technology and tools to increase productivity and facilitate new forms of scholarship. 
For more information about JSTOR, please contact support@jstor.org.
This content downloaded from 131.173.17.71 on Mon, 25 Jan 2016 19:20:13 UTC
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

BOOK REVIEWS 
91 
have against the charge that we are simply biased in favor of some 
"mysteries" and against others? 
(3) If we have to live with skepticism about moral facts, we also 
have to live with skepticism about the external world. And to the 
extent that a science-morality dichotomy would serve to generate 
skepticism about moral facts, it would seem correspondingly to 
avoid external-world skepticism. The assumption is that skepticism 
in the moral case is a more pressing problem than skepticism in 
nonmoral cases, though I am not certain this assumption is justi- 
fied. One causal explanation for it, perhaps, is that while we do 
not normally think people responsible for what they perceive, we 
do normally think them responsible for their own acts. And since 
responsibility often entails more pain than pleasure, there is phil- 
osophical and psychological incentive to prefer skepticism about 
moral facts, a situation we don't seem to find with other skepticisms. 
TONI VOGEL CAREY 
New York City 
The Self and Its Brain: An Argument for Interactionism. KARL R. 
POPPER and JOHN 
C. ECCLES. Berlin: Springer Verlag, 1977. 597 p. 
$18.00. 
The authors of this volume could not be more eminent; Sir Karl 
has a Schilpp volume, philosophy's highest honor for a living phi- 
losopher, and Sir John has a Nobel Prize for his research in neuro- 
physiology. The credentials of the authors will no doubt lead many 
lay readers of the book to suppose that the arguments encountered 
represent the most advanced state of the art in the philosophy of 
mind and brain science, but the first thing that must be said about 
this book is that it fails to make serious contact with the best the- 
oretical work of recent years. Conceived in Olympian isolation, it 
makes little attempt to address the issues, solve the problems, or 
rebut the arguments that most researchers take seriously today, and 
although there are discussions of some recent work, they are for 
the most part conducted at arms' length, and are so unspecific that 
I doubt that any writer whose work is criticized will feel obliged 
to respond. 
The format of the book reveals that it is not, as one might have 
0022-362X/79/7602/0091$00.70 
C 1979 The Journal of Philosophy, Inc, 
This content downloaded from 131.173.17.71 on Mon, 25 Jan 2016 19:20:13 UTC
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

92 
THE JOURNAL OF PHILOSOPHY 
hoped, the hard-won product of a major effort of cross-disciplinary 
collaboration, but rather a coincidental duet. The first third is an 
essay by Popper, setting out his version of the history of the philos- 
ophy of mind and presenting and defending the philosophical 
aspects of their shared interactionistic theory. The middle third is 
an essay by Eccles setting out what he takes to be the empirical 
support from brain science for the shared theory, and providing a 
more detailed account of the proposed interaction between brain 
and "self-conscious mind." The last third is a lightly edited tran- 
script of twelve conversations Popper and Eccles had at the Villa 
Serbelloni at the outset of the project. The result, not surprisingly, 
is ungainly and poorly unified. Worse still, the theory of mind that 
emerges is not really one theory, since there are unresolved differ- 
ences between Popper's and Eccles' versions. These men are not 
really co-authors, but co-contributors to an unedited anthology; 
they have not hammered out a joint theory, nor does it appear that 
they have been tough critics of each other's contributions. 
Popper's essay is a remarkable mixture of misplaced emphases 
and largely gratuitous scholarship. Roughly equal time is devoted 
to rebutting the views of panpsychists, occasionalists, epiphenom- 
enalists, and contemporary materialists, and nearly as much scholar- 
ship is devoted to "the prehistoric discovery of the self" as to 
Descartes. The point of much of the historical scholarship is to 
establish that "All thinkers of whom we know enough to say any- 
thing definite on their position, up to and including Descartes, 
were dualist interactionists" (152). Even if this were true (and 
Popper's case must rest, of course, on a great deal of anachronistic 
reconstruction), all it would show was that some form of bare-bones 
interactionism is the default opinion of people who haven't thought 
all that much about it, or had the benefit of modern discoveries to 
aid their thinking. Flat-earthers could probably marshall a similar 
majority through history in favor of their doctrine. Popper's com- 
mentary on the history of the issues does, however, repay the 
reader with unusual perspectives and insights, but caveat lector: 
Popper writes history a la Russell, with bold but unmarked un- 
orthodoxies amidst the standard fare. 
Popper eloquently expresses his reverence for the complexity of 
the universe-and 
his concomitant contempt for all reductionists 
and oversimplifiers-but 
does not usually manage to extend his 
appreciation of depth and intricacy to the works of other authors, 
who almost invariably are drastically underestimated by him. 
Popper operates by forced dichotomy and large-scale classification 
This content downloaded from 131.173.17.71 on Mon, 25 Jan 2016 19:20:13 UTC
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

BOOK REVIEWS 
93 
of views. Few subtleties are permitted. "If this Laplacean deter- 
minism is accepted, nothing whatever can be unpredictable in 
principle. So evolution cannot be emergent" (22). So much for 
Laplacean determinism, but interesting varieties of emergence com- 
patible with interesting varieties of determinism are apparently 
unimagined by Popper. 
The brandishing of isms is a familiar and not entirely useless 
pursuit. Sometimes important economies of analysis and argument 
can be obtained by it. For instance, 'interactionism' in the vocab- 
ulary of most modern materialists names a species of insane views 
that no one is presumed to hold; it simply refers to a particular 
region of theoretical perdition one always wants to avoid and often 
wants to warn about: the region in which little mental poltergeists 
pound away miraculously on the synapses. Popper calls himself an 
interactionist, but of course he is not that sort of interactionist, but 
something apparently much more sophisticated. Popper, in mirror 
image, uses 'materialism' and 'physicalism' as the names of an 
equally daft group of theories, but there is an asymmetry: Popper 
seems really to believe that the many people who call themselves 
materialists or physicalists these days hold the silly views he attacks. 
Certainly any philosopher who held the views he discusses would 
deserve the short shrift he gives them. "Climbing high mountains, 
climbing Everest for example, always seemed to me a striking re- 
futation of the physicalist view of man. To overcome difficulties, 
just for the sake of doing so . .. how can these ways of fighting all 
our natural inclinations be explained by physicalism or behavior- 
ism?" (146) Popper's physicalists apparently never read the sports 
page. At first I was inclined to suppose that his unflattering por- 
trayal of modern materialists was due to unfamiliarity with the 
recent literature-that 
he had simply imagined an upstart tribe 
of benighted theorists not worth his detailed attention-but 
he 
shows evidence of having read at least the major books of recent 
years, and he is equally ready to attribute simple-minded views to 
the greats of yore. "When Kant suggests that the thought 'I think' 
must be able to accompany all our perceptions and experiences, 
he does not seem to have thought of a child (or himself) in his 
prelinguistic or prephilosophical state" (49/50). End of refutation. 
Poor absent-minded old Kant. If great philosophers were that easily 
shown wrong, why would anyone think philosophy worth studying? 
Popper's allotment of space would better have been used to clar- 
ify the central novelties of his position; for after providing a host 
of mostly familiar observations with which few materialists would 
This content downloaded from 131.173.17.71 on Mon, 25 Jan 2016 19:20:13 UTC
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

94 
THE JOURNAL OF PHILOSOPHY 
want to quarrel-about 
holistic or mass-action effects in the brain, 
our susceptibility to illusions, creativity in perception, the unity 
of self, the folly of (simple-minded) reductionism-he 
leaps to an 
explicitly nonmaterialistic, dualistic interactionism supported by 
one curious and insufficiently developed argument about interac- 
tion between items in "World 3" (essentially a platonic world of 
abstract entities, such as theories, hypotheses, undiscovered math- 
ematical theorems) and items in "World 2" (mental events such as 
thoughts, images, conjecturings, and wonderings). The argument 
runs straightforwardly: World 3 objects are real (and irreducible 
to objects in World 2 or World 1-unproblematic 
physical objects); 
World 3 objects have their effect via World 2 interactions (to grasp 
a concept, for example, is for there to be a causal interaction be- 
tween a mental event and an abstract entity in World 3); World 2 
cannot be a proper part of World 1 because of this interaction of 
World 2 with World 3, and hence mental events are not physical 
events. What kind of causal interaction can this be between a 
thinking and a theory? We are not told. Popper waves his hands 
about how modern physics has vacated all the old-fashioned phil- 
osophical ideas about causation, but does not give a positive ac- 
count of this new kind of causation; so no reasons are given for 
supposing that such interaction, if it does occur, could not just as 
well occur between World 3 objects and World 1 objects. It seems 
just as apt to say that when I put a Z brace on a gate to keep it 
from sagging, I bring about a causal interaction between theorems 
of Euclid and the pine boards, as it does to say that there is a 
causal interaction between my thinking and these theorems. That 
is, in the absence of much more detailed persuasions, both views 
appear ludicrous. Nor is the nature of the second variety of inter- 
action in Popper's theory, the interaction between World 2 and 
World 1 objects, positively characterized. We are given examples 
of "downward causation" and "levels of emergence," but the extra- 
polation of principles from diffraction gratings and wedges (items 
exhibiting downward causation) to mind-brain effects is left to the 
reader, together with the assurance that what is proposed is not 
just poor old Descartes's action-by-impulse, but something "holis- 
tic." Does Popper in the end succeed in inventing a sophisticated 
theory that does not tumble into the scrap heap of earlier interac- 
tionistic theories? One cannot say, but there are signs that Popper 
underestimates the dangers: commenting in defense of Descartes's 
version of interactionism, he writes 
This content downloaded from 131.173.17.71 on Mon, 25 Jan 2016 19:20:13 UTC
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

BOOK REVIEWS 
95 
If, in addition, we interpret Descartes's mechanical 'animal spirits' 
not mechanically, but physicalistically as electrical phenomena, then 
this particular difficulty [conservation of momentum] becomes alto- 
gether negligible since the mass of the deflected electrical current is 
almost equal to zero so that there is no problem in compensating for 
a switch which changes the direction of the current (180). 
The contribution by Eccles exhibits parallel shortcomings. It 
consists in the main of a survey of results in brain science-neural 
cytoarchitecture, what little is known about anatomical localiza- 
tion of functions, the effects of commissurotomy and various lesions 
-but 
no thread ties the parts together, because Eccles simply has 
no overarching psychological theory at all. His interactionism, 
which he touts as a "radical hypothesis . . . that is essentially a 
new philosophy of perception" (271), is an unrivaled example of 
the invocation of a deus ex machina. Whenever a truly difficult 
theoretical issue arises, such as the "integration" or "interpreta- 
tion" of the multifarious neural "signals," Eccles passes the buck 
to "the self-conscious mind," about whose apparently wonderful 
powers he is conveniently silent. Most of what is well understood 
today in brain science concerns the peripheries: peripheral "pre- 
processing" of perceptual stimulation and peripheral "implemen- 
tation" of motor-nerve activity. By declaring the brain to be noth- 
ing but a preprocessor and implementer for the mind, a sort of 
physical doughnut round the mind's hole, Eccles excuses himself 
from further theoretical obligations. 
Since I am not a trained neurophysiologist, my judgment of 
Eccles' survey of the field must be indirect and guarded. Like many 
other recent surveys, Eccles' essay consists of a mixture of textbook 
verities, challenging data from recent experimental and clinical 
work, and currently untestable speculations and conjectures about 
how the parts might go together. Every surveyor has his favorite 
set of speculations, and I cannot see that Eccles' are any more 
plausible, or better wedded to the data, than those of others, and 
Eccles' account has the disadvantage of being poorly written. It is 
neither good science writing nor good popular writing. It is un- 
satisfactory science writing because experiments apparently crucial 
to his case, e.g., Libet's work (256-259), are so underdescribed that 
equally plausible alternative interpretations of their results as re- 
counted cannot be assessed, let alone dismissed. It is unsatisfactory 
popular writing because Eccles makes almost no attempt to recast 
the compact language of the specialist for lay readers. Most terms 
This content downloaded from 131.173.17.71 on Mon, 25 Jan 2016 19:20:13 UTC
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

96 
THE JOURNAL OF PHILOSOPHY 
are defined when they are introduced, but, for example, surely 
many readers will have to "translate" the following sentence to 
uncover its rather simple message: "All areas of the body surface 
from the extreme caudal to the extreme rostral lie in linear se- 
quence along the postcentral gyrus from its dorso-medial end over 
the convex surface of the cerebral hemispheres" (255). In any case, 
only a small fraction of the physiological and anatomical detail 
provided is invoked in any important way in the arguments for 
interactionism. 
When Eccles turns from summarizing to theorizing, his efforts 
are hampered by an extraordinary lacuna in his knowledge: he 
seems largely ignorant of work in psychology during the last twenty 
years-except for the hemisphere-specialization literature. About as 
close as he gets to cognitive psychology, for example, is quoting 
Bronowski's description (in an interview) of Roger Shepard's work 
with rotating mental images, and his accounts of perception and 
memory exhibit no familiarity with the sorts of theories attempted 
over the years by either behaviorists or cognitivists. His thinking 
about the fundamental problems of perception is so naive that he 
can repeatedly write of the "reconstitution" of the "visual picture" 
as the final outcome of visual perception, as if no problems at- 
tended such an idea. Since he has chosen to ignore the efforts of 
theoreticians in psychology, his own theoretical speculations gain 
little from his vast knowledge of the details of brain activity; he 
can't see the woods for the trees. As he himself observes, "We can 
only dimly imagine what is happening in the human cortex or 
indeed in the cortices of the higher mammals, but it is at a level 
of complexity, of dynamic complexity, unmeasurably greater than 
anything else that has ever been discovered in the universe or cre- 
ated in computer technology" (243). Suitably impressed by the 
utter inability of neurophysiological constructs on their own to 
explain the felicities of the mind's operations, he sees no recourse 
but a capitulation to interactionistic dualism, but only because he 
does not even look in the direction of cognitivistic theories. One 
might at least look at the attempts before declaring materialist 
psychology impossible. 
The third segment of the book, the transcript of discussions, 
makes uncomfortable reading, for the deference and mutual con- 
gratulation that was probably appropriate in the salubrious atmo- 
sphere of the twilit gardens of the Villa Serbelloni looks faintly 
ridiculous in cold print. The learned knights keep noting each 
This content downloaded from 131.173.17.71 on Mon, 25 Jan 2016 19:20:13 UTC
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

BOOK REVIEWS 
97 
other's brilliance, marveling at their own "staggering hypotheses," 
citing the summings-up of their favorite sages (the inevitable 
Schr6dinger, Einstein, Bronowski, Dobzhanski, Medawar), and gen- 
erally egging each other on down the primrose path to dualism. 
Since the discussions took place before the major essays were com- 
posed, one looks in vain in them for important clarifications or 
reconciliations of their views. 
Materialism in one form or another is the reigning orthodoxy 
among philosophers of mind, but neuroscientists are notorious for 
harboring staunch dualists in their fraternity. Do they know some- 
thing that we don't know? Many philosophers must have conjured 
up visions of terribly technical considerations accessible only to 
neurophysiologists that incline the wise toward dualism-like 
the 
arguments of quantum physicists for indeterminism. Someday some- 
one may come up with such an argument, but on the showing of 
this book materialist philosophers may breathe easily. Eccles' dual- 
ism is clearly revealed by his arguments to be the product of his 
philosophical and psychological naivete, not of his neurophysio- 
logical sophistication, and Popper's dualism has been composed as 
an alternative to a materialism no sane materialist holds. Might 
dualism nevertheless be true? No a priori refutation of all forms 
of dualism is possible-some 
coherent form of dualism might in 
the end be true so far as I can see-and 
no empirical disconfirma- 
tion of the dualism proposed is possible in view of the vagueness 
of the empirical claims made. But their view is, as the authors 
themselves repeatedly stress, an extravagant hypothesis, and insuffi- 
cient motivation for it has been provided. No current theoretical 
perplexity has been shown to have an elegant solution in their 
terms; no chasm has been made to yawn, over which their view is 
our only bridge. Until the day arrives when dualism can thus be 
seen as theoretical salvation, materialism will deserve its orthodoxy 
because it is both a fruitful working hypothesis-in 
sharp contrast 
with Popper-Eccles interactionism-and 
a reasonable implication 
of mild principles of scientific unity. 
DANIEL C. DENNETT 
Tufts University 
This content downloaded from 131.173.17.71 on Mon, 25 Jan 2016 19:20:13 UTC
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

