Stud. Hist. Phil. Biol. & Biomed. Sci. 35 (2004) 721–727
www.elsevier.com/locate/shpsc
Essay review
An evolutionary perspective on cognition:
through a glass lightly
Daniel C. Dennett
Center for Cognitive Studies, Tufts University, Medford, MA 02155-7059, USA
Thought in a hostile world: the evolution of human cognition
Kim Sterelny; Blackwell, Oxford, 2003, pp. 280, Price £50.00 hardback, ISBN 0-
631-18886-X, Price £16.99 paperback, ISBN 0-631-18887-8.
For roughly half a century philosophers of mind have gnawed and nibbled on
the bones of folk psychology, the informal ‘theory of mind’ that we articulate in
everyday terms: our lore about ‘beliefs’ and ‘desires’, ‘intentions’ and ‘thoughts’,
‘pains’ and ‘pleasures’ and the like. Meanwhile academic psychology has under-
gone several waves of shifting nomenclature and ideology, from various kinds of
behaviorism to various kinds of cognitivism, with neuroscience and evolutionary
biology being thrown into the mix–with mixed results. It is depressing to reﬂect on
how little has been truly settled by all this activity. One cannot expect to use any
particular vocabulary to describe ‘the mind’ (itself an embattled concept) without
provoking a sizeable cohort of objectors prepared to marvel at the fact that one is
still in the thrall of that deeply problematic way of describing things. And yet there
has been progress. It has been won, I think, by the interactions between two more
or less opponent processes: opportunistic theory-driven oversimpliﬁcation on the
one hand and hard-won, in-the-trenches, empirical fact-digging on the other. The
phenomena are so complicated that breathtaking oversimpliﬁcation looks like a
winning opening strategy here, if only we can ﬁnd one as fecund as the toy worlds
of Galilean mechanics or Mendelian genes or Bohr atoms. Then we can get a
bird’s-eye view of the task ahead, knowing that further progress will consist largely
in conceding, again and again, that things turn out to be much more complicated
than that simple picture suggests. But which oversimpliﬁcations should we lean on
for the time being? Not those of stimulus-response behaviorism, apparently, but
E-mail address: ddennett@tufts.edu (D.C. Dennett).
1369-8486/$ - see front matter # 2004 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
doi:10.1016/j.shpsc.2004.09.008

what of the physical symbol systems of GOFAI (Good Old Fashioned AI) or
connectionism or neural nets or dynamical systems theory? Or should we cling to
good old fashioned folk psychology and try to make its terms and categories line
up with whatever we ﬁnd in the brain?
Since these are questions about how to conceive of extraordinarily complicated
interacting bits of cognitive machinery, and since all these had to evolve, it is
reasonable to propose that an evolutionary perspective is a good bet to provide us
with the largest-scale context in which to reverse-engineer the pieces. And in their
own diﬀerent ways, all the oversimpliﬁers have acknowledged this, some just pay-
ing lip-service to the point, and others trying, opportunistically, to exploit evol-
utionary ideas in big, simple ways in their theories. Central to Skinner’s account of
operant conditioning, for instance, was his insight that somehow or other, the
brain had to be the site of a redesign process in the individual organism that was
fundamentally evolutionary: ‘Where inherited behavior leaves oﬀ, the inherited
modiﬁability of the process of conditioning takes over’ (Skinner, 1953, p. 83). At
the other extreme, East Pole cognitivists (Dennett, 1987) such as Chomsky and
Fodor have been eager to catalogue the innate gifts we each must have received
from natural selection, while postponing indeﬁnitely any attempt to decipher the
historical evolutionary process. In between have been a spectrum of specialists,
using insights from disciplines as diverse as animal psychology, behavioral ecology,
evolutionary game theory, neuroanatomy, Artiﬁcial Life, and economics to bring
aspects of Darwinian wisdom to bear on the complexities that confront us.
Kim Sterelny has his own ideas about which fruits of evolutionary thinking will
help us understand the mind, and he wisely frames them within a larger project, an
attempt to unify and consolidate the eﬀorts of others, bringing a more detailed set
of evolutionary considerations to bear on this task, analyzing the progress we have
made and assessing the near-term prospects for further breakthroughs. This
requires him to go slowly and cautiously over ground that others have dashed
over. He surefootedly lays out the steps of the arguments, noting the diﬃculties
and unresolved puzzles. He plays a traditional philosophical role, as an abstract
agenda-setter and general-purpose argument-critic, and he achieves the traditional
philosophical goals of exposing weaknesses in arguments and assumptions, clarify-
ing the concepts, and organizing the issues, but his methods and diction are not all
that traditional. First, he has an enviable command of an enormous spread of
scientiﬁc literature that bears on the topics. A traditional philosopher of mind
would be simply unable to undertake this project, since it depends heavily on hav-
ing a wide and deep familiarity with the empirical research–the presuppositions
and methods as well as the proclaimed results. Second (and this is to me the most
striking feature of the book), he abandons the standard philosophical modes of
assertion in favor of an unsettlingly candid avowal of his mere opinions. Again and
again, we ﬁnd him saying ‘I conjecture . . .’ (24); ‘My suspicion . . .’ and ‘My bet . . .’
(p. 50); ‘My overall line of thought is . . .’ (p. 57); ‘It is probable, then . . .’
(p. 61); ‘I think it is fair to say . . .’ (p. 70); ‘I think the best guess is that . . .’
(p. 76); ‘I am not sure that . . .’ (p. 86); ‘I doubt that’ and ‘my guess is’ (p. 92);
‘I think this is very suggestive indeed’ (p. 115); ‘In my view’ and ‘I conjecture’
D.C. Dennett / Stud. Hist. Phil. Biol. & Biomed. Sci. 35 (2004) 721–727
722

(p. 134); ‘My own guess’ (p. 143); ‘my best guess’ (p. 205); ‘In short, I am far
from convinced’ (p. 208); ‘I am not persuaded’ (p. 214); ‘I do not reject this
argument. But I do not want to rely exclusively on it . . .’ (p. 228). Is this
refreshing humility or outrageous arrogance? Is he uncharacteristically acknowl-
edging that we philosophers in our armchairs can’t ﬁgure out all the answers a
priori but might still make a modest contribution or two? Or is he just a lazy
philosopher who can’t be bothered to ﬁnish the job and prove his conjectures
(‘Thus I refute thee!’)? Besides, why should anybody be interested in his mere
opinion? I think the truth is that he is bravely leading with his chin: he has
obviously informed himself assiduously and thought long and well about the
issues. Here are his considered views, for what they are worth, and he will not
parade them as proofs or discoveries. Take them or leave them. Take them all
seriously, say I. This (in my opinion) is an honest and attractive way of present-
ing the fruits of philosophical labors when they are so well informed, and I com-
mend both the results and the mode of delivery to others, philosophers and
scientists alike. That doesn’t mean that I accept all his conjectures and claims,
and at times I wish he’d tried harder to ﬁnish oﬀa forlorn target of criticism or
secure a conclusion. But these are slippery and diﬃcult issues, and it is clear
that his own opinions are often still unsettled. Better to admit it than to bluﬀ.
At least this way a caveat is issued to the reader. It is disconcerting to realize
how inﬂuential a shoot-from-the-hip verdict from an authority can be in prema-
turely burying a promising new idea.
Sterelny divides the task he is surveying into two integrative projects. The inter-
nal project is strictly scientiﬁc: how does the machinery in our brains execute the
work of relating us so appropriately to the environment in which we must make a
living? (How do the ‘wiring facts’ explain the ‘connection facts’?) The second pro-
ject asks where folk psychology ﬁts in: ‘the external integrative project, then, is to
understand the relationship between the wiring-and-connection facts and the
interpretation facts’ (p. 6). For some theorists, of course, the two projects have
been seen as inextricably united by what Sterelny calls the Simple Coordination
Thesis: the interpretations we bandy about in folk psychology work because they
sketchily carve the human brain at its joints; if we look just right we will ﬁnd those
beliefs, desires, thoughts, intentions and pains as salient states and events in the
brain’s machinery. And if folk psychology ‘works’ on frogs and birds, we will ﬁnd
the same saliencies in frogs’ brains and birds’ brains. But this risks a major distor-
tion of the Whig history sort: anthropocentrically back-projecting into the brains
of other species the peculiarities of our particular cognitive mechanisms, which
may have evolved for quite diﬀerent competences. It may be irresistible, when we
are in interpretation mode, to wonder what monkeys believe about their rivals (or
how bats think about their experience of echolocation) but a wiser course is to
review what we know about the conditions under which cognitive mechanisms
have arisen over all of evolutionary history. As D’Arcy Thompson famously said,
everything is the way it is because it got that way, and as we add detail to our
account of the historical journey, adopting a minimalist economy that imputes no
723
D.C. Dennett / Stud. Hist. Phil. Biol. & Biomed. Sci. 35 (2004) 721–727

cognitive sophistication before its time, we may appreciate more striking diﬀerences
than similarities when we compare our minds to those of other animals.
The central novelty in Sterelny’s account is the distinction between transparent
and translucent worlds, a close kin–surprisingly unacknowledged by Sterelny–to
the founding insight of game theory: as von Neumann and Morgenstern (1944)
recognized, when there are other agents in the environment, an agent has to adopt
a more complex way of representing its options, since they can be tracked, and
thwarted, by that other, in a feedback loop. In a transparent world there can be
problems of dealing with random noise but not of systematic interference by com-
peting agents. As an organism you may need a sun-ﬁnder, but you needn’t worry
about heliocrypsis; the sun isn’t designed to try to hide from you. (In a transparent
portion of the world, such as the avenues leading from your eyes to your brain and
thence to your eﬀectors, the engineering is similarly less demanding; your eyes may
on occasion deceive you, but these are accidents or by-products of trade-oﬀs; your
eyes are basically on your side because you and your eyes are in the same boat,
evolutionarily.) Sterelny develops a persuasive case that evolution would design
quite diﬀerent systems for dealing with transparent and translucent (‘hostile’)
aspects of the world. ‘Hostile agents pollute an animal’s informational world . . .
they make decision problems more diﬃcult through their agent-sensitive responses
. . . [and] hostile agents impose costs on epistemic action’ (p. 26). Among the esca-
lating responses to such problems are ‘robust tracking’ systems that can rely on
any of a variety of diﬀerent cues or modes of perception and, in particular, ‘decou-
pled representations’, the opposite, one might say, of what the frog’s eye famously
tells the frog’s brain, a state that may be a representation of sorts, but that is
ﬁrmly tied at both ends. The frog can neither muse about ﬂies in their visual
absence nor refrain from zotting with its tongue when the message is active. This
serves the frog admirably until sneaky biologist agents intervene to exploit its tra-
ditional reliance on a relatively transparent world.
In between the robotic tropism of a frog and the savvy versatility of a human
being lie all manner of hard-to-describe competences that are slowly beginning to
expose their boundaries to relentless investigators. ‘Some populations of chimps
‘‘ﬁsh’’ for termites, pushing twigs into termite mounds, then pulling out the stick
and sucking oﬀthe termites. Could they adapt their ﬁshing techniques to exploit
other social insects?’ (p. 47) This question, to which nobody yet knows the answer,
highlights a nagging problem in animal studies: the incessant pull of generous over-
generalization by human observers. How could the chimp, so cleverly ﬁshing with
its stick, not be able to generalize in this simple fashion? And yet, again and again,
researchers have stubbed their toes on striking cases of utter cluelessness in cases
where ‘intuitively’ the novel problem should be well nigh identical to the old,
solved problem. One would have thought there was a clearly decoupled represen-
tation in the chimp’s brain, a general-purpose ‘fuel for success’ (Godfrey-Smith,
1996) available for instant exploitation in a novel setting, but perhaps not. We
have to do the experiments. Sterelny reviews this literature well, highlighting the
anomalies that have been found (apparently–some of the more anomalous ﬁndings
are frankly doubted and furiously debated within the ﬁeld).
D.C. Dennett / Stud. Hist. Phil. Biol. & Biomed. Sci. 35 (2004) 721–727
724

Predator–prey relations raise the ante by creating an arms race of deception and
detection, but what about the role of a more narrowly social environment (close
kin and other conspeciﬁc agents, who may cooperate or compete) in driving evol-
utionary innovation? A popular view, pioneered by Humphrey (1976) and elabo-
rated in several diﬀerent ways by many others, is that a suite of cognitive
elaborations evolved to permit speciﬁcally social intelligence, Machiavellian intelli-
gence (Whiten & Byrne, 1988) enabling higher-order intentional states (beliefs
about beliefs, desires about desires, and other such metarepresentations). While it
is tempting and easy–well nigh irresistible–to impute higher order intentional states
to primates (and dolphins and wolves, and, especially, dogs), the evidence needed
to secure any particular higher-order attribution in a non-speaking animal is
mighty hard to come by, with ‘romantic’ and ‘killjoy’ interpretations competing for
our endorsement (Dennett, 1983). Sterelny rightly sees a need to emphasize the
deﬂationary side of this ongoing tug of war, and his account of the recent cam-
paigns about imitation and its confounds is clear and balanced. So is his account of
the much discussed suite of experiments with chimps that turned Daniel Povinelli
(Povinelli & Eddy, 1996) from a romantic into a killjoy. When philosophers ﬁrst
learn of such experiments in isolation from the rest of the literature, they often
jump to the invited interpretation with the enthusiasm of a born-again convert.
Sterelny knows better, and nowhere are his best guesses and informed doubts more
salutary. At times, however, his insider’s knowledge lures him into falling back on
shorthand and knowing allusions that will probably baﬄe the uninitiated. His dis-
cussion of Tony Dickinson’s proposals about the Garcia eﬀect and ‘Norns’ (Dick-
inson & Balleine, 2000), the admirable artiﬁcial creatures invented by the British
software engineer, Steve Grand (2000), was hard to follow and unpersuasive even
to me, and I participated with Sterelny in the workshop where Dickinson presented
these ideas. A similar lapse later in the book is his treatment of the frame problem.
Anyone unfamiliar with the primary literature on this curious and important topic
will probably still be in the dark after reading his brief discussion. Much more suc-
cessful pedagogically is his vivid and clear review of the literature on the evolution
of cooperation, especially the emphasis on coalition and enforcement by risky pun-
ishment.
By the time evolution has created mechanisms for dealing with tricky con-
speciﬁcs, we are a long way from what the frog’s eye tells the frog’s brain: we have
some at least partially decoupled representation, equipment for enabling social
coalition, and the stage is set for sociality to begin to play a dominant evolutionary
role—not just by fostering further cooperation genes or anything like that, but by
tidying up and revising the environment in which the individuals live and thrive
and compete, so that the selective environment ‘downstream’ (in subsequent
generations) becomes radically altered. This is ‘niche construction’, the idea that
in some species, and pre-eminently in ours, the organism actively adapts the
environment to its needs instead of passively adapting to its environment. This idea
has been a persistent theme among a few evolutionists for years, starting
with Lewontin (1982), and is now the subject of a new campaign (see especially
Odling-Smee, Laland, & Feldman, 2003) about which Sterelny is cautiously
725
D.C. Dennett / Stud. Hist. Phil. Biol. & Biomed. Sci. 35 (2004) 721–727

enthusiastic, though he succeeds no better than the chief proponents of the
movement in getting clear about whether this is a useful wrinkle in evolutionary
thinking or a revolutionary overhaul of evolutionary theory. Just going on the
track record of previous presumably revolutionary bandwagons in the area, I sus-
pect that when the dust settles, niche construction will be seen as a minor elabor-
ation of such predecessor ideas as Dawkins’s extended phenotype (Dawkins, 1982).
That’s my best guess, but I don’t want to rain on their parade. The way in which
our species has made the world safe for its own kind, buﬀering most of the selec-
tive pressures that shaped our ancestors and hence abruptly shifting the adaptive
landscape is at least very dramatic, and perhaps deserves to be focused upon as a
major transition (Maynard Smith & Szathmary, 1995) in its own right.
Notice that so far, the evolution of language has not been mentioned. It lies in
the background, of course, as a major enhancer of both social interactions and
niche construction in our species, but Sterelny rightly, I think, wants to put the
brakes on here as well, and see how far we can get before we contaminate all our
thinking about other minds by making them speakers like us. This permits him to
develop some refreshing perspectives on several well advertised but probably over-
sold hypotheses about the modularity of language and modularity hypotheses more
generally. Language, on Sterelny’s analysis, is well suited in some regards for a
modular design solution, since for instance ‘there is no conﬂict of interest between
speaker and listener’ with respect to the task of parsing or identifying the speaker’s
intentions (p. 180). Your likelihood of deceiving your listener depends on your not
confusing him about which words you are uttering or which speech acts you mean
him to take you to be performing. But a ‘theory of mind module’ in contrast,
would seem to be a sitting duck for exploitation in most regards. Fodor’s (1983)
modules, being encapsulated, obligatory and cognitively impenetrable, ‘work
because, within particular domains, there are ecological constants that are stable
across evolutionarily signiﬁcant periods of time’ (p. 186). This makes them inferior
design options for use in volatile social interactions in which heavy feedback eﬀects
would be expected. Maybe, but I think this observation ignores a huge diﬀerence in
time scales. Cuckoos and their unwilling hosts are engaged in a clearly hostile arms
race, in which the moves and countermoves presumably could not adapt any faster
than they do, but each move is apparently quite a rigid module. Are cuckoo host
species more likely than other bird species to develop free-wheeling non-modular
brains under the pressure of cuckoo parasitism? That would seem to be an impli-
cation of Sterelny’s argument here.
Among other bracing buckets of cold water thrown by Sterelny are some good
reﬂections on the poverty of the stimulus argument and several other oversimple
analyses that have been held to support innate modules of one sort or another,
especially where ‘theory of mind’ is concerned. None of this is conclusive, as he
readily grants, but a burden of proof has been introduced that the other side must
now shoulder. It may be that we are simply innately curious about other agents,
innately biased in our allocation of attention and other cognitive resources to the
problems of anticipating their actions, and this may suﬃce to permit normal
people to develop robust interpretive skills with something like a ceiling eﬀect
D.C. Dennett / Stud. Hist. Phil. Biol. & Biomed. Sci. 35 (2004) 721–727
726

(where just about everybody is as expert as everybody else). Much of the cross-
cultural uniformity that has been typically interpreted as grounds for a genetic
source can be reinterpreted as due to niche construction, which provides an infor-
mational superhighway that can easily rival the genes in ﬁdelity and bandwidth,
and is much more quickly constructed. Mother nature is not a gene centrist. If
valuable information can be transmitted to oﬀspring by cultural means, this will
secure the spread of a ﬁtness-enhancing trait well in advance of any genetic mod-
iﬁcations that hard-wire the trait. Moreover, there is at least often a positive coup-
ling between interpreter and interpretee: it usually pays to grow into the
interpretations others make of you. And that sort of scaﬀolding by expectation
could presumably go a long way in securing the uniformity that strikes others as
clear evidence of an innate scheme.
This book contains many arresting observations that defy summary but neverthe-
less persistently suggest subtle shifts in one’s thinking about the topics and theories
that currently preoccupy a multi-disciplinary multitude of researchers trying to
understand the evolution of cognition. Aside from a few lapses into insider-speak
such as those mentioned above, it is very accessibly and vividly written, and should
make an enticing guide to neophytes who want to know the state of play today,
while battle hardened veterans will be sure to ﬁnd provocative novelties that will
challenge some of their working assumptions about what is important and why.
References
Dawkins, R. (1982). The extended phenotype: The gene as the unit of selection. Oxford & San Francisco:
Freeman.
Dennett, D. C. (1983). Intentional systems in cognitive ethology: The ‘Panglossian paradigm’ defended.
Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 6, 343–390.
Dennett, D. C. (1987). The logical geography of computational approaches: A view from the east pole.
In M. Harnish, & M. Brand (Eds.), Problems in the representation of knowledge (pp. 59–79). Tucson:
Univ. of Arizona Press.
Dickinson, A., & Balleine, B. W. (2000). Causal cognition and goal directed action. In C. Heyes, & L.
Huber (Eds.), The evolution of cognition (pp. 185–204). Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Fodor, J. (1983). The modularity of mind. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Godfrey-Smith, P. (1996). Complexity and the function of mind in nature. Cambridge: Cambridge Univer-
sity Press.
Grand, S. (2000). Creation: Life and how to make it. London: Weidenfeld & Nicolson.
Humphrey, N. (1976). The social function of intellect. In P. P. G. Bateson, & R. A. Hinde (Eds.), Grow-
ing points in ethology (pp. 303–317). Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Lewontin, R. (1982). Organism and environment. In H. C. Plotkin (Ed.), Learning, development and
culture (pp. 151–170). New York: Wiley.
Maynard Smith, J., & Szathmary, E. (1995). The major transitions in evolution. San Francisco: Freeman.
Odling-Smee, J., Laland, K., & Feldman, M. (2003). Niche construction: The neglected process in evol-
ution. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Povinelli, D., & Eddy, T. (1996). What young chimpanzees know about seeing. Monographs of the
Society for Research in Child Development, 61, 1–152.
Skinner, B. F. (1953). Science and human behavior. New York: Macmillan.
von Neumann, J., & Morgenstern, O. (1944). Theory of games and economic behavior. Princeton: Princeton
University Press.
Whiten, A., & Byrne, R. W. (Eds.) (1988), Machiavellian intelligence. Oxford: Clarendon Press.
727
D.C. Dennett / Stud. Hist. Phil. Biol. & Biomed. Sci. 35 (2004) 721–727

