BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1990) 139 577-584
Printed in the United States of America
Commentary on Daniel C* Dennett (1983) Intentional systems in cognitive ethology? The "Panglossian paradigm"
defended BBS 6^43-390,
Abstract of the original articles Ethologists and others studying animal behavior in a "cognitive" spirit are in need of a descriptive
language and method that are neither anachronistically bound by behaviorist scruples nor prematurely committed to particular
"information-processing models." Just such an interim descriptive method can be found in intentional system theory. The use of
intentional system theory is illustrated with the case of the apparently communicative behavior of vervet monkeys. A way of using
the theory to generate data - including usable, testable "anecdotal" data - is sketched. The underlying assumptions of this
approach can be seen to ally it directly with "adaptationist" theorizing in evolutionary biology, which has recently come under
attack from Stephen Gould and Richard Lewontin, who castigate it as the "Panglossian paradigm." Their arguments, which are
strongly analogous to B. F. Skinner's arguments againt "mentalism," point to certain pitfalls that attend the careless exercise of
such "Panglossian" thinking (and rival varieties of thinking as well), but do not constitute a fundamental objection to either
adaptationist theorizing or its cousin, intentional system theory.
Doctor Dennett and Doctor Pangloss:
Perfection and selection in biology and
psychology
Ron Amundson
Department of Philosophy, University of Hawaii at Hilo, Hilo, HI 96720
EBeetronie mail: ronald@uhccux.bitnet
Daniel Dennett wrote a paper on vocal signaling in vervet
monkeys. In it he commended the "intentional stance" to
behavioral ecologists. An anonymous referee claimed that
Dennett's paper exemplified evolutionary adaptationism,
which, according to the critic, had been shown to be "bankrupt"
by Gould and Lewontin (1979). These evolutionary theorists
had referred to adaptationism as the "Panglossian paradigm." In
response to this critique, Dennett added a discussion of adapta-
tionism to the vervet monkey paper. He likewise expanded the
title, which became "Intentional systems in cognitive ethology:
The 'Panglossian paradigm' defended" (Dennett 1983). I have
no direct knowledge of Dennett's thoughts in revising the
paper. But, taking the "intentional stance" with regard to the
episode, and having some understanding of the beliefs and
desires probably involved, one may construct the following
scenario: Dennett is a man of civility and culture, but he was
unhappy with this dismissal. He wishes to give a strong re-
sponse. So he did the most offensive thing he could think of
under the constraints of civility. He compared Gould & Lewon-
tin to B. F. Skinner. [See also BBS special issue on the work of
B. F. Skinner BBS 7(4) 1985.]
1. Adaptationism as mentaiism. There are reasons not to take
the analogy between Gould & Lewontin and Skinner too se-
riously. Most details address argumentative style rather than
theoretical substance. Richard Dawkins, Dennett's strongest
biological supporter, calls the parallel "mischievous" (Dawkins
1983a, p. 360). And Dennett himself, responding to a reply from
Lewontin, says that Lewontin just "can't take a joke" (Dennett
1983, p. 388). Jocularity aside, I believe the issue to be an
important one. The debates surrounding mentalism in psychol-
ogy show deep similarities to those surrounding adaptationism
in evolutionary theory. Dennett has the parallel precisely back-
wards, however. This commentary will present an analogy
between psychological and evolutionary theory with the op-
posite polarity to Dennett's. It will explore the implications of
Dennett's alignment of adaptationism with mentalism, and
argue in conclusion that Dennett's defense of adaptationism
ought not to be welcomed by adaptationists.
The more rhetorical of Dennett's comparisons between Gould
& Lewontin and Skinner point out, for example, that each party
claims its opponents' explanations to be too easy to invent, and
that each exploits especially poor examples of opponents' think-
ing. It would be hard to find a serious debate in which these
techniques were unused; exaggerating ones opponent's flaws
hardly makes one a Skinnerian. In a much more substantive
critique, Dennett says that Gould & Lewontin, like Skinner,
prefer historical causes to post hoc "rationalizations," and for this
reason reject the assumptions of optimality which are shared by
mentalism and adaptationism. Mentalism assumes optimal ra-
tionality in the psychological subject (for reasons to be discussed
later). Biological adaptationism assumes that organisms are
optimally adapted to their environments. Skinner's opposition to
mentalism can be traced to its optimality assumptions; likewise
Gould & Lewontin's opposition to adaptationism. But the
problem, according to Dennett, is not that adaptationism and
mentalism are falsely accused of being irrefutable and taut-
ologous. In fact, the critics are right in this judgement. The
critics' mistake is their assumption that what is irrefutable must
lack scientific value. Mentalism and adaptationism are not
themselves theories, to be judged by their fit to the data. They are
rather "stances or strategies that serve to organize data, explain
interrelations, and generate questions to ask Nature" (Dennett
1983, p. 353). Stances and strategies have scientific value
independent of their falsifiability. Gould & Lewon tin's criticism
of adaptationism and Skinner's of mentalism are mistaken for the
same reasons. Adaptationism stands to its critics as mentalism
stands to behaviorism.
2. Adaptationism as behawiorism. We will return to Dennett's
analogy, but first I will introduce a rival version. My version
rests on similarities in the structure of explanations in psycholo-
gy and evolutionary theory. The first similarity has been inde-
pendently recognized by many authors. Among them are two of
the campers Dennett has so gleefully assigned to the same tent -
Richard Lewontin and B. F. Skinner. A third is an even stranger
bedfellow, and one whom I expose with a great pretence of
reluctance — Daniel Dennett himself (Lewontin 1.982; Skinner
1990 Cambridge University Press
0140-525X/90 $5.00+.00
577

Continuing Commentary
1981; Dennett 1975). Each of these writers has pointed out the
similarity between natural selection and the Law of Effect.
Natural selection explains phylogenetic adaptation by positing a
nondirected ("random") source of heritable variation within the
lineage, together with selection by the environment of those
variants which happen by chance to be better suited to survival
and reproduction. The Law of Effect (with its cognates trial-and-
error learning and operant conditioning) explains the on-
togenetic adaptation of individual behavior (what we call "learn-
ing") by positing nondirected ("spontaneous") variations in
behavior, together with some form of selection by the environ-
ment which allows successful behavior to persist and the unsuc-
cessful to die out. In each case, the adaptations are cumulative,
and so indefinitely fine tuning is possible in theory. The on-
togenetic behavioral adaptation of the learning organism can be
explained by a selective mechanism virtually identical in its
structure to that used to explain the phylogenetic adaptation of
the evolving species.
The important point is not just that the parallel exists. It is that
the selective mechanism possesses a sort of singularity. It is
arguably the only explanation of complex (i.e. nonaccidental)
adaptedness which does not beg the question. It produces a
naturalistic explanation, perhaps the only such explanation, of
the phenomena which have given comfort to teleologists
throughout the ages.1 The selectionist mode of explanation is
surely one of the most intellectually satisfying achievements of
the 19th century.2 We can now give a naturalistic answer to the
question of how adaptations come about. But a related question is
not settled with the acceptance of selection. It is this: Which
characters of organisms are adaptations? In biology this is by no
means a simple issue. The debates about adaptationism are not
about whether natural selection is the appropriate explanation of
adaptations - virtually everyone agrees that it is. The issue is how
adaptations are identified, not how they are explained.
Accepting selection as the sole mechanism of adaptation can
create semantic problems. An example is the conflict between
new and old criteria for use of the term "adaptation." We are
commonsensically tempted to say that a character is "well
adapted" (or "an adaptation") to a task just in case it performs the
task well. In this sense, human eyebrows must be an adaptation
for keeping perspiration out of the eyes. But if we accept that all
adaptations are explained by selection, then we run the risk of
concluding that eyebrows were selected for because of their
drainage properties, based simply on the fact that their drainage
properties are useful. Now, it may well be true that eyebrows
evolved in this way. But we must be careful not to reach this
conclusion by the wrong route. Our belief that selection ex-
plains adaptation should not lead us to believe that selection
explains everything good in the world. If selection explains all
adaptation, then whether something is an adaptation depends
not only on whether it serves a purpose, but whether it had a
certain sort of causal origin - a selective origin. After all, things
with different causal origins may equally well serve current
needs. Let us resolve to call a character an "adaptation" only
when we mean to assert that the character evolved selectively to
serve a specific purpose. This is consistent with reflective
biological practice.
If this stipulation seems odd, consider a parallel bit of seman-
tics from psychology. Thirty years ago psychologists talked
about the "learning" of language. Now the topic is the "acquisi-
tion" of language. Today we expect quite different things from a
course entitled "Learning" and one entitled "Cognition." To
the lay individual there is nothing especially theory-laden about
the term "learning." As far as the individual in the street knows,
a course in "learning theory" might well discuss mental images
and the language of thought. But within the profession these
terms have taken on proprietary meanings. Whether a particu-
lar ontogenetic change exhibits "learning" or "cognition" de-
pends, as we sometimes say, on which theory you believe.
(Actually, it depends on which theory is true.) To call a change in
behavior "learning" is to assert that it arose as a result of a certain
kind of causal process. This was a semantic decision, made at
quite an early stage by linguists and cognitive psychologists.
They could have launched a crusade to rescue the term "learn-
ing" from the behaviorists, but they tactically surrendered the
terminology. The behaviorist credo was accepted - all learning
was conditioning. The important question remained; which
features of behavioral change are cases of learning?
It might be difficult for generative linguists to explain to lay
individuals just why they were reluctant to say that little Johnny
is learning English. Generativists would have to explain that the
term "learning" is associated with a particular psychological
theory - in their opinion, the wrong one. They might then
describe the alternative theory, and why they prefer the non-
selectionist explanation of language development. The debates
about adaptationism are similar. Presented only with adapta-
tionism and its denial, the nonspecialist is hard put to imagine
what the debate is about. What is the alternative to adapta-
tionism? Dennett gives very little help in this regard. He names
a few alternatives mentioned by Gould & Lewontin (genetic
drift, material compensation, "phyletic inertia," and architec-
tural constraints; Dennett 1983, p. 352), but with no particular
regard for their nature. Usually he refers only to the "historic-
architectural" preferences of Gould and Lewontin.
Just as linguists have alternatives to behaviorism which un-
derwrite their rejection of "learning theory," there are substan-
tive nonadaptational evolutionary explanations which under-
write the criticisms of adaptationism. I will try to show that at
least some of these alternatives are to adaptationism as cognitive
and nativist psychological theories are to behaviorist psycholo-
gy. The basic formula is this: On the one hand are theories which
explain existing characters as environmentally selected results
of randomly generated variation. On the other hand are theories
which explain existing characters as environmentally influenced
variations on highly conservative structures, and explain change
by reference to complex internal mediating mechanisms. On
this second sort of view, the environment may shape the ex-
pressed outcome of development, but the shaping effects are
significantly constrained by internal structure. Theories of the
first sort (let us call them "environmentalist") include behav-
iorist learning theories and selectionist/adaptationist biology.
Theories of the second sort ("structuralist") include nativist and
cognitive psychology, and evolutionary theories which stress,
for example, morphological and embryological constraints on
evolution (see Maynard Smith et al. 1985, for a recent discus-
sion).
3. How adaptationists defend adaptationism. Research pro-
grams are based on central factual beliefs. The term "adapta-
tionism" is used both to refer to an evolutionary research
program and to its central factual belief. The belief is that the
great majority of characters of organisms are recognizable adap-
tations to environments, formed in their detail by natural
selection. The research program of the same name uses the
belief as a guide to further research - one assumes that a
complex structure is an adaptation, and attempts to devise a
selective explanation consistent with the known (or the plausi-
bly hypothesized) facts of natural history.
Qua research program, adaptationism is indeed unfalsifiable,
but benignly so. After all, research programs are "instruments"
of research generation. Instrumentalism is true of research
programs, and Dennett is right to defend them on this ground.
The story is different when "adaptationism" refers to the factual
belief on which the research program is based. If adaptationists
systematically fail to consider nonadaptive explanations of char-
acters, as Gould & Lewontin claim they do, then their factual
belief in the ubiquity of adaptation is immunized from chal-
lenge. An unfalsifiable belief is worse than an unfalsifiable
research program.
Most biological defenses of adaptationism adopt a strategy
different from Dennett's. They do not defend the unfalsifiability
578
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1990) 13:3

Continuing Commentary
of adaptationism-the-program. They rather argue that indi-
vidual adaptive explanations are falsifiable - that adaptationism-
the-belief is subject to test whether or not adaptationism-the-
program is (Dawkins 1983a). Adaptationists can and do refute
particular adaptive explanations (often replacing them with
adaptationist alternatives). Gould and Lewontin may have over-
stated the problem of falsification, as even some supporters
acknowledge (e.g. Kitcher 1985, p. 232). They must not insist
(nor, on my reading, did they insist) that the entire adaptationist
research program and/or the central belief in the ubiquity of
adaptation, should stand or fall with the tested success of each
individual explanation. On the other hand, critics of adapta-
tionism have a perfect right to expect appropriate nonadaptive
explanations to be at least sometimes entertained by adapta-
tionists. Competing types of explanation must be considered,
not just competing tokens of the same type. Let us consider how
adaptationists deny individual adaptive scenarios, and what
alternatives to adaptive scenarios might exist.
Current adaptationists are able to reject individual adaptive
explanations because they operate under substantive Darwinian
constraints. To be sure, a few can find it in their hearts to praise
pre-Darwinian adaptationists - even William Paley.3 But the
basic commitment is not to adaptation itself, but to the power of
natural selection to create it. This can be seen in the disputes
surrounding group selection. Were the real Dr. Pangloss alive
today, he would point to characters which exist "for the good of
the species." But most modern adaptationists reject these.
Why? Because careful analysis seems to show that natural
selection could give rise to such characters only under very rare
circumstances. Adaptationism gives way under the pressure of
selectionism. Other adaptationist refutations of adaptive expla-
nations are similar. A plausible scenario of selective history is a
necessary corollary to an adaptationist explanation. To be sure,
there are some comparative studies which focus on extant
groups.4 This may give the appearance of unencumbered adap-
tationism - the sort which asserts adaptedness without any
commitment to its cause. But whatever the outcome of a com-
parative study, it will be subject to selectionist evaluation. In
the words of a critic of Gould & Lewontin, adaptationism "is a
method of generating hypotheses based on our knowledge of the
processes and limitations of natural selection." (Brown 1982, p.
884, emphasis added.) I submit that any proposed adaptationist
explanation which cannot be supported by a plausible selec-
tionist scenario will be, for that reason alone, rejected by
modem adaptationists. Today's adaptationist, like William Pal-
ey, expects the world to be rich in adaptations. Unlike Paley, his
faith is in selection. A character, no matter how useful or
cleverly related to an organism's needs, will not be seen as an
adaptation unless it can be explained as an outcome of particular
mechanisms of natural selection.
There are many productive lines of research in biology which
give alternatives to adaptationist explanations.5 None of the
alternatives denies that natural selection will produce adapta-
tion. Rather, it is contended (1) that other evolutionary forces
may give rise to patterns of complex characters best accounted
for by nonselective explanations, or (2) that there are reasons to
doubt that the conditions necessary for the operation of natural
selection actually obtained in the evolutionary history of a
purported adaptation.
Recall that the operation of natural selection requires copi-
ous, heritable, nondirected variation. This is the source from
which the environment selects reproductively successful vari-
ants. But suppose that there is some internal, nonenvironmen-
tal mechanism which constrains the variation of a certain char-
acter within a phylogenetic lineage. The discovery of this
constraint contributes to the explanation of why organisms in
that lineage exhibit the characters they do. In doing so, it
reduces the scope of any selectionist/adaptationist explanation
of the same facts. Suppose that the variations occur preferen-
tially in a certain direction. This also reduces the scope of the
selectionist explanation. The absence of environmental com-
petition from non-character-holders erodes the force of selec-
tionism yet again.
My present purpose is not to argue that such constraints,
biases, and non-competitive environments actually existed in
the history of life on earth. These are questions of fact. The point
is this: Adaptationism hangs on these questions of fact. Consider
one example. Many respectable biologists believe that ter-
restrial vertebrates have never had variation for limb number.
Without variation, there is nothing for the environment to
select. Unlike the insects, the deep developmental processes
which have been constant in land vertebrates strongly constrain
limb number. Our ancestors the lobe-finned fishes had four, and
we inherited their developmental program. You and I and dogs
and bats do vary in the morphology of our limbs, and today's
great diversity must result largely from adaptive selection. But
even here it is argued that variation is biased by embryological
mechanisms, for example, that digits can be added and lost only
in certain orders (Shubin & Alberch 1986). In amongst the
diversity lurk universals; selection and adaptation probably
explain diversity, but structural constraints may explain
universals.
This should sound familiar to students of psychology and
linguistics. Postbehaviorist linguists propose linguistic univer-
sals, and internal constraints on language acquisition. Surely
some of language is "learned" in an environmentalist way, in-
volving reinforcement and whatnot. But the explanatory force of
environmental selection is eroded by the nonrandomness of the
child's responses, and the evidence for complex internal pro-
cesses which mediate the child/environment interaction. It is
often claimed that the child's linguistic environment contains
too little behavioral training (i.e. selection) to account for the
complex development observed. Something else, innate and
internal, must account for the development. If these claims are
true, then the environmentalist/selectionist theory - Skinner's
theory - is weakened. This is one of many parallels between the
environmentalist-versus-structuralist debates in biology and
those in psychology. I will spare the reader further details, but
repeat one reminder - at issue are factual matters, not to be
settled by methodology-slinging alone. The issues are similar in
biology and psychology, but not in the way Dennett suggests.
4. Dennett's defense of adaptationism. Up to this point my
argument may sound like false dichotomy. After all, perhaps
Dennett and I are both right - adaptationism is in some ways
like mentalism and in others like behaviorism. (Dennett himself
has recently taken this approach; Dennett 1987.) But, as it
happens, adaptationism is not like mentalism in the ways Den-
nett says. Notice that he and I have chosen different aspects of
antibehaviorist psychology to emphasize. I cite the causal ex-
planatory force of postulated internal structures, while he cites
the assumption of optimal rationality needed to support inten-
tional interpretations. My focus is syntactic; his is semantic. To
see the significance of this, recall that Dennett's notion of the
"intentional stance" involves a special and somewhat controver-
sial view on the relations between mentalistic psychological
ascriptions and the causal insides of the psychological subject.
He holds that mentalistic ascriptions of beliefs and desires have
a sort of explanatory value even if no genuine, causal, internal
mental structures exist to be identified as those beliefs and
desires. The value of mentalistic talk lies not in its reference to
an internal, causally active reality, but in its instrumental
usefulness in making predictions and inspiring experiments.
(This is not a majority view among philosophers. Many believe
that mentalism has explanatory force only if it describes actual,
internal causes. There are disagreements, of course, on whether
this condition is satisfied.)
Dennett has recommended the intentional stance to cog-
nitive ethologists. It has not been generally noticed that this
suggestion has two distinct instrumentalist implications. First
and uncontroversially (as noted above) the stance is a research
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1990) 13:3
579

Continuing Commentary
program, an instrument for generating research. Second, Den-
nett's view on mentality gives an instrumental interpretation to
each program-inspired mentalistic explanation. So not only the
program, but each of its products, is an instrument for predic-
tion. The ethologist would be mistaken who expected the
intentional stance to yield objectively accurate causal descrip-
tions of vervet monkeys' cognitive insides.
Dennett applies his two-pronged instrumentalism to adapta-
tionism in a manner exactly consistent with his analogy. Not
only adaptationism-the-program, but also individual adaptive
explanations lack reference to specific causal processes. Even
intentionality, the mentalist's Holy Grail, is given an adapta-
tionist analog. "The indirect bearing of the Eiffel Tower on my
thought about the Eiffel Tower, like the indirect bearing of the
toxicity of those ancestral bee corpses that weren't removed
from their hives on the current behavior vis-a-vis corpses of
today's bees, is not the sort of relation that can be illuminated by
a mechanistic, nonintentional account, however voluminous."
Dennett sees this unilluminating, mechanistic, nonintentional
account as including selection mechanisms; it is Gould &
Lewontin (not adaptationists) who foolishly advocate "un-
adorned mechanical history of actual selection" (Dennett 1985,
p. 764).
Dennett points out, correctly, that the truth of a nonadapta-
tionist story (e.g., a Laplacean microphysical account) does not
require the falsehood of all adaptationist stories of the same
feature. He then attributes the denial of this belief to adapta-
tionism's critics. As evidence that anti-adaptationists have phys-
ical reductionist tendencies, Dennett quotes a case - the only
specific case mentioned in his adaptationism discussion. The
case is the one discussed above - quadrapedality in terrestrial
vertebrates. The nonadaptationist explanation is that the an-
cestral species had four limbs. This structural account asserts
that ancestry, rather than adaptation, explains quadrapedality.
Dennett analyzes the case as follows: He attributes the nonadap-
tationist conclusion to reductionism - the false belief that
adaptationist explanations are in competition with causal ones.6
Adaptationists would be expected to develop an optimalizing
rationale for quadrapedality, unrestrained by the physicalist/
structuralist alternative.
Is this how adaptationists think? Is the affection for "mechan-
ical histories of actual selection" a mistake of anfi-adaptationists?
Does the relation between an adaptation of today and a selective
mechanism of yesteryear involve the deep problem of "about-
ness"? Are particular adaptive explanations actually tools for
prediction, independent of physical history? Here are the words
of adaptationists, quoted from passages specifically responding
to antiadaptationist criticism. Richard Dawkins reports that,
"the adaptationist controversy . . . is concerned with whether,
given that we are dealing with a phenotypic effect big enough to
see and ask questions about, we should assume that it is the
product of natural selection." (Dawkins 1982, p. 33) Later, "The
neo-Darwinian adaptationist . . . insists upon knowing the ex-
act nature of the selective process that has led to the evolution of
the putative adaptation." (ibid., p. 51) These passages do not
sound as if mechanistic histories of selection were something the
adaptationist could just as well do without. And would an
adaptationist float an optimizing rationale over the ancestry
explanation of quadrapedality? Verne Grant, even while "strik-
ing back" (his expression) against critics of adaptationism, specif-
ically accepts the ancestry explanation of quadrapedality. He
does not accuse its proponents of reductionism, and does not
propose a free floating adaptive rationale (Grant 1983, p. 155). If
adaptationism were decoupled from the mechanisms of selec-
tion in the way Dennett says, we should be able to find adapta-
tionists who doubted whether a particular adaptation were
indeed the causal result of a specific physical history of selection.
There have been many such thinkers, of course. But then along
came Darwin.
5. M caution to adaptationists. My version of the psycholo-
gy/biology analogy stresses similarities in the causes cited by
Skinner and adaptationists, and in the sorts of causal constraints
cited by their critics. Dennett cites optimality, a commitment
said to be shared by mentalists and adaptationists, as the central
feature of his version. To be sure, both mentalists and adapta-
tionists make optimality assumptions. But do they do so for
relevantly similar reasons? Evolutionary adaptationists regard
optimality as an implication of a specific causal theory - Darwi-
nian selection. If the conditions necessary for unconstrained
selection are present, optimal adaptation is to be expected. But
for mentalistic psychology, the story is more intricate.
Mentalists assume optimal rationality in a psychological sub-
ject because if they didn't there would be no criterion for
correctness in the semantic interpretation of mental states. As
Quine (1960, pp. 59, 69) showed in his discussion of "radical
translation," any semantic interpretation is as good as any other
when we suppose our subject to be irrational. Mentalists, by
definition, want to make semantic interpretations. It seems that
there is no way to do so, under our present state of knowledge,
without presuming rationality. We rely on rationality by default
- because we have nothing else to rely on.
The mentalist would be freed from his dependence on ra-
tionality if a better way of assigning semantic content were
available. Imagine that a mentalistic Newton or Einstein were to
come along with an acceptable, naturalistic, causal theory of
intentional content assignment - perhaps a nice little neu-
rological or behavioral semantics. We would no longer be forced
to assume optimal rationality. It would be independently test-
able. We simply assign our semantic interpretations as the
theory tells us, and then assess the subject's beliefs by our now-
independent normative criteria of rationality. Today, sad to say,
such a theory is not available. In its absence, mentalism does not
(and cannot) derive rationality from a specific causal theory.
Mentalism reluctantly assumes optimality for lack of anything
better.
So the cornerstone of Dennett's analogy between adapta-
tionism and mentalism is an epiphenomenon. Optimality is a
concept which adaptationists anchor to a central causal theory,
and which mentalists presuppose for lack of one.7
Given Dennett's views on mentalism, there is no reason for
him to be embarrassed by the lack of causal warrant for the
optimality assumption. In noncausal theories, calling something
an "epiphenomenon" is no special curse. If belief-ascriptions
are tools for prediction, and if optimality assumptions prove to
be useful tool-sharpeners, then why worry about independent
causal warrants?
The problem is that Dennett's disenchantment with causal
theories has resulted in an insensitivity to the causal texture of
evolutionary theory. He removes from adaptationism its com-
mitment to selectionist causation and replaces it with the prob-
lem of intentionality. The one thing which saves modern adapta-
tionism from starry-eyed, contentless, Leibnizian pseudo-
optimism is its commitment (in principle at least) to Darwinian
mechanisms and to the hard cold facts of natural history. Inten-
tionality, on the other hand, is the most notorious unsolved
problem of modern philosophy. The tradeoff is not a bargain for
biologists. Keep in mind that the critics of adaptationism do
have causal warrant. Adaptationism is to be defended not
against people who find it instramentally useless, as incapable of
"generating questions to ask Nature." It must be defended
against specific alternative causal explanations of evolutionary
phenomena. If adaptationists accept Dennett's exchange, if they
commit themselves to optimal adaptation on instrumental
rather than on causal grounds, Pangloss may live but Darwin
will die. Dennett's defense of adaptationism is a poisoned pill.
NOTES
1. Dennett (1975) points to the singularity of selection in explaining
why the Law of Effect will not go away; Dawkins (1983b) argues that
580
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1990) 13:3

Continuing Commentary
Darwinian selection is, virtually a priori, the explanation of any adaptive
evolutionary process anywhere in the universe; Skinner slightly more
conservatively claims that selection (either ontogenetic or phylogenetic)
accounts for all adaptiveness in this world, and an active contingent of
"evolutionary epistemologists" agrees, some of them extending the
domain of selection in amazing ways (see the readings in Plotkin 1982).
2. The first publication of a fully naturalistic selectionist explanation
in psychology occurred in the same year as its introduction to biology;
Darwin's Origin of Species and Alexander Bain's The Emotions and the
Will were both published in 1859.
3. A. J. Cain is cited by Dennett (1983) praising Robert Hooke on
insect antennae; Dawkins (1983b) describes adaptationists like himself
as "neo-Paleyans."
4. For example, two explanations of sexual dimorphism can be tested
by their differing predictions of dimorphism in monogamous and harem-
holding primates (Maynard Smith 1984, p. 301).
5. A few of the nonadaptationist explanations are those involving
macroevolutionary theory, restrictions on optimality which come from
the details of genetic mechanisms (especially in sexually reproducing
species), the "neutralist" theories of molecular geneticists, and the
developmental constraints discussed briefly below.
6. Dennett 1983, p. 354. It is particularly bizarre in this passage that
the people Dennett hints to be microphysical reductionists are mac-
roevolutionary theorists. Most of these people don't even believe that
macroevolution can be reduced to population level processes, let alone
to microphysical particles. Reductionism is simply not a motivating
factor in the criticisms of adaptationism. Dennett has again superim-
posed a topic from the philosophy of mind onto evolutionary biology,
and again it doesn't fit.
7. Some, including Dennett, have used natural selection itself as a
reason to assume optimal rationality. I take it that Stich (1985) has shown
the failure of this line of reasoning. In this context Dennett could
accurately be accused of Panglossianism.
Author's Response
Dr. Pangloss knows best
Daniel C. Dennett
Center for Cognitive Studies, Tufts University, Medford, MA 02155
Amundson's Insightful and entertaining commentary on
my defense of adaptationism closes with a warning to the
adaptationist (and indirectly to the ethologist): The trade-
off I propose to biologists is "not a bargain"; it is "a
poisoned pill."
I concur with his warning against the view he describes
as mine: It is not the view I have espoused, however.
Amundson has reacted to some exaggerations and incau-
tious remarks of mine with some exaggerations of his own,
but since he is not alone in reading me this way, I accept
the blame for the misdirection.
Amundson is certainly right when he urges adapta-
tionists not to abandon their obligations to the causal
histories of the features they hope to describe as adapta-
tions. But what he describes as my "disenchantment with
causal theories" is nothing of the kind. My point was
rather that biologists who claim to rely abstemiously on
nothing but unvarnished, uninterpreted causal histories
of actual selection are kidding themselves; that is just as
impossible as the Skinnerian dream of a psychology that
does all its explaining and predicting by appeal to nothing
but an unvarnished history of reinforcement. What I have
advertised is not a "noncausa!" theory of adaptations (or of
beliefs and desires), but rather indirectly causal theories.
Just as there has to be some intelligible causal path that
grounds a claim such as "he didn't think the gun was
loaded" (it can't be defended just because it fits so nicely
with a particular story one likes to tell), so there has to be
some intelligible causal path that grounds any claim about
an adaptation. I wanted just to show how any such path
becomes intelligible only on interpretation - from the
intentional stance, with its inevitable assumption of op-
timality or rationality. (I hope this has become clearer in
Dennett 1987 and 1988.) The "free-floating rationales" I
have pointed to are not utterly unanchored - they are just
not tied to independently identifiable representations of
those rationales in the causal ancestry. Just as it is folly to
look for the brain-writing to clinch "he didn't know the
gun was loaded" - the (brain-)writing might exist, but its
existence is not required for the truth of the claim - so it is
folly to think that for every adaptation there must be
something analogous to a specific change order in a
design-and-manufacturing project. Unless one were to
suppose - with zero plausibility - that the design process
of natural selection can never "kill two birds with one
stone," one should not expect to be able to "read off' the
adaptation claims licensed by even total historical infor-
mation about causation, birth, and death.
Amundson says, "The ethologist would be mistaken
who expected the intentional stance to yield objectively
accurate causal descriptions of vervet monkeys' cognitive
insides." This is true if we read it to assert that the
intentional stance does not directly yield such causal
descriptions; but of course the whole point of adopting
the intentional stance is to work directly toward that very
goal: objectively accurate causal descriptions of creatures'
cognitive insides. (see Dennett 1989)
Amundson points out that he and I emphasize different
aspects of both behaviorism and mentalism, which is why
when we line them both up with adaptationism and its
critics, we get the opposite mapping. He sees Chomsky's
structuralism as the central mentalist alternative to be-
haviorism, whereas I have always viewed that as a weirdly
extremist doctrine ("nobody ever learns anything") held
by a vocal minority of mentalists (or "cognitive scien-
tists"). There is a mapping from these extremists of
cognitive science onto extremists in evolutionary theory:
those who hold that there really is only trivial selection -
the constraining structures and principles are (nearly)
totally constraining. I don't put Lewontin and Gould in
that camp of critics, but rather into the puritanical camp
of critics who think that interpretation that uses optimiza-
tion is to be steadfastly avoided - an impossible ideal they
themselves cannot live by. When I aligned adaptationism
with mentalism, I was thinking of the mentalists who
agree with the behaviorists in thinking that there is
genuine learning (as opposed to mere "triggering"), but
who disagree with them about how that is to be described
and explained. As Amundson shrewdly observes, I was
not just poking fun with my parallel. My advice to
Skinnerians has always been: loosen up, and notice that
you can have all the virtues of causal-historical science
plus "mentalistic" interpretation as an indispensible lev-
er; so my advice to Gould and Lewontin is the same: You
can't do biology without optimality assumptions, so in-
stead of condemning the game, learn the rules.
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1990) 13:3
581

Continuing Commentary
References
Brown, J. L. (1982) The adaptationist program. Science 217:884. 
[RA]
Dawkins, E. (1982) The extended phenotype. Oxford University Press. 
[RA]
(1983a) Adaptationism was always predictive and needed no defense.
Behavioral and Brain Sciences 6:360-61. 
[RA]
(1983b) Universal Darwinism. In Evolution from molecules to men, ed. D.
S. Bendall. Cambridge University Press. 
[RA]
Dennett, D. C. (1975) Why the Law of Effect will not go away. Journal of the
Theory of Social Behavior 5:169-87. 
[RA]
(1983) Intentional systems in cognitive ethology: The "Panglossian
paradigm" defended. Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 6:343-90. 
[RA]
(1985) When does the intentional stance work? Behavioral and Brain
Sciences 8:763-66. 
[RA]
(1987) The intentional stance. MIT Press. 
[RA, rDCD]
(1988) Science, philosophy, and interpretation. Behavioral and Brain
Sciences ll(3):535-44. 
[rDCD]
(1989) "Cognitive ethology: Hunting for bargains or a wild goose chase?" In:
Goals, No-Goals and Own Goals: A debate on goal-directed and
intentional behaviour, ed. A. Montefiore & D. Noble. Unwin
Hyman. 
[rDCD]
Gould, S. J., & Lewontin, R. C. (1979) The spandrels of San Marco and the
Paeglossian paradigm: A critique of the adaptationist programme.
Proceedings of the Royal Society of London 6205:581-98. 
[RA]
Grant, V. (1983) The synthetic theory strikes back. Biobgisches 
Zentralblatt,
102:149-58. 
[RA]
Kitcher, P. (1985) Vaulting ambition. MIT Press. 
[RA]
Lewontin, R. C. (1982) Organism and environment. In: Learning,
development and culture, ed. H. C. Plotkin. Wiley. 
[RA]
Maynard Smith, J., Burian, R., Kaufrman, S., Alberch, P., Campbell, J.,
Goodwin, B., Lande, R., Raup, D. & Wolpert, L. (1985) Developmental
constraints and evolution. The Quarterly Review of Biology 60:265-
87. 
[RA]
Maynard Smith, J. (1984) Optimalization theory in evolution. In: Conceptual
Issues in Evolutionary Biology, ed. E. Sober. MIT Press. 
[RA]
Plotkin, H. C. (ed) (1982) Learning, Development, and Culture. John Wiley
and Sons. 
[RA]
Quine, W. V. O. (1960) Word and object. MIT Press. 
[RA]
Shubin, N. H., & Alberch, P. (1986) A morphological approach to the origin
and basic organization of the tetrapod limb. Evolutionary Biology 20:319-
87. 
[RA]
Skinner, B. F. (1981) Selection by consequences. Science 213:501-4.
Stich, S. (1985) Could man be an irrational animal? In: Naturalizing
Epistemology, ed. H. Komblith. MIT Press. 
[RA]
Commentary on Daniel C. Dennett (1988) Precis of The Intentional Stance. BBS 11:495-546.
Abstract of the original article: The intentional stance is the strategy of prediction and explanation that attributes beliefs, desires, and
other "intentional" states to systems - living and nonliving - and predicts future behavior from what it would be rational for an
agent to do, given those beliefs and desires. Any system whose performance can be thus predicted and explained is an intentional
system, whatever its innards. The strategy of treating parts of the world as intentional systems is the foundation of "folk
psychology," but is also exploited (and is virtually unavoidable) in artificial intelligence and cognitive science more generally, as
well as in evolutionary theory. An analysis of the role of the intentional stance and its presuppositions supports a naturalistic theory
of mental states and events, their content or intentionality, and the relation between "mentalistic" levels of explanation and
neurophysiological or mechanistic levels of explanation. As such, the analysis of the intentional stance grounds a theory of the mind
and its relation to the body.
The matter of other minds
Beatrice de Gelder
Departments of Psychology and Philosophy, Tilburg University, Tilburg
5000 LE, The Netherlands
Electronic mail: beadegel/htikubS.bitnet
Dennett's (1987; 1988) The Intentional Stance (henceforth
Stance) continues a long tradition of philosophers' writing pre-
scriptions for psychology. In the past, prescriptions were part of
cures for uncertainties about what we can know (epistemology)
and doubts about what we must do (ethics). The current philo-
sophical discussion about psychology is often limited to the
scientific status of the concepts of folk psychology. Stance is also
devoted to such matters (but see Dennett 1984). In this com-
mentary we examine the relevance to autism of the meth-
odology advocated in Stance. Autism also raises questions relat-
ed to the practical, ethical side of folk psychology not discussed
here.
When it was first described by Kanner in 1943, autism was
defined as an "innate inability to form the usual biologically
provided affective contact with people." Subsequent research
has confirmed that autism is a matter of severe social unadapted-
ness which is only remotely related to the syntactic aspects of
linguistic and intellectual skills. For example, linguistic impair-
ments are specifically in the domain of semantic-pragmatic
competence. Impairments in the basic skills needed for interac-
tion with others lead in turn to difficulties autists have in (to use
Dennett's words) "making sense of themselves." In the face of
this diagnosis, one is tempted to use the notion of a "theory of
mind." Should we conclude that, unlike chimpanzees (Premack
& Woodruff 1978), autists. do not have a theory of mind (Baron-
Cohen et al. 1985), that they are specifically retarded in the
development of a theory of mind (Baron-Cohen 1989), or alter-
natively, that autists might have only a theory of mind and lack
an ability for ascribing mental states in natural interaction (de
Gelder et al. 1988)? Such conclusions sound very much like
answers from folk psychology. We understand them but we do
not know what they mean. Stance promises to extricate us from
the predicament we find ourselves in when for the best of
scientific reasons we refuse to dump folk psychology. The
trouble is that Stance speaks in many tongues. It defends surface
intentionalism (SI), deep realism (DE) and it promotes a distinc-
tion between notions and beliefs (NBD). In this commentary I
point out that each of these views taken separately suggests a
perspective on autism. It appears difficult to combine and to
elaborate these perspectives.
1. Stance confirms at length the SI standpoint Dennett is
well known for: To be predictable by the intentional stance is all
there is to having beliefs. On most occasions we can effortlessly
predict autistic behavior by treating autists as if they had beliefs
and desires. If so, we must conclude on the strength of SI that
autists are real believers. This gets the intentionalist in conflict
with the current diagnosis of autism as a specific deficit that
manifests itself in interaction with other people but does not
affect perceptual beliefs. The conflict is of a peculiar kind
because SI is unhelpful in clarifying what the disagreement is
about and how far it extends. Moreover, the student of autism
searches for internal causes, mechanisms and processes to be
blamed for the deficit. SI declares that when it comes to
deciding about the intentionality of the system none of that
582
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1990) 13:3

