1. Introduction
In a prosperous society most misery is self-inflicted. We
smoke, eat and drink to excess, and become addicted to
drugs, gambling, credit card abuse, destructive emotional
relationships, and simple procrastination, usually while at-
tempting not to do so. The human bent for defeating our
own plans has puzzled writers since antiquity. From Plato’s
idea that the better part of the self – reason – could be over-
whelmed by passion, there evolved the concept of a faculty
– will – that lent reason the kind of force that could con-
front passion and defeat it. The construct of the will and its
power became unfashionable in twentieth century science,
but the puzzle of self-defeating behavior – what Aristotle
called akrasia – and its sometime control has not been
solved. With the help of new experimental findings, and
conceptual tools from economics, game theory, and the phi-
losophy of mind, it is possible to form a hypothesis about
the nature of will that does not violate the conventions of
science.
In this précis I have followed the outline of Breakdown
of Will (Ainslie 2001) in three main parts and twelve chap-
ters, but have necessarily been selective in what I describe
in detail. In the first part, “Breakdowns of Will” (sects. 2 to
4 here), I criticize the two main conventional approaches to
impulsiveness and self-control (Ch. 2, sect. 2.1 here), then
present experimental evidence that vertebrates’ evaluation
of future options is basically hyperbolic, rather than expo-
nential as conventionally assumed (Ch. 3, sect. 3 here), and
argue that the hyperbolic form offers an alternative to clas-
sical conditioning as a mechanism for involuntary behaviors
(Ch. 4, sect. 4 here). In the second part, “A Breakdown of
the Will” (sects. 5 to 8 here), I argue that hyperbolically
based uncertainty about our own future choices leads us to
see current choices as test cases (Ch. 5, sect. 5.1 here), that
this perception establishes willpower through an intertem-
poral version of the repeated prisoner’s dilemma (Ch. 6,
sect. 6 here), that this model fits common experiences of
will (Ch. 7, sect. 7 here), and that substantial evidence fa-
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (2005) 28, 635–673
Printed in the United States of America
© 2005 Cambridge University Press
0140-525X/05 $12.50
635
Précis of Breakdown of Will
George Ainslie
Department of Veterans Affairs Medical Center, 116A, Coatesville, PA 19320
and Temple Medical College, Philadelphia, PA 19140
George.Ainslie@va.gov
http://www.Picoeconomics.com
Abstract: Behavioral science has long been puzzled by the experience of temptation, the resulting impulsiveness, and the variably suc-
cessful control of this impulsiveness. In conventional theories, a governing faculty like the ego evaluates future choices consistently over
time, discounting their value for delay exponentially, that is, by a constant rate; impulses arise when this ego is confronted by a condi-
tioned appetite. Breakdown of Will (Ainslie 2001) presents evidence that contradicts this model. Both people and nonhuman animals
spontaneously discount the value of expected events in a curve where value is divided approximately by expected delay, a hyperbolic
form that is more bowed than the rational, exponential curve.
With hyperbolic discounting, options that pay off quickly will be temporarily preferred to richer but slower-paying alternatives, a phe-
nomenon that, over periods from minutes to days, can account for impulsive behaviors, and over periods of fractional seconds can ac-
count for involuntary behaviors. Contradictory reward-getting processes can in effect bargain with each other, and stable preferences
can be established by the perception of recurrent choices as test cases (precedents) in recurrent intertemporal prisoner’s dilemmas. The
resulting motivational pattern resembles traditional descriptions of the will, as well as of compulsive phenomena that can now be seen
as side-effects of will: over-concern with precedent, intractable but circumscribed failures of self-control, a motivated (“dynamic”) un-
conscious, and an inability to exploit emotional rewards. Hyperbolic curves also suggest a means of reducing classical conditioning to
motivated choice, the last necessary step for modeling many involuntary processes like emotion and appetite as reward-seeking behav-
iors; such modeling, in turn, provides a rationale for empathic reward and the “construction” of reality.
Keywords: altruism; appetite; behavioral economics; classical conditioning; compulsions; dynamic inconsistency; emotions; empathy;
freedom of will; hyperbolic discounting; impulsiveness; intertemporal bargaining; self-control; social construction; volition; weakness of
will
While a student at Harvard Medical School, George
Ainslie proposed that a recently discovered function
describing choice among unpredictable, recurring re-
wards, Herrnstein’s matching law, could be applied to
discrete, predictable rewards in the form of a hyperbolic
discount curve. Empirical demonstration of this “irra-
tional” curve and its implications – choice that changes
as a function of proximity, durable conflicting interests
within the individual, and intertemporal bargaining
among those interests – has been the work of nearly forty
years. His behavioral and bargaining experiments and
theoretical deductions have been published in journals
of psychology, philosophy, economics, and law, in many
book chapters, and in a previous book, Picoeconomics:
The Strategic Interaction of Successive Motivational
States Within the Person (Cambridge, 1992).
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0140525X05280111
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Eastern Kentucky University, on 20 Nov 2019 at 18:38:06, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms.

vors the bargaining model over other models of willpower
(Ch. 8, sect. 8 here). In the last part “The Ultimate Break-
down of Will” (sects. 9 to 11 here), I describe how in-
tertemporal bargaining leads to compulsive side effects
(Ch. 9, sect. 9 here) and how a hyperbolically based im-
pulse toward premature satiation of appetite gives emo-
tions their quasi-voluntary quality (Ch. 10, sect. 10 here),
and motivates the social construction of facts, the quest
for vicarious experience, and indirect approaches to goals
(Ch. 11, sect. 11 here). I summarize the conclusions of
these arguments in section 12 (Ch. 12 of the book).
2. Breakdowns of will: The puzzle of akrasia
(Part I, Ch. 1 of book)
2.1. The dichotomy at the root of decision science: Do
we make choices by judgments or by desires?
(Ch. 2)
The puzzle of self-defeating behavior has provoked two
kinds of explanation, neither of which has been adequate.
Cognitive theories have stayed close to introspective ex-
periences of will and its failure, using familiar concepts
like strength (e.g., Baumeister & Heatherton 1996); but
they have not offered systematic causal hypotheses. Util-
ity-based theories have assumed a comprehensive inter-
nal marketplace of desires that compete on the basis of
the expected value of their goals, discounted exponen-
tially for delay – that is, by a fixed percentage per unit of
time:
Value  Value at no delay  (1 – Discount rate)Delay
But discounting the future per se does not imply impul-
siveness – the most rational planners devalue delayed out-
comes. On the contrary, the implication of exponential dis-
counting is stability of preference; the preferred of a set of
alternatives does not change based on the individual’s prox-
imity to the alternatives (Fig. 1A). Utility theories have ac-
counted well for many properties of choice, but predict nei-
ther self-defeating behavior nor any faculty to prevent it.
Hypotheses to reconcile self-defeating behavior with a de-
cision-making process that maximizes utility have cited lack
of experience with the consequences (e.g., Herrnstein &
Prelec’s [1992] “primrose path” to addiction), short time
horizons (Becker & Murphy 1988), conditioned cravings
(Loewenstein 1996), and recent discoveries about the neu-
rophysiological process of reward (Ho et al. 1998), but all
of these explanations can be shown to be incomplete on
experimental or logical grounds. Experienced addicts of-
ten re-addict themselves after becoming drug-free, and
short time horizons do not predict people’s plans to avoid
temptations when they face them from a distance. There
is no reason to think that conditioned cravings should op-
erate differently from other appetites, all of which have
conditioned elements; and although studies of brain
physiology reveal the sites of powerful rewards, they do
not suggest how people come to avoid some of these re-
wards.
3. The warp in how we evaluate the future (Ch. 3)
Quantitative research over the past three decades has given
utility theory a rationale for the conflict between impulses
and controls. The assumed exponential discount curve for
discounting the value of expected events is not basic. There
is extensive evidence that both people and nonhuman ani-
mals spontaneously value future events in inverse propor-
tion to their expected delays (Green et al. 1994b; Kirby
1997; Mazur 1997). The resulting hyperbolic discount
curve is seen over all time ranges, from seconds to decades
(Harvey 1994). This curve is a variant of Herrnstein’s
matching law as applied to delay (Chung & Herrnstein
1967), and is adequately described by Mazur’s (1987) sim-
ple formula:
Value 
Value at no delay
[Constant  (Impatience factor  Delay)]
The constant is a small number (Mazur proposed an in-
variant “1”) which describes the failure of values to ap-
proach infinity as delays approach zero. By varying only one
element – the impatience factor – investigators have been
able to produce substantially better fits to choices among
delayed rewards than have been possible with the expo-
nential curves upon which most utility theories rely. Data
include a number of animal studies (Grace 1994; Mazur
1997) and human experiments with both hypothetical
(Kirby & Marakovic 1995; Vuchinich & Simpson 1998) and
real (Green et al. 1994b; Kirby 1997) money. Investigators
sometimes report that their data fit even better if the de-
nominator is raised to a power (Grace 1994; Myerson &
Green 1995), but this power is usually close to 1.0, and in
any case doesn’t change the crucial implication of this for-
mula: that the elementary discount curve produces a basic
tendency to prefer smaller rewards over larger ones tem-
porarily, when the smaller reward is imminently available
(Fig. 1B).
Ainslie: Précis of Breakdown of Will
636
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (2005) 28:5
Figure 1.A.
Conventional (exponential) discount curves from a
smaller-sooner (SS) and a larger-later (LL) reward. At every point
their heights stay proportional to their values at the time that the
SS reward is due. B.
Hyperbolic discount curves from an SS and
an LL reward. The smaller reward is temporarily preferred for a
period just before it’s available, as shown by the portion of its curve
that projects above that from the later, larger reward.
A
B
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0140525X05280111
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Eastern Kentucky University, on 20 Nov 2019 at 18:38:06, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms.

In contrast to exponential curves, hyperbolic discount
curves depict a strong but temporary tendency to prefer
smaller and sooner (SS) rewards to larger and later (LL)
ones, in the period just before an SS reward is due. This
change in preference as a function of only elapsing time has
also been widely observed in animals (Ainslie & Herrnstein
1981; Green et al. 1981), as well as in people’s choices be-
tween sensual rewards like fruit juice (Forzano & Logue
1992), process rewards like access to video games (Millar &
Navarick 1984), negative reinforcers like relief from nox-
ious noise (Navarick 1982; Solnick et al. 1980), and token
rewards like money, both hypothetical and real (Ainslie &
Haendel 1983; Green et al. 1994a; Kirby 1997). The ani-
mal findings are important, for they let us be sure that the
phenomenon is not the product of cultural expectations or
experimenter suggestion.
3.1. The self as a population
Hyperbolic discounting offers utility theory a rationale for
why people should so frequently have impulses that contra-
dict their own recognized best interests. These highly bowed
curves shift the main problem. We are no longer at a loss to
explain choices that are short-sighted and temporary; now we
have to account for how people learn the self-control that lets
them adapt to a competitive world. How does an internal
marketplace that disproportionately values immediate re-
wards grow into what can be mistaken for the long-range re-
ward-maximizer of conventional utility theory?
We can no longer regard people as having unitary pref-
erences. Rather, people may have a variety of contradictory
preferences that become dominant at different points be-
cause of their timing. The orderly internal marketplace pic-
tured by conventional utility theory becomes a bazaar of
partially incompatible factions, where, in order to prevail,
an option has not only to promise more than its competi-
tors, but to act strategically to keep the competitors from
later undermining it. The behaviors that are shaped by the
competing rewards must deal not only with obstacles to get-
ting their reward if chosen, but with the danger of being un-
chosen in favor of imminent alternatives.
An agent who discounts reward hyperbolically is not the
straightforward value estimator that an exponential dis-
counter is supposed to be. Rather, she will be a succession
of estimators whose conclusions differ; as time elapses
these estimators shift their relationship with one another
from cooperation on a common goal to competition for mu-
tually exclusive goals. Ulysses planning for the Sirens must
treat Ulysses hearing them as a separate person, whom he
must influence if possible and forestall if not. If what you
do in a situation regularly gets undone later, you’ll learn to
stop doing it in the first place – but not out of agreement
with the later self that undoes it, only out of realism. Mean-
while, you’ll look for steps toward getting what you want
from the earlier vantage point, steps that won’t get undone,
because they forestall a future self who will try to undo
them. You’ll be like a group of people rather than a single
individual; subjectively, however, the results of learning to
do this may feel like no more than having to plan for self-
control.
This lability of preference in turn predicts that a popula-
tion of conflicting reward-getting processes will grow and
survive within the individual, sometimes leading to choices
that are harmful to her in the long run (first elaborated in
Ainslie 1975; detailed in Ainslie 1992, pp. 123–227). I will
call the processes selected for by a particular kind of reward
the person’s interest in that reward. Interests based on re-
wards within the person should be very like interests based
on goals within a society, those factions that are rewarded
by (“have an interest in”) the goal that names them (e.g., a
sobriety interest or drinking interest within the person, like
“the petroleum interest,” or “the arts interest” within a so-
ciety). Because a person’s purposes should still be coherent
where conflicting rewards don’t dominate at successive
times, it makes sense to name an interest only in cases of
conflict. I wouldn’t be said to have separate chocolate and
vanilla ice cream interests, even though they are often al-
ternatives, because at the time when I prefer chocolate I
don’t increase my prospective reward by forestalling a pos-
sible switch to vanilla. But I may have an ice cream interest
and a diet interest, such that each increases prospective re-
ward in its own time range by reducing the likelihood of the
other’s subsequent dominance. Put another way, I don’t in-
crease my prospective reward in either the long or short
range by defending my choice of chocolate against the pos-
sibility that I may change to vanilla; but I increase my pro-
spective long-range reward by defending my diet against
ice cream, and I increase my prospective short-range re-
ward by finding evasions of my diet for the sake of ice
cream. Whichever faction promises the greatest discounted
reward at a given moment gets to decide my move at that
moment; the sequence of moves over time determines
which faction ultimately gets its way.
Where the alternative rewards are available at different
times, each will build its own interest. Such interests are not
options chosen by an overarching ego, the top-down model
assumed by holistic theorists, but rather function as quasi-
independent agents that have grown to exploit particular
sources of reward over particular time ranges. In this bot-
tom-up model, an interest survives by realizing more ex-
pected, discounted reward than rival interests, which some-
times entails finding ways to actively forestall rival interests
that would otherwise turn the tables when they became
dominant in the future. If my diet interest can arrange for
me not to get too close to ice cream, the discounted
prospect of ice cream may never rise above the discounted
prospect of the rewards for dieting, and the diet interest will
effectively have won. However, whenever the value of ice
cream spikes above that of dieting, the ice cream interest
may undo the effect of many days of restraint.
The ultimate determinant of a person’s choice is not 
simply a preference, any more than the determinant of
whether a piece of legislation becomes law is simply voting
strength in a legislature; in both situations, strategy is the
critical factor. Analysis of this kind of strategy will require
an economics of the internal marketplace, a micro-micro-
economics (hence, “picoeconomics”; Ainslie 1986; 1992)
that evaluates the game-theoretic value of the options avail-
able to each interest. The target book lays out the rudiments
of such an economics.
4. The warp can create involuntary behaviors:
Pains, hungers, emotions (Ch. 4)
Because we try to identify a set of consistent behaviors as
“our own,” we will be uncomfortable with the perception
that our preferences intrinsically change. The least deni-
Ainslie: Précis of Breakdown of Will
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (2005) 28:5
637
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0140525X05280111
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Eastern Kentucky University, on 20 Nov 2019 at 18:38:06, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms.

able change occurs with the impulsive actions that could be
called deliberate. When we go on a binge or spending
spree, or even when we have a brief lapse in an intention
not to smoke – preference reversals that last from minutes
to days – we experience them as decisions. Even here, how-
ever, we may not feel fully responsible. An alcoholic learns
that he is “helpless against alcohol,” and impulses are often
personified as alien forces: “The devil made me do it.”
Thus, it is natural to ask whether preferences that have
other durations, longer or shorter than that of the deliber-
ate lapse, might underlie processes that are experienced as
involuntary. The discussion in the rest of this chapter is not
necessary for examining the mechanism of will per se, but
will be important in our subsequent examination of the
will’s limitations.
There are long-lasting preferences that nevertheless feel
like prisons – anorexia nervosa, obsessive-compulsive per-
sonality disorder, and narrowness of character generally,
which are complex in that they are themselves enforced by
some kind of self-control; I’ll discuss them in section 9 (Ch.
9 of the book). At the other end of the scale of durations,
there are processes that usually feel involuntary but never-
theless have incentive value, positive or negative. These in-
clude brief “irresistible” urges like tics, emotions (including
the emotion-like component of pain that makes it aversive;
Melzack & Casey 1970), hungers, and much of what directs
our attention. Many of these processes are innately pro-
grammed, so that a given stimulus leads to an invariant re-
sponse. Even with relatively malleable processes like emo-
tions, a person is not a Lockean blank slate, but has inborn
dispositions to respond to particular stimuli in particular
ways, for instance with fear to the appearance of being at a
great height (Rader et al. 1980). There are, as it were,
grooves in the slate, into which the chalk of behavior tends
to fall.
However, predisposed responses can still be modified. A
neutral stimulus that precedes being at a great height may
come to induce fear, or repeated experience with being at
a great height may cause it to stop inducing fear. Because
these changes are usually involuntary, conventional theory
attributes their selection not to the same kind of reward that
selects voluntary choices but to an altogether different se-
lective principle, “classical” conditioning. If a stimulus that
can call up a slate with particular grooves regularly follows
a new stimulus, that new stimulus is said to acquire the abil-
ity to call up the same slate. The trouble with this theory is
that they are not exactly the same set of grooves – on close
examination “conditioned” responses differ in detail from
their parent responses (Siegal 1983), so they must be
shaped by some additional selective principle, a third one if
it is not the same one that governs choice. And the gist of
later conditioning research has been that conditioning does
not control responses at all; the pairing of stimuli connects
only the stimuli, not responses (Rescorla 1988). Condition-
ing theory is awkward also in several other ways that there
is not room to discuss here (see Ainslie 1992, pp. 19–22;
Ainslie 2001, pp. 100–14). Because all stimuli that can
cause conditioning also have an incentive value (Gerall &
Obrist 1962; Miller 1969) and conditioning has been suc-
cessfully modeled on computers as incentive-dependent
(Donahoe et al. 1993; 1997), it is worth asking whether this
second selective principle can be boiled down to the first –
reward. That is, those involuntary responses that are mal-
leable might be modified not by being transferred to new
sets of grooves, but by being drawn out of the original
grooves by reward whenever the reward is strong enough
and the groove shallow enough. In different imagery, these
responses would not be pushed by trigger stimuli but pulled
by incentives.
4.1. The problem of pain
There has always been one massive obstacle to this sugges-
tion – not that these choices are mostly unconscious, for un-
conscious shaping of behavior is well known (even during
sleep, Granda & Hammack 1961), but that reward is
thought of as attracting only desirable behaviors. How
would we be pulled into experiences that we don’t want?
And if we can’t be pulled, we must have to be pushed, pre-
sumably by conditioning.
Hyperbolic discount curves have already provided a way
around this obstacle for the case of impulses, that is, choices
in the middle of the continuum of preference durations:
When a reward precedes a longer period of nonreward, it
is often preferred when up close but avoided at a distance.
The same kind of cycle can be discerned in itch-like activi-
ties, but the cycle length is shorter. Minor itches will abate
if never scratched, and the motive to scratch them gets de-
scribed as an urge rather than a desire, as does the motive
to bite your nails, use speech mannerisms, and emit tics.
These are voluntary behaviors and may be subject to strong
momentary motivation, but people avoid them at a distance
and often seek preventive treatments. This is the kind of be-
havior that Berridge and Robinson (1998) have described
as “wanted” but not “liked,” the exemplar of which is the
electrical brain self-stimulation that a rat will perform to ex-
haustion once it has begun, but which it will not cross a cage
floor to begin again. Berridge and co-workers have cata-
logued a number of these behaviors in people as well, in-
cluding brain self-stimulation patients. They think of these
behaviors as “nonhedonic,” classically conditioned, even
though these behaviors use muscles that are usually under
voluntary control; however, a conditioning mechanism is
unnecessary. Forty years ago the same pattern was created
just by varying the rate of reward: Pigeons were shown to
actively avoid being offered the option of doing poorly re-
warded work for food, instead of simply not doing the work
when offered (see Zimmerman & Ferster 1964, among oth-
ers). The mere chance to work for food became aversive,
even though the subjects did the work when it was offered
– or rather because they did the work when it was offered.
They came to avoid being pulled into this undesirable pat-
tern of responses by short-term rewards.
An extension of the same cyclic mechanism may explain
involuntary behaviors generally. Pain and painful emotions
attract attention but deter approach. Pain can’t be the sim-
ple opposite of reward that is often assumed, because it
could not then oblige people to attend to it. The traditional
solution to this problem is to treat pain like a reflex and fear
like a conditioned reflex, processes that motivate but are
not themselves motivated. But in addition to the difficulties
just mentioned with conditioning as a separate principle of
selection, there are many indications that emotions and
even the emotional part of pain are not automatic, but have
to compete with rewarded activities for a person’s partici-
pation. Granted that emotions are usually occasioned by
events outside of your voluntary control; the theory that
they are governed by such events runs afoul of the wide-
Ainslie: Précis of Breakdown of Will
638
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (2005) 28:5
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0140525X05280111
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Eastern Kentucky University, on 20 Nov 2019 at 18:38:06, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms.

spread acknowledgment that they are trainable: You can
“swallow” your anger or “nurse” it, and learn to inhibit your
phobic anxiety (Marks & Tobena 1990), panic (Clum et al.
1993; Kilic et al. 1997), or grief (Ramsay 1997). Pain itself
registers in consciousness but is less apt to cause emotional
aversion during the distraction of intense sports competi-
tion or battle than during daily life (Beecher 1959, pp. 157–
90), and less during daily life than when you’re trying to go
to sleep. Techniques to avoid aversion by distracting your-
self are commonly taught for dental procedures and child-
birth (Licklider 1959), and may even cover major surgery
in people with strong attention-focusing skills (“good hyp-
notic subjects” – Hilgard & Hilgard 1994, pp. 86–165).
Techniques to foster or inhibit emotions in everyday life
have been described (Parrott 1991), as has their use in
preparing yourself for particular tasks (Parrott 1993). Most
schools of acting teach an ability to summon emotion de-
liberately (e.g., McGaw 1966; Strasberg 1988), because
even in actors actual emotion is more convincing than
feigned emotion (Gosselin et. al. 1998). The frequent philo-
sophical assertion that emotions have a moral quality –
good or bad (e.g., Hume as presented by Baier 1991) – im-
plies motivated participation; some philosophers have gone
so far as to call the passions voluntary (e.g., Sartre 1939/
1948). In sum, emotions show signs of being goal-directed
processes that are ultimately selected by their conse-
quences, not just their antecedents. That is, they are at least
partially in the realm of motivated behaviors, not condi-
tioned responses; they are pulled by incentives rather than
pushed by stimuli. Even pain itself and “negative” emotions
like fear and grief seem to be urges that lure you into par-
ticipating in them, rather than being automatically imposed
states.
But we just saw that a cycle of reward and subsequent un-
reward can draw you into an activity which, at even a fairly
slight distance, is aversive. A faster version of this cycle pro-
vides a model of how mental processes can be involuntary
and still be reward-dependent, even if their overall pattern
is aversive: If an itch is a fast addiction, maybe a pain is a
fast itch. That is, perhaps the vividness but aversiveness of
pain and negative emotions is a pattern of repeating, brief,
intense reward, the occurrence of which causes an other-
wise continuous nonreward (Fig. 2A). Each reward is dom-
inant so briefly that it can command only attention, not a
motor response (Fig. 2B), and the overall pattern motivates
avoidance. Of course, for these two elements to fuse in per-
ception, the cycle duration would have to be a fraction of a
second.
In this way, hyperbolic discounting has the power, in the-
ory at least, to unite along a common dimension not only
Berridge’s liking and wanting, but even action and passion.1
This does require, however, that we strip “reward” of its
connotations of pleasure, and leave it with a basic functional
definition: “that which increases the likelihood that the 
processes it follows will recur.” In return, we are freed 
from dealing with two different selective principles for re-
sponses, which involve the same set of stimuli, but which
differ in that one (seen as using classical conditioning) se-
lects for both positive and negative processes and the other
(seen as using reward) selects for the positive and against
the negative. Rather, pain, emotions, and other “condition-
able” processes – probably including appetite – must all
pay off quickly and repeatedly to attract participation; but
great variance in the rewardingness of the longer phases be-
tween these payoffs determines how negative or positive
their overall valence will be.
If emotions and similar processes are reward-dependent
behaviors, a problem arises converse to the problem of
pain: What keeps you from emitting the positive ones ad lib,
in effect coining unlimited reward? I will address this prob-
lem in section 10 (Ch. 10 of the book).
5. A breakdown of will: The components of
intertemporal bargaining (Part II of book)
5.1. The elementary interaction of interests (Ch. 5)
An interest that has survived in the marketplace of reward-
getting strategies needs to have ways to forestall incompat-
ible interests, at least well enough to sometimes get the re-
ward on which this interest is based. This need accounts for
the examples of self-committing tactics that have long puz-
zled utility theorists, who depict the person as a unitary re-
ward maximizer with no reason to restrict her own freedom.
Three kinds of tactic are straightforward: (1) finding con-
straints or influences outside of your psyche, sometimes
physical devices like pills that spoil an appetite, or illiquid
investments (Laibson 1997), but more often the influence
of other people; (2) keeping your attention off temptations,
either consciously (Metcalfe & Mischel 1999) or in the
Freudian defense mechanisms of suppression, repression,
or denial; and (3) cultivating or inhibiting emotions, either
consciously (Mischel & Mischel 1983) or in the defense
mechanisms of isolation or reversal of affect. If an underly-
ing, universal discount curve is hyperbolic in shape, a mo-
tive to self-commit should also be observable in nonhuman
animals; and in fact it is. Given choices between SS (smaller,
Ainslie: Précis of Breakdown of Will
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (2005) 28:5
639
Figure 2.A.
Aversion as a cycle of brief, intense reward (right-
ward hatching) that interrupts an on-going baseline reward (left-
ward hatching) for a relatively longer time. B.
Hyperbolic dis-
count curves drawn from a single spike in an aversion sequence
such as that in Figure 2A. (Each curve is the sum of the curves
from each moment of reward, see Fig. 4.) The spike has less area
than the baseline reward to which it is an alternative; but because
it’s taller it will be preferred just before it’s available.
A
B
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0140525X05280111
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Eastern Kentucky University, on 20 Nov 2019 at 18:38:06, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms.

sooner) rewards and LL (larger, later) ones, nonhuman sub-
jects will sometimes choose an option available in advance
that prevents the SS alternative from becoming available
(Ainslie 1974; Hayes et al. 1981). The converse is true of
punishments. Rats will press a bar committing them to get
0.5 sec of shock 40 seconds later instead of 5 seconds of
shock 45 seconds later, rather than leave the choice open
and subsequently fail (almost always) to choose 0.5 seconds
of imminent shock over 5 seconds of shock 5 seconds later
(Deluty et al. 1983).
However, these tactics are less adaptable, and often less
available, than what is usually called willpower. Willpower
represents a fourth tactic, which seems to be at once the
strongest and most versatile, but which has hitherto been
mysterious. What is there about “making a resolution” that
adds anything to your power to resist changing motivations?
When people have given up smoking or climbed out of
debt, they mostly say they “just did it.” Words like volition,
personal rules, character, intention, and resolve are often
applied, but don’t suggest how people have learned to re-
sist temporary preferences for shortsighted options.
The specific property that has most often been attrib-
uted to the will is the perception of individual choices as
referable to a larger principle. Writers since antiquity have
recommended that impulses could be controlled by decid-
ing according to principle, that is, deciding in categories
containing a number of choices rather than just the choice
at hand. Aristotle said that incontinence (akrasia) is the
result of choosing according to “particulars” instead of
“universals” (Nichomachean Ethics 1147a; Aristotle 1984,
pp. 24–28). Kant said that the highest kind of decision-
making involves making all choices as if they defined uni-
versal rules (the “categorical imperative”; Kant 1793/1960,
pp. 15–49). The Victorian psychologist Sully said that will
consists of uniting “particular actions . . . under a common
rule” so that “they are viewed as members of a class of 
actions subserving one comprehensive end” (Sully 1884,
p. 663). In recent years, behavioral psychologists Heyman
(1996) and Rachlin (1995) have both suggested that choos-
ing in an “overall” or “molar” pattern (respectively) will ap-
proach reward-maximizing more than a “local” or “molec-
ular” one.
Hyperbolic discounting suggests a workable rationale for
choosing according to principle, albeit one that requires a
degree of self-awareness probably unavailable to nonhu-
mans. Insofar as you interpret your current choice as infor-
mation predicting your own future choices between similar
rewards, the incentives bearing on your current choice will
to some extent include the bundle of future rewards that
this choice predicts. That is, the current choice of a larger,
later (LL) reward over a smaller, sooner (SS) reward, if per-
ceived as a test case, will come to predict a whole bundle of
LL rewards in the future, and thus be valued more than it
would be by itself. There is experimental evidence in ani-
mals showing that the hyperbolically discounted effects of
each reward in a series simply add (analyzed in Mazur
1997). More importantly, because hyperbolic curves are
relatively high at long delays, bundling rewards together
predicts an increase in the hyperbolically discounted value
of the LL rewards relative to the hyperbolically discounted
value of the SS rewards. Thus, a bundle of LL rewards may
be consistently worth more than a bundle of SS ones, even
where the discounted value of the most imminent smaller
reward greatly exceeds the discounted value of its LL al-
ternative (Fig. 3A).
Experiments in both humans and rats have verified the
predicted anti-impulsive effect of bundling choices to-
gether. Kirby and Guastello (2001) reported that students
who faced five weekly choices of a SS amount of money im-
mediately or a LL amount one week later, picked the LL
amounts substantially more if they had to choose for all five
weeks at once than if they chose individually each week.
The authors reported an even greater effect for SS versus
LL amounts of pizza. Ainslie and Monterosso (2003a) re-
ported that rats made more LL choices of sugar water when
they chose for a bundle of three trials all at once than when
they chose between the same SS versus LL contingencies
on each separate trial. The effect of such bundling of choices
is predicted by hyperbolic but not exponential curves. Ex-
ponentially discounted prospects do not change their rela-
tive values however many are summed together (Fig. 3B);
by contrast, hyperbolically discounted SS rewards, although
disproportionately valued as they draw near, lose much of
this differential value when choices are bundled into series.
In Figure 3A, the schooner-like picture of the summed
discount curves from series of rewards, the “sails” get grad-
ually lower as the choice point moves later in the series, for
they comprise a decreasing number of curves added to-
Ainslie: Précis of Breakdown of Will
640
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (2005) 28:5
Figure 3.A.
Summed hyperbolic curves from a series of larger-
later rewards and a series of smaller-earlier alternatives. As more
pairs are added to the series, the periods of temporary preference
for the series of smaller rewards shrink to zero. The curves from
the final (rightmost) pair of rewards are the same as in Figure 1B.
B.
Summed exponential curves from the same series as in Fig-
ure 3A. Summing doesn’t change their relative heights. (This
would also be true if the curves were so steep that the smaller, ear-
lier rewards were preferred; but in that case, summing would add
little to their total height, anyway, because the tails of exponential
curves are so low.)
A
B
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0140525X05280111
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Eastern Kentucky University, on 20 Nov 2019 at 18:38:06, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms.

gether. The last pair of sails are the same as a lone pair.
However, if the series has no foreseeable end, which is the
case for most real-life categories, the sails may be added for-
ward to a time horizon that stays a constant distance ahead,
so that the height of the summed rewards stays roughly con-
stant.
But how does an individual arrange to bundle expected
rewards together? This is where human perceptiveness is
needed. Consider philosopher Michael Bratman’s example
of a pianist who throws his nightly performance off by
drinking wine beforehand (Bratman 1999, pp. 35–57). At a
distance he prefers to abstain and perform well, but each
night at dinnertime he changes his preference to drinking
the wine. However, as Figure 3A suggests, even at dinner-
time he may prefer abstaining all nights to drinking all
nights for the foreseeable future. The incentives for choos-
ing between these categories of reward will be the expected
values of the series of rewards. The incentives for choosing
just for one night will be just the curves from a lone pair, as
in Figure 1B. But if he perceives that his choice tonight is
the best current predictor of what his future choices will be,
he bundles his expectations together by that perception
alone. Then if he has wine tonight, he sets a precedent, and
sustains a greater expected loss than just tonight’s poor per-
formance.
Most choices in real life aren’t between momentary re-
wards, but between extended experiences – the pleasure of
a binge versus feeling fit and having intact prospects Mon-
day morning, or a good venting of rage versus keeping a job
and friends. Often the difference isn’t between intensities
of satisfaction-per-minute, but between different durations
of comparable satisfactions. The pleasure of staying up for
a couple more hours after midnight may be the same as the
differential pleasure of feeling alert the next day, for in-
stance, but the alertness lasts all day. However, if successive
rewards are additive, it’s easy to convert durations to total
amounts (simple arithmetic derivations in Ainslie 1992,
pp. 155–62). If you value the fun of staying up at one unit
per minute and expect to lose one unit per minute of com-
fort from when you get up at 7:00 the next morning until
you leave work at 17:00, your discount curves from a day’s
aggregation of these rewards will look like those in Figure
4A. But if you see each night as a test case, your expecta-
tions will be bundled as in Figure 4B. As with more discrete
moments of reward, bundling these experiences into series
moves preferability toward the larger, later rewards.
6. Sophisticated bargaining among internal
interests (Ch. 6)
The bundling phenomenon implies that you will serve your
long-range interest if you can obey a personal rule to be-
have alike toward all the members of a category. This is the
equivalent of Kant’s categorical imperative, and echoes the
psychologist Lawrence Kohlberg’s sixth and highest princi-
ple of moral reasoning, deciding according to principle
(Kohlberg 1963). It also explains how people with funda-
mentally hyperbolic discount curves may sometimes learn
to choose as if their curves were exponential. Bundling
whole series of choices together makes their summed dis-
count curve look more exponential, as shown in Figure 5.
Furthermore, if you adopt a personal rule to “discount all
significant income at 6% per year,” summed hyperbolic
curves from all the expected amounts might be enough to
motivate obedience to it, even though the shape of your
summed curves did not approach this exponential curve
closely. Summed hyperbolic curves from whatever goods
accrued from the whole practice of exponential discounting
might motivate rates of 3%, or any other rate including 0%;
but the lower the rate to be enforced, the more vulnerable
the rule would be to the lure of SS rewards.
The problem with the bundling tactic is that there are
Ainslie: Précis of Breakdown of Will
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (2005) 28:5
641
Figure 4.A.
Curves that are the aggregate of hyperbolic discount curves from continuing rewards – staying up from midnight to 2:00
versus feeling rested from 7:00 to 17:00. B.
Summed curves from ten pairs of the rewards depicted in Figure 4A. The effect of sum-
mation is the same as for the point rewards in Figure 3A.
A
B
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0140525X05280111
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Eastern Kentucky University, on 20 Nov 2019 at 18:38:06, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms.

many possible personal rules. The ice cream at hand may
violate one diet but not another; and even if it is so outra-
geously rich as to violate all conceivable diets, there is apt
to be a circumstance that makes the present moment an ex-
ception: It is Thanksgiving dinner or my birthday, or a host
has taken special trouble to get the ice cream, or I have
cause to celebrate or to console myself just today, and so
forth. The molar principle that offers an exception just this
once will be rewarded more than the one that does not, for
it predicts the aggregation of LL rewards (as in Figs. 3A and
4B) for all but the first LL reward, and the first early spike
of SS reward.
The possibility of seizing immediate rewards while pro-
tecting your expectation of later bundles – by discerning ex-
ceptions – makes the self-prediction upon which will de-
pends potentially volatile, especially where self-control is
tenuous. The hyperbolic discounter who has an overeating
problem can’t simply estimate whether she is better off
limiting her food intake or eating spontaneously, and then
follow the best course, the way an exponential discounter
could. Even if she figures, from the perspective of distance,
that dieting is better, her long-range perspective will be
useless to her unless she can avoid making too many ratio-
nalizations. Her diet will succeed only insofar as she thinks
that each act of compliance will be both necessary and ef-
fective – that is, that she can’t get away with cheating, and
that her current compliance will give her enough reason not
to cheat subsequently. The more she is doubtful of success,
the more likely it will be that a single violation will make her
lose this expectation and wreck her diet. Personal rules are
a recursive mechanism; they continually take their own
pulse, and if they feel it falter, that very fact will cause fur-
ther faltering.
In this model, deciding according to molar principles is
not a matter of making dispassionate judgments, but of de-
fending one way of counting your prospects against alter-
native ways that are also strongly motivated. Here, the mod-
ified utility theory that I am proposing differs radically from
a conventional top-down theory. In a top-down theory, the
dieter, or pianist, does not need to predict her future
choices because she (her ego, or other executive organ) can
will them, and if her will is “strong” enough it will do just
what she currently intends. But if, by contrast, choice is de-
termined in a marketplace of competing interests, “she” is
just the resultant of their activities, and stable choice has to
be achieved as it is in the kind of markets that don’t have
governors. The rules of this market are the internal equiv-
alent of the “self-enforcing contracts” made by traders who
will be dealing with each other repeatedly, contracts that let
them do business on the strength of handshakes (Klein &
Leffler 1981; Macaulay 1963). This recursive process of
staking the credibility of a resolution on each occasion when
it is tested gives your resolve momentum over successive
times. The on-going temptation to risk a damaging prece-
dent – and the ever-present anxiety that this may happen –
is probably what makes this strategy of self-control feel ef-
fortful. It separates intentions from mere expectations, and
force of will from mere force of habit.
6.1. Intertemporal bargaining
Hyperbolic discount curves create a relationship of partial
cooperation (limited warfare; Schelling 1960, pp. 21–80)
among your successive motivational states. Their individual
interests in short range rewards, conflicting with their com-
mon interest in longer range rewards, create incentives
much like those in the much studied bargaining game, re-
peated prisoner’s dilemma. Choice of the better long range
alternative at each point represents “cooperation,” but this
will look better than impulsive “defection” only as long as
you see it as necessary and sufficient to maintain your ex-
pectation that future selves will go on cooperating. This is a
useful way of modeling the will – like the “will” of nations
not to risk a nuclear war – rather than a cognitive hierarchy
of some kind, but it needs to be modified for the intertem-
poral case. As Bratman has correctly argued (Bratman
1999, pp. 35–57), a present “person-stage” can’t retaliate
against the defection of a prior one, a difference that dis-
qualifies the prisoner’s dilemma in its classical form as a 
rationale for consistency. However, insofar as a failure to 
cooperate will induce future failures, a current decision-
maker contemplating defection faces a danger of the same
kind as retaliation.
Intertemporal cooperation is most threatened by ratio-
nalizations that permit exceptions for the choice at hand,
and is most stabilized by finding bright lines to serve as cri-
teria for what constitutes cooperation. A personal rule
never to drink alcohol, for instance, is more stable than a
rule to have only two drinks a day, because the line between
some drinking and no drinking is unique (bright), while the
two-drinks rule does not stand out from some other num-
ber, or define the size of the drinks, and is thus susceptible
to reformulation. However, skill at intertemporal bargain-
ing will let you attain more flexibility by using lines that are
less bright. This skill is apt to be a key component of the
control processes that get called ego functions.
This model proceeds from hyperbolic discounting with
almost no extra assumptions – only rough additiveness –
and predicts credible weapons for each side in the closely
fought contests that occur as people decide about self-con-
trol: Long range interests define principles, and short range
interests find exceptions.
7. The subjective experience of intertemporal
bargaining (Ch. 7)
Analyzing an activity that is second nature inevitably en-
larges some features and slights others, so that the result-
ing picture seems foreign to familiar experience. Charac-
Ainslie: Précis of Breakdown of Will
642
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (2005) 28:5
Figure 5.
Summed hyperbolic discount curves from eleven re-
wards, compared with a single exponential curve and a single hy-
perbolic curve such as shown in Figure 1. The summed curves
come closer to exponential discounting than the lone hyperbolic
curve does in the crucial sector of the curve where delay is low.
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0140525X05280111
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Eastern Kentucky University, on 20 Nov 2019 at 18:38:06, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms.

terizing will as intertemporal bargaining may make it sound
more deliberate, more effortful, and more momentous than
casual introspection tells us our wills are:
1. Bargaining is usually thought of as requiring explicit
consciousness of its contingencies; but the tacit bargaining
that I have hypothesized as the basis of will may appear in
a number of guises – from prayers addressed to supernat-
ural powers to beliefs in the factuality of propositions that
are actually personal rules, guises that by chance or design
conceal the active nature of our participation.
2. Bargaining might be thought to require continual re-
evaluation; but bargaining may have its most important ef-
fect by establishing and only occasionally testing a domi-
nance hierarchy of interests, just as social groups establish
pecking orders that become habits.
3. The most conspicuous examples of bargaining stake
huge incentives on all-or-none choices, such as when a re-
covering addict faces an urge to lapse; but resolutions like
keeping your house neat can be mundane and largely based
on intrinsic incentives, while still having a recursive com-
ponent. The only faculty you need in order to recruit the ex-
tra motivation that forms willpower is an awareness that
your current decisions predict the pattern of your future
decisions.
8. Getting evidence about a nonlinear
motivational system (Ch. 8)
If we conceive of the will broadly as whatever intentional-
ity has some kind of force, it is possible to find five distinct
models of it in the literature of motivational science. These
models come from widely different intellectual traditions
and often leave mechanisms unspecified, but they can be
compared at least in their positions on whether and how ex-
tra motivation is recruited for impulse control.
The null theory holds that there is no extra motivation,
and that will is therefore a superfluous concept (e.g.,
Becker & Murphy 1988; Ryle 1949/1984). This theory
seems to be based only on the absence of a rationale for will
in an exponential system.
The organ theory holds that the will is characterizable as
strong or weak in general and directed, rather like a mus-
cle, by an independent intelligence (e.g., Baumeister &
Heatherton 1996). The principal problem with this kind of
model is that it has to be guided by some evaluation process
outside of motivation, since it has to act counter to the most
strongly motivated choice at the time. On what basis does
this process choose? What keeps this strength from being
co-opted by the bad option? Even granting a homunculus
that governs from above, what lets a person’s strength per-
sist in one modality, say, smoking, when it has fallen flat in
another, such as overeating?
The resolute choice theory holds that the will maximizes
conventional utility by a rational avoidance of reconsider-
ing plans (e.g., Bratman 1999; McClennen 1990). By this
avoidance, the proponents in the philosophy of mind may
mean diversion of your attention, the second committing
device I mentioned in section 5.1; but this would be effec-
tive only against brief urges like pain or panic, not against
addictions (McConkey 1984), the urge for which forces a
re-evaluation over the hours or days that the diversion must
be maintained. However, the philosophers may mean a
more complex mechanism: McClennen refers to “a sense of
commitment” to previously made plans (McClennen 1990,
pp. 157–61), and Bratman refers to “a planning agent’s con-
cern with how she will see her present decision at plan’s
end” (Bratman 1999, pp. 50–56), which suggests that self-
prediction is a factor. Resolute choice may turn out to be
another name for intertemporal bargaining.
The pattern-seeking theory holds that the will consists of
an appreciation of pattern that is intrinsically motivating,
like that which makes a whole symphony more rewarding
than the sum of its parts (Rachlin 1995). Thus, a recovered
addict might avoid lapses because of the aversiveness of
spoiling her pattern of sobriety. However, this aesthetic fac-
tor does not seem robust enough; distaste is not how most
people would describe temptations, even the temptations
that they avoid.
The intertemporal bargaining model that I have de-
scribed holds that the perception of precedents recruits
motivation against impulses by bundling together classes of
choices between hyperbolically discounted rewards. It is
the only model that explains both temporary preference
and adequate incentive to overcome it from the properties
of the rewards involved. However, because the mechanism
is recursive, it is hard to study directly by controlled exper-
iment. There has been suggestive evidence. For example,
when Kirby and Guastello (sect. 5.1) compared separate
and bundled choices in their college subjects, they found an
intermediate degree of self-control if they suggested to
some of the separate-choice subjects that their current
choice might be an indicator of what they would choose on
subsequent occasions (Kirby & Guastello 2001). However,
I argue that better evidence comes from its ability to resolve
paradoxes of intentionality that have been distilled into
thought experiments by the philosophers of mind. One ex-
ample is Kavka’s problem.
8.1. Kavka’s problem
A person is offered a large sum of money just to intend to
drink an overwhelmingly noxious but harmless toxin. Once
she has sincerely intended it, as verified by a hypothetical
brain scan, she is free to collect the money and not actually
drink the toxin (Kavka 1983). Philosophical discussion has
revolved around whether the person has any motive to ac-
tually drink the toxin once she has the money, and whether,
foreseeing a lack of such motive, she can sincerely intend to
drink it in the first place, even though she would drink it if
that were still necessary to get the money.
Kavka’s problem poses the question: Are the properties
of intention such that a person can move it about effort-
lessly from moment to moment, the way she raises and low-
ers an arm; and if not, what factors constrain changes of 
intention? Wholly unconstrained changes would make in-
tention seem no different from momentary preference.
The problem makes it clear that intention must include a
forecast of whether one will carry it out; but this would
seem to make it impossible to intend to drink the toxin,
since mere forecasting leaves the intention powerless
against a sudden change of incentive, even one that is en-
tirely predictable. In that case, Ulysses couldn’t intend to
sail past the Sirens unaided, and Kavka’s subject couldn’t in-
tend to drink the toxin, because they couldn’t expect to ful-
fill their intentions.
However, if will is an intertemporal bargaining situation,
an answer is at hand. Intending is the classification of an act
Ainslie: Précis of Breakdown of Will
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (2005) 28:5
643
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0140525X05280111
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Eastern Kentucky University, on 20 Nov 2019 at 18:38:06, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms.

as a precedent for a series of similar acts, so that the person
stakes the prospective value of this series – perhaps, in the
extreme, the value of all the fruits of all intentions whatso-
ever – on performing the intended action in the case at
hand. Thus, the person could meaningfully intend to drink
the toxin, but only because she couldn’t subsequently
change her mind with impunity.
If I resolve to painfully donate bone marrow to a friend
with leukemia, but then renege, I haven’t gotten away with
stealing altruistic pleasure during the period that my reso-
lution was in force. My failure to go through with it has re-
duced the credibility of my intending, and hence the size of
the tasks I can subsequently intend. My willpower has suf-
fered an injury, perhaps a costly one. Thus, Kavka’s subject
does have an incentive to follow her original intention once
she has the money: preservation of the credibility of her
will; whether this incentive is adequate to overcome the ap-
proaching noxiousness of the toxin doesn’t matter for pur-
poses of the illustration. Will, in short, is a bargaining situ-
ation, where credibility is power. How a person perceives
this bargaining situation is the very thing that determines
how consistently she will act over time.
Kavka’s contribution has been to create a conceptual ir-
ritant that cannot be removed until we supply a piece that
is missing from conventional assumptions about intention.
The piece I suggest is credibility, the stake that you add to
a mere plan to keep yourself from reneging on it. To add a
piece like this may be cheating; I imagine that Kavka envi-
sioned philosophers working with only the elements he
gave. But the theoretical problem may not have been a Chi-
nese puzzle with a hidden solution, but rather a card game
that we have been playing without a full deck. The fact that
an intertemporal bargaining model can fill out the deck pro-
vides empirical support for its role in will. Drinking the
toxin is irrational under the null theory and resolute choice
theory. The organ and pattern-seeking theories seem to
make no prediction about it. Only intertemporal bargaining
makes it affirmatively rational.
Solutions to two other philosophical problems are dis-
cussed in the target book, but can only be mentioned here:
(1) In the problem of freedom of will, the determination of
your choice by your own recursive prediction of your future
choices makes choice neither indeterminate nor a straight-
forward estimation of external incentives. (2) In New-
comb’s problem (Nozick 1993, p. 41), a choice that is de-
fined as a diagnostic act is arguably made into a causal act
by the postulation of an omniscient diagnostician; then it re-
sembles the precedent-setting choice in intertemporal bar-
gaining that is both diagnostic and causal.
9. The ultimate breakdown of will: Nothing fails
like success (Part III of book)
9.1. The downside of willpower (Ch. 9)
Unfortunately, a person’s perception of the prisoner’s
dilemma relationship among her successive selves – and
the willpower that results from this perception – can’t sim-
ply cure the problem of temporary preference. Willpower
may be the best way we know to stabilize choice, but the in-
tertemporal bargaining model predicts that it will also have
serious side effects, side effects that have in fact been ob-
served by clinicians. Such bargaining doesn’t let us choose
our best prospects from moment to moment as true expo-
nential discounting would. Rather, it formalizes internal
conflict, making some self-control problems better, but
some worse.
These side effects need to be discussed. Where they are
noticed at all, they generally aren’t recognized as the con-
sequence of using willpower. In a dangerous split of aware-
ness, we tend to see willpower as an unmixed blessing that
bears no relation to such abnormal symptoms as loss of
emotional immediacy, abandonment of control in particu-
lar areas of behavior, blindness toward one’s own motives,
or decreased responsiveness to subtle rewards. I will argue
that just these four distortions are to be expected to a
greater or lesser extent from a reliance on personal rules.
They may even go so far as to make a given person’s
willpower a net liability to her.
9.2. Rules overshadow goods-in-themselves
The perception of a choice as a precedent often makes it
more important for its effect on future expectations than for
the rewards that literally depend on it. When this is true,
your choices will become detached from their immediate
outcomes and take on an aloof, legalistic quality. You will
have an impaired ability to live in the here-and-now, per-
haps the loss of authenticity that existential philosophers
complain of in modern society generally.
It is often hard to guess how you’ll interpret a current
choice when looking back on it. Did eating that sandwich
violate your diet or not? Where there’s ambiguity, coopera-
tion with your future selves will be both rigid and unstable.
Under the influence of an imminent reward you may claim
an exception to a rule, but later think you fooled yourself,
that is, you may see yourself as having had a lapse. Con-
versely, you may be cautious beyond what your long-range
interest requires, for fear that you’ll later see your choice as
a lapse. Every lapse reduces your ability to follow a personal
rule, and every observance reduces your ability not to. Er-
rors in either direction impose costs that would never result
from the exponential curves of conventional rationality,
since those curves wouldn’t make choice depend on recur-
sive self-prediction in the first place.
9.3. Rules magnify lapses
When you violate a personal rule, the cost is a fall in your
prospect of getting the long-range rewards on which it was
based. But this prospect is what you have been using to
stake against the relevant impulses; a lapse suggests that
your will is weak, a diagnosis that may act recursively to
weaken your will. To save your expectation of controlling
yourself generally, you’ll be strongly motivated to find a
boundary line that excludes from your larger rule the kind
of choice where your will failed. This means attributing the
lapse to a particular aspect of your present situation, even
though it will make self-control much more difficult when
that aspect is present in the future. You may decide that you
can’t resist the urge to panic when speaking in public, or to
lose your temper at incompetent clerks, or to stop a dough-
nut binge once begun. Your discrimination of this special
area has a perverse effect, because within it you see only
failure predicting further failure. If you no longer have the
prospect that your rule will hold here, these urges may
Ainslie: Précis of Breakdown of Will
644
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (2005) 28:5
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0140525X05280111
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Eastern Kentucky University, on 20 Nov 2019 at 18:38:06, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms.

seem to command obedience automatically, without an in-
tervening moment of choice. Such an area, where a person
doesn’t dare attempt efforts of will, could be called a lapse
district, by analogy to the vice districts in which Victorian
cities encapsulated the vice they couldn’t suppress. Where
the encapsulated impulses are clinically significant, a lapse
district gets called a symptom – for instance, a phobia, a
dyscontrol, or a substance dependence.
Thus, the perception of repeated prisoner’s dilemmas
stabilizes not only long range plans but lapses as well (dis-
cussed further in Ainslie 1992, pp. 193–97). Alternative
models of self-control failure based on exhaustion of
“strength” (Baumeister & Heatherton 1996) or an oppo-
nent process (Polivy 1998), do not account for regular fail-
ure that is specific to a particular circumstance.
9.4. Rules motivate misperception
Personal rules depend heavily on perception – noticing and
remembering your choices, the circumstances in which you
made them, and their similarity to the circumstances of
other choices. And since personal rules organize great
amounts of motivation, they naturally create temptations
for you to suborn the perception process. When a lapse is
occurring or has occurred, it will often be in both your long-
and short-range interests not to recognize that fact: Your
short-range interest is to keep the lapse from being de-
tected so as not to invite attempts to stop it. Your long-range
interest is also at least partially to keep the lapse from be-
ing detected, because acknowledging that a lapse has oc-
curred would lower the expectation of self-control that you
need to stake against future impulses.
After a lapse, the long-range interest is in the awkward
position of a country that has threatened to go to war in a
particular circumstance that has then occurred. The coun-
try wants to avoid war without destroying the credibility of
its threat, and may therefore look for ways to be seen as not
having detected the circumstance. Your long-range interest
will suffer if you catch yourself ignoring a lapse, but perhaps
not if you can arrange to ignore it without catching yourself.
This arrangement, too, must go undetected, which means
that a successful process of ignoring must be among the
many mental expedients that arise by trial and error – the
ones you keep simply because they make you feel better
without your realizing why. As a result, money disappears
despite a strict budget, and people who “eat like a bird”
mysteriously gain weight.
9.5. Rules may serve compulsions
The fact that a decision comes to be worth more as a prece-
dent than it is in its own right doesn’t necessarily imply that
it is the wrong decision. On the contrary, you would think
from the logic of summing discount curves that judging
choices in whole categories rather than by themselves
would have to improve your overall rate of reward (Figs. 3A
and 4B). Cooperation in a repetitive prisoner’s dilemma
would have to serve the players’ long-range interests, or else
they’d abandon it. How, then, can self-enforcing rules for
intertemporal cooperation ever become prisons? Why
should anyone ever conclude that she was trapped by her
rules, and even hire a psychotherapist to free her from a
“punitive superego?”
The likeliest answer is that in everyday life a person can
discern many possible prisoner’s dilemmas in a given situa-
tion; and the way of grouping choices that finally inspires
intertemporal cooperation need not be the most produc-
tive: Personal rules operate most effectively on distinct,
countable goals. Thus, the ease of comparing all financial
transactions lets the value of a sum of money fluctuate
much less over time than, say, the value of an angry out-
burst, or of a night’s sleep. The motivational impact of a se-
ries of moods has to be much less than that of an equally
long series of cash purchases. When some personal rules
are based on well-marked criteria, and criteria for richer al-
ternative rules are harder to specify, the well-marked crite-
ria may win out simply because they offer more stability to
the corresponding personal rules. The personal rules of
anorectics or misers are too strict to promise the greatest
satisfaction in the long run, but their exactness makes them
more enforceable than subtler rules that depend on judg-
ment calls. Here is a mechanism for the disorders of over-
control, which impair a person’s capacity for satisfaction but
seem to be enforced by an insistent will. The exemplar is
obsessive-compulsive personality disorder, “control freak”
disease, which differs from the more itch-like obsessive-
compulsive disorder (without the “personality”) particu-
larly in that people who have it endorse its strictures and
seek to sustain them rather than seeking to be cured of
them (American Psychiatric Association 1994, pp. 417–23,
669–73).
So, cooperation among successive motivational states
does not necessarily bring the most reward in the long run.
The mechanics of policing this cooperation may produce
the intrapsychic equivalent of regimentation, which will in-
crease your efficiency at reward-getting in the categories
you have defined, but reduce your sensitivity to less well-
marked kinds of reward.2
9.6. Rationality is elusive
Both hyperbolic discounting and the personal rules that
compensate for it have distorting effects. Therefore, there
can be no hard and fast principle that people should follow
to maximize their prospective reward. Thus “rationality”
becomes an elusive concept. Insofar as it depends on per-
sonal rules demanding consistent valuation, rationality
means being systematic, though only up to the point where
the system seems to go too far and we look compulsive.
Even short of frank compulsiveness, the systemization that
lets rules recruit motivation most effectively may under-
mine our longest-range interests.
The attempt to optimize our prospects with personal
rules confronts us with the paradox of definition – that to
define a concept is to alter it, in this case toward something
more formalized. If you conclude that you should maximize
money, you become a miser; if you rule that you should min-
imize your vulnerability to emotional influence, you de-
velop the numbing insensitivity that clinicians have named
alexithymia (Nemiah 1977); if you conclude that you should
minimize risk, you become obsessively careful; and so forth.
The logic of rules may come to so overshadow your re-
sponsiveness to experience that your behavior becomes le-
galistic and inefficient. A miser’s strict rules for thrift make
her too rigid to optimize her chances in a competitive mar-
ket; even the minor confinement of a rule to maximize
Ainslie: Précis of Breakdown of Will
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (2005) 28:5
645
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0140525X05280111
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Eastern Kentucky University, on 20 Nov 2019 at 18:38:06, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms.

profit on a yearly basis undermines a financier’s effective-
ness (Malekzadeh & Nahavandi 1987). Similarly, strict au-
tonomy means shielding yourself against exploitation by
others’ ability to invoke your passions; but alexithymics can’t
use the richest strategy available for maximizing emotional
reward, the cultivation of human relationships (Ainslie
1995).
In this way, people who depend on willpower for impulse
control are in danger of being coerced by logic that doesn’t
serve what they themselves regard as their best interests.
Concrete rules dominate subtle intuitions; and even though
you have a sense that you’ll regret having sold out to them,
you face the immediate danger of succumbing to short-
range urges like addictions if you don’t.
10. An efficient will undermines appetite (Ch. 10)
The value of willpower seems to be limited not only by
these four side-effects but also by two ways in which re-
wards seduce attention when they are too imminent to be
offset by even bundled long-range rewards: in the genera-
tion of appetites (including emotion and pain) and in pre-
mature satiation. Appetites can sometimes by avoided by
other forms of trained foresight, as I described in Chapter
4 (sects. 4 here); but they can’t be willed away, which has
probably contributed to the common impression that they
don’t depend on reward. I also argued in Chapter 4 (sect. 4
here) that the seduction of attention is how negative emo-
tions impose themselves on people who don’t want them. I
shall now discuss the converse problem of what constrains
ad lib self reward with positive emotions. The key concept
is premature satiation, the other process that can’t be con-
trolled by will. The limitation of reward by premature sati-
ation is key in turn to three other puzzles that have only be-
gun to be addressed by utility theory, which I will discuss in
section 11 under the headings of construction of fact, vicar-
ious reward, and indirection.
10.1. The limitation of positive emotion puzzle
Emotional rewards of one kind or another seem to be a
large part of most people’s incentives. We may decide to
climb mountains, or become an object of envy, or achieve
moral purity, or perform any number of other feats that
aren’t necessary for our physical comfort. We could ignore
these tasks without any obvious penalty; but we somehow
become committed to them, occasionally to the point of dy-
ing for them.
However, emotional reward is physically independent of
any particular turnkey in the environment, an inconsistency
with conventional utility theory. To function as a reward, ac-
cording to that theory, a good has to be limited in supply or
accessibility: if it is available unconditionally, as emotion is,
it should never induce significant motivation to obtain it. As
Adam Smith originally observed (Smith 1776/1976, pp. 44–
45), this is just the reasoning that makes air have less mar-
ket value than diamonds, although air is more necessary. To
let rewarding emotions be seen as economic goods, utility
theory has had to assume that they are unmotivated reflexes
that must be released by conditioned stimuli. But we saw in
Chapter 4 (sect. 4 here) that conditioning is a superfluous
mechanism, that supposedly conditioned responses can be
accounted for by the brief predominance of hyperbolically
discounted rewards – except for the deferred question of
how nature prevents the liberal coining of self-reward. It is
to that question that I now return.
10.1.1. Avoiding premature satiation. The strongest emo-
tions do seem to require a sense of necessity, so that we 
experience them not as choices but as responses to an ex-
ternal provocation. Although emotions are physically avail-
able, something makes them less intense in proportion as
the occasion for them is arbitrary. To the extent that some-
one learns to access them at will, doing so makes them pale,
mere daydreams. Even an actor needs to focus on appro-
priate occasions to bring them out with force. But what
properties must an event have in order to serve as an occa-
sion for emotion? The fact that there is no physical barrier
opposing free access to emotions raises the question of how
emotional experiences come to behave like economic goods
that are in limited supply. That is, how do you come to feel
as if you have them passively, as implied by their synonym,
“passions”?
The basic question is: How does your own behavior be-
come scarce? I’ll divide it into two parts: Why would you
want a behavior of yours to become scarce, that is, to limit
your free access to it? And, given that this is your wish, how
can you make it scarce without making it physically un-
available?
All kinds of reward depend on a readiness for it that is
used up as reward occurs and that cannot be deliberately
renewed. This readiness is the potential for appetite, some-
times called appetite itself, although “appetite” then does
not differentiate between an actual arousal for consuming
a reward (as in “stimulating your appetite” or “becoming
emotional”) and the adequately deprived or rested state
that makes this arousal possible. The distinction is not im-
portant here, since exhausting the aroused appetite also ex-
hausts the potential for it, so I will speak merely of appetite.
The properties of appetites are often such that rapid con-
sumption brings an earlier peak of reward but reduces the
total amount of reward that the appetite makes possible, so
that we have an amount versus delay problem of the kind
that was described in Figure 1B. Where people – or, pre-
sumably, any reward-governed organisms – have free ac-
cess to a reward that is more intense the faster it is con-
sumed, they will tend to consume it faster than they should
if they were going to get the most reward over time from
that appetite. In a conflict of consumption patterns be-
tween the long and pleasant versus the brief but even
slightly more intense, an organism that discounts the future
hyperbolically is primed to choose the brief but intense.
This problem makes no sense in a world of exponential
discounting. In an exponential world, an adept consumer
should simply gauge what the most productive way to ex-
ploit an appetite will be, and pace her consumption ac-
cordingly. People could sit in armchairs and entertain
themselves optimally by waiting for just enough emotional
appetite and then satisfying it. By contrast, common expe-
rience teaches that emotional reward, indulged in ad lib,
becomes unsatisfactory for that reason itself. To get the
most out of any kind of reward, we have to have – or de-
velop – limited access to it.
Limiting access should be easiest for physical rewards:
you can make a personal rule to consume them only in the
presence of adequately rare criteria. But with emotional re-
wards, the only way to stop your mind from rushing ahead
Ainslie: Précis of Breakdown of Will
646
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (2005) 28:5
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0140525X05280111
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Eastern Kentucky University, on 20 Nov 2019 at 18:38:06, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms.

is to avoid approaches that can be too well learned. Thus,
the most valuable occasions will be those that are either un-
certain to occur or mysterious – too complex or subtle to be
fully anticipated, arguably the rationale of art. To get the
most out of emotional reward, you have to either gamble on
uncertainty or find routes that are certain but that won’t be-
come too efficient. In short, your occasions have to stay sur-
prising – a property that has also been reported as neces-
sary for activity in brain reward centers (e.g., Berns et al.
2001; Hollerman et al. 1998).
To restate this pivotal hypothesis: In the realm of emo-
tional reward – the great preponderance of the reward that
even modestly well-off people pursue – possible behaviors
must compete on the basis of how well they can maintain
your appetite. The processes that are rewarded by emotion
compete for adoption on the basis of the extent to which
their occasions defy willful control. Direct paths to reward
become progressively less productive, because insofar as
they become efficient they waste your readiness for reward.
Conversely, if there is a factor that delays consumption from
the moment at which the consumption could, if immediate,
compete with available alternatives – the moment it reaches
what could be called the market level of reward – that fac-
tor may substantially increase the product of [value x dura-
tion] before the appetite satiates. Figure 6 shows this using
the simplest assumption that the build-up of potential ap-
petite and the falling level of reward during consumption
are linear over time; any concavity in the build-up or con-
vexity in the consumption curve would accentuate the ef-
fect.
To repeat satisfactions that were once intense, you have
at least to structure them as fantasies involving obstacles in
order to achieve a modicum of suspense; but as a fantasy
becomes familiar and your mind jumps ahead to the high
points, the fantasy collapses further into being just a cursory
thought – an irritant if it retains any attractiveness at all, and
a disregarded, empty option if it does not. Durable occa-
sions for emotion have to be surprises, so that you don’t
have to restrain your attention from jumping ahead. Thus,
it’s usually more rewarding to read a well-paced story than
to improvise a fantasy, although even in fantasy some ran-
domization is possible. Accordingly, surprise is sometimes
said to be the basis of aesthetic value (Berlyne 1974; Sci-
tovsky 1976). In modalities where you can mentally reward
yourself, surprise is the only commodity that can be scarce.
Although there are wide variations in the equilibria peo-
ple find between gratification at will and strict dependence
on external occasions – the fantasy-prone seem to have
emotions that are more robust than other people’s despite
equally free access (Rhue & Lynn 1987) – everyone learns
limits to her self-induction of emotions. Most people prob-
ably develop intuitions about how to foster sources of sur-
prise (e.g., a rule not to read ahead), without ever making
an explicit theory. People – and presumably nonhuman an-
imals – wind up experiencing as emotion only those pat-
terns that have escaped the habituation of voluntary access,
by a selective process analogous to that described by Robert
Frank for the social recognition of “authentic” emotions
(Frank 1988): Expressions that are known to be intention-
ally controllable are disregarded, as with the false smile of
Ainslie: Précis of Breakdown of Will
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (2005) 28:5
647
Figure 6.A.
Repeated cycles (not summed) of growing reward potential (“appetite,” depicted schematically by the straight lines) and
actual consumption to the point of satiety (gray areas). Consumption begins at the points (arrows) when discounted value of expected
consumption reaches the competitive market level set by alternative sources of reward (which are not shown). Hyperbolic discount curves
of the total value (the sum of the gray areas) of each act of consumption decline with delay from its anticipated onset (right to left as de-
lay increases). B.
Increased reward (striped areas) resulting from increased appetite when there is an obligatory delay from the mo-
ment of choice to the moment of starting consumption (“\” brackets); the choice to consume occurs at the points (arrows) when the
discounted value of the delayed consumption reaches the market level. Note that this figure was inaccurately drawn in the target book.3
A
B
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0140525X05280111
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Eastern Kentucky University, on 20 Nov 2019 at 18:38:06, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms.

the hypocrite. By this process of selection, positive emotion
is left with its familiar guise as passion, something that has
to come over you. (The negative emotions habituate less,
and need not be limited except by avoidance.)
It is undoubtedly adaptive for vivid rewards to fade away
into habit as you get efficient at obtaining them; this pro-
cess may keep you motivated to explore your environment,
both when you are young and inept and when you have be-
come a master problem-solver. If internal reward were
strictly proportional to how much of some external stimu-
lus you could get, then a reward rate that was sufficient to
shape your behavior when you were a beginner would lead
you to rest on your laurels once you had become adept at
getting it. But instead, as you become increasingly skilled in
an activity, the reward it generates increases only at first,
and then decreases again because your appetite doesn’t last
as long.
The paradox is that it is just those achievements which are most
solid, which work best, and which continue to work that excite
and reward us least. The price of skill is the loss of the experi-
ence of value – and of the zest for living. (Tomkins 1978, p. 212)
11. The need to maintain appetite eclipses the will
(Ch. 11)
I’ll argue that the other three puzzles also hinge upon pre-
mature satiation, the impulse to harvest emotional reward
before it is ripe. Will not only cannot control this impulse,
it may make you more vulnerable to it because of its de-
mand for regular, distinct criteria for choice, the fourth side
effect listed in section 9 (Ch. 9). The greatest limitation of
the will comes from the same process as its greatest
strength: its relentless systemization of experience through
attention to precedent, which braces it against temporary
preferences, but also makes it unable to follow subtle
strategies to overcome the premature satiation of emotional
appetite.
11.1. The construction of fact puzzle
It is now common knowledge that people’s beliefs are heav-
ily influenced by their own tacit choices. Decisions about
attending to or ignoring information shape perception so
much that some “social constructivists” have put fact and
fiction on a par, under the name “text” (e.g., Gergen 1985;
see Harland 1987). To a great extent belief does seem to be
a goal-seeking activity. However, it cannot be based simply
on rewardingness and still be experienced as belief. Belief
differs from make-believe in depending on the ruling of
some external arbiter, some test that is beyond your direct
influence, rather than simply being chosen.
Instrumental beliefs, those shaped by external rewards,
leave little room for construction. Construction can occur
readily where the consequences of beliefs are emotional
rather than externally determined, but the constraints on
this process haven’t been explored. However, the pervasive
urge for premature satiation, discussed in the previous sec-
tion, is a likely limiting factor. This urge can be expected to
create a selective process favoring emotions that are occa-
sioned by adequately inaccessible texts, thereby promoting
those texts to a status more significant than fantasy. That is,
the premature satiation hypothesis predicts an incentive to
cue emotions by something as inflexible as facts in order to
optimize available appetite. Emotions tied to beliefs that
can shift as convenience dictates will become daydreams,
just like emotions that aren’t tied to beliefs at all. The texts
that get selected as beliefs for noninstrumental motives will
be those interpretations of reality that serve as effective oc-
casions for emotions. If they are adequately unique – the
history everyone agrees upon, the answer that seems too
hard to have alternatives, the assumption you’ve held since
childhood – those texts have the feel of facts, and the recog-
nition of their importance has the feel of belief.
According to this hypothesis, the very point of nonin-
strumental beliefs is to constrain the occasions for emotion.
As with any mental process, the ultimate selective factor
must be reward, but here, long-range rewardingness will
depend on a balance between the production and restric-
tion of reward; and because the production of emotions is
not intrinsically limited, we learn to produce them when
and only when there are adequate restrictions. Cues that
have been selected on this basis as occasions for emotions
become experienced as the facts that stimulate these emo-
tions. For this purpose, accuracy per se will be only one se-
lective factor for belief in a fact, and not an indispensable
one at that.
11.2. The vicarious reward puzzle
Other people are especially valuable as sources of emo-
tional experience. Conventional utility theory calls this a
simple putting-yourself-in-the-other’s-place, and regards it
as natural whenever “social distance” is short. This idea,
first elaborated by Adam Smith (1759/1976), has been put
into terms of utility by Julian Simon (1995). But the mov-
ingness of social experiences doesn’t precisely depend on
distance, or even on the existence of a real other person as
opposed to a fictional character; and in many cases the ex-
perience that one person gets is obviously different from
that of her vicarious object – at the extreme, for sadist and
victim. How do other people move us, and what are the con-
straints on that process?
There has been a lively debate between authors who be-
lieve that altruism is a primary motive (e.g., Batson & Shaw
1991) and those who think it reduces to selfish pleasure
(Piliavin et al. 1982; Sen 1977). Economic man is supposed
to maximize his own prospects, and help others only inso-
far as doing so will elicit reciprocity. However, you find
counterexamples all the time, from transients who leave
tips for waiters they’ll never see again to heroes who give
their lives to save strangers in fires and accidents. People
also have the potential to derive satisfaction from others’
pain – even, in the extreme, from their death throes (e.g.,
Davies 1981, pp. 78–82). Instrumentality again aside, what
makes this range of perceived experiences in other people
valuable to us?
The premature satiation hypothesis predicts that vicari-
ous experience ought to be a good criterion for occasioning
emotional reward, but should become less valuable to the
extent that you can bring it under your control, because
your control will inevitably undermine your appetite. Thus,
the greatest rewards from other people will come through
gambles on their responses. But gambles that are rigged –
interactions that are predictable, people you can boss
around, relationships you’re poised to leave if they turn dis-
appointing – push your emotional experiences in the di-
rection of daydreams. These hedges are tantamount to ex-
changing a mutual game of cards for a game of solitaire, and
Ainslie: Précis of Breakdown of Will
648
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (2005) 28:5
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0140525X05280111
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Eastern Kentucky University, on 20 Nov 2019 at 18:38:06, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms.

perhaps even to cheating at solitaire; such an impulse is
punished by a loss of suspense, and hence, of all but fairly
short-range reward.
Given adequate appetite, the emotional payoff comes
when the other person gives you a good occasion for emo-
tion. Making predictions about other people becomes a
highly rewarded activity for its emotion-occasioning value,
quite aside from how it may help you influence them. How-
ever, this is only part of the story. So far, there is no reason
to think that gambling on other people’s behavior would be
any more rewarding than gambling on a horse race, or on
your ability to solve a puzzle. The fact that this puzzle re-
sponds strategically to your choices might make it more
challenging, but would not qualitatively change the experi-
ence of succeeding or failing. But when the puzzle is built
like the person solving it – that is, when it is another per-
son – it may foster what is likely to be a much richer strat-
egy for occasioning emotions.
First, this similarity supplies a different way of solving the
puzzle. Because other people’s choices depend more on
their interaction with you than on anything you know about
them in advance, you soon learn that the best way to pre-
dict them is to use your own experience to model theirs. If
the model isn’t arbitrary – if it is disciplined by observation
– it is apt to behave much more like the actual other per-
son than a nonempathic model would – for instance, one
made like the model of an economy from statistical data.
The best way to predict people is to put yourself in their
shoes.
However, this empathic modeling process should yield
more than just prediction. Putting yourself in the other per-
son’s shoes means adopting as your own the criteria that you
think she is using to occasion emotion. For the time being
you entertain her emotions. But of course, they are hers only
in the sense that you are having them according to a theory
about her. You are the person through whose brain they are
percolating. This means that you can use such a model to
occasion emotions just as you use your own prospects.
Because emotions don’t need a turnkey, just appetite and
adequately rare occasions to preserve this appetite, you
should be able to sometimes experience the emotions you
are modeling in the other person as substantially as the ones
you have as yourself. To model other people is to have their
expected feelings; and nothing makes these “vicarious”
feelings differ in kind from “real” ones. The target book
suggests a related rationale for the vicarious enjoyment of
negative emotions (Ainslie 2001, pp. 183–86). However,
the emotional impact of these phenomena will be limited
by the uniqueness of your relationship with the other per-
son, just as the impact of texts is limited by their factuality;
vicarious experiences from strangers picked for the purpose
will be little more than daydreams.
To the extent that we have gambled on another person’s
discernable feelings, these feelings should become a good
that we will work for. Information about our gambles on
other people will be the limited commodity that constrains
the otherwise too-available resource of emotion. This, I ar-
gue, is how other people come to compete for our interest
on the same footing as the goods of commerce.
11.3. The indirection puzzle
Some goal-directed activities cannot effectively approach
their goals by direct routes. Trying to have fun usually spoils
the fun, and trying to laugh inhibits laughter (Elster 1981;
Wegner 1994). At first glance, this problem seems to strike
at the heart of any motivational model, not just one that as-
sumes exponential discounting. How can any goal-directed
activity be undermined by striving toward its goal? How can
a reward-dependent activity not be strengthened by re-
ward?
I have described how the will cannot stop the premature
satiation of suspense. I’ll now argue that will may actually
make premature satiation worse. The will needs conspicu-
ous, discrete criteria of success or failure to maintain the in-
centive to cooperate with future selves at each choice-point.
But systematically following well-defined criteria is exactly
what makes your behavior predictable, by other people as
well as yourself. It’s a great way to achieve a goal as effi-
ciently as possible, so that you can go on to do something
else. It’s a terrible way to enjoy an activity for its own sake,
because it kills appetite. You inevitably learn to anticipate
every step of the activity, so that it eventually becomes “sec-
ond nature,” making it so uninteresting that people used to
think that ingrained habits were run by the spinal cord. You
can’t use will to prevent this anticipation, because clear cri-
teria for rules directing attention aren’t available, and even
if they were, the attention required to test the choice would
be the very behavior involved in the choice. So a too-pow-
erful will tends to undermine its own motivational basis,
creating a growing incentive to find evasions. The awk-
wardness of getting reward in a well-off society is that the
creation of appetite often requires undoing the work of sat-
isfying appetite.
Refreshing your emotional appetite without having to
contradict what you have willed often requires believing in
some seemingly rational, or arguably necessary, activity that
is incompatible with the direct routes to a reward. That is,
you need to find indirect routes to success: dummy activi-
ties that aren’t actually worthwhile for their ostensible pur-
pose, but stay desirable insofar as they maintain appetite by
creating good gambles. In general, you will need to believe
in some larger quest that requires you to put your satisfac-
tion at risk. To climb mountains or jump out of airplanes as
a test of fortitude, to stay with an abusive lover to prove your
loyalty, to join a religion that demands self-abasement, to play
the stock market or the horses as a way to get rich, even to
bet your dignity on staying in the forefront of fashion, leads
to repeated losses or at least the credible threat of losses. You
get your appetite back while struggling not to do so.
Activities that are spoiled by counting them, or counting
on them, have to be undertaken through indirection if they
are to stay valuable. For instance, romance undertaken for
sex or even “to be loved” is thought of as crass, as are some
of the most lucrative professions if undertaken for money,
or performance art if done for effect. Too great an aware-
ness of the motivational contingencies for sex, affection,
money, or applause spoils the effort, and not only because
it undeceives the other people involved. Beliefs about the
intrinsic worth of these activities are valued beyond what-
ever accuracy these beliefs might have, because they pro-
mote the needed indirection.
12. Conclusions (Ch. 12)
Robust evidence has indicated that the basic function by
which all vertebrates devalue delayed events is hyperbolic.
Ainslie: Précis of Breakdown of Will
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (2005) 28:5
649
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0140525X05280111
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Eastern Kentucky University, on 20 Nov 2019 at 18:38:06, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms.

Hyperbolic discounting has confronted conventional utility
theory with the likelihood that it doesn’t describe elemen-
tary principles of choice, but represents a higher-order cul-
tural invention that doesn’t necessarily operate in all people
or in all situations. Preferences that are temporary aren’t
aberrations any more, but the starting place for a strategic
understanding of functions that used to be thought of as or-
gans: the ego, the will, even the self.
Processes that pay off quickly tend to be temporarily pre-
ferred to richer but slower-paying processes, a phenome-
non that can’t be changed by insight per se. However, where
people come to look at their current choices as predictors
of what they will choose in the future, a logic much like that
in the familiar bargaining game, repeated prisoner’s di-
lemma, should recruit additional incentive to choose the
richer processes. This mechanism predicts all the major
properties that have been ascribed to both the power and
freedom of the will. Further examination of this mechanism
reveals how the will is apt to create its own distortion of ob-
jective valuation. Four predictions fit commonly observed
motivational patterns: A choice may become more valuable
as a precedent than as an event in itself, making people le-
galistic; signs that predict lapses tend to become self-con-
firming, leading to failures of will so intractable that they
seem like symptoms of disease; there will be motivation not
to recognize lapses, which creates an underworld much like
the Freudian unconscious; and distinct boundaries will
marshal motivation better than subtle boundaries, which
impairs the ability of will-based strategies to exploit emo-
tional rewards.
Furthermore, hyperbolic discounting suggests a distinc-
tion between short-lived reward and the more durable plea-
sure that allows us to account for the often-observed se-
ductiveness of pain and “negative” emotions. Conversely,
the likelihood that this discounting pattern hastens our con-
sumption of a reward where slower consumption would be
richer explains why we seek external occasions for rewards
that are otherwise at our disposal. The existence of both
strong lures to entertain aversive mental processes and in-
trinsic constraints on freely available, pleasurable processes
makes it possible to do without the hoary theory of classical
conditioning. Instead, emotions and hungers (together,
“appetites”) recur to the extent that they are rewarded. This
means that the “conditioned stimuli” for appetites are not
automatic triggers, but signs that emitting these appetites
will be more rewarding, at least in the very short run, than
not emitting them. These cues don’t release appetites, they
occasion them.
The urge to prematurely satisfy appetite teaches effi-
ciency of reward-getting, but brings about the decline of
pleasures once they have become familiar. This problem
provides a primary motive for the separation of belief from
fantasy. Instrumental needs aside, beliefs determined by
relatively rare events that are outside of your control are
better occasions for feeling than your own arbitrary con-
structions, and hence come to be experienced as more
meaningful. However, uniquely well-established social con-
structions may function about as well as objective facts in
this regard. Similar logic explains the value of empathic in-
teraction with other people, apart from any motives for
practical cooperation. To gamble, in effect, on the experi-
ences of others keeps your occasions for emotion surpris-
ing, and thus counteracts learned habituation.
Finally, there is an inevitable clash between two kinds of
reward-getting strategies. Belief in the importance of ap-
petite-satisfying tasks – amassing wealth, controlling peo-
ple, discovering knowledge itself – leads to behaviors that
rush to completion; but a tacit realization of the vulnerabil-
ity of appetite motivates a search for obstacles to solutions,
or for gambles that will intermittently undo them. Con-
sciousness of the second task spoils the very belief in the
first task that makes the first task strict enough to be an op-
timal pacer of reward. Thus, the task of restoring appetite
tends to be learned indirectly, and to be culturally trans-
mitted via beliefs that seem superstitious or otherwise irra-
tional to conventional utility analysis.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
Thanks to Lynne Debiak for corrected artwork, and to John Mon-
terosso, David Spurrett, and Andries Gouws for comments on this
précis.
NOTES
The author of this Précis is employed by a government agency
and, as such, this Précis is considered a work of the U.S. govern-
ment and not subject to copyright within the United States.
1. Even if these elements are governed by different brain cen-
ters, neurophysiologists Shizgal and Conover have pointed out
that there has to be an “evaluative circuitry” that reduces them to
a common currency: “For orderly choice to be possible, the util-
ity of all competing resources must be represented on a single,
common dimension” (Shizgal & Conover 1996).
2. For an analogous problem in social organization, see Sun-
stein (1995).
3. Figure 6B is Figure 10B in the target book. In Figure 10B
the slope of increasing appetite is steeper than it is in Figure 10A,
whereas to illustrate my point it has to be the same as in Figure
10A. Figure 6B has thus been corrected here.
Open Peer Commentary
Models of preference reversals and personal
rules: Do they require maximizing a utility
function with a specific structure?
Horacio Arló-Costa
Philosophy Department, Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, PA 15213.
hcosta@andrew.cmu.edu
http://www.phil.cmu.edu/faculty/arlocosta/
Abstract: One of the reasons for adopting hyperbolic discounting is to ex-
plain preference reversals. Another is that this value structure suggests an
elegant theory of the will. I examine the capacity of the theory to solve
Newcomb’s problem. In addition, I compare Ainslie’s account with other
procedural theories of choice that seem at least equally capable of accom-
modating reversals of preference.
One of the ambitions of Ainslie’s book is to develop a descriptive
theory of choice and intentionality (Ainslie 2001). The theory
abandons some of the main tenets of Rational Choice Theory
(RCT) although it is still compatible with explanations in terms of
maximization of time-indexed utility.
The main departure from RCT is based on Ainslie’s conviction
that discount curves are not only nonexponential, but also “specif-
ically hyperbolic” (p. 31). Although this hypothesis has some cur-
Commentary/Ainslie: Précis of Breakdown of Will
650
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (2005) 28:5
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0140525X05280111
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Eastern Kentucky University, on 20 Nov 2019 at 18:38:06, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms.

rency among economists, the idea is not completely consensual.
The phenomenon of preference reversals is certainly an empiri-
cally robust fact. But as Rubinstein (2003) and other economists
have recently remarked, the adoption of hyperbolic discounting
does far more than just modeling the psychological phenomenon
that the present has a special status. “It assumes the maximization
of a utility function with a specific structure and as such it misses
the core of the psychological decision-making process. Thus, I
find it to be no more that a minor modification to the standard dis-
counting approach” (Rubinstein 2003, p. 1215).
The objection raised by Rubinstein is that the same sort of evi-
dence provided by preference reversals can also reject hyperbolic
discounting as well; although most of these phenomena can be ex-
plained in terms of a decision procedure based on similarity rela-
tions, Rubinstein’s own proposal constitutes an even more severe
departure from RCT (e.g., transitivity is not satisfied). It has nev-
ertheless the merit of delivering an account of other important
choice anomalies that inspired the main theories of nonexpected
utility.
Of course, a sophisticated theory of rationality cannot be based
on an unmodified version of RCT. This is so in virtue of normative
reasons alone. For example, some phenomena, like Ellsberg’s,
seem to require a normative relaxation of RCT of the sort advo-
cated by Amartya Sen (2002) or Isaac Levi (1986). An adequate
descriptive theory of choice should also be able to explain prob-
lematic patterns of choice of this kind. But it seems doubtful that
the adoption of a particular functional form for utility can accom-
plish that. The so-called theories of nonexpected utility, which also
relied on the use of special utility curves, have been relatively suc-
cessful in explaining only a limited range of recalcitrant phenom-
ena (e.g., Ellsberg’s puzzle cannot be explained by appealing to the
special utility and probability curves of prospect theory; especial
and questionable ad hoc hypotheses have been used instead by
Fox and Tversky [1991] – see Arló-Costa and Helzner [2005] for
a critical appraisal of this account).
In Chapter 4 of Ainslie’s book, hyperbolic discounting is applied
via ingenious arguments to develop accounts of emotions, pain,
and other aversive behavior. The extension requires the neat sep-
aration of the notions of reward and pleasure. Therefore, the the-
ory is quite different from the standard hedonic articulations of ra-
tional choice. In addition, the model presents an account of
emotions as “pulled” by reward, which seems, prima facie, con-
troversial.
But the bulk of the book is devoted to showing that one can de-
velop a model of the will as emerging from a process of intertem-
poral bargaining among units called interests. This is one of the
most imaginative and interesting parts of the book. Perhaps the
most charitable account of interests is as time slices of the self.
Stroz concluded in his seminal paper (Stroz 1955) that “the in-
dividual always decides what to do on the assumption that he has
no authority over his future self” (p. 180). Since then, many
philosophers have questioned this assumption by postulating that
agents can bind themselves through the operation of their wills.
This strategy postulates rather than explains intentionality. Ainslie
suggests instead that when someone seems to be choosing ac-
cording to principle (or by using a personal rule), what literally
happens is that his successive selves form a repeated prisoner’s
dilemma relationship, which is solved in the manner of interper-
sonal bargainers. So the idea here is to explain the will away, rather
than invoke it to explain commitment.
Ainslie concedes that the existence of the resulting internal
feedback process is probably impossible to study via controlled
experiments. Nevertheless, he claims that postulating hyperbolic
discounting (and therefore recursive decision-making) solves
some well-known philosophical conundra on intentionality and
choice. I only have space here to focus on one of them: the so-
called Newcomb’s problem.
As originally formulated, Newcomb is a single-play situation
and the puzzle is to determine what is normatively required in this
case. Ainslie seems to think (citing Nozick 1969) that in this case
RCT requires choosing both boxes (p. 134). But Nozick’s argu-
ment insists that if one maximizes “evidential” expected utility
(EU), one should choose one box. Dominance is invoked to ratio-
nalize the two-box solution. Later on, deviant versions of RCT
(causal versions) have been developed in order to articulate the
latter solution (Joyce 1999). Presystematically, Ainslie seems to be
a two-boxer (p. 137). But this conclusion is deeply controversial
(see, e.g., Levi 1975; Meek & Glymour 1994), and it does not seem
to be based on using hyperbolic discounting or recursive decision-
making.
In addition, the author argues that the temptation to hedge on
a personal rule could be modeled as a problem with the same
arithmetic structure as a repeated version of Newcomb. In his
model, he argues, diagnostic acts are also causal acts and one can
then explain the sequential analogue of the “evidential” solution
in the single-play case (cooperating). But this does not seem to ex-
plain why Ainslie defends the solution analogous to mutual defect
in the one-shot case of Newcomb. And this is the gist of New-
comb’s problem.
Ainslie’s very ambitious idea is to open the impenetrable black
box of intentionality, which is then modeled as a sort of brokerage
process. But this process is hard to dissect on account of its re-
cursive nature. I do not think that the appeal to philosophical puz-
zles like Newcomb’s adds credibility to it. Many of these puzzles
share with Ellsberg’s example the feature of being thought exper-
iments designed to uncover normative inadequacies of RCT. And
the theory presented in the book, like many other descriptive the-
ories of choice, seems unable to deal with this type of problems.
Ultimately, the plausibility of Ainslie’s theory seems to rest on how
well it fares in comparison to other attempts to “open the black
box of decision.”
The final chapters of the book (on the “dyscontrol” symptoms
that can be induced by bargaining strategies) are full of fascinat-
ing insights. Probably, Ainslie offers in this book one of the most
complete and theoretically unified theories of the will available to-
day. The resulting overall picture is certainly quite impressive.
Three other motivational factors
Kent Bach
Department of Philosophy, San Francisco State University, San Francisco,
CA 94132. kbach@sfsu.edu
http://online.sfsu.edu/~kbach
Abstract: Ainslie uses his hyperbolic discount model to explain a dazzling
array of puzzling motivational phenomena. In so doing, he assumes that
the motivational force of a given option at a given time is directly propor-
tional to its discount-adjusted reward as assessed at that time. He over-
looks three other factors which, independently of the perceived reward,
can affect motivational force.
Ainslie (2001) assumes that the motivational force of a given op-
tion at a given time is directly proportional to its discount-adjusted
reward as assessed at that time. Evidently, he rejects any inde-
pendent role for cognition in mediating or arbitrating competing
rewards or in deliberating and deciding what to do when. Rather,
he conceives of these interests as a population of quasi-indepen-
dent agents engaged in tacit bargaining, each aimed at its own
temporally discounted reward. He argues that the curves repre-
senting this discounting are “highly bowed,” hyperbolic rather
than exponential in form, thereby allowing for temporary rever-
sals of preferences. He briefly mentions four other discounting
patterns (p. 208), but, mathematically speaking, there are count-
less others consistent with temporal reversal. Indeed, perhaps the
discounting takes different shapes for different rewards, and
maybe the discounting is sometimes non-monotonic, as with
highly unstable desires. But let’s assume that Ainslie’s contention
that they are hyperbolic is not hype and that he is not taking us for
pigeons.
Commentary/Ainslie: Précis of Breakdown of Will
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (2005) 28:5
651
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0140525X05280111
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Eastern Kentucky University, on 20 Nov 2019 at 18:38:06, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms.

The key idea is that hyperbolic discounting, by devaluing future
rewards and punishments (negative rewards) proportionately to
their delay, lets “utility theory move beyond its stalemate with cog-
nitivism” (p. 38). So-called “dynamic inconsistency” is really a side
effect of the fact that the discount curves for different rewards can
cross: “people will naturally go for smaller, earlier over later, larger
rewards. . . . Akrasia is just maximizing expected reward, dis-
counted in highly bowed curves” (p. 39). In explaining how pref-
erences can temporarily reverse, this simple model eliminates the
apparent mystery of how we can act against our better judgment
and against our “true” interests. Ainslie contends that hyperbolic
discounting can explain a host of phenomena, including impul-
siveness, addiction, compulsion, ambivalence, procrastination, and
back-sliding. It can explain “the irony of smart people doing stupid
things or having to outsmart themselves in order not to” (p. 27), by
adopting “personal rules,” cultivating good work habits, and mak-
ing commitments that increase the cost of yielding to temptation.
Consideration of future rewards doesn’t take us outside the realm
of reward and require higher-level judgments. There is just the on-
going competition among the rewards themselves.
It may seem an exaggeration to treat a person’s different values
as autonomous agents engaged in intertemporal bargaining with
one another. Ainslie himself recognizes that his seemingly schizo-
phrenic model of “the self as a population” (p. 39) makes it puz-
zling how, in a dog-eat-dog world of competing bargaining agents,
“a marketplace of hyperbolically discounted choices [could] ever
come to look like a single individual” (p. 40) rather than a kennel.
What most worries me, though, is something else: At a given time,
the motivational force of a desire (drive, urge, goal, value, or what-
ever you want to call the members of this population) is not a func-
tion merely of the reward associated with it, even as adjusted for
the odds of success and the cost of failure and as temporally dis-
counted.
Here are three other factors that can contribute to the motiva-
tional force of a particular desire: (1) the frequency and persis-
tence of the desire’s coming to mind, (2) the desire’s degree of in-
satiability, and (3) its resistibility to the second-order desire to get
rid of it. Each of these factors can vary even as the perceived re-
ward of what is desired stays the same. For example, (1) something
you want but deem of little importance can be more zealously pur-
sued simply because the thought of it keeps occurring to you and
capturing your attention. Playing another video game when you
are trying to finish writing a commentary does not seem all that
important, but its urgency is enhanced just because the thought
of doing it keeps occurring to you. This doesn’t make it seem like
a better thing to do. Rather, you think you had better do it. What
is rewarding is not playing the game but eliminating the clamor-
ing desire to play it. Even worse, sometimes (2) the thought of
playing the game does not go away after you play it. You did what
you wanted to do, but now you want to do it again, just as if you
hadn’t done it in the first place. It’s not that you want it more but
that you want it again. In such a predicament, you may desire to
make this desire go away, but (3) try as you may, it keeps rearing
its head, keeping you from concentrating on that commentary.
Now you’re back to square (1), and vulnerable to (2) and (3) all
over again.
You could have the opposite problem, say with a long-term pro-
ject that requires irregular but frequent attention over time. As
much as you value the ultimate reward of cultivating your garden,
for example, (1) the thought of doing even a little puttering does
not occur as frequently as it should. Not only that, (2) when it does
occur and you act accordingly, the mere satisfaction of doing a lit-
tle something makes you feel as though you have made significant
progress even though you haven’t. And, to make matters worse,
(3) the thought of cultivating your garden resists staying in mind
even when you want it to.
It might seem that these three factors are reducible to the per-
ceived size of the desired reward. However, to suppose that would
confuse the assessed size of the desired reward with these three
independent dimensions of strength of the desire itself.
I have three further worries about the explanatory depth and
breadth of the hyperbolic discount model. First, it ignores the dis-
tinction between something’s being desired because it is reward-
ing and something’s being rewarding because it is desired. Second,
this model does not explain the magnitudes assigned to particular
rewards in the first place. And third, the fact, if it is a fact, that dis-
counting is hyperbolic itself cries out for an explanation.
Hyperbolas and hyperbole: The free will
problem remains
Bruce Bridgeman
Department of Psychology, University of California–Santa Cruz, Social
Sciences 2, Santa Cruz, CA 95064. bruceb@ucsc.edu
http://psych.ucsc.edu/faculty/bruceb/
Abstract: Hyperbolic theories have the fatal flaw that because of their ver-
tical asymptote they predict irresistible choice of immediate rewards, re-
gardless of future contingencies. They work only for simple situations.
Theories incorporating intermediate unconscious choices are more flexi-
ble, but are neither exponential nor hyperbolic in their predictions. They
don’t solve the free will paradox, which may be just a consistent illusion.
Will a hyperbolic theory of reward discounting solve the persistent
problems of the role of will in governing behavior? Ainslie (2001)
makes a case for that idea, but hyperbolic theories have problems
of their own. The hyperbola is defined by two perpendicular as-
ymptotes, in this case one at the baseline of zero reward value and
the other at the time of reward. Inevitably, a hyperbolic theory
must predict reward value approaching infinity as the function
moves toward the moment of reward. Rewards should become ir-
resistible, no matter what other conditions apply, when the mo-
ment of reward gets very close. The exponential curve, in contrast,
always has a finite value at a given time. True, the hyperbola has a
predictive advantage over most of its range, where it predicts
lower reward value (more discounting of future rewards) than ex-
ponential models, but the choice of either conic section is more a
matter of mathematical convenience than theory, because no rea-
sonably developed theory of reward motivates either model.
Another problem with hyperbolic theories became clear to me
when I applied the only hyperbolic model that I have developed
during my career, an ideal-observer model that predicts reading
rate at any rate of display flicker, as on a CRT monitor. It was a har-
rowing experience, because once the positions of the two asymp-
totes have been established (in this case at zero display frequency
and reading speed at infinite frequency) there is only one free
parameter left, a scaling parameter. It’s not much to go on. The
model worked well enough, though, enabling us to predict read-
ing speed at one frequency with great precision, given only the
reading speed at another frequency (Montegut et al. 1997).
The hyperbolic model of reading rate worked because it dealt
with a low-level stimulus sampling issue, not with deep psycho-
logical issues of reward and choice. The hyperbola simply doesn’t
leave enough room to take complexities into account. Recogniz-
ing this, Ainslie proposes that reward-delay decisions involve a
whole cascade of hidden intermediate decisions, each with its own
hyperbolic function that is replaced by another hyperbolic func-
tion at the time of an intermediate decision. The resulting pre-
dictions of future reward value are neither exponential nor hy-
perbolic, but depend on the timings of the intermediate decisions.
Each intermediate decision brings with it a new free parameter,
making the model more predictive but less theoretically useful,
because the number of free parameters expands faster than the
number of predicted actions.
Ironically, the decision cascade idea highlights an essential
paradox of linear decision theories – decisions are themselves
nonlinearities, places where everything that has gone before is ap-
plied to a single binary choice: you either accept the reward or you
Commentary/Ainslie: Précis of Breakdown of Will
652
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (2005) 28:5
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0140525X05280111
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Eastern Kentucky University, on 20 Nov 2019 at 18:38:06, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms.

don’t. After each binary choice, represented by the vertical lines
in Ainslie’s diagrams, the data that previously went into the choice
are discarded, and the process starts again. This is the sense in
which decisions are nonlinear. And it’s difficult to make a linear
theory of nonlinear behavior.
Even this expanded theory, however, fails to resolve the deep-
est paradox of reward theory, the issue of what seems like free will.
Even if the intermediate decisions are driven by utility theory or
by some other deterministic algorithm, we still do not know how
that last decision gets made. Substituting intertemporal bargain-
ing within an individual adds flexibility, but there still must be
rules governing each bargaining agent. The paradox of free will re-
mains, the two alternatives of choice determined either by some
unknown influence or by uncaused action. In the first alternative,
free will is an illusion, a feeling of free choice in an environment
where the decision is in fact determined by unconscious informa-
tion-processing in the brain. The second flies in the face of every-
thing we know about the physical world. Indeterminacy from ran-
dom or chaotic processes doesn’t solve the problem, for it only
adds a bit of noise to the reasoning process, whether conscious or
unconscious. And noise is not the same as free will; even in intro-
spection, we don’t confuse lack of control with freedom. The only
alternative left is the uncomfortable first alternative, that is, that
free will is indeed an illusion, but since it is a consistent illusion, it
is accepted as reality.
The idea that consistent illusions are perceived as reality has
precedents from more prosaic, but better-defined, domains in
perceptual research. Illusions can be defined as situations that
change upon closer inspection, whereas reality remains the same
upon closer inspection. Length illusions, such as the Müller-Lyer
arrows-in versus arrows-out figure, for example, can be tested eas-
ily by measuring the two lines in question, or by superimposing
them for direct comparison. The illusion becomes obvious, but
even after years of experience the figures still appear to be of dis-
torted lengths. Other illusions are more difficult to expose as illu-
sions. The slopes of hills, for instance, are grossly overestimated
by most people, who will go through their lives believing that the
steepest streets in San Francisco are perhaps 45 degrees, when
they are actually about 10 degrees. If no one corrects them on this,
the 45 degrees is reality for them, with none of the conflict that
pertains to illusions when they are exposed. Analogously, if the un-
conscious information-processing that goes into decision-making
is never exposed, people can go through their lives believing that
their thought processes are guided by free will, and never be con-
fronted by the paradoxes of uncaused action or hidden determin-
ism. Still, a theory that can help us to predict behavior in serious
situations, such as addictions, is a pragmatic step forward.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
Preparation of this commentary was supported by a Faculty Research Grant
from the Academic Senate of the University of California, Santa Cruz.
Regret and the control of temporary
preferences
Terry Connollya and Jochen Rebb
aDepartment of Management and Policy, The Eller College, University of
Arizona, Tucson, AZ 85721; bSingapore Management University, Lee Kong
Chian School of Business, Singapore 178899. connolly@email.arizona.edu
jochenreb@smu.edu.sg
Abstract: Regret is often symptomatic of the defective decisions associ-
ated with “temporary preference” problems. It may also help overcome
these defects. Outcome regret can modify the relative utilities of different
payoffs. Process regret can motivate search for better decision processes
or trap-evading strategies. Heightened regret may thus be functional for
control of these self-defeating choices.
In Ainslie’s taxonomy of “temporary preference” problems, the
defining feature of addictions is that “the imminent prospect of
such activities is strongly rewarding but they’re avoided if foreseen
from a distance and regretted afterward” (Ainslie 2001, p. 49; ital-
ics added). In compulsions, similarly, “regret may still occur . . .
and the person may even expect the regret while indulging in the
behavior” (p. 50), but the behavior still persists. Regret, then, may
accompany, or even define, the problematic behaviors. What
Ainslie appears to overlook is the possibility that regret may help
to control them.
The “temporary preference” problem involves, minimally, the
integration of two payoffs, one of which arrives earlier than the
other, and is thus prone to the immediacy or hyperbolic discount
effect. Viewed from a suitable distance before or after the choice,
the later option is superior. Close to the decision point the earlier
option is (temporarily) more attractive, a phenomenon that, as
Ainslie notes (p. 198), “can’t be changed by insight per se.” The
addict surrenders to the overwhelming desire for a fix, and the
compulsive for yet another hand-wash, despite a clear intellectual
understanding that she would, on balance, prefer not to and that
the temporary urge will pass. Intellection is overpowered by emo-
tion, System 2 by System 1 (Kahneman 2003).
Although emotions commonly involve both cognition and feel-
ing (Frijda 1988), regret does so to an unusually large extent
(Landman 1993). Asked if we feel regret over our choice of job,
spouse, or vacation, most of us would reply “Let me think.” We
comfort a friend torn by feelings of regret by offering consoling
thoughts: “How could you have known?” “You made a careful
choice, there’s nothing to blame yourself for.” This intimate inter-
weaving of thought and feeling has made regret the variable of
choice for decision theorists interested in emotions. Perhaps it has
a role to play in the complete understanding of temporary prefer-
ence problems.
It is useful to distinguish two targets of decision-related regret:
(1) regret associated with the outcome of a decision, and (2) re-
gret associated with the choice process itself (Connolly & Zeelen-
berg 2002). The former seems to be essentially a reference-point
phenomenon, in which the value of an outcome is reduced (or, if
positive, enhanced: e.g., rejoicing) by comparison with some ref-
erence point, commonly the outcome of a foregone alternative
(see Bell 1982; Loomes & Sugden 1982; Mellers et al. 1999). The
second seems to involve a stronger component of self-blame or
remorse, and is tied to the feeling that the decision made or the
process used in making it was, in retrospect, insufficiently justi-
fied. The two regrets may be compounded, as for a mother who
feels both outcome regret at the sickness of her small child, and
self-blame regret at not having thought more carefully about his
medical care (Reb & Connolly 2005). The failed dieter regrets
both the additional weight gained and the poor decision about the
chocolate cake.
There is abundant evidence that anticipated regret can influ-
ence decisions in a variety of domains, including medical care
(Connolly & Reb 2003), consumer decisions (Simonson 1992),
and negotiations (Larrick & Boles 1995). Richard et al. (1996) re-
port some success in one temporary preference context, curbing
unsafe sexual behavior, by shifting time-frames and making regret
salient. They asked their respondents about either their feelings
about unsafe sex or the feelings they would anticipate after hav-
ing had unsafe sex. Participants in the second condition reported
“safer” behavioral expectations immediately, and less actual risky
sexual behavior in the six months following the experiment. How,
exactly, might such a manipulation of regret salience achieve this
promising result?
Two mechanisms might be suggested, paralleling the two sorts
of regret described above. One possibility is that the manipulation
enhanced outcome regret associated with the smaller, sooner be-
havior (unsafe sex), lowering its payoff value, and/or increased the
larger, later payoff value by adding a component of rejoicing. It is
clear from the conventional portrayal of discounted payoff values
(e.g., Ainslie 2001, Fig. 4, p. 63) that modestly lowering the ear-
Commentary/Ainslie: Précis of Breakdown of Will
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (2005) 28:5
653
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0140525X05280111
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Eastern Kentucky University, on 20 Nov 2019 at 18:38:06, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms.

lier payoff or raising the later one could resolve the preference re-
versal in favor of the later behavior.
A second, perhaps complementary, mechanism might rely on
the self-blame, process-oriented component of regret. We have
shown in recent work (Reb 2005) that making regret salient to ex-
perimental participants can lead them to use more careful deci-
sion processes, acquire more decision-relevant information, and
deliberate longer before deciding. Perhaps the participants in
Richard et al.’s study responded to the regret-salience manipula-
tion by searching more diligently for alternative choices, weighing
the costs and benefits of the unsafe behavior more carefully, or
considering one of the familiar self-control strategies discussed by
Ainslie (p. 73ff).
The hypothesis, then, is that regret can be more than a mere
symptom of failed decision making. Regret may, in some circum-
stances, play a role in improving decisions: the experience of re-
gret can drive learning in repeated decisions; its anticipation can
shape single decisions. Outcome regret affects decisions by mod-
ifying the relative attractiveness of different payoffs. Process-re-
lated regret does so by motivating the search for trap-evading
strategies such as decision bundling, precommitment, and the
like. In both cases, the interweaving of thought and feeling that
characterize regret provide the bridge between System 1 and Sys-
tem 2 processes, between the thoughtful appraisal of the distant
goal and the visceral appeal of the immediate indulgence. With-
out venturing into evolutionary speculation that regret may have
developed to serve such a system-bridging purpose, it is not diffi-
cult to see that some level of regret can be highly functional for
control of the self-defeating processes that temporary preference
problems represent. The hypothesis seems to us worthy of serious
consideration.
The will: Interpersonal bargaining versus
intrapersonal prediction
Luca Ferrero
Department of Philosophy, University of Wisconsin–Milwaukee, Milwaukee,
WI 53201-0413. ferrero@uwm.edu
http://www.uwm.edu/~ferrero
Abstract: Ainslie is correct in arguing that the force of commitments
partly depends on the predictive role of present action, but this claim can
be supported independently of the analogy with interpersonal bargaining.
No matter whether we conceive of the parties involved in the bargaining
as interests or transient selves, the picture of the will as a competitive in-
teraction among these parties is unconvincing.
I am unpersuaded by Ainslie’s central claim that the will is the
product of transtemporal bargaining among successively domi-
nant, transient interests analogous to the emergence of coopera-
tion in a repeated Prisoner’s Dilemma (Ainslie 2001, pp. 90–93).
It is questionable that we could make sense of the parties involved
in this bargaining as truly separate sources of agency. And even if
we could, it is hard to see how cooperation could emerge out of
the interactions between these parties. It is doubtful, therefore,
that the will can be understood as a genuine interpersonal phe-
nomenon.
Consider the alleged competition among separate interests.
Ainslie presents the interests as independent agencies that strive
for selection (Ainslie 2001, pp. 39–41, 61, 73) as if they were repli-
cators in a process of natural selection. But he gives no reason to
believe that there are heritability and differential fitness in the
competition among interests. What the selection amounts to is just
that the strongest interest is satisfied at the expense of the con-
flicting, weaker interests. This satisfaction does not alter the
chances of any interest to reappear with equal strength in the fu-
ture. Nor does it promote the development of any adaptive strat-
egy by the interests themselves. Understanding of the effects of
hyperbolic discounting does not depend on the unwarranted reifi-
cation of the agent’s preferences into independent sources of
agency that compete strategically in a genuinely selective process.
Talk of selection among the preferences and the development of
strategies to deal with the conflicts of preferences is more appro-
priate at the level of agents, even if the agents operate in response
to the varying strengths of their preferences. In any event, inter-
action among interests could not explain the emergence of com-
mitments. A short-range interest has no incentive to submit to a
commitment, because commitments preclude the interest’s pre-
sent and future satisfaction. Interests seek nothing other than
their satisfaction, hence nothing can be offered to them in ex-
change for their frustration.
What if the parties are not interests, but successive temporal
selves? Ainslie occasionally shifts from talk of transient interests to
talk of temporal selves (Ainslie 2001, pp. 40, 93, 161). The two no-
tions are not identical, however. Contrary to transient interests,
temporal selves are sources of agency and can have multiple in-
terests. It seems that temporal selves might agree to be under
commitments that frustrate their dominant short-range prefer-
ences in exchange for the satisfaction of other preferences. How-
ever, temporal selves are transient, hence they have no incentive
to settle for less than the satisfaction of their short-range dominant
interest.
The problem would not arise for parties that are transient in the
sense that they act just once, but have stakes in the long-term out-
comes of their actions (see Ainslie 2001, p. 93). These parties have
no problem seeing the long-term benefits of a commitment. Nev-
ertheless, they are tempted to make an exception now, thereby sat-
isfying their dominant short-range interest while still reaping the
long-term benefits of future compliance. However, if the present
action counts as a precedent, a single exception to the commit-
ment is self-defeating, given that present defections invite future
ones. For Ainslie, transient interests/selves happen to be related
so that their actions count as precedent for future ones, whence
the stability of commitment. However, the fact that transient par-
ties with long-term stakes can strategically agree to cooperate does
not explain the will. First, there is no need to look at interpersonal
scenarios to appreciate that actions can work as intrapersonal
precedents. Given that the same agent is going to face the same
choice at the future time with the same set of preferences, it is not
surprising that her present action is a precedent for her future
ones, thereby defeating temptations to make exceptions to her
commitments. This is not really strategic thinking, but just re-
flection on the import of one’s present action in the context of one’s
continued existence as one and the same agent who is going to face
exactly similar choices in the future. Appeal to transient selves
adds nothing to this straightforward intrapersonal explanation.
Moreover, in order to make the repeated Prisoner’s Dilemma sce-
nario envisaged by Ainslie (2001, p. 93) truly explanatory, special
interpersonal conditions must be assumed: The parties must face
exactly the same choice over time and share the same long-term
preferences. But these conditions are not special from the intrap-
ersonal point of view. They are just distinctive features of the
agent’s temporal identity.
Second, the fact that we are subject to hyperbolic discounting
and thus prone to inconsistent shifts in short-term preferences is
no reason to think that we are made up of competing transient
selves with long-term stakes. What makes this false picture at-
tractive is the misleading focus on scenarios like “Ulysses and the
sirens” as if they were paradigmatic of diachronic agency. Ulysses’
situation, however, is unusual. When Ulysses listens to the sirens,
he does not just reverse his short-range preferences, rather, he is
also insensitive to long-term considerations. Hence, he does not
care that his action could be a precedent. But this makes him im-
pervious to commitments. He can be controlled only by physical
restraints or short-range disincentives. If hyperbolic discounting
were to make us always like Ulysses, our lives would indeed be
best described in interpersonal terms. But then there would be no
will, just crude transtemporal manipulation. On the other hand, if
temporal selves are depicted as having not just shifting short-term
Commentary/Ainslie: Précis of Breakdown of Will
654
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (2005) 28:5
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0140525X05280111
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Eastern Kentucky University, on 20 Nov 2019 at 18:38:06, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms.

preferences, but also stable long-term ones, then they have no ex-
planatory force. They are just like ordinary extended agents with
stable long-term preferences, except that they act just once.
Speaking of an agent as made up of a succession of these selves is
just a convoluted way of saying that, as a result of hyperbolic dis-
counting, we are going to have dynamically inconsistent short-
term preferences.
Ainslie is right in claiming that we are subject to hyperbolic dis-
counting and that the will is partly a matter of predicting future
conduct from one’s present action. But this conclusion is inde-
pendent of the misleading picture of a bargaining among com-
peting interests/selves. The will is not an organ, but it is not a bar-
gaining situation either. It is rather the product of the agent’s
reflection on the long-term effects of her actions, including their
role as precedents, under the assumption of her own identity over
time.
Hyperbola-like discounting, impulsivity, 
and the analysis of will
Leonard Green and Joel Myerson
Department of Psychology, Washington University, St. Louis, MO 63130.
LGreen@wustl.edu
JMyerson@wustl.edu
Abstract: Ainslie’s insightful treatment of dynamically inconsistent choice
stands in contrast to traditional views in psychology, economics, and phi-
losophy. We comment on the form of the discounting function and on new
findings regarding choice between delayed rewards. Finally, we argue that
the positive correlation between temporal and probability discounting is
inconsistent with the view that impulsivity represents a unitary trait.
In Breakdown of Will, Ainslie (2001) proposes a radical departure
from the traditional approach to the concept of will. He argues
against the notion of will as a faculty that exerts top-down control
(an executive function, as it were). A major problem with this tra-
ditional, top-down approach, as Ainslie points out, is that it can-
not easily account for dynamically inconsistent choice. For exam-
ple, an individual may agree to give a talk at an upcoming meeting,
yet regret having made that commitment as the date gets closer.
From the traditional perspective, it seems odd that the same per-
son who is endowed with a sufficient degree of will at an earlier
point in time would not possess it at a later point. Even odder from
the traditional perspective is that the same person often will agree
to give yet another talk if asked well in advance of a subsequent
meeting.
Rather than blaming such apparently inconsistent behavior on
inadequate willpower or selective stupidity, Ainslie suggests that
such dynamic inconsistencies, as well as the behavioral phenom-
ena traditionally explained in terms of will, can be better ac-
counted for by conceptualizing will as a strategy that involves
thinking of individual choices as precedents. Thinking of choice in
terms of precedents that establish choice policies has the effect of
“bundling” the sequence of rewards that would be obtained by fol-
lowing a specific policy. Giving a talk, for example, may be thought
of as part of a larger, ongoing plan for career advancement associ-
ated with larger rewards than might result from a single talk (see
also Rachlin 1995; 2000). According to Ainslie, the utility of this
bundling strategy derives from the hyperbolic nature of the dis-
counting of future consequences.
Ainslie was among the first to argue that hyperbolic discount-
ing predicts that preferences may reverse with the passage of time,
whereas the standard economic model, which assumes exponen-
tial discounting, predicts stable preferences. That is, although a
larger, later reward may be chosen over a smaller, sooner reward
when both are sufficiently delayed, as time passes and the delay
until both rewards is reduced equally, preference may reverse and
the smaller, sooner reward becomes the more attractive alterna-
tive. In the absence of some form of overt commitment, well-in-
tended resolutions frequently are broken as preference reverses.
Such inconsistency emerges naturally from hyperbolic discount-
ing and, according to Ainslie and others, provides compelling ev-
idence against exponential discounting.
Preference reversals, however, do not, in and of themselves,
rule out exponential discounting. If larger delayed rewards are dis-
counted less steeply than smaller delayed rewards, then exponen-
tial and hyperbolic discounting both lead to preference reversals
(see Fig. 1 in Green & Myerson 1993). This is important because
a number of studies have shown that discounting rate is, in fact,
inversely related to amount of reward (Chapman & Elstein 1995;
Green et al. 1997; Kirby 1997; Raineri & Rachlin 1993), and thus
an alternative method for distinguishing between exponential and
hyperbolic discounting models is needed. Curve fitting provides
such a method, and when exponential and hyperbolic functions
are fit to individual discounting data, the hyperbolic consistently
accounts for a larger proportion of the variance (Kirby &
Marakovic 1995; Myerson & Green 1995; Simpson & Vuchinich
2000).
As it turns out, curve fitting reveals that a hyperbola-like dis-
counting function in which the denominator is raised to a power
provides an even better fit to individual discounting data than ei-
ther an exponential or a simple hyperbola (Myerson & Green
1995; Simpson & Vuchinich 2000). More specifically, the power to
which the denominator is raised is often significantly less than 1.0,
and never significantly greater than 1.0. Moreover, often when the
data from an individual cannot be described by a simple hyper-
bola, it can be described by a hyperbola-like discounting function.
It is important to note that the hyperbola-like function preserves
the essential characteristic required by Ainslie’s framework –
steeper discounting at short delays and less steep discounting at
longer delays, rather than the constant (stationary) discounting
rate predicted by the exponential. Thus, although we disagree
with Ainslie’s argument against exponential discounting based on
preference reversals, nevertheless we agree with Ainslie’s bottom-
line conclusion that the discounting function is hyperbolic (or at
least hyperbola-like).
Studies in which curve fitting has been used to evaluate the
form of the discounting function almost always have examined
choice between an immediate and a delayed reward. An impor-
tant issue arises when choice involves two delayed rewards. In
such situations, people do not simply compare the present (hy-
perbolically discounted) values of the two rewards, as most be-
havioral-economic analyses of preference reversals, including
Ainslie’s, would imply. Neither does behavior conform to the pre-
dictions of an elimination-by-aspects decision process (Tversky
1972). For example, in a situation where one has to choose be-
tween a smaller reward available in one year and another, larger
reward available in two years, both alternatives share the common
aspect of a one-year wait, yet people do not ignore the common
one-year wait. Instead, recent work in our laboratory (Green et al.,
in press) suggests that discounting functions are still hyperbola-
like, but people give less-than-full weight to the common aspect
of the delays. By not taking the actual delays fully into account, in-
dividuals increase the likelihood that they will choose the sooner,
smaller reward, thereby exacerbating their problems with self-
control and furthering the “breakdown of will.”
Which brings us to the question of what is the best way to talk
about the important issues under consideration in Ainslie’s in-
sightful book. It should be clear to his readers that when Ainslie
refers to self-control, he means control of the self (in the sense of
control of one’s own thoughts and behavior), rather than control
by the self, and we strongly endorse his use of the term. A related
issue concerns the use of the term impulsivity, a term that does
not occur in the index to Breakdown of Will but which is increas-
ingly used by researchers to refer to the tendency to choose
smaller, sooner over larger, later rewards. Ainslie’s arguments
against a unitary faculty of willpower also apply to the notion of a
unitary trait of impulsivity, which appears to mean simply a lack of
willpower. According to the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of
Commentary/Ainslie: Précis of Breakdown of Will
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (2005) 28:5
655
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0140525X05280111
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Eastern Kentucky University, on 20 Nov 2019 at 18:38:06, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms.

Mental Disorders (DSM-IV, American Psychiatric Association
1994), for example, “the essential feature of Impulse-Control Dis-
orders is the failure to resist an impulse, drive, or temptation”
(p. 609) when the consequences are harmful. Thus, impulsivity
and lack of impulse control (an inhibition deficit, as it were) rep-
resent the modern version of a lack of willpower.
To Ainslie’s arguments against such constructs we would add
the fact that the degree to which individuals discount delayed re-
wards is positively (but weakly) correlated with the degree to
which they discount probabilistic rewards (Myerson et al. 2003).
A unitary faculty of willpower and an impulsivity trait both imply
that a negative correlation between temporal and probability dis-
counting should be observed. For instance, the term “impulsivity”
often is used to refer to both an unwillingness to wait for delayed
rewards and a willingness to gamble in the hope of getting larger
rewards. If the tendencies to discount steeply the value of delayed
rewards and a failure to discount the value of probabilistic rewards
were both reflections of a single, impulsive trait, then a negative
correlation would exist between temporal and probability dis-
counting. Our data are clearly inconsistent with this view.
In Breakdown of Will, Ainslie builds on his early insights into
the implications of hyperbolic discounting of delayed rewards. Us-
ing these insights as a foundation, he constructs a theoretical
framework that is able to account for violations of preference con-
sistency, violations that often are mistakenly viewed as represent-
ing failures of willpower or as the result of misjudgments about
oneself and the world. These mistaken views are represented in
many disciplines – economics, philosophy, and experimental, so-
cial, and clinical psychology – and it is to be hoped that Ainslie’s
book will provide a needed corrective. In addition, the book may
be of help to individuals seeking better control of their own be-
havior (not to mention providing fodder for the self-help indus-
try). In closing, we point out that we share with Ainslie the belief
that a better understanding of the fundamental properties of dis-
counting will shed light on the mechanisms that underlie both suc-
cesses and failures in controlling one’s own behavior. Our com-
ments on specific aspects of these fundamental properties (e.g.,
on the form of the discounting function and the relationship be-
tween temporal and probability discounting) are offered in the
hope of furthering such understanding.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
Support for the preparation of this commentary was provided by grant
MH55308 from the National Institute of Mental Health.
Comparing apples to oranges: 
Who does the framing?
Richard Griffin and Daniel Dennett
Center for Cognitive Studies, Tufts University, Medford, MA 02155.
Richard.Griffin@ tufts.edu
Daniel.Dennett@tufts.edu
http://www.ase.tufts.edu/cogstud/
Abstract: The idea of “bundling” lesser later rewards so they outweigh
smaller sooner rewards is compelling, but the sophisticated cognitive ac-
tivity involved in this bundling is not yet modeled; in particular the role of
language is hard to assess.
Contrary to the old adage, you can compare apples to oranges, but
if you want the results to be worthwhile, you have to do some
clever framing. Just “bundling” them together and weighing them
on some scale is not apt to give you a meaningful (or effective) re-
sult. Ainslie’s mathematical model is enticing, but he hasn’t yet
told us how the backstage carpenters do all the framing.
Ainslie (2001) wants to show how it is that we sometimes come
to maximize larger, later (LL) rewards in the face of the default
hyperbolic discounting so readily seen in nonhuman animals. He
suggests that choosing “according to a principle” or “bundling” can
approximate exponential discounting, overwhelming the smaller,
sooner (SS) rewards with the summed force of an imagined or at
least anticipated series of LL rewards. He also suggests that this
ability requires a self-awareness that is probably unavailable to
nonhumans. It probably requires language. In Ainslie’s model,
however, the bundles of LL rewards are simply summed and if the
value is high enough, this will trump the SS impulse. This is math-
ematically neat, but is it psychologically accurate? Does each bit
of the bundle have the same value? One voice, one vote? This
doesn’t seem likely. A pianist who likes to have several glasses of
wine at night might refrain from doing so because of a simple al-
beit value-laden reason: he has an important performance tonight.
What will he do in the future? It may depend on the importance
of the gig. A couple of glasses of Pinot Noir may be just the ticket
for a chamber rehearsal. The mechanism may be a summing func-
tion, but “I” get to prepare the bundles – indeed have to prepare
the bundles – before they are put on the scales. (What do you get
when you cross B. F. Skinner with J. P. Sartre? George Ainslie!)
Ainslie follows a tradition dating back to Plato when he pro-
poses disassembling this “I” into a group of lesser agents or agen-
cies, and composing the competence (and incompetence) of the
whole person out of the interactions of these subpersonal ho-
munculi, which he calls “interests.” There is nothing wrong with
this tactic so long as none of the homunculi are too smart. Here is
where Ainslie tempts fate somewhat. His interests are not like the
myopic and obedient clerks that populate most cognitive models
or even the eager-beaver competitive homunculi of pandemo-
nium models. Interests are more like different personalities than
subpersonal modules or cognitive organs. What is particularly
striking about them is that the rules or principles they bargain with
are explicitly expressed, not implicit somehow in the hardware.
We do not yet know how to devise mechanistic models that can
discharge such worldly sub-agencies, with their long time hori-
zons, world knowledge, and access to language.
Language is a tool for thinking, and thinking is a tool for doing
a lot of things, or not doing a lot of things. Children are often told
to “think before they act” and we often remind ourselves to do the
same. Indeed, research with children (and chimpanzees) shows
that learning apparently simple associations can be quite difficult
when prepotent responses are involved (e.g., pointing to a larger
food reward but receiving the smaller). Although perseverative er-
rors abound in these cases, they can be alleviated when symbols
are introduced as an intermediary. For instance, in tasks indexing
young children’s ability to deceive, 3-year-olds have great difficulty
actually pointing somebody in the wrong direction (it’s that-a-
way), though their performance increases dramatically if they use
an arrow symbol rather than their finger (Carlson et al. 1998).
There are many similar findings, and the dictum among develop-
mentalists might as well be “reduce/enhance the salience, reveal
the competence.” Language is just such an intermediary, and can
both reduce and enhance the salience of various phenomena. But
the conceptual/emotional structures of which language is part are
neither born of a cookie cutter nor are they immutable to change
over time, whether isolated or bundled.
What Ainslie provides, then, is a proposal about the architec-
ture of a model of choosing, rather than a model whose mode of
operation is already even sketched. This does not diminish the im-
portance of what he proposes. Inverting the modeler’s imagina-
tion, getting us all to see that our self-control (and its many prob-
lems, so revealingly analyzed by Ainslie) must somehow be
constructed out of the hyperbolically discounted urges that we are
born with, is a contribution that opens up new vistas. It is hyper-
bolic except when it is not, and that’s when things get interesting.
Commentary/Ainslie: Précis of Breakdown of Will
656
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (2005) 28:5
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0140525X05280111
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Eastern Kentucky University, on 20 Nov 2019 at 18:38:06, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms.

Is the evidence for hyperbolic discounting in
humans just an experimental artefact?
Glenn W. Harrisona and Morten Igel Laub
aDepartment of Economics, College of Business Administration, University of
Central Florida, Orlando, Florida 32816-1400; bCentre for Economic and
Business Research, Copenhagen Business School, DK-2000 Frederiksberg,
Denmark. Glenn.Harrison@bus.ucf.edu
mol@cebr.dk
http://www.bus.ucf.edu/gharrison
http://www.cebr.dk/mol
Abstract: We question the behavioral premise underlying Ainslie’s claims
about hyperbolic discounting theory. The alleged evidence for humans can
be easily explained as an artefact of experimental procedures that do not
control for the credibility of payment over different time horizons. In ap-
propriately controlled and financially motivated settings, human behavior
is consistent with conventional exponential preferences.
Ainslie’s (2001) book, Breakdown of Will, is based on hyperbolic
discounting theory. This theory predicts that the individual could
behave in a dynamically inconsistent manner, by holding and act-
ing on preferences at one point in time that contradict the pref-
erences of the same individual at a later date. However, before
worrying about ways that the individual could address possible dy-
namic inconsistencies, we need to be sure that the behavioral
premise is valid.
A critical design feature in the empirical literature on hyper-
bolic discounting is the use of a time delay to the early payment
option in order to control for any confounding effects from fixed
premia due to transactions costs. The use of this front end delay
(FED) means that one cannot differentiate between “quasi-hy-
perbolic preferences” and “exponential preferences,” and we do
not believe that any credible design can do so.
Ainslie concludes his discussion of the empirical evidence on
hyperbolic discounting with the following passage:
There is extensive evidence that both people and lower animals spon-
taneously value future vents in inverse proportion to their expected de-
lays. The resulting hyperbolic discount curve is seen over all time
ranges, from seconds to decades. Because a hyperbolic curve is more
bowed than the exponential curve that most utility theories go by, it de-
scribes a preference pattern that these theories would call irrational: It
predicts temporary preferences for the poorer but earlier of the two al-
ternative goals during the time right before the poorer alternative be-
comes available. (Ainslie 2001, p. 47)
This passage confounds three things. The first is whether the dis-
count rate varies with the length of the time horizon over which it
is being elicited, such as it does with continuously hyperbolic pref-
erences. The second is whether the discount rate for a given hori-
zon and elicited with a FED is different than the discount rate for
the same horizon and elicited with no FED. For an experimenter,
and for subjects evaluating the credibility of being paid, these are
very different questions. The potential importance of this distinc-
tion seems to have been first noticed by Benzion et al. (1989).1 It
was also highlighted by Roberts (1991, p. 344), in the context of
comments on Ainslie and Haendel (1983) and Winston and Wood-
bury (1991). The third issue is whether nonexponential prefer-
ences imply dynamic inconsistency when one relaxes the restric-
tive assumption of temporally separable preferences (Machina
1989; McClennan 1990).
The FED design was introduced into discount rate experiments
to address concerns about differential credibility. Although it may
not completely solve the potential credibility problem, it arguably
mitigates it. The FED also serves to equalize any other unspeci-
fied differences subjects may perceive between the two payment
options. For example, if subjects have a “passion for the present,”
they demand a premium in order to accept a delay of any length.
In a choice between immediate payment and delayed payment,
this premium is attached only to the delayed payment. Thus, the
subject is being asked to compare “good apples today” with “bad
apples tomorrow,” confounding the discount rate with the credi-
bility of receiving the commodity. However, if both payments are
delayed, the premium applies to both choices and thus becomes
irrelevant to a choice between them. Harrison et al. (2002) used a
FED in a major field experiment in Denmark, and found that
elicited discount rates are proximately invariant with respect to
horizon.
There are, however, many field settings in which the relevant
issue is what the discount rate is for “money today” versus “money
in the future.”2 Even if the experimenter faces the inferential
problem of having to then tease apart the effects of time horizon
from credibility, transactions, or other subjective costs, it is en-
tirely appropriate that experiments with no FED be considered.
If there is a finding that discount rates are not constant when there
is no FED, then it is a matter for interpretation as to whether this
is a subjective differential cost effect or a time-inconsistency ef-
fect (or both).
Evidence for the behavioral importance of a 30-day FED was
provided by Coller and Williams (1999). In one of their experi-
mental treatments they had no such delay, and the results from
those experiments can be directly compared to their other exper-
iments. After some minor modifications to their statistical analy-
sis, Coller and Williams’s results provide evidence that the use of
a FED decreases elicited rates by a large amount. The average ef-
fect of having no FED is to increase elicited rates by 28 percent-
age points, with a 95% confidence interval between 52 percent-
age points and 3 percentage points. Coller et al. (2003) provide
additional laboratory evidence on the role of the FED, and show
that a 7-day FED is sufficient to overcome the effects of subjec-
tive transactions costs.
Finally, there have been no direct tests of the implication of dy-
namically inconsistent choice behavior using real rewards. Such
longitudinal tests require that one allow for possible changes in
the states of nature that the subject faces, since they may confound
any in-sample comparisons of discount rate functions at different
points in time. Harrison et al. (2005) have reported the results of
a large-scale panel experiment undertaken in the field to examine
this issue and found evidence strikingly consistent with dynamic
consistency.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
We thank the Danish Social Science Research Council for research sup-
port under project No. 24-02-0124.
NOTES
1. Holcomb and Nelson (1992) reexamined the role of a FED with
monetary payoffs, motivated by a concern that Benzion et al. (1989) only
studied hypothetical choices. Their FED was only one day long, so it is not
obvious that the subjects viewed this as substantially different from there
being no FED. They observed no apparent effect of the one-day FED on
behavior.
2. Such settings might include individual decisions of whether to con-
sume now or save for future consumption, or to purchase a more expen-
sive but energy efficient appliance. We believe that individual decisions in-
volving more significant sums of money or public policy decisions are
better characterized as having a FED.
Shaping your past selves
Jeanne Peijnenburg
Faculty of Philosophy, University of Groningen, 9712 GL Groningen, The
Netherlands. Jeanne.Peijnenburg@rug.nl
Abstract: I propose to complement Ainslie’s idea of “bargaining with your
future selves” with that of “shaping your past selves.” The result of such a
complementation is that an action can work in two ways: (1) as a prede-
cent for future behavior and (2) as a shaper of past behavior. I argue that
this diminishes the unwanted effects of hyperbolic discounting even fur-
ther.
Weakness of will, or akrasia, comes in two different forms. Broad,
apparent, or diachronic akrasia covers cases where an agent fails
Commentary/Ainslie: Précis of Breakdown of Will
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (2005) 28:5
657
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0140525X05280111
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Eastern Kentucky University, on 20 Nov 2019 at 18:38:06, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms.

to stand by a previous decision about what he will do; strict, clear-
eyed, or synchronic akrasia comprises actions that go against an
overall judgement that the agent still considers the best at the time
of the action. Broad akrasia constitutes the easy problem: How
does one explain that an agent changes his mind? Strict akrasia
presents the hard problem: How does one understand that an
agent believes at time t1 that action A is the best, all things consid-
ered, and yet performs not-A at t1? Some have given short shrift
to the hard problem by declaring that strict akrasia is an illusion
(Socrates, notably); others have tried hard to solve it (e.g., Donald
Davidson, whose seminal work [Davidson 1969] spawned dozens
of papers and books on the subject).
Be that as it may, Ainslie’s (2001) book deals with the easy prob-
lem (where “easy” should of course be read tongue-in-cheek). For
Ainslie locates akrasia in reversals of preference that occur when-
ever an agent comes close to a tempting, lesser reward. Ainslie’s
explanation of this phenomenon is very original in that it is based
on the idea that broad akrasia is the rule, whereas its opposite –
enkrateia or strength of will – is the exception. Hence, the problem
is not why people do not stick to their guns, but rather, why they of-
ten do. Ainslie’s solution to that problem lies in the view of an agent,
P, as being a collection of agents P1, P2, and so on, at different times,
t1, t2, and so on. These P1, P2, . . . have different and often compet-
ing interests, but there are also interests that they all have in com-
mon. By cleverly bargaining together in the intrapersonal version of
a repeated Prisoner’s Dilemma, they might succeed in letting the
common interests prevail, thereby accounting for P’s strong will.
Ainslie’s explanation of enkrateia is ingenious, and if couched in
less technical jargon, it might well become a useful therapeutic in-
strument. However, it has a questionable implication as well. For
it presupposes that an earlier Pj must be interested in a later Pk,
and if P is a pitiable alcoholic, this presupposition is doubtful. The
hallmark of an addict suffering from weakness of will is that he
does not care how he will feel tomorrow or next year. (Ainslie de-
nies this on pp. 17–18, where he argues that a “rational addict”
does care about the future, because she “wouldn’t even try to kick
her habit.” What Ainslie means, of course, is that she would not
even try to kick her habit now. But this illustrates, contrary to what
Ainslie suggests, precisely her carelessness about the future. In the
usual sense of “caring about the future” the agent is able to see and
reason further than the present moment – something that an ad-
dict qua addict is unable to do.)
If an akrates were really to care about the future (in the usual
sense), the first step towards his recovery would have been taken.
Ainslie’s happy thought is to model this first step as a decision that
functions as a precedent for future decisions, and hence keeps
pace with a “personal rule” that, if followed, will generate a greater
reward in the end. Nonetheless, each Pi can still fall prey to hy-
perbolic discounting by choosing the earlier, sooner reward over
the larger, later one; and if he does, he can always logically claim
that this was a special case and not a violation of the general rule.
However, I think we can make this problem less pressing.
Imagine that I am a happily married mother of five. One day I
go to a party, where I dance and drink exuberantly, only to wake
up the following morning in a hotel bed next to an attractive man
whom I cannot recall having seen before. Although it seems all too
clear what happened, I still have some latitude in determining
what I have already done. In particular, I can make it the case,
through my future actions, that this adventure becomes either a
mere incident or the beginning of a long and secret affair.
This example shows that sometimes I can, to a certain extent,
determine my past actions. Moreover, my knowledge of the fact
that I have this possibility, and hence my understanding that I am
at a bifurcation point, might motivate me to pursue the one rather
than the other course. Thus, we have here another way of evading
the effect of hyperbolic discounting. For if choosing the larger,
later reward (continue a happy family life) simultaneously means
determining a past action (make my adventure a mere incident),
then the smaller, sooner reward (date the attractive stranger again)
loses much of its temptation. The reason for this is, of course, that
the shaping in retrospect of a past action is already very reward-
ing in itself. Similarly, when an alcoholic realizes that, through his
future actions, he can make a recent lapse become an exception
rather than a precedent for his future behavior, he might feel re-
lieved. Very likely this knowledge will diminish his feelings of fa-
talism and hopelessness, and make him more motivated to con-
template bargaining with his future selves in order to obtain the
larger, later reward.
I therefore propose that Ainslie’s idea of “bargaining with your
future selves” should be complemented with the idea of “shaping
your past selves.” The result of such a complementation is that an
action can work in two ways at the same time, that is, as a prece-
dent for future behavior and as a shaper of past behavior. This
means, to use Ainslie’s terms, that the behavior in question is not
pushed, but pulled (pp. 19, 69). However, it is now pulled more
strongly, for two forces are operating simultaneously. In Ainslie’s
metaphor, a future reward is pulling my present behavior into the
future. To this I have added the metaphor of a current reward that
is pulling my past behavior into the present. The resultant force is
greater than either of its components, and it may well recruit
strengthened motivation (cf. Peijnenburg 2004; forthcoming).
Problems with internalization
Howard Rachlin
Psychology Department, State University of New York at Stony Brook, Stony
Brook, NY 11794-2500. howard.rachlin@sunysb.edu
Abstract: Ainslie’s Breakdown of Will contains important insights into real
world self-control problems, but it loses testability to the extent that it in-
ternalizes concepts whose meaning lies in overt behavior and its conse-
quences.
Most psychologists who think about self-control tend to stop when
they have postulated two forces: a primary impulsive tendency to
consume an immediate reinforcer, and a more far-seeing tendency
(“the will,” in Ainslie’s terms) to resist such consumption when it
interferes with long-term goals. Breakdown of Will (Ainslie 2001)
shows conclusively that such a two-force conceptual scheme is to-
tally insufficient to describe almost any real-life motivational
dilemma. In our society of plenty, the far-seeing tendency itself
needs to be controlled. Otherwise, as Ainslie clearly points out, we
will be just as badly off as we would have been if we simply gave
in to all our impulses in the first place; indeed, we might be worse
off. This fascinating book contains a rich analysis of human moti-
vation and many deep and insightful descriptions of motivational
dilemmas.
Having said this, it might sound churlish to complain. Yet I do.
Although Ainslie takes care to relate the phenomena he discusses
to hyperbolic discounting – a fundamentally behavioral concep-
tion – he tends to treat hyperbolic discounting itself as an inter-
nal, nonbehavioral (or at least non-overtly behavioral) process.
Consequently, some of the discussion takes the form of a literary
essay (albeit finely wrought), rather than a scientific analysis. (See
particularly the discussion of indirection, pp. 187–96.)
At the root of this problem is Ainslie’s attitude towards mental
life in general; it is not behavioral enough. (I daresay most of the
other commentaries will complain that it is too behavioral.) There
is a paucity of empirical research described or cited and few sug-
gestions about how such research could be conducted, especially
in the later chapters. Instead, an internal arena is imagined with
behaviors, discriminative stimuli, and rewards – all concepts orig-
inally constructed to describe the interaction of the behavior of
whole organisms with their environments – interacting and com-
peting over time. This internalization of fundamentally external
concepts forces Ainslie to resort to internal “thought experiments”
like Newcomb’s problem (p. 134), rather than real experiments, as
evidence for his theory.
Commentary/Ainslie: Précis of Breakdown of Will
658
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (2005) 28:5
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0140525X05280111
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Eastern Kentucky University, on 20 Nov 2019 at 18:38:06, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms.

Before discussing Newcomb’s problem, let us consider a more
fundamental concept – the interaction of hyperbolic discount
functions. Ainslie writes as if they were internal forces – as if each
person has a set of them that he consults (consciously or uncon-
sciously) whenever he has to decide how to behave. But hyper-
bolic discount functions are most usefully conceived not as inter-
nal forces prior to behavior, efficiently causing behavior (that may
or may not be inhibited), but as descriptions or summaries of ac-
tual overt choices. If anyone has hyperbolic discount functions it
is the scientific observer, not the actor. The same goes for a per-
son’s intentions. Intentions are not singular internal events occur-
ring just prior to overt actions and causing those actions, but ac-
tual patterns of behavior – behavior of the whole organism (to use
Skinner’s phrase) over time.
Newcomb’s problem is interesting only if you believe that in-
tentions are something hidden deep inside a person, normally ac-
cessible only by introspection. Newcomb’s “powerful being” is a
mind reader who can divine those intentions and thus reward or
punish the person for intending one thing and doing another. But,
if our intentions are patterns of behavior extending into our pasts
as well as futures, anyone who knows us sufficiently well (our
friends, relatives, perhaps even psychoanalysts) could discover
them as well as we could ourselves. These are our true mind read-
ers – better than Newcomb’s “powerful being” (unless she can use
her power to become invisible and has the time to follow us
around wherever we go).
Imagine, nevertheless, that I actually had internal intentions
and that my vacation starts in two weeks. Today I intend to go to
the beach, but a week from now I change my mind and intend to
go to the mountains. Then, on the day before my vacation, I
change my mind again and intend to go to the beach. However,
the next day, I actually go to the mountains – as I have done on
60% of my previous vacations. Did I really do the opposite of what
I (internally) intended at the time or did I just have a weak inten-
tion to go to the mountains, as instantiated in my past behavior,
and act consistently with that intention? Alternatively, suppose,
despite my past tendency to go to the mountains, I went to the
beach this time and on every vacation thereafter for the next ten
years. You might look back then and say that I really did intend to
go to the beach this time. Or, you might not. What my intentions
actually are is a matter of how they may best be used to predict my
behavior. Identifying them with the operation of some cognitive
mechanism in my brain or what I may or may not say to myself or
to other people will detract from such use. What I say to other peo-
ple about my past, present, and future behavior is evidence of my
intentions, but it is not evidence of an internal state; it is evidence
of my past, present, and future behavior (including verbal behav-
ior). Newcomb’s “powerful being” could no more discover my in-
tentions by looking inside my head than she could discover the
path of a leaf as it falls by looking inside the leaf. Newcomb’s prob-
lem is a conceptual as well as a physical impossibility.
Personal rules are a kind of intention in the sense described
above. They are not internal forces bargaining with impulses in an
internal arena, striking a deal and only then causing overt behav-
ior; personal rules are descriptions of patterns in a person’s be-
havior over time accessible to observers (as well as the behaving
person). Rules with occasional violations (which Ainslie discusses
so insightfully) are just more abstract rules, hence more abstract
patterns. It is true, as Ainslie writes (p. 81), that a theory that says
rules are behavioral patterns ought to specify how those patterns
are formed and maintained. I have claimed (Rachlin 2000) that,
like simpler behavioral patterns, highly abstract patterns may be
shaped by extrinsic reinforcement (by parents and society at large
as well as by the nonhuman environment). The habit of develop-
ing abstract and temporally extended behavioral patterns may it-
self be shaped. The external reinforcers form a kind of scaffolding
for a structure like an arch that will stand by itself when finished.
Such patterns may then be maintained, because once fixed, they
prove to be of intrinsically of high value and are costly to disrupt.
A girl may learn to play an instrument by external reinforcement
but keep playing it by the intrinsic value of its pattern. Admittedly,
this is woefully insufficient as a theory. We need empirical tests
and evidence. But such a conception of personal rules is testable.
Thought experiments are fun and often illuminating (unlike New-
comb’s silly problem), but they cannot be used as evidence for a
theory of self-control, however brilliantly conceived that theory
may be.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This commentary was prepared with the assistance of a grant from NIH.
Behavioral (pico)economics and the brain
sciences
Don Rossa,b and David Spurrettc
aDepartments of Philosophy and Economics, University of Alabama at
Birmingham, AL 35294-1260; bSchool of Economics, University of Cape
Town, Rondebosch 7701, South Africa; cSchool of Philosophy and Ethics,
University of KwaZulu-Natal, Durban 4041, South Africa.
dross@commerce.uct.ac.za
spurrett@ukzn.ac.za
http://www.uab.edu/philosophy/ross.html
http://www.nu.ac.za/undphil/spurrett/
Abstract: Supporters of Ainslie’s model face questions about its integra-
tion with neuroscience. Although processes of value estimation may well
turn out to be locally implemented, methodological reasons suggest this is
less likely in the case of subpersonal “interests.”
Ainslie’s (2001) model of the function and pathologies of the will
exploits two main ideas. The first, hyperbolic discounting of de-
layed rewards, predicts the intertemporal inconsistency which is
the problem facing the will. The second, bargaining among sub-
personal interests, is the motivational competition arising, given
intertemporal inconsistency, that in turn is the will.
We think Ainslie’s model is an elegant, powerful, and exciting
contribution to behavioral economics. What about the brain? Any-
one concerned with how the sciences hang together will want to
know more about the relations between the sort of behavioral sci-
ence Ainslie’s Breakdown of Will exemplifies, and what the brain
sciences tell us about neural processes of reward estimation. The
recent and rapid rise of neuroeconomics makes questions about
these relationships especially pressing.
Consider discounting first. Besides discounting for delays,
agents have reason to discount for decreased likelihood, for infla-
tion, and perhaps for other separations between themselves and
rewards that are not simply temporal. Behavioral data is itself
equivocal on the extent to which there is a single discounting sys-
tem or several. Ostaszewski et al. (1998), for example, found dis-
sociation between discounting for delay and for inflation.
In any event, what appears basic from a behavioral perspective
may not be implemented in a simple or unified way in the brain.
Observed hyperbolic temporal discounting need neither be pro-
duced by a dedicated “discounting module” nor involve the ac-
tivity of any neural subsystem that itself computes a hyperbolic
function. Recent research in neuroscience suggests a range of pos-
sibilities, of which we draw attention to three. Montague and
Berns (2002) show that steeper than exponential discounting can
arise from the combination of exponential discounting of the value
of a future reward with growing uncertainty that the reward will
arrive the further into the future it is expected. McClure et al.
(2004) propose that the existence of distinctive neural systems for
appraising imminent and delayed rewards may explain an overall
pattern of steeper than exponential discounting. Finally, Tanaka et
al. (2004) argue both for separate neural systems differentially re-
cruited for appraising immediate and delayed rewards, and for the
existence of structured neural maps of multiple time scales in
brain regions involved in reward prediction.
These results are neither straightforwardly complementary nor
are they in definite conflict, partly because comparison of their re-
Commentary/Ainslie: Précis of Breakdown of Will
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (2005) 28:5
659
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0140525X05280111
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Eastern Kentucky University, on 20 Nov 2019 at 18:38:06, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms.

sults and methods is impeded by differences between the specific
task designs in each case. Ongoing research will extend and refine
our understanding of the implementation of value estimation for
rewards at different times, including how the implementation is
fractionated into multiple neural subsystems. This fractionation,
and the consequent possible dissociations that might, in turn, be
experimentally investigated, can be expected to help explain vari-
ous behavioral pathologies.
These issues draw attention to a general methodological ques-
tion raised by the ongoing, multiplex integration of economics
with cognitive science, through neuroeconomics and through
Ainslie’s “picoeconomics” simultaneously. Economic theory has
traditionally not presumed or imposed any particular ontological
assumptions about the behavioral units over which it generalizes
(Davis 2003; Ross 2005). These are, in different economic mod-
els, variously whole biological people, time slices of people, firms,
nations, animals, and even species (Vermaij 2004). The basis for
this ontological permissiveness – which is the source of economic
theory’s generalizing power – lies in the fact that an economic
agent is just a utility or fitness-maximization function. Which of
these there are in the world isn’t typically something we can sim-
ply observe. Instead, agents are inferred in the construction of
economic models. We observe a class of states in some system that
seem relatively resistant to perturbation, and infer that it repre-
sents an equilibrium in some dynamics or comparative statics of
that system. Then we posit agents whose strategic or competitive
interaction would yield the equilibrium in question.
This method is fairly clearly the one by which Ainslie supposes
that we should infer subpersonal interests in picoeconomic mod-
els. The alternative possibility would be to independently identify
brain regions (groups of neurons) that appear to track value and
contribute to behavioral syntheses in relatively modular ways.
However, various remarks of Ainslie’s seem to set him against this
approach. For example:
[I]nterests are limited in their duration of dominance, but not neces-
sarily in their access to any of the functions that compose the “self” in
any of its definitions . . . [L]ike parties trying to rule a country, internal
interests gain access to most of a person’s resources when they prevail.
The person who wants to stay up later at night and the person who wants
to rest in the morning are indeed entire personalities, in the sense that
they have the whole person’s psychic apparatus at their disposal; and yet
they are clearly in conflict with one another. When an intelligent per-
son is acting in his long-range interest not to smoke, he may use that in-
telligence to devise better stratagems to precommit his future behav-
ior; but when he acts in his short-range interest to have a cigarette, he
can marshall that same intelligence to evade these devices. (Ainslie
1992, p. 94)
Thus, in the tradition of behaviorism that has dominated eco-
nomics for many years, Ainslie regards interests as descriptions of
molar patterns in behavior. We suggest that this kind of theoreti-
cal interpretation is best understood by reference to Dennett’s
(1987) so-called “intentional stance” (Ross 2005). As Dennett has
long argued, subpersonal agents identified in this way should not
generally be expected to reduce to units individuated by the “bot-
tom-up” strategies of neuroscience.
We would not favor any attempt at a sweeping philosophical
“solution” to the question about how picoeconomic interests will
turn out to relate to neuroeconomic units. It seems to us correct
to say that neuroeconomics should identify constraints on the in-
formational dynamics in terms of which intrapersonal bargaining
games go on. But this doesn’t directly address questions about po-
tential mismatches in individuation principles over subpersonal
agents. For now, we simply warn against premature attempts to
locate picoeconomic interests directly in neuronal structures. This
straightforward sort of “bottom-up” approach to theory construc-
tion has seldom been wholly successful in the behavioral sciences,
and it has historically served economists especially poorly.
Freud meets Skinner: Hyperbolic curves,
elliptical theories, and Ainslie Interests
Federico Sanabria and Peter R. Killeen
Department of Psychology, Arizona State University, Tempe, AZ 85287-1104.
Federico.Sanabria@asu.edu
Killeen@asu.edu
http://www.asu.edu/clas/psych/research/blab/
http://www.asu.edu/clas/psych/people/faculty/pkilleen.html
Abstract: Ainslie advances Freud’s and Skinner’s theories of homunculi
by basing their emergent complexity on the interaction of simple algo-
rithms. The rules of competition and cooperation of these interests are un-
derspecified, but they provide a new way of thinking about the basic ele-
ments of conditioning, particularly conditioned stimuli (CSs).
A mere inconsistency in conduct from one moment to the next
is perhaps no problem, for a single self could dictate different
kinds of behavior from time to time. But there appear to be
two selves acting simultaneously and in different ways when
one self controls another or is aware of the activity of another.
–B. F. Skinner (1953, p. 284)
If Freud dropped the ball when tackled by modern critics (see
Ainslie 2001, p. 9), Ainslie has recovered it and is making great for-
ward progress. Why has it taken so long to meld the best of Freud
and Skinner? By drawing an image of the human psyche as a ne-
gotiation, not among Skinner’s two selves or Freud’s three, but
among a host of economic interests imbued with simple operating
characteristics, Ainslie accomplishes much more with the meta-
phor than did the giants on whose shoulders he stands.
In complexity theory, gross outcomes issue from competition
among many elements governed by simple algorithms. The com-
plex behavior of ant colonies arises from a network of such algo-
rithms (Hutchinson & Gigerenzer 2005). In Ainslie’s system, the
elements are Interests, and their primary operating characteristics
are the central theme of the book – hyperbolic discounting. Just
as carriers of AI “genes” mix and morph, so do Interests in Ainslie’s
mental life, often overriding one another, sometimes riding one
another, with relative strengths depending on proximity to re-
wards. Because such concatenation would usually be unproduc-
tive, Ainslie needs an ego (Fodor’s [1983] executive module?) to
play cop. But no ex machina machinery need apply for top ego-
cop in this self-organizing theory. Instead, Ainslie leaves it to the
Interests to negotiate, replacing the homunculus with a host of
agents. This is not so bad as it sounds, if their operating algorithms
are few and simple. But this part needs work. Let us hope that the
present précis by Ainslie will draw workmates to help replace this
ellipsis with models and data.
A recurring theme in the book is the relation between hyper-
bolic discounting and the “rational” standard, exponential dis-
counting. Without a story for that relation, Ainslie’s theory is a
“Dutch Book.” Accumulating hyperbolically discounted rein-
forcers may provide the needed approximations to temporally
consistent choices. If organisms in their niche always “bundled”
reinforcers to solve intertemporal inconsistencies, researchers
would rarely speak of hyperbolic discounting, except when extra-
neous agents “unbundled” discount functions. As Ainslie points
out, however, inconsistencies are too common for exponential dis-
counting to be the rule. It appears that the neat ramp up to the ra-
tional tower of temporal consistency is a kluge of multiple ramps
of discordant slope. But hyperbolic discounting is insufficient. We
need a chemistry of intra-individual interests. When are they bun-
dled? When broken down? When parasitized? Without clear the-
oretical groundings, Ainslie’s models (p. 208, note 14) reduce to
mathematical prosthetics for exponential discounting. We need to
identify adaptive biological and behavioral processes that deliver
hyperbolic discounting. Some candidates are the following:
Reinforcer expiration. The hyperbolic shape of temporal dis-
count functions may be a fixed property of behavior that evolved
in contexts where preference reversals optimized reinforcement
rate (Logue 1988). Such a scenario often involves non-constant
Commentary/Ainslie: Précis of Breakdown of Will
660
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (2005) 28:5
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0140525X05280111
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Eastern Kentucky University, on 20 Nov 2019 at 18:38:06, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms.

rates of reinforcer expiry. When predators compete, prey that are
not attacked quickly may not be attacked at all, and be left either
to maintain the prey population, or to feed a competitor. Rational
impulsiveness becomes irrational only in modern times, when
banks and groceries ensure longevity of some reinforcers. Other
reinforcers, such as sexual partners, maintain selection pressure
for alacrity.
Smaller-sooner versus larger-later? Temporal inconsistencies
may rarely occur naturally, but may be manufactured by the
“smaller-sooner versus larger-later” (SSLL) experimental para-
digm. SSLL appears to be designed to model the choices between
temptations and virtues that modern human-regulated environ-
ments offer, yet it fails to capture the relevant features of the en-
vironment of nonhuman organisms – an environment similar to
that in which human behavior presumably evolved. Foragers, for
instance, sequentially exploit depleting food patches, continu-
ously facing the choice between staying and leaving the currently
exploited patch. Blue jays nearly maximize food intake when these
contingencies are simulated in the laboratory, but not when fac-
ing an economically equivalent SSLL preparation (Stephens &
Anderson 2001).
Whether shaped through natural selection or provoked through
experimentation, hyperbolic discounting may be the expression of
more general – and adaptive – behavioral processes. Let us con-
sider two candidate processes: sensory/temporal discriminability,
and Pavlovian conditioning.
Relative discriminability. Adding a constant delay to both rein-
forcers may turn an “impulsive” subject into a “self-controlled”
one; it also makes both delays less discriminable, while the dis-
criminability of amount remains unchanged. Human participants
in temporal discounting experiments may be subject to an analo-
gous – verbally mediated – phenomenon: Most humans can dis-
tinguish goods attainable with $10 versus $100, but not with $910
versus $1,000. The role of the discriminability of reinforcement
delays and amounts on intertemporal choice is yet unknown, but
the ubiquity of Weber’s law suggests its potential significance.
Approach gradients? A key property of signals of reinforce-
ment is that they become both conditioned reinforcers, or CRs,
and conditioned stimuli, or CSs, eliciting approach (Hearst &
Jenkins 1974). Is this the behavioral substrate of desire, of ap-
petite? If so, then Ainslie’s hyperbolic interests, Skinner’s CRs,
and Pavlov’s CSs are the same entity. A theory of one is a theory
of all. Ainslie offers the opportunity to embed the hoary study of
CRs in the neomodern study of genetic algorithms and artificial
life. This would reinvigorate conditioning theory, promising a
much richer and more certain application to the human condition.
The irrationality of hyperbolic discounting may be an awkward
by-product of the demands of (a) rapid cultural evolution on hu-
man behavior, and (b) experimental attempts to generate such dis-
tortions in nonhuman behavior. What would life be like if we dis-
counted exponentially? Hyperbolae may remain the best way to
wire homo economicus in this post-modern era of Internet forag-
ing. Simulations, anyone? The winners in such round-robin Axel-
rod competitions will probably find themselves equipped with
modules that owe more to Skinner than to Freud; but it would not
be inappropriate to call the modules “Ainslies.”
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
Preparation of this commentary was supported by NSF IBN 0236821 and
NIMH 1R01MH066860 grants.
On the coexistence of cognitivism 
and intertemporal bargaining
Keith E. Stanovich
Department of Human Development and Applied Psychology, University of
Toronto, Toronto, Ontario M5S 1V6, Canada. kstanovich@oise.utoronto.ca
http://tortoise.oise.utoronto.ca/~kstanovich/index.html
Abstract: Although Ainslie rejects cognitivism as providing an explanation
of willpower, a type of nonhomuncular cognitivism is hiding in his own pro-
posal. The key mental mechanism of aggregating individual decisions (bun-
dled reframings) involves representation and decoupling operations en-
compassed within the analytic system of dual-process mental architectures.
Like others (e.g., Dennett 2003), I am immensely impressed with
Ainslie’s subtle interpretation of the concept of will as intertem-
poral bargaining (Ainslie 2001). I would like to explore the idea of
marrying his ideas of intertemporal bargaining with cognitivism in
the form of dual-process theories of reasoning (Evans 2003; Kah-
neman & Frederick 2002; Sloman 1996; Stanovich 1999; 2004).
In his book, Ainslie is perhaps rightly scornful of traditional cog-
nitivist views of the will that posited little more than a homuncu-
lus standing outside the emotions. But more contemporary dual-
process accounts share more features with Ainslie’s intertemporal
bargaining view.
First, dual-process models are closer to multi-entity bargaining
views than it may seem, because such models are really about a
multitude of processes, not just two. What has been termed, per-
haps misleadingly, System 1 (Kahneman & Frederick 2002;
Stanovich 1999), is really a whole set of autonomous processes –
processes given the term autonomous because: (1) their execution
is rapid, (2) their execution is mandatory when the triggering stim-
uli are encountered, (3) they are not dependent on input from
high-level control systems, and (4) they can operate in parallel.
In contrast to the autonomous set of systems stands the nonau-
tonomous system(s) – sometimes going under the name of ana-
lytic processing – with the opposite set of properties. Analytic cog-
nitive processes are serial, rule-based, often language-based, and
computationally expensive. The analytic system carries out two
critical processes. First, it is responsible for sustaining the decou-
pling of representations from the world so that cognitive simula-
tions can be run which test the outcomes of imaginary actions
(Currie & Ravenscroft 2002; Dienes & Perner 1999; Nichols &
Stich 2003; Perner 1991). Secondly, the analytic system can over-
ride responses triggered by the autonomous system.
Hyperbolic discounting provides a wonderful and heretofore
missing explanation of where the analytic system gets the motiva-
tional force to override the autonomous systems that are responsi-
ble for preference reversals in conflicts between short-term and
long-term interests. The bundling of rewards extended over time
turns hyperbolic curves into exponential ones (at least temporarily,
subject, of course, to the many other subtle bargaining effects that
Ainslie’s book details so ingeniously). However, there is much ref-
erence in Ainslie’s book to bundling choices together, to choosing
on the basis of principle, and to aggregating choices into categories.
Now this kind of talk hides a lot of cognitivism – but in this case I
think it is the good kind of cognitivism and not the bad kind that
Ainslie spurns at the beginning of his book. Bundles, categories,
principles – these are representations, often formed using the
quasi-linguistic representational formats of the analytic system.
The bundles or principles represent an alternative framing of the
situation (one that yields exponential discounting rather than hy-
perbolic discounting). If the bundled frame dominates, then the
long-term interest wins out. If the unbundled, single-choice frame
dominates, then the short-term interest wins out. This type of rep-
resentational redescription (see Karmiloff-Smith 1992) is much fa-
cilitated by language (and the discrete categories it provides). Us-
ing linguistic rules to rapidly implement new goal hierarchies is a
quintessential function of the nonautonomous analytic system.
Likewise, I suspect that metarepresentation (another unique
Commentary/Ainslie: Précis of Breakdown of Will
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (2005) 28:5
661
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0140525X05280111
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Eastern Kentucky University, on 20 Nov 2019 at 18:38:06, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms.

analytic system function not within the capability of autonomous
systems) would be implicated if we fully unpacked the mecha-
nisms behind bundling, aggregating, or implementing a rule. At
some point before the rule is fully instantiated, the first-order
preference for the short-term reward has undergone a critique
(the person realizes that they prefer to prefer otherwise).
Finally, Ainslie is clear that the reward bundling process criti-
cally implicates a self-prediction process (“a big part of this pic-
ture is her expectation of how she’ll choose at later times,” p. 131).
However, these self-predictions are cognitive representations
used in simulations in what some investigators call the Possible
World Box (PWB; Nichols & Stich 2003), and sustaining the PWB
is cognitively effortful (Glenberg 1997; Stanovich 2001; 2004).
Ainslie has given us an insightful explanation of the motivational
force that sustains the PWB.
I suspect that such dual-process explanations generalize to sit-
uations and effects not involving intertemporal discounting (e.g.,
probability matching, conjunction fallacies, various non-Bayesian
responses). I have argued (Stanovich 2004) that many fallacies in
the heuristics and biases literature arise from conflicts between
autonomous systems more geared to genetic fitness maximization
(i.e., to subpersonal entities not maximizing at the level of the in-
dividual) and analytic system procedures geared toward personal
utility maximization. Ainslie edges toward this view when he posits
(p. 45) that hyperbolic discounting might have been fitness maxi-
mizing at the expense of the individual organism, and when he al-
lows for bundling to be facilitated by “executive processes that find
bright lines” (p. 99).
Ainslie’s view is consistent with dual-process theorists (Evans &
Over 2004; Stanovich 2004) who emphasize that the bundling of
choices into rules is evolutionarily unprecedented (“certainly a
novelty in nature . . . a rather artificial process unlikely to have
arisen in lower animals”; Ainslie 2001, p. 146), but he parts com-
pany with most of us in his view that “we apparently used the same
intelligence that created this impulse problem to find a way
around it”; p. 146). Autonomous processes create the problem of
making us prone to responses that serve ancient interests of ge-
netic fitness but not current personal utility maximization, and
they lack a host of features necessary to overcome the problem,
including: the ability to decouple from primary representations,
the ability to create possible worlds and run simulations in them,
and the ability to metarepresent. These processes – necessary to
perceive an alternative world that better serves personal long-
term interests and to take actions that bring about that world – are
fundamentally different from the ballistic and automatically trig-
gered features of autonomous systems.
In short, Ainslie adds the motivational component missing in
most dual-process theories; whereas the latter deal extensively
with the linguistic bracketing, cognitive decoupling, and simula-
tion operations that are the mechanisms lying underneath the
bundling and aggregating of choices. I see great potential for en-
riching dual-process theory with the insights from Ainslie’s very
nuanced attempt at a scientifically valid elucidation of the ancient
concept of willpower.
“To do or not to do?” Modeling the control 
of behavior
John D. Swaina and James E. Swainb
aPhysics Department, High Energy Group, Northeastern University, Boston,
MA 02115-5000; bChild Study Center, Yale University School of Medicine,
New Haven, CT 06520. john.swain@cern.ch
james.swain@yale.edu
Abstract: The author of this fascinating book explores the problem of de-
cision-making. As a basis, he uses hyperbolic discounting theory to discuss
many basic assumptions related to self-control. In an accessible conversa-
tional tone, he succeeds in capturing many current problems in decision
science and presents a rational framework for further work.
Rewards in the far future tend to be valued less than rewards in
the more immediate future. The way in which future value is de-
creased seems to constitute a “breakdown of will,” in that choices
are often made that seem not to favor the overall best outcome.
Assignment of reduced value to a delayed reward is expressed in
terms of “discounting,” and arguments are made that rational dis-
counting should be done according to an exponential function.
Such a distribution is well known in essentially all the sciences and
follows from expressions of the form “rate of change of V with re-
spect to time is proportional to the value of V itself at that time.”
It embodies an assumption that there is no change in the form of
the solution if time is delayed by some constant.
Ainslie (2001) points out the rather striking fact that people do
not discount rewards according to a relationship of this sort.
If I asked a roomful of people to imagine that they’ve won a contest and
can choose between a certified cheque for $100 that they can cash im-
mediately and a postdated certified check for $200 that they can’t cash
for three years, more than half of the people usually say they would
rather have the $100 now. If I then asked what about $100 in six years
versus $200 in nine years virtually everyone picks the $200. But this is
the same choice seen at six years’ distance. (p. 33)
An exponential discounting function is incompatible with this be-
havior, so clearly, some other sort of discounting must take place
favoring early rewards over later ones more strongly. The beauty
of this sort of quantitative measure of reward and time is that the
discounting function can actually be computed (or, more properly,
estimated) from experiments. The result is that the data are well
described, not by an exponential discounting, but by a hyperbolic
one, that is, the perceived value at time t from now falls off as 1/t.
Such a hyperbolic discounting has significant qualitative differ-
ences both at early and late times. At very early times, it in fact ex-
plodes, requiring a modification to render it finite, so that 1/t must
be replaced by an expression of the form 1/(t  a). It very strongly
favors immediate rewards. At very late times, however, it falls off
more slowly than an exponential decay, making very long-term re-
wards more appealing than they would be for an exponential dis-
counting. These twin features, argues Ainslie, can go a long way
towards explaining both the fact that we tend to favor immediate
gratification over mid-term gratification, and yet we can also plan
for events far into the future.
From the point of view of the physical sciences, it is interesting
to examine the origins of the distributions in order to see why hy-
perbolic discounting might be favored. Any discounting formula
must come from an expression of the form “rate of change of value
is some function of value and time.” Exponential discounting, as
described earlier, assumes no special time (so the function re-
ferred to is independent of time), and it also assumes that there is
no special value – the rate of discounting is proportional to the
value already there. Hyperbolic discounting assumes, on the other
hand, that discounting is proportional to the square of the value,
and although it introduces no special time, the solution in fact fa-
vors the special time t  0, or “now.”
Under conditions of great stability, where there is no special
time, and “now” is much the same as “tomorrow” or “next year,”
and there is no special urgency attached to a large versus small
value, one might well expect a simple exponential discounting, and
indeed, this is what one sees in finance with respect to interest
rates. Constant interest rates reflect stable times, whereas inter-
est rates that change with time represent deviations from strict ex-
ponential discounting.
In nature, for the most part, there is little reason to expect this
sort of stability. Lifespan is certainly finite, and most people would
have little interest in waiting for 1,000 years versus 1,003 for the
experiment with the cashiers’ cheques. Even more pressing is the
evolutionarily critical ability to reproduce, and Ainslie does sug-
gest that a gene-driven urge to somehow reproduce “now,” for “to-
morrow” we could be dead, would seem to motivate hyperbolic
discounting. Ainslie also hints at the role of nonlinearities, and al-
though he only begins the discussion of what could be a very wide
Commentary/Ainslie: Précis of Breakdown of Will
662
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (2005) 28:5
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0140525X05280111
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Eastern Kentucky University, on 20 Nov 2019 at 18:38:06, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms.

field of inquiry, it is easy to see how nonlinearities could come into
play. Suppose that instead of the offers with $100 or $200, one had
100 or 200 seeds, and further suppose that by planting the seeds
one could have 100 seeds yield 1,000 in one year. Now delaying
acceptance of 100 seeds to get 200 seeds three years later is clearly
foolish – one will be well ahead of the game with 100 seeds now!
Here, however, one sees a difference with seeds in that they do
not have so much a fixed value, as a value that itself can increase
over time. Similar effects can arise for coupled resources and in
cooperative systems. In a leading approximation, the simplest
nonlinear modification of the equation leading to exponential dis-
counting will generically lead to hyperbolic discounting.
How far hyperbolic discounting will ultimately go to resolve
deep questions about the human will, remains to be seen, but
Ainslie makes it clear that, at the very least, defining rational be-
havior as that which would correspond to exponential discounting
(and thus to assumptions about uniformity of conditions in time
and the lack of any nonlinearities) is flawed. More complex dis-
counting algorithms are certainly conceivable, but both from gen-
eral arguments and a wealth of experimental data, it seems that
hyperbolic discounting goes a long way towards capturing the ba-
sic spirit of these.
This is a well organized and reasonably priced, accessible book
– useful for any behavioral scientists interested in a deeply con-
sidered introduction to the topic of decision science.
Reference point-dependent tradeoffs in
intertemporal decision making
X. T. Wang and Jeffrey S. Simons
Psychology Department, University of South Dakota, Vermillion, SD 57069.
xtwang@usd.edu
jsimons@usd.edu
http://www.usd.edu/~xtwang/
http://www.usd.edu/~jsimons/
Abstract: We agree with Ainslie’s general approach to intertemporal
choices and self-control. However, we argue that a concept of “will” is su-
perfluous in explaining tradeoffs between SS (smaller and sooner) and LL
(larger and later) rewards in a framework of temporal goal setting and goal
aggregation. We provide an alternative framework of reference point-de-
pendent tradeoffs between SS and LL options.
Ainslie (2001) brings human choices out of the realm of rational
maximization of economic goods and into a psychological world of
motivation, temptation, and risk preferences. We agree with his
general approach to studying risky choices and self-control in a
framework of temporal goal setting and goal aggregation. Ainslie
suggests that “will” can be viewed as being the effect of aggregat-
ing goals over time to determine choice. This hypothesis affords
some interesting reasons as to why people would prefer smaller
and sooner options (e.g., cognitive deficits that make the aggrega-
tion of goals difficult; a foreshortened sense of the future; experi-
ence with unpredictable environments; self-efficacy in achieving
long-term goals, etc.).
However, we argue that in a framework of goal settings and goal
aggregation, a concept of will as an explanatory construct is su-
perfluous. We propose a new conceptual framework of reference
point (goal or a minimum requirement) dependent tradeoffs be-
tween SS and LL rewards to account for intertemporal decision-
making and self-control.
Ainslie’s description of will as aggregated choice is a potentially
rich and informative perspective. However, Ainslie’s conceptual-
ization of the will is primarily descriptive, yet the construct of will
in psychology is mainly promoted as explanatory. He defines
“strong” will as the aggregation of future choice points to facilitate
choosing longer, later (LL) over shorter, sooner (SS). He suggests
that “strong” will manifests when the SS/LL choice is viewed as a
class of choices and that choosing SS at one point in time is per-
ceived as promoting SS choices at each successive time point.
Ainslie states that individual differences in aggregation rules lead
to adaptive or maladaptive consequences of the functioning of the
will. What we do not know is how people develop variations of
these aggregation rules, how some are able to view the aggrega-
tion of choices against SS as more reinforcing than the current
choice for SS. The answer to that question provides explanatory
power and yet this seems largely untouched in Ainslie’s conceptu-
alization of the will.
Contrary to the assumption indicated in Ainslie’s book, that LL
rewards are always superior to their SS alternatives, we intend to
demonstrate that some ostensibly irrational and impulsive behav-
iors in favor of SS rewards over LL ones can be both normative
and adaptive, given that risky choices are bounded by goals and
deadlines in life.
The last three decades have witnessed great theoretical and em-
pirical developments in the studies of reference points in human
decision-making regarding risk (e.g., Heath et al. 1999; Kahneman
& Tversky 1979; Lopes 1987; Tversky & Kahneman 1981) and in
foraging behavior of nonhuman animals (e.g., Kacelnik & Bateson
1997; Stephens & Krebs 1986).
In making intertemporal decisions between SS and LL rewards,
the process of approaching a goal (G) can be viewed as a process
of status quo (SQ) improvement, whereas the process of falling to-
wards a minimum requirement (MR) can be seen as a process of
SQ deterioration. As illustrated in Figure 1, when faced with SS
and LL alternatives, the choice becomes a tradeoff between the
amount and the delay of rewards with reference to distances to the
upper- and lower-bound reference points (i.e., G and MR).
For an upward expected SQ over time, SS should be preferred
to LL (SS  LL) if SS can reach a goal earlier. SS (or any choice)
should be preferred whenever it will be sufficient for reaching the
goal state. The upper middle arrow is LL in respect to the upper
left arrow, but SS in respect to the upper right, yet in either case
it should be preferred because it moves the person past the goal.
Essentially, the crucial determinant is not maximizing value but
minimizing the goal discrepancy as quickly as possible (cf. Carver
et al. 1996). Outcomes that fall both below or both above a refer-
ence point (a goal or a minimum requirement) are expected to be
more similar in their psychological values, whereas outcomes that
are located on different sides of a reference point are expected to
be markedly different in psychological values.
For a downward expected SQ over time, LL options should be
Commentary/Ainslie: Précis of Breakdown of Will
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (2005) 28:5
663
Upward SQ
Goal
Time
MR
Downward SQ
Value
Figure 1 (Wang & Simons).
Expected future gains on top of ei-
ther an upward status quo (SQ) trajectory or a downward status
quo trajectory. The length of the arrows represents the amount
(value) of rewards (gains) at different time points. MR  mini-
mum requirement.
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0140525X05280111
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Eastern Kentucky University, on 20 Nov 2019 at 18:38:06, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms.

preferred to the SS alternatives (LL  SS), provided that the de-
lay will not allow the person to fall or remain below the MR. How-
ever, SS options should be preferred when they can keep the SQ
above the MR or bring the SQ above the MR sooner than LL al-
ternatives. In the case illustrated in the lower part of the figure,
the medium gain would be superior to the largest gain (SS  LL)
because survival cannot be delayed. A starved man needs any food
that can feed him instead of a delayed larger supply. As the SQ ap-
proaches the MR in time, the temporal difference is vital, but the
amount difference is functionally null.
This analysis suggests that some impulsive behavior such as
drug use and unprotected sex may not be simply a result of intox-
ication or cognitive deficit, but adaptive reactions to perceived
goal distance and to subjective estimation of SQ trajectory, which
may or may not be accurate. That is, if one is below, or perceived
to be falling below a MR, the option that most quickly returns the
person to above the MR should be favored. Though the projected
outcome of the LL may be superior, the individual is unable to be
sustained below the MR to reach the LL choice point in time.
Hyperbolic discounting functions provide a general mathemat-
ical expression of psychological mechanisms of intertemporal de-
cision-making. However, the functions themselves are not psy-
chological mechanisms and seem not to be congruent with a
framework of reference-dependent decision-making.
Author’s Response
A bazaar of opinions mostly fit within
picoeconomics
George Ainslie
Veterans Affairs Medical Center, Department 116A, Coatesville, PA 19320
and Temple Medical College, Philadelphia, PA 19140.
George.Ainslie@va.gov
www.Picoeconomics.com
Abstract: The will has generated a wider range of opinions than
most phenomena, lacking as it does both an animal model and
consistent behavioral correlates. It has even been held not to ex-
ist. The commentators approached my intertemporal bargaining
(picoeconomic) model from many angles. Doubts about the exis-
tence of the underlying phenomenon, hyperbolic discounting,
were still raised by some, but other commentators added to the
evidence for it, which I regard now as overwhelming. Where
mechanisms of self-control were specified, I found it possible to
place them within a picoeconomic framework.
R1. Introduction
My purpose has been to show the feasibility of a bottom-up
model of choice-making, one that starts with the simple re-
ward-seeking processes observable in most animals and
combines these processes by simple principles so that, once
a capacity for foresight and self-perception is added, it pre-
dicts the familiar nuanced experience of an autonomous
ego. The commentators have made useful suggestions
about each stage of this model, and have given me occasion
to clarify many aspects of it in ways I had not thought of be-
fore. Most of their analyses start with the seminal empirical
finding of hyperbolic discounting, which still seems to be
controversial. Section R2 concerns the intertemporal con-
flict implied by this finding, and several commentators’ cri-
tiques of the idea that internal interests based on conflict-
ing rewards create a self in the form of a marketplace (dis-
cussed further in sect. R3). One commentary encouraged
my alternative approach to classical conditioning (sect. R4).
The greatest number of commentators addressed the ca-
pacity of a modified repeated prisoner’s dilemma game in
this marketplace to generate strength of will (sect. R5), a
mechanism that also gives a rationale for the experience of
freedom of will (sect. R6). My suggestion that thought ex-
periments can provide valid data on this kind of recursive
internal process was addressed in the case of the least
straightforward of my examples, Newcomb’s problem (sect.
R7). Finally, since most of the commentators deal in one
way or another with the empirical status of my approach, I
review the present status of research on this topic (sect.
R8). The main topic of the last third of the target book, hy-
perbolically driven impatience for premature satiation of
appetites and its likely consequences, was, perhaps wisely,
left alone.
R2. Hyperbolic discounting
The most important consequence of hyperbolic discount-
ing is that it may cause the value of a small, sooner (SS) re-
ward to spike above that of a larger, later (LL) one tem-
porarily, when the SS reward is imminently available.
Bridgeman says that the hyperbolic model will not work
because, among other problems, hyperbolic curves go to 
infinity at zero delay; but the empirically derived curve I
propose does not go to infinity. Arló-Costa suggests that
Rubinstein’s (2003) “similarity relations” mechanism con-
tradicts hyperbolic discounting. However, those experi-
ments mostly show that subjects ignore very small differ-
ences, which at most suggests a supplementary principle to
the robust hyperbolic curves that have been observed in
both human and nonhuman experiments. One of Rubin-
stein’s experiments unwittingly replicates Kirby and Gua-
stello (2001): A preference for $997 now over $1,000 a
month later, but not for four $997’s at monthly intervals
over four $1,000’s, each a further month later, does not re-
fute hyperbolic discounting, but rather demonstrates the
mechanism by which it permits willpower – the predicted
increase in preference for LL rewards when choices are
bundled into series (Breakdown of Will, Ainslie 2001,
pp. 82–84).
Green & Myerson refer to data, much of it their own,
that support a specifically hyperbolic shape. They argue for
a credible refinement that improves its already superior fit
with choice data by raising the denominator of the value
equation to a power, an adjustment first suggested for the
matching law in general by Baum (1974). I have not exam-
ined this suggestion at any length because, as Green & My-
erson point out, it does not change the strategic implica-
tions of the basic hyperbolic curve for intertemporal
bargaining. However, this added bit of precision clearly
supports the basic hyperbolic shape of the discount curve,
as does the finding of Green et al. (in press) that the choice
between two non-immediate rewards is also evaluated 
hyperbolically. Ainslie and Haendel reported temporary
changes of preference between two non-immediate alter-
natives as early as 1983, but the parametric work of Green
and his colleagues argues much more strongly for hyper-
bolic discounting in all delay periods (cf. Ainslie & Haendel
1983).
Response/Ainslie: Précis of Breakdown of Will
664
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (2005) 28:5
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0140525X05280111
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Eastern Kentucky University, on 20 Nov 2019 at 18:38:06, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms.

Does this mean that we are sometimes observing peo-
ple’s inborn discounting tendency in the raw? Almost cer-
tainly not. People report discounting large amounts of
money less steeply than small ones, while rats and pigeons,
presumably making something close to raw choices (with-
out acquired cognitive overlay), do not change their ob-
served discount rates by amount of reward, or even dis-
count smaller amounts less than greater amounts (Wogar et
al. 1993). Older people discount rewards much less steeply
than younger ones (Green et al. 1994); although this effect
has not been looked for in pigeons, it is hard to imagine it
there. The impatience factor varies by hundreds within sin-
gle human experiments, but only sevenfold in nonhumans
(reviewed in Ainslie & Monterosso 2003, p. 42). The large
but variable increases in human patience are best ascribed
to learned impulse control, modulating but not obliterating
the original discount function. I have argued that the mod-
ulation of observed discounting comes from the action of
committing maneuvers on undiminished impulses, rather
than an ability to bend the function itself (Ainslie 1992,
pp. 123–25): To bend the function itself would be to make
distant rewards more valuable, in effect to coin value, a skill
that we would expect any subject to have learned maximally
if it were possible. It would be as if a child could suddenly
learn to make her birthday seem only half as far away. Such
a change should certainly be highly rewarding, in contrast
to the painfulness that usually characterizes impulse con-
trol.
The most basic objection to hyperbolic curves is that they
ought not to exist (Bach), perhaps because evolution ought
not to have selected for them. But I have cited numerous
controlled experiments showing that something very close
to that form does exist, in both humans and nonhumans. It
is clear why animals in the wild benefit from immediate
obedience to instinctual urges, enforced by a steep devalu-
ation of future possibilities, just as Sanabria & Killeen
suggest; but that can be achieved by exponential curves as
well, without the potential problem of intertemporal con-
flict. I have suggested that hyperbolic curves might betray
the individual into preserving its genes by fighting or re-
producing in opposition to its own interests (as Stanovich
also notes), or alternatively, that these curves were dictated
by some basic scheme of sensory organization and are
harmless in less foresighted organisms (Breakdown of Will,
pp. 45–47), but this is pure speculation.
Swain & Swain point out that hyperbolic discounting is
a simple modification of the exponential kind – making de-
creases in value with delay proportional not to momentary
value, as in exponential discounting, but to the square of
momentary value.
dV(t)  k V(t)  V(t) instead of dV(t)  k V(t) the exponential formula
dt
dt
(amplification in John Swain, personal communication).
This nonobvious relationship which hyperbolic curves have
with exponential ones may or may not turn out to play a role
in their evolutionary origin.
Bach observes, by way of rebutting hyperbolic theory,
that countless curves can produce temporal reversal. Most
of them, however, would lead to the same limited warfare
relationship among successive motivational states, which is
the basis of intertemporal bargaining theory. I have advo-
cated the hyperbolic shape not because it is unique in this
regard, but because it is so well supported by data. Bach
adds that different modalities of reward might have differ-
ently shaped curves, thus suggesting an alternative mecha-
nism for temporary preferences that would have more se-
rious theoretical consequences. If alcohol were discounted
more steeply than the absence of hangover, for instance,
then even an exponential discounter might prefer heavy
drinking temporarily, in the period before it was available.
However, virtually all amount-versus-delay experiments
have kept within single modalities of reward.
The most widely accepted argument against hyperbolic
discounting as a mechanism for impulsiveness cites the fre-
quent experience (and some fMRI data; McClure et al.
2004) that an emotional rush based on immediate avail-
ability precedes impulsive consumption. This observation
has led to the proposal that temporary preference for the
impulse is based on this rush, and that except for this brief
period, discounting is exponential (Laibson 1997). Harri-
son & Lau make a similar objection, that the temporary
preference phenomenon in human subjects is an artifact of
not using a “front end delay” (SS reward at one month, say,
instead of immediately). They report, in contradiction to
Green & Myerson, that when they used such a delay they
elicited preferences for various amounts of money at vari-
ous delays that did not imply hyperbolic discounting or
temporary preference in most subjects. However, these ex-
periments offered large amounts of money ($450 to $1,840)
and listed the possible choices to subjects with the equiva-
lent annual discount rates next to them (Harrison et al.
2005). Their subjects could well have been choosing among
the listed discount rates rather than going by the hard-to-
calculate SS versus LL amounts. It has always been clear
that people can learn to obey conventional exponential
curves in some circumstances, especially in sizeable finan-
cial transactions (Ainslie 1991). People who cannot, will be
money-pumped: Someone who has learned the knack of ex-
ponential evaluation will buy their overcoat, for example,
every spring, and sell it back to them every fall. The re-
markable finding is that so many experimenters report a hy-
perbolic pattern, even in financial preferences.
As for the “conditioned” rush that often precedes im-
pulsive choices, it may be a reward-seeking process that 
attempts to make a reward happen immediately (see Break-
down of Will, pp. 65–69). It is apt to arise in Darwin-James-
Lange fashion when you do not have complete confidence
in your resolution not to indulge in this kind of reward
(Ainslie, in press a).
R3. The marketplace model
Several commentators object to my assertion that an ego or
self need not exist as an organ, but only as an alliance of pro-
cesses motivated by long-range reward. Bach criticizes my
making cognition the servant of reward, “something’s being
desired because it is rewarding” rather than “something’s
being rewarding because it is desired.” He prefers “magni-
tudes assigned to particular rewards” by a governing cogni-
tive process. Certainly, that is the way that our culture – and
perhaps all cultures – describe the experience of higher-
level judgments. The impossibility of predicting decisions
from the apparent contingencies of reward has led to the
theory that choice comes ultimately from a transcendent
ego; but if this ego is not to be exempted from the chain of
Response/Ainslie: Précis of Breakdown of Will
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (2005) 28:5
665
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0140525X05280111
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Eastern Kentucky University, on 20 Nov 2019 at 18:38:06, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms.

causality, it must itself have a basis for making choices.
Judgments are called higher-level when they buffer deci-
sions from relatively fast-paying rewards. My argument has
been that the tails of hyperbolic discount curves at long de-
lays describe adequate motivation for these judgments in all
the complexity that we ascribe to them. I suspect that it is
impossible by spontaneous introspection to discriminate in-
tertemporal bargaining in an internal marketplace from the
organ of judgment that is commonly imagined – and, fur-
thermore, that analysis of this introspection by means of
thought experiments provides evidence for the bargaining
model. True, we often “assign” value to a goal, but in doing
so we are not just thinking, but shifting motivational
weights, and we must apply weight in order to do this. The
function of cognition is to estimate where to put the ful-
crum.
Bridgeman makes the opposite objection, that my
game-theoretic mechanism for integrating motives entails
too many free parameters to be of any theoretical use. I am
not sure that my model is clear to him. I do not propose that
the data that goes into previous choices is discarded, for ex-
ample, but that all elements of your choice history can be
part of the self-prediction necessary for intertemporal bar-
gaining. The experimental phenomena that the theory pre-
dicts have been relatively elementary – that organisms are
sometimes motivated to limit their own future choices, for
instance, or that choosing in bundles increases the tendency
to choose LL alternatives – but that has to be true of all
models of human choice. The complexity of determinants
makes certainty impossible in principle, and gives rise to the
impression of free will (see sect. R5). Yet some modeling is
still possible. The complex theoretical problems of internal
motivational conflict seem to be closely analogous to those
found in macro- and microeconomics, which have been
rendered much more tractable by a game-theoretic ap-
proach (Smith 1992).
Ferrero correctly points out that what I call interests –
processes selected (shaped) by what rewards them – are not
“replicators in a process of natural selection,” competing by
heritability. Natural selection is a mathematical effect gov-
erning the survival of organisms over multiple generations;
the fitness that is inferred from survival follows an expo-
nential curve (Lotka 1957, p. 123). I am describing selec-
tion by an organic process, reward, that is coherent in the
respect that it determines the relative dominance of all mu-
tually substitutable processes according to the same hyper-
bolic attenuation curve that governs perception (Gibbon
1977); under its control, the learned processes that I call in-
terests may wax and wane, but do not die to be replaced by
new generations. What are transient are the momentary
configurations of motivation that determine which of these
processes prevail at each point in time – my “successive
selves.”
I agree that interpersonal analogies are just illustrations,
but since interests can be expected to share some proper-
ties with whole people, such analogies may clarify. A legis-
lature contains people who serve particular interests, and
who must both overtly bargain with others to establish rules
and covertly plan strategies – to augment their own power,
diminish that of competitors, and while in power protect as
much of their gain as possible against periods when they
will be out of power. My argument is that the shifting pref-
erences created by hyperbolic discount curves create simi-
lar incentives for competing interests – which, remember,
are just reward-seeking processes, each defined by the re-
ward it seeks. A coherent ego grows – is learned – insofar
as it is valuable to enough interests, and comes into play
only when coming into play is more rewarding than not
coming into play. Ferrero seeks to differentiate “really
strategic thinking” from “reflection on the import of one’s
present action in the context of one’s continued existence,”
but I would accept as strategic the latter process, involving,
as he says, an appreciation of precedents. Whether you re-
gard an agent as having “identity over time” or comprising
successive states in a limited warfare relationship is much
like the question of whether you regard an atom as solid or
mostly empty. All these views are true in their way, but the
former of each pair just extends a subjective impression,
whereas the latter specifies a model.
Griffin & Dennett warn that the interests I propose
may be “too smart,” perhaps becoming the bad sort of ho-
munculi, “bogeymen [that] duplicate entire the talents they
are rung in to explain” (Dennett 1978, pp. 123–24). How-
ever, I mean them to be not necessarily more than conven-
tions of the observer. Interests are ways of grouping the pro-
cesses that are shaped by one reward as opposed to those
shaped by its alternative(s), and then only if the reward is
increased by strategically blocking the alternative(s). There
is no reason for their generality not to remain fluid. We
could speak of a dieting interest or a long-range fitness in-
terest, or even a self-control interest, or, moving the other
way on a specificity scale, of a cholesterol-reducing interest
or even a keeping-my-appetite-for-today’s-dinner interest.
The opposing interests must necessarily be short range, a
snacking interest, or a taking-the-edge-off-my-appetite in-
terest or an eating-that-particular-ice-cream-cone interest.
The concept is useful only when the contingencies of one
reward create an incentive to forestall or avoid being fore-
stalled by the other(s) – thus, it would be pointless to dis-
tinguish a chocolate interest from a vanilla interest.
I say “not necessarily more” than observers’ conventions,
because the fluidity of the concept does let us recognize
that some interests can assume an identity and function as
personalities. That is, the observers that group together the
processes which seek a particular kind of reward might in-
clude this group itself: The interest might include an ob-
serving process that advances the group by scrutinizing its
properties and distinguishing members from non-mem-
bers. The extreme example would be the outlawed traits
that combine to escape the surveillance of the main per-
sonality in the dissociative disorders (Ainslie 1999). How-
ever, this should happen only when there is differential re-
ward to form and defend separate identities – perhaps the
same reward contingency that usually leads people to form
a single sense of self. As Ross & Spurrett suggest, inter-
ests can be seen as Dennettian intentional systems, which
can also divide and combine without a priori limits. The
limited warfare relationship motivated by hyperbolic dis-
counting then serves variously as the wedge that divides
them and the glue that combines them.
There are undoubtedly properties of bargaining that are
implicit in people’s hardware, in the same way that our
hardware prepares us to communicate with nouns and
verbs in whatever the language we wind up learning. As
Griffin & Dennett point out, we cannot observe or even
infer most of these properties yet. However, an effort has
begun to find mechanistic models that might resonate with
them, along the lines suggested by Ross & Spurrett
Response/Ainslie: Précis of Breakdown of Will
666
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (2005) 28:5
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0140525X05280111
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Eastern Kentucky University, on 20 Nov 2019 at 18:38:06, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms.

(Ainslie 2005b). I certainly agree with Ross & Spurrett that
we have no basis for speculating about “how picoeconomic
interests will turn out to relate to neuroeconomic units,”
but that “neuroeconomics should identify constraints on
the informational dynamics in terms of which intrapersonal
bargaining games go on.” Nevertheless, neurophysiology
has already described phenomena that are at least consis-
tent with the implications of hyperbolic discounting. For
example, the activity in brain centers that responds propor-
tionately to rewards is also often found to be proportional
to the surprisingness of rewards (Berns et al. 2001). Al-
though this activity may be only informational, it also may
be involved in the habituation of predictable rewards, to
which I have attributed the impracticality of ad lib self-re-
ward (see Breakdown of Will, pp. 164–74). More counter-
intuitive are Berridge’s (1999) findings that both human
and nonhuman subjects will work to obtain events that they
report or show other evidence of not liking, if and only if
the events are imminently available. He suggests that the
“incentive salience” which selects for such choice does so
through classical conditioning, but it is much more likely to
do so by inducing genuine, but temporary, preference for
brief, imminent reward (see Breakdown of Will, pp. 51–
54). As a final example, Iacoboni et al. (1999) have reported
neuronal activity in areas governing particular movements
that occurs when a person observes someone else making
similar movements. This finding suggests a fundamental
preparedness to model others’ experiences as your own,
which would be at the service of the primary incentive for
empathy (see Breakdown of Will, pp. 179–86).
R4. Aversion with only one factor
Sanabria & Killeen were alone among the commentators
in mentioning the opportunity to revise “the hoary study of
CRs [conditioned responses]” afforded by hyperbolic dis-
counting. I judge such a revision to be among its most im-
portant implications. It has no obvious bearing on the learn-
ing of information by simple connectionism, sometimes
called stimulus–stimulus conditioning (Rescorla 1988).
However, for the selection of responses, the potential of
brief temporary preferences to lure organisms into re-
sponse processes that are aversive overall, could let us do
without the deus ex machina of a second, “conditioned” se-
lective principle that is so often invoked to explain aversive,
involuntary, or maladaptive processes. This is not to deny
that classical conditioning exists as a procedure, but to point
out that the combination of prepared responses and hyper-
bolically discounted rewards could explain its observed 
patterns, and more parsimoniously (Breakdown of Will,
pp. 51–61; target article précis, sect. 4.1). After all, condi-
tioning and reward-based choice depend on the same se-
lective factors, but heretofore, rewards have been equated
just to satisfactions, with only unconditioned stimuli seen as
able to select aversive processes. The model of aversion as
a rapidly cycling addiction comprising reward and inhibi-
tion of reward lets us add conditioned processes to the mar-
ketplace of rewarded behaviors.
R5. Intertemporal bargaining
Because of its subtlety, the process of will has been de-
scribed from several different angles, which seem at first
glance to demand incompatible theories. The true picture
is probably more like one of the blind men describing an
elephant. I have described it in terms of expected reward,
but it is also a process that could be seen as one of assign-
ing reward values (implied in Bach), goal-setting (Wang &
Simons), metarepresentation/representational redescrip-
tion (Stanovich), or the converse of expected regret (Con-
nolly & Reb). Bach does not actually address the problem
of will, so I will not belabor the question of what factors con-
strain the assignment of reward values.
Wang & Simons’ reference point model deals with the
choice of instrumental behaviors toward a given goal, not
the competition of goals themselves. As such, it presumes
some means of goal-setting, and carries on from there. But
a goal is not the same thing as an amount of reward. If the
only significant reward in a situation comes from the kind
of all-or-nothing goal depicted in their figure, which you ei-
ther “move past” or you do not, then the upper mid-length
(striped) arrow is the only sensible choice. By the definition
of the problem, the greater length of the later arrow would
not be more rewarding but superfluous. If there is a second
goal of avoiding a disaster – their “MR” – then, obviously,
no response that permitted the disaster would be rewarded.
The competition between responses would then be based
on each option’s chance of getting the positive goal (how
probable, how rewarding, how soon?) and its risk of incur-
ring disaster (how probable, what loss of reward, how
soon?). The upward and downward baselines would have an
impact to the extent that they affected these dimensions.
Hyperbolic discount curves predict that the distance to the
changes of reward from either goal or disaster would dis-
proportionately influence the person’s choice of options
when this distance was short, unless she had made her
choices the subject of an effective personal rule.
Stanovich suggests that “cognitivism in the form of dual-
process theories of reasoning” is compatible with intertem-
poral bargaining. I agree. Recursive self-prediction cer-
tainly involves cognitive processes, often subtle ones, as do
many other interpretations that are central to the growth of
farsighted mental processes. My criticism of cognitivism
has to do with the seemingly doctrinaire avoidance of any
selective principle (like reward) that characterizes some
writings in this school – the insistence that ego functions
are above that kind of thing, which might otherwise reduce
them to mere mechanisms. (Is this implicit in Bach’s com-
mentary?) Stanovich largely covers the informational pro-
cesses that I agree must be involved in conflictual choice-
making, and recognizes that one process is selected over
another on the basis of “motivational force.” Even the point
of disagreement that he names is a misunderstanding, the
product of an ambiguity on my p. 146: When I speak about
human intelligence creating an impulse problem, I am re-
ferring to the inventions that have given us so much free-
dom of choice, not the source of urges themselves.
However, I would like Stanovich and the many other ad-
vocates of dual-process theories to consider the possibility
that the commonly listed pairs of autonomous and analytic,
or visceral and cerebral, or hot and cool, processes do not
represent dichotomies but two zones on a continuum, and
not the most distant zones at that. Between the autonomous
and analytic processes there are those of middling rapidity,
partial responsiveness to triggering stimuli, and marginal
controllability by high-level control systems. Hot anger
shades into grudge and burning love into attachment; the
Response/Ainslie: Précis of Breakdown of Will
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (2005) 28:5
667
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0140525X05280111
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Eastern Kentucky University, on 20 Nov 2019 at 18:38:06, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms.

fear of imminent collision morphs through the fear of flunk-
ing today’s test to the fear that civilization is declining. Prob-
ably all delayed incentives must motivate with immediate
emotional representations – the process that is conspicu-
ously absent in the amotivation of severe depressives, and
that runs amok in the grandiose planning of manics. That
is, although analytic processes are often alternatives to au-
tonomous ones, they also harness these necessary sources
of reward more or less extensively. The brain imaging stud-
ies that have been held to demonstrate two alternative pro-
cesses actually show activity in analytic centers during all
contingencies of reward (always token rewards so far, how-
ever); they do show activity in the supposedly visceral cen-
ters only in imminent contingencies, but the designs have
not been such as to discriminate on-off dichotomies from
continua (e.g., McClure et al. 2004; Tanaka et al. 2004).
The key reason to hypothesize a continuum of analytic-
ness (which I imagine to vary with duration of dominance,
but that is not essential) is that a given process may some-
times compete with a higher function, and sometimes with
a lower one. Getting drunk is not as autonomous as emit-
ting a tic, and a tic not as autonomous as succumbing to
panic; for that matter, compulsive self-control could be said
to be more autonomous than flexible choice. In other
words, there can be more than one tier of metapreferences,
for instance in my example from Breakdown of Will, p. 63:
Take a patient trying to overcome bulimia nervosa. Her longest
range interest is to eat flexibly, but she has a compulsion to
strictly limit her intake. This compulsion arises from a percep-
tion that she has an addiction to eating, which periodically
breaks out in the form of a binge. Let’s say, to create a crude ex-
ample, that her bingeing is sometimes preyed upon by an ob-
sessional worry that her food is spoiled, an itch range [of reward
durations] urge that spoils the pleasure of eating – and that she
then stubs her toe, and has such pain that she can’t even enter-
tain her worry – we have what could be called a chain of preda-
tion containing . . . experientially distinct ranges of preference.
All but the longest range interest could be called au-
tonomous in some sense, and all but the pain have some
component of analysis.
I digress for a moment to mention Bach’s three motiva-
tional factors as alternatives to hyperbolic overvaluation in
“the motivational force of a particular desire”: persistence
of coming to mind, insatiability, and “resistibility to the sec-
ond-order desire to get rid of it.” These factors can be cre-
ated parsimoniously by the rapid cycling of brief immedi-
ate reward and longer obligatory nonreward that I propose
for wanted but disliked behaviors (itches; Breakdown of
Will, pp. 51–54 and target article Précis, sect. 4). In the pre-
ceding paragraph, tics and obsessional worries play this
role. That is, all it takes to put the pesky video game into a
purely reward-based model is an urge that is strong enough
to command your attention briefly with the promise of im-
mediate payoff, that is quickly disposed of, but that also re-
generates quickly. Once the urge succeeds in getting you
playing, of course, the math of reward is more like that of a
binge, and the temporary preference considerably longer.
I agree with Connolly & Reb that there is, first of all, a
simple “outcome regret” that does not follow a failure of
self-control. I have speculated that its proportionality with
the nearness of the miss comes from the person’s urge to
break her rules for constructing beliefs (Ainslie 1992,
pp. 321–23). It is less threatening than the “regret associ-
ated with the choice process itself,” an experience that is of-
ten called guilt. Connolly & Reb discuss anticipated regret
as an important incentive for self-control, and I agree with
this, also; but fear of the choice-process kind of regret is re-
ally the same incentive as the expectation of a bundle of fu-
ture rewards, seen from the converse angle as the threat of
losing them. A highly meaningful failure of will can induce
a guilt (or regret) that is close to panic, since it may lower a
person’s expectation of self-control generally. What Con-
nolly & Reb call increased regret salience, I would call in-
creased personal rule salience, the perception of more of
your behaviors as test cases for your will. Increasing the
specificity of your intentions has indeed been shown to in-
crease your self-control (Gollwitzer, in press), and may well
entail both increased expectations of bundled rewards and
increased fear of losing them. But increased reliance on
willpower makes you more compulsive (see Breakdown of
Will, pp. 151–53), a condition noted for a preoccupation
with avoiding regret.
Griffin & Dennett point out that little is known as yet
about the constraints on bundling. In particular, “Does each
bit of the bundle have the same value?” There are some
data showing that, with small bundles in controlled experi-
ments, the value of the bundle is the simple sum of the val-
ues of the component rewards, discounted hyperbolically
(Mazur 1986). It is also clear that in naturalistic situations,
the value of a stretch of experience as measured by willing-
ness to repeat it is not the sum of the values of its compo-
nent moments, but receives disproportionate weight from
the most intense and the most recent parts (Kahneman
1999, pp. 19–22). Because no choices repeat exactly, and
most choices share some feature or other in common, the
make-up of a bundle clearly depends on personal book-
keeping, perhaps mediated by socially taught language, but
I think not necessarily so.
What constrains your perception of precedents and
hence bundles? In the simplest model, it is your prediction
of what you will see as a precedent in the future, arrived at
by whatever cognitive processes and influenced by what-
ever lawyerly pleading you may have learned by trial and er-
ror to prevent a realization of having fooled yourself. An ex-
ecutive “I” may earn its keep by expertise at discerning
bundles, but the process can also happen without central
direction, from incentives analogous to those that moved
generations of unsupervised judges to develop the English
common law. If the pianist claims an exception to his no-
wine rule because “It’s just a chamber rehearsal,” and then
realizes, “but I knew that the esteem of my colleagues was
still at stake,” he has made an error. This error will cost him
some of the expected reward of reputation, and not just
from this episode; the recognition that “I knew that” iden-
tifies a lapse, which makes his no-wine rule and maybe his
will in general less credible. Griffin & Dennett are right
that he may view a lapse involving his colleagues as less se-
rious than a lapse involving the public, or, if he has alcoholic
tendencies, he may view all lapses involving wine as equally
dangerous. But these views are not at his arbitrary disposal;
they are predictions about the fact of his subsequent views,
which determine the stake available to bet against impulses.
Although there is wiggle room in both the prediction and
the determination of these views (the effect of rationaliza-
tion), both are ultimately constrained by the reward they
deliver; too much wiggling turns them into useless self-
delusions and leaves him at the mercy of his impulses.
Peijnenburg deals with one kind of wiggle room. She
Response/Ainslie: Précis of Breakdown of Will
668
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (2005) 28:5
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0140525X05280111
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Eastern Kentucky University, on 20 Nov 2019 at 18:38:06, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms.

says that she, and I, are dealing with the “easy,” diachronic
form of akrasia; but my position is that relying on personal
rules, while fortifying you against easy akrasia, also creates
a potential for the hard, synchronic form. That is, bundling
choices changes the basis of impulses from the simple prox-
imity of a possible SS reward to the existence of loopholes
or other weaknesses in the personal rule. All the examples
that authors have described of doing what you simultane-
ously believe not to be best can be seen as obeying an im-
pulse in violation of a personal rule. You “really” wanted the
long-range rewards defended by your rule, but in the case
at hand the rule was not strong enough. Or you found a ra-
tionalization that distinguished the case at hand, which
might or might not still be counted as akrasia. I would call
Peijnenburg’s example of the married woman with the sin-
gle lapse of fidelity a case of rationalization. The woman is
asserting that an occasional lapse is best called an exception,
a stance that, taken after the fact, may preserve adequate
credibility for her rule. I agree that this is probably the wis-
est interpretation for the woman to make. The optimal de-
gree of tolerance for lapses has been discussed in addiction
psychology, with the conclusion that the most rigid rules,
“zero tolerance,” invite an “abstinence violation effect,” the
complete collapse of resolve in the relevant area after a
lapse (Curry et al. 1987). On the other hand, to plan such
an exception in advance would be to start down a slippery
slope. In order to preserve the rule in question by “shaping
your past [self],” the lapse had better have been a surprise,
as it was in this example; and even so, repeated appeal to
such shaping would motivate short-range interests to in-
hibit your self-awareness, so that more lapses could be sur-
prising (see Ainslie 1999). Because the lapse must not be
planned in advance, Peijnenburg’s shaping effect looks as if
it is operating retroactively, but actually it is a current in-
terpretation (as of the morning after) that is designed to af-
fect future choices (by repairing the expectation of being a
faithful wife). To affect choice, all reward differentials must
be prospective.
R6. Freedom of will
Bridgeman argues that choice must be strictly determined
by prior causes, which is also my position. I did not develop
it in the target Précis, but I did in the book (Breakdown of
Will, pp. 129–34). I argue that there is a genuine distinc-
tion to be made between choices that are the straightfor-
ward product of identifiable incentives, and those that are
subject to the recursive self-prediction that arises in in-
tertemporal bargaining. We feel driven by the former, but
are open to surprise by the latter, because of the sensitive
dependence of its outcome on small shifts of predictive
cues. I claim that the location of recursiveness within the
will itself adds the sense of ownership, the lack of which has
led other authors to reject such a process as the mechanism
of free will. This solution involves neither illusion nor inde-
terminacy:
Of course, mere dependency on internally fed back processes
doesn’t create the feeling of being a self: “If chaos-type data 
can be used to justify the existence of free will in humans, they
can also be used to justify the existence of free will in chaotic
pendulums, weather systems, leaf distribution, and mathemat-
ical equations (Sappington 1990).” That is, even information-
rich processes that don’t somehow engage what feels like our
self will still be experienced as random, “more like epileptic
seizures than free responsible choices (Kane 1989, p. 231).” So
far, chaos theory has not been given an element that internal-
izes the process. [However,] I’m arguing that intertemporal
bargaining supplies that extra element: that your own motiva-
tion – in many cases emotion – is what you’re predicting. (Break-
down of Will, p. 233)
If recursive self-prediction turns out to be coterminous
with what we experience as free will, I have no problem
with calling it free will. Were the experience specifically one
of indeterminacy it would be an illusion, of course; but as
Bridgeman and many others have pointed out, “we don’t
confuse lack of control with freedom.” The distinction be-
tween free will and the alternative usually imagined, what
might be called stimulus-boundness, is not an illusory one.
R7. Thought experiments
Rachlin points out that I am violating the behaviorist con-
vention against internal models by trying to discern mental
mechanisms. The original purpose of this convention was
to promote the productive methodology of controlled ex-
perimentation in the face of an entrenched tradition of in-
trospection (Boring 1950, pp. 641–43). It succeeded be-
cause the methodology proved very fruitful indeed, and
described a number of regularities in behaviors upon which
external events were contingent. However, it never demon-
strated that mental mechanisms did not exist or even that
they were unimportant, just that a great deal could be
learned while obeying a discipline that disregarded them.
Ironically, exploration of one of the most robust of these
regularities, Herrnstein’s matching law (1997), has pro-
duced evidence consistent with a model of reward as an in-
ternal event, one that is less dependent on external events
than has been heretofore assumed by any branch of moti-
vational science. Hyperbolic discounting has removed the-
oretical obstacles to regarding such disparate phenomena
as appetites, emotions, involuntary behaviors, and ego func-
tions as reward-dependent behaviors competing in a mar-
ketplace, rather than as transferred reflexes or transcen-
dent cognitions (see Breakdown of Will, pp. 48–70, 90–
104). I would argue that these theoretical obstacles were
the last pivotal ones, and that the behaviorist convention is
not an obstacle even theoretically. It is a self-control device
for theorists, designed to ensure consensual validation of
findings. The degree to which an individual, or a field, is
willing to risk failures of consensual validation in order to
increase the sensitivity of observation is ultimately a matter
of taste.
In the thirty years since the core of hyperbolic discount-
ing theory was first published (Ainslie 1975), no one has
raised a reason why it could not be true; the intertemporal
bargaining that it predicts is at the very least a possibility.
Any discipline that rules this out because of the difficulty of
studying it will be left with a restricted field of view. Such a
discipline will be ignoring suggestive evidence from many
sources: pattern-matching, interpersonal analogs, com-
puter models, . . . and thought experiments (Breakdown of
Will, Ch. 8). The trouble with introspectionism was that the
designs of Titchener and his generation did not elicit ob-
servations that all could share – the equivalent of “native
speaker” recognitions in linguistics or the perceptual shifts
of Gestalt psychology. Thought experiment is a way of pro-
ducing highly specific shared experiences. It has been de-
veloped in recent years mostly by the philosophy of mind,
Response/Ainslie: Précis of Breakdown of Will
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (2005) 28:5
669
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0140525X05280111
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Eastern Kentucky University, on 20 Nov 2019 at 18:38:06, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms.

a field that seems to have a discipline opposite to behavior-
ism – never rely on controlled experiment. I offer it as a
complementary way to test theories that purport to explain
our experience.
The function of thought experiments is to clarify what
knowledge we already have by testing its implications in
simplified situations. Entire fields have been created by this
method – the exemplar was plane geometry – but sufficient
examples are scarce in motivational theory. Rachlin and
Arló-Costa criticize my application of Newcomb’s prob-
lem, the former because, aside from his behaviorist convic-
tions, he does not think that the counterfactual premise
evokes a meaningful experience, the latter because he does
not see how hyperbolic discounting predicts a rational so-
lution. Insofar as a reader cannot relate to a thought exper-
iment, or thinks she should not, she will need to see the re-
ports of an adequate sample of others, which are actually
available in the Newcomb case and confirm a widespread
disposition to choose one box (Shafir & Tversky 1992).
However, what the introspection, or sample, demonstrates
is not necessarily the rationality of one solution, but some-
thing about the nature of the solving. If the reader, or sam-
ple of undergraduates, feel like choosing one box, this is ev-
idence that they are going by a consideration beyond what
the conventional view of utility (rational choice theory, or
RCT) predicts. That is the service of this thought experi-
ment – to demonstrate that RCT is missing a piece here.
The only hypothesis about why RCT does not describe peo-
ple’s one-box disposition has been magical thinking – your
belief that by faking the diagnosis of being a one-boxer you
will cause the $1 million to be in that box. Intertemporal
bargaining offers an alternative hypothesis, that people are
intuitively familiar with the kind of diagnostic thinking that
is also causal and apply it to the Newcomb presentation.
Perhaps the evocativeness of the Newcomb problem is
best explained if we bypass its externalizing dollar values
and guess how someone might interpret it in terms of in-
ternal utility: The first box contains your aggregated expec-
tation of reward for resisting your greatest temptation over
time, the second your reward for giving in to it this time.
The omniscient being dwells somewhere in your own con-
sciousness. (At least there is something there that seems
omniscient, always saying, “I told you so.”) It is literally pos-
sible to get the contents of both boxes, but this situation, in-
volving as it does your greatest temptation, is not new to
you. You know by now whether you are a two-boxer in this
situation, and this knowledge governs both your choice
(knowing you are a two-boxer undermines any resolve not
to give in to your temptation) and the contents of the first
box (empty for the two-boxer, full for the one boxer). The
missing piece in RCT as applied to Newcomb’s problem,
my hypothesis goes, is the role played in your choice by
what you know (omnisciently, if we are to be strict). Know-
ing that you are a one-boxer fills the box with expectations
of reward ( the present value of the aggregated actual re-
wards to come); knowing that you are a two-boxer empties
it. Bundling choices converts not only intertemporal con-
flicts to conflicts of principle, it converts actions to traits: In-
sofar as you have always chosen two boxes you are a two-
boxer, a trait that governs your choices unless some factor
happens to balance one of them closely. In real life there
are many things you can do to overcome a two-boxer trait,
of course, or to wreck a one-boxer trait, but Newcomb’s
problem serves to illustrate the pure extremes. Incidentally,
Arló-Costa has me wrong: Two-boxers are irrational, as are
the people who renege on drinking Kavka’s toxin (Break-
down of Will, pp 126–29).
R8. The state of research
Sanabria & Killeen peg the current state of picoeconomic
knowledge accurately. As they point out, Skinner perceived
that strategically related selves could be shaped within a
person by operant reward. However, hyperbolic discount-
ing was necessary to explain why there should be separate
selves, not a unified organization of behaviors all seeking
the same goals. The explanation “needs work. . . . We need
a chemistry of intra-individual interests. When are they
bundled? When broken down? When parasitized?”
Chapter 8 of Breakdown of Will reviewed progress to-
ward answers, as of 2001 (pp. 117–40). Controlled research
on the components of motivation continues, some of it by
the commentators on the Précis. Interpersonal analogs of
the hypothesized intertemporal processes can be run (Mon-
terosso et al. 2002), but they are noisy, and complicated
by the unavoidable admixture of intertemporal bargaining
within the participants (see Ainslie, in press b). A rereading
of the psychoanalytic literature, substituting hyperbolic
curves for repression as the source of impulses, suggests some
dynamics. But correspondences with this once-dominant
distillation of psychological anecdotes enrich intertemporal
bargaining theory more than they test it. For tests of the co-
herence and naturalism of intertemporal bargaining theory,
as well as its downstream consequences, I am returning to
computer simulation (Ainslie 1992, pp. 274–91; 2005b) just
as Sanabria & Killeen suggest. A team at the University
of KwaZulu-Natal is developing of an automated working
model of a picoeconomic agent, hoping that the hypothe-
sized need for surprise suggests a rationale for gambling be-
havior. As for fitting this theory to the real world, the prob-
lem is coming within the reach of neurophysiology, but only
just. Finally, the potential of the much maligned thought ex-
periment to test the actual occurrence of predicted pro-
cesses remains controversial, but I believe that it is far from
nil (Ainslie 2005a). We witness the operation of our own
wills on a daily basis, and may be prevented from reporting
it clearly more by our assumptions than by any lack of its
visibility.
NOTE
The author of this response is employed by a government agency
and, as such, this response is considered a work of the U.S. gov-
ernment and not subject to copyright within the United States.
References
Letters “a” and “r” appearing before authors’ initials refer to target article
and response respectively.
Ainslie, G. (1974) Impulse control in pigeons. Journal of the Experimental Analysis
of Behavior 21:485–89.
[aGA]
(1975) Specious reward: A behavioral theory of impulsiveness and impulse
control. Psychological Bulletin 82:463–96.
[arGA]
(1986) Beyond microeconomics: Conflict among interest in a multiple self as a
determinant of value. In: The multiple self, ed. J. Elster, pp. 133–75.
Cambridge University Press.
[aGA]
(1991) Derivation of “rational” economic behavior from hyperbolic discount
curves. American Economic Review 81:334–40.
[rGA]
References/Ainslie: Précis of Breakdown of Will
670
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (2005) 28:5
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0140525X05280111
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Eastern Kentucky University, on 20 Nov 2019 at 18:38:06, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms.

(1992) Picoeconomics: The strategic interaction of successive motivational states
within the person. Cambridge University Press.
[arGA, DR]
(1995) A utility-maximizing mechanism for vicarious reward: Comments on
Julian Simons “Interpersonal allocation continuous with intertemporal
allocation.” Rationality and Society 7:393–403.
[aGA]
(1999) The dangers of willpower: A picoeconomic understanding of addiction
and dissociation. In: Getting hooked: Rationality and addiction, ed. J. Elster &
O-J. Skog, pp. 65–92. Cambridge University Press.
[rGA]
(2001) Breakdown of will. Cambridge University Press.
[arGA, HA-C, KB, BB,
TC, LF, LG, RG, GWH, JP, HR, DR, FS, KES, JDS, XTW]
(2005a) Can thought experiments prove anything about the will? Presented at
the conference, Mind and World II, University of Alabama, Birmingham,
March 18, 2005; proceedings to be published by Routledge.
[rGA]
(2005b) Emotion as motivated behavior. In: Agents that want and like:
Motivational and emotional roots of cognition and action. Proceedings of a
Symposium at the Artificial Intelligence and Simulation of Behaviour ’05
Convention, Hatfield, U.K., AISB ed. L. Canamero, pp. 1–8.
[rGA]
(in press a) A selectionist model of the ego: Implications for self-control. In:
Disorders of volition, ed. N. Sebanz & W. Prinz. MIT Press.
[rGA]
(in press b) You can’t give permission to be a bastard. Commentary on Henrich
et al. (2005), “Economic man” in cross-cultural perspective. Behavioral and
Brain Sciences 28(6).
[rGA]
Ainslie, G. & Haendel, V. (1983) The motives of the will. In: Etiology aspects of
alcohol and drug abuse, ed. E. Gottheil, K. Druley, T. Skodola & H. Waxman,
pp. 119–40. Charles C. Thomas.
[arGA, GWH]
Ainslie, G. & Herrnstein, R. J. (1981) Preference reversal and delayed
reinforcement. Animal Learning and Behavior 9:476–82.
[aGA]
Ainslie, G. & Monterosso, J. (2003a) Building blocks of self-control: Increased
tolerance for delay with bundled rewards. Journal of the Experimental
Analysis of Behavior 79:83–94.
[aGA]
(2003b) Hyperbolic discounting as a factor in addiction: A critical analysis. In:
Choice, behavioural economics, and addiction, ed. R. R. Vuchinich & N.
Heather, pp. 35–62. Pergamon.
[rGA]
American Psychiatric Association (1994) Diagnostic and statistical manual of
mental disorders, 4th edition. APA Press.
[aGA, LG]
Aristotle (1984) The Complete Works of Aristotle, ed. J. Barnes. Princeton
University Press.
Arló-Costa, H. & Helzner, J. (2005) Comparative ignorance and the Ellsberg’s
phenomenon. In: ISIPTA ’05: Proceedings of 4th International Symposium on
Imprecise Probabilities and Their Applications, ed. F. G. Cozman, R. Nau &
T. Seidenfeld, pp. 21–31. Brightdoc. Available at: http://www.sipta.org/
isipta05/proceedings/index.html.
[HA-C]
Baier, A. (1991) A progress of sentiments: Reflections on Hume’s treatise. Harvard
University Press.
[aGA]
Batson, C. D. & Shaw, L. L. (1991) Evidence for altruism: Toward a pluralism or
prosocial motives. Psychological Inquiry 2:159–68.
[aGA]
Baum, W. M. (1974) On two types of deviation from the matching law: Bias and
undermatching. Journal of the Experimental Analysis of Behavior 22:231–42.
[rGA]
Baumeister, R. F. & Heatherton, T. (1996) Self-regulation failure: An overview.
Psychological Inquiry 7:1–15.
[aGA]
Becker, G. & Murphy, K. (1988) A theory of rational addiction. Journal of Political
Economy 96:675–700.
[aGA]
Beecher, H. (1959) Measurement of subjective responses. Oxford University Press.
[aGA]
Bell, D. E. (1982) Regret in decision making under uncertainty. Operations
Research 30:961–81.
[TC]
Benzion, U., Rapoport, A. & Yagil, J. (1989) Discount rates inferred from
decisions: An experimental study. Management Science 35:270–84.
[GWH]
Berlyne, D. E. (1974) Studies in the new experimental aesthetics. Hemisphere.
[aGA]
Berns, G. S., McClure, S. M., Pagnoni, G. & Montague, P. R. (2001) Predictability
modulates human brain response to reward. Journal of Neuroscience
21:2793–98.
[arGA]
Berridge, K. C. (1999) Pleasure, pain, desire, and dread: Hidden core processes of
emotion. In: Well-being: The foundations of hedonic psychology, ed. D.
Kahneman, E. Diener & N. Schwartz. Sage.
[rGA]
Berridge, K. C. & Robinson, T. (1998) What is the role of dopamine in reward:
Hedonic impact, reward learning, or incentive salience. Brain Research
Reviews 28:309–69.
[aGA]
Boring, E. G. (1950) A history of experimental psychology. Appleton-Century-
Crofts.
[rGA]
Bratman, M. E. (1999) Faces of intention: Selected essays on intention and agency.
Cambridge University Press.
[aGA]
Carson, S. M., Moses, L. J. & Hix, H. R. (1998) The role of inhibitory processes in
young children’s difficulties with deception and false belief. Child
Development 69:672–91.
[RG]
Carver, C. S., Lawrence, J. W. & Scheier, M. F. (1996) A control-process
perspective on the origins of affect. In: Striving and feeling: Interactions
among goals, affect, and self-regulation, ed. L. L. Martin & A. Tesser, pp. 11–
52. Erlbaum.
[XTW]
Chapman, G. B. & Elstein, A. S. (1995) Valuing the future: Temporal discounting
of health and money. Medical Decision Making 15:373–86.
[LG]
Chung, S. & Herrnstein, R. J. (1967) Choice and delay of reinforcement. Journal of
the Experimental Analysis of Behavior 10:67–74.
[aGA]
Clum, George A., Clum, Gretchen A. & Surls, R. (1993) A meta-analysis of
treatments for panic disorder. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology
61:317–26.
[aGA]
Coller, M., Harrison, G. W. & Rutström, E. E. (2003) Are discount rates constant?
Reconciling theory and observation. Working Paper 3–31, Department of
Economics, College of Business Administration, University of Central Florida.
[GWH]
Coller, M. & Williams, M. B. (1999) Eliciting individual discount rates.
Experimental Economics 2:107–27.
[GWH]
Connolly, T. & Reb, J. (2003) Omission bias in vaccination decisions: Where’s the
“omission”? Where’s the “bias”? Organizational Behavior and Human
Decision Processes 91:186–202.
[TC]
Connolly, T. & Zeelenberg, M. (2002) Regret in decision making. Current
Directions in Psychological Science 11:212–20.
[TC]
Currie, G. & Ravenscroft, I. (2002) Recreative minds. Oxford University Press.
[KES]
Curry, S., Marlatt, A. & Gordon, J. R. (1987) Abstinence violation effect: Validation
of an attributional construct with smoking cessation. Journal of Consulting
and Clinical Psychology 55:145–49.
[rGA]
Davidson, D. (1969) How is weakness of the will possible? In: Moral concepts, ed.
J. Weinberg, pp. 93–113. Oxford University Press.
[JP]
Davies, N. (1981) Human sacrifice in history and today. Morrow.
[aGA]
Davis, J. (2003) The theory of the individual in economics. Routledge.
[DR]
Deluty, M. Z., Whitehouse, W. G., Mellitz, M. & Hineline, P. N. (1983) Self-
control and commitment involving aversive events. Behavior Analysis Letters
3:213–19.
[aGA]
Dennett, D. C. (1978) Artificial intelligence as philosophy and as psychology. In:
Brainstorms: Philosophical essays on mind and psychology, ed. D. C.
Dennett, pp. 109–26. Bradford Books/MIT Press.
[rGA]
(1987) The intentional stance. MIT Press.
[DR]
(2003) Freedom evolves. Viking.
[KES]
Dienes, Z. & Perner, J. (1999) A theory of implicit and explicit knowledge.
Behavioral and Brain Sciences 22:735–808.
[KES]
Donahoe, J. W., Burgos, J. E. & Palmer, D. C. (1993) A selectionist approach to
reinforcement. Journal of the Experimental Analysis of Behavior 60:17–40.
[aGA]
Donahoe, J. W., Palmer, D. C. & Burgos, J. E. (1997) The S-R issue: Its status in
behavior analysis and in Donahoe and Palmer’s Learning and Complex
Behavior. Journal of the Experimental Analysis of Behavior 67:193–211.
[aGA]
Elster, J. (1981) States that are essentially by-products. Social Science Information
20:431–73. Reprinted in Elster, J. (1983) Sour grapes: Studies in the
subversion of rationality, pp. 43–108. Cambridge University Press.
[aGA]
Evans, J. St. B. T. (2003) In two minds: Dual-process accounts of reasoning. Trends
in Cognitive Sciences 7:454–59.
[KES]
Evans, J. St. B. T. & Over, D. E. (2004) If. Oxford University Press.
[KES]
Fodor, J. A. (1983) The modularity of mind. Bradford Books.
[FS]
Forzano, L. B. & Logue, A. L. (1992) Predictors of adult humans’ self-control and
impulsiveness for food reinforcers. Appetite 19:33–47.
[aGA]
Fox, C. R. & Tversky, A. (1991) Ambiguity aversion and comparative ignorance.
The Quarterly Journal of Economics 110(3):585–603.
[HA-C]
Frank, R. H. (1988) Passions within reason. Norton.
[aGA]
Frijda, N. H. (1988) The laws of emotion. American Psychologist 43:349–58.
[TC]
Gerall, A. A. & Obrist, P. A. (1962) Classical conditioning of the pupillary dilation
response of normal and curarized cats. Journal of Experimental Psychology
50:261–63.
[aGA]
Gergen, K. J. (1985) The social constructionist movement in modern psychology.
American Psychologist 40:266–75.
[aGA]
Gibbon, J. (1977) Scalar expectancy theory and Weber’s law in animal timing.
Psychological Review 84:279–325.
[rGA]
Glenberg, A. M. (1997) What memory is for. Behavioral and Brain Sciences 20:1–
55.
[KES]
Gollwitzer, P. M. (in press) If–then plans and the intentional control of thoughts,
feelings, and actions. In: Disorders of volition, ed. N. Sebanz & W. Prinz. MIT
Press.
[rGA]
Gosselin, P., Kirouac, G. & Dore, F. Y. (1998) Components and recognition of
facial expression in the communication of emotion by actors. Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology 68:83–96.
[aGA]
Grace, R. C. (1994) A contextual model of concurrent chains choice. Journal of the
Experimental Analysis of Behavior 61:113–29.
[aGA]
References/Ainslie: Précis of Breakdown of Will
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (2005) 28:5
671
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0140525X05280111
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Eastern Kentucky University, on 20 Nov 2019 at 18:38:06, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms.

Granda, A. M. & Hammack, J. T. (1961) Operant behavior during sleep. Science
133:1485–86.
[aGA]
Green, L., Fisher, E. B. Jr., Perlow, S. & Sherman, L. (1981) Preference reversal
and self-control: Choice as a function of reward amount and delay. Behaviour
Analysis Letter 1:43–51.
[aGA]
Green, L., Fristoe, N. & Myerson, J. (1994a) Temporal discounting and preference
reversals in choice between delayed outcomes. Psychonomic Bulletin and
Review 1:386.
[aGA]
Green, L., Fry, A. & Myerson, J. (1994b) Discounting of delayed rewards: A life-
span comparison. Psychological Science 5:33–36.
[arGA]
Green, L. & Myerson, J. (1993) Alternative frameworks for the analysis of self
control. Behavior and Philosophy 21:37–47.
[LG]
Green, L., Myerson, J. & Macaux, E. W. (in press) Temporal discounting when the
choice is between two delayed rewards. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Learning, Memory, and Cognition.
[rGA, LG]
Green, L., Myerson, J. & McFadden, E. (1997) Rate of temporal discounting de-
creases with amount of reward. Memory and Cognition 25:715–23.
[LG]
Harland, R. (1987) Superstructuralism: The philosophy of structuralism and post-
structuralism. Methuen.
[aGA]
Harrison, G. W., Lau, M. I. & Rutström, E. E. (2005) Dynamic consistency in
Denmark: A field experiment. Working Paper 5–02, Department of
Economics, College of Business Administration, University of Central Florida,
January 2005.
[rGA, GWH]
Harrison, G. W., Lau, M. I. & Williams, M. B. (2002) Estimating individual
discount rates for Denmark: A field experiment. American Economic Review
92(5):1606–17.
[GWH]
Harvey, C. M. (1994) The reasonableness of non-constant discounting. Journal of
Public Economics 53:31–51.
[aGA]
Hayes, S. C., Kapust, J., Leonard, S. R. & Rosenfarb, I. (1981) Escape from
freedom: Choosing not to choose in pigeons. Journal of the Experimental
Analysis of Behavior 36:1–7.
[aGA]
Hearst, E. & Jenkins, H. M. (1974) Sign-tracking: The stimulus-reinforcer relation
and directed action. The Psychonomic Society.
[FS]
Heath, C., Larrick, R. P. & Wu, G. (1999) Goals as reference points. Cognitive
Psychology 38:79–109.
[XTW]
Herrnstein, R. J. (1997) The matching law: Papers in psychology and economics,
ed. H. Rachlin & D. I. Laibson. Sage.
[rGA]
Herrnstein, R. J. & Prelec, D. (1992) A theory of addiction. In: Choice over time,
ed. G. F. Loewenstein & J. Elster, pp. 331–60. Sage.
[aGA]
Heyman, G. M. (1996) Resolving the contradictions of addiction. Behavioral and
Brain Sciences 19:561–610.
[aGA]
Hilgard, E. R. & Hilgard, J. R. (1994) Hypnosis in the relief of pain, revised
edition. Brunner/Mazel.
[aGA]
Ho, M.-Y., Al-Zahrani, S. S. A., Al-Ruwaitea, A. S. A., Bradshaw, C. M. & Szabadi,
E. (1998) 5-hydroxytryptamine and impulse control: Prospects for a
behavioural analysis. Journal of Psychopharmacology 12:68–78.
[aGA]
Holcomb, J. H. & Nelson, P. S. (1992) Another experimental look at individual
time preference. Rationality and Society 4(2):199–220.
[GWH]
Hollerman, J. R., Tremblay, L. & Schultz, W. (1998) Influence of reward
expectation on behavior-related neuronal activity in primate striatum. Journal
of Neurophysiology 80:947–63.
[aGA]
Hutchinson, J. M. C. & Gigerenzer, G. (2005) Simple heuristics and rules of
thumb; where psychologists and behavioral biologists might meet.
Behavioural Processes 69:97–124.
[FS]
Iacoboni, M., Woods, R. P., Brass, M., Bekkering, H., Mazziotta, J. C. & Rizzolatti,
G. (1999) Cortical mechanisms of imitation. Science 286:2526–28.
[rGA]
Joyce, J. M. (1999) The foundations of causal decision theory. Cambridge
University Press.
[HA-C]
Kacelnik, A. & Bateson, M. (1997) Risk-sensitivity: Crossroads for theories of
decision making. Trends in Cognitive Science 1:304–309.
[XTW]
Kahneman, D. (1999) Objective happiness. In: Well-being: The foundations of
hedonic psychology, ed. D. Kahneman, E. Diener & N. Schwartz, pp. 3–25.
Sage.
[rGA]
(2003) A perspective on judgment and choice: Mapping bounded rationality.
American Psychologist 58:697–720.
[TC]
Kahneman, D. & Frederick, S. (2002) Representativeness revisited: Attribute
substitution in intuitive judgment. In: Heuristics and biases: The psychology of
intuitive judgment, ed. T. Gilovich, D. Griffin & D. Kahneman, pp. 49–81.
Cambridge University Press.
[KES]
Kahneman, D. & Tversky, A. (1979) Prospect theory. Econometrica 47:263–92.
[XTW]
Kane, R. (1989) Two kinds of incompatibilism. Philosophy and Phenomenological
Research 50:220–54.
[rGA]
Kant, I. (1793/1960) Religion within the limits of reason alone, trans. T. Green &
H. Hucken, pp. 15–49. Harper and Row.
[aGA]
Karmiloff-Smith, A. (1992) Beyond modularity: A developmental perspective on
cognitive science. MIT Press.
[KES]
Kavka, G. (1983) The toxin puzzle. Analysis 43:33–36.
[aGA]
Kilic, C., Noshirvani, H., Basoglu, M. & Marks, I. (1997) Agoraphobia and panic
disorder: 3.5 years after alprazolam and/or exposure treatment.
Psychotherapy and Psychosomatics 66:175–78.
[aGA]
Kirby, K. N. (1997) Bidding on the future: Evidence against normative discounting
of delayed rewards. Journal of Experimental Psychology: General 126:54–70.
[aGA, LG]
Kirby, K. N. & Guastello, B. (2001) Making choices in anticipation of similar future
choices can increase self-control. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Applied
7:154–64.
[arGA]
Kirby, K. N. & Marakovic, N. N. (1995) Modeling myopic decisions: Evidence for
hyperbolic delay-discounting within subjects and amounts. Organizational
Behavior and Human Decision Processes 64:22–30.
[aGA, LG]
Klein, B. & Leffler, K. B. (1981) The role of market forces in assuring contractual
performance. Journal of Political Economy 89:615–40.
[aGA]
Kohlberg, L. (1963) The development of children’s orientations toward a moral
order: I. Sequence in the development of moral thought. Vita Humana 6:11–
33.
[aGA]
Laibson, D. (1997) Golden eggs and hyperbolic discounting. Quarterly Journal of
Economics 62:443–79.
[arGA]
Landman, J. (1993) Regret: The persistence of the possible. Oxford University
Press.
[TC]
Larrick, R. P. & Boles, T. L. (1995) Avoiding regret in decisions with feedback: A
negotiation example. Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes
63:87–97.
[TC]
Levi, I. (1975) Newcomb’s many problems. Theory and Decision 6:161–75.
[HA-C]
(1986) The paradoxes of Allais and Ellsberg. Economics and Philosophy 2:23–
56.
[HA-C]
Licklider, J. C. R. (1959) On psychophysiological models. In: Sensory
communication, ed. W. A. Rosenbluth. MIT Press.
[aGA]
Loewenstein, G. (1996) Out of control: Visceral influences on behavior.
Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes 35:272–92.
[aGA]
Logue, A. W. (1988) Research on self-control: An integrating framework.
Behavioral and Brain Sciences 11:665–78.
[FS]
Loomes, G. & Sugden, R. (1982) Regret theory: An alternative theory of rational
choice under uncertainty. Economic Journal 92:805–24.
[TC]
Lopes, L. L. (1987) Between hope and fear: The psychology of risk. Advances in
Experimental Social Psychology 20:255–95.
[XTW]
Lotka, A. (1957) Elements of mathematical biology. Dover.
[rGA]
Macaulay, S. (1963) Non-contractual relations in business: A preliminary study.
American Sociological Review 28:55–67.
[aGA]
Machina, M. J. (1989) Dynamic consistency and non-expected utility models of
choice under uncertainty. Journal of Economic Literature 27:1622–68.
[GWH]
Malekzadeh, A. R. & Nahavandi, A. (1987) Merger mania: Who wins? Who loses?
Journal of Business Strategy 8:76–79.
[aGA]
Marks, I. & Tobena, A. (1990) Learning and unlearning fear: A clinical and
evolutionary perspective. Neuroscience and Biobehavioral Reviews 14:365–
84.
[aGA]
Mazur, J. E. (1986) Choice between single and multiple delayed reinforcers.
Journal of the Experimental Analysis of Behavior 46:67–77.
[rGA]
(1987) An adjusting procedure for studying delayed reinforcement. In:
Quantitative analyses of behavior V: The effect of delay and of intervening
events on reinforcement value, ed. M. L. Commons, J. E. Mazur, J. A. Nevin
& H. Rachlin. Erlbaum.
[aGA]
(1997) Choice, delay, probability, and conditioned reinforcement. Animal
Learning and Behavior 25:131–47.
[aGA]
McClennan, E. F. (1990) Rationality and dynamic choice. Cambridge University
Press.
[aGA, GWH]
McClure, S. M., Laibson, D. I., Loewenstein, G. & Cohen, J. D. (2004) The
grasshopper and the ant: Separate neural systems value immediate and
delayed monetary rewards. Science 306:503–507.
[rGA, DR]
McConkey, K. M. (1984) Clinical hypnosis: Differential impact on volitional and
nonvolitional disorders. Canadian Psychology 25:79–83.
[aGA]
McGaw, C. (1966) Acting is believing: A basic method. Holt, Rinehart &
Winston.
[aGA]
Meek, C. & Glymour, C. (1994) Conditioning and intervening. British Journal for
the Philosophy of Science 45:1001–21.
[HA-C]
Mellers, B. A., Schwartz, A. & Ritov, I. (1999) Emotion-based choice. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: General 128:332–45.
[TC]
Melzack, R. & Casey, K. L. (1970) The affective dimension of pain. In: Feelings
and emotions, ed. M. B. Arnold, pp. 55–68. Academic Press.
[aGA]
Metcalfe, J. & Mischel, W. (1999) A hot/cool-system analysis of delay of
gratification: Dynamics of willpower. Psychological Review 106:3–19.
[aGA]
Millar, A. & Navarick, D. J. (1984) Self-control and choice in humans: Effects of
video game playing as a positive reinforcer. Learning and Motivation 15:203–
18.
[aGA]
References/Ainslie: Précis of Breakdown of Will
672
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (2005) 28:5
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0140525X05280111
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Eastern Kentucky University, on 20 Nov 2019 at 18:38:06, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms.

Miller, N. (1969) Learning of visceral and glandular responses. Science 163:434–
45.
[aGA]
Mischel, H. N. & Mischel, W. (1983) The development of children’s knowledge of
self-control strategies. Child Development 54:603–19.
[aGA]
Montague, P. R. & Berns, G. S. (2002) Neural economics and the biological
substrates of valuation. Neuron 36:265–84.
[DR]
Montegut, M. J., Bridgeman, B. & Sykes, J. (1997) High refresh rate and
oculomotor adaptation facilitate reading from video displays. Spatial Vision
10:305–22.
[BB]
Monterosso, J. R., Ainslie, G., Toppi Mullen, P. & Gault, B. (2002) The fragility of
cooperation: A false feedback study of a sequential iterated prisoner’s
dilemma. Journal of Economic Psychology 23:437–48.
[rGA]
Myerson, J. & Green, L. (1995) Discounting of delayed rewards: Models of
individual choice. Journal of the Experimental Analysis of Behavior 64:263–
76.
[aGA, LG]
Myerson, J., Green, L., Hanson, J. S., Holt, D. D. & Estle, S. J. (2003) Discounting
delayed and probabilistic rewards: Processes and traits. Journal of Economic
Psychology 24:619–35.
[LG]
Navarick, D. J. (1982) Negative reinforcement and choice in humans. Learning
and Motivation 13:361–77.
[aGA]
Nemiah, J. C. (1977) Alexithymia: Theoretical considerations. Psychotherapy and
Psychosomatics 28:199–206.
[aGA]
Nichols, S. & Stich, S. P. (2003) Mindreading: An integrated account of pretence, self-
awareness, and understanding other minds. Oxford University Press.
[KES]
Nozick, R. (1969) Newcomb’s problem and two principles of choice. Essays in
honor of Carl G. Hempel, ed. N. Rescher, pp. 107–33. Reidel.
[HA-C]
(1993) The nature of rationality. Princeton University Press.
[aGA]
Ostaszewski, P., Green, L. & Myerson, J. (1998) Effects of inflation on the
subjective value of delayed and probabilistic rewards. PsychonomicBulletin
and Review 5:324–33.
[DR]
Parrott, W. G. (1991) Mood induction and instructions to sustain moods: A test of
the subject compliance hypothesis of mood congruent memory. Cognition and
Emotion 3:41–52.
[aGA]
(1993) Beyond hedonism: Motives for inhibiting good moods and for
maintaining bad moods. In: Handbook of mental control, ed. D. M. Wegner &
F. W. Pennebaker. Prentice-Hall.
[aGA]
Peijnenburg, J. (2004) Nemen gedane zaken geen keer? (Is what is done done?).
General Dutch Journal of Philosophy (Algemeen Nederlands Tijdschrift voor
Wijsbegeerte) 96:114–25 (in Dutch).
[JP]
(forthcoming) Shaping your own life. Metaphilosophy.
[JP]
Perner, J. (1991) Understanding the representational mind. MIT Press.
[KES]
Piliavin, J. A., Callero, P. L. & Evans, D. E. (1982) Addiction to altruism?
Opponent-process theory and habitual blood donation. Journal of Personality
and Social Psychology 43:1200–13.
[aGA]
Polivy, J. (1998) The effects of behavioral inhibition: Integrating internal cues,
cognition, behavior, and affect. Psychological Inquiry 9:181–204.
[aGA]
Rachlin, H. (1995) Self-control: Beyond commitment. Behavioral and Brain
Sciences 18:109–59.
[aGA, LG]
(2000) The science of self-control. Harvard University Press.
[LG, HR]
Rader, N., Bausano, M. & Richards, J. E. (1980) On the nature of the visual-cliff-
avoidance response in human infants. Child Development 51:61–68.
[aGA]
Raineri, A. & Rachlin, H. (1993) The effect of temporal constraints on the value of
money and other commodities. Journal of Behavioral Decision Making 6:77–
94.
[LG]
Ramsay, R. W. (1997) Behavioural approaches to bereavement. In: The best of
behavior research and therapy, ed. S. Rachman & H. J. Eysenck. Pergamon.
[aGA]
Reb, J. (2005) The role of regret aversion in decision making. Doctoral dissertation,
University of Arizona.
[TC]
Reb, J. & Connolly, T. (2005) Determinants of regret intensity: A comparison of
justifiability and normalcy accounts. Working paper, University of Arizona.
[TC]
Rescorla, R. A. (1988) Pavlovian conditioning: It’s not what you think it is.
American Psychologist 43:151–60.
[arGA]
Rhue, J. W. & Lynn, S. J. (1987) Fantasy proneness: The ability to hallucinate “as
real as real.” British Journal of Experimental and Clinical Hypnosis 4:173–80.
[aGA]
Richard, R., van der Pligt, J. & de Vries, N. K. (1996) Anticipated regret and time
perspective: Changing sexual risk-taking behavior. Journal of Behavioral
Decision making 9:185–99.
[TC]
Roberts, R. D. (1991) Myopic discounting: Empirical evidence – Comment. In:
Handbook of behavioral economics, vol. 2B, ed. S. Kaish & B. Gilad. pp. 342–
45. JAI Press.
[GWH]
Ross, D. (2005) Economic theory and cognitive science: Microexplanation. MIT
Press.
[DR]
Rubenstein, A. (2003) “Economics and psychology”? The case of hyperbolic
discounting. International Economic Review 44:1207–16.
[rGA, HA-C]
Ryle, G. (1949/1984) The concept of mind. University of Chicago Press.
[aGA]
Sappington, A. A. (1990) Recent psychological approaches to the free will versus
determinism issue. Psychological Bulletin 108:19–29.
[rGA]
Sartre, J.-P. (1939/1948) The emotions: Sketch of a theory, trans. B. Frechtman.
Philosophical Library.
[aGA]
Schelling, T. C. (1960) The strategy of conflict. Harvard University Press.
[aGA]
Scitovsky, T. (1976) The joyless economy: An inquiry into human satisfaction and
consumer dissatisfaction. Oxford University Press.
[aGA]
Sen, A. K. (1977) Rational fools: A critique of the behavioral foundations of
economic theory. Philosophy and Public Affairs 6:317–44.
[aGA]
(2002) Rationality and freedom. Harvard University Press.
[HA-C]
Shafir, E. & Tversky, A. (1992) Thinking through uncertainty: Nonconsequential
reasoning and choice. Cognitive Psychology 24:449–74.
[rGA]
Shizgal, P. & Conover, K. (1996) On the neural computation of utility. Current
Directions in Psychological Science 5:37–43.
[aGA]
Siegal, S. (1983) Classical conditioning, drug tolerance, and drug dependence. In:
Research advances in alcohol and drug problems, vol. 1, ed. R. Smart, F.
Glaser, Y. Israel, H. Kalant, R. Popham & W. Schmidt. Plenum.
[aGA]
Simon, J. L. (1995) Interpersonal allocation continuous with intertemporal
allocation: Binding commitments, pledges, and bequests. Rationality and
Society 7:367–430.
[aGA]
Simonson, I. (1992) The influence of anticipating regret and responsibility on
purchase decisions. Journal of Consumer Research 19:105–18.
[TC]
Simpson, C. A. & Vuchinich, R. E. (2000) Reliability of a measure of temporal
discounting. The Psychological Record 50:3–16.
[LG]
Skinner, B. F. (1953) Science and human behavior. Macmillan.
[FS]
Sloman, S. A. (1996) The empirical case for two systems of reasoning.
Psychological Bulletin 119:3–22.
[KES]
Smith, A. (1759/1976) The theory of moral sentiments. Oxford University Press.
[aGA]
Smith, A. (1776/1976) An inquiry into the nature and causes of the wealth of
nations. Oxford University Press.
[aGA]
Smith, V. (1992) Game theory and experimental economics: Beginnings and early
influences. In: Toward a history of game theory, ed. E. R. Weintraub. Duke
University Press.
[rGA]
Solnick, J., Kannenberg, C., Eckerman, D. & Waller, M. (1980) An experimental
analysis of impulsivity and impulse control in humans. Learning and
Motivation 2:61–77. Review, 2:217–25.
[aGA]
Stanovich, K. E. (1999) Who is rational? Studies of individual differences in
reasoning. Erlbaum.
[KES]
(2001) Reductionism in the study of intelligence. Trends in Cognitive Sciences
5:91–92.
[KES]
(2004) The robot’s rebellion: Finding meaning in the age of Darwin. University
of Chicago Press.
[KES]
Stephens, D. W. & Anderson, D. (2001) The adaptive value of preference for
immediacy: When shortsighted rules have farsighted consequences.
Behavioral Ecology 12:330–39.
[FS]
Stephens, D. W. & Krebs, J. R. (1986) Foraging theory. Princeton University Press.
[XTW]
Strasberg, L. (1988) A dream of passion: The development of the method. Dutton.
[aGA]
Strotz, R. H. (1955) Myopia and inconsistency in dynamic utility maximization.
Review of Economic Studies 23:165–80.
[HA-C]
Sully, J. (1884) Outlines of psychology. Appleton.
[aGA]
Sunstein, C. R. (1995) Problems with rules. California Law Review 83:953–1030.
[aGA]
Tanaka, S. C., Doya, K., Okada, G., Ueda, K. Okamoto, Y. & Yamawaki, S. (2004)
Prediction of immediate and future rewards differentially recruits cortico-
basal ganglia loops. Nature Neuroscience 7(8):887–93.
[rGA, DR]
Tomkins, S. S. (1978) Script theory: Differential magnification of affects. Nebraska
Symposium on Motivation 26:201–36.
[aGA]
Tversky, A. (1972) Elimination by aspects: A theory of choice. Psychological
Review 79:281–99.
[LG]
Tversky, A. & Kahneman, D. (1981) The framing of decisions and the psychology
of choice. Science 211:453–58.
[XTW]
Vermaij, G. (2004) Nature: An economic history. Princeton University Press.
[DR]
Vuchinich, R. E. & Simpson, C. A. (1998) Hyperbolic temporal discounting in
social drinkers and problem drinkers. Experimental and Clinical
Psychopharmacology 6:292–305.
[aGA]
Wegner, D. M. (1994) Ironic processes of mental control. Psychological Review
101:34–52.
[aGA]
Winston, G. C. & Woodbury, R. G. (1991) Myopic discounting: Empirical
evidence. In: Handbook of behavioral economics, vol. 2B, ed. S. Kaish & 
B. Gilad, pp. 325–42. JAI Press.
[GWH]
Wogar, M. A., Bradshaw, C. M. & Szabadi, E. (1993) Effect of lesions of the
ascending 5-hydroxytryptaminergic pathways on choice between delayed
reinforcers. Psychopharmacology 111:239–43.
[rGA]
Zimmerman, J. & Ferster, C. B. (1964) Some notes on time-out from reinforcement.
Journal of the Experimental Analysis of Behavior 7:13–19.
[aGA]
References/Ainslie: Précis of Breakdown of Will
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (2005) 28:5
673
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0140525X05280111
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Eastern Kentucky University, on 20 Nov 2019 at 18:38:06, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms.

