International Phenomenological Society
The Message is: There is no Medium
Consciousness Explained by Daniel C. Dennett
Review by: Daniel C. Dennett
Philosophy and Phenomenological Research, Vol. 53, No. 4 (Dec., 1993), pp. 919-931
Published by: International Phenomenological Society
Stable URL: http://www.jstor.org/stable/2108264 .
Accessed: 31/08/2014 06:51
Your use of the JSTOR archive indicates your acceptance of the Terms & Conditions of Use, available at .
http://www.jstor.org/page/info/about/policies/terms.jsp
 .
JSTOR is a not-for-profit service that helps scholars, researchers, and students discover, use, and build upon a wide range of
content in a trusted digital archive. We use information technology and tools to increase productivity and facilitate new forms
of scholarship. For more information about JSTOR, please contact support@jstor.org.
 .
International Phenomenological Society is collaborating with JSTOR to digitize, preserve and extend access to
Philosophy and Phenomenological Research.
http://www.jstor.org 
This content downloaded from 83.109.180.175 on Sun, 31 Aug 2014 06:51:21 AM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

Philosophy and Phenomenological 
Research 
Vol. Lm, No. 4, December 1993 
The Message is: There is no Medium 
DANIEL C. DENNEIT 
Tufts University 
Sydney Shoemaker notes that my "avoidance of the standard philosophical 
terminology for discussing such matters" often creates problems for me; 
philosophers have a hard time figuring out what I am saying and what I am 
denying. My refusal to play ball with my colleagues is deliberate, of course, 
since I view the standard philosophical terminology as worse than useless- 
a major obstacle to progress since it consists of so many errors trapped in the 
seductively lucid amber of tradition: "obvious truths" that are simply 
false, broken-backed distinctions, and other cognitive illusions. I want to 
shift the perspective of philosophy of mind, and for that task using the stan- 
dard terminology would be counterproductive. Fortunately, the inevitable 
communication-difficulties my policy provokes are forced into the open by 
occasions such as this constructive confrontation, permitting me to clarify 
my shocking message. I am grateful to Shoemaker, and to Michael Tye, Frank 
Jackson and David Rosenthal, for their vigorous and sympathetic reactions 
to my book. 
Traditional philosophy of mind, in my opinion, has a rather bad case of 
tunnel-vision, excusing itself from many interesting and important ques- 
tions. This is excellently revealed by the puzzlement Shoemaker and Tye 
express about my targets. Just who am I arguing against, in my assault on 
the Cartesian Theater? Could it be sense-datum theorists, Shoemaker won- 
ders: "But sense-datum theory has few defenders nowadays, and seems un- 
likely to be Dennett's main target." Tye comments "Why he should be so 
concerned to refute it is not immediately clear. For Dennett himself associ- 
ates no specific philosophers or psychologists with Cartesian materialism, 
and I know of no one who endorses it." Well, if Shoemaker and Tye know no 
philosophers who are guilty of the errors I am scouting, that is probably be- 
cause almost no philosopher has ventured to work out a theory of conscious- 
ness in sufficient detail to confront the problems that lead more intrepid 
theorists, with great regularity, into the errors of Cartesian materialism. 
Among psychologists and neuroscientists who do aspire to model con- 
sciousness as a neural phenomenon, the temptations of "sense-datum the- 
ory" (though not, of course, under that name) are almost irresistible. When 
DENNEIT SYMPOSIUM 919 
This content downloaded from 83.109.180.175 on Sun, 31 Aug 2014 06:51:21 AM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

I called Cartesian materialism the view nobody holds, I meant it ironically; 
whereas almost nobody would avow it, the hopes and hunches and arguments 
of most theorists-philosophers included-betray a sneaking and unrecog- 
nized commitment to the view. I have been gratified by the widespread 
acknowledgment of this by scientists in response to my "outing" of the 
theory. Antonio Damasio, one of the world's leading theoretical 
neuroscientists, says, in his commentary on Dennett and Kinsbourne, "Time 
and the Observer: the Where and When of Consciousness in the Brain," in 
Behavioral and Brain Sciences: "This notion, which D & K modestly refer to 
as a 'prevailing view,' is far worse than that: It informs virtually all 
research on mind and brain, explicitly and implicitly."' 
But when David Rosenthal says that the Cartesian Theater model 
"tacitly underlies much that's mistaken in current thinking about mind and 
consciousness," I suspect he has philosophers in mind, primarily, and he's 
right about them, too. The few philosophers who have tried to say some- 
thing specific about how consciousness might fit in the brain end up endors- 
ing Cartesian materialism implicitly (see, e.g., the commentaries by Ned 
Block and Robert van Gulick in the same issue of Behavioral and Brain Sci- 
ences), or even explicitly. Michael Lockwood, in his essay on my book,2 now 
declares himself to be a Cartesian materialist. 
Indeed, if Tye and Shoemaker want to see a card-carrying Cartesian mate- 
rialist, each may look in the mirror, for their commitment to qualia or 
"phenomenal seemings" itself involves a covert assumption that there is a 
privileged medium in the brain, the medium in which these properties get in- 
stantiated-as I will now try to show briefly. When Tye says that advocates 
of the reality of phenomenal seemings "are not committed to holding that 
there is a single place in the brain in which the seemings and feelings occur" 
this is really just because these advocates have not developed their allegiance 
to this reality beyond the vaguest of handwavings. Presumably 
"phenomenal seemings" are seemings-to-me (as opposed to the non-phenom- 
enal seemings that are just seemings-to-my-retina or seemings-to-some-un- 
conscious-control-process), but making this distinction requires that one 
identify a privileged neural medium-the Medium, you might call it- 
transduction into which marks the onset of true phenomenal seeming.3 
Antonio R. Damasio, "The Selfless Consciousness," Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 15, 
1992, pp.208-9. 
2 
Michael Lockwood, 1993. "Dennett's Mind," Inquiry, 36, pp. 59-72. 
3 
This medium might be anatomically spread around, but that creates further problems for 
the model-see Dennett and Kinsbourne, "Escape from the Cartesian Theater," our re- 
sponse to thescommentaries in Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 1992, pp. 234-47, esp. sec- 
tions 1, 2, and:4. 
920 DANIEL 
C. DENNE1r 
This content downloaded from 83.109.180.175 on Sun, 31 Aug 2014 06:51:21 AM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

I owe this new way of putting it to Bruce Mangan, who in his forthright 
attack on my book,4 found a formulation of Cartesian materialism of envi- 
able clarity and vividness: consciousness, he proposed, is itself a particular 
physical medium in the brain. You don't have conscious visual experience, 
for example, as soon as light strikes your retina, for that is not yet the 
medium that is consciousness. He declines to tell us just which neural tis- 
sues compose the medium of consciousness, but at the moment when infor- 
mation eventually gets transduced into that medium, it enters conscious ex- 
perience. In the aftermath of spectrum inversion fantasies, for instance,when 
the host of merely reactive dispositions are becoming re-inverted in order to 
normalize the merely functional or behavioral properties, it is the state of 
affairs in the Medium that determines whether or not one's qualia are still 
inverted. If there is no such medium, there is no fact of the matter about 
whether one's qualia (as distinguished to one's merely reactive dispositions) 
are inverted-more on this later.' 
I turn now to respond in more detail to Tye, Jackson, Shoemaker, and 
Rosenthal, in that order. 
I claim that verificationism makes sense precisely in the case of con- 
sciousness, citing Kant as a distinguished predecessor (p. 132n), but Tye 
prefers Mr. McCawber's conservatism. Tye sees, correctly, that I base my 
claim on the belief that "the central concept of phenomenal experience or 
seeming can only be understood in terms of concepts pertaining to judgment 
or belief." A major problem he sees with this is that it renders my "main ar- 
gument" redundant. This would not worry me, since my main argument 
might still be the best way of drawing out the implications of my main 
claim for the imagination-impaired. It all hinges, as Tye notes, on whether 
there might be "real seeming" independent of all judging or believing. 
Why? Because the only way to overrule my verificationism would be to find 
a ground for insisting that there was some real seeming going on, about 
which a subject's judgments were inconclusive.6 
The term "judging," which I use loosely, also has more strict senses, and 
Tye and Shoemaker both show what problems arise for my view if one takes 
me to be using the term in its strict-and perhaps standard-philosophical 
4 
"Dennett, Consciousness and the Sorrows of Functionalism," Consciousness and Cogni- 
tion, 2, 1993, pp. 1-17. See also my reply, "Caveat Emptor," in the same issue. 
5 
When Shoemaker speaks of the duration of "the experience" (as opposed to the duration of 
the entire neural process from sense organ stimulation to eventual quiescence) he must be 
supposing that there is something like a transduction event that marks the onset of con- 
scious experiencing as a subprocess within the larger process-and this is the essence of 
Cartesian materialism. 
6 
By the way, Tye slightly misdescribes his example of wheels seeming to revolve back- 
wards. There has to be a source of phased snapshotting-film or television frames, or 
strobe light or, under special conditions, just the 60-cycle (or in Europe, 50-cycle) pulsing 
of ordinary electric light-to make rapidly turning wheels seem to rotate backwards. 
DENNETT 
SYMPOSIUM 921 
This content downloaded from 83.109.180.175 on Sun, 31 Aug 2014 06:51:21 AM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

sense. But Shoemaker goes on to point out, correctly, that there is a 
"somewhat more plausible" way of interpreting my claims that avoids 
these embarrassments: "let us understand these to be contentful states 
whose contents the subject does not necessarily endorse (as one does endorse 
the contents of one's judgings)." This is what I meant, and not only do the 
passages Shoemaker refers to support this reading; many of my other claims 
demand it. As Shoemaker notes in the passage just noted, the standard con- 
cept implies the existence of a single canonical "subject" whose endorse- 
ment is essential for judgments, whereas my theory demands that there be 
judgment-like episodes that compete for something like eventual endorse- 
ment. So Tye is right that my view would be in deep trouble if I meant by 
"judgment" what philosophers standardly mean, but Shoemaker is right 
that there is a better interpretation of my language. 
I am pleased to see that Tye grants that if my arguments against 
"phenomenal realism" were successful, I really would have explained con- 
sciousness. So it all does come down to whether my "concoction" can take 
the place of "real phenomenal consciousness." And he notes that if you be- 
lieve in the latter, there is a huge (but not necessarily unbridgeable) task re- 
maining to be done. I take that to be in itself a ground for suspicion-noth- 
ing more-of the concept of phenomenal consciousness. Add to that suspi- 
cion the positive reasons I have given for discarding the concept of phenome- 
nal consciousness, and my "concoction" begins to look attractive, I think, 
especially if it can offer the beginnings of positive accounts (as I claim it 
does) of some undeniably ubiquitous features of phenomenology-the aw- 
fulness of pain, the facts of color preference, etc. Faced with a choice be- 
tween brute inexplicability on the one hand, and a concoction that begins to 
explain what needs explaining, I think the choice is obvious. 
I entirely agree with Jackson's discussion of the ambiguities hidden in 
the standard questions about the reality of this and that, ambiguities which 
excuse-indeed prohibit-straightforward answers. And I accept his break- 
down into the A, B, and C questions, and his conclusion that it is the C ques- 
tion, the "truth-maker" question, that is compulsory for materialists, and 
hence for me. 
The truth-maker 
question for materialists 
is to specify what it is about a person's material na- 
ture (widely understood 
so as not to exclude, for instance, material environment) 
which neces - 
sitates their psychological nature. (p. 901) 
But when he goes on to proclaim a sharp distinction between "behavior- 
ism, functionalism, eliminativism, and instrumentalism as competing an- 
swers," he sees differences that don't hold up, in my opinion. My answer, in 
any event, mixes elements from all of these, and denies that there is any good 
reason to cleave to a less eclectic answer. Matching the brevity of Jackson's 
922 DANIEL 
C. DENNETr 
This content downloaded from 83.109.180.175 on Sun, 31 Aug 2014 06:51:21 AM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

thumbnail account of the differentia is my thumbnail account of how to 
merge all four: 
Some traditionally well-regarded mental states should be eliminated; in 
other words, only a reformed folk psychology stands in need of materialis- 
tic reduction. Now we must deal with the leftovers: what makes it true that 
people have the real mental states is facts about their behavioral disposi- 
tions and capacities, but these facts can be perspicuously and efficiently ex- 
pressed only from the intentional stance, an instrument of prediction (and 
explanation). As for functionalism, in its defensible version, it is not really 
an alternative to behaviorism, but simply a reflection of the tight constraint 
behavioral capacities (as described from the intentional stance) place on in- 
ternal states. So let me confirm Jackson's surmise that I am his behaviorist; I 
unhesitatingly endorse the claim that "necessarily, if two organisms are be- 
haviorally exactly alike, they are psychologically exactly alike." 
Jackson thinks this view is a non-starter because of the problems he 
thinks are raised by Ned Block's imagined gigantic look-up table, which, he 
notes, I do not address in my book. I do address it elsewhere, however, In 
"Can Machines Think?"7 I offer what I consider to be conclusive grounds 
for dismissing Block's putative counterexample. Briefly, the sane theorist is 
entitled to lean a little on some obvious if arguably non-necessary facts. 
Block claims that a huge look-up table could always "in principle" provide 
the innards governing any behavioral regularities whatever, and intuition 
proclaims that we would not consider anything controlled by such a mere 
look-up table to have psychological states. (If I discovered that you were in 
fact controlled by such a giant look-up table, I would conclude that you 
were not a person at all, but an elaborate phony.) But as Alan Turing recog- 
nized when he proposed his notoriously behavioristic imitation game, the 
Turing Test, this "in principle" possibility is not really a possibility at all. 
A look-up table larger than the visible universe, accessed at speeds trillions 
of times in excess of the speed of light, is not a serious possibility, and noth- 
ing less than that would suffice. What Turing realized is that for real time 
responsivity in an unrestricted Turing Test, there is only one seriously con- 
ceivable architecture: one that creates its responses locally, on the fly, by 
processes that systematically uncover the meaning of the inputs, given its 
previous history, etc., etc. Any such "creative" architecture, I submit, would 
meet our intuitive demands for intelligence-for "having a psychology"- 
since it would have plenty of transitional states that accomplished the nec- 
essary analysis and construction. So Turing's simple, "external" behavioral 
test actually puts exactly the right sort of constraint on the internal states: 
7 
"Can Machines Think," in M. Shafto, ed., How We Know, New York: Harper and Row, 
1985, pp. 121-45. See also "Fast Thinking," chapter 9 in The Intentional Stance, Cam- 
bridge, Massachusetts: MIT Press, 1987. 
DENNEMT 
SYMPOSIUM 923 
This content downloaded from 83.109.180.175 on Sun, 31 Aug 2014 06:51:21 AM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

not too parochial or "chauvinistic" (to use Block's term), and not too lax- 
since Block is simply wrong about the possibility of the giant look-up table. 
(If "possibilities in principle" count here, they count everywhere, in which 
case an analogue of Block's counterexample also goes to establish that no 
chemist has succeeded in establishing that there is H20 in the Pacific Ocean.) 
Now Turing did not bother spelling this all out; it takes someone like Block 
to dream up the loophole that forces this retrospectively obvious point into 
explicitness. 
Hidden behind this abrupt response to Block is another, which is in some 
regards more useful, even though it begins by conceding to him the 
"possibility in principle" of the giant look-up table. Let us suppose that 
Descartes' evil demon, with his infinite powers, hand-coded this look-up 
table-nothing less could accomplish such a super-astronomical task. Now 
pause to consider how this table is-must be-organized. There is going to 
be plenty of structure in this vast storehouse of raw data-discernible in the 
behavioral regularities it guarantees. In short, there is, in this vast memory, a 
virtual machine of tremendous complexity. (My computer has only two 
real disk drives, which contain real disks that really spin, and that are di- 
vided into sectors that can be written on and read from by electromagnetic 
processes. But it also has a virtual disk drive which is simply a portion of 
RAM-it behaves exactly as if it were a disk drive. It "passes the Turing 
Test for Disk Drives" when subjected to interactions by all the software 
that I can run on it.) All the-internal structure and process that Block finds 
intuitively to be required for genuine psychology is present in virtual form 
in the giant look-up table. Is the structure "real"? Yes, in one very impor- 
tant sense: it has to have been designed-barring more miracles. The "r and 
d" process that the demon used to configure all the data in the look-up table 
is at least as elaborate as the "r and d" process that configures the actual 
processes and structures in an actual brain. What I as a card-carrying behav- 
iorist (of this special sort) insist upon is that the difference between virtual 
and "real" machines is important as biology, important as materials science, 
but not important as psychology.8 For example, if it turned out that left- 
handers, or women, used virtual brain machines for some cognitive tasks that 
others used real brain machines for, this would be a fascinating discovery, 
but it would certainly not impugn the mentality of left-handers or women, 
even with regard to the competence in question. 
So there is no real conflict between my endorsement of behaviorism and 
my endorsement as well of what we may call virtual machine functional- 
ism-they come to the same thing. Jackson's brief objection to the latter is 
that "relatively simple machines" could encode multiple drafts and instan- 
tiate Joycean machines, and manifestly they would not be conscious, so I owe 
8 
For more on this theme, see my discussion of Mangan's views in "Caveat Emptor," op. cit. 
924 DANIEL C. DENNETT 
This content downloaded from 83.109.180.175 on Sun, 31 Aug 2014 06:51:21 AM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

an account of the kind of complexity that necessitates consciousness. I agree, 
but I thought I gave that account: the sort of complexity that matters is the 
sort that could sustain a highly contentful and predictive intentional stance 
characterization. No simple machine can do that-for it amounts to passing 
the Turing Test. This is particularly apparent, I would have thought, in my 
discussion of zimbos (pp. 309-14). Among zombies, only a zimbo could 
conceivably pass the Turing Test; a zimbo has a highly complex profile as an 
indefinitely higher-order intentional system. But, say I, that is sufficient for 
consciousness (pp. 405-6). Jackson is absolutely right in claiming that I, as a 
materialist, must answer the truth-maker question. He has not seen that in 
the course of the book, I have done so, quite forthrightly-if not quite in the 
format philosophers usually provide their answers. 
Shoemaker once remarked to me in a letter responding to "Quining 
Qualia" that I seemed to have been placed on this earth to raise his blood 
pressure. I fear my reply to his current essay will confirm that suspicion. 
Yes, Sydney, I am saying you are the victim of an illusion, and while your 
thought experiments vividly illustrate your state of mind, they do not show 
it to be undeluded. Please don't take my words with a pinch of salt! 
Ned Block figures once again as a ghost at the banquet-his "inverted 
Earth" thought experiment is supposed to secure a conclusion that is also se- 
cured by some of Shoemaker's own arguments. I like Shoemaker's version 
better, since, as he notes, it is shorter, which will hasten its demise. "All in- 
verted spectrum scenarios do," Shoemaker notes, "is to highlight and drama- 
tize a point that should be obvious without them-that there is an aspect of 
our experiences...that is not captured by behavioral and functional character- 
izations." Too true: that is all such scenarios do-they dramatize a presump- 
tion without providing any non-question-begging support for it. If you al- 
ready believe in the "obvious" point, then you are bound to go along with 
the gag, but I flatly deny the presumption. Let us look, then, at Shoemaker's 
rendition of the case of partial inversion to see where I can drive in the 
wedge. Post-surgically our subject reports that the shades of color "within 
a very small range" have "switched places." As Shoemaker notes, this 
would be a change in the structure of her quality space, and would be behav- 
iorally detectable in lots of ways. (She would see some vivid color bound- 
aries where she used to see indistinguishably smooth fades or blends, for in- 
stance.) 
He adds parenthetically that this could not be the result of memory tam- 
pering, but this is simply not so. Shoemaker is taken in by the ordinary un- 
derstanding of memory (a passive storehouse that materials enter after they 
have passed through the pre-processing stage and entered consciousness). We 
should remind ourselves that any transient informational effect in the 
course of perceptual processing is from one perspective a memory-effect. As 
Shoemaker himself puts it, "something akin to memory" is involved in ev- 
DENNETT SYMPOSIUM 925 
This content downloaded from 83.109.180.175 on Sun, 31 Aug 2014 06:51:21 AM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

ery case of motion perception, for instance. Even such familiar phenomena as 
complementary-color after-images are thus in one sense the result of mem- 
ory-tampering. Now it is no escape from this to insist that even if these 
"early" effects are called memory, there must be some later effect that is 
not "merely" a memory effect (but rather a real qualia inversion), for this 
manifestly begs the question! 
But set that difficulty aside. When Shoemaker goes on to imagine our sub- 
ject making only a "semantic" accommodation to her newly inverted cir- 
cumstances, he must be distinguishing such mere semantic accommodations 
from the host of other dispositional accommodations that might or might 
not be made. After the crimson-chartreuse switch, and the subject's merely 
semantic accommodation to it, does chartreuse ineluctably bring to her mind 
fair Harvard or not? Suppose not; then Shoemaker is wrong when he claims 
that after a total series of such inversions "we can suppose that together 
with the semantic accommodation to that change it would restore the per- 
son's 'reactive dispositions' to what they were initially." When objectively 
crimson things are put before her, she unhesitatingly calls them crimson, but 
few or none of her old Harvard-related associations are stimulated. (Some 
associations may be stimulated via the newly made bridge to the word 
"crimson," but this bridge may well carry only a fraction of the earlier 
traffic.) 
So we must try to suppose all such association-inversions do go along 
with the surgery. But this ruins the story. For instance, now the subject will 
not be able to confirm (to herself-let alone to the rest of us!), as we go 
along on the series of shifts, that, e.g., the earlier qualia-shifts haven't spon- 
taneously reverted. What? Can't she "just tell," when the latest bout of 
surgery obliterates a color-boundary problem she'd been noting, which of 
the two "possible" inversions occurred? No-unless you beg the question. 
Ex hypothesi, nothing will seem to be "strangely" colored post-surgically, 
even though color contrasts that existed before the surgery will have disap- 
peared. Alternatively, Shoemaker might propose that there would be an ini- 
tial sense of strangeness or novelty for some of the post-surgical colors, but 
the "strangeness wears off' (as it must, to restore all reactive dispositions), 
but then what grounds could he give to support the obligatory claim that 
the process of "strangeness wearing off' is not in fact the process of "qualia 
re-inversion"? This was the point I was making (too swiftly, apparently) in 
my discussion of the imaginary case of the fatal shade of blue that reminded 
the subject of a car crash (pp. 395ff). 
Shoemaker notes in his footnote 6 that there are empirical objections to 
spectrum inversion that I do not raise. Actually, in my own way I do allude 
to them in simplified form-in my discussion of color preferences and, 
again, in the blue car example. Shoemaker proposes to "finesse such objec- 
tions" by some science fiction, noting that "surely no defender of physical- 
926 DANIEL C. DENNETT 
This content downloaded from 83.109.180.175 on Sun, 31 Aug 2014 06:51:21 AM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

ism or functionalism will want to rest his case on the claim that we are not 
like the envisaged creatures." Guess again. What anchors our naive sense that 
there are such properties as qualia are the multiple, asymmetrical, interde- 
pendent set of reactive dispositions by which we acquaint ourselves with the 
sensible world. Our sense that the color red has, as it were, an identity, a 
"personality" all its own is due to the host of different associations that go 
with each color. Shoemaker's envisaged creatures, lacking all such reactive 
landmarks in their dispositional make-up, would not think they had qualia at 
all-what it was like to have one sort of experience would not differ at all 
from what it was like to have a different one! So I claim; if Shoemaker 
thinks otherwise, he needs to find a supporting argument.9 
Supposing that there is something in addition to these complex families 
of reactive dispositions is falling for an illusion, plain and simple-an illu- 
sion of subtraction, you might call it. Shoemaker seems to go along with the 
natural but treacherous assumption that reactive dispositions must involve 
the person reacting to a quale, presented somehow to the reactor, and causing, 
by its presentation, the reaction. (The given is then taken.) For instance, 
here's how pain works: the pain-networks produce (somewhere central?) the 
awfulness quale, which is then the very property to which "one" reacts with 
abhorrence. My view is that this confuses cause and effect; it is the reactions 
that compose the "introspectable property" and it is through reacting that 
one "identifies" or "recognizes" the property. Consider the fascinating case 
of infant "cuteness." When you look at a little baby, is there a cuteness 
quale in your experience? It turns out (most probably) that our appreciation 
of the cuteness of infants has a deep biological base. Some animals have off- 
spring that need significant amounts of parental care after birth; during this 
vulnerable period, they all have foreshortened "baby-faces"-short snouts, 
big eyes, etc. Animals that eschew parental care are born with "adult" head 
shapes. Current theory maintains that the baby-face features evolved to trig- 
ger hard-wired nurturing routines-in adult dinosaurs (those that cared for 
their young) as well as in adult birds, horses and us. You couldn't get much 
more "reactive behavioral-dispositional" than that. Now do you suppose 
that in addition to the propensity to trigger such parental tenderness-behav- 
ior there is a cuteness-quale produced, to which you are reacting when you 
9 
Shoemaker also claims to have shown elsewhere that the similarity relations between 
properties such as colors "are parasitic on the similarity relations between features of 
perceptual states of those observers in a way that assigns to those features the role of be- 
ing qualia." In the papers in question, the view he actually argues against, the 
"intentionalist view," maintains simply that experiences have no introspectable proper- 
ties other than intentional ones ("Qualities and Qualia: What's in the Mind?" Philosophy 
and Phenomenological Research, 50, 1990, pp. 109-31. See p. 114). But I agree that in addi- 
tion to the pure intentional properties (which Shoemaker and I both claim can be handled 
by functionalism), there are others-the dispositional properties! 
DENNETr SYMPOSIUM 
927 
This content downloaded from 83.109.180.175 on Sun, 31 Aug 2014 06:51:21 AM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

find yourself cooing and cuddling? As Ivan Fox has said, a quale thrown into 
that gap falls right through. 
First let me confirm that Rosenthal's 
summary description of the 
Multiple Drafts Model is an excellent translation of my view into terms 
that many philosophers will find more familiar. His own view, as he notes, 
is very close kin to mine-the influences on each other run back and forth 
through our discussions over the years-and we understand each other's po- 
sitions better than most other philosophers do. So why do I find it so hard to 
say why I still prefer my version to his? My discussion (pp. 314-20) of 
what I find unacceptable in his view is, I think, both the most difficult and 
least successful part of my book. Perhaps it will help if first I tally up what 
I think is importantly right in his view. 
Like me, he sees the need for a theory that builds human consciousness out 
of functional (unconscious) properties of the information-flow in an animal 
(or robot) control system. And the property that matters most, he notes, is 
the one which permits us to distinguish reporting from (merely) expressing, 
for example: the property created by a general and iterable capacity for self- 
monitoring. This is nicely captured "from a distance" one might say, in the 
folk-psychological terms of thoughts about thoughts-HOTs in his termi- 
nology. 
The problems arise, I think, when one tries to take this everyday charac- 
terization too seriously as a working model of actual inner processes, for 
implicit in folk psychology is the idea of a single, unified subject, whose 
"endorsement" of these HOTs (recalling Tye and Shoemaker's discussions 
of judgments) would require a more centralized organization of the brain 
than the facts permit. The heart of Rosenthal's model has a spurious 
specificity: 
A mental state can have many mental effects without becoming conscious, but not if it causes a 
HOT. Having a thought about something is one way of being conscious of it. So if one comes 
noninferentially 
to have a thought that one is in a particular mental state, that state becomes 
conscious. 
This noninferential process is what we might call a sub-perceptual pro- 
cess, presumably, and such processes occur ubiquitously in the brain-but in- 
tuitively only the grandest or most important of these should count as con- 
sciousness-ensuring. HOTs may themselves be unconscious (Rosenthal's 
master stroke), but they have to be, somehow, more globally influential than 
the merely local-effect, run-of-the-mill self-monitoring outcomes that 
crowd the brain. How could the distinction be drawn? I think Rosenthal, in 
spite of his own good warnings about ancient errors, is still somewhat in the 
thrall of the idea of consciousness as a property that has sharp boundaries in 
the brain-and in the world. Provoked by his way of putting things, I have 
928 DANIEL 
C. DENNEIT 
This content downloaded from 83.109.180.175 on Sun, 31 Aug 2014 06:51:21 AM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

come up with yet another analogy to help make my case that the tradition 
has been radically wrong about what kind of a phenomenon consciousness is. 
Andy Warhol anticipated a future in which each person would be famous 
for fifteen minutes. What he nicely captured in this remark was a reductio ad 
absurdum of a certain (imaginary) concept of fame. Would that be fame? Has 
Warhol described a logically possible world? If we pause to think about his 
example more carefully than usual, we see that what makes the remark 
funny is that he has stretched something beyond the breaking point. It is 
true, no doubt, that thanks to the mass media, fame can be conferred on an 
anonymous citizen almost instantaneously (Rodney King comes to mind), 
and thanks to the fickleness of public attention, fame can evaporate almost as 
fast. But Warhol's rhetorical exaggeration of this fact carries us into the ab- 
surdity of Wonderland. We have yet to see an instance of someone being fa- 
mous for just fifteen minutes, and in fact we never will. Let some one citizen 
be viewed for fifteen minutes by hundreds of millions of people, and then- 
unlike Rodney King-be utterly forgotten. To call that fame would be to 
misuse the term (ah yes, an "ordinary language" move, and a good one, if 
used with discretion). 
If that is not obvious, then let me raise the ante: could a person be fa- 
mous-not merely attended-to-by-millions-of-eyes, but famous-for five 
seconds? Every day there are in fact hundreds if not thousands of people who 
pass through the state of being viewed, for a few seconds, by millions of 
people. Consider the evening news on television, presenting a story about the 
approval of a new drug. Accompanying Dan Rather's voice-over, an utterly 
anonymous nurse is seen (by millions) plunging a hypodermic into the arm 
of an utterly anonymous patient. Now that's fame-right? Of course not. 
Being seen on television and being famous are different sorts of phenomena; 
the former has technologically sharp edges that the latter entirely lacks. 
What I am arguing, in my attack on the Cartesian theater, is that being an 
item in consciousness is not at all like being on television; it is, rather, a 
species of mental fame. Almost literally. Consciousness is cerebral 
celebrity -nothing more and nothing less. Those contents are conscious that 
persevere, that monopolize resources long enough to achieve certain typical 
and "symptomatic" effects-on memory, on the control of behavior and so 
forth. Not every content can be famous, for in such competitions there must 
be more losers than winners. And unlike the world of sports, winning is ev- 
erything. There are no higher honors to be bestowed on the winners, no Hall 
of Fame to be inducted into. In just the way that a Hall of Fame is a redun- 
dant formality (if you are already famous, election is superfluous, and if you 
are not, election probably won't make the difference), there is no induction 
or transduction into consciousness beyond the influence already secured by 
winning the competition and thereby planting lots of hooks into the ongo- 
ing operations of the brain. 
DENNEIT SYMPOSIUM 929 
This content downloaded from 83.109.180.175 on Sun, 31 Aug 2014 06:51:21 AM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

Instantaneous fame is a disguised contradiction in terms, and it follows 
from my proposed conception of what consciousness is that an instantaneous 
flicker of consciousness is also an incoherent notion. Those philosophers who 
see me as underestimating the power of future research in neuroscience when 
I claim that no further discoveries from that quarter could establish that 
there was indeed a heretofore undreamt-of variety of evanescent-but gen- 
uine-consciousness might ask themselves if I similarly undervalue the re- 
search potential of sociology when I proclaim that it is inconceivable that 
sociologists could discover that Andy Warhol's prediction had come true. 
This could only make sense, I submit, to someone who is still covertly at- 
tached to the idea that consciousness (or fame) is the sort of semi-mysteri- 
ous property that might be discovered to be present by the tell-tale ticking 
of the phenomenometer or famometer (patent pending!).10 
Consider a question nicely parallel to the Orwell-Stalin stumpers I de- 
clare to be vacuous: did Jack Ruby become famous before Lee Harvey Oswald 
died? Hmm. Well, hundreds of millions witnessed him shooting Oswald on 
"live" television, and certainly he subsequently became famous, but did his 
fame begin at the instant his gun-toting arm hove into view, while Oswald 
was still alive and breathing? I for one do not think there is any fact we 
don't already know that could conceivably shed light on this question of 
event ordering. 
Cerebral celebrity is tantamount to being the object of a HOT, but is a 
more promising model for future development. Gone is the specific class of 
internal episodes, the thoughts about thoughts, identifiable in principle by 
their vehicular shape and their ingredients (like boxcars containing boxcars). 
In their place is something that would do the same work-structures that 
10 Owen Flanagan has made the claim in detail, in Consciousness 
Reconsidered, 
Cambridge, 
Massachusetts: 
MIT Press, 1992, esp. pp. 14-15, pp. 82-83. He supposes, for instance, that 
the 40-herz phase-locked 
oscillation championed 
by Singer, von der Malsburg, and others, 
and suggested by Crick and Koch as a key mechanism 
in consciousness, 
might serve as the 
missing ingredient that could trump my short-sighted 
verificationism. 
"Never say never" 
he advises me. Well, now that neuroscience's 
love affair with 40-herz is beginning to cool 
off (because of problems that were always inherent in the idea-people were asking too 
much of it), let's look more closely at the prospects. If Crick and Koch are taken to be 
proposing a mechanism for securing cerebral celebrity-the underlying mechanism by 
which some contents win and others lose in competition-then they are not offering a ri- 
val view, but merely specifying details I left blank in my sketch. Ignore the problems and 
suppose they are right (I would love to have an account of the detailed mechanisms, 
after 
all). Notice that it is logically impossible for a 40-herz oscillation mechanism to resolve 
temporal onset questions below the two-pulse minimum of 25msec, and any plausible 
competition-for-entrainment 
model would surely require considerably 
more time-mov- 
ing us inexorably into a window of indeterminacy 
of the size I postulated: several hun- 
dred milliseconds. Alternatively, 
if Flanagan supposes that Crick and Koch are claiming 
that 40-herz entrainment 
causes a subsequent state-change (which could be an instanta- 
neous transduction 
into some new medium, for instance), then he is simply insisting on the 
very concept of consciousness 
I am challenging-that consciousness 
requires entrance into 
a "charmed 
circle." 
930 
DANIEL 
C. DENNEIT 
This content downloaded from 83.109.180.175 on Sun, 31 Aug 2014 06:51:21 AM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

more or less guarantee the mutual accessibility of various contents to each 
other and to the mechanisms that can use them. That was to have been the 
function of thoughts about thoughts, after all, but this way we eliminate 
the middleman who has to have those HOTs and know what to do about 
them. 
DENNEMT SYMPOSIUM 931 
This content downloaded from 83.109.180.175 on Sun, 31 Aug 2014 06:51:21 AM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

