Real Patterns
Daniel C. Dennett
The Journal of Philosophy, Vol. 88, No. 1. (Jan., 1991), pp. 27-51.
Stable URL:
http://links.jstor.org/sici?sici=0022-362X%28199101%2988%3A1%3C27%3ARP%3E2.0.CO%3B2-2
The Journal of Philosophy is currently published by Journal of Philosophy, Inc..
Your use of the JSTOR archive indicates your acceptance of JSTOR's Terms and Conditions of Use, available at
http://www.jstor.org/about/terms.html. JSTOR's Terms and Conditions of Use provides, in part, that unless you have obtained
prior permission, you may not download an entire issue of a journal or multiple copies of articles, and you may use content in
the JSTOR archive only for your personal, non-commercial use.
Please contact the publisher regarding any further use of this work. Publisher contact information may be obtained at
http://www.jstor.org/journals/jphil.html.
Each copy of any part of a JSTOR transmission must contain the same copyright notice that appears on the screen or printed
page of such transmission.
JSTOR is an independent not-for-profit organization dedicated to and preserving a digital archive of scholarly journals. For
more information regarding JSTOR, please contact support@jstor.org.
http://www.jstor.org
Fri May 18 08:30:51 2007

27 
REAL PATTERNS 
REAL PATTERNS* 
A
RE there really beliefs? Or are we learning (from neuro- 
science and psychology, presumably) that, strictly speaking, 
beliefs are figments of our imagnation, items in a super- 
seded ontology? Philosophers generally regard such ontological 
questions as admitting just two possible answers: either beliefs exist 
or they do not. There is no such state as quasi existence; there are no 
stable doctrines of semirealism. Beliefs must either be vindicated 
along with the viruses or banished along with the banshees. A bracing 
conviction prevails, then, to the effect that when it comes to beliefs 
(and other mental items) one must be either a realist or an elimina- 
tive materialist. 
I .  REALISM ABOUT BELIEFS 
This conviction prevails in spite of my best efforts over the years to 
undermine it with various analogies: are voices in your ontology?' 
Are centers of gravity in your ontology?' 
It is amusing to note that my analogizing beliefs to centers of 
gravity has been attacked from both sides of the ontological dichot- 
omy, by philosophers who think it is simply obvious that centers of 
gravity are useful fictions, and by philosophers who think it is simply 
obvious that centers of gravity are perfectly real: 
The trouble with these supposed parallels . . . is that they are all strictly 
speaking false, although they are no doubt useful simplifications for 
many purposes. It is false, for example, that the gravitational attraction 
between the Earth and the Moon involves two point masses; but it is a 
good enough first approximation for many calculations. However, this is 
not at all what Dennett really wants to say about intentional states. For 
he insists that to adopt the intentional stance and interpret an agent as 
acting on certain beliefs and desires is to discern a pattern in his actions 
which is genuinely there (a pattern which is missed if we instead adopt a 
scientific stance): Dennett certainly does not hold that the role of inten- 
tional ascriptions is merely to give us a useful approximation to a truth 
that can be more accurately expressed in non-intentional terms.3 
* Thanks to Kathleen Akins, Akeel Bilgrami, Donald Davidson, Barbara Hannan, 
Douglas Hofstadter, Norton Nelkin, W. V. 0.Quine, Richard Rorty, George Smith, 
Peter Suber, Stephen White, and the MITPufts philosophy of psychology discus- 
sion group for the discussions that provoked and shaped this paper. 
' Content and Consciousness (Boston: Routledge & Kegan Paul, 1969), ch. 1. 
"Three Kinds of Intentional Psychology," in R. Healey, ed., Reduction, Time 
and Reality (New York: Cambridge, 1981); and The Intentional Stance (Cam-
bridge: MIT, 1987). 
Peter Smith, "Wit and Chutzpah," review of The Intentional Stance and Jerry 
A. Fodor's Psychosemantics, Times Higher Education Supplement (August 7, 
1988), p. 22. 
0022-362X/91/8801/27-51 
O 1991 The Journal of Philosophy, Inc. 

28 
THE JOURNAL OF PHILOSOPHY 
Compare this with Fred Dretske's4 equally confident assertion of 
realism: 
I am a realist about centers of gravity. . . . The earth obviously exerts a 
gravitational attraction on all parts of the moon-not 
just its center of 
gravity. The resultant force, a vector sum, acts through a point, but this 
is something quite different. One should be very clear about what 
centers of gravity are before deciding whether to be literal about them, 
before deciding whether or not to be a center-of-gravity realist (ibid., 
p. 511). 
Dretske's advice is well-taken. What are centers of gravity? They 
are mathematical points-abstract 
objects or what Hans Reichen- 
bach called abstracts-definable in terms of physical forces and 
other properties. The question of whether abstract objects are real 
-the 
question of whether or not "one should be a realist about 
them"-can 
take two different paths, which we might call the meta- 
physical and the scientific. The metaphysical path simply concerns 
the reality or existence of abstract objects generally, and does not 
distinguish them in terms of their scientific utility. Consider, for 
instance, the center of population of the United States. I define this 
as the mathematical point at the intersection of the two lines such 
that there are as many inhabitants north as south of the latitude, and 
as many inhabitants east as west of the longitude. This point is (or can 
be) just as precisely defined as the center of gravity or center of mass 
of an object. (Since these median strips might turn out to be wide, 
take the midline of each strip as the line; count as inhabitants all 
those within the territorial waters and up to twenty miles in altitude 
-orbiting 
astronauts do not count-and 
take each inhabitant's 
navel to be the determining point, etc.) I do not know the center of 
population's current geographic location, but I am quite sure it is 
west of where it was ten years ago. It jiggles around constantly, as 
people move about, taking rides on planes, trains, and automobiles, 
etc. I doubt that this abstract object is of any value at all in any 
scientific theory, but just in case it is, here is an even more trivial 
abstract object: Dennett's lost sock center: the point defined as the 
center of the smallest sphere that can be inscribed around all the 
socks I have ever lost in my life. 
These abstract objects have the same metaphysical status as centers 
of gravity. Is Dretske a realist about them all? Should we be? I do not 
intend to pursue this question, for I suspect that Dretske is-and 
we 
should be-more 
interested in the scientific path to realism: centers 
"The Stance Stance," commentary on The Intentional Stance, in Behavioral 
and Brain Sciences, XI (1988): 51 1-2. 

REAL PATTERNS 
29 
of gravity are real because they are (somehow) good abstract objects. 
They deserve to be taken seriously, learned about, used. If we go so 
far as to distinguish them as real (contrasting them, perhaps, with 
those abstract objects which are bogus), that is because we think they 
serve in perspicuous representations of real forces, "natural" prop- 
erties, and the like. This path brings us closer, in any case, to the 
issues running in the debates about the reality of beliefs. 
I have claimed that beliefs are best considered to be abstract ob- 
jects rather like centers of gravity. Smith considers centers of gravity 
to be useful fictions while Dretske considers them to be useful (and 
hence?) real abstractions, and each takes his view to constitute a 
criticism of my position. The optimistic assessment of these opposite 
criticisms is that they cancel each other out; my analogy must have hit 
the nail on the head. The pessimistic assessment is that more needs to 
be said to convince philosophers that a mild and intermediate sort of 
realism is a positively attractive position, and not just the desperate 
dodge of ontological responsibility it has sometimes been taken to 
be. I have just such a case to present, a generalization and extension 
of my earlier attempts, via the concept of a pattern. My aim on this 
occasion is not so much to prove that my intermediate doctrine 
about the reality of psychological states is right, but just that it is 
quite possibly right, because a parallel doctrine is demonstrably right 
about some simpler cases. 
We use folk psychology-interpretation 
of each other as believers, 
wanters, intenders, and the like-to 
predict what people will do next. 
Prediction is not the only thing we care about, of course. Folk psy- 
chology helps us understand and empathize with others, organize 
our memories, interpret our emotions, and flavor our vision in a 
thousand ways, but at the heart of all these is the enormous predic- 
tive leverage of folk psychology. Without its predictive power, we 
could have no inte.rpersona1 projects or relations at all; human activ- 
ity would be just so much Brownian motion; we would be baffling 
ciphers to each other and to ourselves-we 
could not even concep- 
tualize our own flailings. In what follows, I shall concentrate always 
on folk-psychological prediction, not because I make the mistake of 
ignoring all the other interests we have in people aside from making 
bets on what they will do next, but because I claim that our power to 
interpret the actions of others depends on our power-seldom 
ex-
plicitly exercised-to 
predict theme5 
R. A. Sharpe, in "Dennett's Journey Towards Panpsychism," Inquiry,xu11 
(1989): 233-240, takes me to task on this point, using examples from Proust to 
drive home the point that "Proust draws our attention to possible lives and these 

30 
THE JOURNAL OF PHILOSOPHY 
Where utter patternlessness or randomness prevails, nothing is 
predictable. The success of folk-psychological prediction, like the 
success of any prediction, depends on there being some order or 
pattern in the world to exploit. Exactly where in the world does this 
pattern exist? What is the pattern a pattern of ?6 Some have thought, 
with Fodor, that the pattern of belief must in the end be a pattern of 
structures in the brain, formulae written in the language of thought. 
Where else could it be? Gibsonians might say the pattern is "in the 
lightm-and Quinians (such as Donald Davidson and I) could almost 
agree: the pattern is discernible in agents' (observable) behavior 
when we subject it to "radical interpretation" (Davidson) "from the 
intentional stance" (Dennett). 
When are the elements of a pattern real and not merely apparent? 
Answering this question will help us resolve the misconceptions that 
have led to the proliferation of "ontological positions" about beliefs, 
the different grades or kinds of realism. I shall concentrate on five 
salient exemplars arrayed in the space of possibilities: Fodor's indus- 
trial-strength Realism (he writes it with a capital 'R'); Davidson's 
regular strength realism; my mild realism; Richard Rorty's milder- 
than-mild irrealism, according to which the pattern is only in the eyes 
of the beholders, and Paul Churchland's eliminative materialism, 
which denies the reality of beliefs altogether. 
In what follows, I shall assume that these disagreements all take 
place within an arena of common acceptance of what Arthur Fine7 
calls NOA, the natural ontological attitude. That is, I take the inter- 
est in these disagreements to lie not in differences of opinion about 
the ultimate metaphysical status of physical things or abstract things 
(e.g., electrons or centers of gravity), but in differences of opinion 
about whether beliefs and other mental states are, shall we say, as 
real as electrons or centers of gravity. I want to show that mild 
realism is the doctrine that makes the most sense when what we are 
possible lives are various. But in none of them is prediction of paramount impor- 
tance" (240). I agree. I also agree that what makes people interesting (in novels and 
in real life) is precisely their unpredictability. But that unpredictability is only 
interesting against the backdrop of routine predictability on which all interpretation 
depends. As I note in The Intentional Stance (p. 79) in response to a similar 
objection of Fodor's, the same is true of chess: the game is interesting only because 
of the unpredictability of one's opponent, but that is to say: the intentional stance 
can usually eliminate only ninety percent of the legal moves. 
Norton Nelkin, "Patterns," forthcoming. 
' The Shaky Game: Einstein Realism and the Quantum Theory (Chicago: Uni- 
versity Press, 1986); see esp. p. 153n, and his comments there on Rorty, which I take 
to be consonant with mine here. 

REAL PATTERNS 
31 
Figure 1 
talking about is real patterns, such as the real patterns discernible 
from the intentional stance.' 
In order to make clear the attractions and difficulties of these 
different positions about patterns, I shall apply them first to a much 
simpler, more readily visualized, and uncontroversial sort of pattern. 
11. THE REALITY OF PATTERNS 
Consider the six objects in Figure 1 (which I shall call frames): 
We can understand a frame to be a finite subset of data, a window 
on an indefinitely larger world of further data. In one sense A-F all 
display different patterns; if you look closely you will see that no two 
frames are exactly alike ("atom-for-atom replicas," if you like). In 
another sense, A-F all display the same pattern; they were all made 
by the same basic process, a printing of ten rows of ninety dots, ten 
black dots followed by ten white dots, etc. The overall effect is to 
create five equally spaced black squares or bars in the window. I take 
it that this pattern, which I shall dub bar code, is a real pattern if 
anything is. But some random (actually pseudo-random) "noise" has 
been allowed to interfere with the actual printing. The noise ratio is 
as follows: 
See The Intentional Stance, pp. 38-42, "Real patterns, deeper facts, and 
empty questions." 

32 
THE JOURNAL OF PHILOSOPHY 
It is impossible to see that F is not purely (pseudo-) random noise; 
you will just have to take my word for it that it was actually generated 
by the same program that generated the other five patterns; all I 
changed was the noise ratio. 
Now, what does it mean to say that a pattern in one of these frames 
is real, or that it is really there? Given our privileged information 
about how these frames were generated, we may be tempted to say 
that there is a single pattern in all six cases-even 
in F, where it is 
"indiscernible." But I propose that the self-contradictory air of "in- 
discernible pattern" should be taken seriously. We may be able to 
make some extended, or metaphorical, sense of the idea of indiscern- 
ible patterns (or invisible pictures or silent symphonies), but in the 
root case a pattern is "by definition" a candidate for pattern recogni-
tion. (It is this loose but unbreakable link to observers or perspec- 
tives, of course, that makes "pattern" an attractive term to someone 
perched between instrumentalism and industrial-strength realism.) 
Fortunately, there is a standard way of making these intuitions 
about the discernibility-in-principle of patterns precise. Consider the 
task of transmitting information about one of the frames from one 
place to another. How many bits of information will it take to trans- 
mit each frame? The least efficient method is simply to send the "bit 
map," which identifies each dot seriatim ("dot one is black, dot two 
is white, dot three is white, . . ."). For a black-and-white frame of 
900 dots (or pixels, as they are called), the transmission requires 900 
bits. Sending the bit map is in effect verbatim quotation, accurate 
but inefficient. Its most important virtue is that it is equally'capable 
of transmitting any pattern or any particular instance of utter pat- 
ternlessness. 
Gregory Chaitin'sg valuable definition of mathematical random- 
ness invokes this idea. A series (of dots or numbers or whatever) is 
random if and only if the information required to describe (transmit) 
the series accurately is incompressible: nothing shorter than the ver- 
batim bit map will preserve the series. Then a series is not random 
-has 
a pattern-if 
and only if there is some more efficient way of 
describing it.'' Frame D, for instance, can be described as "ten rows 
"Randomness and Mathematical Proof," Scientijc American, CC:XXXII (1975): 
47-52. 
l o  More precisely: "A series of numbers is random if the smallest algorithm 
capable of specifying it to a computer has about the same number of bits of 
information as the series itself" (Chaitin, p. 48). This is what explains the fact that 
the "random number generator" built into most computers is not really properly 
named, since it is some function describable in a few bits (a little subroutine that is 
called for some output whenever a program requires a "random" number or 
series). If I send you the description of the pseudo-random number generator on 

REAL PATTERNS 
33 
of ninety: ten black followed by ten white, etc., with the following 
exceptions: dots 57, 88, . . . ." This expression, suitably encoded, is 
much shorter than 900 bits long. The comparable expressions for 
the other frames will be proportionally longer, since they will have to 
mention, verbatim, more exceptions, and the degeneracy of the 
"pattern" in F is revealed by the fact that its description in this 
system will be no improvement over the bit map-in 
fact, it will tend 
on average to be trivially longer, since it takes some bits to describe 
the pattern that is then obliterated by all the exceptions. 
Of course, there are bound to be other ways of describing the 
evident patterns in these frames, and some will be more efficient 
than others-in 
the precise sense of being systematically specifiable 
in fewer bits." Any such description, if an improvement over the bit 
map, is the description of a real pattern in the data." 
Consider bar code, the particular pattern seen in A-E, and almost 
perfectly instantiated in D. That pattern is quite readily discernible 
to the naked human eye in these presentations of the data, because 
of the particular pattern-recognition machinery hard-wired in our 
visual systems-edge 
detectors, luminance detectors, and the like. 
But the very same data (the very same streams of bits) presented in 
some other format might well yield no hint of pattern to us, espe- 
cially in the cases where bar code is contaminated by salt and pepper, 
as in frames A through C. For instance, if we broke the 900-bit series 
of frame B into 4-bit chunks, and then translated each of these into 
hexadecimal notation, one would be hard pressed indeed to tell the 
resulting series of hexadecimal digits from a random series, since the 
hexadecimal chunking would be seriously out of phase with the deci- 
my computer, you can use it to generate exactly the same infinite series of random- 
seeming digits. 
" Such schemes for efficient description, called compression algorithms, are 
widely used in computer graphics for saving storage space. They break the screen 
into uniformly colored regions, for instance, and specify region boundaries (rather 
like the "paint by numbers" line drawings sold in craft shops). The more compli- 
cated the picture on the screen, the longer the compressed description will be; in 
the worst case (a picture of confetti randomly sprinkled over the screen) the com- 
pression algorithm will be stumped, and can do no better than a verbatim bit map. 
l 2  What about the "system" of pattern description that simply baptizes frames 
with proper names (A through F, in this case) and tells the receiver which frame is 
up by simply sending 'F?This looks much shorter than the bit map until we consider 
that such a description must be part of an entirely general system. How many 
proper names will we need to name all possible 900-dot frames? Trivially, the 
900-bit binary number, 11 11 11 11 . . . . To send the "worst-case" proper name 
will take exactly as many bits as sending the bit map. This confirms our intuition that 
proper names are maximally inefficient ways of couching generalizations ("Alf is tall 
and Bill is tall and . . ."). 

34 
THE JOURNAL OF PHILOSOPHY 
ma1 pattern-and 
hence the "noise" would not "stand out" as noise. 
There are myriad ways of displaying any 900-bit series of data points, 
and not many of them would inspire us to concoct an efficient de- 
scription of the series. Other creatures with different sense organs, 
or different interests, might readily perceive patterns that were im- 
perceptible to us. The patterns would be there all along, but just 
invisible to us. 
The idiosyncracy of perceivers' capacities to discern patterns is 
striking. Visual patterns with axes of vertical symmetry stick out like 
sore thumbs for us, but if one simply rotates the frame a few degrees, 
the symmetry is often utterly beyond noticing. And the "perspec- 
tives" from which patterns are "perceptible" are not restricted to 
variations on presentation to the sense modalities. Differences in 
knowledge yield striking differences in the capacity to pick up pat- 
terns. Expert chess players can instantly perceive (and subsequently 
recall with high accuracy) the total board position in a real game, but 
are much worse at recall if the same chess pieces are randomly placed 
on the board, even though to a novice both boards are equally hard 
to recall.I3 This should not surprise anyone who considers that an 
expert speaker of English would have much less difficulty perceiving 
and recalling 
The frightened cat struggled to get loose. 
than 
Te ser.ioghehnde t srugfcalde go tgtt ohle 
which contains the same pieces, now somewhat disordered. Expert 
chess players, unlike novices, not only know how to Play chess; they 
know how to read chess-how 
to see the patterns at a glance. 
A pattern exists in some data-is 
real-if 
there is a description of 
the data that is more efficient than the bit map, whether or not 
anyone can concoct it. Compression algorithms, as general-purpose 
pattern describers, are efficient ways of transmitting exact copies of 
frames, such as A-F, from one place to another, but our interests 
often favor a somewhat different goal: transmitting inexact copies 
that nevertheless preserve "the" pattern that is important to us. For 
some purposes, we need not list the exceptions to bar code, but only 
transmit the information that the pattern is bar code with n% noise. 
Following this strategy, frames A and C, though discernibly different 
under careful inspection, count as the same pattern, since what mat- 
l 3  A. D. de Groot, Thought and Choice in Chess (The Hague: Mouton, 1965). 

REAL PATTERNS 
35 
ters to us is that the pattern is bar code with 25% noise, and we do 
not care which particular noise occurs, only that it occurs. 
Sometimes we are interested in not just ignoring the noise, but 
eliminating it, improving the pattern in transmission. Copy-editing is 
a good example. Consider the likely effoct thes santince wull hive 
hod on tha cupy adutor whu preparis thas monescrupt fur prunteng. 
My interest in this particular instance is that the "noise" be transmit- 
ted, not removed, though I actually do not care exactly which noise is 
there. 
Here then are three different attitudes we take at various times 
toward patterns. Sometimes we care about exact description or re- 
production of detail, at whatever cost. From this perspective, a real 
pattern in frame A is bar code with the following exceptions: 7, 8, 
I I ,  . . .. At other times we care about the noise, but not where in 
particular it occurs. From this perspective, a real pattern in frame A 
is bar code with 25% noise. And sometimes, we simply tolerate or 
ignore the noise. From this perspective, a real pattern in frame A is 
simply: bar code. But is bar code really there in frame A? I am 
tempted to respond: Look! You can see it with your own eyes. But 
there is something more constructive to say as well. 
When two individuals confront the same data, they may perceive 
different patterns in them, but since we can have varied interests and 
perspectives, these differences do not all count as disagreements. Or 
in any event they should not. If Jones sees pattern a (with n% noise) 
and Brown sees pattern /3 (with m% noise) there may be no ground 
for determining that one of them is right and the other wrong. 
Suppose they are both using their patterns to bet on the next datum 
in the series. Jones bets according to the "pure" pattern a, but 
budgets for n% errors when he looks for odds. Brown does likewise, 
using pattern 0.If both patterns are real, they will both get rich. That 
is to say, so long as they use their expectation of deviations from the 
"ideal" to temper their odds policy, they will do better than chance 
-perhaps 
very much better. 
Now suppose they compare notes. Suppose that a is a simple, 
easy-to-calculate pattern, but with a high noise rate-for 
instance, 
suppose a is bar code as it appears in frame E. And suppose that 
Brown has found some periodicity or progression in the "random" 
noise that Jones just tolerates, so that /3 is a much more complicated 
description of pattern-superimposed-on-pattern. This permits 
Brown to do better than chance, we may suppose, at predicting when 
the "noise" will come. As a result, Brown budgets for a lower error 
rate-say 
only 5%. "What you call noise, Jones, is actually pattern," 
Brown might say. "Of course there is still some noise in my pattern, 

36 
THE JOURNAL OF PHILOSOPHY 
but my pattern is better-more 
real-than 
yours! Yours is actually 
just a mere appearance." Jones might well reply that it is all a matter 
of taste; he notes how hard Brown has to work to calculate predic- 
tions, and points to the fact that he is getting just as rich (or maybe 
richer) by using a simpler, sloppier system and making more bets at 
good odds than Brown can muster. "My pattern is perfectly real- 
look how rich I'm getting. If it were an illusion, I'd be broke." 
This crass way of putting things-in 
terms of betting and getting 
rich-is 
simply a vivid way of drawing attention to a real, and far 
from crass, trade-off that is ubiquitous in nature, and hence in folk 
psychology. Would we prefer an extremely compact pattern descrip- 
tion with a high noise ratio or a less compact pattern description with 
a lower noise ratio? Our decision may depend on how swiftly and 
reliably we can discern the simple pattern, how dangerous errors are, 
how much of our resources we can afford to allocate to detection 
and calculation. These "design decisions" are typically not left to us 
to make by individual and deliberate choices; they are incorporated 
into the design of our sense organs by genetic evolution, and into our 
culture by cultural evolution. The product of this design evolution 
process is what Wilfrid Sellars14 calls our manifest image, and it is 
composed of folk physics, folk psychology, and the other pattern- 
making perspectives we have on the buzzing blooming confusion that 
bombards us with data. The ontology generated by the manifest 
image has thus a deeply pragmatic source.15 
Do these same pragmatic considerations apply to the scientific 
image, widely regarded as the final arbiter of ontology? Science is 
supposed to carve nature at the joints-at 
its realjoints, of course. Is 
it permissible in science to adopt a carving system so simple that it 
makes sense to tolerate occasional misdivisions and consequent mis- 
predictions? It happens all the time. The ubiquitous practice of using 
idealized models is exactly a matter of trading off reliability and 
accuracy of prediction against computational tractability. A particu-
larly elegant and handy oversimplification may under some circum- 
stances be irresistible. The use of Newtonian rather than Einsteinian 
mechanics in most mundane scientific and engineering calculations 
is an obvious example. A tractable oversimplification may be attrac- 
l 4  Science, Perception and Reality (Boston: Routledge & Kegan Paul, 1963). 
l 5  In "Randomness and Perceived Randomness in Evolutionary Biology," Syn-
these, XLIII (1980): 287-329, William Wimsatt offers anice example (296): while the 
insectivorous bird tracks individual insects, the anteater just averages over the 
ant-infested area; one might say that, while the bird's manifest image quantifies over 
insects, 'ant' is a mass term for anteaters. See the discussion of this and related 
examples in my Elbow Room (Cambridge: MIT, 1984), pp. 108-110. 

37 
REAL PATTERNS 
tive even in the face of a high error rate; considering inherited traits 
to be carried by single genes "for" those traits is an example; con- 
sidering agents in the marketplace to be perfectly rational self-ag- 
grandizers with perfect information is another. 
111. PATTERNS IN LIFE 
The time has come to export these observations about patterns and 
reality to the controversial arena of belief attribution. The largish 
leap we must make is nicely expedited by pausing at a stepping-stone 
example midway between the world of the dot frames and the world 
of folk psychology: John Horton Conway's Game of Life. In my 
opinion, every philosophy student should be held responsible for an 
intimate acquaintance with the Game of Life. It should be consid- 
ered an essential tool in every thought-experimenter's kit, a prodi- 
giously versatile generator of philosophically important examples 
and thought experiments of admirable clarity and vividness. In The 
Intentional Stance, I briefly exploited it to make a point about the 
costs and benefits of risky prediction from the intentional stance,16 
but I have since learned that I presumed too much familiarity with 
the underlying ideas. Here, then, is a somewhat expanded basic 
introduction to Life." 
Life is played on a two-dimensional grid, such as a checkerboard or 
a computer screen; it is not a game one plays to win; if it is a game at 
all, it is solitaire. The grid divides space into square cells, and each 
cell is either ON or OFF at each moment. Each cell has eight neigh- 
bors: the four adjacent cells north, south, east, and west, and the 
four diagonals: northeast, southeast, southwest, and northwest. 
Time in the Life world is also discrete, not continuous; it advances in 
ticks, and the state of the world changes between each tick according 
to the following rule: 
Each cell, in order to determine what to do in the next instant, counts 
how many of its eight neighbors is ON at the present instant. If the 
answer is exactly two, the cell stays in its present state (ON or OFF) in the 
next instant. If the answer is exactly three, the cell is ON in the next 
instant whatever its current state. under all other conditions the cell 
is OFF. 
The entire physics of the Life world is captured in that single, 
unexceptioned law. [While this is the fundamental law of the "phys- 
l6 The Intentional Stance, pp. 37-9. 
" Martin Gardner introduced the Game of Life to a wide audience in two col- 
umns in Scienti$c American in October, 1970, and February, 1971. William 
Poundstone, The Recursive Universe: Cosmic Complexity and the Limits of Sci- 
entijc Knowledge (New York: Morrow, 1985), is an excellent exploration of the 
game and its philosophical implications. Two figures from Poundstone's book are 
reproduced, with kind permission from the author and publisher, on pp. 39 & 40. 

38 
THE .JOURNAL OF PHILOSOPHY 
ics" of the Life world, it helps at first to conceive this curious physics 
in biological terms: think of cells going ON as births, cells going OFF 
as deaths, and succeeding instants as generations. Either overcrowd- 
ing (more than three inhabited neighbors) or isolation (less than two 
inhabited neighbors) leads to death.] By the scrupulous application 
of this single law, one can predict with perfect accuracy the next 
instant of any configuration of ON and OFF cells, and the instant 
after that, and so forth. In other words, the Life world is a toy world 
that perfectly instantiates Laplace's vision of determinism: given the 
state description of this world at an instant, we finite observers can 
perfectly predict the future instants by the simple application of our 
one law of physics. Or, in my terms, when we adopt the physical 
stance toward a configuration in the Life world, our powers of pre- 
diction are perfect: there is no noise, no uncertainty, no probability 
less than one. Moreover, it follows from the two-dimensionality of 
the Life world that nothing is hidden from view. There is no back- 
stage; there are no hidden variables; the unfolding of the physics of 
objects in the Life world is directly and completely visible. 
There are computer simulations of the Life world in which one can 
set up configurations on the screen and then watch them evolve 
according to the single rule. In the best simulations, one can change 
the scale of both time and space, alternating between close-up and 
bird's-eye view. A nice touch added to some color versions is that ON 
cells (often just called pixels) are color-coded by their age; they are 
born blue, let us say, and then change color each generation, moving 
through green to yellow to orange to red to brown to black and then 
staying black unless they die. This permits one to see at a glance how 
old certain patterns are, which cells are co-generational, where the 
birth action is, and so forth.'' 
One soon discovers that some simple configurations are more 
interesting than others. In addition to those configurations which 
never change-the 
"still lifes" such as four pixels in a square-and 
those which evaporate entirely-such 
as any long diagonal line seg- 
ment, whose two tail pixels die of isolation each instant until the line 
disappears entirely-there 
are configurations with all manner of 
periodicity. Three pixels in a line make a simple flasher, which be- 
comes three pixels in a column in the next instant, and reverts to 
three in a line in the next, ad infinitum, unless some other configura- 
tion encroaches. Encroachment is what makes Life interesting: 
I s  Poundstone, op. cit., provides simple BASIC and IBM-PC assembly language 
simulations you can copy for your own home computer, and describes some of the 
interesting variations. 

REAL PAlTERNS 
39 
Glider 
a4.6. 
Time 0 
Time 1 
Time 2 
Time 3 
Time 4 
Figure 2: (fromPoundstone, op. cit.). 
among the periodic configurations are some that swim, amoeba-like, 
across the plane. The simplest is the glider, the five-pixel configura-
tion shown taking a single stroke to the southeast in figure 2. Then 
there are the eaters, the puffer trains, and space rakes, and a host of 
other aptly named denizens of the Life world that emerge in the 
ontology of a new level, analogous to what I have called the design 
level. This level has its own language, a transparent foreshortening of 
the tedious descriptions one could give at the physical level. For 
instance: 
A n  eater can eat a glider in four generations. Whatever is being con-
sumed, the basic process is the same. A bridge forms between the eater 
and its prey. In the next generation, the bridge region dies from over-
population, taking a bite out o f  both eater and prey. The eater then 
repairs itself. The prey usually cannot. I f  the remainder o f  the prey dies 
out as with the glider, the prey is consumed (ibid., p. 38). 
Note that there has been a distinct ontological shift as we move 
between levels; whereas at the physical level there is no motion, and 
the only individuals, cells, are defined by their fixed spatial location, 
at this design level we have the motion of persisting objects; it is one 
and the same glider that has moved southeast in figure 2, changing 
shape as it moves, and there is one less glider in the world after the 
eater has eaten it in figure 3. (Here is a warming-up exercise for what 
is to follow: should we say that there is real motion in the Life world, 
or only apparent motion? The flashing pixels on the computer 
screen are a paradigm case, after all, of what a psychologist would 
call apparent motion. Are there really gliders that move, or are there 
just patterns of cell state that move? And if we opt for the latter, 
should we say at least that these moving patterns are real?) 
Notice, too, that at this level one proposes generalizations that 
require 'usually' or 'provided nothing encroaches' clauses. Stray bits 
of debris from earlier events can "break" or "kill" one of the objects 

40 
THE JOURNAL OF PHILOSOPHY 
..... 
.....
.-::j i-: 
. .
- . -
. . .  
.
. 
.
.
.
 
-r 
-- .--. 
. . .  
. . 
.
.
.
' 
*'* 
. 
' 
' 
* 
,.*** 
, . , 
6 
"
' 
,om*:, 
' 
' 
' .*.*,*-
a*. 
. . ***!' : 
. . 
l. . . . . .  .*. .
. 
*. 
, 
. 
, 
, 
. a. , : : ;
,..I -
e:n ..j. . .  
.
..'q., . 
. . . . .  e . 2 ' - : . : : . ~ T ~ e 3 . ' ! ; : , ~ 9 j ~ l .
..........
: 
. .* .
.
. , 
, . . . . . . . . . . . . .  -
..,
----r.1 
1 .  --. . t 
+ ,-~---.~
--.--
1 : 4.1 . . - . .i . - . - . . . .  - 4  : 
-.
. . . . . .  
, ,
... .-:.!.I 
.-:. .. .!LL~l.&. ......... 1 . . . . . - . .' . . . . . . .  -~-........ ;_. 
-.! Li .*. 
._.1 
. . . . . ..: .......-.- . . . . . . . . . . . .  t 
-., 
- ,-
1
, 
4 
I 
I 
I 
L . . . . . . * . . . . . .  .-...-
......
t
i . . . .  
. ! .
.
 
: 
. . . . . . . . . . .  ,.: 
_ . 
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
. . . . .  
' 
.
.
,
.
 
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
 
.
.
.
.
.
 80 . . ' . ' .  ' 1  
Q O : ' . ' . . '  
' 
'
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
. . . .  
O O P ' : : : : ' .  
0 
. . 
, 
'a 
3
.
. 
.
.
.
 Bbb:. . . . . . . . . '  bBO. .
.
. .90'. 
Q O . ' . ' . . . . . . . .  
-- ----- ., . .  .- . .  *k; 
. . . .  
. - . .  -.-!.; . . .  
. . .  
..
-.-.-a.
. . . . . . .  4
, . . . . . . .  ?...'~:.:. 
.'.*$.-
1 .
*, 
. . 
1
, 
, 
. 
, .*.'* 
ei. 
.
, 
.
*.i. 
.*.a 
,
. 
. 
.
.
.
.
.
. f .  . 
. * .  . ,  
, *  
l 
,
Bw6r-...:! ;. 
-&..,
,.~.Z&-+&@@:
- '. ,. ' . G8:'-
. ' . ' .&~iher.a€eT-; . '-:.: . :-: 
Figure 3: (from Poundstone, op. cit.). 
in the ontology at this level; their salience as real things is consider-
able, but not guaranteed. To say that their salience is considerable is 
to say that one can, with some small risk, ascend to this design level, 
adopt its ontology, and proceed to predict-sketchily 
and riskily-
the behavior of larger configurations or systems of configurations, 
without bothering to compute the physical level. For instance, one 
can set oneself the task of designing some interesting supersystem 
out of the "parts" that the design level makes available. Surely the 
most impressive triumph of this design activity in the Life world is 
the proof that a working model of a universal Turing machine can in 
principle be constructed in the Life plane! Von Neumann had al-
ready shown that in principle a two-dimensional universal Turing 
machine could be constructed out of cellular automata, so it was 
'tjust" a matter of "engineering" to show how, in principle, it could 
be constructed out of the simpler cellular automata defined in the 
Life world. Glider streams can provide the tape, for instance, and the 
tape reader can be some huge assembly of eaters, gliders, and other 
bits and pieces. What does this huge Turing machine look like? 
Poundstone calculates that the whole construction, a self-reproduc-
ing machine incorporating a universal Turing machine, would be on 
the order of 1013 pixels. 
Displaying a 101"pixel pattern would require a video screen about 3 
million pixels across at least. Assume the pixels are 1 millimeter square 
(which is very high resolution by the standards of home computers). 
Then the screen would have to be 3 kilometers (about two miles) across. 
It would have an area about six times that of Monaco. 

REAL PATTERNS 
41 
Perspective would shrink the pixels of a self-reproducing pattern to 
invisibility. If you got far enough away from the screen so that the entire 
pattern was comfortably in view, the pixels (and even the gliders, eaters 
and guns) would be too tiny to make out. A self-reproducing pattern 
would be a hazy glow, like a galaxy (ibid., pp. 227-8). 
Now, since the universal Turing machine can compute any com- 
putable function, it can play chess-simply 
by mimicking the pro- 
gram of any chess-playing computer you like. Suppose, then, that 
such an entity occupies the Life plane, playing chess against itself. 
Looking at the configuration of dots that accomplishes this marvel 
would almost certainly be unilluminating to anyone who had no clue 
that a configuration with such powers could exist. But from the 
perspective of one who had the hypothesis that this huge array of 
black dots was a chess-playing computer, enormously efficient ways 
of predicting the future of that configuration are made available. As 
a first step one can shift from an ontology of gliders and eaters to an 
ontology of symbols and machine states, and, adopting this higher 
design stance toward the configuration, predict its future as a Turing 
machine. As a second and still more efficient step, one can shift to an 
ontology of chess-board positions, possible chess moves, and the 
grounds for evaluating them; then, adopting the intentional stance 
toward the configuration, one can predict its future as a chess player 
performing intentional actions-making 
chess moves and trying to 
achieve checkmate. Once one has fixed on an interpretation scheme, 
permitting one to say which configurations of pixels count as which 
symbols (either, at the Turing machine level, the symbols '0' or 'l', 
say, or at the intentional level, 'QxBch' and the other symbols for 
chess moves), one can use the interpretation scheme to predict, for 
instance, that the next configuration to emerge from the galaxy will 
be such-and-such a glider stream (the symbols for ' R x Q ,say). There 
is risk involved in either case, because the chess program being run 
on the Turing machine may be far from perfectly rational, and, at a 
different level, debris may wander onto the scene and "break" the 
Turing machine configuration before it finishes the game. 
In other words, real but (potentially) noisy patterns abound in 
such a configuration of the Life world, there for the picking up if 
only we are lucky or clever enough to hit on the right perspective. 
They are not visual patterns but, one might say, intellectual pat-
terns. Squinting or twisting the page is not apt to help, while posing 
fanciful interpretations (or what W. V. Quine would call "analytical 
hypotheses") may uncover a goldmine. The opportunity confronting 
the observer of such a Life world is analogous to the opportunity 
confronting the cryptographer staring at a new patch of cipher text, 

42 
THE JOURNAL O F  PHILOSOPHY 
or the opportunity confronting the Martian, peering through a tele- 
scope at the Superbowl Game. If the Martian hits on the intentional 
stance-or 
folk psychology-as 
the right level to look for pattern, 
shapes will readily emerge through the noise. 
IV. THE REALITY O F  INTENTIONAL PATTERNS 
The scale of compression when one adopts the intentional stance 
toward the two-dimensional chess-playing computer galaxy is stu- 
pendous: it is the difference between figuring out in your head what 
white's most likely (best) move is versus calculating the state of a few 
trillion pixels through a few hundred thousand generations. But the 
scale of the savings is really no greater in the Life world than in our 
own. Predicting that someone will duck if you throw a brick at him is 
easy from the folk-psycholog;lcal stance; it is and will always be in- 
tractable if you have to trace the photons from brick to eyeball, the 
neurotransmitters from optic nerve to motor nerve, and so forth. 
For such vast computational leverage one might be prepared to 
pay quite a steep price in errors, but in fact one belief that is shared 
by all of the representatives on the spectrum I am discussing is that 
"folk psychology" provides a description system that permits highly 
reliable prediction of human (and much nonhuman) behavior.lg 
They differ in the explanations they offer of this predictive prowess, 
and the implications they see in it about "realism." 
For Fodor, an industrial-strength Realist, beliefs and their kin 
would not be real unless the pattern dimly discernible from the 
perspective of folk psychology could also be discerned (more clearly, 
with less noise) as a pattern of structures in the brain. The pattern 
would have to be discernible from the different perspective provided 
by a properly tuned syntactoscope aimed at the purely formal (non- 
semantic) features of Mentalese terms written in the brain. For 
Fodor, the pattern seen through the noise by everyday folk psycholo- 
gists would tell us nothing about reality, unless it, and the noise, had 
the following sort of explanation: what we discern from the perspec- 
tive of folk psychology is the net effect of two processes: an ulterior, 
hidden process wherein the pattern exists quite pure, overlaid, and 
partially obscured by various intervening sources of noise: perfor- 
mance errors, observation errors, and other more or less random 
'"0 
see that the opposite poles share this view, see Fodor, Psychosemantics 
(Cambridge: MIT, 1987), ch. 1, "Introduction: the Persistence of the Attitudes"; 
and Paul Churchland, Scientific Realism and the Plasticity of Mind (New York: 
Cambridge, 1979), esp. p. 100: "For the P-theory [folk psychology] is in fact a 
marvelous intellectual achievement. It gives its possessor an explicit and systematic 
insight into the behaviour, verbal and otherwise, of some of the most complex 
agents in the environment, and its overall prowess in that respect remains unsur- 
passed by anything else our considerable theoretical efforts have produced." 

REAL PATTERNS 
43 
obstructions. He might add that the interior belief-producing pro- 
cess was in this respect just like the process responsible for the 
creation of frames A-F. If you were permitted to peer behind the 
scenes at the program I devised to create the frames, you would see, 
clear as a bell, the perfect bar-code periodicity, with the noise thrown 
on afterward like so much salt and pepper. 
This is often the explanation for the look of a data set in science, 
and Fodor may think that it is either the only explanation that can 
ever be given, or at any rate the only one that makes any sense of the 
success of folk psychology. But the rest of us disagree. As G. E. M. 
AnscombeZ0 put it in her pioneering exploration of intentional ex- 
planation, "if Aristotle's account [of reasoning using the practical 
syllogism] were supposed to describe actual mental processes, it 
would in general be quite absurd. The interest of the account is that 
it describes an order which is there whenever actions are done with 
intentions . . ." (ibid., p. 80). 
But how could the order be there, so visible amidst the noise, if it 
were not the direct outline of a concrete orderly process in the 
background? Well, it could be there thanks to the statistical effect of 
very many concrete minutiae producing, as if by a hidden hand, an 
approximation of the "ideal" order. Philosophers have tended to 
ignore a variety of regularity intermediate between the regularities of 
planets and other objects "obeying" the laws of physics and the 
regularities of rule-following (that is, rule-consulting) systems.21 
These intermediate regularities are those which are preserved under 
selection pressure: the regularities dictated by principles of good 
design and hence homed in on by self-designing systems. That is, a 
"rule of thought" may be much more than a mere regularity; it may 
be a wise rule, a rule one would design a system by if one were a 
system designer, and hence a rule one would expect self-designing 
systems to "discover" in the course of settling into their patterns of 
activity. Such rules no more need be explicitly represented than do 
the principles of aerodynamics that are honored in the design of 
birds' wings." 
Intention (New York: Blackwell, 1957). 
'' A notable early exception is Sellars, who discussed the importance of just this 
sort of regularity in "Some Reflections on Language Games," Philosophy of 
Science, XXI (1954):204-228. See especially the subsection of this classic paper, 
entitled "Pattern Governed and Rule Obeying Behavior," reprinted in Sellars's 
Science, Perception and Reality, pp. 324-7. 
22 Several interpreters of a draft of this article have supposed that the conclusion 
I am urging here is that beliefs (or their contents) are epiphenomena having no 
causal powers, but this is a misinterpretation traceable to a simplistic notion of 
causation. If one finds a predictive pattern of the sort just described one has ipso 
facto discovered a causal power-a 
difference in the world that makes a subsequent 

44 
THE JOURNAL OF PHILOSOPHY 
The contrast between these different sorts of pattern-generation 
processes can be illustrated. The frames in figure 1 were created by a 
hard-edged process (ten black, ten white, ten black, . . .) obscured 
by noise, while the frames in figure 4 were created by a process 
almost the reverse of that: the top frame shows a pattern created by a 
normal distribution of black dots around means at x = 10, 30,50,70, 
and 90 (rather like Mach bands or interference fringes); the middle 
and bottom frames were created by successive applications of a very 
simple contrast enhancer applied to the top frame: a vertical slit 
"window" three pixels high is thrown randomly onto the frame; the 
pixels in the window vote, and majority rules. This gradually removes 
the salt from the pepper and the pepper from the salt, creating 
"artifact" edges such as those discernible in the bottom frame. The 
effect would be more striking at a finer pixel scale, where the black 
merges imperceptibly through grays to white but I chose to keep the 
scale at the ten-pixel period of bar code. I do not mean to suggest 
that it is impossible to tell the patterns in figure 4 from the patterns 
in figure 1. Of course it is possible; for one thing, the process that 
produced the frames in figure 1 will almost always show edges at 
exactly 10, 20, 30, . . . and almost never at 9, 1 1, 19, 2 1, . . . while 
there is a higher probability of these "displaced" edges being created 
by the process of figure 4 (as a close inspection of figure 4 reveals). 
Fine tuning could of course reduce these probabilities, but that is not 
my point. My point is that even if the evidence is substantial that the 
discernible pattern is produced by one process rather than another, 
it can be rational to ignore those differences and use the simplest 
pattern description (e.g., bar code) as one's way of organizing 
the data. 
Fodor and others have claimed that an interior language of 
thought is the best explanation of the hard edges visible in "propo- 
sitional attitude psychology." Churchland and I have offered an 
alternative explanation of these edges, an explanation for which the 
difference testable by standard empirical methods of variable manipulation. Con- 
sider the crowd-drawing power of a sign reading "Free Lunch" placed in the 
window of a restaurant, and compare its power in a restaurant in New York to its 
power in a restaurant in Tokyo. The intentional level is obviously the right level at 
which to predict and explain such causal powers; the sign more reliably produces a 
particular belief in one population of perceivers than in the other, and variations in 
the color of typography of the sign are not as predictive of variations in crowd- 
drawing power as are variations in (perceivable) meaning. The fact that the regular- 
ities on which these successful predictions are based are efficiently capturable (only) 
in intentional terms and are not derived from "covering laws" does not show that 
the regularities are not "causal"; it just shows that philosophers have often relied on 
pinched notions of causality derived from exclusive attention to a few examples 
drawn from physics and chemistry. Smith has pointed out to me that here I am 
echoing Aristotle's claim that his predecessors had ignored final causes. 

REAL PAlTERNS 
45 
Figure 4 
process that produced the frames in figure 4 is a fine visual meta- 
phor. The process that produces the data of folk psychology, we 
claim, is one in which the multidimensional complexities of the un- 
derlying processes are projected through linguistic behavior, which 
creates an appearance of definiteness and precision, thanks to the 
discreteness of words.z3 As Churchlandz4 puts it, a person's declara- 
tive utterance is a "one-dimensional projection-through 
the com- 
pound lens of Wernicke's and Broca's areas onto the idiosyncratic 
surface of the speaker's language-a 
one-dimensional projection of 
a four- or five-dimensional 'solid' that is an element in his true 
kinematic state" (ibid., p. 85). 
Fodor's industrial-strength Realism takes beliefs to be things in the 
head-just 
like cells and blood vessels and viruses. Davidson and I 
both like Churchland's alternative idea of propositional-attitude 
statements as indirect "measurements" of a reality diffused in the 
behavioral dispositions of the brain (and body).25 We think beliefs are 
'"ee 
my discussion of the distinction between beliefs and (linguistically infected) 
opinions; in Brainstorms (Montgomery, VT: Bradford, 1978), ch. 16, and in "The 
Illusions of Realism," in The Intentional Stance, pp. 110-6. 
24 "Eliminative Materialism and the Propositional Attitudes," this JOURKAL, 
LXXVIII, 2 (February 1981): 67-90, esp. p. 85. 
''Churchland introduces the idea in Scientific Realism and the Plasticity o] 
Mind, pp. 100-7. My adoption of the idea was in "Beyond Belief," in A. Woodfield, 
ed., Thought and Object (New York: Oxford, 1982), repr. as ch. 5 of The Znten- 
tional Stance. Davidson's guarded approval is expressed in "What is Present to the 
Mind?" read at the Sociedad Filosbfica Ibero Americana meeting in Buenos Aires, 
1989. 

46 
THE JOURNAL OF PHILOSOPHY 
quite real enough to call real just so long as belief talk measures these 
complex behavior-disposing organs as predictively as it does. What 
do we disagree about? As John H a ~ ~ e l a n d ' ~  
has pointed out, David- 
son is more of a realist than I am, and I have recently tracked down 
the source of this disagreement to a difference of opinion we have 
about the status of Quine's principle of indeterminacy of translation, 
which we both accept. 
For Davidson, the principle is not the shocker it is often taken to 
be; in fact, it is well-nigh trivial-the 
two different translation man- 
uals between which no fact of the matter decides are like two differ- 
ent scales for measuring temperature. 
We know there is no contradiction between the temperature of the air 
being 32' fahrenheit and 0' celsius; there is nothing in this 'relativism' 
to show that the properties being measured are not 'real'. Curiously, 
though, this conclusion has repeatedly been drawn. . . . Yet in the light 
of the considerations put forward here, this comes to no more than the 
recognition that more than one set of one person's utterances might be 
equally successful in capturing the contents of someone else's thoughts 
or speech. Just as numbers can capture all the empirically significant 
relations among weights or temperatures in infinitely many ways, so one 
person's utterances can capture all the significant features of another 
person's thoughts and speech in different ways. This fact does not chal- 
lenge the 'reality' of the attitudes or meanings thus reported." 
On Davidson's view, no substantive disagreements emerge from a 
comparison of the two description schemes, and so they can quite 
properly be viewed as competing descriptions of the same reality. 
I think this is a flawed analogy. A better one is provided by the 
example of "rival" descriptions of patterns-with-noise. Consider two 
rival intentional interpretations of a single individual; they agree on 
the general shape of this individual's collection of beliefs (and de- 
sires, etc), but because of their different idealizations of the pattern, 
they do not agree point-for-point. Recalling a famous analogy of 
Q~ine's'~and extending it beyond radical translation to radical in- 
terpretation (as Davidson and I both wish to do), we get the image in 
Figure 5. 
To the left we see Brown's intentional interpretation of Ella; to the 
right, Jones's interpretation. Since these are intentional interpreta- 
'"ee 
the discussion of Haugeland's views in the last chapter of The Intentional 
Stance, "Mid-Term Examination: Compare and Contrast," pp. 348-9. 
"Davidson, "What is Present to the Mind?" (ms.), p. 10. 
"Different persons growing up in the same language are like different bushes 
trimmed and trained to take the shape of identical elephants. The anatomical details 
of twigs and branches will fulfill the elephantine form differently from bush to bush, 
but the overall outward results are the same." Word and Object (Cambridge: MIT, 
1960), p. 8. 

47 
REAL PATTERNS 
Figure 5 
tions, the pixels or data points represent beliefs and so forth, not (for 
instance) bits of bodily motion or organs or cells or atoms, and since 
these are rival intentional interpretations of a single individual, the 
patterns discerned are not statistical averages (e.g., "Democrats tend 
to favor welfare programs") but personal cognitive idiosyncracies 
(e.g., "She thinks she should get her queen out early"). Some of the 
patterns may indeed be simple observed periodicities (e.g., "Ella 
wants to talk about football on Mondays") but we are to understand 
the pattern to be what Anscombe called the "order which is there" in 
the rational coherence of a person's set of beliefs, desires, and in- 
tentions. 
Notice that here the disagreements can be substantial-at 
least 
before the fact: when Brown and Jones make a series of predictive 
bets, they will not always make the same bet. They may often disagree 
on what, according to their chosen pattern, will happen next. To take 
a dramatic case, Brown may predict that Ella will decide to kill her- 
self; Jones may disagree. This is not a trivial disagreement of predic- 
tion, and in principle this momentous difference may emerge in spite 
of the overall consonance of the two interpretations. 
Suppose, then, that Brown and Jones make a series of predictions 
of Ella's behavior, based on their rival interpretations. Consider the 
different categories that compose their track records. First, there are 
the occasions where they agree and are right. Both systems look good 
from the vantage point of these successes. Second, there are the 
occasions where they agree and are wrong. Both chalk it up to noise, 

48 
THE JOURNAL OF PHILOSOPHY 
take their budgeted loss and move on to the next case. But there will 
also be the occasions where they disagree, where their systems make 
different predictions, and in these cases sometimes (but not always) 
one will win and the other lose. (In the real world, predictions are not 
always from among binary alternatives, so in many cases they will 
disagree and both be wrong.) When one wins and the other loses, it 
will look to the myopic observer as if one "theory" has scored a 
serious point against the other, but when one recognizes the possibil- 
ity that both may chalk up such victories, and that there may be no 
pattern in the victories which permits either one to improve his 
theory by making adjustments, one sees that local triumphs may be 
insufficient to provide any ground in reality for declaring one ac- 
count a closer approximation of the truth. 
Now, some might think this situation is always unstable; eventually 
one interpretation is bound to ramify better to new cases, or be 
deducible from some larger scheme covering other data, etc. That 
might be true in many cases, but-and 
this, I think, is the central 
point of Quine's indeterminacy thesis-it 
need not be true in all. If 
the strategy of intentional-stance description is, as Quine says, a 
"dramatic idiom" in which there is ineliminable use of idealization, 
and if Fodor's industrial-strength Realism is thus not the correct 
explanation of the reliable "visibility" of the pattern, such radical 
indeterminacy is a genuine and stable possibility. 
This indeterminacy will be most striking in such cases as the imag- 
, ined disagreement over Ella's suicidal mindset. If Ella does kill her- 
self, is Brown shown to have clearly had the better intentional inter- 
pretation? Not necessarily. When Jones chalks up his scheme's fail- 
ure in this instance to a bit of noise, this is no more ad hoc or 
unprincipled than the occasions when Brown was wrong about 
whether Ella would order the steak not the lobster, and chalked 
those misses up to noise. This is not at all to say that an interpretation 
can never be shown to be just wrong; there is plenty of leverage 
within the principles of intentional interpretation to refute particu- 
lar hypotheses-for 
instance, by forcing their defense down the path 
of Pickwickian explosion ("You see, she didn't believe the gun was 
loaded because she thought that those bullet-shaped things were 
chocolates wrapped in foil, which was just a fantasy that occurred to 
her because . . . ."). It is to say that there could be two interpreta- 
tion schemes that were reliable and compact predictors over the long 
run, but that nevertheless disagreed on crucial cases. 
It might seem that in a case as momentous as Ella's intention to kill 
herself, a closer examination of the details just prior to the fatal 
moment (if not at an earlier stage) would have to provide additional 
support for Brown's interpretation at the expense of Jones's inter- 

49 
REAL PATTERNS 
pretation. After all, there would be at least a few seconds-or 
a few 
hundred milliseconds-during 
which Ella's decision to pull the trig- 
ger got implemented, and during that brief period, at least, the 
evidence would swing sharply in favor of Brown's interpretation. 
That is no doubt true, and it is perhaps true that had one gone into 
enough detail earlier, all this last-second detail could have been pre- 
dicted-but 
to have gone into those details earlier would have been 
to drop down from the intentional stance to the design or physical 
stances. From the intentional stance, these determining consider- 
ations would have been invisible to both Brown and Jones, who were 
both prepared to smear over such details as noise in the interests of 
more practical prediction. Both interpreters concede that they will 
make false predictions, and moreover, that when they make false 
predictions there are apt to be harbingers of misprediction in the 
moments during which the dhouement unfolds. Such a brief swing 
does not constitute refutation of the interpretation, any more than 
the upcoming misprediction of behavior does. 
How, then, does this make me less of a realist than Davidson? I see 
that there could be two different systems of belief attribution to an 
individual which differed substantially in what they attributed- 
even in yielding substantially different predictions of the individual's 
future behavior-and 
yet where no deeper fact of the matter could 
establish that one was a description of the individual's real beliefs 
and the other not. In other words, there could be two different, but 
equally real, patterns discernible in the noisy world. The rival theo- 
rists would not even agree on which parts of the world were pattern 
and which were noise, and yet nothing deeper would settle the 
issue." The choice of a pattern would indeed be up to the observer, a 
matter to be decided on idiosyncratic pragmatic grounds. I myself do 
not see any feature of Davidson's position that would be a serious 
obstacle to his shifting analogies and agreeing with me. But then he 
would want to grant that indeterminacy is not such a trivial matter 
after 
What then is Rorty's view on these issues? Rorty wants to deny that 
any brand of "realism" could explain the (apparent?) success of the 
2g Cf. "The Abilities of Men and Machines," in Brainstorms, where I discuss two 
people who agree exactly on the future behavior of some artifact, but impose 
different Turing-machine interpretations of it. On both interpretations, the ma- 
chine occasionally "makes errors" but the two interpreters disagree about which 
cases are the errors. (They disagree about which features of the object's behavior 
count as signal and which as noise.) Which Turing machine is it really? This question 
has no answer. 
Andrej Zabludowski seems to me to have overlooked this version of indeter- 
minacy in "On Quine's Indeterminacy Doctrine," Philosophical Review, XCVIII 
(1989): 35-64. 

50 
THE JOURNAL OF PHILOSOPHY 
intentional stance. But since we have already joined Fine and set 
aside the "metaphysical" problem of realism, Rorty's reminding us 
of this only postpones the issue. Even someone who has transcended 
the scheme/content distinction and has seen the futility of corre- 
spondence theories of truth must accept the fact that within the 
natural ontological attitude we sometimes explain success by corre- 
spondence: one does better navigating off the coast of Maine when 
one uses an up-to-date nautical chart than one does when one uses a 
road map of Kansas. Why? Because the former accurately represents 
the hazards, markers, depths, and coastlines of the Maine coast, and 
the latter does not. Now why does one do better navigating the shoals 
of interpersonal relations using folk psychology than using astro- 
logy? Rorty might hold that the predictive "success" we folk-psychol- 
ogy players relish is itself an artifact, a mutual agreement engen- 
dered by the eggng-on or consensual support we who play this game 
provide each other. He would grant that the game has no rivals in 
popularity, due-in 
the opinion of the players-to 
the power it gives 
them to understand and anticipate the animate world. But he would 
refuse to endorse this opinion. How, then, would he distinguish this 
popularity from the popularity among a smaller coterie of astro- 
logy?31 It is undeniable that astrology provides its adherents with a 
highly articulated system of patterns that they think they see in the 
events of the world. The difference, however, is that no one has ever 
been able to get rich by betting on the patterns, but only by selling 
the patterns to others. 
Rorty would have to claim that this is not a significant difference; 
the rest of us, however, find abundant evidence that our allegiance to 
folk psychology as a predictive tool can be defended in coldly objec- 
tive terms. We agree that there is a real pattern being described by 
the terms of folk psychology. What divides the rest of us is the nature 
of the pattern, and the ontological implications of that nature. 
Let us finally consider Churchland's eliminative materialism from 
this vantage point. As already pointed out, he is second to none in his 
appreciation of the power, to date, of the intentional stance as a 
strategy of prediction. Why does he think that it is nevertheless 
doomed to the trash heap? Because he anticipates that neuroscience 
will eventually-perhaps 
even soon-discover 
a pattern that is so 
clearly superior to the noisy pattern of folk psychology that everyone 
will readily abandon the former for the latter (except, perhaps, in the 
rough-and-tumble of daily life). This might happen, I suppose. But 
Cf. my comparison of "the astrological stance" to the intentional stance, The 
Intentional Stance, p. 16. 

Churchland here is only playing a hunch, a hunch that should not be 
seen to gain plausibility from reflections on the irresistible forward 
march of science. For it is not enough for Churchland to suppose 
that in principle, neuroscientific levels of description will explain 
more of the variance, predict more of the "noise" that bedevils 
higher levels. This is, of course, bound to be true in the limit-if 
we 
descend all the way to the neurophysiological "bit map." But as we 
have seen, the trade-off between ease of use and immunity from 
error for such a cumbersome system may make it profoundly unat- 
tractive.32 If the "pattern" is scarcely an improvement over the bit 
map, talk of eliminative materialism will fall on deaf ears-just 
as it 
does when radical eliminativists urge us to abandon our ontological 
commitments to tables and chairs. A truly general-purpose, robust 
system of pattern description more valuable than the intentional 
stance is not an impossibility, but anyone who wants to bet on it 
might care to talk to me about the odds they will take. 
What does all this show? Not that Fodor's industrial-strength Real- 
ism must be false, and not that Churchland's eliminative materialism 
must be false, but just that both views are gratuitously strong forms 
of materialism-presumptive 
theses way out in front of the empirical 
support they require. Rorty's view errs in the opposite direction, 
ignoring the impressive empirical track record that distinguishes the 
intentional stance from the astrological stance. Davidson's interme- 
diate position, like mine, ties reality to the brute existence of pattern, 
but Davidson has overlooked the possibility of two or more conJlict-
ing patterns being superimposed on the same data-a 
more radical 
indeterminacy of translation than he had supposed possible. Now, 
once again, is the view I am defending here a sort of instrumentalism 
or a sort of realism? I think that the view itself is clearer than either 
of the labels, so I shall leave that question to anyone who stills find 
illumination in them. 
DANIEL C. DENNETT 
Tufts University 
32 AS I have put it, physical-stance predictions trump design-stance predictions, 
which trump intentional-stance predictions-but 
one pays for the power with a loss 
of portability and a (usually unbearable) computational cost. 

