THE BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1978), 3,337-375
Printed in the United States of America
JL 
1
1
1 
1 1
L U I L C A dllUL LllC IIlIIItJL Ulcllll
Roland Pyccetti
Department of Philosophy, Dalhousie University, Halifax, N.S., Canada
Robert W. Dykes
Department of Physiology and Biophysics, Dalhousie University, Halifax, N.S.,
Canada
Abstract: One of the implicit, and sometimes explicit, objectives of modern neuroscience is to find neural correlates of subjective
experience so that different qualities of that experience might be explained in detail by reference to the physical structure and
processes of the brain. It is generally assumed that such explanations will make unnecessary or rule out any reference to conscious
mental agents. This is the classic mind-brain reductivist program. We have chosen to challenge the optimism underlying such an ap-
proach in the context of sensory neurophysiology and sensory experience. Specifically, we ask if it is possible to explain the subjective
differences among seeing, hearing, and feeling something by inspecting the structure and function of primary visual, auditory, and
somesthetic cortex.
After reviewing the progress in localization of sensory functions over the past two centuries and examining some aspects of the struc-
ture and function of somesthetic, auditory, and visual cortex, we infer that one cannot explain the subjective differences between
sensory modalities in terms of present day neuroscientific knowledge. Nor do present trends in research provide grounds for optimism.
At this point we turn to three philosophical theories to see what promise they hold of explaining these differences. A brief discussion
of each - identity theory, functionalism, and eliminative materialism - suggests that none adequately accounts for the facts of the situa-
tion, and we tentatively conclude that some form of dualism is still a tenable hypothesis.
Keywords: consciousness; dualism; functionalism; mind-brain problem; neural correlates; primary sensory cortex; sensation
Introduction
In a recent review, Sperry (1976) correctly says: "A working
assumption of neuroscience holds that a complete causal expla-
nation of brain function is possible, in principle, in terms
entirely objective and material without reference to conscious
mental agents." However, a working assumption is not the same
as a general truth, though it may disguise one's belief in the lat-
ter, and in fact it is no part of science to subscribe to particular
metaphysical views like the causal inefficacy of consciousness.
As Bertrand Russell once remarked in the wider context of
whether scientists are not committed to the view that every
event has a cause - something science itself could never es-
tablish - the scientist is more like a geologist who assumes there
is oil or gold to be found somewhere and spends his time looking
for likely places.
If so, the very least one could hope for in acting on the above
working assumption is that progress will be made in finding
neural correlates of subjective experience (Werner, 1974) such
that the different qualities of that experience might be explained
in detail with reference solely to physical structures and
processes in the brain. Yet if that is what the assumption leads
one to expect, it is surprising how little progress has in fact been
made. Sherrington (1933) once sounded this pessimistic note:
"We have to regard the relation of mind to brain as still not
merely unsolved, but still devoid of a basis for its very begin-
ning," a view also shared by Adrian (1946). Sperry himself, at
that time looking for a reductivist explanation, echoed this
pessimism in 1952, nineteen years after Sherrington: "It is not a
solution we aspire to but only abasis on which to begin."
It will be our contention in this paper that, far from having of-
fered a new evidential basis for aspiring to a solution to this prob-
lem, neuroscientific progress over the intervening quarter
century has only deepened the gulf between mind and brain. For
it appears that the more we learn about details of brain function,
the greater the difference between these and the known
qualities of sensory experience.
More specifically, we intend to show that with regard to three
of the most commonly employed sensory modalities - touch,
hearing, and vision - not only is present-day neuroscience un-
able to account for the subjective differences between them in
terms of discrete neural mechanisms, but there is no good indica-
tion that it ever will be able to do so. We base this negative claim,
sweeping as it is, on the observation that one can point to no
striking or even notable structural or functional aspect of the
receiving area in the brain for each modality that promises to ac-
count for the obvious qualitative disparities among touching,
hearing, and seeing something.
In doing this we shall be raising a problem that we think is
central to future brain research, and yet appears to us to be insur-
mountable. If this is right, the scientific problem then has im-
portant philosophical implications; for it would seem to rule out
entirely some currently fashionable theories that would reduce
the mind to the brain.
But first we need to review briefly the development of the
modern concept of cerebral localization.
Localization of cerebral function
In the eighteenth century, the cerebral hemispheres were
thought to be a common sensorium without specifically localized
®1978 Cambridge University Press
0140-525X/78/RPUDY008$04.00/0
337

Puccetti & Dykes: Sensory cortex and the mind-brain problem
functions. In harmony with this simplistic view, the predominant
philosophical position was still what might be called naive
Cartesian dualism: the conviction that the "mind," "soul" or
"ego" resides inside the pineal gland and uses the brain to
receive and send messages from various parts of the body.
The opening wedge in dismantling this intellectual structure,
a belief in localized cerebral functions subserving specific con-
scious as well as behavioral functions, seems to have developed
before there was solid evidence for its support. In about 1800,
Gall combined his thoughts on neuroanatomy with localiza-
tionist ideas; unfortunately, he popularized them in a way that
gave rise to extremist phrenological claims, thereby discrediting
his extensive high-quality anatomical studies (Temkin, 1947). In
any case, the available experimental evidence came mainly from
Flourens's (1824) work on cerebral ablation and tended to show
only limited localization of function.
However, with Broca's discovery of a speech center in 1861,
the trend towards localization began to accelerate (Boring, 1942).
Jackson, an exceptional neurologist, was another early believer
in localization of functions. Although he distrusted sharp delin-
eations of brain areas subserving particular movements, he said
(1958) that all of his clinical work for many years had presup-
posed that disorders like epilepsy reflect localized cerebral le-
sions. But it was not until duBois-Reymond adapted the inducto-
rium for biological experiments in the latter part of the
nineteenth century that it became possible to use a precise
electrical stimulus in confirming cerebral localization. By 1870
Fritsch and Hitzig were stimulating the cerebral cortices of dogs
and observing that different points of stimulation produced dif-
ferent movements; so, too, removal of a cortical area that was
found to produce forepaw movement upon stimulation limited
motor function in that limb (Walker, 1957). Additional pioneers
in this trend toward localization were Ferrier (1876) and Munk
(1881). Although they had differing ideas about its exactness and
about the sites for particular functions, their work taken as a
whole was complementary in reinforcing localizationist doc-
trine. Ferrier deserves special credit for locating auditory and
visual regions of the brain by careful observation of behavior
subsequent to cerebral lesioning long before evoked potential
recordings were available.
Over the same two centuries progress in finding anatomical
distinctions between the functionally discrete areas of the brain
has been significantly less impressive. When histological tech-
niques for studying neural tissue were developed to the point
that silver stains could be used to delineate fibers and Nissl
stains were used to delineate cell bodies, it became possible to
attempt classifying areas of cerebral cortex. In 1874, Betz
described the large pyramidal cells characteristic of the region
where Fritsch and Hitzig had elicited movements. By the begin-
ning of the twentieth century Campbell (1905) and Brodmann
(1909) had produced maps showing many different cytoarchitec-
tonic areas, as did the Vogts (1919a,b), who combined the his-
tological approach with cortical stimulation. However, these
studies relied upon such subtle and subjective differences that
no two cytoarchitectonic maps substantially agreed. Further,
the number of brains used may have been too small - there is no
transparent reason why brains should not show as much indi-
vidual variability as do faces. Nevertheless, there was agreement
on one matter: all the principal investigators noted the simi-
larities between cortical areas we now recognize as primary for
touch, hearing, and vision. Each such region, they saw, was
characterized by an abundance of stellate cells tending to ob-
scure the pyramidal cell layers by a thickening, specifically, of
the fourth layer, and by a proliferation of afferent fibers terminat-
ing in the fourth layer and the bottom of the third just above it.
Thus, the global name "sensory cortex" came to designate all
three of these cortical areas on the grounds of anatomical
homogeneity, and later, on grounds of their functional dif-
ferentiation from motor and other areas of cortex as well.
But it was the introduction in the 1930's of modern elec-
trophysiological methods capable of recording evoked potentials
that, first, confirmed the separate loci of the primary sensory pro-
jection areas by showing that the largest and shortest latency
potentials for visual, auditory, and cutaneous stimuli occurred far
apart on the cortical surface; and second, that revealed in each
case the topographical organization of such areas. Beginning
with the work of Woolsey and his colleagues (Dykes, 1978), the
cutaneous projection areas were the first to be described
(Marshall et al., 1937; Adrian, 1941), and their somatotopic orga-
nization was soon established (Bard, 1938). Almost si-
multaneously, Marshall and Talbot (1942) found the primary pro-
jection area of the retina, while Woolsey and Walzl (1942) did the
same for auditory cortex and demonstrated its cochleotopic orga-
nization. In these experiments, it was possible to map the
sensory cortical areas by placing electrodes on the cortical sur-
face and searching for that point on the body's receptor sheet
that, when stimulated, produced the largest cortical potential. By
shifting the recording electrode slightly and by repeating
stimulation of the receptor sheet, one could find small areas of
cerebral cortex particularly responsive to stimulation of a given
point. In this way it was discovered that there is quite unequal
representation of the body's receptor sheet on the cortical sur-
face; for example, a large region of somatosensory cortex is de-
voted to hands and lips, and little to the back (Woolsey &
Fairman, 1946), and in visual cortex the central retina has dispro-
portionate representation compared to peripheral retinal areas
(Talbot & Marshall, 1941, 1942). More recently, the same has
been found to be true for the middle frequency range of the
cochlear membrane in auditory cortex (Merzenich et al., 1975).
However, as is usually the case in biological phenomena,
things were not as simple and straightforward as the above
sketch may make them seem. Almost from the beginning of these
experiments it was apparent that there were multiple representa-
tions of each of the sensory receptor sheets. Marshall et al. (1937)
and Adrian (1941), for example, reported multiple projections
from the forepaw of the cat, Talbot (1942) a second visual area,
and Woolsey and Walzl (1942) two auditory projections. Experi-
ments performed after the mid-1940s have added further com-
plexities, finding, for instance, that there were multiple short
latency projection areas for the skin, ears, and eyes in each cere-
bral hemisphere and that a point in one of these cortical maps
represents more than simply a point on the receptor array
(Dykes, 1978). Nevertheless, the general picture that began to
emerge with cytoarchitectonic maps and the recording of evoked
potentials in the first half of this century still holds; namely, that
on each cerebral hemisphere's cortical surface there are widely
separate primary sensory projection areas mediating touch, hear-
ing, and vision, and that neither anatomically, in terms of their
cellular composition and arrangement, nor physiologically, in
terms of the cell bodies' response characteristics under stimula-
tion of the appropriate sensory receptor sheet, is there any clear
way to distinguish between them.
It is this finding that allows us, now, to raise our problem.
The scientific problem
The sensory areas. Let us first look more closely at the three
primary sensory projection areas, considering at the same time
both positive and negative evidence for the critical role each
plays in subjective experience of touch, hearing, and vision. The
areas are identified in Figure 1 by Brodmann's numbers 3, 41,
and 17, respectively.
As will be seen here, area 3, along with adjoining areas 1 and 2,
runs down the length of the central, or Rolandic, fissures of each
hemisphere, constituting the postcentral gyrus. It is this surface
tissue, 2.0 to 3.5 mm thick, that, when activated by natural or
direct stimulation, results in sensations of touch, temperature,
pain, and pressure related to specific parts of the body. But, as
mentioned earlier, and shown in Figure 2, this same strip of
338
THE BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1978), 3

Puccetti & Dykes: Sensory cortex and the mind-brain problem
Figure 1. A lateral view of the brain illustrating the exposed portions of
the three sensory cortices under discussion. Note that only one cytoarchi-
tectonic area has been illustrated for each sensory modality, even though
other areas surrounding each of these have related functions. Historically,
in the somesthetic region, adjacent areas have been incorporated as part of
primary sensory cortex. Recently the somesthetic cortex has been re-
examined (Merzenich et al., 1978) and area 3 has been labeled "SI
proper."
cortical tissue is somatotopically organized, with quite unequal
representation for the various body parts. Thus, if an electrode
tip is placed in area 3, halfway down the exposed postcentral
gyrus of the left hemisphere, the subject may report tactile sensa-
tions in the right thumb (Penfield & Rasmussen, 1950). Similarly,
a destructive lesion in the same place will often abolish or
severely impair the ability to recognize stimuli coming from that
^ / I —Lower lip
0*3 t—Teeth, gums, and jaw
I
—Tongue
Figure 2. The sensory homunculus for the postcentral gyrus. Re-
produced with permission from Penfield and Rasmussen (1950).
part of the skin, for example, the texture of objects touched by the
thumb (Crosby et al., 1962).
Now consider area 41 in Figure 1. This area of primary audi-
tory cortex lies well back on the upper surface of the superior
temporal gyrus and extends into the temporal operculum of the
great lateral, or Sylvian, fissure of each hemisphere. Electrical
stimulation of this area (and of parts of area 42 adjoining it)
evokes sensations of sound, or "audenes" (Celesiaetal., 1968), a
phenomenon sufficiently remarkable to encourage speculation
about developing an electronic auditory prosthesis for people
whose deafness is caused by cranial nerve damage, but who
retain an intact area 41 (Dobelle et al., 1973). On the other hand,
bilateral destruction of this relatively small, 3 mm-thick tissue
area leads, in man perhaps more than any other mammal, to com-
plete and permanent deafness.
Finally, look at area 17, visual cortex, shown in Figure 1 at the
occipital pole of the cerebral hemisphere. Only a small portion of
this region can be seen on the lateral surface, but on the inner or
mesial surface of each hemisphere it covers the entire superior
and inferior lips of the calcarine fissure to a depth averaging 1.5
to 2.2 mm (Crosby et al., 1962). Given the topographic organiza-
tion alluded to before, electrode stimulation of, say, the anterior
inferior portion of visual cortex in the right hemisphere produces
photic flashes, or "phosphenes," in the upper left quadrant of the
subjective visual field (Holmes, 1945), which, again, has led to
hopes of building a visual prosthesis for those who are pe-
ripherally but not cortically blind by eventually using an array of
up to 200 implanted electrodes over area 17 in each hemisphere
(Brindley & Lewin, 1968). Again, as in the case of auditory
cortex, bilateral destruction of visual cortex - for example,
following a penetrating missile wound to the back of the head -
results in irreversible blindness.
The problem. So much for the location and functions of these
three cortical areas. One would think - and this is where the puz-
zle begins - that since tactile sensibility, hearing, and seeing are
obviously very different sensory modalities, something in the
microstructure or other features of the cortical tissue found there
would reflect those differences. But such appears to be far from
the case.
Look for a moment at Figure 3, a standard textbook drawing of
representative samples of neocortical tissue. At the extreme left,
in the section captioned "sensory" cortex, there are Roman
numerals designating various layers of cell bodies going from the
top, or cortical surface, down to the white matter underneath.
Layer I is the molecular layer, II the outer granular, III the outer
pyramidal, IV the inner granular, V inner pyramidal, and VI the
fusiform layer. Throughout these six layers are distributed five
types of cell bodies in varying densities and sizes: pyramidal
cells, stellate, fusiform, and horizontal cells, and cells with as-
cending axons. It has been recently proposed that there may be
only two cell types, pyramidal and stellate, and that the others
are just variants of these (Jones & Powell, 1973), but this is a
simplification we can afford to neglect. For even if we accept the
above, more complex, classification, the plain fact is that, with
one minor variation to be discussed in a moment, what is
depicted as "sensory" cortex at the left side of the drawing
illustrates not only somesthetic cortex but auditory and visual
cortex as well. All three are considered examples of
"koniocortex," that is, cortex distinguished by an abundance of
small cells and comparatively thick inner granular layers (IV), as
mentioned earlier. In these respects they contrast strongly with
granular cortex like the motor cortex, depicted in the drawing on
the extreme right, which has only a very thin layer IV but a thick
inner pyramidal layer (V), populated by a large number of giant
pyramidal (or "Betz") cells.
But, then, what does differentiate cytoarchitectonically among
areas 3, 41, and 17? Almost nothing. It happens that visual
cortex's wide layer IV forms the "outer stripe of Baillarger" or
"Line of Gennari" that can, with luck, be seen with the naked
THE BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1978), 3
339

Puccetti & Dykes: Sensory cortex and the mind-brain problem
AREA 3
AREA 41
tip1
Figure 3. A diagrammatic representation of three cytoarchitectonically
distinct types of tissue found in the cerebral cortex. Reproduced with per-
mission from Netter (1962).
eye in unstained cross-sections cut at right angles to the calcarine
fissure. But apart from this feature, slices of cortical tissue taken
from the three areas are practically indistinguishable under the
microscope at 32.5 magnifications, as Figure 4 clearly shows.
Note that area 4, from motor cortex, is obviously somewhat dif-
ferent, whereas areas 3, 41, and 17, with the exception of a more
noticeably uniform line near the top of the photomicrograph of
area 17, are very similar. Certainly nothing in the cellular archi-
tecture revealed by these photographs provides the slightest
clue as to why feeling something touch one's thumb, hearing a
bell ring, or seeing a glorious sunset should be such vastly dif-
ferent sorts of experiences.
Insufficient answers. It might be thought that in drawing atten-
tion to these similarities we have not been attending to the right
details and have thereby created a straw man. After all, one
might say, a neural process is quite a dynamic phenomenon
involving living tissue, and for all we know a deeper inspection
might reveal the significant differences one expects. We shall
deal with these possible objections in turn.
First, if "neural process" means anything it means the electro-
chemical excitation of just the cell bodies, axons, dendrites, and
so on, that are portrayed in Figures 3 and 4. The principles of
such electrochemical excitation -the story of resting membrane
potentials, discharge thresholds, transmitter substances crossing
synaptic spaces, inhibitory and excitatory postsynaptic
potentials, and so forth - apply across cortical tissues and cannot
serve to distinguish one sensory projection area from another.
Second, what is meant by a "deeper inspection"? In Figure 4,
as mentioned, the cells of six-layered neocortex are clearly visi-
ble at 32.5 magnifications. By using a higher-powered light mi-
croscope, one might, at between 1,000 and 2,000 magnifications,
AREA 17
AREA 4
Figure 4. Nissel-stained sections obtained from the human cerebral
cortex in each of the sensory areas and one taken from the motor cortex.
The photographs were taken with an ocular magnifications of 32.5X. Re-
produced with permission from Bailey and Von Bonin (1951).
see inside at least the larger individual cells. But, of course, there
is nothing so alike as the inside of, say, two or more stellate cell
bodies, no matter where they are located. And if this is living
tissue we are looking at, what do we see? Electrical activity, of
course, cannot be seen, though it can be recorded with a mi-
croelectrode and displayed on an oscilloscope. In any case, there
is no evidence that the electrical activity of cells is any different
in somesthetic, auditory, or visual cortex. With great luck one
might, at such high magnifications, see evidence of microsomes
travelling down the axon of some living cells, but this would be
true of any portion of neocortex one could observe so closely. Be-
yond 2,000 magnifications, of course, one can see nothing be-
cause nothing smaller than a micron can be resolved by light.
However, with an electron microscope - and now the tissue has
to be "fixed", hence dead - one could, at 200,000 magnifications,
reach the molecular level and see the shapes of some large
molecules like proteins. But again, nothing so resembles a pro-
tein molecule as another protein molecule, wherever it happens
to be. And beyond that one approaches atomic, then subatomic
levels, where there is even less to differentiate the constituents
of space. As a general rule, the deeper one goes into the levels of
organization of neural tissue, the more alike the tissue becomes.
We are not, it goes without saying, unaware nor unappreciative
of the tremendous explanatory power of scientific investigation,
so we recognize that in principle, at least, the doubts we have
raised so far could be resolved by presently unforeseen dis-
coveries. The recent introduction, for example, of radioisotope
and horseradish peroxidase tracer methods is now producing an
abundance of new information about cortical organization. Such
340
THE BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1978), 3

Puccetti.& Dykes: Sensory cortex and the mind-brain problem
techniques may very well generate new facts about each of the
sensory receiving areas under discussion, and may illuminate
subtle differences in the connectivity of their units that were not
evident before.
Nevertheless, we are impressed by the rather spectacular lack
of progress toward findings that could count as even a partial
resolution of the problem at hand. If anything, the stand still
seems even more decisive in terms of present trends. Jones
(1975a, b), for example, has identified nine different types of
stellate cells in primate somatosensory cortex. Comparing his
observations to those of Lund (1973) and of Lund and Boothe
(1975) on the visual cortex, he finds that some of his classes of
cells are equivalent to theirs. Again, Jones and Powell (1973a, b)
remark that with regard to the basic cytoarchitectonic plan of pri-
mate visual and somesthetic cortex, the relationship between in-
coming fibers and cellular elements is similar down to the level
of location and shape of the synaptic knobs upon which afferent
fibers terminate. Creutzfeldt (1977) has discussed the funda-
mental similarity between various neocortical areas and has
pointed out common principles of afferent, intrinsic, and efferent
organization. Still more recently, Jones and Wise (1977) have
used horseradish peroxidase to identify the size, laminar, and
columnar distribution of cells in monkey somatosensory cortex
and have documented in great detail the remarkably precise
segregation of neurons having different efferent connections.
But as they note, "Results of studies of cortico-cortical and com-
misural connectivity in other areas of primate cortex are
generally in agreement . . . Together, all of the studies on
monkeys indicate a common principle in cortical organization."
In only one minor aspect has it been observed that somesthetic
cortex is any different from visual cortex.
What form must the answer take? No doubt a question looming
in many readers' minds at this point will be the following:
Exactly what must differ from what, and to what degree, in order
to have a basis for explaining the qualitative differences in
sensory perception? Probably no one can say in advance, but if
further investigation continues to turn up greater similarities,
rather than differences, in cortical organization and function of
areas 3, 41, and 17, then the situation will be serious indeed.
Skin, ears, and eyes are clearly different and so are feeling a
touch, hearing, and seeing something. But in between them, me-
diating our subjective experience of the extracorporeal environ-
ment,there appear to be only thin layers of tissues at distant parts
of the cortical surface that are practically interchangeable, for all
we can tell.1 It is as if we discovered a single musical instrument
that, depending on where it is situated in the orchestra, can
produce equally well the sounds of a piano, a violin, and a bass
drum.
It is perhaps important to recognize that nothing in the future
progress of neuroscientific research seems in practice likely to
resolve this problem either. For example, suppose we are able to
overcome the present obstacle of central nerve regeneration in
higher vertebrates and actually reconnect the auditory nerve
with visual cortex and the optic nerve with auditory cortex in an
adult dog or cat. If successful, there seem only two possible out-
comes. Either the waking animal would have visual sensations
upon auditory stimulation and vice versa, or this would make no
difference to the animal's subjective experience and subsequent
behavior.2 Either result would be baffling, but unequally so. We
do not expect the latter, of course, because that would mean that
visual cortex could take over auditory functions and vice versa,
while the former result, in line with cortical stimulation evi-
dence and other phenomena,3 would mean that the population of
neurons in area 17 can subserve only vision, and those in area 41
audition, no matter what the source of the impulses received. If
so, what exactly predetermines their unique sensory function in
each case? Or consider this more extreme speculation. Suppose
in some future age of Utopian neurosurgery we were able to
transpose the tissue from area 17 to area 41 and vice versa.4 What
would happen then? Would the animal experience flashes of
light when we ring a bell in a darkened room and hear bells ring-
ing when we flash lights in a soundproof room? That would
imply that something in the tissue itself settles what sensory
function it has, though with present-day knowledge we have no
idea what that is. Worse still would be finding that the animal
behaved normally after the transposition, since this would sug-
gest, rather mystically, that just being in area 41 endows the
tissue with hearing functions, as just being in area 17 gives it vi-
sual functions.
Thus we seem to be, on this issue at any rate, up against an in-
visible but impenetrable mind-brain barrier. If that is correct, it
will, of course, have powerful consequences for reductivist
theories of the mind. We turn to some of these now.
The philosophical problem
Identity theory. The foremost reductivist theory being debated
in philosophical circles today is known as the mind-brain
identity theory, which was perhaps most strikingly formulated
by Feigl (1958) and Smart (1959), the latter following a lead sup-
plied by Place (1956). In English-speaking countries it has
gained an army of philosophical defenders, and appears to be
winning adherents in the neurosciences as well (Shallice, 1972;
Mountcastle, 1975). In what follows, we shall restrict ourselves
to classical statements of the theory in three versions, realizing as
we do that there have been many more recent formulations and
variations than we can hope to cover here.
On Feigl's statement of the theory we have two kinds of
knowledge of the mental: "knowledge by acquaintance," that is,
through direct experience of "raw feels" or sensations, and
"knowledge by description" of whatever brain processes
neurophysiologists find to be responsible for them. Using
Frege's (1960) distinction between "sense" and "reference," he
is then able to say that logically nothing rules out both kinds of
knowledge having one and the same referent, that is, referring in
each case to one and the same thing.5 Similarly, Smart contends
that sensations are "nothing over and above" brain processes, so
that having a particular kind of experience, such as seeing a
yellowy-orange afterimage, really amounts to no more than a
certain sort of brain process going on, and an experience's
properties are just the neurological ones scientists discover that
brain process to have. On both statements of the theory, the kind
of identity claimed is not logical or semantic, but what Smart
calls "contingent." However, it is not to be thought of as acci-
dental. Apparently it is a kind of natural identity, analogous to
the identity of water and H2O, lightning and electrical dis-
charges in the atmosphere, and so on (Teichman, 1974). So we
are invited to consider that for all we know it is in the nature of
certain neural mechanisms, when functioning normally in the
brain, to be visual experiences, auditory experiences, and so on.
But if this is what the theory claims, then it is easy to see that it
must be false. For, reverting to Feigl's terminology, our
knowledge "by description" of neural mechanisms in som-
esthetic, auditory, and visual cortex hardly varies at all in detail,
except, of course, location (Figure 4). Yet our knowledge "by ac-
quaintance" of tactile, auditory, and visual sensations shows
them to be vastly different sorts of experiences. How, then, could
the two sorts of knowledge really designate the same logical ob-
jects? Or, to use Smart's phraseology, how could touching an ob-
ject, hearing a sound, and seeing a colored afterimage be, in each
case, "nothing over and above" a particular kind of brain process
if these are very distinct kinds of experiences, while the neural
mechanisms held to be contingently identical with them are
overwhelmingly similar? For the identity being claimed, though
contingent, is nevertheless strict, which means that every
property of each kind of sensation is also a property of each kind
of brain process held to be identical with it. That, logically, is
what strict identity entails.6
THE BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1978), 3
341

Puccetti & Dykes: Sensory cortex and the mind-brain problem
F
A=A
B
c
Figure 5. A diagrammatic summary of the logical argument; if A, B, and
C are very similar, yet A', B', and C are very different, how can A = A',
B = B',andC = C?
We can illustrate the difficulty as follows: Let A stand for the
electrochemical activation of a population of neurons in area 3,
let B stand for this in area 41, and C for this in area 17. Now, as al-
ready noted, the similarities of A, B, and C vastly outweigh their
differences to the point that it seems hopeless to try to explain
how they subserve the sensory modalities they do. (For example,
do the occasional cells of Meynert in the upper layers of visual
cortex really account for this tissue mediating vision?) Next, let
A' stand for having a tactile sensation, B' for having an auditory
one, and C for having a visual one. But here the opposite state of
affairs obtains: differences completely outstrip similarities. In
fact, apart from being sensation, hence always of a certain
intensity and duration, A', B', and C have almost nothing in
common. (We cannot even make sense, for example, of "feeling a
tinkle," "hearing an itch," or "seeing a pain".) But in that case
we have the situation described in Figure 5. If strict identity re-
quires that any property F of x also be a property of y, as in the
identity of water and H2O, then how could three things very
much like each other be identical with three things very much
unlike each other? (Three things can be like each other in some
respects and unlike in others, but then there is in each case
something of which these are respects, or properties. The
identity theory is not a double-aspect theory postulating some
underlying reality of which mind and brain are but attributes.)
The radical imbalance of similarities among A, B, and C and of
dissimilarities among A', B', and C simply rules it out. And if so,
then neither can it be that it is the nature of sensations to be brain
processes, or the nature of some neural mechanisms to be sensa-
tions.
Functionalism. There is, however, another version of the
identity theory which may seem to escape this counterargument.
Known loosely as functionalism, it has received from Fodor
(1968) what is perhaps its best articulation. On Fodor's statement
of the theory, identity between psychological states like A', B',
and C on the one hand, and neurological states like A, B, and C
on the other, should not be asserted in terms of the Batter's
consisting of microanalyses of the former, but in terms of a func-
tional equivalence between them. Here he draws the analogy
between a camshaft and a valve-lifter. The camshaft in a
particular internal-combustion engine may in fact lift the valves,
but a valve-lifter need not be a camshaft. To speak of a device as
a "camshaft" is to identify it by reference to its physical struc-
ture; to speak of the same device as a "valve-lifter" is to identify
it by reference to its function. So we can say A has the functional
properties of A', B the functional properties of B', and C the func-
tional properties of C without worrying about the homogeneity
of the tissue involved.
Now if this were all Fodor's functionalism amounted to, we
would have no quarrel with it. The scientific problem, but not
the philosophical one, would still remain. For to say that, for
example, visual cortex has the functional property of visual
experience is just a shorthand way of saying it subserves the hav-
ing of visual experiences. But Fodor does not stop there. In a
completed account of psychological explanation, he says, other
people's mental states have to be subject to noninferential
confirmation. This in turn requires that they be, in principle,
observable states, hence material. Thus psychology, if it is to be a
science, must assume the truth of some psychophysical identity
statements: it must suppose that states of mind are contingently
identical with brain states. In that case, of course, we are back to
Figure 5, for there are no better candidates for identification than
A with A', B with B', and C with C. And so functionalism,
despite its neutral-sounding title, faces the same difficulties as
the earlier version of mind-brain identity.
Eli'minative materialism. We come now to a third version of
the theory, one that really does succeed in sidestepping our
"similarities-differences" argument. For according to Rorty
(1965), A', B', and C in Figure 5 are not to be identified with A,
B, and C, but rather eliminated in favor of them. That is to say
that on Rorty's formulation, sometimes called "eliminative ma-
terialism" for this reason, psychological terms like feeling, hear-
ing, and seeing can simply be replaced without loss - other than
linguistic inconvenience - by neurophysiological descriptions of
what is going on in, respectively, somesthetic, auditory, and vi-
sual cortex. Rorty says: "The absurdity of saying 'Nobody has
ever felt a pain' is no greater than that of saying 'Nobody has ever
seen a demon' if we have a suitable answer to the question 'What
was I reporting when I said I felt a pain?' To this question the
science of the future may reply 'You were reporting the occur-
rence of a certain brain process.' " Thus, on this version of the
theory it does not matter that A, B, and C are undeniably very
similar brain processes. It does not matter because no identity
with dissimilar psychological states like A', B', and C is being
asserted, for the good reason that the latter do not exist!
In order to bring out how unconvincing we think this argu-
ment is, we shall now present a parable about an extraterrestrial
eliminative materialist who visits our planet and studies us. The
idea that an extraterrestrial being might arrive here believing in
eliminative materialism is not prima facie absurd, since on our
own planet common philosophical positions have sometimes
emerged independently in different cultures. (For example, the
Vaisesika school of Indian atomism had its beginnings in the
sixth century B.C., but we know of no evidence that it
contributed to the rise of Greek atomism some two centuries
later.) In any case he arrives - call him EEM - and begins to
study our behavior.
Now let us suppose that on EEM's home planet no animal
evolved the sensory modality we call audition, through EEM has
all the others. Could he discover that we hear things and come to
understand what hearing is like? These are, obviously, different
questions.
Certainly EEM could learn that we hear things, by observing
behavior in us that could not be explained in terms of the other
sense modalities he shares with us. He would see earthlings
turning their heads, for example, to fixate visually on something
approaching from behind. At first he might think we have sup-
342
THE BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1978), 3

Puccetti & Dykes: Sensory cortex and the mind-brain problem
plementary sight organs in the back of the head, but the fact that
we also do things like getting up to open a door and find someone
there smiling would soon dispel that notion. And then the
observation that people here engage in language by lip move-
ment alone, without the elaborate manual gestures used on his
own planet, would make him suspicious, especially when he
sees earthlings so communicating without looking at one
another, both from room to room and even over instruments that
are clearly not equipped with television screens.
Gradually EEM would realize that he is in the presence of a
sensory modality previously unknown to him. His position at this
point would not be unlike our discovery that bees are sensitive to
polarized light. But being a philosopher-scientist, he is naturally
curious to learn more about this: what is it like to "hear" things?
For EMM, a good materialist, that would mean studying earth-
ling physiology.
Of course, what EEM would find is just what we have found:
that in earthling brains, area 41 is primarily responsible for the
behavior he has been observing. Now if his philosophical posi-
tion were just that of Rorty, he would have to conclude that he
does after all know what "hearing" is like, because even though
he has no analogue to area 41 in his own brain, he is committed
to the view that psychological ascriptions like "hearing a sonic
boom" can be substituted, without loss, by neurophysiological
ones like "electrochemical activation of a certain population of
neurons in a certain manner, etc.," and he does have just as much
observational access to area 41 in earthling brains as we do.
But this is surely wrong: EEM does not know what "hearing"
is like any more than we know what it is like to "see" polarized
light. What went wrong was not EEM's observation of earthlings,
but the theory he brought to his observations. Hearing is indeed
caused by what goes on in area 41 of our brains, and this in turn
probably acts upon other neural mechanisms to bring about ap-
propriate auditory behavior, but the subjective experience can-
not simply be reduced to brain events. Adopting such a view,
though certainly not without its own difficulties, would also go a
long way toward attenuating the bewilderment we feel about
histological similarities in somesthetic, auditory, and visual
cortex. For as David Hume showed more than two centuries ago,
neither reason nor experience requires that effects resemble
their causes.
Conclusion
This last remark suggests the direction in which we think the
truth about the mind-brain relationship may lie. An essentially
homogenous sensory cortex could subserve diverse psy-
chological functions if it does this by causing our experiences
rather than constituting them. Thus some form of dualism,
though not the naive Cartesian sort mentioned earlier, may after
all be correct. In taking this position we realize that because of
the historic metaphysical, and even religious, associations of
dualism, our motives for writing this paper will be suspect.
However, we hold no brief for such broader contentions, our
interest being limited to how to understand brain function in
relation to subjective experience of the world around us. The
irony has not escaped us, of course, that while successful loca-
lization of cerebral mechanisms subserving conscious functions
has encouraged the elaboration of reductivist mind-brain
theories, a closer inspection of sensory cortex seems to support
the view that the mind is not the brain. But we leave to others the
question what exactly it is.
NOTES
1. Penfield, to whom we owe so much for evidence of cortical localiza-
tion of sensory functions, has reiterated (1975) his speculation that ter-
minal neurological representation for such functions may be found in the
central grey matter of the upper brainstem. If that were true, it would
merely shift the locus of our problem, unless anatomic studies showed the
significant differences we find absent on the cortical surface. In any case,
this "centrencephalic" hypothesis now seems discredited because tran-
section of the forebrain commissures, leaving the brainstem intact, results
in disconnection of consciousness between the hemispheres.
2. Some reconnection experiments of this sort have in fact been done in
invertebrates, lower vertebrates, and even mammals (Edwards & Palka,
1976; Keating, 1976; Guth, 1975)[Ed.].
3. The "aura" proceding epileptic seizures, probably due to spread of
abnormal patterns of neural activity, sometimes evokes sensations unre-
lated to external stimuli; interestingly, the subjective experience is still
appropriate to the cortical area so recruited.
4. See note 2.
5. There is a problem about two things having all their properties in
common, because then on Leibniz's Law they would be one. But given
that x and y are names that refer, if it turns out that they refer to a single set
of properties, we can say they are names for one and the same thing.
6.(x)(y)[(x = y)D(F)(Fx«Fy)]
REFERENCES
Adrian, E. D. Afferent discharges to the cerebral cortex from peripheral
sense organs. Journal of Physiology. 100:159-91. 1941.
The Physical Background of Perception. Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1946.
Bailey, P., and Von Bonin, G. The Isocortex of Man. Urbana, 111.:
University of Illinois Press, 1951.
Bard, P. Studies on the cortical representation of somatic sensibility.
Bulletin of the New York Academy of Medicine. 14:585-607.1938.
Boring, E. G. Sensation and Perception in the History of Experimental
Psychology. New York: Appleton-Century Crofts, 1942.
Brindley, G. S., and Lewin, W. S. The sensations produced by electrical
stimulation of the visual cortex. Journal of Physiology. 196:479-93.
1968.
Brodmann, K. Vergleichende Lokalisationslehre der Grosshirnrinde. 1909.
Trans, by G. Von Bonin. In: W. W. Nowinki (ed.), Some Papers on the
Cerebral Cortex. Springfield, 111.: C. C. Thomas, 1960.
Campbell, A. W. Histological Studies on the Localization of Cerebral
Function. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1905.
Celesia, G. G., Broughton, R. J., and Rasmussen, T. Auditory evoked
responses from the exposed human cortex. Electroencephalography
and Clinical Neurology 24:458-66. 1968.
Creutzfeldt, O. D. Generality of the functional structure of the neocortex.
Naturwissenschaften 64:507-17. 1977.
Crosby, E. C, Humphrey, T., and Laurer, E. W. Correlative Anatomy of
the Human Nervous System. New York: Macmillan, 1962.
Dobelle, W. H., Stenisaas, S. S., Mladjevosky, M. G., and Smith, J. B.
A prosthesis for the deaf based on cortical stimulation Annals of
Otolaryngology 82:445-63.1973.
Dykes, R. W. Anatomy and physiology of the somesthetic cortical areas.
Progress in Neurobiology. 10:33-88. 1978.
Edwards, J. S., and Palka, J. Neural generation and regeneration in
insects. In: J. C. Fentress (ed.), Simpler Networks and Behaviors.
Sunderland, Mass.: Sinauer Associates, 1976.
Feigl, H. The "mental" and the "physical". In: H. Feigl, M. Scrivan, and
G. Maxwell (eds.) Minnesota Studies in the Philosophy of Science,
vol. 2, Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press, 1958.
Ferrier, D. The Function of the Brain. London: Smith, Elder & Co., 1876.
Reprinted by Jos. Adams, Brussels, 1966.
Flourens, P. Recherches experimentales sur les proprietes et les fonctions
du systeme nerveux dans les animaux vertebres. Paris: Crevot, 1824.
Portions trans, by G. Von Bonin. In: W. W. Nowinski (ed.), Some
Papers on the Cerebral Cortex. C. C. Thomas, Springfield, 111.: C. C.
Thomas, 1960.
Fodor, J. A. Psychological Explanation. New York: Random House, 1968.
Frege, G. Philosophical Writings ofGottlob Frege. Oxford: Blackwell,
1960.
Guth, L. (ed.) Growth and regeneration in the central nervous system.
Experimental Neurology. 48 (3). 1975.
Holmes, G. The organization of the visual cortex in man. Proceedings of
the Royal Society B. 132:349. 1945.
Jackson, J. H. On the anatomical and physiological localization of move-
ments in the brain. In: J. Taylor (ed.), Selected Writings of John
Hughlings Jackson, vol. I. London, Staples Press, 1958.
Jones, E. G. Lamination and differential distribution of thalamic afferents
within the sensory-motor cortex of the squirrel monkey. Journal of
Comparative Neurology. 160:167-204. 1975a.
Varieties and distribution of non-pyramidal cells in the somatic sensory
cortex of the squirrel monkey. Journal of Comparative Neurology.
160:205-67. 1975b.
THE BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1978), 3
343

Commentary/Puccetti & Dykes: Sensory cortex and the mind-brain problem
and Powell, T.P.S. Anatomical organization of the somatosensory cortex.
In: A. Iggo, (ed.), The Handbook of Sensory Physiology, vol. 2 So-
matosensory System. Pp. 579-620. New York: Springer-Verlag, 1973.
Jones, E. G., and Wise, S. P. Size, laminar and columnar distribution of ef-
ferent cells in the sensory-motor cortex of monkeys. Journal ofCom-
parative Neurology. 175:391-438. 1977.
Keating, M. J. The formation of visual neuronal connections: An appraisal
of the present status of the theory of neuronal specificity. In: G. Gott-
lieb (ed.), Neural and Behavioral Specificity, vol. 3. Pp. 59-110. New
York: Academic Press, 1976.
Lund, J. S. Organization of neurons in the visual cortex, area 17, of the
monkey (Macaca mulatta). Jou rnal of Comparative Neurology.
147:455_96. 1973.
and Boothe, R. G. Interlaminar connections and pyramidal neuron orga-
nization in the visual cortex, area 17, of Macaque monkey. Journal of
Comparative Neurology. 159:305-34. 1975.
Marshall, W. H. and Talbot, S. A. Recent evidence for neural mechanisms
in vision leading to a general theory of sensory acuity. Biological
Symposia. 7:117-64. 1942.
Marshall, W. H., Woolsey, C. N., and Bard, P. Cortical representation of
tactile sensibility as indicated by cortical potentials. Science 85:388-
90. 1937.
Merzenich, M. M., Kaas, J. H., Sur, M., and Lin, C.-S. Double representa-
tion of the body surface within cytoarchitectonic areas 3b and 1 in
"SI" in the owl monkey (Aotus trivirgatus). Journal of Comparative
Neurology. In Press.
Merzenich, M. M. Knight, P. L., and Roth, G. L. Representation of the
cochlea within primary auditory cortex in the cat. Journal of
Neurophysiology. 38:231-49. 1975.
Mountcastle, V. B. The view from within: pathways to the study of percep-
tion. Johns Hopkins Medical Journal. 136:109-31. 1975.
Munk, H. Uber die Funktionen der Grosshirnrinde 3te Mitteilung. 1881
Trans, by G. Von Bonin. In: W. W. Norwinski (ed.), Some Papers on
the Cerebral Cortex, Springfield, III: C. C. Thomas, 1960.
Netter, F. Ciba Collection of Medical Illustrations, vol. 1. Nervous
System. N.Y.: Ciba, 1962.
Penfield, W. The Mystery of the Mind. Princeton, N.J.: Princeton
University Press, 1975.
and Rasmussen, T. The Cerebral Cortex of Man: A Clinical Study of Lo-
calization. New York: Macmillan, 1950.
Place, U. T. Is consciousness a brain process? British Journal of Psy-
chology 47:44-50. 1956.
Rorty, R. Mind-brain identity, privacy and categories. Review of Meta-
physics. 19:24-54. 1965.
Shallice, T. Dual functions of consciousness. Psychological Review.
79:383-93. 1972.
Sherrington, C. S. The Brain and its Mechanisms. Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press, 1933.
Smart, J. J. C. Sensations and brain processes. Philosophical Review
68:141-56.1959.
Sperry, R. W. Neurology and the mind-brain problem. American Scientist
40:291-312. 1952.
A unifying approach to mind and brain: ten year perspective. In: M. A.
Corner and D. F. Swaab (eds.) Perspectives in Brain Research.
Progress in Brain Research 45. Amsterdam: Elsevier, 1976.
Talbot, S. A. A lateral localization in the cat's visual cortex. Federation
Proceedings 1:84. 1942.
and Marshall, W. H. Physiological studies on neural mechanisms of vi-
sual localization and discrimination. American Journal of Ophthal-
mology. 24:1255-64. 1941.
Physiological studies on neural mechanisms of visual localization and
discrimination. American Journal ojOphthalmology. 27:213-15. 1942.
Teichman, J. The Mind and the Soul: an Introduction to the Philosophy of
Mind. London: Routledge & Kegan Paul, 1974.
Temkin, O. Gall and the phrenological movement. Bulletin of the History
of Medicine. 21:275-321. 1947.
Vogt, C. and O. Vogt. Allgemeinere Ergebnisse unsere Hirnforschung.
I.V.MJ. Psych. Neurol. Lpz. 25:279-461. 1919a.
Zur Lehre der Erkrankungen der Stiaren System. Zeitschriftfuer
Psychologie undNeurologie(Lepzig) 25:626-846.1919b.
Walker, A. E. Stimulation and ablation, their role in the history of cerebral
physiology./owrna/ of Neurophysiology. 20:435-49.1957.
Werner, G. The study of sensation in physiology: psychophysical and
neurophysiologic correlations. In: V. B. Mountcastle (e^..), Medical
Physiology. Pp 551-74. St. Louis: C. V. Mosby, 1974.
Woolsey, C. N. and Fairman, D. Contralateral, ipsilateral and bilateral
representation of cutaneous receptors in somatic areas I and II of the
cerebral cortex of pig, sheep and other mammals. Surgery. 19:684-
702. 1946.
Woolsey, C. N. and Walzl, E. M. Topical projection of nerve fibers from
local regions of the cochlea to the cerebral cortex of the cat. Johns
Hopkins Hospital Bulletin. 71:315-44. 1942.
Open Peer Commentary
Commentaries submitted by the qualified professional readership of this journal
will be considered for publication in a later issue as Continuing Commentary on
this target article.
Note: Commentary reference lists omit works already cited in the target article
(as indicated by op. cit.j.
Editorial Note: An analysis of the Commentary on Puccetti & Dykes's target
article has revealed nine canonical criticisms, formulated and supported in a va-
riety of different ways by commentators from the disciplines of neuroscience,
philosophy 
and psychology. 
The authors have accordingly 
organized 
their
Response in terms of these nine categories, which are listed below and also indi-
cated in each commentary (by boldface roman numerals [e.g. VI!]) in order to aid
the reader in making cross-references and integrating the text. To minimize in-
tercommentary redundancy, a number of passages making the same points have
been omitted and replaced by the corresponding roman numeral(s) preceded by
three dots [e.g. . . . VII].
6: The known anatomical differences are big enough
IS: The relevant differences are at a finer level, such as the microstructure or bio-
chemistry
III: The differences are in the terms of locus and 
interconnections
SV: The differences are in the peripheral sensory endorgans
V: The differences are not in the primary regions, but in association cortex or
subcortical 
structures
VS: The "Instrument" 
argument, or Computer Equivalence: the same hardware
can function differently depending on the software and the 
information
processed
VII: There is no clear metric for this problem: How big should the differences be?
VIII: But the senses are similar too!
IX: How can similar 
causes now 
be taken 
to have different 
effects?
Precommentary by Arnold B. ScheibeS
Departments 
of Anatomy and Psychiatry, School of Medicine, 
University of
California, Los Angeles, Calif. 90024
On textural variance and the neocortical mission: A lightning rod for the
obvious. The Puccetti & Dykes reformulation of the old mind-brain problem
is a pleasant one to address ... in the same way that every "simple" question
is. The fact that a question is time-honored (some might say hoary) removes
none of its appeal as a challenge, forcing us to rethink the "familiar" and
readdress the "obvious." As I read the manuscript, the authors are asking
one basic question: "Why are the majority of us now confirmed anti-dualists
when presently available evidence indicates that sensations differ whereas
responsible cortical centers do not?" The authors are painting with broad
strokes and admit it, lessening the charm of the question not one whit, while
offering abundant handholds to all who would demur. My own role here, at
the Editor's request, is to cast a preemptive statement which, as I understand
it, will be circulated to commentators along with the article to serve as the
lightning rod for the obvious. Leaving the philosophical issues to others, let
us consider only the structural question.
Like Caesarian Gaul, the question can be divided into three parts: a) the
nature of the sensory systems afferent to the receptive cortical strips, b) the
nature of the cortical strips themselves, and c) the interaction between pe-
ripheral and central portions of the system.
a) First, and most obvious, is our developing understanding of the
processing capabilities of receptive systems at the periphery, and of those
central "relay" nuclei penultimate to the cortex to which they report over
"labelled lines." Compared with the retina of the frog, which seems or-
ganized to compute the size and possibly the degree of risk attached to any
344
THE BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1978), 3

Commentary/Puccetti & Dykes: Sensory cortex and the mind-brain problem
obtruding visual silhouette, the primate retina is relatively simple. Yet even
here, patterns of interconnection and the field survey potentium of retinal
tissue are so complex and loaded with so many ramifications that "reti-
nology" has become a recognized subspeciality in the neurosciences and
has already generated an enormous literature. In a nutshell, we do not know
what the retina is doing in primates and man, but its range of capabilities in
processing data is clearly enormous [IV]. Similar comments apply with even
greater emphasis to the tectum, pretectum, intralaminar nuclei of the
thalamus, and the lateral geniculate body [V]. The latter is unquestionably a
sophisticated laminar cortical structure on its own, receiving inputs from the
two eyes in separate laminae, but in register. Any hope of developing
reasonable structure-function correlates at the intragenicuiatesynaptic level
is immediately frustrated by the typical glomerular synapse, whose reason
for being remains as much a mystery as the transforms undergone by visual
information being sent through. The variety of geniculate cell types and
axonal patterns, and the richness of its short-axoned cell populations, attest
to the complex processing operations undoubtedly involved.
Everything we have said about the visual system so far applies in equal
measure, if in different combinations, to the auditory and somesthetic
systems. If somewhat less initial processing goes on at the level of touch
receptors peripherally, this is more than made up for in the complex synaptic
mechanisms existent in spinal cord and just above the spinal-medullary
junction. Furthermore, thalamic processing of tactile sensation, involving, as
it does, the ventrobasal complex, posterior thalamic nuclear complex, and
midline thalamic nuclear fields, is clearly a research area in status nascendi.
An accurate and comprehensive survey of structure and function in the ven-
trobasal complex alone, with its relation to cortical activity and thalamo-
cortical interrelations, is the work of years to come.
Similar comments apply to the auditory system, with its wealth of brain-
stem-related nuclei from the dorsal and ventral cochlear masses through
trapezoid formation and superior olive, past the vastly underrated nuclei of
the lateral lemnisci, the inferior colliculi, and the medial geniculates. The
synaptic structure and chemistry are as diverse as the range of elec-
trophysiological patterns that have been described.
b) The repeatedly-stressed similarities among the three cortical receptive
zones also warrant more careful scrutiny [I], The authors mention two or three
obvious differences, relating particularly to Area 17. The stripe of Gennari,
visible as it is to the naked eye, is a far more dramatic example of his-
tological singularity, whatever it may mean, than the authors would lead us to
believe. And the presence of giant cells of Meynert - huge Betz-like "motor"
cells in an otherwise typically "sensory cortex" environment- represent an
exciting and exotic addition which dramatically changes the character of the
deeper layers of Area 17. At a level only slightly more subtle, the range of
variation across the three cortical zones becomes still greater. Even casual
comparison of cytoarchitectonic maps indicates very different cell distribu-
tions, size concentrations, and the like, and these impressions (whatever one
may think of cytoarchitectonic morphology) become progressively stronger
as one begins to examine Golgi stained material. With the studies of Cajal
and Lorente de No as foundation, and the more recent Golgi-electron micro-
scopic studies of the past two decades, we can consider ourselves only at
the beginning of cortical field study.
At a somewhat finer level of resolution we know even less [II]. The authors'
contention that synapses, synaptic distributions, and so forth are similar in
all of these zones can be taken only in a most approximate sense. We have
virtually no quantitative data on any of this material, to say nothing of com-
parative quantitative data.
We are just beginning to appreciate the problems inherent in the functional
organization of these areas [VI]. The visual cortex in particular has provided
clues, with its idiosyncratic multidimensional column (or plate) systems,
coded for ocular dominance in one plane and receptive field in another.
Cells of the latter ensembles represent unique aggregates of geniculate
inputs coded in turn for visual field shape, orientation, and direction of move-
ment (the Hubel-Wiesel story needs no recounting). Analogous data are not
yet available for the somesthetic and auditory areas, but at this point there is
no reason to think they will not eventually be shown to possess their own
unique, structure-functional signatures.
c) The entire conceptual area of interaction between neurons in a chain,
from periphery to center (and back), is in the most incomplete state of all [III].
Yet there are abundant clues which indicate that this will be an area of rich
future growth. Two-way circulation along axons is routinely exploited in to-
day's tracking methods with tagged amino acids and horseradish peroxi-
dase. The organizing capacities of endogenous substances carried along
such channels have been known in an approximate way since the early
studies of neuroembryology, and with somewhat more precision following
studies of the neuromuscular preparation and the effects of peripheral nerve
switching on the nature of the muscle innervated. But it is only in the past
decade that a developing molecular biology within the frame of
neuroscience has begun to provide insight into the enormous degree of
trophic control exerted by various elements of neuronal chains or ensembles
on each other. Sperry's early work provided some of the phenomenological
substrate for this field, and today, without understanding the details, we are
becoming more confident that there are specificities of molecular speciation
which may indeed make a visual system peculiarly visual and an auditory
system peculiarly auditory [||].
If there is a caveat from the structural point of view to the position
developed by P & D, it might be cast in these terms: The idiosyncratic nature
of each species of sensory experience is no more caused by the respective
sensory cortices than it is constituted of them [IX]. Each variety of experience
is apparently unique from the initial receptive interface "inward" [IV], with its
own peculiar problems in processing [VI], its own molecular speciation [II],
and its own particularities of subcortical and cortical field structure [V]. The
pervading differences in texture throughout each system are so much more
apparent than any seeming similarities in sensory receptive strip architec-
ture that the P & D formulation must be considered more as a formal than a
substantive one. Those structural resemblances that the authors cite may
issue more from the general mission of cerebral cortical "sensory" tissue in
general [VIII], and of the vastly greater related associational fields which
surround these relatively limited zones [V]. Whatever the neocortical mission
turns out to be, there is more than sufficient textural variance (centrally as
well as peripherally) to satisfy the most ardent monist [VII].
EDITOR'S NOTE
This precommentary was circulated to all commentators together with the
target articles.
by Robert M. Anderson, Jr.
Department of Philosophy, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute, Troy, New York 12181
Relativistic color coding as a model for quality differences. According to
authors Puccetti & Dykes, qualitative differences among experiences in the
various sensory modalities are not reflected in differences in the anatomical
structure of the brain. Precommentator Scheibel claims, to the contrary, that
there are sufficient neuroanatomical differences among the sensory projec-
tion areas to account for the qualitative differences in experience. He does
not, however, delineate which of these features are essential to the qualita-
tive differentiation of sensory experiences, nor does he suggest a method for
making this determination. To ascertain which neural structures are essential
to intermodal differences in quality, it is useful to examine the neural struc-
tures that account for intramodal differences of quality in vision (i.e. color dif-
ferences).
Processing of color information in the visual system begins at the retina,
where photoreceptors (rods and three kinds of cones) containing different
types of photopigment with widely overlapping bell-shaped spectral absorp-
tion curves are stimulated by photons (MacNichol 1964). Electrical
potentials thus produced in the photoreceptors have been found to excite or
inhibit the firing of ganglion cells. The photoreceptor input to the ganglion
cells is often described by reference to the receptive fields of the cells. For
example, many of the ganglion cells have been found to have fields which
exhibit trichromatic color opponency (DeMonasterio et al. 1975). Some have
center-surround organization with the center receiving input only from the
green-cone mechanism and the surround receiving antagonistic input from
both red and blue cone mechanisms. The important point to note here is that,
at the retinal level at least, the visual system detects color by making a com-
parison or calculating a ratio between the activity of several opposing sets of
cones. This relational method of coding color information may account for
Land's (1959) production of full-color experience with a spatial distribution of
red and white light (Maturana et al. 1966).
All recent physiological research finds color to be relativistically coded
throughout the visual system. Spectrally-opponent cells have been found in
the lateral geniculate, striate and prestriate cortex, and, most recently,
THE BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1978), 3
345

Commentary/Puccetti & Dykes: Sensory cortex and the mind-brain problem
Michael (1978) has found dual-opponent cells, some of which have red-on
and green-off centers, and red-off and green-on surrounds.
The ubiquity of relativistic color coding in the visual system suggests that
color experience may be accounted for in terms of some sort of relational
process [VS]. According to such an account, a particular neural process is an
experience of color (to phrase it in terms of mind-brain identity), not because
of some properties intrinsic to it, but because of the relations the neural
process bears to the remainder of the visual system and the brain as a whole.
The relational hypothesis concerning the nature of color experience is sup-
ported by Kohler's (1962) color-adaptation studies with blue left-half and
yellow right-half goggles. After subjects had worn the goggles for several
weeks the color distortions seemed to disappear. When the goggles were
removed after 60 days the visual field appeared yellow to subjects when they
looked to the left, and blue when they looked to the right. On the relational
hypothesis, when the subject looks to the right or left with the goggles on, the
visual system's calculation of the ratio between cone inputs is continually
skewed in one direction. Adaptation occurs when the visual system adjusts
itself to calculate a more balanced ratio. The ratio is then uneven when the
goggles are removed. (Space does not permit properly filling in this sketch.)
[Cf. Gyr, Willey, & Henry: "Motor-sensory feedback and geometry of visual
space: an attempted replication."BBS 2(1) 1979.]
The relational hypothesis of quality differences in vision may be extended
to apply to quality differences in general. It would then follow that qualitative
differences among experiences in the various modalities should be
explainable in terms of the relations which hold between neural processes in
the respective projection areas and the rest of the brain. According to this
view, it is an error to look for differences intrinsic to the neural processes.
P & D are mistaken, therefore, in rejecting the notion "that just being in area
41 endows the tissue with hearing functions" as mystical. To be in area 41
constitutes part (although an extremely gross part) of the relations that an au-
ditory neural process bears to the rest of the central nervous system.
One might object to this extrapolation from the relational hypothesis of vi-
sual quality differences to a relational account of modal differences in
quality, on the grounds that there is an important disanalogy between color
differences and modal differences. Colors can betopologically-ordered and
therefore must have something in common. Qualitative differences between
modalities, however, seem to be absolute. This objection fails on two counts.
First of all, the difference between the experience of red and that of green is a
true qualitative difference. The difference is not presented in terms of any
structural or configurational properties apparent in visual experience
(Anderson 1976). Color is presented as unanalyzable and simple. Secondly,
the differences between the various modalities are not so absolute as they
may seem [VIII]. Often when we describe differences between different
qualities belonging to the same modality, we resort to expressions borrowed
from other modalities (Hayek 1952). A color may be warmer, heavier, or
louder than another; a tone may be rougher, thicker, or brighter than another.
If the relational approach to modality differences is correct, then it may be
possible to account for them, if not in terms of gross anatomical differences,
then perhaps in terms of electrophysiologically-detectable interconnections
between elements of the nervous system [III].
REFERENCES
Anderson, R. M. The illusions of experience. In: R. S. Cohen, C. A.
Hooker, A. C. Michalos, & J. W. vanEvra (eds.), PSA 1974, D. Reidel,
Dordrecht, Holland, 1976.
De Monasterio, F. M., Gouras, P. & Tolhurst, D. J., Trichromatic colour
opponency in ganglion cells of the rhesus monkey retina. Journal of
Physiology. 251:197-216, 1975.
Hayek, F. A. The Sensory Order, University of Chicago Press, Chicago,
1952.
Kohler, I. Experiments with goggles. Scientific American. 206:(5) 62-72,
1962.
Land, E. H. Experiments in color vision. Scientific American. 200:(5) 84-
99,1959.
MacNichol, E. F. Retinal mechanisms of color vision. Vision Research.
4:119-133,1964.
Maturana, H. R., Uribe, G., & Frenk, S. A biological theory of relativistic
colour coding in the primate retina. Presented at the opening session
of the Section of Physiology of the Biological Society of Chile, 1966.
Michael, C. R. Color vision mechanisms in monkey striate cortex: Dual-
opponent cells with concentric receptive fields. Journal of
Neurophysiology. 41:572-587,1978.
by D. M. Armstrong
Department of Traditional and Modern Philosophy, University of Sydney, Sydney,
New South Wales, Australia 2006
On passing the buck. Pucetti & Dykes consider the three primary sensory
projection areas in the brain for touch, hearing, and vision. Everybody can
agree that tactile, auditory, and visual perceptions are three quite different
sorts of state. One would naturally expect these differences to be reflected in
the microstructure or other features of the cortical tissue of the projection
areas. But, the authors assert, no such differences have been found in the
projection areas; and, they are inclined to think, there are no differences to
be found. They take this to be a reason for denying both the reductive ma-
terialist view that perceptions are processes or events in the brain, and the
eliminative materialist view that what we think we are reporting when we
report that our perceptions are not perceptions but are, rather, processes or
events in the brain. The problem should be solved, they consider, by em-
bracing some form of dualism.
If the neurophysiological facts are as P & D say they are, then the problem
for materialists is a real one. I lack the knowledge to comment on their view of
the facts. Instead, I shall comment on their proposed solution to the difficulty.
In their conclusion the authors argue that "an essentially homogenous
sensory cortex could subserve diverse physiological functions if it does this
by causing our experiences rather than constituting them" (their italics). The
experiences themselves, they suggest, are nonmaterial.
On first considering this argument, I was inclined to argue in the following
way. Different sorts of effect require different sorts of cause [SX]. Hence a
tactile sensation in the immaterial mind demands a different sort of neural
cause from an auditory sensation in the same mind. But how is this possible,
if what goes on in the tactile projection area and causes the tactile sensation
is exactly the same sort of thing as what goes on in the auditory area and
causes the auditory sensation? P & D seem simply to have passed the buck
along, because the problem they claim cannot be solved at the cortical or
material level reappears at the nonmaterial level.
This is incorrect, however. Suppose that they hypothesize that the tactile
"area" of the mind has a different nature (perhaps a different nonmaterial
structure) from the auditory area. They can also suppose that the tactile pro-
jection area in the cortex has a direct "channel" for causal communication
with the tactile "area" of the mind, but no such link with the auditory or other
"area" of the mind. The auditory projection area in the cortex will be linked in
a similar way to the auditory "area" of the mind, and with that area alone.
Under these circumstances, the very same sorts of impulses in both projec-
tion areas, acting on differently structured parts of the mind, could be ex-
pected to give rise to different effects: tactile sensations in one case, audi-
tory sensations in another.
I think, however, that P & D may still have to face a modified version of the
objection. There are many different sorts of tactile sensation. If these are to
arise in the mind, then presumably there will have to be corresponding dif-
ferences in the processes in the tactile projection area that give rise to these
different sensations. The same point holds for auditory and other sensations.
Now tactile and auditory sensations do not simply differ in quality. The di-
mensional array of possible different sorts of tactile sensation will be quite
different in structure from the dimensional array of possible different sorts of
auditory sensation. There will be no question of setting up a one-to-one cor-
relation between the different dimensional arrays.
If this is so, however, both the tactile and auditory projection areas in the
cortex will have to contain resources within themselves for representing the
different possible tactile sensations, on the one hand, and the different possi-
ble auditory sensations, on the other. Since these two arrays are different,
there will have to be corresponding differences in the projection areas suit-
able for creating the different representations, probably in their microstruc-
ture. But once such differences are admitted, P & D have repudiated the
premise of their argument-that no such differences are to be found in the
two projection areas.
Perhaps this modified objection can still be met. But to show that it can be
met, that they are not just passing the buck, P & D will have to spell out in
much greater detail their dualist solution to the problem that they raise.
346
THE BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1978), 3

Commentary/Puccetti & Dykes: Sensory cortex and the mind-brain problem
by John BeSoff
Department of Psychology, University of Edinburgh, 
Edinburgh,
EH8 9TJ, Scotland.
The inevitability of dualism. It follows from Puccetti & Dykes's anatomical
argument that either subjective intersensory differences must be due solely
to the location of the relevant areas within the topography of the brain, for
which there seems no reason, or the mind-brain identity theory must be
abandoned and we must resign ourselves to some form of dualism.
Philosophers often discuss the identity theory in terms of whether or not a
pain can be equated with the activation of the hypothetical "C-fibers." If
P & D are correct, however, C-fibers are not just hypothetical but mythical, for
in this connection all fibers are much of a muchness!
Not being a physiologist, I lack the competence to comment on the
premise on which this argument is based, but it goes without saying that the
authors could be factually mistaken, and they themselves acknowledge that
"presently unforeseen discoveries" could materially alter the picture.
Nevertheless, the rest of us have an obligation to pay attention when experts
speak and, if only for the sake of argument, I shall assume in what follows
that they are justified in claiming that there are no significant differences at
the brain-process level that could account for the absolute qualitative dis-
tinctions at the experiential level. Assuming their main premise, then, I will
further concede that their reasoning is impeccable and their conclusion war-
ranted. What I shall try to do, by way of a critique, is to argue that, in spite of
the "army of philosophical defenders" which, as they rightly point out, have
flocked to the identity theory, at any rate in the English-speaking countries,
the objections to the theory are, by now, so numerous and so devastating that
whether the P & D thesis is right or wrong will make little difference. In other
words, even if Scheibel in his precommentary is correct in thinking that some
subtle differentiating factor will yet be found that will save the day for the
scientific monist, we cannot, in the end, escape from some form of dualism.
Although the authors discuss three different variants of the identity theory,
it will, I suggest, clarify the issue if we divide all the different formulations of
the theory into just two main types, according to whether they do or do not ac-
knowledge the irreducible reality of mental events. Those of the first type that
I shall consider take their stand on the fact that all that physics has taught us
about matter is concerned exclusively with its structural or relational
properties. Hence there is nothing to stop us from conjecturing that the in-
trinsic core of physical events might in fact turn out to be mental. In
particular, the intrinsic core of those special physical events we call brain
processes might become manifest to us in experience. In this way mental
events would represent brain events as known from the inside, as it were, as
opposed to the way they would be known, externally, to the brain
physiologist. Among the philosophers who have put forward a mind-brain
identity theory along these lines we may include Russell, Feigl, S. Pepper,
R. J. Hirst, and most recently of all, Maxwell (1978op.cit. by Maxwell).
The other main type of identity theory is that in which various strategies are
used in order to get rid of mental events as such, so that in the end nothing
remains except events that are "physical" in the conventional and respect-
able sense of that word. Usually the favourite strategy is to adopt some kind
of behavioural, dispositionai, or "topic-neutral" analysis of mental concepts
and then insist that only brain states and processes could be the concrete
reference for such expressions. This is the true materialist solution of the
mind-body problem (sometimes known as "central state materialism"), and
among its exponents we may include Place, Smart, Armstrong, Quinton, and
Quine. Thus, for Armstrong, perception is just a matter of acquiring beliefs
about the external world as a result of the stimulation of one's sense-recep-
tors, so there can be no problem as to what we are to do about sense data or
secondary qualities; indeed to reify such entities is to commit what Place
called the "phenomenological fallacy." Sometimes, however, the preferred
strategy takes a more linguistic turn, as in the theory put forward by Rorty,
which the authors discuss, where the supposition is that if only we could rid
our language of all mentalistic expressions, the non-existence of mental
events would become as apparent as the non-existence of demons.
Now, the one major point I wish to make in this commentary is that neither
main type of identity theory (and I know of no other that is not a disguised
form of one or the other) can bring any comfort to the would-be scientific
monist and materialist in whose interest both were originally propounded,
and for whose sake we are asked to tolerate such a radical departure from
common sense (which, of course, has always been dualistic). Let us
consider first the el i mi native type of theory. One hesitates to characterize a
theory that has the backing of such a galaxy of distinguished thinkers as
"self-evidently absurd" (although Maxwell confesses the difficulty he has in
resisting this temptation!). Nevertheless, if only for the reasons P & D
themselves have given, we must agree that this solution of the mind-body
problem can be attained only at the cost of denying what we all know to be
true. As they rightly point out, no amount of knowledge about the underlying
brain processes can tell us what it is like to see, hear, touch, etc. By confus-
ing what a thing is with what it involves, materialism (in the literal sense)
must be dismissed as a philosophical mistake.
As regards the other type of identity theory, this can, I think, be defended,
at any rate if one has the ingenuity and perseverance of Maxwell to do this.
On the other hand, if this is a scientific hypothesis, it is difficult to see how it
could ever be established, or what could ever falsify it, because it is unclear
whether it is a type-type or just a token-token identity that is being asserted.
Moreover, as Maxwell is candid enough to admit, the theory runs afoul of
what he calls the "grain objection," for example, how it could be possible for
a smooth continuous expanse of red in one's visual field to be identical with
brain processes that we know must be highly complex and constantly fluc-
tuating. Maxwell confesses that he has no answer to this objection. But the
final irony is that, even if we assume that the theory can be made viable, what
we get in the end is something far removed from traditional scientific ma-
terialism. Maxwell calls his position "nonmaterialist physicalism," but this
awkward designation hides what I regard as the real truth, which is that it is a
modern form of panpsychism. So much has to be packed into the concept of
the "physical" as to make the term unrecognizable, at least to those who take
their cue from physics.
P & D have rightly restricted their discussion to sensory as opposed to mo-
tor activity and to intermodal as opposed to intramodal differences in order to
bring the issue into sharper focus. However, when we generalize to the larger
view, the cardinal fact we face is that, while the qualitative variation possible
in conscious experience is limitless, the only way in which brain processes
can vary is with respect to the spatio-temporal patterns they represent, or the
number of neurones they encompass. There is thus a fundamental dis-
crepancy between the two domains to start with, quite apart from the
particular cases they discuss. I conclude that, while the authors have
performed a valuable service in drawing attention to this specific problem
which the identity theorist must confront, in the long run the choice before us
is either to revert to the discredited epiphenomenalist theory of the mind-
brain relationship, which is what they seem to be suggesting, or to move for-
ward to a revised form of mind-brain interactionism.
by Ned Block
Department of Linguistics and Philosophy, Massachusetts Institute of
Technology, Cambridge, Mass., 02139
Straw materialism. Puccetti & Dykes attack a straw materialist, a materialist
who is wedded to an intrinsicalist theory of the neural basis of sensation. In-
trinsicalist theories are true of some things-xylophones, for example. A xy-
lophone contains pieces of metal that differ in an intrinsic (i.e. non-relational)
property, namely, size, and the differences among the xylophone's sounds
are due to the size differences among the parts. P & D assume that if ma-
terialism is valid, then the brain is like a xylophone, in that the qualitative dif-
ferences among sensations are due to intrinsic differences among areas of
the sensory cortex; for example, the difference between visual and auditory
sensation would be due to intrinsic differences between the visual and the
auditory cortex.
Now P & D claim to have evidence that there are no significant intrinsic dif-
ferences among parts of the sensory cortex. This claim is suspicious prima
facie, since, until we have more sophisticated neurological theories, we will
not know what sorts of differences to look for, or indeed, what sorts of dif-
ferences would be significant if we found them. [VSI]. But let us give P & D
some rope here; let us assume that they do have evidence that there are no
intrinsic differences of any sort among parts of the sensory cortex.
What follows? P & D conclude that this constitutes evidence against ma-
terialism and for dualism. But their argument depends crucially on the fact
that they consider only intrinsicalist materialism and not relationalist ma-
terialism. Relationalist materialism says that if x and y are different areas of
the sensory cortex, then differences between the qualitative character of
THE BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1978), 3
347

Commentary/Fuccetti & Dykes: Sensory cortex and the mind-brain problem
activity in x and in y are not due to intrinsic differences between x and y, but
rather to differences in the relations between activity in x and y and activity in
other parts of the brain [IIS, VI], including, perhaps, parts outside the sensory
cortex. [¥].
If the musical mascot of intrinsicalism is the xylophone, the simplest
musical mascot of relationalism might be an ordinary steel barrel, whose end
is a homogenous metal sheet which, when struck with a stick, makes different
sounds, depending on whether it is struck near the edge or near the center.
Blows to different parts set up different patterns of vibration, depending on
the relation between the part struck and the edge of the barrel.
P & D think their evidence counts against materialism. But really, if their
evidence counts at all, it counts for materialism, relationist materialism. For if
there are no intrinsic differences among parts of the sensory cortex, and
given the well-known difficulties with dualism, (Savage 1976; Dennett,
forthcoming), we should believe in the relationalist theory of the neurological
basis of sensation.
This matter can be illuminated by a glance at an analogous conflict.
Newton held that the color an object appears to have is a function of the
dominant wavelength in the light reflected from it. For example, when (and
only when) the dominant wavelength is long (about 6500 angstroms) the ob-
ject will look red. But, as it turned out, Newton was wrong (see for example,
Kaufman 1974). For example, Land produced a demonstration in which a
projected slide exhibited all the colors of the rainbow, even though all the
reflected light was within a narrow band of "yellow" light. Those who study
color vision could have taken such phenomena as evidence for a dualist
theory; they could have concluded that since a variety of dissimilar colors
can be produced by very similar light, the color of an object must be a func-
tion not only of the light it reflects, but something else too -spiritual 
light.
Instead, students of color vision showed that the color of a part of a surface
depends in a complex way on the relations between light reflected from that
part of the surface and I ight reflected from other parts of the surface.
The theory that replaced Newton's is somewhat counterintuitive: when one
views a bowl of fruit, the apparent color of an apple is not just a matter of the
light reflected by the apple, but also the light reflected by other things - the
bowl, an orange, etc. (and, perhaps, ligh't reflected a moment earlier as well).
If P & D's physiological claims turn out to be right, then we have evidence for
a corresponding claim about the neural basis of sensation - namely, that the
qualitative character of a single sensation is a complex relational feature
involving spatial (and perhaps temporal) parts of the brain, covering a larger
part of the brain than one might naively suppose.
One final point. P & D think that dualism handles the problem that they
raise better than materialism does. They reason that since effects needn't re-
semble their causes, if sensations are nonneural effects of neural events,
then sensory differences needn't be the effect of physiological differences.
But their reasoning is invalid. For though effects needn't resemble their
causes, still, similar causes have similar effects [IX]. So P & D's physio-
logical claim poses as much of a difficulty for (intrinsicalist) dualism as for
intrinsicalist materialism. If shown the relevant evidence Descartes himself
might well have seen this. (He says "whenever [the brain] is disposed in the
same particular way, [it] conveys the same thing to the mind," Haldane &
Ross 1972, p. 196.)
In short, if we accept P& D's physiological claims, we should be led, not to
reject materialism, but rather to reject intrinsicalism, in both its materialist
and dualist forms.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
I am grateful to Jerry Fodor for comments and suggestions, and also to
Dan Osherson and Janet Levin.
REFERENCES
Dennett, Dan. Current issues in the philosophy of mind. Forthcoming in
the American Philosophical Quarterly.
Haldane, E. & Ross, G. The Philosophical Works of Descartes, Vol. 1.
Cambridge University Press, New York, p. 196,1972.
Kaufman, Lloyd. Sight and Mind, Oxford University Press, New York,
1974.
Savage, C. W. An old ghost in a new body. In G. Globus, G. Maxwell, & I.
Savodnik (eds.), Mind and Brain: Philosophic and Scientific Strate-
gies. Plenum, New York, 1975.
by D. A. Bo©th
Department of Psychology, University of Birmingham, P. 0. Box 363, Birmingham
B15 211, England
Mind-brain puzzle versus mind-physical world identity. Puccetti & Dykes
expose some of the difficulties in mind-brain identity theory with the aid of a
provocatively simple illustration: the similarities of structure in different
primary sensory areas of cerebral cortex. Unfortunately they create difficul-
ties by appearing to assume (in common with their opponents and many
others) the more general theory that subjective experience might one day be
explained by reference to its neural correlates alone. This presupposition,
not just their neuroanatomical thesis, leads P& D to their tentative conclusion
for dualism against monism. It is this commitment among many neuro-
scientists to find consciousness among the neurons which is liable to divert
their attention from the main theoretical issue toward arguments as to
whether P & D are likely to have come to the right anatomical conclusion.
To maintain a neutral monist or multi-aspect view of reality, it is un-
necessary and in fact wrong to identify the mind with the brain alone, or to
locate it exclusively there. A person's mind should be identified, roughly
speaking, with his whole physical world - his physical environment, to some
extent his body, in addition to his brain. Furthermore, we are unlikely to
understand the detailed functioning of an individual brain without knowing
the history of its interactions with the external and internal environments dur-
ing that person's life.
The reason for this is that both the objective and the subjective aspects of
mind, both behavior and experience, lie in the individual's relation to his en-
vironment. Consciousness is a behaver's own viewpoint. Experience is a
private process embodied in the public world of its owner's behavior in his
particular physical and social context (Wittgenstein 1953). Thus experience
is not the sort of process that could be organized solely by a set of brain
events, and the efficacy of a behaver's viewpoint or awareness is not simply
an influence on a network of neurons. Mental processes form causal chains
at a level of analysis in terms of meaning which is complementary to analysis
at the physical level (MacKay 1958; Polanyi 1966). Physical causation runs
through a system in which brain and environment are integrated, and further-
more there is no sense in seeking gaps in that chain of causation to fit con-
sciousness in, whether within the brain or anywhere else (such as the envi-
ronmental history). Specifically to P& D's argument, the nature of a particular
experience depends on the whole system, not just on one particularly critical
set of physical mechanisms.
[... ¥i, 181, IV.] P & D's deaf and dumb extraterrestrial visitor would come
to know what the experience of hearing is if his behavior became organized
by sound through auditory receptors, even if he still had no Area 41 (and
even though he might still refuse to acknowledge the refutation of his "elimi-
native materialism"). And, contrary to P & D's analysis, there are many more
than two possible outcomes after Utopian transplants of human auditory
cortex to visual Area 17 (for example). Far more likely than promptly normal
visual functions or visual stimuli yielding auditory experiences - and an out-
come which might be as instructive as normal perceptual development-
would be initially inchoate visual experiences, or non-modal spatial im-
pressions at most, while erstwhile auditory cortex begins to use its new
visual input and to have its output interpreted elsewhere in the brain and en-
vironment. Establish the new meaning of the physical operations, and good
visual behavior and clear visual experience will be re-established. (If P & D
are wrong about the structural generality of sensory cortices, then completely
normal vision may never be established, even in Utopia.)
In summary, P & D's logical diagram becomes unproblematic when it is
completed (Fig. 1 [V, VI]). There do not have to be any differences between
the structures of sensory areas to account for the differences among the sub-
jective experiences of seeing, hearing, and touch.
These are not mere philosophical quibbles. Dissolving the conceptual
hang-ups of mind-brain identity theory has immediate implications for re-
search strategy. Neurochemists and neurophysiologists should pay as much
attention outside the brain as inside it if they want a chance to find out how
the brain works. Behavior is not a neurosecretion, and consciousness cannot
be a field property of cerebral networks. Physical explanation of the meaning
in behavior, and even of subjective experience, will be in terms integrating
physical environment, somatic physiology, and neuroscience. This is the job
of behavioral neuroscience or physiological psychology (a much misappro-
priated name by which I am proud to designate my work), and developments
348
THE BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1978), 3

Commentary/Fuccetti & Dykes: Sensory cortex and the mind-brain problem
a+A - A
c+C=C
Figure 1 (Booth). Completion and correction of P & D's diagram of mind-brain
relations. If sensory areas A, B, and C are very similar, and yet sensory
experiences A', B', and Care very different, it is still possible for a + A to be
identical with A', b + B = B', and c + C = C , where a, b, and c are other
parts of the same' physical system which are very different. ["+" refers to a
physical connection.]
in both psychology and physiology have very recently brought such a reduc-
tion at last within sight of technical feasibility. Physiological-physical expla-
nation of mind will not eliminate psychology but should stop some
psychologists from feeling that they must try to masquerade as
neuroscientists. It will not rule out consciousness or refute its existence, any
more than atomic physics refutes the existence of life by explaining how life
is possible in terms of biochemistry, physiology, and selective self-
reproduction. Hopefully the prospect may shift neuroscientists from trying to
localize function to elucidating the whole system of processes that makes
function possible.
REFERENCES
MacKay, D. M. Complementarity. Aristotelian Society Suppl. 32:105-
122,1958.
Polanyi, M. The Tacit Dimension. Doubleday, Garden City, N.Y., 1966.
Wittgenstein, L. Philosophical Investigations. Blackwells, Oxford, 1953.
by Bruce Brsdgeman
PsychologyIPsychobiology 
Board of Studies, University of California at Santa
Cruz, Santa Cruz, California 94064
The similarity of the sensory cortices: problem or solution? Puccetti &
Dykes have pinpointed a significant characteristic of mammalian brains
which has received too little attention. The similarity of the topographic
sensory cortices might be better viewed as a solution than as a problem,
however-with this up-side-down analysis it becomes necessary only to
identify the problems which these cortices have solved; they are of two kinds.
First, let us expand von Bekesy's observation that all the topographic
cortices are similar because they have similar jobs to do [VIII]: all of them
receive sensory input in highly pre-processed, parallel, spatiotemporal pat-
terns, combined with information from other parts of the brain; together with
other associated cortical areas they have the function of relating this input to
information about the past and to current challenges facing the organism.
These cortices begin the job of moving away from the stimulus, whatever its
nature, and interpreting it in ways useful to the organism. Evolution's com-
mon solutions to these problems in the visual, auditory, and somatosensory
cortices bring up some fascinating and uninvestigated questions: Did the
three areas evolve independently to similar states? Was a single undif-
ferentiated cortex invaded by fibers from the three senses to become spe-
cialized from there, or is some other evolutionary mechanism responsible?
Unfortunately, these questions are outside the scope of this commentary.
A second problem that the topographic cortices have solved is the need
for flexibility and learning, a requirement which prevents functions from be-
ing hard-wired into neurological structures and demands a very general
neuronal machine which can be adapted to a variety of functions. A cortex
specialized for flexibility can learn to deal with visual, auditory, or somatic
information in turn without changes in its gross anatomy [VI].
In this solution to the problem of sensory coding the vertebrates have used
a strategy very different from that of invertebrates, whose neurological struc-
ture and function can often be correlated. With very few neurons the simpler
invertebrates manage to do some surprisingly sophisticated sensory and
motor processing, but they do it with a monogamous marriage of structure
and function which sacrifices most flexibility and learning. Sensory neuron A
connects to interneuron B, which connects to motor neuron C, and the be-
havior is performed. The altogether different organization of vertebrate brains
emphasizes the endless repetition of startlingly simple neural networks
(Shepard 1974) involving only a few types of neurons and synapses, so that
the microstructure of the cortical anatomy can remain simple while its func-
tions become very complicated. Thus vertebrates escape the unmanageable
problem of increasing the specificity of the brain along with the increasing
complexity of behavior.
This is one of the most significant strengths of the human strategy of brain
organization, and some neuroscientists have already taken advantage of it.
Bach-y-Rita (1972), for example, has demonstrated that the somatosensory
cortex can project the experience of sensory information outside the body in
the same way that the visual cortex can. Bach-y-Rita's subjects, after
experiencing a pattern of sensory input on the back or abdomen, which cor-
responded topographically to objects in space, eventually learned to "see"
those objects in front of them rather than feeling small electrical or
mechanical impulses on their bodies. The somatosensory cortex, given a dif-
ferent input, performed like the cortex of a distance sense.
The strict division of these cortices by modality may be inappropriate even
in normal function. The visual cortex, for example, contains many neurons
which also respond to auditory inputs (Morrell 1971), but these cells code not
so much the auditory characteristics of the stimulus as its location. Thus vi-
sual cortex might be redefined as the spatial cortex rather than as the cortex
which processes the input from the eyes. Similarly, the somatosensory cortex
unites input from a variety of skin innervations with widely differing charac-
teristics. [... SV, VI: stereo speakers.]
Although we do not know in detail how any of the topographic sensory
cortices work, we do have solid information about some of their characteris-
tics, and an examination of one of them can illustrate the principle of spe-
cialized processing with generalized networks. Since lateral inhibitory con-
nections are widespread in cortex and occur in all three of the relevant
sensory projection areas, it is important to look at the implications of this in-
hibition for sensory coding. Computer simulations of a drastically simplified
parallel nerve network incorporating lateral inhibition adapted from the
Hartline-Ratliff equations (Bridgeman 1971, 1978) have revealed a number of
properties of lateral inhibitory networks which are not obvious from their
anatomy. First, patterns of neural activity which have a 1:1 relationship with a
stimulus can extend far beyond the anatomical extent of the inhibitory con-
nections, because secondary and higher-order effects eventually influence
most of the neurons in the network. Neurons which bear a topographic rela-
tion to the stimulus are affected most, but many of the other neurons in the
network are also influenced. A second consequence of lateral inhibition with
a time delay is a form of iconic storage, where activity specific to a given
stimulus remains in the network for some time as inhibitory effects
reverberate. The network also has response characteristics which mimic
those of metacontrast visual masking to a surprising degree of fidelity in
nearly a dozen different stimulus situations. The anatomy alone would never
have revealed this; neurophysiology and extensive simulation were also
necessary. The tired analogy of the computer is appropriate here, where the
same machine can do many different things depending on its input (the
program), and no amount of examination of a dead computer will reveal what
kind of information it was processing [VI].
Turning the specialization-experience 
problem up-side-down 
also
changes the nature of P & D's philosophical problem. When they say "let A'
stand for having a tactile sensation . . .", the verb reveals the essential dis-
tinction between anatomy and function which has been overlooked: percep-
tion is an activity (Gibson 1966), not a passive property of brains. It is this
more modern dualism, the distinction between substrate and activity, which
is the essence of their problem. Looking at the anatomy of the brain can re-
veal no more about experience than looking at the legs of a cadaver can tell
us about running, jumping, skipping, etc. Perceiving is an act, something
you do, and not a passive property of the body or the brain.
P & D's final paragraph raises more philosophical questions than it
answers, for it assumes an interface of some sort between a clearly physical
system and a nonphysical experiential mode. What is the nature of this inter-
THE BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1978), 3
349

Commentary/Puccetti & Dykes: Sensory cortex and the mind-brain problem
face? If physical systems can be defined in terms of their form and of the
physical influences upon them, where does the nonphysical experience
enter? The interface itself becomes a contradiction in terms. One is left either
with empty solipsism or with a mechanistic orientation based on the philo-
sophical assumptions and the experimental data which have been produc-
tive in our understanding of the brain so far. I prefer to stick with mechanism.
REFERENCES
Bach-y-Rita, P. Brain Mechanisms in Sensory Substitution. Academic
Press, New York, 1972.
Bridgeman, B. Metacontrast and lateral inhibition. Psychological Review.
78:528-539,1971.
Bridgeman, B. Distributed sensory coding applied to simulations of iconic
storage and metacontrast. Bulletin of Mathematical Biology. In press,
1978.
Gibson, J. J. The Senses Considered as Perceptual Systems. Houghton
Mifflin, Boston, 1966.
Morrell, F. Specificity of non-visual input to visual cortical neurons.
Electroencephalography and Clinical Neurophysiology. 31:413-414,
1971.
Shepard, G. M. The Synaptic Organization of the Brain. Oxford Univer-
sity Press, New York, 1974.
by Mario Bunge
Foundations and Philosophy of Science Unit, McGill University, Montreal, Canada
H3A 1W7
Cytoarchitechtonic similarity does not entail functional identity. Pucetti &
Dyke's crucial argument for psychophysical dualism is the seeming cytoar-
chitectonic identity of the areas of the sensory cortex that process messages
belonging to different modalities. Not being a neuroscientist I will accept the
premise for the sake of argument and will discuss only the conclusions that
the authors would like to draw from it.
Epiphenomenalism is untenable. The authors favor a well known version of
dualism, namely epiphenomenalism. According to this doctrine, brain
processes cause mental events rather than constituting them. There are at
least two difficulties with this doctrine. One is that nobody has shown how to
characterize the notion of an event happening in an immaterial object (mind,
soul, spirit) - let alone how to identify and measure events of this kind with
the standard scientific paraphernalia. A second difficulty is that a causal
relation can only be exactly elucidated as a relation between genuine
events- i.e. changes in concrete objects, be they atoms or brains [IX]. So,
strictly speaking, epiphenomenalism can only be formulated in ordinary lan-
guage terms, not in the language of science, which is that of things,
properties of things, and changes in properties of things.
Beware of prophesying a bright future for a dead doctrine. The authors
prophesy that psychophysical monism has no future: that everything points
to a strengthening of psychoneural dualism. A first objection is that, to do so,
they have taken into account a (selected) body of neuroanatomical evidence
while neglecting the rest-in particular physiological psychology and psy-
chopharmacology [II . . . IV, V, VI], which seem to presuppose (and in turn
confirm) the hypothesis that the mind is a set of neurophysiological
processes. A second objection is that in prophesying that the future belongs
to dualism, P & D forget to mention that dualism has succeeded only in
blocking scientific research into the mind-body problem for centuries, by
detaching psychology from neuroscience and warning scientists that the
mind is none of their business.
Concluding remarks. I trust that the accompanying Commentary on II - VI
shows that the P & D premise concerning the putative uniformity of the
sensory cortex does not warrant their conclusions. In particular, psy-
chophysical monism survives unscathed. Moreover, it can be argued
(Bunge, 1977) that a certain version of psychoneural monism, namely emer-
gentist materialism, has the following advantages over both dualism and
vulgar materialism. First, it can be formulated in a neat way, whereas dualism
is fuzzy. Second, it invites explaining the mental (rather than eliminating it) in
terms familiar to science, namely as a particular activity of particular material
systems, instead of asking us to believe in the ghostly. Third, it stimulates re-
search instead of stopping it.
REFERENCE
Bunge, Mario. Emergence and the mind. Neuroscience 2:501-9,1977.
by Paul M. ChurchSand and Patricia Smith Ctiurehland
Department of Philosophy, University of Manitoba, Winnipeg, Manitoba, Canada
R3T2N2
The virtuosity of the sensory cortex and the perils of common sense. The
mystery posed by Puccetti & Dykes- how to square the differences among
visual, auditory, and tactile experiences with the structural similarities
among the associated areas of the sensory cortex - is no mystery at all. That
it should seem an especial mystery, and a mystery deep enough to fund a re-
vival of dualism, is itself slightly mysterious. We shall here attempt some
explanatory remarks on both matters.
To see the weakness of P & D's 'instrument argument' [VI], consider three
structurally-identical commercial radios. One is sounding out a raucous
drum solo, the second, a sonorous lullaby by one hundred strings, and the
third, some allegro Bach on an electronic synthesizer. (Actually, it is the os-
cillatory behaviour of the respective currents within each radio's speaker cir-
cuit that concerns us, but since this maps perfectly onto the atmospheric os-
cillations the speaker produces, we can speak of either indifferently, so far as
behavioural similarities and differences across radios are concerned.) This
example shows straightaway that architecturally-identical systems can admit
of activities that are "vastly different" from at least some points of view. The
three radios need differ only slightly in the value of their tuning capacitors,
and the internal details of the signals to which they are tuned will do the rest
(on this point see the precommentary by Scheibel, last paragraph).
Nor need differences in input [IV] carry the entire burden of such
counterexamples. Subtle differences in inductance, resistance, and ca-
pacitance can lead otherwise identical circuits to engage in radically dif-
ferent resonant or oscillatory behaviour, in response to identical input, or with
no input at all [VI]. Commercial electronic kits are readily available with
which one can construct a circuit that chirps like a canary; but change the
value of one tiny capacitance and it growls like a buzz saw; change another
and it whoops like a police siren. Such plasticity is impressive but quite ex-
plicable. And in a system having the breathtaking integration of the sensory
cortex there is no difficulty in imagining even greater virtuosity of activity or
function, despite substantial sameness of physical form. P & D have
seriously underestimated the variety of internal activities possible within the
framework of a single physical structure. (This general point also solves the
"problem" of the variety of sensations possible within a given modality, a
problem strangely unmentioned by the authors.)
Materialist theories are hence safe from whatever threat the "instrument"
argument posed. Interestingly, however, even P & D's premise of vast sub-
jective intersensory differences may be defective [VIII]; we again appeal to
the radio analogy: Consider a creature whose sense modalities consist of
three radio-like circuits, each of which produces nothing but (internal) drum
solos, sonorous lullabies, and Bach fugues, respectively. Each circuit is
uniquely sensitive to a distinct dimension of environmental reality, and in-
formation about that dimension shows up as characteristic variations within
the steady drum solo (or lullaby, or fugue) of the relevant modality.
Now, for a conscious creature whose experience is exhausted by these
three discrete kinds of input, the activities of each modality would no doubt
seem "vastly different" from each other, perhaps so radically different as to
defy any attempt to articulate the difference. But that appearance would
clearly be misleading. Our creature's experience is not broad enough for him
to appreciate that the three kinds of experience are just discrete areas of a
common continuum. And his understanding is not deep enough for him to
appreciate the nature of that underlying activity which can take such varied
forms. So he remains impressed by what are relatively superficial dif-
ferences.
But there is no reason why we must be so short-sighted. Perhaps our vi-
sual, tactile, and auditory sensations are not so "vastly different" after all.
Perhaps the common conviction that they are so rests, as in the fable, on
nothing more substantial than the narrowness and shallowness of our in-
trospective perspective on the matter. And if introspection can be mislead-
ing in precisely this way, then it cannot be acceptable to cite introspection,
as the authors do, as the sole support for premise (1).
The authors' lapse on this point connects with their question-begging re-
jection of eliminative materialism, (eliminative materialism holds that our
conceptions concerning "mental states" are so grossly inadequate to reality
that they should simply be displaced, even in introspective contexts, by the
more penetrating conception of our inner life that materialistic neuroscience
will eventually provide.) P & D appear never to take seriously the possibility
350
THE BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1978), 3

Commentary/Puccetti & Dykes: Sensory cortex and the mind-brain problem
that our common-sense taxonomy of mental states has all the conceptual in-
tegrity of the alchemists' confused conception of what we now recognize as
chemical phenomena. That conception worked, but only just, and it hid far
more than it revealed. And so it may be with ourse/f-understanding. To treat
our current self-conception as "conjectural" (and hence as possibly false) is
admittedly difficult, but unless we learn to do so, we are doomed to beg all
the important questions, as the authors do in premise (1) and in their closing
critique of eliminative materialism.
by Daniel C. Dennett
Department of Philosophy, Tufts University, Medford, Mass. 02155
What's the difference: some riddles. Once upon a time there were two
radios, as alike as two radios could be, right down to the location of the
needle on the dial, and yet one was playing a Beethoven symphony and the
other was playing a weather forecast [VI]. How could this be? Answer: one
was in Tokyo and the other was in New York. Spatial location does not always
make a big difference, but it always makes a difference [III].
Puccetti & Dyke's Figure 5 does not represent a puzzle at all. Take any
three things, however similar, and ask yourself: in how many ways do they
differ? The answer will always be: in as many ways as you have patience to
list-infinitely many, in fact. So there is no "logical" hay to be made from
similarities in brain tissue. To determine whether the authors have a genuine
problem here, we must know what similarities and differences are "im-
portant" and why [VII]. For this we need an empirical theory, or at least a
theory-sketch, but the authors focus their argument on theories that make a
most dubious assumption: that experiences or sensations (or other mental
events) are events that owe their identity to their intrinsic properties, not their
functional or causal or otherwise relational properties. I am not sure that any
other philosopher of mind has ever taken the intrinsicalist position seriously,
either to defend it or, like Puccetti, to use it as a premise in an argument for
dualism. For those of us who have always supposed that nothing could be a
visual experience of a red circle, say, without being a highly interrelated part
of an immense system of other things, the arguments advanced by P & D are
idle.
It all comes down to this: "Suppose in some future age of Utopian neuro-
surgery we were able to transpose the tissue from area 17 to area 41 and vice
versa. What would happen then? Would the animal experience flashes of
light when we ring a bell in a darkened room, and hear bells ringing when we
flash lights in a sound-proofed room?" Certainly not. Lord only knows what
else might happen, but one thing I am confident of: if the tissues in these two
areas are as structurally similar as the authors maintain, and if all the tedious
details of preserving the proper connectivity [IIS] could be solved (a
practically impossible condition, one would suppose), then the animal would
go right on seeing shapes and colors and hearing sounds, though perhaps
with some distortions, loss of fidelity, etc. The authors find this possibility
vertiginous: "since this would suggest, rather mystically, that just being in
area 41 endows the tissue with hearing functions, as just being in area 17
gives it visual functions." Of course there is nothing mystical about this. Just
being in these locations means just being richly interconnected not only with
the relevant sense organs [IV], but -just as important -with the relevant
belief-modification machinery, behavior-controlling machinery, introspec-
tive-report-inducing machinery [V]. Being located in area 41 lets something
contribute to reports of things heard, and being located in area 17 lets
something furnish input to whatever up to now has stored visual beliefs.
Here's another riddle: two identical "FREE BEER" signs are placed in
identically clean and well-lit saloon windows; one draws throngs and the
other doesn't. Why? Same answer as the first riddle. Spatial location can as
radically alter the effects emanating from a thing as the causes impinging on
it [III]. The crucial effects-the effects that contribute to the very identity of
the thing - are not nonphysical (as the authors have it in their conclusion) but
cognitive, dispositional, ultimately behavioral.
What would happen, the authors wonder, if we hooked up the optic nerve to
the auditory cortex and the auditory nerve to the visual cortex (but left the
output connections of these cortical areas unchanged, presumably). Lord
only knows, again, but this experiment, unlike the previous one, would be a
test of plasticity (more than of anything else). If the thing could be done at all,
the results with inverting lenses (which show how dramatically plastic our vi-
sual system is) suggest that after an initial period of reporting (and
experiencing) sounds when presented with flashes, etc., one would adapt to
roughly normal sight and hearing, now subserved by different cortical areas
[cf. Gyr, Willey, & Henry: "Motor-sensory feedback and geometry of visual
space: an attempted replication." BBS 2(1) 1979]. But whether or not the
brain was this plastic, the occurrence of visual sensations under auditory
stimulation, if it did in fact occur, would not be due to marvelous and here-
tofore undiscovered intrinsic differences in the cortical tissue, but to the con-
nectedness of that cortical tissue with the subsequent cognitive machinery of
the brain.
It is not that there could be no important relation between empirical facts
about neural structure and philosophical theories of the mind, but just that
the authors have not hit upon an important one, even if their empirical
premises were all true. Here is a better argument for dualism from a premise
about neural structure: Our brains have no more structure on any level of
analysis than a pail of water; therefore, the brain could not possibly subserve
the intricate dependencies of human cognition (and no other organ of our
bodies could either); therefore, since cognition occurs, dualism must be
true. - Fortunately for us materialists, the premise is false.
by Key Oismukes
Neurosciences 
Research Program, Massachusetts 
Institute 
of 
Technology,
Boston, Mass. 02130
What mind-brain problem? What a hoary old conundrum is the mind-brain
question! I, like Puccetti $ Dykes, doubt that we are moving closer to solving
it, but for rather different reasons, I suggest that it will simply disappear as
we slowly elucidate the functional organization of the brain. The "problem"
will be dissipated rather than solved because it is not real. The apparent
conflicts are artificial, created by our simplistic categorizations and failure to
appreciate the implications of the hierarchical organization of biologic struc-
ture and function.
Scientific problems. Rather than broadly confronting the difficulties of re-
ductionism, P & D have tied their analysis to a specific anatomical aspect - a
sensible and constructive approach - but their argument fails dismally be-
cause: 1) their depiction of current thinking about the organization of sensory
pathways is incomplete and misleading, and 2) their assumption that grossly
similar structures must serve similar functions is erroneous.
The authors correctly note the similarity of organization of different regions
of the neocortex. The neocortex is arranged in parallel arrays of basic build-
ing blocks, or modules. It is not yet certain how big the basic modules are, or
how much they vary from one cortical region to another. Mountcastle (1978),
has described ontogenetically-arising minicolumns of about 30^u, diameter.
These may be packaged (perhaps in varying numbers) into a hypercolumn,
which would be a basic functional unit, such as that described by Hubel &
Wiesel (see oper. cit. in Edelman & Mountcastle 1978) for visual orientation
fields.
The general organization of neurons in each module appears to be similar,
although we do not yet have anything like a wiring schematic of the synaptic
connections (cf. Edelman & Mountcastle 1978).
At present we know very little about how modules are wired together to
form functional entities. The number of modules grouped together may vary,
as well as the organization of synaptic input into each. The number of com-
binations and permutations conceivable is just about uncountable, a far cry
from P & D's depiction of virtual identity of cortical areas [III]. In fact, if their
depiction were accurate, it would be a problem not just for the mind-body
issue, but even more crucially so for conventional physiology, because dif-
ferent cortical regions perform quite different physiologic operations.
Even a minute change in wiring can profoundly alter the function of a cir-
cuit, as every engineer knows. Moving a single wire or even changing the
value of a capacitor can convert an electronic amplifier into an oscillator.
Yet, the authors' argument about cortical function is tantamount to looking in-
side a computer, observing that some modules have similar arrangements of
transistors, capacitors, resistors, and wires, and concluding that they cannot
perform qualitatively different operations [VI].
The authors' failure to take modern knowledge of the processes of sensory
perception adequately into account is dramatically illustrated by the
hypothetical experiment in which they would "reconnect the auditory nerve
with visual cortex, and the optic nerve with auditory cortex," or "transpose the
tissue from area 17 to area 41 and vice-versa." In fact, the raw data from
sensory receptors are subjected to a sequence of processing operations as
they pass up through a series of neuronal centers on the way to the neo-
THE BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1978), 3
351

Commentary/Fuccetti & Dykes: Sensory cortex and the mind-brain problem
cortex. These centers are not just relay stations; each consolidates input data
and abstracts characteristic features to be passed upward. In the retina
alone there are three levels of processing. The optic nerve goes not to the vi-
sual cortex, but to the lateral geniculate bodies, which further transform optic
information and pass their abstractions up to the primary visual cortex (which
itself has multiple levels of processing). The visual cortex does not have ac-
cess to the raw data of sensation; it knows only the abstractions of form.
Hubel & Wiesel (see oper. cit. in Edelman & Mountcastle 1978) have ele-
gantly shown that columns (or modules) of cells in the primary visual cortex
mainly recognize dark-light contours, each column responding to a specific
line orientation. The final recognition of, say, a familiar face does not occur in
the primary visual cortex but at later stages in cortical processing [V].
Thus, P & D's hypothetical experiment of transposing nerves is trivial. The
answer to their question about what distinguishes the sensation of sight and
sound is simply that the distinction arises from the quite different temporal-
spatial character of receptor stimulation in each sensory mode [IV] and the
hierarchies of feature extraction and abstraction as well as the final com-
parison to previous experience.
The authors also extend their assertion that grossly similar anatomical
structures cannot subserve qualitatively different experiences at the level of
bioelectric activity. "There is no evidence that the electrical activity of cells
is any different in somesthetic, auditory, and visual cortex." This is hard to
comprehend. Certainly, different sensory stimuli evoke completely different
patterns of bioelectric response in cortical areas. On the other hand, if they
mean that all neuronal communication and processing involves basically
similar electric encoding, so what? Does the fact that both my dry prose and
Shakespeare's sonnets are written with a common alphabet of 26 letters
imply that both portray basically similar experiences?
Problems with reductionism. The authors base their philosophic criticism
mainly on their argument that primary sensory cortex appears unvarying in
structure. This is unfortunate, because that argument does not hold [I], and
yet there are major questions to be raised about the limits of reductionism.
The authors state that a working assumption of neuroscience is that mental
experience can be completely reduced to descriptions of neuronal function,
and they quote Sperry to that effect. I suggest that a thorough inspection of
the working practices of neuroscientists would yield a somewhat different
perspective. Lacking space here for such an examination, I will simply make
two brief arguments: 1) We must distinguish between reductionistic practice
in science and strict philosophic reductionism; 2) Strict philosophic reduc-
tion of mind to brain is not possible, nor can any biologic process be com-
pletely reduced to lower level descriptions.
1) Certainly a major thrust of modern biology has been to elucidate the
structures and functions that underlie biologic phenomena, and the word "re-
ductionistic" has been applied to this process of trying to explain events at
one level of organization in terms of lower-level events. However, a strict
definition of reductionism requires that events at the higher level be com-
pletely accounted for by descriptions at the lower levels. In the practice of
science one seldom attempts complete reduction. An enzymologist, for
example, would not attempt to describe enzyme reaction in purely atomic-
level terms.
2) I suggest that complete reduction of any biologic phenomenon to
lower-level description is impossible, forthree reasons:
(a) The process would be infinitely tedious. Even a relatively simple
task such as predicting the catalytic specificity of an enzyme by adding up
the bonds of all the enzyme's atoms (and of each potential substrate and
product) would exhaust all the King's scientists and all the King's com-
puters.
(b) Even if we finally succeeded in putting together all the atomic-level
information as above, the result would not be in a form we could use. This
is better illustrated by human perception. A black-and-white television pic-
ture consists of nothing but a pattern of hundreds of thousands of spots of
varying brightness. Therefore, all the information that is necessary for a
picture of a voluptuous starlet could be contained in a catalogue of the
spots and their relative positions. Yet that information would be useless to
us as far as perception is concerned. We would not recognize the picture
implicit in the catalogue, and we certainly would not have an emotional
reaction to it.
(c) There may be theoretical limits (quantum uncertainty and perhaps
even Gddelian logical constraints) on the completeness with which a bio-
logic phenomenon can be described in terms of underlying functions.
On the basis of these considerations, I agree with P & D's rejection of
Rorty's proposal to replace psychological expressions with neurophysio-
logical descriptions. They are quite right that a deaf extraterrestrial visitor
could describe the processes of audition but not "know" what it is to hear.
But that argument does not force one to accept dualism or an "impenetrable
mind-brain barrier." A simpler and more unifying explanation is that any liv-
ing creature is organized in a hierarchy of levels of structure and function. At
each level there appear properties unique to that level which can be
described, at least roughly, in terms of lower-level functions, but never com-
pletely. The mind is one such step in the organization of a human being. It
can and will be increasingly examined in terms of its neurologic substrates.
Those descriptions will deepen our understanding, but they will never be
complete in themselves because characterization of any biological
phenomenon must include descriptions of events at the level of that
phenomenon. I have no fear that we scientists will ever put either poets or
phi losophers out of work.
REFERENCE
Edelman, G. M. & Mountcastle, V. B. The mindful brain: Cortical organi-
zation and the group-selective theory of higher-brain function.
M.I.T. Press, Cambridge, Mass. 1978.
by Judith Economos
Renaissance Studio, Scarsdale, N.Y. 10583
What is it like, Mr. Puccetti? In responding to the Puccetti & Dykes paper, it
is necessary first to point out that dualism is not the default view; none of the
several answers to the mind-body problem enjoys that privileged position.
Therefore, even if one should assent (mistakenly, I mean to show) to P & D's
argument that brain-stuff does not vary as much as experiences do and is
therefore distinct from them, one could not conclude that dualism was valid.
This said, let us consider P & D's featured argument, to wit: if sensory
experiences were identical with sensory cortex, then we should find dif-
ferences among the relevant cortical areas sufficient to reflect the subjective
differences among our sense modalities; and we don't.
In the first place, as Smart explained (1959op. cit.), one does not claim
that subjective experiences are brain tissues, but that the event or process of
having a subjective experience is identical with some brain events or
processes. This is no trivial distinction, but we should miss P & D if we were
to stop here. Moreover, what I shall say would probably apply to a new P & D-
like argument complaining of insufficient variety among brain processes, al-
though such an argument might have its own difficulties. So let us ask, what
would count as appropriate differences among brain tissues for understand-
ing subjective difference among sense modalities [VII]? P & D ask, but do
not answer, this same question. Should we want visual cortex to change
colors, auditory cortex to hum? No. Well, would it be enlightening to find that
visual cells were cubic, auditory ones tetrahedrai? In what conceivable way
would a shape difference help explain subjective qualitative differences
among sense modalities? So what if visual cells are made of rubies and au-
ditory cells of topazes? Different composition would not help explain qualita-
tively different sense modalities. Not even if every visual-cortical cell had a
tiny "V" on its cell-body, and every auditory-cortical one an "A", would we be
any closer to seeing how subjective differences between seeing and hearing
could be accounted for thereby. Such lack of results suggests that the wrong
question is being asked.
Conceptual oddness occurs again when we ask P & D about the dif-
ferences among, not tissues, but qualia: "What subjective qualitative dif-
ferences do you mean?", we ask. For they give no instances. Arguing from
Leibniz's law they use "A'" and "B'!I as if we knew over what those variables
ranged (probably we should be writing "F' (A')," and so forth, but never
mind). However, I at least am struck dumb when I try to explain the purely
subjective qualitative difference(s) between seeing and hearing. Of course I
can give nonsubjective differences: the stimuli that cause them, the
responses they provoke; what organs and brain areas are involved; who the
great artists in each modality are. But these belong to the A and B side, not
the A' and B' side. As for the EEM not "knowing what hearing is like": well,
Puccetti and Dykes presumably know what hearing is like. What/s it like, Mr.
Puccetti? If you can tell Mr. Dykes, you can tell the EEM and he'll know, too;
and If you can't, then what exactly do you mean when you say you "know"
something? What can we claim to know "by acquaintance" that cannot be
352
THE BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1978), 3

Commentary/Puccetti & Dykes: Sensory cortex and the mind-brain problem
known "by description" by the EEM? I readily agree that there are
experiences that P & Dhave that the EEM cannot have; but when people are
pressed to say what it is Puccetti knows, it is generally something on the
order of "what it is like to hear a symphony." But is it "like" anything to hear a
symphony? Why, for example, except for the same reasons the EEM can
have, would we think Puccetti's hearing a symphony is like Dykes' hearing it?
What it eventually reduces to is that P & D can hear and the EEM cannot,
which was (after all) the supposition. No stateable, disconfirmable, mistake-
able knowledge is therefore P & D's which is forever inaccessible to the EEM.
Indeed, the worst expressible feature of qualia, for P & D, is that they are—
ineffable. Nothing shows up to stand in for the F' (A') the way predicates like
"is cubic" and "is made of rubies" show up to stand in for the F(A); even if
those latter predicates are irrelevant, at least they can be said out loud. Since
we can say neither what differences among tissues could possibly explain
subjective differences between seeing and hearing, nor what subjective dif-
ferences between seeing and hearing there are to be explained, I conclude
that P & D's argument is temporarily incapacitated.
In the space remaining I want to obliterate, not dualism, but the idea that
dualism is the natural, naive view to which we gratefully revert when more
exotic mind-body theories encounter difficulties. Dualism is a bizarre con-
jecture, and it takes considerable effort to get the naive to see any sense in it.
It has spectacular and embarassing problems—e.g.: accounting to
thermodynamics; explaining what it is that the brain-events cause, exactly;
how to tell which experiences are whose; giving the laws, if any, that mind-
stuff obeys; explaining how any causation is possible between material,
spatially-extended stuff and something which is neither; and others, includ-
ing, prima facie, imparsimony. Dualism makes the identity thesis look pretty
good, in fact; nor have P & D altered that situation.
by Frank R. Freemon
Department of Neurology, Vanderbilt University, and Veterans 
Administration
Hospital, Nashville, Tenn. 37203
Visualizing 
visual cortex in the mind's eye. The apparent paradox
described by Puccetti & Dykes contains three relationships symbolized in
their Figure 5.
1. The sensory cortices appear similar.
A = B = C
In his precommentary Scheibel argues that this relationship does not hold:
significant anatomical differences do distinguish these cortical regions.
Without criticizing Scheibel on anatomical grounds (what gall that would
take), I think we can admit a similarity that is more than superficial. Analogy
to nerve fibers is helpful. Axons of optic nerve and of auditory nerve have
identical membrane properties, yet the former carry vision, the latter hearing.
The sensory differences between these nerves arise from their central con-
nections rather than from any intrinsic characteristics [III]. I think sensory dif-
ferences between visual and auditory cortex derive from their embedded lo-
cation within a larger neurological system rather than from differences of
internal organization.
2. The sensations that correspond to these cortical regions are quite dif-
ferent.
I wager that some commentators will review cross-modality research to
argue that sensations which seem so different can overlap [VIII, cf. Marks,
Milner]. Blind people can describe what they "see" when a television
camera transduces light impulses into tactile stimulation [cf. Bridgeman,
Hebb]. I think, however, that if one accepts subjective experiences as real
data, then one must accept that in this level of description, things which
seem different are different.
3. There is a relationship between vision and the visual cortex, hearing and
the auditory cortex, feeling and the somatosensory cortex.
B
' C 4C
What is the relationship symbolized by a question mark over the equality
sign? Does A produce A' or vice versa? Are they two aspects of the same
reality? Do physiologic changes in the occipital cortex represent, reflect,
correspond, create, transmit, transduce, or parallel the perception of visual
images? Here is where the Puccetti & Dykes paradox breaks down into a
special case of the insoluble mind-brain dilemma.
A closer look at the relation between vision and the so-called visual cortex
of the occipital lobe may illuminate this problem. Bilateral lesions of this
region are not uncommon in man, due to blockage of blood flow through end
branches of the basilar artery. Some of these infarctions spare the medial oc-
cipital lobes, including the termination of macular fibers; these patients
retain central vision. Certain other patients, perhaps with incomplete lesions,
can see only moving objects. Unlike other animal species, most humans with
complete bilateral occipital infarction are totally blind (Denny-Brown &
Chambers 1976). They are unable to report when a light is shone into the
eyes, though the pupils briskly contract, since the pupillary light reflex in-
volves only subcortical structures.
When asked to describe their visual experience, these cortically-blind
patients generally report a grayness or darkness. Yet their imagination of vi-
sual scenes is unaffected. They perform as well as the sighted on tests of
long-term visual memory (Which hand is raised on the Statue of Liberty?).
Both cortical and ocular blindness, when acquired in adults, can produce
exaggerated visual imagery. These subjects turn to the sound of the voice
when addressed and either remember or imagine the face of the speaker.
This semi-hallucinatory imagination has been called phantom vision, by
analogy to the phantom limb sensations that follow amputation (Cohn 1971).
If one accepts any relation at all between mind and brain, the ability of vi-
sual imagination to survive occipital lobe destruction must indicate that the
neurological system which corresponds to the visual images in the "mind's
eye" includes more of the brain than the traditional visual cortex [V]. I have
no direct knowledge of this, but I think a cortically-deaf person can re-
member or imagine familiar sounds, and a patient who has suffered destruc-
tion of the postcentral gyrus can still imagine distinctive textures such as
sandpaper. If this is true, then the "mind's ear" must be more than auditory
cortex, and what I guess you would have to call the "mind's finger" involves
more than somatosensory cortex.
In the great neurophilosophical war between the localizationists and the
generalists, most of the specific data favor the localizationist position. The
solution to the P & D paradox seems to be a victory for the generalists.
REFERENCES
Cohn, R. Phantom vision. Archives of Neurology. 25:.468-471,1971.
Denny-Brown, D. & Chambers, R. S. Physiological aspects of visual per-
ception. I: Functional aspects of visual cortex. Archives of Neurology.
33:219-227,1976
by John L. Gedye
Department of Neurology, School of Medicine, Wayne State University, Detroit,
Mich. 48201
On accounting for one kind of difference in terms of another kind of dif-
ference. In his Jayne Lectures "Induction and Intuition in Scientific Thought,"
Peter B. Medawar (1969) proposed that one of the "distinctive and important
functions" for scientific methodology, as a discipline, to perform would be
the elucidation of the problem of causality—the "problems raised by the no-
tion of necessary connexion." In a footnote to the published version he
elaborated his views as follows: "When we carry out an experiment of or-
dinary unifactorial design (one factor or circumstance varied, the others kept
constant), the result of the experiment is the difference between two sets of
readings .. . namely those recorded in the experiment itself and those
recorded in its "control"; and the inference we are entitled to draw is that the
difference between the starting conditions was the cause of the difference
between the two sets of results." He goes on "In everyday life .. . the cause
[of a state of affairs]. .. when analyzed, usually turns out to be the cause of a
difference between what was and what might have been; between what did
happen and what might have happened if the antecedents had themselves
been different."
A study of, say, the effects of a certain type of brain lesion on human be-
havior fits the Medawar paradigm very closely. In such an exercise we are, at
least in principle, concerned with how exhibited differences in behavior
between a patient and a suitable control subject can be accounted for in
terms of differences between their brain morphologies arising from the le-
sion. This approach can, of course, be extended fairly easily to studies of
"naturally-occurring" behavioral differences between individuals in relation
THE BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1978), 3
353

Commentary/Puccetti & Dykes: Sensory cortex and the mind-brain problem
to "naturally-occurring" differences between their brain morphologies, but it
becomes more difficult—for reasons we shall touch on later—to extend it, as
Pucetti & Dykes would like, to the study of intrasubject differences, unless,
that is, we choose the topic very carefully, so that the conditions for applying
the paradigm are satisfied.
Since, as I understand it, a reductivist approach is one in which, in trying to
understand a multilevel system, we seek to explain the differences between
things on each level in terms of differences between things on lower levels, a
study, as described above, in which we seek to account for behavioral dif-
ferences in terms of morphological differences, is, by definition, reductivist.
However, as Karl R. Popper (1977) has recently emphasized, an important
distinction needs to be made between philosophical reduction and scientific
reduction. I quote: "[philosophical reduction] is characterized by an attempt
to simplify our view of the world; [scientific reduction], by an attempt to
provide bold and testable theories of high explanatory power. I believe that
the latter is an extremely valuable and worthwhile method, while the former is
of value only if we have good reasons to assume that it corresponds to the
facts about the universe."
The trouble with Puccetti & Dykes's approach is that if we take the three
sensory systems as wholes, we have, as Scheibel points out, an abundance
of differences among them [I], but very little to go on if we set ourselves the
reductionist task of trying to figure out which of these differences might be
responsible for any particular aspect of the characteristically different sub-
jective experiences associated with the three modalities in which we may be
interested. It may be unfair of me to say this, but P & D's arguments seem to
me to come perilously close at times to being analogous to those used by a
man who compares three protein types of widely different function, and be-
cause their amino acid sequences look equally random, argues that they re-
semble each other too much for their structural differences to account for the
differences in function [SI]! By making the remark ".. . nothing so resembles
a protein molecule as another protein molecule . .." P & D give the im-
pression of being unaware both of the combinatorial richness and hence, on
a reductionist view, the explanatory power of the modular constructional
techniques exemplified by proteins, or of the difficulty, when such modular
constructional techniques are used to create a structure, of understanding
just why any particular design works in the way that it does, and produces the
higher level phenomena that it does [VI].
If we pose the question: "given a pair of protein molecules, in what circum-
stances would we decide to treat them as tokens of two different types, as op-
posed to two tokens of the same type?", the answer would clearly be "if we
were unable to put their amino acid sequences into 1:1 correspondence."
The simplest example of this situation, in which the types would show
maximum resemblance, would be if the two molecules differed in just one lo-
cation—a situation illustrated by the beta chains of normal hemoglobin and
sickle hemoglobin, which differ in position 6, the glutamic acid residue
found in the normal hemoglobin being replaced by valine in the sickle hemo-
globin. The crucial point, of course, is that a single difference—the smallest
that, by definition, allows us to distinguish two types—can produce a crucial
change in function (although by no means all such differences have this ef-
fect).
The exercise of comparing two protein molecules allows us to make a
further point: whereas two such sequences of the same length can be of the
same type in only one way, one can differ from another in a large number of
ways: (q p - 1), where q is the size of the alphabet, these ways including, of
course, everything from differences at a single location to differences at each
of p locations.
In raising the problem they do, P & D seem to me to have started from the
wrong end. Surely it would have been better, for their purposes, to have taken
two sensory systems that were as similar as could be found and to have ex-
plored the mental correlates of the smallest observable structural differences
between them [VII]. The topic that immediately comes to mind here is human
color vision and its anomalies—such as the case of the unusual individual
with different cone function in the two eyes, in whom similar physical stimuli
have given rise to different subjective experiences according to the eye
stimulated, and where the subjective differences could be related to dif-
ferences in the distribution of visual pigments in the cones of the two eyes
(cf. Anderson, this Commentary).
Such an approach, in which the implications of quantum changes are
systematically explored, seems to me to have more profound consequences
for the philosophical mind-brain problem than the issues P & D attempt to
raise by their global comparison of widely differing sensory modalities.
REFERENCES
Medawar, P. B. Induction and Intuition in Scientific Thought. Methuen,
London, pp. 14-21, 1969.
Popper, K. R. & Eccles, J. C. The Self and Its Brain. Springer Interna-
tional, New York, p. 60, 1977.
by Kathleen PL Gibson
Department of Anatomy, University of Texas Dental Branch, Houston, Texas 77025
Asking the right questions: other approaches to the mind-brain problem.
Posing proper questions is the most crucial step in any scientific or philo-
sophical endeavor. I believe that Puccetti & Dykes are asking the wrong
questions. In searching in the cerebral cortex for the determinants of sensory
modalities, they are searching in the wrong place. In attempting to dif-
ferentiate cortical areas primarily on cytoarchitectonic grounds, they are us-
ing the wrong parameters. In assuming that the answer to the mind-brain
problem must lie primarily in microanalysis of the structure and function of
individual cells, they are making a serious philosphical error. Finally, they
seriously err in considering only the receptive nature of the cortex and ignor-
ing its processing function. Each of these errors creates a bias in favor of the
dualistic interpretation.
Sensory reception occurs not in the neocortex but in the peripheral
nervous system: in the organ of Corti of the ear, the Meissner's corpuscles
and Merkel's discs of the skin, and the rods and cones of the eye [IV]. These
structures differ from each other radically in anatomy and in the nature of the
sensory stimuli to which they respond (Barr 1974).
Neocortical projection areas are not autonomous structures capable of
functioning in isolation, but rather small portions of a complex nervous
system consisting of many interconnected and functionally interdependent
components. While cytoarchitectonic distinctions between cortical areas
may be apparent only to specialists in cortical microanatomy, cortical areas
differ profoundly in terms of their long-distance vertical connectivity with the
brain stem and horizontal connectivity with other cortical areas [ill] (Crosby
et al. 1962op. cit.). The role each projection area plays in sensory percep-
tion cannot be understood solely by anatomical and physiological mi-
croanalysis but must also encompass analysis of those larger circuits of
which each area is a part. When this is done, it is clear that the primary visual
cortex can mediate only vision and not audition or touch, because it is linked
by means of two-way neuronal chains with brain-stem visual processing
centers and ultimately with the rods and cones of the eye. It is not similarly
linked to the neuronal receptors in the ear and skin. The determination of
whether stimulation of cortical visual, auditory, and somatosensory areas
yields identical physiological responses must involve measurements of
long-distance sub-cortical as well as cortical responses, particularly in brain-
stem centers subserving the sensory modalities [V].
The neocortex is a nervous system superstructure absent in lower
vertebrates and greatly expanded in size in humans, in comparison even
with such highly intelligent species as the great apes. It is highly improbable
that such a large and recently evolved structure has as its primary role the
rudimentary and phylogenetically ancient capacity of differentiating touch,
vision, and audition from one another. More likely, the neocortex processes
sensations in a manner superior to or different from the processing ca-
pacities of animals with little or no cortex. A primary goal in the mind-brain
dilemma is not the determination of why each projection area subserves one
particular sensory modality, which is evident from the vertical connectivity,
but the determination of what these cortical processing functions are and how
they contribute to overall cognition.
Since very strong structural similarities do exist among cortical areas, I
would suggest that it is probable that the cortex processes each sensory mo-
dality in a somewhat similar fashion [VIII]. Consequently, one important
question that needs investigation is whether there are similarities in the
processing of different sensory modalities that would account for the similar
cortical architecture. In other contexts it has been suggested that functional
similarities do exist (Luria 1966; Gibson 1977). The human and primate cere-
bral cortex appears capable of a number of important processing
mechanisms that can be applied to each sensation, including, among
354
THE BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1978), 3

Commentary/Fuccetti & Dykes: Sensory cortex and the mind-brain problem
others, fine sensory differentiation and the construction of new perceptual
wholes by simultaneous and sequential synthesis of separately-perceived
sensory stimuli. Each of these suggested abilities matures with age in hu-
mans in conjunction with the maturation of the cerebral cortex (Gibson 1977).
Each is disrupted by cortical damage (Luria 1966), and some, at least,
demonstrate a phylogenetic diversity which may correlate with cortical size
(Jerison 1973).
This suggestion, that cortical areas may, in fact, function in a highly similar
fashion, with the distinction between visual, auditory, and tactile functions
depending primarily on vertical connectivity, will probably strike a discor-
dant note with the authors, who dismiss as unlikely the concept that the vi-
sual cortex could assume auditory functions if vertical reconnections could
be established. Actually, this is not so unlikely as the authors assume. It has
long been suspected that functional plasticity exists in the cerebral cortex,
and that one mechanism for this plasticity may involve the formation of new
neuronal connections (Stein et al. 1974).
Finally, the philosophical questions discussed by the authors are curiously
deficient, in that although they purport to address the mind-brain problem,
they totally ignore the science of the mind: psychology. Surely, important
clues to the mechanisms of the mind, and hence to functional processes of
the brain, can be gained from studying the large extant body of knowledge
contributed by perceptual and cognitive psychologists. For instance, the
works of Piaget (1969) present important information on cognitive functions,
suggesting very strongly that any conception of perception or cognition as
mere "raw feels" is too simple. Humans actively construct their own reality -
i.e. their own perceptions and their own concepts of physical casuality,
space, and logic-by continual active mental experimentation. Further
analysis of these constructional processes and other cognitive mechanisms,
coupled with a search for their neural determinants in various species and in
brain-damaged humans, could surely aid in deciphering the relationships
between mind and brain. These, however, are macro, not micro questions.
In sum, I think the authors have backed themselves into an intellectual
corner by the questions they have chosen to ask. The situation is not so bleak
as they suggest. The solution of the mind-brain problem is still far from com-
plete and will 
require considerable additional effort by scientists
knowledgeable in both behavioral and brain research and willing to ask
questions at both micro and macro levels. Hopefully, many such individuals
read this journal and are thinking in these directions.
REFERENCES
Barr, M. L. The Human Nervous System. Harper and Row, Hagerstown,
Maryland, 1974.
Gibson, K. R. Brain structure and intelligence in Macaques and human in-
fants from a Piagetian perspective. In: S. Chevalier-Skolnikoff & F. E.
Poirer (eds.) Primate Bio-Social Development. Garland Publishing,
New York, 1977.
Jerison, H. J. Evolution of the Brain and Intelligence. Academic Press,
New York, 1973.
Luria, A. R. Higher Cortical Functions in Man. Basic Books, New York,
1966.
Piaget, J. The Psychology of the Child. Basic Books, New York, 1969.
Stein, D. G., Rosen, J., & Butters, N. Plasticity and Recovery of Function.
Academic Press, New York, 1974.
by Gordon G. Globus
Department of Psychiatry and Human Behavior, University of California at Irvine,
Irvine, Calif. 92717
What is the sound of one hand clapping, the touch of a still wind, the sight
of a "black hole"? Puccetti & Dykes have led us to an apparent stalemate,
from which a Zen koan may deliver us. In essence, they have provided a dis-
cussion of the "principal of psychoneural correspondence" which claims
(some kind of) a correspondence between psychological "whatevers" and
neural "whatevers." This principle is consistent with practically all theories of
the mind/brain problem that address themselves to an account of the nature
of the correspondence.
It might turn out empirically that this psychoneural correspondence is one-
to-one, one-to-many, or many-to-one (Feigl 1958 op. cit.). The first two of
these alternatives are consistent with a reductionism in which a
psychological "whatever" is equated (in a sense that continues to exercise
contemporary philosophers) with one or several neural "whatevers." But in
many-to-one correspondence there is no way of recovering the many from the
one, so we have simplification instead of reduction.
The authors view current neuroscience (and indeed any future Utopian
neuroscience) as strongly supporting a many-to-one psychoneural cor-
respondence, since three psychological "whatevers"-vision, hearing, and
touch - correspond to essentially one neural "whatever"-the sensory
cortex. They accordingly claim that the reductionist program fails.
Scheibel contributes to the stalemate in arguing that contemporary
neuroscience does support (and Utopian neuroscience will support) one-to-
one psychoneural correspondence in accordance with reductionism. This
appears to be a true impasse, since there is no clear procedure to decide
whether there is enough neural variation to account in a one-to-one fashion
for the alleged "obviously very different" sensory experiences [VII].
Now, although the authors offer considerable detail on the neural side of
the correspondence, the psychological side is left quite unremarked (in ac-
cordance with the innermost predilections of analytic philosophers), other
than the repeated emphasis that tactile, auditory, and visual sensations are
"vastly different sorts of experiences." If purely psychological inquiry (i.e.
phenomenological reflection; see Zaner 1970) can detail these disparities,
then we shall have some idea of the order of neural differences the reduc-
tionist ought to seek; at the least, the issue will be more sharply focused. Ac-
cordingly, I shall present briefly my own reflection on the "qualia" of touch,
hearing, and vision and amicably invite the reader to co-reflect with me.
Initially I note certain commonalities [VIII] across these qualia (which are
especially easy to express for hearing and vision). Each is organized into
figure and ground and has spatial and textural properties. Each has a dimen-
sion of intensity and qualitative variation (brightness and loudness; color and
pitch). Given such commonalities, it is not surprising that there are simi-
larities between the areas of sensory cortex which correspond to these
qualia.
But more importantly, just what are the fundamental disparities among
touch, hearing, and vision? To answer this question through phenom-
enological reflection, we must get to the qualia themselves by putting aside
the meanings and intentions that we bring to the world of our conscious
experience. To use the authors' examples, a "glorious sunset" has a set of
meanings vastly different from a "bell" or feeling "something" - say, a pin -
touch one's thumb. The meanings we bring to perception (and which, pre-
sumably, are not "subserved" by sensory cortex [V]) serve to exaggerate the
true differences across qualia (which presumably are "subserved" by
sensory cortex).
This issue of meaningless perception is well posed by the Zen koan, "What
is the sound of one hand clapping?" The sound of one hand clapping is the
sound of no sound. Correspondingly, the touch of a still wind is the touch of
no object, and the sight of a (cosmological) "black hole" is the sight of no
thing. It is upon objectless touching, hearing, and seeing perse that we must
reflect (an admittedly difficult skill) if we are to assess what P& D claim to be
"vastly different sorts of experiences."
According to my reflection, there is something more fundamental than, and
common to, touch, hearing, and vision; this might be termed, somewhat re-
dundantly, being consciously aware. Touch, hearing, and vision are modes
of being consciously aware. They are kinds or qualities of conscious aware-
ness. They are but ways of being consciously aware.
Moreover, as I reduce my meanings to a bare minimum, such that I do not
mean any tactual, auditory, or visual "thing" but only mean touching, hear-
ing, and seeing as pure qualia,1 the differences across these qualia are
much less obvious; yet they do not entirely disappear. There is one way of
being consciously aware that is bright and colored, and another way that is
loud and toneful. These perceptual experiences are not "vastly different" but
just "this way" and "that way" of being consciously aware. Given this order of
disparity, there is no necessity for dramatic differences across the cor-
responding 
areas of sensory cortex in order to claim one-to-one
psychoneural correspondence.
Since these qualia are all "ways of being consciously aware," it would be
anticipated that whatever the neural elements that correspond to conscious
awareness, they would be common to the various qualia. What would cor-
respond to the different "ways" of consciousness would be different ways
these 
elements were functionally 
arranged. Thus, different system
properties [VI], rather than different component properties, correspond to dif-
THE BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1978), 3
355

Commentary/Puccetti & Dykes: Sensory cortex and the rnind-brain problem
ferent qualia. Since neuroscience currently knows so little about the system
properties of the brain, it would be rash to claim that Utopian neuroscience
will never discover different properties of the primary cortical tissue subserv-
ing touch, hearing, and vision qua systems.
It might be argued that the best currently available methods for studying
system properties of the brain are in fact not neuroscientific but
phenomenological. Indeed, it is not widely appreciated that if an accepta-
ble version of the identity thesis could be found,2 then phenomenological
reflection isde facto brain investigation. Here philosophy has practical im-
portance for science.
In summary, phenomenological reflection on touch, hearing, and vision
per se provide no reason to anticipate vast differences among the cor-
responding areas of sensory cortex. Furthermore, the differences that we do
anticipate are likely to be holistic properties of functional systems, rather
than differences in system components; the former remain for Utopian
neuroscience to explore. I conclude that P & D's argument against reduc-
tionism (as well as their move toward dualism, by default of reductionism) is
not supported by phenomenological reflection.
NOTES
1. Of course, if I forego all meaning, then meaningful observation
ceases and I accordingly have nothing to say. Here, I believe, lies the tran-
sition from phenomenological reflection to the higher forms of meditation.
2. A sequence of not unfaulted attempts in this regard can be found in
Globus (1973, 1976; for references see Globus & Franklin 1979). Accord-
ing to this view, "the old mind-brain problem" cannot be reduced simply
to brain in any referential, functional, or eliminative way, as discussed by
P & D. There is both an ontological reduction to a pure structure con-
served across "mind" and "brain" (i.e. structural "identity") and an irre-
ducible epistemological dualism as a function of a fundamental principle
of complementarity.
REFERENCES
Globus, G. & Franklin, S. Prospects for the scientific observer of per-
ceptual consciousness. In: J. M. Davidson & R. J. Davidson (eds.) The
Psychobiology of Consciousness. Plenum Press, New York, in press,
1979.
Zaner, R. The Way of Phenomenology: Criticism as a Philosophical Dis-
cipline. Pegasus, New York, 1970.
by IViieiiaeS B. Green
Minnesota Center for Philosophy of Science, University of 
Minnesota, Min-
neapolis, Minn. 55455
Some difference is enough difference. Puccetti & Dykes's argument hinges
importantly on their intuitive measure of the degree of difference among
sensory modalities, but this measure has no other support [Vii, VI1IJ. Their
claim that A, B, and C are similar in composition and structure may be sup-
ported by present-day neuroscience. But we have no solid intuitions about
how to measure the degree of similarity for sensations. I fail to have strong in-
tuitions about whether smells are more similar to touches than to sights or
than the latter two are to each other. My intuitions are even more attenutated
when it comes to comparing that degree of similarity to the putative similarity
among neural areas A, B, and C.
But even if we had a clear understanding of what it meant to say that the
sensory modalities were vastly different, there is nothing counterintuitive
about vastly-different effects being produced by minimally-different causes
[i, IX]. This is the scientific end of the problem. Thus, it is wrong for P & D to
dismiss the possibility that the occasional cells of Meynert in the upper
layers of visual cortex account for the fact that this tissue mediates vision un-
less other considerations from the nomological network support such an in-
ference. On the contrary, if, counterfactually, this small difference were the
only difference among the privileged loci, this would be good evidence for
the cells of Meynert's playing just such a role.
P & D seem puzzled by the possibility that similar neural tissue might be
able to produce radically different sensory modalities, depending upon its
locus within the overall neural network, comparing it to the possibility of "a
single musical instrument which, depending on where it is situated in the
orchestra, can equally well produce the sounds of a piano, a violin, and a
bass drum." A well-confirmed theory of acoustics tells us that the latter is ab-
surd, but no similar theory of brain function permits the former to seem even
peculiar. In fact, ordinary perception of color patches depends heavily on the
background against which the patch is placed. Does not perception of
musical instruments vary similarly [VI...]?
P & D finally argue that proposing that areas A, B, and C cause our sensa-
tions but are not identical with them "would also go a long way toward at-
tenuating the bewilderment we feel about histological similarities in
somesthetic, auditory, and visual cortex." But this is no help for their puzzle-
ment on either the scientific or philosophical end. Two "overwhelmingly-
similar" neural states would still be producing "vastly-different" sense mo-
dalities [IX]. The authors quote Hume for support to show that causes need
not resemble their effects. Hume provides no support, however, for his prin-
ciple is that while effects heed not resemble their causes, like causes
produce like effects. But if A and B are different enough to produce "vastly
different" sensory modalities, they must be different in ways important
enough to overcome the philosophical objection of the authors and to be
[identical with] those modalities. If they were not different, a virtual miracle
would have occurred. Barring miracles, the plausible conclusion would be
that some differences in the neural states A, B, and C were causally responsi-
ble for the different sensory states produced. And the most likely candidate -
microfunctional organization - defeats their initial intuition that "something
in the microstructure or other features of the cortical tissue" should be
radically different [SI].
Perhaps P & D should not be faulted for their failure to address the central
mind-body issue: whether an identification between neural centers and their
respective modalities would be plausible even if the neural centers were
drastically dissimilar in structure and composition. The traditional starting
point for philosophical argumentation on the subject has assumed one-to-
one or a one-to-many psychophysical correlation. Unfortunately, their dis-
missal of eliminative materialism depends on the assumption that such an
identification makes no sense. They reject eliminative materialism because a
nonauditory extraterrestial who knew all about area B would still not know
what it was like to hear a sound. Eliminative materialism, despite its
considerable drawbacks, is not committed to holding that "hearing a sonic
boom" means the same as "electrochemical activation of a certain popula-
tion of neurons" (Rorty 1970); nor to the absurd claim that "observational" ac-
cess to an earthling's auditory cortex should serve as a hearing aid and
produce an auditory experience. The only other apparent reason for rejecting
eliminative materialism would be that sensory modalities just do not seem to
be the same kind of stuff as neural centers, and so could not be replaced or
eliminated by the latter. But this is where the mind-body problem begins on
the philosophical side. I am not arguing for an identity theory, but P & D offer
no plausible argument against it.
REFERENCE
Rorty, R. In defense of eliminative materialism. The Review of
Metaphysics. 24:(1) 112-121,1970.
by Gilbert Harman
Department of Philosophy, Princeton University, Princeton, N.J. 08540
What is experience made of? A familiar model of the brain in the body is
that of the computer in a robot. This model has often been stressed by func-
tionalists (e.g. Putnam 1960, 1967; Fodor 1968op. cit.). Clearly it is a model
that by itself gives one no reason to expect to find different sorts of cells in
the auditory, visual, or tactile cortex, any more than one would necessarily
expect to find that different sorts of transistors or microchips process in-
formation from the auditory, visual, and tactile receptors of the robot [VI].
What one should expect to find in these areas are not differences in the na-
ture of the cells or microchips or whatever, but differences in connections
among the cells in a given area [III], in connections to sense organs [IV], in
connections to other parts of the brain [V], and so forth.
Why then do Puccetti & Dykes (and many others) suppose that physicalism
requires that the obvious differences among feeling, hearing, and seeing be
reflected by differences "in the microstructure or other features of the cortical
tissue" in the relevant areas of the brain- i.e., intrinsic differences that are
not just differences in connections and relations to other things? I sense in
their remarks something like the following intuitively appealing argument: (1)
If a certain visual experience ("seeing a glorious sunset") is to be identified
as a purely physical phenomenon, it must be identified with something going
on in the visual cortex, and analogously for a given auditory experience
356
THE BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1978), 3

Commentary/Fuccetti & Dykes: Sensory cortex and the mind-brain problem
("hearing a bell ring") and for a given tactile experience ("feeling something
touch one's thumb"). (2) The intrinsic (nonrelational) characters of these
experiences are quite different. (3) So, if these experiences are to be
identified as purely physical phenomena, the corresponding cortical areas
must contain quite different intrinsic characters.
The above argument will be challenged in at least two ways. First, a func-
tionalist will deny 1, holding that a given experience is to be identified with a
complex physical event that involves not only what is going on in the relevant
sensory cortex but also various connections and relations between that
activity and various other aspects of the brain [VI], also including perhaps
connections with other parts of the body and even the world outside.
(Couldn't a brain in a vat, unconnected to sense organs and muscles, still in
theory have the experience of seeing a glorious sunset if appropriately stimu-
lated in the visual cortex? Perhaps we count what goes on in such a brain as
such an experience only because it would be a crucial part of such an
experience in a brain that was in a normal bodily context (Harman 1973, pp.
62-65). Could a visual cortex (in a vat) that was unconnected even with the
rest of the brain have the experience of seeing a glorious sunset if appro-
priately stimulated [V]?)
A second challenge to the argument will come from those who are
sceptical about the use made in 2 and 3 of the notion of intrinsic or nonrela-
tional character. How can I tell what is part of the intrinsic character of my
experience of seeing a glorious sunset? Presumably I am to attend to those
features of which I am immediately aware, the idea being that I am aware of
those features without necessarily being aware of any relation between my
experience and anything outside it; for such features must, it seems, be in-
trinsic features of my experience. The problem here is that my visual
experience is itself an awareness of something - a sunset-that is not itself
an experience (although this awareness may, of course, be illusory). What I
am directly aware of are features of the sunset, and these must not be
confused with features of my visual experience of the sunset (Armstrong
1962). True, I am aware of one feature of my experience, namely that it is an
experience of seeing a sunset of a certain sort. But that is to say, as it were,
that my experience is a mental representation that represents me as seeing
such a sunset (Armstrong 1968, pp. 209-211; Harman 1973, esp. pp. 182-
184). Representation of this sort would appear to be possible only in the
context of a system that allowed other potential representations, used in
certain ways in response to sensory "input" and in inference and reasoning,
and sometimes leading to behavioral "output" (Harman 1973, chapters 3-4).
So, it can be argued that this sort of feature of my experience, namely that it is
an experience of seeing a sunset of a certain sort, is a relational charac-
teristic of the experience and not part of its intrinsic nonrelational character
(if indeed this notion of intrinsic character even makes sense).
Much more needs to be said here. My point is merely that P & D need to
formulate an argument like the one described, and that this raises complex
issues that are not easy to resolve.
REFERENCES
Armstrong, D. M. Perception and the Physical World. Routledge and
Kegan Paul, London, 1962.
A Materialist Theory of Mind. Routledge and Kegan Paul, London,
1968.
Harman, G. Thought. Princeton University Press, Princeton, N.J., 1973.
Putnam, H. Minds and machines. In: S. Hook (ed.) Dimensions of Mind.
New York University Press, New York, 1960.
Psychological predicates. In: W. H. Capitan & D. D. Merrill (eds.) Art,
Mind, and Religion. University of Pittsburgh Press, Pittsburgh, 1967.
by D. O. Hefob
Department of Psychology, Dalhousie University, Halifax, N. S., Canada B3H4J1
A problem of localization. What Puccetti & Dykes have proposed is, as far
as I know, a really new argument against the idea that mind and conscious-
ness are an activity of the brain. However, the argument has flaws- one of
them, I think, fatal.
First, it depends on a direct, immediate, introspective acquaintance with
our own mental processes, and there is reason to think that there is no such
direct acquaintance [Vli, VIII]. It is assumed that in the case of vision, for
example, we know what seeing is and how it operates, in addition to knowing
the properties of the thing seen and in what circumstances one can see.
However, Humphrey (1951) has shown that we do not perceive our sensa-
tions or perceptions but instead the thing sensed or perceived. Anything
more is pure theory. It cannot even be safely assumed that visual sensation is
recognizably distinct from auditory or tactile sensation, intrinsically and
apart from the context in which it occurs. This is shown by the fascinating
case of "facial vision," the long-ago theory that explained one's awareness of
nearby objects in complete darkness as a sensitivity of the skin analogous to
vision. The phenomenon is actually auditory (i.e. echolocation: Supa, Cotzin,
& Dallenbach 1944), and the fact that the theory could be maintained at all is
enough to show that what is auditory is not so different from what is tactile or
visual.
However, the idea that mental content can be examined directly and com-
pared with neurological conceptions is quite general in these attacks on
identity theory, and Humphrey's (1951) criticism of the idea has had little im-
pact (but has not been refuted, just disregarded). Perhaps the criticism is
over-subtle, even hairsplitting. So let us turn now to a less subtle point.
P & D have got their localizations wrong [V]. Perception does not take
place in the cortical sensory areas but at some higher level (Teuber 1960). In
the visual case, for example, destruction of area 17 on one side produces
hemianopia-vision is lost in one half of the field-but still if simple sym-
metrical objects are presented so that one half of the object falls in the area
of blindness, the objects are seen as wholes (somewhat shrunken on the
blind side). The process of completion is at some higher level, for it cannot
occur where the cortical tissue is absent. Again, little success has been at-
tained in the treatment of pain from phantom limbs by surgical removal of the
corresponding part of area 3; despite complete absence of that tissue when
the removal is radical, pain persists. It is not therefore in area 3 that we must
look for the perception of pain.
The cortical sensory areas, then, are properly so named, as part of the
transmission from sensory surface to the (less well named) association
cortex. Here as elsewhere it is essential to distinguish between sensation
and perception, on physiological as well as psychological or behavioral
grounds (Hebb 1972). When they discuss subjective experience, P & D are
discussing perception, which is a function of the divergent conduction of
association cortex, not the relative simplicity of the parallel conduction
characteristic of sensory cortex.
REFERENCES
Hebb, D. O. Textbook of Psychology (3rd ed.) Saunders, Philadelphia,
1972.
Humphrey, G. Thinking. Methuen, London 1951.
Supa, M., Cotzin, M., & Dallenbach, K. M. "Facial vision": the perception
of obstacles by the blind. American Journal of Psychology. 57:133-
183,1944.
Teuber, H. L. Perception. In: J. Field, H. W. Magoun, & V. E. Hall (eds.),
Handbook of Physiology: Neurophysiology. Vol. 3. American Physio-
logical Society, Baltimore, Williams & Wilkins, 1960.
by J. L. Mackfe
University College, Oxford University, Oxford 0X1 4BH, England
Inexplicit dualism. Puccetti & Dykes interestingly challenge the assumption
commonly made by philosophers who discuss the mind-body problem that
there is at most a one-many correlation between kinds of mental state and
kinds of underlying bodily state. They argue that the areas of the sensory
cortex associated with touch, hearing, and sight are so similar to one
another, while the experiences of feeling, hearing, and seeing are so dif-
ferent from one another, that the mind-brain identity theory, functionalism,
and eliminative materialism are all ruled out. But if Scheibel is right, their
argument is at least premature: there are plenty of still-to-be-explored possi-
ble differences between the three cortical areas. However, their discussion
raises a philosophically interesting hypothetical question: To what sort of
view would we be led if things turned out as they suggest- if thorough inves-
tigation revealed no possibly relevant physical differences among cortical
areas 3, 17, and 41 ? They are cagey about this, hinting only at "some form of
dualism," and saying that the cortex may cause rather than constitute our
experiences.
But how would this last move help? How could relevantly similar segments
of cortex even cause radically diverse experiences [IX]? Would there not
have to be some additional causal factor associated with each area? And if
THE BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1978), 3
357

Commentary/Puccetti & Dykes: Sensory cortex and the mind-brain problem
this is, by hypothesis, not a physical difference between them, must it not be
a physically ungrounded mental factor? Is there, then, a bit of spiritual
substance inclined towards tactile experience attached to area 3, and
aurally- and visually-inclined bits attached to areas 17 and 41? This is the
sort of dualism to which we should be directed if the facts were as P& D sug-
gest; but how does it escape the charge of being naively Cartesian?
P & D assume rather than argue that there are real qualitative differences
among our tactile, auditory, and visual experiences: that these do not differ
merely functionally or in their causes or in their behavioural connections. But
they are right to assume this, and it could be argued if necessary. Given this,
there are only the following possibilities with regard to the explanation of
these qualitative differences.
(a) They are explained by i-VS.
(£>) They are explained by nonphysical differences somehow associated
with these three parts of the cortex.
(c) They are not explained at all - or, what comes to much the same thing,
they are "explained" by the fact that God, say, directly and without the use of
second causes gives us appropriately-differential experiences when our
hands touch objects and the somesthetic cortex is stimulated, when sound
waves lead to the stimulation of the auditory cortex, and soon.
As P & D say, explanation in terms of mere location [III] seems rather
mystical. IV conflicts with the evidence that visual-type experiences are
produced by any stimulation of the visual cortex, irrespective of its distal
source or cause, and similarly with the other cortical areas, c is obviously a
counsel of despair. So if, as P & D suggest, the rest of a is empirically ruled
out-as, of course, it might be - it would be with b that we were left. ButP&D
should have explained how this possibility could be developed in anything
other than a naively-Cartesian way. Even philosophers who are quite happy
to recognize the real and irreducible differences in quality among sensory
experiences as such will be reluctant to abandon possibility a until alterna-
tive t» is presented more fully and more plausibly.
by George handler
Department of Psychology, University of California, San Diego, La Jolla, Calif.
92093
Mind (psychology) is not (currently) reducible to body (neurobiology).
Questions about the definition or specification of "mind" and "body" have
often been elided in the process of presenting any solution to the mind-body
"problem." It is illuminating to try to provide such specifications. In modern
times it has been recognized that the "body" part of the puzzle does not cor-
respond to some simple notion of "matter," but rather that it refers to a com-
plex, constructed, theory-rich view of human physiology (cf. Popper and Ec-
cles 1977 op. cit. by Gedye; Mandler 1978). However, at the "mind" level
such sophistication has been neither permitted nor demonstrated. The con-
cept of "mind" has frequently remained at the same archaic level that gave
rise to the identification of "body" and "matter." Mind is seen as self-
evident - an ineluctable and inescapable part of the usually conscious self.
If, on the other hand, one views mind in the same modern sense that we use
in the definition of body, it turns out that mind is also a complex, constructed,
theory-rich conceptual view of... what? Presumably human psychology, or
what human psychology can be about-namely, the various mechanisms
and processes, both conscious and unconscious, that are ascribed to the
human organism in order to make its thoughts and actions comprehensible.
But if it is the case that the mind-body problem concerns the relation
between two bodies of theory and data, the one about physiology and the
other about psychology, then it falls into a well-known class of problems-
namely, the reductionist schema. Can theory and data in psychology be
reduced, without loss of power or meaning, to theory and data in physiology?
Most current views hold that reductionism is unattainable, either in
practice or in principle. In any case, it has not been attained in any other
fields of knowledge. But then, if organ physiology is not reducible to cell
physiology, or biochemistry to particle physics, why are papers not written
about the liver-cell or the gene-atom problem? I submit that such pseudo-
problems are not, in principle, different from the mind-body problem.
The paper by Puccetti & Dykes and the precommentary by Scheibel
illustrate my thesis. P & D try to push the reductionist position all the way and
conclude that it cannot work. In the process of trying to reduce subjective
experience to physiology, they show that the functional neocortex cannot be
"reduced" to differences among cells, and further "down," that cells cannot
be "reduced" to protein molecules-QED. Scheibel, in contrast, finds
enough evidence in terms of cortical structure and texture to "satisfy the most
ardent monist." Thus, P & D argue on the basis of one set of observations for
dualism; Scheibel argues on the basis of other evidence for monism. In fact,
however, Scheibel provides no reductive evidence, only possibilities. It is
not the ardent monist who has to be satisfied, but psychologists who have to
be convinced that their theories and concepts are reducible to physiological
theories and concepts. It is not enough to say that there is enough textural
variance available, but one must show how a theory of that textural variance
produces concepts and structures that make unnecessary (without loss of
power or meaning) psychological concepts ranging from commonsense
"blueness" to Gestalt qualities, visual illusions, the schematic perception of
scenes, and so on.
If one is unhappy about the current state of psychological theory (as many
readers may well be), it is important to consider the argument in principle. I
assume merely that some kind of psychology (and not necessarily the
present one) must provide the appropriate theory and observations that will
structure human experience and action. Whether it is some offspring of cur-
rent concepts or some larger theoretical cognitive science is immaterial. To-
day, the concept of mind is frequently anchored in folk theories and common
language speculations, but much of current sensory, perceptual, and cogni-
tive psychology provides the basis on which a more acceptable family of
theories can be built, which will in turn make the concept of mind obsolete for
scientific purposes. The functionalist point of view discussed by P & D
comes close to such a position, though I do not believe it possible, or even
necessary, that mental states can be subject to noninferential confirmation.
These states can be treated as theoretical entities, a step which makes our
job difficult but not impossible (Mandler 1975).
I do not consider the position described here as dualist. It is orthogonal to
the dualist-monist distinction constructed by generations of philosophers. If
it is dualist, then any non-reductionist position is dualist. But I do not believe
that biochemists who do not accept that their theories are fully reducible to
the concepts of nuclear physics can be so described. Nor is it necessary, for
present purposes, to take a position on the eventual possibility of reduction
from sociology to psychology to neurophysiology to biochemistry to nuclear
physics. In the foreseeable future it is unlikely that we will achieve such a
complete reduction; what we can do is build bridges and coordinate
theories. However, together with traditional monists and modern dualists we
can reject the heritage of the ineluctable soul and the indeterminate self.
REFERENCE
Mandler, G. Mind and emotion. Wiley, New York, 1975.
Review of Popper & Eccles' "The self and its brain." Science.
200:1040-1041,1978.
by Lawrence E*
John B. Pierce Foundation Laboratory, New Haven, Conn. 06519, and Yale
University, New Haven, Conn. 06510
Does the brain mind?
1. How do the senses differ? Let me count the ways.
They differ phenomenologically.
They differ informationally [VI].
They differ psychophysically.
They differ physiologically.
2. How do the senses resemble? Let me count the ways.
They resemble phenomenologically [VIII].
They resemble informationally.
They resemble psychophysically.
They resemble physiologically.
3. Order the following from the pair whose members most resemble to the
pair whose members most differ:
noise - piano sonata
watching a mime - listening to a speech
bright flash of lightning - sharp clap of thunder
spotting a familiar face in a crowd-hearing a familiar voice in a din
4. You put your money where your examples are - on the processes,
mechanisms, or phenomena whose resemblances or idiographs you want to
emphasize.
5. The immediate experience of sound stands qualitatively apart from the
358
THE BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1978), 3

Commentary/Puccetti & Dykes: Sensory cortex and the mind-brain problem
immediate experience of sight, yet at the same time there exist dimensions
common to sensations of hearing and sight (and touch, taste, and smell).
Synesthesia may be a relatively unusual sensory phenomenon, but a strong
synesthetic current does murmur in the stream of normal perception and
thought. People judge white colors to be like high-pitched sounds; bright
lights to be like loud sounds; round objects to be like slow melodies; and, of
course, red and yellow colors to be warm .. . green and blue colors, cool.
6. The visual sense provides information about spatial arrays, and about
changes in spatial arrays overtime; indeed, vision is lauded for its capacity
to mediate fine details about size, shape, position. The auditory sense
provides information about events in time; hearing is lauded for its capacity
to resolve sequences. Yet it is also the case that we hear voices come from
speakers' mouths. (And the pen I feel in my hand is, to perception as to fact,
the pen I observe.)
7. The laws of color mixture are surely not the laws of tonal mixture. But in
our capacity to discriminate stimuli from each other, and to judge sensory
magnitudes like brightness and loudness, most-maybe all - modalities
yield approximations to Weber's law and to Stevens's law. And processes
like spatial summation, temporal summation, adaptation, inhibition pop up in
nearly every one of the senses.
8. The senses are most specialized at the receptors, differing markedly in
their manner of transduction and degree of peripheral processing [IV]. Still,
as Puccetti & Dykes remind us, in the sensory cortex the visual, auditory, and
somesthetic areas look much alike.
9. How can cortical areas be so similar in structure, when the kinds of in-
formation they process are so different [VI]?
10. A neuron is a neuron is a neuron. As, perhaps, it should be if a resem-
blance is a resemblance is a resemblance. What we experience is
experience, not the processes leading to experience. There is nothing to
experience but experience itself.
11. How much need the primary sensory areas of the cortex resemble
each other, to account for resemblances in process and percept? How much
need they differ, to account for differences [VSIJ?
12. "No supposition seems to me more natural than that there is no
process in the brain correlated with associating or with thinking....
"It is thus perfectly possible that certain psychological phenomena cannot
be investigated physiologically, because physiologically nothing cor-
responds to them." (Wittgenstein 1967, p. 106)
Brain processes neither constitute nor cause sensations.
13. How are sensory experiences related to events in the brain, assuming
Wittgenstein's conjecture is not correct? What events in the brain should we
look at?
14. It is useful to follow Descartes in at least this respect, to start by seek-
ing the most fundamental of principles.
15. Nearly indubitable (save by Wittgenstein) is the Principle of Nomina-
tion: For every change in the state of the mind there is a change in the state of
the nervous system. Every nuance of color or taste, every discernible smell or
musical note, has a corresponding unique neural process.
Any change will do.
16. Not enough? Then perhaps the Principle of Correspondence is
needed - a principle of isomorphism between brain and sensation:
"To an equality, similarity, dissimilarity in the constitution of sensations . . .
corresponds an equality, similarity, dissimilarity in the constitution of the
psychophysical processes, and vice versa. And, indeed, to a greater or
smaller similarity in sensations corresponds also a greater or smaller simi-
larity in the psychophysical processes, and vice versa." (G. E. Muller 1896,
p. 2)
17. What is a similarity?
Are similarities discovered or created?
18. What physiological difference correlates with a difference between
qualities of a single modality-between blue and red, between warm and
cool, between sweet and salty?
19. What sort of physiological difference could possibly constitute such a
difference in quality?
20. If a non-difference in brain process-chemical or physical - cannot
constitute a difference in sensation, then it can no more cause a difference in
sensation [IX].
21. If any difference in brain process can correlate with any difference in
sensation, then it can constitute or cause a difference in sensation.
22. If it is not true that any difference in brain process can correlate with
any difference in sensation, then this is so because we subrpit to the meta-
phorical imperative embodied in the Principle of Correspondence, the im-
perative to seek "adequate" physical correlates to mental states.
23. But if we faiI to find what we seek, wherein lies the fault?
In the principle?
In our power to conceive, to discover, to create similarities?
24. Does the brain mind?
25. When it makes sense.
REFERENCES
Marks, L. E. The unity of the senses. Academic Press, New York, 1978.
(2,5,6,7,8,15,16)
Muller, G. E. Zur Psychophysik der Geischtsempfindungen. Zeitschrift
fur Psychologie. 10:1-82,1896. (16)
Wittgenstein, h.Zettel Blackwell, Oxford, 1967. (12)
by Grover Maxwell
Department of Philosophy, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, Minn. 55455
Mind and brain: an arduous task by neuroscience, physics, and phi-
losophy. As a (somewhat irresolute) monist, I find Professor Scheibel's
contentions contra Puccetti & Dykes quite reassuring. However, P&D's article
remains interesting and suggestive and contains some novel considerations;
moreover, lurking in its background are many, perhaps most, of the perennial
issues and obstacles that a mind-brain identity thesis must face. In order to
pursue a very few of these, let us assume for the sake of argument (and, I
hope, counterfactually) that, as far as contemporary neurophysiological in-
formation is concerned, they are right and Scheibel is wrong.
But first, consider their (extremely convincing) argument against "elimina-
tive materialism." Let us now ask: Why does this argument not count just as
strongly against any kind of identity theory, quite independently, moreover,
of their considerations about the similarity of the visual and tactile (etc.)
areas? For, according to them, the (deaf) extraterrestrial EEM determines, by
means of his examinations of Earthlings' brains, etc., all there is to know
about the neurophysiology of hearing but still knows nothing at all about
"what 'hearing' is like." Does it not follow from this alone, then, that there is
more to hearing than mere neurophysiology? And would this not follow even
if the neurophysiology "associated" with hearing were quite different from
that associated with, say, vision? P&D apparently think so, for they go on to
assert, "Hearing is ... caused by . . . [brain events]. . ., but the subjective
experience cannot simply be reduced to brain events." This is prima facie
convincing, but I do not believe that it counts against a properly formulated
identity theory, although it does all but demolish eliminative materialism.
To begin my argument, let me first note that P&D started to move in the
right direction when they remarked, "What went wrong was not EEM's
observation of Earthlings, but the theory he brought to his observation." But
then, unfortunately, they seem to assume that observations alone tell us (and
EEM) all there is to know about neurophysiology; this, I believe, is where P&D
went wrong. Such an assumption would, of course, be grievously mistaken,
for much of our knowledge of neurophysiology and most of our knowledge of
the underlying physics and chemistry is highly theoretical-i.e., it is
knowledge about unobservables. Like most of our theoretical knowledge,
moreover, it is knowledge of structure only, so that it leaves us completely ig-
norant about the intrinsic nature of the events in the neurophysiological
causal network that we label "the brain." Thus neurophysiology (and its
physics, chemistry, etc.) leave entirely open the possibility that some of
these "brain" events simply correspond to our pains, joys, patches of red in
our visual fields, etc. in all of their subjective, mentalistic richness. To
assume that this is so results in a genuine mind-brain identity theory which,
nevertheless, does full justice to the impeccable ontological status of the
genuinely mental - a kind of "physicalism" but by no means a materialism in
any usual sense. (There is not sufficient space here to even begin a sketch of
an argument for the plausibility of these claims; I have discussed them at
great length elsewhere (see, e.g., Maxwell 1976, 1978), where I also cite
references to previous work by Feigl, Russell, Schlick, and others.)
Let us next suppose that P&D would grant all of this and strategically
retreat to their central argument. I must grant them that it is (contingently)
extremely likely that, if the structure of the visual area is the same as the
structure of the tactile area, then the intrinsic properties of the events in one
area are the same as the intrinsic properties exemplified in the other area. It
must be emphasized, however, that if the structure and the intrinsic nature of
THE BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1978), 3
359

Commentary/Puccetti & Dykes: Sensory cortex and the mind-brain problem
the two areas is the same (or virtually the same), then any familiar kind of
dualism seems to be in almost as awkward a predicament as monism.
Consider, for example, interactionism. P&D note, correctly, that "neither
reason nor experience requires that effects resemble their causes."
However, reason and experience do seem to require that the same cause al-
ways produce the same effect [IX]. But what if their claim about the simi-
larities of the various regions were correct? We would have a certain de-
terminate kind of event in the tactile area producing a tactile experience, and
the same determinate kind of event in the visual area producing a radically
different kind of effect - namely a visual experience. Obviously, the conse-
quences are equally embarrassing for epiphenomenalism; and surely
parallelism requires that the same determinate kind of brain event, if it has a
"mental correlate" at all, always have the same (determinate kind of) cor-
relate and, contrapositively, that different kinds of mental events have dif-
ferent kinds of correlates.
None of this, of course, refutes the claim that the various sensory regions
are essentially the same, both structurally and intrinsically. According to
Scheibel we already know that this claim is wrong, but, again, let us assume
the worst as far as contemporary scientific knowledge is concerned. Well, I
am strongly of the opinion that P&D are much too sanguine, not only about
the current state of neurophysiology, but also about that of contemporary
physics, chemistry, etc. Our knowledge at the submicro-, and micro-, and the
macro-levels is quite incomplete and, in many respects, still quite primitive.
In view of this, it could turn out that the similarities among regions that P&D
cite are relatively superficial [II]; or, if they are not, it may be that various
structurally-different outputs from the different sensory regions [IV], feed into
central processing and receiving areas of the brain [V] and, thereby,
produce different sensory experiences.
But this is still relatively primitive and unsatisfactory. What is badly
needed, and what we hardly have even the rudiments of, is a comprehensive,
systematic, fairly-detailed scientific theory of the relationship between mind
and brain (cf. Pribram 1974). (It goes without saying that the correct
theory may turn out to be dualistic; I trust that it will not.) In other words,
neurophysiology, psychophysiology, and neuropsychology cry out for
unification. The "mind-body problem" is not a philosophers' plaything, and
(tentatively-proposed) solutions of the problem are far from being mere icing
for the neuroscientific cake. Without such a (tentative) "solution," any pur-
ported scientific view of the world is incomplete at its most crucial juncture;
and, until their details are fleshed in, the broad, general proposed "solu-
tions" such as interactionism, parallelism, epiphenomenalism, and even
"identity theory" merely avoid the problem by putting it on a shelf, while
eliminative materialism, of course, avoids it by sweeping it under a rug.
Physics itself may have to be substantially modified before such a
comprehensive theory is possible; but, as I have argued elsewhere (Maxwell
1978), independent considerations indicate the need for extensive altera-
tions and additions to physical theory, and it is not too fanciful to suppose
that considerations from neuropsychology and psychophysiology may give
suggestive hints about some of the modifications that should be tried.
Sir John Eccles (1976) has recently remarked, "The hardest problem a
man can ever have is the relationship of his own brain processes to his
mental states. Don't be defeated because we haven't got there yet." In order
to get anywhere near "there," I believe that we will need intensive and
concerted efforts by neuroscientists, physical scientists, and, perhaps, lo-
gicians and philosophers.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
Support of research by the National Science Foundation is gratefully ac-
knowledged. Responsibility for the results is, of course, entirely my own.
REFERENCES
Eccles, John, Dewan, E. M., and others. The role of scientific results in
theories of mind and brain: a conversation among philosophers and
scientists, In: G. Globus, G. Maxwell, & I. Savodnik (eds.)> Con-
sciousness and the Brain: A Scientific and Philosophical Inquiry.
Plenum Press, New York, 1976.
Maxwell, G., Scientific results and the mind-brain issue, In: Conscious-
ness and the Brain (see volume cited immediately above), 1976.
Rigid designators and mind-brain identity. In: C. Wade Savage (ed.),
Perception and Cognition: Issues in the Foundations of Psychology:
Minnesota Studies in the Philosophy of Science, Vol. IX, University
of Minnesota Press, Minneapolis, 1978.
Pribram, K. H., Baron, R., & Nuwer, M. The holographic hypothesis of
memory in brain function and perception. In: R. C. Atkinson, D. H.
Krantz, R. C. Luce, & P. Suppes (eds.), Contemporary Developments
in Mathematical Psychology. W. H. Freeman, San Francisco, 1974.
by P. M. Mflner
Department of Psychology, McGill University, Montreal, Quebec, Canada H3A 1B1
What's the matter with mind? Others, I am sure, will comment on the
nonsequiturs and doubtful logic of the main body of Puccetti & Dykes' paper,
so I will pass these over and concentrate on the peculiar conclusions
expressed in the final paragraph. There it is stated that the difficulties of
explaining the different sensations that accompany the activity of similar-
looking areas of cortex can be overcome by assuming that homogeneous
cortex might cause the different experiences of seeing, hearing, and feeling.
This suggestion derives from the premise that effects are not required to re-
semble causes, but it seems to me that this is by no means equivalent to say-
ing that identical causes can produce different effects [IX]. The fact that the
authors are mistaken in their assumption that sensory cortex is homogeneous
[I] may render their faulty reasoning irrelevant, but it does not excuse it.
A further point is that, although I cannot claim any expertise in philo-
sophical terminology, I was surprised to discover that causal relations re-
quire the assumption of dualism, even if not "of the naive Cartesian sort." The
physical sciences must be riddled with this sort of dualism, as, for example,
when the physical properties of a substance are caused by the arrangement
of its atoms, or depolarization of muscle fibers causes them to contract,
which in turn causes limb movements.
The fundamental difference between these physical examples of causality
and the suggested causal relations between brain activity and sensation is
that the latter is an isolated, unqualified relation, and the former are part of a
large theoretical framework. Molecular theory enables us to explain how pro-
tein molecules may acquire the properties needed to move in relation to
each other and exert a force in a muscle; the same highly-quantified theory
can explain the form of crystals, the effects of temperature on solids, liquids,
and gases, and a multitude of other phenomena. We do not really under-
stand the forces exerted by particles on each other, but we can measure
them and relate them to many observed events, and it is upon this network of
interrelationships that we base our vaunted "materialistic" science.
Sunlight and a pebble, one might suppose, have no more in common than
brain activity and subjective sensation, but because we can measure light
energy and the mass of a pebble, and because we have a theory that tells us
the energy equivalent of a given mass, we can quantify the relation between
sunlight and the pebble. On the other hand, we are as yet unable to measure
subjective experience; in fact, we probably have no way of making contact
with it at all.
The crux of the matter is contained in P & D's parable of the deaf
extraterrestrial (though, except for dramatic effect, he does not have to be
extraterrestrial, nor even deaf). Certainly, it is impossible to describe our
sensation of hearing to a deaf person, but we have the same trouble explain-
ing it to each other; we merely assume, quite unjustifiably, that we are all the
same. But Dr. Puccetti has no idea what Dr. Dykes experiences when a bell
rings, and vice versa. The phenomenon of synesthesia, in which the distinc-
tion between sensations in different modalities is eroded, suggests that we
do not all experience the same stimuli in the same way, and although it is un-
likely, for example, that my visual sensations are like your auditory sensa-
tions, it is impossible to be certain that they are not, and we certainly have no
way of proving that our visual sensations are identical [Vill]. This means that
we cannot use verbal reports of subjective experience except in a very
general way (verbal reports, in any case, can only tell us something about
brain activity), and we therefore have no valid way of relating such
experiences to stimuli or to anything else that we can measure [VII].
The conclusion I draw from this is not that we have to accept dualism
(which, in effect, means abandoning neuroscience), but that sensation can-
not be "explained." Scientists would be well advised not to waste anytime
on this problem, at least until they find inconsistencies in the relation
between brain activity and behaviour that resist any explanation in terms of
contemporary knowledge. If that day ever comes (which I personally doubt),
the discrepancies may provide an objective source of information about
"mind" influences on behaviour and pave the way for the incorporation of
subjective experience into the realm of scientific explanation.
360
THE BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1978), 3

Commentary/Puccetti & Dykes: Sensory cortex and the mind-brain problem
by Thomas Natsoulas
Department of Psychology, University of California, Davis California 95616
What do we know when we know what having auditory experience is like?
Near the end of their article, Puccetti & Dykes briefly consider the view that
all psychological descriptions of sensory experience (their specific example
is auditory experience) can ultimately be replaced, without loss of informa-
tion, by neurophysiological descriptions of what is happening in certain
parts of the brain. Such a view implies, they suggest, that one can know what
having auditory experience is like from an entirely third-person, objective
perspective, that is, without hearing or having heard anything at all.
P & D think that this claim is surely wrong. It is supposed to be obviously
wrong, in the way that we must be wrong if we propose that we can know what
seeing polarized light is like. We cannot know what seeing polarized light is
like, presumably, because we cannot see polarized light. And so, too, a con-
genitally deaf neurophysiologist could not know what having auditory
experience is like because he cannot hear and has never in his life heard a
thing.
The conclusion: psychological descriptions of auditory experience cannot
be replaced entirely by neurophysiological descriptions without loss. For
such a replacement would not include a description of what it is like to have
auditory experiences, since neurophysiological descriptions are amodal: the
meanings of the concepts involved do not depend on having experiences in
any particular modality.
The purpose of the present commentary is to raise the question whether
what an experience, or kind of experience, is like can form any part of a
psychological description of that experience. Of course it can - in one sense
of "like:" we often compare our own experiences, saying, for example, that
one of them is more like another than it is like a third. This is the resemblance
sense of like.
In our ability to note resemblances and differences among our
experiences there does not reside anything troublesome for physicalism (in
regard to the relation of mind to brain) that does not likewise reside in our
ability to note resemblances and differences among physical objects.
Surely, it does not follow from how we know our experiences that they are not,
therefore, physical occurrences in our brains. If physicalism turns out to be
correct (and P & D's main argument against physicalism, in terms of what we
know now about brain function, is not at all convincing, and seems to me to
be premature), if indeed a human being is nothing over and above his living
body with all its physical attributes, the same resemblances and differences
among experiences that we detect "from the inside" will be detectable from
the third-person perspective as well.
There is, however, another, nonresemblance sense of what an experience
is like. This sense requires firsthand experience of a special kind. When we
use the phrase "what an experience is like" in the nonresemblance sense,
we do not mean to refer to resemblances, which could be detected by other
means. When we say, for example, that we recently found out what it is like to
pilot an airplane, we imply that we actually did pilot an airplane or engaged
in an activity very much like it (e.g., a close simulation on the ground). When
we use "what it is like" with reference to sensory experiences in the present
sense, it is how it is to have a particular experience, or kind of experience,
that is meant.
We may ask: what is having the experience like for him? Or, what is it like
for anyone to undergo this kind of experience? But no introspective act is im-
plied on the part of the organism whose experience it is. There is, in this
sense, something it is like "to hear" for an organism that hears, even if that
organism does not have anything vaguely like a concept of experience, and
therefore has no idea that it is hearing.
It would be appropriate, no doubt, to answer the above kind of question by
reminding the person who asks it of a similar experience he has had. But this
is often felt not to suffice, particularly when the questioner is deaf, say, and is
asking what it is like to have auditory experiences; in fact, the latter is
considered a frustrating, insurmountable situation. Also, the reason that be-
ing referred to a comparison experience is accepted (when it is) as a satis-
factory reply rests upon the belief that the questioner knows what it is like (in
the nonresemblance sense) to have the comparison experience. He is sup-
posed to get an idea of what having the experience of interest is like from al-
ready knowing what it is like to have another experience, which resembles
the first.
The latter is the kind of point naturally emphasized by those who use the
argument that there is something about the experience, namely "what it is
like to have it," that cannot be captured by thoroughly objective description.
They insist that we must have that kind of experience, the same experience
or a very similar one, in order really to know what having the experience is
like. On this view, while we may characterize experiences in various ways,
we cannot characterize what it is like to have them.
That is, it can never suffice merely to hear talk about them; the talk must be
evocative in us of the right kind of experience, or memory "from the inside" of
one. While an experience's attributes may be named and its similarities and
differences to other experiences attested to, knowing what having the
experience is like is not something that can be given descriptive expression.
The knowing, in this case, is so tied up with the having as to be inextricable;
at most we can say, "sothat is what it is like."
This suggests that knowing what hearing is like is not a piece of
knowledge about hearing but a kind of firsthand understanding or contact
with it. If all we can do, having such "knowledge" is to try to point, then it
does not appear to be an obstacle to replacement without loss of
psychological descriptions by neurophysiological descriptions. In their
reply to these commentaries, P& D would do well to improve our under-
standing of their argument by addressing the issue of what we know when we
know what having auditory experience is like. What psychological descrip-
tions of auditory experience would express this purported kind of
knowledge?
by Donald A. Norman
Department of Psychology, University of California, San Diego, La Jolla, Calif.
92093
So what should information look like? We are far from understanding the
operations and the various components of the brain. We do not yet know how
the mechanisms and operation of the human mind result from the brain's
hardware (electrical, structural, chemical). But to examine brain slices from
different areas and say, "my goodness, they all look the same, so how can
they represent different sensory qualities?" reflects naive notions of
information-processing mechanisms.
Information-processing structures can perform quite differently, though
they be made of the same stuff [VI]. Indeed, the very same information
processor can perform quite different acts, if the information that guides the
processing be different. Note that phrase: "information that guides the
processing." Call this the program -the software or firmware for the device.
Information is invisible. It resides in configurations. A bit of information by it-
self has no structure. Rather it must be interpreted. Information can reside in
molecular structures, or in particular combinations of synaptic configurations
and excitatory and inhibitory levels.
To perform information processing, one requires structure. But this struc-
ture need only be logical elements, timing circuits, storage devices, and
transducers. The contents and interpretations of processing need not be visi-
ble.
I thought that our modern experience with digital and analog computa-
tional devices would have made this point. Alas, there is more. I find it
strange that P & D concentrate on sensory cortex. Why should not all sensory
cortex look similar? Certainly no one would deny gross differences among
the transducers. The sensory transducers for taste, touch, sight, smell, and
sound differ considerably [IV], or did P & D forget that? Even a psychologist
can tell you that the optical-chemical transduction mechanism of the eye is
qualitatively different from the mechanical lever and fluid dynamics of the
ear. Once the initial transduction and initial stages of processing get done
(by very specialized mechanisms), the signals get shipped to sensory cortex
(as well as a large number of other places).
What does the sensory cortex do? Shouldn't we seek the answer to this fun-
damental question before wringing our hands in dualism? Maybe the
sensory cortex does pattern recognition. If so, there are numerous examples
of pattern recognition devices that are constructed in a uniform fashion and
work along the same general principles, regardless of the form of the sensory
input, regardless of the particular things being recognized [VIII]. P & D em-
phasize differences in the conscious awareness of perceptions. I would not
expect the site of consciousness to be the sensory cortex [V].
The various sensory cortices have some features in common, for they must
integrate the information provided from all senses. There are many spe-
cialized sections of the brain, many areas that look considerably distinctive,
even to the naked eye. Do my qualitative-sensory impressions depend on the
THE BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1978), 3
361

Commentary/Puccetti & Dykes: Sensory cortex and the mind-brain problem
way their neurons are structured in each area? Why cannot my qualitative im-
pressions be derived from the purpose of the information, in part governed
by the location from which the information comes, and in part driven by the
use to which I put that information?
by John R, Perry
Department of Philosophy, Stanford University, Stanford, Calif. 94305
Defenses for the mind-brain identity theory: causal differences. My com-
mentary consists of a survey of defenses, available to an advocate of the
mind-brain identity theory, against the criticisms of Puccetti & Dykes.
Consider an identity theorist who claims that my seeing a gun on a certain
occasion is identical with the electrochemical activity of a population of
neurons in Area 17 of my brain, while my hearing the gun discharge is
identical with the activity in Area 41. P & D's criticism can be seen as are-
ductio ad absurdum, adding to these claimed identities two further premises
that the identity theorist must accept, and deriving a contradiction from the
whole set. The identity theorist must find some way to reject the added
premises or give up the identities. The added premises are that the neural
activity in area 17 is similar to the neural activity in area 41, and that my
seeing the gun is completely unlike my hearing. [... IV, III.]
The following strategy seems open to the identity theorist: We are to
identify not only experiences with their relevant neural activities, but also the
similarities between the experiences with the similarities between the neural
activities and the dissimilarities between the experiences with the dissimi-
larities between the neural activities.
Up to a point, at least, this strategy seems promising. The neural activities
are dissimilar in their causal roles (Lewis 1966), and so are the experiences.
My seeing the gun is caused by a process which begins with the stimulation
of my eyes by light; my hearing the gun, by a process that begins with
stimulation of my ears by sound. The one may lead to my averting my eyes;
the other, to my clapping my hands over my ears. So my experiences, like my
neural activities, differ in their causal roles. The identification of my hearing
with the activity in area 41 allows what we know of the causal role of hearing
through common experience, as well as what the brain scientists know and
will learn about the causal role of the activity in area 41, to be meshed into a
single picture of a process with more and less remote causes and effects.
What of the similarities between the neural activities? The identity theorist
is committed to the view that my hearing and my seeing have many
properties in addition to those known to a minimally reflective adult. He can
say that my hearing and seeing are similar in all of the ways that area 17 and
area 41 neural structures and activities are, although these similarities could
not have been known without the sorts of scientific activity the authors survey.
We know them only through the identifications. So far so good.
But apparently my seeing the gun is unlike my hearing the gun, not just in
terms of causal roles, but intrinsically; every reflective seer and hearer knows
this. So here is an intrinsic dissimilarity between the experiences that cannot
be mapped onto and then identified with a dissimilarity between the neural
activities, which are intrinsically similar.
I wish to outline three positions available to the identity theorist at this
point, aside from abandoning the identities. The first two involve accepting
the intrinsic dissimilarity between my hearing the gun and my seeing the
gun. First, he might claim that this dissimilarity between the experiences is
also a dissimilarity between the neural events, though one not discoverable
by the brain scientist as brain scientist. Just as the identity theorist admitted
that the experiences were similar in ways not discoverable simply by reflec-
tive seeing and hearing, so he might claim that the neural events are
dissimilar in ways not discoverable by the brain scientist with his methods of
investigation. At this point one is inclined to claim that the identity theorist
has given up his physicalism and retreated to a sort of double aspect theory,
for he seems to have countenanced a non-physical similarity between neural
events. He has saved the identity theory only by accepting a dualism of
properties (Smart 1959op. cit.). But it is worth pointing out that it is not at all
clear what is meant by a physical property. If our notion is simply that of a
property postulated by the web of theory required to explain physical
phenomena, which seems the only notion that allows us to think of the charm
of a quark as a physical property, then this species of dissimilarity does
seem to qualify (Lubow 1974).
The second position adds that this subjective dissimilarity will itself turn
out to be identifiable with some neurological dissimilarity discovered or yet
to be discovered. The authors observe no dramatic dissimilarities. But the
dramatic value of a dissimilarity may depend on the way things are ap-
proached [VII]. Consider two pans of water at somewhat different tempera-
tures. Restricted to certain instruments and modes of perception, one notices
no dramatic differences. But a difference is registered somewhat dra-
matically by a thermometer. The dissimilarity, once noted, can be identified
with the difference in mean kinetic energy of the molecules- in principle,
discoverable in other ways.
A third position involves denying that there is an intrinsic dissimilarity
between my hearing the gun and my seeing the gun other than the dissimi-
larities in causal roles [VIII]. The dissimilarity P& D note when they claim
that my hearing a gun is totally unlike my seeing a gun would, on this view
really be a dissimilarity between the causal roles of the experiences, and so,
would be identifiable with a dissimilarity between the neural events.
The points the authors make in their discussion of eliminative materialism
suggest an objection to these last two positions: If the way in which my hear-
ing a gun is dissimilar from my seeing a gun is to be identified with an undra-
matic difference in the structure or activity in areas 41 and 17, or with a
dissimilarity between the activity in these areas in terms of the causal roles,
then it is a dissimilarity which could, in principle, be observed by EEM, the
extraterrestrial being who does not hear. So the extraterrestrial being could
know how my seeing differed from my hearing. The authors believe, I think,
that it is obvious that there is a dissimilarity between my seeing a gun and my
hearing a gun that would be inaccessible to such a being. Their term for this
is "what hearing or seeing is like."
At this point the argument seems to lose some of its scientific flavor. Sup-
pose that so dramatic and fundamental a dissimilarity between the area 17
activity and the area 41 activity had indeed emerged in the literature P & D
surveyed. This could be discovered, in principle, by our extraterrestrial be-
ing. But any dissimilarity discoverable by him is, on the present argument,
ineligible to constitute the crucial dissimilarity between my hearing and
seeing. The argument has a distinctively Cartesian flavor now: none of the
ways in which neural events could be dissimilar is the way in which
experiences are known to be dissimilar simply by reflection.
An identity theorist who holds the second view described above could
deny that we know anything about this difference at all. Being able to register
a difference does not require knowing anything at all about the nature of the
difference registered, and for all the subject knows in virtue of seeing and
hearing, the difference he notes might be a relatively undramatic one in the
structure of activity in areas 17 and 41 - in principle, discoverable by the
extraterrestrial scientist.
An identity theorist who holds the third view could claim that though we
know something about how our experiences differ, what we know is how their
causal roles differ, and this is something the extraterrestrial brain scientist
could also know. Try to say how your hearing a gun differs from your seeing a
gun. Inarticulate grunting is not allowed. You might say that seeing is unlike
hearing, in that when you see you can tell what color the gun is, but you can't
do this by just hearing it. You will find that you are making a remark the
extraterrestrial brain scientist could understand. So, through your testimony
he could learn how the experiences differ. Do congenitally-blind people
know what it is like to see? We can tell them everything we know. What we
can't do is give them a certain range of abilities that sighted people have,
such as sorting objects by color without use of certain information. But hav-
ing that ability is only misleadingly described as knowing something about
seeing; it is simply being able to see. Whatever we know about seeing we
can tell them. [Farrell 1962]
None of these defenses strikes me as obviously right. But none of them has
been finally polished off by P & D. I am inclined to think that the first defense
relies on a seductive but incorrect perceptual model of introspection. The
second I do not favor, because it seems to me that for all I know there is no
difference between the experiences of seeing and hearing other than their
causal roles. The third seems to me probably correct, but if it is, there is a lot
of work to be done in explaining why it seems so obviously wrong to so many
thoughtful people.
REFERENCES
Farrell, B. A. Experience. Reprinted in The philosophy of mind, by V. C.
Chappell, Prentice-Hall, Englewood Cliffs, N.J. pp. 23-48,1962.
Lewis, David K. An argument for the identity theory. Journal of
Philosophy. 63:17-25,1966.
Lubow, Neil B. The Mind-Body Identity Theory. UCLA Doctoral
Dissertation, 1974.
362
THE BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1978), 3

Commentary/Fuccetti & Dykes: Sensory cortex and the mind-brain problem
by Walter Bitter
Department 
of Psychology, 
Lehman 
College, CUNY, and Department 
of
Neuroscience, Albert Einstein College of Medicine, Bronx, N.Y. 10461
How completely are the processes that constitute the brain known? It is
apparent that there must be differences in connectivity [ill], even within
sensory cortex of a given modality, associated with the various dimensions of
the stimuli of that sensory modality. Different stimuli elicit different patterns of
neural activity [VI], depending, for example, on which combination of feature
detectors is activated. Evoked potentials vary both within and between the
primary receiving areas under discussion as a function of the characteristics
of the stimuli employed. [.. .V.]
Even if one were to grant Puccetti & Dykes's assumption that subjective
sensory experiences are caused solely by activity within primary receiving
areas, and that there are no known differentiating characteristics between
these areas, it does not follow that an appeal to dualism either resolves the
problem or is a necessary conclusion.
If the activities within the various primary receiving areas are identical in
"structure and function" and cause sensory experience, then it is difficult to
conceive how the mind, simply because it is different from the brain,
transforms identical causes into different results [IX]. Is it that the mind
learns to read out different messages from the various primary receiving
areas in such a way as to produce differential subjective experiences? How
would the mind do this if there really were no distinguishing characteristics
among the brain activities which the authors believe cause sensory
experiences? This question holds for differences in subjective experiences
between as well as within sensory modalities.
An alternative possibility is that certain portions of the mind are genetically
predisposed to respond to specific primary receiving areas, and that the
structural and functional properties of the mind which respond to given
primary receiving areas are responsible for the transformation of identical
causes into different subjective experiences. This would account for the
gross subjective differences between sensory modalities. But additional
possibilities must be considered in order to account for differences within a
sensory modality.
Now, the authors obviously know that different portions of primary receiv-
ing areas are activated by different stimuli. A touch on the toe, for example,
elicits neural events in different parts of the postcentral gyms than a touch on
the nose. Presumably their argument is that the pattern of activity elicited is
identical in the two instances, and only differs in its location. Thus, a
necessary extension of the genetic hypothesis is that the mind is predis-
posed to respond to activity in one portion of area 3 as a touch on the toe and
another portion as a touch on the nose. On similar grounds, further exten-
sions of the hypothesis would include analogous predispositions with
respect to the neurons that differentially respond to the various features of the
sensory modalities (color, pitch, temperature, shape, etc.).
As the hypothesis becomes more complex, the increasing role that genetic
factors play in determining the structure of the mind tends to diminish the dif-
ference (the dualism) between brain and mind. In fact, whatever combination
of genetic and learning factors is proposed, what reason is there to believe
that the additional structures of the mind hypothesized to constitute sensory
experience are not themselves brain processes?
The assertion that "the mind is not the brain" presumes knowledge of what
the brain is. The concept of what the brain is has changed overtime. When
electrical activity was discovered to have a functional role in the nervous
system, the scientific conception of the brain had to include electrical
phenomena. In the twentieth century, when it was ascertained that gaps exist
at neural junctions, and that chemicals are released into the synaptic cleft,
further changes were required, which later included differential effects of
excitatory and inhibitory neurotransmitter substances. There is no reason to
believe that additional functional processes of the brain will not be dis-
covered in the future. Kohler (1938), for example, developed theories con-
cerning the role in perception of the electrical fields generated in the brain
by the electrical activity of neurons. The possibility that the electrical fields
have functional properties in the nervous system is being investigated, with
the initial results tending in a positive direction (Adey 1975). In the mean-
time, these fields can be heuristically considered as a substratum of subjec-
tive experience (Ritter 1978).
Since the scientific conception of what constitutes the brain is likely to
change in the future, there are no substantial grounds to assert that "nothing
in the future progress of neuroscientific research seems in practice likely to
resolve" the problem posed by the authors. If it were true that areas 3, 17, and
41 caused sensory experience and had no observable, distinguishing
characteristics, then obviously some kinds of processes must be activated
by these areas which do contain the appropriate distinguishing characteris-
tics. To suggest that the latter are a part of the mind instead of the brain does
not resolve the problem, because those processes of the mind which bring
about differential sensory experience would be just as biologically based as
brain processes. Nor does the problem posed by the authors constitute a
compelling argument for dualism, as there are no necessary reasons for
concluding that the processes which do produce differential sensory
experiences are not themselves brain processes.
REFERENCES
Adey, W. R. The influences of impressed electrical fields at EEG fre-
quencies on brain and behavior. In: N. Burch & H. L. Altschuler
(eds.), Behavior and Brain Electrical Activity. Plenum, New York,
1975.
Kohler, W. The Place of Value in a World of Facts. Liveright, New York,
1938.
Ritter, W. Cognition and the brain. In: H. Begleiter (ed.), Evoked Brain
Potentials and Behavior. Plenum, New York, 1978.
by Steven P. R. Rose
Brain Research Group, Open University, Milton Keynes, MK7 6AA, England
Mind-brain; Puccetti & Dykes' non-solution to a non-problem. It is good
that BBS is prepared to carry discussions on the disputed frontier territory
between philosophy and neurobiology, and brave of Puccetti & Dykes to
serve as a reconnaissance party into it. But bravery is not enough if you do
not have adequate compass and surveying gear, and it seems to me that
rather than charting a clear path, they miss their footing and plunge head-
long into the bog.
Basically, their argument is a simple one. If you open a brain and inspect
it, you do not find a small camera in the visual cortex or a loudspeaker in the
auditory cortex [VII], or, for that matter, a microphone in the speech center or
an internal combustion engine in the motor area. Hence vision, audition,
speech, and motor activity cannot be accounted for in terms of brain struc-
tures; hence reductionist ("reductivist") brain models cannot suffice to ac-
count for mind, and hence we must reconsider dualism as an alternative.
The fallacy in P & D's argument is sufficiently clear that it is not likely to
cause reductionists much loss of sleep [.. .VI . . . ] , but their paper does
provide an interesting exemplar of a phenomenon to which it is well worth
drawing attention. There is no doubt that the dominant trend in Western
philosophy of mind today is a materialist, reductionist version of the identity
theory, sometimes characterized as "hard-nosed" or "central-state" ma-
terialism, a trend which runs from Ryle to Armstrong by way of several of the
philosophers cited by P & D. This trend is in accord with a dominant mode of
reductionist thinking within many areas of biology, which draws sustenance
from the successes of molecular biology over the past twenty-five years (see
e.g. Rose & Rose 1974). One of the few counter-tendencies to this trend has
been located among neurophysiologists who, often toward the end of their
careers, find themselves in search of their souls: Sherrington, Adrian, Brain,
and more recently Penfield, Sperry, and Eccles. For Penfield (cited by P & D)
and Eccles (e.g. Popper and Eccles 1977 op. cit. by Gedye) the way out of
the reductionist trap has been to argue for an autonomous "mind" located in
association with a left hemisphere region, as yet not characterized, called
the "liaison brain," into which the mind can reach, tweaking a synapse here,
altering a firing pattern there, to allow volitional control over the otherwise
clockwork automatism of the brain machine. I have discussed elsewhere the
inadequacies of the Eccles and Penfield resurrection of this decadent
dualism, which is little more philosophically sophisticated (despite its
neurophysiology) than was that of Descartes (Rose 1976, 1978), though their
positions are at least in advance of that of P & D.
The reasons for this concern among some neurobiologists to escape re-
ductionism may in part be sought in the sociology of knowledge. In part,
however, they are of more intrinsic interest than this. In criticising these
reasons, and in commenting adversely on the P & D formulations, I do no?
wish to imply that I regard reductionism as adequate. Its ideological frame-
work is all too apparent; the crude formulations and otiose technologies
which flow from it reveal its social and methodological origins all too
transparently (e.g. Delgado and DeFeudis 1977; for a critique see Chorover,
forthcoming).
THE BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1978), 3
363

Commentary/Fuccetti & Dykes: Sensory cortex and the mind-brain problem
However, the attack on reductionism comes from two quarters. One indeed
is the misty idealism of the dualist position, which P & D refer to uneasily in
their conclusion. The second does not retreat from materialism but
transcends it; this is the method ignored by most western philosophy of mind
over the past century: that of dialectical materialism. I do not argue that dia-
lectics "solves" the mind/brain problem, or that its growth and development
has been without tremendous difficulties, both conceptual and political, in
the last fifty years, but I do claim that it provides a method for the develop-
ment of a solution (see Lewontin and Levins 1976, for a clear statement of
what the dialectical method in biology involves). For dialectical materialism
the statement of identity offered by reductionism remains. Mind is brain, but
at a different level of analysis and of discourse.
To see how this slogan cashes in, in practice, consider the relationship
between the firing of particular hypothalamic cells and the experience of
anger. For the reductionist the firing of these cells causes the sensation
called anger (in fact, it looks from their conclusion as if P & D's dualism can
be interpreted in this way too). For the dualist of the Penfield/Eccles ilk, the
mind, wishing to produce the manifestation of anger, causes the
hypothalamic cells to fire, and the body responds according to automatic
blind-pilot landing mechanisms.
For the dialectical materialist (at least my sort of dialectical materialism)
the firing of the hypothalamic cells is anger; that is, "anger" and the "firing of
particular hypothalamic cells" are statements that describe the same
phenomenon at different hierarchical levels of discourse. A description of the
phenomenon is possible in either mind language or brain language. Each
language system is valid and can be complete at its own level (the "cause"
of the anger may be a perceived insult to the individual's experience; the
"cause" of the hypothalamic cells' firing is the antecedent firing of certain
other cells, inputs from the sensory systems, etc.). Mistakes emerge and
confusions arise when one tries to locate causes at one level in terms of con-
sequences at another level. The task of neurobiology becomes the identifica-
tion of the translation rules that map mind events onto brain events,
psychology onto physiology-the discovery at each level of the necessary,
sufficient, and exclusive correlates of events at the other. Such a task needs
a cool conceptual head and a rigorous approach to experimentation in which
theory and practice in the neurosciences become united.
REFERENCES
Delgado, J. M. R. & De Feudis, F. V. Behavioural N euro chemistry.
Spectrum, New York, 1977.
Lewontin, R. & Levins, R. In: H. A. Rose & S. P. R. Rose (eds.), The Radi-
calisation of Science. Macmillan, London, pp. 32-65,1976.
Rose, S. P. R. The Conscious Brain. Penguin, Harmondsworth, 1976.
In: Ideology and Consciousness? (Forthcoming), 1978.
& Rose, H. A. Cognition. 3:479-502,1974.
by David M. Bosenfhal
Department of Philosophy, Graduate School and University Center of the City
University of New York, New York, N.Y. 10036
The insignificance of incommensurate variations. It is far from obvious that
one can make clear or precise sense of Puccetti & Dykes's "radical im-
balance" between cortical similarities and intermodal dissimilarities [VII].
Two ways of doing so seem open. Perhaps we can show that the number of
respects in which two sensations differ is less than the number in which they
resemble, and that the opposite holds of two events in the relevant cortical
regions. Or perhaps we can sustain a claim such as that the average degree
of similarity is greater in one case, and less in the other, than the average
degree of dissimilarity. Both suggestions face seemingly insuperable
obstacles. In either case one must compare the number of respects in which
two events resemble with the number in which they differ. But events, like
entities, always resemble and differ in an indefinitely large number of
respects, so any attempt at such a comparison will be automatically idle.
And, still more telling, both suggestions require some nonarbitrary technique
to compare degrees of resemblance in one respect with degree of resem-
blance in some quite different respect. When the two respects of resem-
blance are as radically divergent as in the present case, there is little if any
reason to think we understand what such a comparison amounts to. The
macroscopic differences among chemical elements are due to differences in
atomic structure. But the macroscopic differences between mercury and
gold, or between carbon and nitrogen, may intuitively seem wholly dispro-
portionate compared to the differences of atomic structure of these elements,
whose atomic numbers differ only by one. It is no easier to have confidence
in a comparison of these two degrees of difference than to have confidence
in a comparison of the degree of difference between two introspectible
qualities with that between two cellular structures.
Even if we suppose that we have some nonarbitrary finite list of relevant
bases for comparison, together with a nonarbitrary technique for comparing
the relevant sorts of incommensurate variations, the P & D argument would
still fail to create even a presumption against the identity hypothesis. If,
contra that argument, sensations are particular sorts of neural events, then
sensations will simply have the closely-resembling properties of neural
events as well as the more dramatically-divergent introspectible properties
we are all familiar with. Nothing in the arguments of P & D casts doubt on this
possibility. For, whether or not neuroscience can detect, between relevant
neural events, differences that would seem to us as remarkable as the in-
termodal differences between sensations, the two sets of differences pertain
to two highly disparate sets of properties. There is, therefore, no problem
whatever for the identity hypothesis. One person, using only touch, might de-
tect little variation in a set of blocks, while another, using only smell, detects
great differences among them. But this would be no reason to conclude that
the objects perceived by the two people were not identical. Indeed, this
much information would simply leave the question entirely open - in this
case and in the mental-neural case as well.
The external conditions responsible for the stimulation of the different
senses do happen to differ rather dramatically, and intuitively these dif-
ferences are at least as marked as the intermodal differences among the cor-
responding sensations. But nothing in the situation would have led us to
predict in advance that such intuitively-proportionate differences would ob-
tain; the intermodal differences among sensations might have turned out to
result from what seem to us to be only slight variations in the environment.
And the existence of proportionate variations in that case gives us no reason
to expect that we will find intuitively commensurate variation in the correla-
tions between sensations and those neural events that cause, or are even,
perhaps, identical with, sensations.
The most striking differences among biological species result from varia-
tions in genetic material whose "similarities . . . vastly outweigh [their] dif-
ferences." The mechanisms by which this occurs are, of course, still largely
unknown. But there is no reason to suppose that knowledge of these
mechanisms would, by itself, enable us to predict exactly which "obvious
qualitative disparities" would result from distinct genetic material; we must
independently discover which morphological structures result from which
particular mechanism and genetic material. Similarly, a complete neuro-
scientific account of sensations need not, by itself, enable one to predict the
introspective character of a sensation from its neurological basis.
It is sometimes argued that mental events such as sensations are distinc-
tive in special ways that invalidate the foregoing comparisons with other
areas of scientific research. (A particularly good example is Nagel 1974.) If
such arguments are correct, then perhaps no satisfactory scientific explana-
tion of sensations is possible that does not include introspectible qualities
themselves among the resources to be used in constructing explanations. P
& D's discussion of the identity hypothesis (particularly of Rorty 1965op. cit.)
sometimes suggests a tacit appeal to this view. But this view is, at best, very
highly controversial. Without an independent defense of this claim, therefore,
it can do little to help buttress P& D's '"similarities-differences' argument."
REFERENCE
Nagel, Thomas. What is it like to be a bat?, The Philosophical Review.
LXXXIII: 435-450,1974.
by Tim ShaSIIce
Psychology Department, The National Hospitals for Nervous Diseases, London
WCIN3BG, England
Are the properties of cells relevant for understanding consciousness? A
materialist can respond to the Puccetti & Dykes argument in two ways. A de-
fensive approach is to counter their position on their own terrain, by showing
that the cellular anatomy of the brain is not incompatible with a materialist
approach. Arguments such as I, III, and V seem to me valid ones of this type.
Yet it seems unlikely that a strong positive materialist argument on why con-
sciousness should exist will be developed with this sort of approach.
364
THE BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1978), 3

Commentary/Puccetti & Dykes: Sensory cortex and the mind-brain problem
However the argument by analogy from computer systems [VI] makes it
clear that paradoxes, including that claimed by P & D, can arise because the
problem is being tackled at an inappropriate conceptual level. It is likely,
though, that the hardware/software analogy over emphasizes the inde-
pendence of the properties of the different knowledge systems relevant to
understanding thought and the brain. As a generalization of the computer
analogy, consider the analogy between a map and a knowledge system (e.g.
histology, phenomenology). If we take a broadly materialist position (and not
a reductionist version of it such as that adopted by Armstrong 1970)
the materialist/dualist debate can be mirrored in the problem of deciding
whether a collection of maps all represent the same part of the earth or dif-
ferent parts. Even if the former, it is most unlikely that they could be placed in
a linear string so that each map was "reduced" to the next; this would apply
only to maps that differed in scale alone. It could well be that one map (e.g. a
detailed contour map) would show considerable similarities between two
regions that are represented very differently on another map (e.g. a vegeta-
tion map). It would obviously be false to claim, after the fashion of P & D, that
the maps represented different parts of the earth.
Using this analogy, not only can a criticism of P & D be developed, but
also a model of how strong arguments for materialism could be formulated. A
more solid inference that such a collection of maps does represent the same
part of the earth could be obtained by finding a strong isomorphism between
certain aspects of one map and another map, and so on, so as to construct a
network of (partial) isomorphisms covering all maps. For any particular map
a crucial issue becomes whether there is any other map, already accepted
as part of the network, with which a (partial) isomorphism can be developed.
The analogous question is whether, already within the domain of the ma-
terialist approach, a (partial) isomorphism can be developed between
phenomenology and any knowledge system.
Strong candidates for the appropriate link system are the related dis-
ciplines of cognitive psychology and artificial intelligence [See Pylyshyn:
"Computional models and empirical constraints" BBS 1(1) 1978; Haugeland:
"The nature and plausibility of Cognitivism" BBS 1(2) 1978]. Cognitive
psychology is being increasingly given a materialist base through the
development of the neuropsychology of memory, perception, and cognition.
Over the last ten years there has been an extensive debate within cognitive
psychology on whether bridges can be built between some information-
processing concepts and some phenomenological ones (see Mandler 1975
op. cit. by Mandler; Shallice 1978). Four main positions have been ad-
vocated. Some (e.g. Erdleyi 1974) have claimed that consciousness can be
identified with the contents of a short-term memory store. Others (e.g. Turvey
1974) argue that it arises from active constructivist processes in perception.
Posner and Klein (1973) have argued that it reflects the operation of a high-
level limited-capacity system. Finally, I have claimed that consciousness
results from the existence of system constraints necessary to ensure the
coherence of thought and action, and thus I attempted to explain, in addition,
why consciousness should exist (Shallice 1972op. cit; 1978).
The variety of theoretical positions adopted by cognitive psychologists on
this issue might suggest that no progress is being made. In fact a number of
the differences between the positions may be removed by greater precision
in characterizing the phenomenological concepts being modelled. All these
theories have in common, for instance, that visual experience does not
"arise" in area 17. Given this, it follows that for all of them the paradox of P &
D is immediately dissolved. Moreover, all these positions attempt to incorpo-
rate a variety of nonintuitive empirical phenomena, so they are not merely
token theories. Unless this sort of approach can be shown to be invalid, any
claim for dualism will remain very inadequate.
REFERENCES
Armstrong, D. M. The nature of mind. In: C. V. Borst (ed.), The Mind -
Brain Identity Theory. Macmillan, London, 1970.
Erdelyi, M. H. A new look at the New Look: perceptual defence and vigi-
lance. Psychological Review. 81:1-25,1974.
Posner, M. I. & Klein, R. M. On the functions of consciousness. In: S.
Kornblum (ed.), Attention and Performance Vol. 4 Academic Press,
New York, 1973.
Shallice, T. The dominant action-system: an information processing ap-
proach to consciousness. In: K. S. Pope & J. L. Singer (eds.), The
Stream of Consciousness: Scientific Investigations into the Flow of
Human Experience. Plenum Press, New York, 1978.
Turvey, M. T. Constructive theory, perceptual systems and tacit
knowledge. In: W. B. Weimer & D. S. Palermo (eds.), Cognition and
the Symbolic Processes, Erlbaum, Hillsdale, NJ, 1974.
by J. J. C. Smart
Department of Philosophy, Research School of Social Sciences, The Australian
National University, Canberra, A.C.T. 2600, Australia
Cortical localization and the mind-brain identity theory. As a philosopher I
hold that mental experiences are in fact brain processes, and I do this be-
cause I think that this hypothesis is most plausible in the light of total
science, and because I think that I can refute the usual philosophical objec-
tions to this view. My metaphysical thesis is (I think) the same as Sperry's
"working assumption," but unlike Puccetti & Dykes I do not contrast "working
hypothesis" and "general truth"; after all, if the working hypothesis happens
to be true, then it is a general truth.
P & D attempt to marshal evidence for dualism; I would need an awful lot of
such evidence, because of the difficulty of fitting dualism into total science,
including the theory of evolution. Changes in DNA can lead to differences in
the physiology of the brain, but how could they lead to consciousness, if this
is nonphysical? The identity theory does not rely on establishing particular
psychophysical laws. It depends rather on scientific plausibility - the choice
of the simplest total hypothesis that is consistent with the known facts. So
even if the cortical regions discussed by P & D are as similar physiologically
as these authors claim they are, I can still conjecture unknown differences if
these are needed to explain the differences in the experiences of sight and
sound. [... IV, VI.]
P & D draw attention to the differences between phosphenes and audenes:
But are the differences all that great [Viil]? They seem great to us, but so
do differences among the faces of sheep seem to their shepherd. The
experiences are much less different from one another than either of them is
from processes that belong to a wider class-for example, avalanches or
tidal waves or hiccups. And the phosphene is perhaps much less different
from an audene than either is from some rich visual or auditory experience.
I agree with much of what P & D say about functionalism and eliminative
materialism. Functionalism is perfectly compatible with the identity theory.
The concept of a camshaft is indeed different from the concept of a valve-
lifter, but that does not prevent a particular valve-lifter from in fact being a
camshaft. I would reject eliminative materialism if this says that there are no
experiences. Nevertheless there is some truth in eliminative materialism. Be-
cause of Quinean doubts about analyticity and translation, I would not now
want to give an analysis or translation of sentences about experiences in
terms of the "topic-neutral" formula "what is going on in me is like what is go-
ing on in me when...." The topic-neutral formula gives the gist of the com-
mon ground between the dualist and myself, which explains why we can talk
to one another about our experiences. It may well be that in common sense
language some dualistic sentences (such as "the mind is spiritual") are
frequently asserted; if so, these need to be eliminated. I contend that there
are no good scientific or philosophical reasons against so eliminating them.
Moreover, as an approximation, at least the "translation" form of the identity
theory still seems to me to be correct.
by Roger Sperry
Division of Biology, California Institute of Technology, Pasadena, California 91125
Mentalist monism: consciousness as a causal emergent of brain processes.
Any collaborative effort that helps bring together philosophy and
neuroscience is much to be encouraged for the many potential, long-range
benefits. I thank the authors for starting their article with a quotation of mine,
but I must explain that the paper from which the quote is taken is wholly de-
voted to arguments that directly counter the statement cited. Also, in their in-
troduction they again give the reader an erroneous impression that I have
written in terms overly similar to something expressed by Sherrington 19
years earlier. Actually I used the same Sherrington quotation in the exact
form (and to make the same point) reiterated by Puccetti & Dykes, and then,
alongside the quote in the following sentence, I simply paraphrased the
Sherrington statement for added emphasis. One takes these to be minor
inadvertent slips by a writer (R.P.) who is otherwise a recognized master at
using the language to convey desired subtleties.
In regard to P & D's main thesis, the outstanding impression one gets is
THE BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1978), 3
365

Commentary/Puccetti & Dykes: Sensory cortex and the mind-brain problem
that our thinking on the mind-brain relation seems still to go round and round.
I thought we had adequately laid to rest over 25 years ago the same issue
that the authors readdress here in a search for cortical correlates of subjec-
tive quality (Sperry, 1952, op. cit.). Many of the same arguments were made,
along with additional supporting observations. It is reassuring to find that ad-
vances in our knowledge of cortical organization since that time leave much
of the basic reasoning on these points essentially unchanged.
In the 1952 treatment, however, we started with different premises and
came to a quite different conclusion, in which subjective meaning was in-
ferred to be a "functional or operational derivative" of brain activity. The un-
derlying neural process was conceived to take the form not of a copy or
direct correlate, but of an active adjustment to a perceived or imagined item;
this view did not assume correlations between the subjective qualities and
the details of cortical processing. The subjective qualities were seen to be
derived instead from the "overall functional effects," or from "higher-order
functional and operational effects as these work on successive brain states."
".. .It is the functional or operational effect of the input patterns on the dy-
namics of cerebral adjustment that counts. The overall adjustment might
have a constant functional or subjective value, even though the particular
neurons excited and the spatial and temporal patterning were to vary. . . ."
These concepts were spelled out in some detail at the time, with examples.
They seem to be strikingly similar to ideas articulated some years later by
Fodor (1968, op. cit.) and others, and referred to by the authors as "func-
tionalism." The arguments by which P & D try to dispose of this approach
hardly stand up, for reasons explained below.
This "functionalist" approach, moreover, has since evolved far beyond the
1952 and 1968 statements. In brief, the view has been seen to logically imply
a functional and therefore causal impact of subjective qualities on cerebral
activity. By combining the concepts of "functionalism" with aspects of
emergent theory and "downward causation," a model for the mind-brain rela-
tion was arrived at that offers a logical explanation in principle for the way
mind could be evolved from matter, and conscious experience could have
causal use in controlling brain processing (Sperry 1965, 1969, 1970; see
1977 for earlier references). These conceptual developments take subjective
experience out of the realm of epi- and paraphenomena, to place it within the
causal domain of science in a monistic scheme - without reducing the mind
to the brain or identifying the two. Although these developments bear directly
on the argument of the P & D paper, as will be indicated below, and have
revolutionized our thinking on the mind-brain problem during the past
decade, they go unmentioned.
Rather than having "deepened the gulf between mind and brain," this
latest model in neuroscience offers a "unifying view" that puts brain and
mind within the same monistic hierarchy (Sperry 1976, op. cit.). Instead of
leaving us with a problem that "appears .. . insurmountable" to research, our
neurally-based model is testable in principle and offers hope that some day
we will be able to vary details of neural organization to produce consistent
related changes in subjective experience, and that we will begin to under-
stand why this occurs.
Reasons were advanced in the 1952 discussion for not assuming that con-
scious experience is a correlate of activity in the primary sensory fields of the
cortex [V]. A more central and extensive adjustment of the brain was inferred
that includes a deep structure of attentional, orientational, and emotional ele-
ments, as well as cortical components, some of which are now found (Sperry
et al. 1978) to be lateralized by forebrain commissurotomy, some not. It
follows accordingly that to search the cortical areas for even greater detail
with "deeper inspections" is to proceed in the wrong direction. Failure
throughout the article to take into account the more global, holistic, func-
tional effects in cerebral organization [VI], as possibly being the critical cor-
relate for subjective experience, logically nullifies many of P & D's argu-
ments.
On the above terms the mind-brain problem becomes a case of the
broader problem of understanding the relation of the properties of the whole
to those of the parts, and of the old controversy as to whether or not the
emergent properties of the whole are predictable. I have assumed the
emergent properties to be often predictable in principle, if not in practice,
and that they are always deterministic in the sense that every time the parts
are assembled in the same way, the same holistic properties will emerge.
The predictability in practice depends very much in different cases on the
nature of the parts and on their relations to the system as a whole. In the case
of subjective qualities and the component neural events, one anticipates that
this relationship will not be an easy one to perceive directly. Nevertheless,
we know of no better way to gain a scientific understanding of subjective
phenomena than to obtain greater knowledge of the neural substrate,
particularly at the critical level.
The explanatory value of the analytic approach decreases abruptly,
however, as one's analysis sinks to the parts of the parts or to the subparts of
the subparts. It thus follows that the problem of finding neural correlates for
subjective experience first becomes one of finding the proper organizational
level or levels of cerebral processing at which to search. It is our bet that this
is not at the atomic, molecular, cellular, or nerve-relay levels, nor even at the
sensory cortical levels on which the authors focus, but rather at a somewhat
higher level that involves the way in which the different sensory inputs
engage the deeper, more extensive, and centralized adjustments of the brain
as a unit. The organizational nature of these engagements we assume to be
molded by evolution and innately determined.
The concept of conscious experience as a causal emergent of brain
processing is hardly compatible with dualism in the traditional sense in
which this term has been used through the 1960s. Our causal emergent view
combines aspects of both materialism and mentalism, as well as func-
tionalism and emergentism, offering an intermediate compromise between
formerly disparate philosophic positions. It has since been taken to support
dualism (Popper and Eccles 1977, op. cit. by Gedye) on the one side, and at
the same time has added new life to identity theory, as proponents discover
that their "neurophysiological terms" (Feigl 1960) such as "neural events"
and "brain processes" can be stretched now in our revised conceptual
framework to include the subjective mental qualities in a causal role. "Emer-
gentism" and "interactionism," originally eschewed in identity theory (Feigl
1960; 1958, op. cit.) are now creeping in under terms like "organizational"
and "causal efficacy." In general these developments of the past decade in
philosophy are not telling neuroscience that our latest mind-brain model is
wrong, but only that this is what they meant in philosophy all along. The most
attractive alternative at this point would appear to be a view that combines
dual aspect and emergence theory, wherein everything from molecules to
brains is conceived to have both physical and inner psychic attributes
without interaction, as expressed in the original emergent concepts of Lloyd
Morgan (1923).
Our present model requires that a new distinction be made between
dualism and mentalism, because it retains the latter and rejects the former.
Mental phenomena are retained as causal realities in their "raw," subjec-
tively-experienced form. On the other hand, their existence in separate
dualistic realms apart from brain activity is strongly discounted. Though P &
D, along with others, seem prepared to redefine dualism in ways that might fit
the new concepts, it seems preferable, for a number of reasons, to go the
other way and to redefine monism so as to include mental qualities as
emergents over and above the neural events. The term "mentalist monism"
seems more accurately to describe the position. "Emergent interactionism"
and "enlightened materialism" have also been applied, and both seem
preferable to redefining dualism, for the reason that the latter term is much
needed in philosophy for contrasting our conception of the physical world of
science with various views that involve the existence of mind, intellect, be-
ing, and spirit in forms and realms separate and apart from the physical
brain. This dichotomy is the most critical in all philosophy, axiology, and hu-
manist thinking generally. Dualism has served this need in the past, and it
would seem desirable to retain it for this purpose.
While our concept of mind as causal emergent has done much to elevate
the status of subjective experience and of the mental and phenomenal in
science and philosophy, it no longer follows in our present paradigm that this
does anything to encourage dualist beliefs in the mystical, the paranormal,
or the supernatural. When we conceive mind to be an inseparable functional
property of brain processing, this hardly in itself supports credence in the
existence of domains of mind, spirit, or intellect apart from the functioning
brain.
Regardless of dualist and related "other-world" considerations, the con-
ceptual changes we deal with here are basic and central to "this-world"
views of the nature of man and his role. They directly oppose the basic thesis
of scientific materialism that has been telling us for more than half a century
that "Science can give a complete account of man in purely physico-
chemical terms," that "Man is nothing but a material object, having none but
physical properties," and that brains contain "nothing over and above" their
physicochemical processing. These and similar views were still being pro-
366
THE BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1978), 3

Commentary/Puccetti & Dykes: Sensory cortex and the mind-brain problem
pounded in the late 1960's by Armstrong (1968, op. cit. by Harman) and
other mind-brain identity theorists.
Once science has modified its traditional materalist-behaviorist stance
and begins to accept in theory and to encompass in principle within its
causal domain the whole world of inner, conscious, subjective experience,
the very nature of science itself changes, not in basic methodology of course,
but in its scope and in its role as a cultural, intellectual, and moral force. The
kinds of interpretations that science supports, the world picture and at-
tendant values, and the concepts of physical reality that derive from science,
all undergo substantial revisions on these terms (Sperry 1978). The change
is away from the mechanistic, deterministic, and reductionistic doctrines of
pre-1965 science to the more humanistic interpretations of the 1970's. The
latter are more mentalistic, wholistic, and subjectivist. They give more
freedom in reducing the restrictions of mechanistic determinism, and they
are more quality-rich and more rich in value and meaning. The pervasive
broad paradigm changes involved are particularly welcomed by all who look
to science, not alone for objective knowledge and material advances, but
also for worldview perspectives and criteria of ultimate meaning - those who
see science as the best and most valid route to an understanding of "the
forces that move the universe and created man." Science, in the new para-
digm, takes on a higher, expanded, and perhaps more critical societal role.
REFERENCES
Feigl, H. Mind-body, not a pseudoproblem. In: Sydney Hook (ed.), Di-
mensions of Mind. New York University Press, N.Y. pp. 33-44, 1960.
Morgan, C. L. Emergent Evolution. Holt, New York, 1923.
Sperry, R. W. Forebrain commissurotomy and conscious awareness.
Journal of Medical Philosophy. 2:101-126, 1977.
Mind, self and the divided brain. Doubleday Lecture at Smithsonian In-
stitution, Washington, D.C., (in press) 1978.
Zaidel, E., & Zaidel, D. Self recognition and social awareness in the
deconnected minor hemisphere. Neuropsychologia. (in press) 1978.
by J. Szentagothai
Department of Anatomy, Semmelweis University Medical School, 
Budapest,
Hungary
A false alternative. Puccetti & Dykes start from the undeniable fact that the
spectacular developments in the last quarter of a century, in both the
neurosciences and the behavioral sciences, have widened rather than nar-
rowed the gulf between brain and mind. In a rapidly increasing number of
publications noted neuroscientists, psychologists, and philosophers feel
compelled to take sides on the age-old issue of the reductivist versus the
dualistic concept of this relationship. Moreover, both sides seem to be con-
vinced that the reductivist-dualist alternative is ready for resolution by legiti-
mate scientific means. This commentary aims at showing that, at least for the
time being, this is a false or unrealistic alternative for a scientific approach,
although this commentator readily admits that it is a very real one for a per-
sonal credo.
Being no philosopher but a humble neuroanatomist, I am still astonished to
see that the reductivists- with rare exceptions-embrace an essentially
18th-century mechanistic materialism and proceed as if the more advanced
version of this philosophy, such as dialectic materialism, did not even exist
[cf. Rose]. One cannot but agree with most criticisms raised against any
kind of reductivist view, including even its most articulate expression in the
mind-brain identity theory of Feigl (1958, op. cit.). However, let us keep away
from the philosophical argument and stick to the neurosciences.
The anatomical argument. P & D refer to their main argument in the third
section of their paper as "the scientific problem." However, what they dis-
cuss is a simple anatomical argument, and not a particularly sophisticated
one. I cannot but agree with the most elegant reasoning expounded in the
precommentary by Scheibel. The authors seem to forget entirely about the
magnificent neuronal machinery inserted at virtually every step of the
sensory pathway. Although we may still be very far from understanding the
mechanisms for processing the rough sensory information picked up by the
receptors, we have a fairly clear idea about the stepwise "feature-extracting"
mechanisms by which much of the message relevant to the animal is
distilled from the "raw informational material" provided by the receptors.
Why should one expect fundamental differences in the neuronal processing
machine at the first cortical target site, where the neuronal mechanism can
and in fact should, logically, be rather similar [VSI1]? The differences
between the various senses are apparently not in the processing mechanism
but in the input [IV]. The undergraduate textbook-level illustrations
presented by the authors, however good otherwise, are certainly nothing
upon which an argument either way can be based. I need not reemphasize
the (probably rather fundamental) differences among the primary sensory
areas; Scheibel has already done so [I]. One could in fact go much further
than the authors do in stressing the essential structural similarity of all parts
of the neocortex. But how could this help their argument? The similarity- in
fact uniformity-of structure is much more evident in the cerebellar cortex,
and yet the latter precalculates the details (in the ballistic elements) of the
motor program for ordinary walking, running, jumping, and manual manipu-
lation, including the movements of the ballet dancer and the violinist, not to
mention everyone else's speech, eye movement, and anything else one likes.
Hence, virtually identical neuronal networks can produce an infinite variety
of outputs, depending exclusively on the input.
But, returning to the neocortex, I am somewhat puzzled about basing any
argument on the primary sensory areas themselves. As far as we know, they
do very little that may have to do with our subjective experience [¥]. If one
were to remove the entire cortex except the primary sensory areas, the indi-
vidual would certainly have nothing that one might call "subjective
experience." As we begin to understand it today, the cortex is a mosaic of
vertically-oriented multicellular units of columnar shape (sometimes also
called modules). The size (definition) of the columns (hypercolumns,
minicolumns) or modules may still be controversial, but the architectural
principle is not. I personally favor the view (Szentagothai 1978b) that the size
of the column (particularly for cortical connectivity) is 200-300 /xm in
diameter and corresponds to the cortical thickness in length. But even so, the
number of columns (or cortical processing units) is of the order of 106— 107 in
man. This figure becomes much larger if smaller modular units (mini-
columns, etc.) are considered. We also know that there is a highly sophisti-
cated and specific, partially-reciprocal connectivity (wiring) pattern between
any given column of the cortex and a number of other cortical columns, both
on the ipsilateral and the contralateral sides; not to mention a similar, often
reciprocal connectivity between cortex and subcortical structures. (Almost
nothing of the former exists in the cerebellar cortex, where the association
between the several cortical regions is virtually nil - and yet, witness its un-
believable versatility.) The almost complete neglect of this remarkable
degree and refinement in connectivity of the neocortex, not to mention all
other connectivities between cortex and subcortex, is by no means convinc-
ing [Hi]. An argument in favor of the dualistic concept in the brain-mind rela-
tionship should at least be based on the current state of anatomical and
physiological knowledge, as has been provided in recent years in the
remarkable books and publications of Eccles (see works cited in Popper and
Eccles 1977, op. cit. by Gedye).
"Dissipative structures" or dynamic patterns. It is, hence, certainly the
case, as emphasized by Scheibel, that if it all depended on "textural
variance," this is known to be "more than sufficient".. . "to satisfy the most
ardent monist." However, this is only one side of the story. The more we look
for the details, the more we are inspired with awe when pondering the infinite
complexity, specificity, and diversity in the genetically-determined con-
nectivity of the nervous system. This is already so at the crude anatomical
level of the "wiring diagram," but let us also recall the rapidly accumulating
knowledge about at least as much diversity, complexity, and specificity in
the biochemical and metabolic properties of neurons, and in the
mechanisms by which they interact synaptically or trophically (other aspects
of this have been hinted at briefly in the third paragraph of the precom-
mentary by Scheibel [II]). But even including all this knowledge (which I
usually summarize-for my own purposes, and probably as an incorrect
metaphor-as the "hardware" of the nervous system), this is only a small part
of reality.
Over the past few years some of us have been trying, initially in a rather
timid way (Szentagothai and Arbib 1974, cited in Szentagothai 1978a), to
show that on top of the specific connectivity of the nervous system there is
also something that one might call "quasi randomness" in neural connec-
tions. In the lower neural centers this quasi randomness is ensured by the
system of histodynamically-nonpolarized interneurons with presynaptic den-
drites engaged in a diffuse system of dendritic synapses (this is already
mentioned by Scheibel). The main apparatus for this quasi randomness in
the cerebral cortex is the rich system of pyramidal neuron collaterals
(Szentdgothai 1978a; for more detail see also Szentagothai 1978b; and for a
THE BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1978), 3
367

Commentary/Fuccetti & Dykes: Sensory cortex and the mind-brain problem
summary of additional possibilities for diffuse connectivity see Szentagothai
1978c and d, forthcoming). This diffuse, reciprocal, and symmetric con-
nectivity, acting over distances of at least 3 mm (i.e., one order of magnitude
larger than the main cortical modules) ensures that phenomena so far ex-
plored only at the micro level can, and in fact must, occur at the macro level
of the neuronal network.
It was the last great contribution of the late Aharon Katchalski (Katchalski
et al. 1974) to call attention to the possibility that "dynamic patterns" (or
cooperativity, or so-called "dissipative structures") may be of major im-
portance in the neurosciences [VI]. At that time it looked rather dubious
whether those phenomena could occur and have any significance at the
level of the neuronal network. However, theoretical studies on random net-
works (Wilson and Cowan 1973), and "psycho-dissection" taking advantage
of Julesz (1971) patterns, have shown that these phenomena may well have a
significant role in neural networks, and that they are useful for explaining
simple sensory phenomena. My own humble role in this has only been to
show that the real neural network offers all the requisite architectural condi-
tions for the emergence of "dissipative structures." This is a whole new world
of phenomena, to which no neuroscientist and no philosopher engaged in
the field of the brain-mind relationship appears thus far to have given much
thought. (It is fair, though, to mention that Sir John Eccles mentioned and
illustrated dynamic patterns as early as 1953 [Eccles 1953]; however, he
used them to draw different conclusions.) Such dynamic patterns (dissipa-
tive structures) are "superstructures" at a hierarchical level different from that
of the conventional operations of the nervous tissue known to the
physiologist. And yet they are clearly within the framework of our natural
laws, notably thermodynamics (of course/the "non-equilibrium" thermody-
namics of Prigogine 1973). Before this new world of higher hierarchical
events is thoroughly explored, it seems to me utterly unrealistic to draw any
scientific conclusions from the widening gulf between the neurosciences
and the behavioral sciences. This is nothing but what is to be expected at
this stage of our analysis.
A final comment. Although this journal's Instructions to Authors explicitly
discourage "ad hominemisms," I cannot resist responding to a very candid
statement by P & D in their conclusion. Personally, I am not reluctant (or
"ashamed," in the words of one of its great exponents) to admit my
adherence to one of the major western religious denominations; however, as
a scientist I do not think it necessary or even advisable (sub specie eterni-
tatis) to depart from the most rigorous interpretation of the principles of na-
ture, as we are able to comprehend them.
REFERENCES
Eccles, J. C. The Neurophysiological Basis of Mind. The Principles of
Neurophysiology. Clarendon Press, Oxford, p. 315,1953.
Julesz, B. Foundations of Cyclopean-Perception. The University of
Chicago Press, Chicago, p. 406,1971.
Katchalski, A. K., Rowland, V., & Blumenthal, R. Dynamic patterns of
brain stem assemblies. Neurosciences Research Program Bulletin.
12:(1)1-181,1974.
Prigogine, I. Time, irreversibility and structure. In: J. Mehra (ed.), The
Physicist's Conception of Nature. D. Reidel Publ., Dordrecht,
Holland, 1973.
Szentagothai, J. Specificity versus (quasi-) randomness in cortical con-
nectivity. In: M. A. B. Brazier & H. Petsche (eds.) Architectonics of
the Cerebral Cortex. Raven Press, New York, pp. 77-97,1978a.
The neuron network of the cerebral cortex. The 1977 Ferrier Lecture,
Proceedings of the Royal Society, London B, 201: 219-248,1978b.
Local neuron circuits of the neocortex. In: F. G. Worden (ed.) The
Neurosciences: Fourth Study Program, The Rockefeller University
Press, New York, In press, 1978c
The local neuronal apparatus of the cerebral cortex. In: P. A. Buser & A.
Rougeul-Buser (eds.) Cerebral Correlates of Conscious Experience.
INSERM serie Vol. 6, Elsevier/North Holland Biomedical Press B.V.,
Amsterdam, 1978d.
Wilson, H. R. & Cowan, J. D. A mathematical theory of the functional dy-
namics of cortical and thalamic nervous tissue. Kybernetik 13:55-80,
1973.
by William R. Uttal
Institute for Social Research, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, Mich. 48103
Codes, sensations, and the mind-body problem. I honestly do not believe
that anyone who has given much thought to the implications of the
neurosciences to the study of mind could disagree with the pessimism
expressed by Puccetti & Dykes when they state that "one cannot explain the
subjective differences among sensory modalities in terms of present-day
neuroscientific knowledge." Nor do I disagree with their projection that there
are few reasons to expect that any major breakthroughs are near at hand.
Nevertheless, I do not believe that this empirical situation in any way
challenges the fundamental monistic basis of contemporary mind-body
theory, nor do I feel that the fact keynoted by these authors- that there are
few observable cytoarchitectural differences among the cortical projection
areas - poses the serious conceptual problem they suggest.
Let us first consider P & D's assertion of the observed "similarity" among
the cortical areas. To appreciate the significance of their observation, we
must remind ourselves that the study of the nervous system is carried out at
many different levels. Biochemists have made considerable progress in
understanding the ionic chemistry of the neuron; physiologists are now able
to observe the electrical actions of individual neurons of a wide variety of dif-
ferent sizes and shapes; psychobiologists can measure the behavioral ef-
fects of ablations of various pieces of brain tissue; and anatomists have
made considerable progress in determining the structural arrangement of
neurons in the peripheral and central nervous systems. The question as to
which of these levels of analysis is the essential one is, of course, always go-
ing to be open to debate and heavily flavored by the individual perspective
of each kind of neuroscientific analysis. But, at the risk of offending the
deeply-held beliefs of some of my biochemical, anatomical, and single-cell
electrophysiological colleagues, I must assert that, in my opinion, the critical
and essential level of neuroscientific analysis, if one is interested in under-
standing the neural correlates of mental states, is the pattern woven by the
network of neurons. It is there, at the level of ultramicroscopic neuronal inter-
connectivity rather than P & D's cytoarchitectural level that I believe the
essential differences between different nervous tissues (or between the dif-
ferent states of the same tissue) are encoded [SI].
I also feel that P & D's choice of a criterion of cytoarchitectural similarity in
their study of subjective quality reflects an incomplete understanding of the
nature of sensory coding theory. Even if the utramicroscopic variation in
neural interconnectivity to which I have alluded did not exist, the very fact
that the visual, somesthetic, and auditory zones are located in different
cortical regions provides another perfectly plausible "place" code for dif-
ferent subjective experiences [III]. One wonders whether the authors were
aware of the implications of Muller's "specific energy of nerves" lawfortheir
argument. The idea implicit in Muller's law would allow, without any stretch
of current data or theory, a perfectly satisfactory means of representating
subjective differences based simply on differences in cortical loci. [... ¥8].
In short, I believe that P & D have looked at the problem from too narrow a
perspective. Their premise that there are few microscopic differences among
the various cortical projection regions is irrelevant. They have ignored two
perfectly plausible codes for sensory quality: (1) ultramicroscopic patterns of
interconnectivity, and (2) cortical location. They have thus committed a Type
II error and have inadvertantly accepted an invalid null hypothesis.
Finally, I also reject their contention that the difficulty of (and the lack of
current progress towards a solution to) the mind-body problem should en-
courage us to reject materialistic monism in its various forms. The
philosophy of monism does not depend on a full and rigorous demonstration
of all the correspondences between mind and brain. It is entirely possible
that the complete theoretical and empirical analysis to which we now aspire
is forever beyond man and his science; the combinations and permutations
of which even a few neurons are capable may just possibly exceed our
comprehension and computational power. Nevertheless, the validity of the
concept that whatever our minds are is totally dependent on what brains are
is in no way challenged by the cytoarchitectural data marshalled by P & D to
buttress their dualistic philosophical perspective.
by M. F. Ward
Department of Philosophy, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, Minn. 55455
The mind-brain issue unsimplified. Puccetti & Dykes have radically over-
simplified the position of psychophysical monism, (which I will also take as
described by Feigl's (1958, op. cit.) mind-brain identity theory). They sup-
pose in the first premise of their argument that "the different qualities of...
experience might be explained in detail with reference solely to physical
structures and processes in the brain." It is not" so simple. In fact, such an
368
THE BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1978), 3

R^spons^/Puccetti & Dykes: Sensory cortex and the mind-brain problem
explanation of experiential qualities would be inconsistent with the basic
epistemological position underlying the (Feigl) identity theory.
This position holds that careful analysis of perception and scientific in-
ference reveals that our observations and theories about external physical
events provide information regarding only their abstract structure. True, we
may know some events by direct acquaintance and also know, therefore,
their intrinsic qualities (by the raw experience of those qualities). But what
we may know about an event by physical description concerns its purely
structural (or mathematical) properties. The intrinsic qualities of events
simply do not enter into proper physical descriptions.
Applied to the mind-brain issue, this implies that a proper physical
characterization of brain events concerns only their abstract structure. And
though it is possible that these brain events have the same intrinsic qualities
as conscious events, indeed, though it is probable that certain brain events
and conscious events are identical, still, it is impossible to infer any
nonstructural, intrinsic qualities from a strictly physical description of brain
events.
Accordingly, the mind-brain identity theory does not entail that the
physical description of the brain should even mention, let alone explain in
detail, the different qualities of experience.
The properties of conscious events open to physical description would be
just those properties which were identical to the described abstract
structural properties of brain events. In other words, only abstract structural
properties of conscious events may be explained on a physical description
of the brain.
The distinct qualities of conscious experience are open to mathematical
schematization (Carnap 1969, p. 130), but they must be well-ordered before
properties of experience can be correlated with structural properties of the
brain. (And still, this is not to correlate qualitative differences but rather dif-
ferences in the qualities of conscious events with structural differences
among brain events.)
It is not simple, but we must think abstractly about the properties of con-
scious and brain events in order to understand their most harmonious partici-
pation in a unified world view. [... I, BS9, SV5 VI, IX.]
parameters were included in the property calculation [III]. Two balls,
however similar in other properties, cannot be the same ball because they
are in different places at the same time. Hence P& D cannot just leave out lo-
cation (as in the italicized parenthesis above) because that is where the
problem is, forthem as for Leibniz.
Secondly (and this follows immediately if the relevant brain areas differ
only in location and not in structure): is the location difference of itself
enough to explain differences in types of sensation? The "if" there is a big
one (and is denied by those making point I in the standard notation for this
discussion), but let us assume it here for the sake of the argument that
follows.
I would answer that nothing P & D write shows that we can know that the
difference of location is not sufficient [VII]. They appeal to the obvious dif-
ference between hearing and sight, but why is that necessarily greater than
either [VIII]: (a) the difference between touch on the tongue and on the back,
or between red and green, both of which are great, but which we can accept
as belonging to one "information channel" and a single type; or (b) the dif-
ference between heat and light perceptions, which we receive through dif-
ferent channels and judge to be sensations of different types, and yet which
we know scientifically to differ only in terms of wavelength? How can we
know that the brain is not wiser than our prescientific consciousness, and
hence maps these different sensations of heat and light onto areas of the
brain differing only in position? That is to say, the analogy of the linear
spectrum might, for all we know, be reproduced in the brain tissue itself. If
that were so, then no structural differences would be required in order to ac-
count for the difference of type between heat (touch sensations) and light
(sight sensations). (I am not seriously suggesting that that this is the case,
any more than I wish to be caught defending mind-brain identity; I am only
pointing out that it is a possibility that P & D should consider.) [... IX.]
REFERENCE
Dreyfus, H. What Computers Can't Do. Harper & Row, New York, 1972.
REFERENCE
Carnap, R. The Logical Structure of the World 6- Pseudoproblems in
Philosophy. University of California Press, Berkeley, 1969.
Authors' Response
by YorSck Wilks
Department of Language & Linguistics, University of Essex, Colchester, Essex,
C04 3SQ,U.K.
Leibniz, location, and distinguishing types of sensation. First, let me refer
to what has come to be called point VI: that in view of the standard
hardware/software distinction in computer science it is often unnecessary to
consider the physical location of information in a more or less homogeneous
digital computer. This point is of course correct and tells against Puccetti &
Dykes's expectation that there should be some kind of structural (and locat-
able) difference between the areas of the relevant part of the brain if any kind
of brain-mind identity theory is correct. However, it is worth reminding
ourselves that there are almost certainly aspects of sensation that are not ap-
propriate for digital representation, such as the differences between shades
of color. Hence, a priori limitations of digital simulation suggest that only
analogical simulation of a whole range of human faculties will be possible:
Dreyfus (1972) has produced a number of candidates of this latter sort [see
Haugeland, "The Nature and Plausibility of Cognitivism," BBS 1 (2) 1978]. If
that is so, there may still be the question of physical location and structure to
discuss, in the way that P & D's paper requires, since in analogical computa-
tion the hardware cannot be separated from the software so easily as to dis-
miss P & D's way of setting up the questions.
However, that said, I do not believe that P & D can center their case on the
argument, presented schematically in their Figure 5, that "our knowledge 'by
description' of neural mechanisms . . . varies hardly at all {except for loca-
tion, of course) in any detail" (my italics), and hence sensations, which do
differ so much in type among themselves, cannot be identical to those brain
areas of processes that do not so differ. In my view, P & D's passing
reference to Leibniz gives the game away, because all philosophy students
remember that the problem with his principle of the Identity of Indiscernibles,
as it applied to real objects, was precisely that it was false if spatio-temporal
by Roland Puccetti and Robert W. Dykes
Localizationism and dualism; a second look at the
paradox
In the welter of objections raised by our many distinguished
commentators, it may have gone unnoticed that for the first time
the traditional mind-body problem has been placed in an em-
pirical context. How do the primary sensory strips of cortex dif-
fer? How do the related sensory modalities differ? These are em-
pirical questions. It does not matter that, for the present, the
answers we give them vary wildly; that these questions be ad-
dressed at all is at least a step towards freeing the problem from
its purely metaphysical background. Even the contention that
these are not, scientifically, the right questions to ask is in-
directly beneficial, for it necessitates our examining them care-
fully first. And if nothing else, debating the appropriateness of
the questions has focused the attention of philosophers and
scientists on common ground, making them perhaps more aware
than before of what they can learn from one another. To this
extent, at any rate, we feel it has been a productive exercise,
wherever the truth may lie.
This is not to say there are no problems about the logical status
of the conclusions we draw from answering those questions as
we have. We grant that the empirical data base concerning mind
is restricted and imprecise, compared even to the one available
for brain; so our hypothesis - that mind and brain are distinct -
is bound to be less rigorous than we would like. We also grant
that if our hypothesis is correct, it could not be confirmed by
intersubjectively-verifiable observations, so its truth would lie
beyond science; this is indeed why we have insisted that it poses
THE BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1978), 3
369

Response/Fuccetti & Dykes: Sensory cortex and the mind-brain problem
an insurmountable problem for brain research. Nevertheless, the
hypothesis is (give and take a lot of argument, no doubt) open to
empirical refutation, either by evidence that significant relevant
differences do exist in the cortical sensory strips, or by evidence
that sensory experience under the modalities of touch, hearing,
and vision is really as alike as we claim the sensory strips to be.
And if an hypothesis can be refuted by experience, even if it can-
not be so confirmed, it is difficult to deny that it is empirical.
Thus our dualistic conclusion, irksome as it may be to many, can
at least serve as a fruitful null hypothesis in the brain sciences - a
challenge to future research. We turn now to some of the prin-
cipal criticisms mounted against our argument by the commenta-
tors.
I: The known anatomical differences are big enough
The elegant Scheibel precommentary has proved reassuring to
many of our critics, (e.g. Gedye and Green.) Let us get quite clear
about what Scheibel claims therein.
Scheibel is certainly not claiming that textural variance among
areas 3, 41, and 17 already explains why touch, hearing, and vi-
sion are such apparently different sensory modalities. Nor is he
saying that textural variance among these regions of cortex will
explain this in the near future. He is saying only that there is
more variance than we have detailed, and hence that the possi-
bility of eventually finding key differences that might account for
sensory disparities is still a real one. That is all Scheibel claims.
However, Scheibel does sometimes give the impression that
great and revealing discoveries are just around the corner. For
example, in commenting on the stripe of Gennari in visual
cortex, he says that this is a far more dramatic instance of his-
tological singularity than we would lead others to believe, but
then he adds, "whatever it may mean." Indeed so, for the
significance of this feature to visual experience as such is com-
pletely unknown; and until this is known, the stripe's existence
does nothing to distinguish seeing from hearing or touch. Again,
Scheibel says that the presence of Meynert cells in area 17 is an
"exotic addition" to its deepest layers, which "dramatically
changes their character." But what do they have to do with
seeing (other than, perhaps, some oculomotor driving of the
eyes), since as he admits, they are motor-type cells? How could
the presence of such cells help to distinguish visual from audi-
tory or tactile sensations? On this matter, apparently, Scheibel
has nothing whatever to say; yet Green, for one, thinks it is a con-
clusive point.
The suggestion by Scheibel, that what clear textural simi-
larities are found in areas 3, 41, and 17 may be explained in terms
of the three regions having what he calls a "common neocortical
sensory mission," has to be regarded with caution. Szentagothai
and several other commentators hold that the differences
Scheibel has pointed to in those areas are sufficient to account for
the differences between the sensory modalities, but that the
unity of conscious experience and the need for simultaneous
processing under those modalities make it appropriate that the
sensory strips be structurally similar. Szentagothai says that the
neuronal mechanisms for the three modalities at their first
cortical site (areas 3, 41, and 17) should logically be alike, and he
compares this with cerebellar cortex, where even greater simi-
larities are to be found, in spite of the latter's role in precalculat-
ing detailed ballistic movements of an astonishing variety. These
are appealing considerations, but they do not go far enough. One
looks in vain, for example, for a general sensory function (other
than the name) underlying vision, audition, and tactile sensi-
bility - a matter we shall take up again in Section VIII. And the
cerebellum does, after all, subserve precise movements of any
and every kind; structural similarities there are expectable, but
why should we also find similarities nearly as great in sensory
neocortices mediating such distinct kinds of experiences? (That
the areas in question are only the "first cortical target site" for af-
ferent sensory impulses giving sensations of seeing, hearing, and
touch is a claim we shall examine in Section V.)
On the neuroanatomical side, Scheibel could not have meant
that the multidimensional column (or plate) system is a func-
tional feature idiosyncratic to primary visual cortex. In fact, the
cortical column was first described by Mountcastle (1957) in so-
matosensory cortex, and even at that time it was hypothesized to
have extra-modal significance. Recent experiments give addi-
tional support to the view that such columns are units of organi-
zation in all the sensory cortices (Dykes, Rasmussen, and
Hoeltzell 1978; Middlebrooks, Dykes, and Merzenieh 1978).
Indeed, in his Ferrier Lecture, Szentagothai (1978b op cit. by
Szentagothai) himself described this elementary cortical unit by
combining anatomical data from both visual and somatosensory
cortex almost without distinction, apparently because he
believes them to be equivalent; this hypothetical functional
column or module is found in all neocortex.
Booth, on the other hand, suggests that sensory differences
would be compatible with structural and functional similarities
in areas 3, 41, and 17 if it could be shown that "other parts" of the
same organic system differ as much as do touch, hearing, and vi-
sion, and that these "other parts" determine what goes on in the
three sensory cortical strips. In that case, of course, the latter
would be logical candidates for identification with touch, hear-
ing, and vision, rather than areas 3, 41, and 17. Such candidates
will be discussed in Sections IV and V below.
We of course welcome the support of Beloff and Handler in
questioning Scheibel's optimistic-sounding survey of future
possibilities. As Mandler says, it is not just the ardent monist
who must be satisfied (and who can afford to wait a very long
time). Eventually psychologists will have to be satisfied that a
theory of textural variance in the cortical strips can produce con-
cepts and structures that make unnecessary, without loss of
power or meaning, strictly psychological concepts such as com-
monsense "blueness." And this state of affairs seems far off
indeed.
II. The relevant differences are at a finer level, such as the
micro structure or biochemistry
Several commentators, evidently not feeling safe enough with
Scheibel's disclaimers, have retreated to the level of synaptic
structures or biochemical activity as possibly marking critical dif-
ferences between the sensory cortices. For all we know, such
conjectures could be sound; we have no facts to confute them,
because there simply exist no relevant data. How do the enzyme
reactions (Uttal) or the "microfunctional organization" (Green)
within somesthetic cortex differ from what we find in visual
cortex so that a caress is qualitatively different from a flash of
light? It is all very well to say, as the Churchlands do, that in
electronic circuits subtle differences in inductance, resistance,
and capacitance can produce radically different resonant or os-
cillatory behavior, but what evidence is there that comparable
differences are to be found in areas 3, 41, and 17? Yet many of our
critics (Bunge, Gedye, Perry, Hitter) appear to be confident, be-
yond any factual justification now available, that such differences
will turn up. Perhaps they will; who can say in advance? But
equally, perhaps they will not. Unless and until data in support
of this claim are forthcoming, we do not see how a bare possi-
bility constitutes a refutation of our view.
Ill: The differences are in terms of locus and interconnections.
Several commentators (Dennett, Uttal, Wilks) feel that a "place
code" would be a sufficient difference. Wilks cites problems
with Leibniz's principle precisely with respect to spatio-
temporal factors. But Leibniz considered spatial location to be a
property of things, so that two balls with all properties in com-
370
THE BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1978), 3

Response/Fuccetti & Dykes: Sensory cortex and the mind-brain problem
mon, including spatial location, would differ solo nurnero, and
hence be one ball only. Further, this principle of the Identity of
Indiscernibles is not the same as our footnoted formula for strict
identity, which is its converse, the Indiscernibility of Identicals
(see also Section VII, in connection with a similar point by
Rosenthal). Moreover, we never claimed that the three sensory
cortical strips have all properties in common except location on
the cortical surface. The words Wilks quotes include 'Varies
hardly at all," which is far from complete identity of properties.
Great similarity, or homogeneity, is much less than identity.
Figure 5 should certainly make that clear. The (claimed or puta-
tive) identity is between A and A', B and B', C and C',not among
A, B and C themselves. Finally, the question of the sufficiency of
small differences, such as spatial location, is dealt with in Sec-
tion VII on the "metric" problem.
An even larger number of commentators think that the answer
to our challenge lies in the interconnections (e.g. Scheibel,
8zentagothai3 Ritter). Gibson stresses long distance vertical con-
nectivity with the brain stem, and shorter horizontal connectivity
with other cortical areas. Uttal, not content with enzyme reac-
tions, appeals also to synaptic interconnection patterns. Globus
refers to holistic properties of functional systems, Maxwell to Pri-
bram's hologram theory. Dismukes criticizes us for passing over
the functional interconnections within each cortical module,
though he grants that they are similarly organized in different
regions of neocortex; but apart from saying that the cortical
columns are "thought to be" hooked together differently, he is
silent on this.
Interestingly, the philosophers Anderson, Block, Dennett, and
Harman raise a parallel objection that turns on the conceptual
point that relational properties may be more important than "in-
trinsic" properties of visual, auditory, and somesthetic cortex [cf.
section V on "localization"]. But it is difficult to see what these
relational properties are supposed to be, if not properties of the
CNS itself. For example, at any given moment your visual cortex
will be either closer to or farther away from the Eiffel Tower in
Paris than your auditory cortex. Is that significant? If so, how?
Such properties change every time you turn your head. If not
those relational properties, which ones?
Block says that the qualitative character of a single sensation
involves a "complex relational feature" including spatial and
perhaps temporal aspects of the brain, hence covering a larger
portion of the nervous system than we have naively supposed
(see also sections IV-VI); he suggests that the particular sensa-
tion you get may be as variable as the sounds coming from a steel
drum when it is struck, depending on where you strike it.
Harman tries to show, by reference to a hypothetical "brain in a
vat," and even an excised "visual cortex in a vat," that to have
sensations you need a normal bodily context: seeing that the
sunset is glorious is more than seeing a sunset. Anderson says
much the same for color experiences in general, and Dennett for
red circles. But in none of these contributions to the discussion is
there any hint of just where to look beyond the cortical sensory
strips in question, or what to look for there. Without more
concrete suggestions, this relationist gambit does not appear to
advance our understanding of the possibilities at all.
Furthermore, and this is what both the neuroscientists and the
philosophers who are betting on a "broader" explanation of
sensory functions appear to overlook, the evidence from brain
stimulation studies already discussed in the target article tends
to undermine any such claim. When the electrode tip is placed
on the cortical surface in area 3, the stimulus impulse train and
its intensity crudely mimicking impulses normally arriving at
that point from the receptor sheet, a sensation of touch is reliably
felt by the subject. True, it is more of a paraesthesia than a
normal sensation, and the subject knows that it is being
artificially induced, but it is still a sensation. What is more, it is
subjectively referred to a highly specific point on the body sur-
face. Immediately adjoining points on the somatosensory strip
often project from quite disparate locations on the body surface,
as distant as toes and genitals, or thumb and forehead (see target
article's Figure 2), but apparently current spread does not recruit
neighboring populations of neurons, since no such disparate
sensations are reported. This being the case, how can
hypothetically broader regions of the brain by involved (other
than the reticular formation, its activity apparently being a pre-
condition for all conscious experience arising from neocortex -
which may provide the plausibility for Harman's suggestion that
an isolated visual cortex in vitro would not yield visual sensa-
tions, though a whole brain "in a vat," including the brain-stem
reticular connections, might)?
If not, if highly-selective cortical stimulation can yield specific
sensations in spite of the proximity of neuron populations
responsive to stimulation of distant points on the body surface -
a finding reinforced by the work of Libet (1973) and his
associates over the years - then it cannot be the case that inter-
connections outside the immediate target area for stimulation de-
termine the nature of those sensations. We agree that complex
perceptions like "seeing a glorious sunset" involve more than a
sensation, but without sensations there are no perceptions, so
our point still takes hold. But we shall return to this later, in Sec-
tion V.
IV: The differences are in the peripheral sensory endorgans
Scheibel, as well as many others, suggests that there are enough
differences among the sense organs and the sensory pathways
leading from them to the respective cortical projection areas to
account for perceived differences among the three modalities.
But such differences in the endorgans and relay systems cannot
be indispensible to the having of sensations under a particular
modality, since, as just discussed, completely bypassing them by
means of direct cortical stimulation of the projection areas
themselves still yields sensations characteristic of each modality.
Thus, sufficient substrate for appropriate sensory experience ap-
pears to exist at the cortical level and beyond; if differences
between the modalities are to be explained by differences in
brain structure and function, they will have to be sought at that
level, not in the means by which impulses get there.
Norman, for example, labors the obvious when he says that the
optical-chemical transduction mechanism of the eye is qualita-
tively different from the mechanical lever and fluid dynamics of
the ear. But seeing does not go on in the eyes, nor hearing in the
ears. If they did, there would be little point in trying to perfect
visual and auditory prostheses based on cortical stimulation for
people who have lost these senses due to peripheral damage,
either to the endorgans themselves or to intervening relay sta-
tions.
Gibson says that primary visual cortex can only mediate vision
because it is linked with brain-stem visual processing centers
and with the rods and cones of the eye. This we do not yet know,
for the futuristic experiment of linking ear with visual cortex or
eye with auditory cortex in adult higher vertebrates has not been
performed.
Curiously, Booth thinks area 41 could come to subserve vision,
and 17, hearing, sending new input to "other" parts of the brain
for appropriate motor output, though he does not say to what
other parts, and it is hard to see how that would come about
without the two cortical strips sprouting new efferent pathways.
And finally, Perry spreads confusion on the whole issue by
stating that, for all he knows, there is just no difference between
seeing and hearing other than the causal roles they have in be-
havior! If we take that suggestion seriously, it would make no dif-
ference to our survival as a species if half of use heard the sun
sinking below the horizon, or half of us saw growls in the forest
at night. But we cannot even understand what such
"experiences" would be like - a point we shall return to in Sec-
tion VIII of this reply.
THE BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1978), 3
371

Response/Fuccetti & Dykes: Sensory cortex and the mind-brain problem
V: The differences are not In the primary regions, but In
association cortex or subcortical structures
The "antilocalizationist" school of thought is characterized by a
certain skepticism about the interpretation of experimental
results obtained from electrical stimulation of the exposed
cortex, and from ablation of discrete cortical regions. And, to be
sure, there is always a danger of drawing overly-simplistic con-
clusions from such data. However, in the target article, and again
here in our response to the commentators, we have felt no need
to defend the validity of such studies in general, for two reasons.
First, these results, along with those from intracellular recording
of neuronal activity provide the most direct evidence available
for the localization of conscious functions in the brain. But
second, if localization itself is denied, then the kinds of reduc-
tivist mind-brain theories it is our larger aim to undermine
simply could not be given a tempting formulation. For it would
be ironical in the extreme if, in order to parry our attack, reduc-
tivists retreated to the sort of cerebral holism that used to be dear
to the hearts of idealists! This is, of course, the source of the
paradox we have raised against reductivism: localizationism ap-
pears to fuel the reductivist program, but upon closer examina-
tion the critical sites for touch, hearing, and vision seem
insufficiently different in relevant respects to account for qualita-
tive differences in conscious experience under those modalities,
opening the way for a dualistic interpretation of mind and brain.
If this is indeed the case, then similar treatment can be given
to claims that such differences are really to be found in associa-
tion cortex, or in subcortical structures. Brain stimulation often
includes careful probing of association areas. If the current is not
strong enough to cause dangerous spread, but is kept at the
minimum necessary to elicit sensations in the primary areas, it
fails to do so in association areas, which is why such areas are
often referred to as "silent" areas (Penfield and Rasmus sen 1950
op. cit.). Nor does stimulation of subcortical structures by depth
electrodes elicit sensations of touch, hearing, or vision (Sem-
Jacobsen 1968), which is hardly surprising, since decorticate
animal preparations appear to be blind, deaf, and unable to feel
touches (Bard and Macht 1958).
Thus, the larger claim by many of our critics (e.g. DIsmukes,
Freemon, Gibson, Norman; cf. also Booth, Dennett), that the
primary sensory strips of the cortex are but "intermediate
processing stations" for visual, somesthetic, and auditory in-
formation, appears to be without foundation. We are not denying
that further analysis occurs - for example, that visual information
processed in area 17 undergoes further processing in areas 18
and 19, and even in areas 20 and 22. But it does not follow from
this that sensory experience does not arise initially in the
primary regions and is not already, at that level, clearly dif-
ferentiated 
into visual-, auditory-, and somatosensory-type
sensations.
Hebb, again, is right in saying that perception is more than
sensation. But when, for example, cortical excisions are
performed to relieve focal epilepsy, removal of tissue from a
nonprimary region like the posterior parietal area - presumably
disrupting commissural pathways - allows an early return of so-
matic sensibility, whereas therapeutic ablation in the postcentral
gyrus itself (see Figure 1 in the target article) leaves a permanent
defect in sensibility for the part of the body surface projecting to
that point in area 3 (Corkin, Milner, and Rasmussen 1970).
Szentagothai suggests that if all the rest of cortex were
removed, leaving only the primary sensory areas intact, the indi-
vidual concerned would have no conscious experience of touch,
hearing, and vision. This may very well be true, but it is far from
demonstrating that, in a normal brain, feeling a touch, hearing
something, and seeing something do not first arise in areas 3, 41,
and 17. Consider that of all the sensory experiences that one
could have, those that are most devoid of mental relationships
(since they occur without relational features such as contrast and
are unrelated to the subject's volitions, memories, and emotional
and attentional sets) are the audenes, phosphenes, and tactile
sensations elicited by cortical stimulation in these areas. Yet the
subject does hear sounds, see patches of light before him, feel
something touching his right thumb when so stimulated. So they
are in some perfectly legitimate sense "sensations," and they are
eminently localizable on the cortical surface.
VI: The "Instrument" argument, or Computer Equivalence: the
same hardware can function differently depending on the
software and the information processed
The Churchlands say that a radio is an instrument that can
produce the sounds of piano, violin or base drum. Bridgeraan
prefers three stereo speakers. Dennett reverts to two radios, one
playing Beethoven and the other forecasting weather, identical
even to the location of the needle on the dial, but one located in
Tokyo, the other in New York (cf. Section III).
All of these are supposed to meet our "musical-instrument"
analogy in the target article, but none is a musical instrument.
What is at stake here, obviously, is not the appropriateness of our
analogy, but the point behind it: namely, that sensory cortex in
areas 3, 41, and 17 is so much alike that it is bewildering to find
that the same sort of tissue can subserve such disparate kinds of
sensory experience as touch, hearing, and vision, depending, ap-
parently, on no more than its location in the cerebral orchestra.
Our critics, on the other hand, are representing this as being easy
to understand on the basis of analogy with electronic devices.
Dismukes says that, as every engineer knows, moving a single
wire or changing the value of a capacitator can convert an
amplifier into an oscillator. The Churchlands point out that their
three radio speakers may play a drum solo, a Bach allegro, and a
one-string lullaby simultaneously, depending only on the os-
cillatory behavior of each speaker circuit; this is supposed to
show that architecturally-identical systems can admit of vastly
different activities. Norman, Bridgeman, and others add that the
same computer can do three different tasks according to the
inputs, program, or "software" it is operating on [cf. Scheibel,
Shallice, Szentagothai, Wilks].
Unfortunately for our critics on this point, these electronic
analogies fail, because varying stimulation of the sensory
cortices does not evoke varying kinds of sensations. Although a
wide range of frequencies and intensities has been used in
cortical stimulation studies, activation of somatosensory cortex
elicits only touch or tactile sensations. The same is true of
evoked electrophysiological responses in auditory cortex, which
produce sound sensations exclusively; similarly, visual sensa-
tions are unique to calcarine cortex. The same kind of tissue is
giving off three quite distinct kinds of sensations - but, so far as
we know, only when it has the cortical location it has (cf. Section
III). If, by modifying slightly the intensity or frequency of the
stimulus delivered by the electrode, one could get visual sensa-
tions from auditory cortex, sensations of sound from the
postcentral gyrus, and so on, then our critics' analogies would be
telling. Since that is not the case, they all fall wide of the mark
and leave our argument undisturbed.
Herman asks what we would expect to find in a computer-
based robot with functional 
vision, hearing, and tactile
sensitivity; surely, he suggests, we would find basically the same
electronic components subserving these sensory functions, but
with different interconnections between the units of each
component, different connections with the robot endorgans, and
different connections with other parts of its computer brain. But
from the fact that, at least hypothetically, one could get visually-,
auditorily-, and tactually-guided behavior from such an entity, it
does not follow that the robot it having any subjective
experiences when so behaving. So unless it were possible to
372
THE BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1978), 3

Response/Puccetti & Dykes: Sensory cortex and the mind-brain problem
know that the latter is indeed the case, nothing at all follows for
human beings and the way they function.
But, for all we actually know, there may indeed be a whole
range of sensorily-guided human behaviors, including touch,
hearing, and vision, that cannot normally be effected unless the
appropriate sensory experiences occur at the same time. Now, if
one wanted to say that (again, for all we know) a future genera-
tion of robots simulating human sensory behavior may also have
sensory experiences while doing so, the question would be
whether those experiences, like ours, were diverse despite the
essential homogeneity of the critical components subserving the
robot's tactile, auditory, and visual functions. It is difficult to see
how we humans could ever know the answer to this question. If
we could, and the answer were "yes," then the problem we have
raised would be extended to robots. And if the answer were
"no," because robots have the same kinds of sensations when
feeling a touch, hearing, or seeing things, then all we could say
would be that they don't have anything in common with our
mental lives! (Indeed, it is arguable that we could extend our
mental language legitimately in saying touch, hearing, and
seeing are all the same to robots - but this is a point that will
recur under Section VIII below.)
VII: There is no clear metric for this problem: How bigshould
the difference be?
In the target article we were careful to point out that probably no
one can say in advance what differences would have to be found
in the sensory cortices to account for differences in subjective
experience. Gedye and Perry consider the requisite magnitude a
relative, perhaps even arbitrary matter. Dennett thinks that any
three distinct things, no matter how similar, will still differ in
infinitely many ways - a metaphysical declaration that clouds the
whole issue. Green and other determined monists, seem to feel
that whatever difference is found will be difference enough!
Economos asks whether it would be enlightening to find that
visual cells were cubic and auditory ones tetrahedral [cf. Rose].
Well, that would be a good beginning. Green asks whether an
identity claim would be more plausible, should the sensory
cortices be found to be drastically different in structure and com-
position. Of course it would, at least on that ground.
Roseethal thinks that if the identity theory is valid, sensations
can have all the closely-resembling neural properties of areas 3,
41, and 17 and at the same time possess widely-divergent in-
trospectible properties! Here he seems to have misunderstood
the requirement of strict identity (see Footnote 5 in the target
article). This states that for every x and every y, if x and y are
identical, F is a property of x, if and only if F is a property of y
(the converse of Leibniz' law, hence a statement of the Indis-
cernibility of Identicals). From this it follows that every
property of a neural event or state is also a property of the kind of
sensation with which it is identical, and vice-versa. The mind-
brain identity theorist need not, of course, say which neural
property maps on which aspects of the requisite sensation; he
can leave that to the neurophysiologist. Nevertheless, he cannot
say, as Rosenthal does, that incompatible properties are allow-
able under an identity claim, by analogy with a set of blocks
similar to touch but having distinct smells-that is to confuse
mind-brain identity with a double-aspect theory. Ward and Wilks
make a similar mistake.
VIII. But the senses are similar too!
A number of commentators warn against the incomplete and mis-
leading view of brain processes provided by introspective data -
(did anyone ever even discover he had a brain that way?). Hebb
doubts that there are such data. Green says that we have no solid
intuitions on how to compare sensations: are smells more similar
to touches or to sights? Wilks reasons similarly. Anderson,
Bridgeraan, Gibson, Globus, Marks, Norman, and Perry all point
to structural and linguistic features common to the sensory mo-
dalities. Globus adds that since conscious awareness spans all
modalities, it is this that gives each sensation meaning - what
would it be like to have an unconscious sensation? - and without
it the differences we point to are minimal: for him, introspection
shows we are wrong! The Churchlands, on the other hand, sug-
gest that our view, that vision, touch, and hearing are vastly dif-
ferent, may just be due to a shallow, narrow, introspective
perspective of the kind that eliminative materialism is trying to
eliminate. So we stand condemned for relying on introspection
as well as for not doing enough of it!
One must learn to call nonsense by its name. The experi-
menter places an electrode tip in area 41 and asks you what you
feel. You may feel nothing, but if you reported a phosphene
instead of an audene, he would think that he had missed 41 by a
good four inches! (Of course, he can tell whether you are lying,
or hysterical, simply by alternating real and fake stimulations; if
you report, without his asking, that you felt something, he
believes you, but if you report when he is not applying the cur-
rent, he does not.) The idea that a subject like this would not
know what to say - as to whether he had heard something or seen
something, because one is not clear what the difference is
between hearing and seeing - is just absurd.
Smart says audenes and phosphenes may seem very different
to us, but then so do the faces of sheep to a shepherd; and in any
case, they may be less different from each other than are, for
example, avalanches, tidal waves, and hiccups. But surely you
need no expertise to know, when undergoing cortical stimula-
tion, whether what you are experiencing is a sound, a white dot
floating before your eyes, or a touch on the thigh. Our critics
seem to be straining to deny the obvious.
Economos asks us to explain what hearing is like, suggesting
that if we can do so, we could tell EEM in our parable, and
then he would know too; but if we can't, then how can we claim
to know what hearing is like? Similarly, Milner grants that it is
impossible to describe the sensation of hearing to a congenitally-
deaf person, but he adds that we have the same trouble explain-
ing it to one another. We merely assume, he says, and quite
unjustifiably, that we hearing persons are all the same. But Puc-
cetti, he goes on, has no idea what Dykes experiences when a
bell rings, or vice-versa!
Is Economos maintaining that all knowledge is verbally
transmittable? Is that how we develop a good backhand in ten-
nis? Can one tell a child what an orgasm feels like? If not, does
that mean we do not really know what it feels like? Of course we
have no trouble at all explaining what hearing is like to one
another, for the good reason that we never explain it to one
another - we don't need to. Are we unjustified in assuming that
others hear too? If Dykes and Puccetti are walking in St. Peter's
and a bell rings, so that we both stop and look up, covering our
ears and grimacing, is it true that Puccetti has "no idea" what
Dykes heard . . . nor Dykes, what Puccetti heard? Maybe a
philosophy teacher in an introductory epistemology course
would argue this, to make some point about the ultimate privacy
of sensations. But if the doctor holds up a tuning fork or a ticking
watch behind you and asks if you can hear it, and you answer that
you have no idea what he means by "hear" so you cannot say
(though you obviously heard his question), he might very well
send you down the hall to another department.
All such attempts to subvert our argument fail in view of the
simple fact, well understood by many philosophers these days,
that we do have a naturally-evolved public language in which
statements about what we hear and don't hear, see and don't see,
feel and don't feel, are constantly and effortlessly made, readily
understood, and acted upon. If the qualitative distinctions
between sensory modalities were blurred or ill understood, it
THE BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1978), 3
373

Response/Puccetti & Dykes: Sensory cortex and the mind-brain problem
would be impossible to explain that our language of sensations
functions as it does. For example, if in a court of law you
responded to a question about whether you had actually seen the
defendant in flagrante delicto, heard her moaning across the
darkened room and assumed this, or else reached down to the
floor and felt a familiar mole, it would be most strange to say you
didn't understand the question, because, after all, aren't these
very similar? More important, if you said you saw a low moan
coming from her part of the room, heard a familiar mole, said felt
her in the act at a distance of sixteen feet, no one would under-
stand your response. One can, of course, find phrases in the lan-
guage that allow a cross-modal application, as some commenta-
tors indicate. But if there are any linguistic barriers to
intersensory descriptions of one's experience, their existence
would appear to indicate qualitative disparities among tactile, vi-
sual, and auditory sensations reflected in the language itself,
rather than being a consequence of some philosopher's arbitrary
ruling. (We leave the question of intrasensory differences to Sec-
tion IX, following.)
Natsoulas, somewhat like Economos, argues that if we cannot
give descriptive expression to "hearing" as such, then it is not a
"piece of knowledge" about hearing; if not, then our inability to
say exactly what hearing is means that there does not exist a
psychological description to be replaced by a neurophysiological
one, so EEM in our parable was quite right to correlate what is
going on in area 41 of humans with their auditory behavior-
nothing more. But if this means EEM knows ali there is to know
about hearing, since we know no more, then he should be able to
use and understand (in written form, anyway) our language of
hearing: "a tearing sound," "a muffled thud," "whining followed
by a boom." But this he cannot do, for he knows not what it is to
be a hearing organism (Nagel 1974 op. cit. by Rosenthal). It is
precisely the subjective character of auditory experience that
stands uneliminated by such an analysis.
IX: How can similar causes now be taken to have different
effects?
In the target article we limited our own conclusions to the
proposition that the brain is not the mind, and we left to others
the question as to what exactly is the mind. However, several
commentators have raised a problem that we recognize as
challenging to that conclusion, and concerning which we feel we
must respond.
We begin with Bunge's contention that if there were such a
thing as an immaterial mind, nothing going on in it would be
open to standard scientific measurement the way brain activities
are. That is, of course, correct. But then he says causal relations
can only be elucidated between genuine events - that is,
changes in concrete objects - suggesting that if there are any
purely mental events, they are not genuine. This obviously begs
the question. For Bunge, dualism is "fuzzy"; it asks us to believe
in the "ghostly." However, we don't find it written in the stars
that reality should be unfuzzy, in order to conform with
philosophers' preconceptions. Similarly, in response to Smart's
statement that it would be difficult to fit dualism into "total
science," we can but say that science is not committed to
underwriting a particular view of the world that excludes nonma-
terial minds [see Section X]. It is committed only to finding the
truth about the world, insofar as it can. If it turns out that minds
cannot be reduced to brain activity alone, why should that be
more disturbing to scientists than, say, discovering limitations to
physical determinacy in quantum mechanics? There appears to
be consideable partisan metaphysics, on this question anyway,
masquerading as commitment to science. Let us look more
closely at the matter.
Consider Green's observation that, while there is nothing
counter-intuitive about vastly different effects being produced
by minimally different causes (our claim), Hume provides no
support for this, because his principle was that even if effects
need not resemble their causes, still, like causes produce like ef-
fects. No doubt Hume meant this with regard to everyday
observations of physical events like billiard balls striking each
other. We are suggesting that where brain stimulation and
sensory effects are involved, like causes produce very wnlike ef-
fects, Hume's support consists in his insight that neither reason
nor experience requires a likeness between causes and their ef-
fects. Block concedes this much, but he adds that similar causes
nevertheless do have similar effects. All we can say to this is that
if our data are correct, that is not true of the brain-mind relation!
Milner says that the observation that effects are not required to
resemble causes is not equivalent to saying that (near-) identical
causes can in fact produce different effects. But surely, if one
allows the other, then it is logically equivalent. The same
rejoinder can be made to Marks, who holds that if a non-dif-
ference in brain process cannot constitute a difference in sensa-
tion, neither can it cause one. But of course it can, given that, as
Hume maintained, cause and effect are always "distinct
existences." Maxwell, troubled by the same difficulty, asks how,
if the tactile area and the visual area of the brain are so similar,
yet touch and vision are so different, the former could cause the
latter. We need only point out (see Figure 5 in the target article)
that A causes A', and C causes C, reliably and repeatedly. This is
all that one needs in order to retain the hypothesis of causal regu-
larity between brain and mind, at least in that direction. (We
have no idea how it works going from mind to brain. But since,
contra Bunge, we do not espouse epiphenomenalism, we sup-
pose that it does. Once the "gate" is opened, there is nothing in-
tuitively incoherent in two-way traffic.)
But perhaps the most serious threat to our dualistic conclusion
comes from Armstrong. He says that, at first, he thought that dif-
ferent sorts of mind-effects require different sorts of brain-
causes, so the difficulty we present as insoluble at the material
level reappears at the immaterial level ("passing the buck
along"). But then he realized that this was incorrect, for the
tactile receiving area of the mind could have a different nature,
perhaps {pace Bunge!) a different "immaterial structure," from
that of the mind's auditory receiving area; and each might have a
direct, unique channel to its appropriate cortical sensory strip.
But next, Armstrong asks us to meet a modified form of the
original objection. He observes that there are many different
sorts of tactile sensations, such as a touch felt on the toe as dis-
tinct from one on the nose, just as there are many different sorts
of auditory sensations (whistle, boom, etc.). To account for this
"dimensional array" within each sensory modality, there would
have to be corresponding differences in the cortical projection
areas that account for perceiving rough vs. smooth things, loud
vs. soft sounds, and so on. If this be admitted, he goes on, then
there would indeed be striking differences, even if only in the
microstructure, between areas 3 and 41 - and these are just what
we appear to deny exist.
We feel that, in line with fair-minded comments by Mackie and
Maxwell, this is just the kind of challenge that we should attempt
(at least) to meet, in order to show that we are not presenting
dualism merely as, in Economos' phrase, a "default position."
What we say here may apply as well to some objections raised by
Ritter and the Churchlands.
It occurs to us that if Armstrong agrees that we could defend
dualism cogently against his original objection by postulating
mental receiving areas with different "structures" and unique
access to their appropriate cortical sensory strips, it would only
require an extension of that postulate to meet his modified form
of the same objection. One can simply suppose that within each
modality-specific mental receiving area there are sub-areas spe-
cialized for the reception of particular kinds of sensation at
specific levels or intensities corresponding to the range of the
perceived "dimensional array." Thus could dualism explain
intrasensory as well as intersensory subjective differences
without their being microstructural or indeed any physioco-
374
THE BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1978), 3

Response/Puccetti & Dykes: Sensory cortex and the mind-brain problem
chemical differences in the tissue itself.
Indeed, this kind of extension of the dualistic postulate may be
necessary for other reasons. For example, while specific sub-
regions of the cortical sensory strips are known to have specific
sensory functions, the exact relation between the neurons com-
posing such sub-regions and the particular quality of the result-
ing sensation are at present totally obscure. In the somesthetic
system, for instance, area 3 is routinely divided into an anterior
area 3a, associated with sensations arising from deep body struc-
tures (muscles, tendons, etc.), and a posterior area 3b, responsive
to pressure on the cutaneous surface. Furthermore, within each
sub-area the intensity range of the stimulus is believed to be
coded by the frequency of nerve impulses travelling down the
axons of activated neurons. And, as already noted in the target
article (see Figure 2), each body part is represented at a different
mediolateral point on the sensory strip. In combination these
observations allow objective correlation of cell populations and
nerve-impulse frequency with points on the subjective "dimen-
sional array" for touch sensations. What they do not tell us is why
one group of activated neurons leads to a feeling of pressure,
another immediately adjacent group to a feeling of vibration,
within the same sub-area. We do not naively expect the former to
be pressing against each other, nor the latter to be fluttering. But
on the other hand, if mind-brain reductivism were valid, there
ought to be some observable difference in the two groups of
neurons that could be correlated with the quite distinct qualities
of feeling a flutter as opposed to feeling pressure. Yet so far, at
any rate, none has been found.
The difficulty of accounting for the felt quality of sensations in
terms of neuronal activity is perhaps better appreciated in
studies on the primary visual system (Jung 1973). Individual
cells in the visual associative areas of cat or monkey (inferotem-
poral cortex, areas 20 and 21) may respond selectively to circular
objects in the visual field; other nearby ones, only to rectangular
objects; but nothing in the observable characteristics of these
neurons provides a clue as to why circles and rectangles are be-
ing seen. From the fact that it would be naive to expect such
neurons to be circular themselves, or to group together to form a
rectangular cell assembly, it does not follow that no differences
should be anticipated. Indeed, the unity of the subjective visual
field seems impossible to account for on any neuroanatomic
basis. One passes in vain from the punctuate mosaic of retinal
transformation to the equally fragmentary feature extraction of
cells in the inferotemporal cortex in search of some neurological
mechanism to explain our seeing a familiar object or face in all its
perceptual unity. The hypothesis of a distinct mind unifying
these perceptual elements and ordering them according to its
own principles then seems less far-fetched than it may have in
the first flush of localizationist enthusiasm. In the final analysis,
it may be to Immanuel Kant, rather than to the sceptic Hume,
that we shall have to return in order to understand our
experience.
X: Concluding remarks
Due to spatial as well as personal limitations, we have
necessarily left a lot of criticisms unanswered here. For example,
we have not tried to deal with Hitter's remarks on the functional
properties of electrical fields in the nervous system, Shallice's
explanation of consciousness in terms of system constraints,
Sperry's nonreductivist monism, or Rose's dialectical ma-
terialism. We feel that to do an adequate job with so much
criticism would require a joint sabbatical leave.
However, there has been one persistent complaint that we
cannot leave unanswered. Smart cites the "difficulty of fitting
dualism into total science." Bunge says dualism has blocked
scientific research into the mind-body problem for centuries.
Norman speaks of "wringing our hands in dualism," perhaps the
equivalent of Mackie's "counsel of despair." Armstrong calls it
"passing the buck," and Milner flatly states that dualism in effect
means abandoning neuroscience!
To all such charges we can only reply that, on the contrary, our
argument, and the response it has generated, promises a more
intense search for the objective correlates of particular sensa-
tions than hitherto. Thus, if it turns out that we were wrong, and
such correlates are eventually found, such critics can thank us for
the stimulus. And if we are right? Well, it wouldn't be the first
time that a scientific quandary had led to learning something
new about the human condition.
REFERENCES
Bard, P. and Macht, M. B. The behaviour of chronically decerebrate cats.
In: G. E. W. Wolstenholme and C. M. O'Connor (eds.), Neurological
Basis of Behaviour. J. & A. Churchill, Ltd., London, pp. 55-75, 1958.
Corkin, S., Milner, B., and Rasmussen, T. Contrasting effects of
postcentral and posterior parietal lobe excisions. Archives of Neu-
rology. 23:43-58, 1970.
Dykes, R. W., Rasmusson, D. R., and Hoeltzell, P. B. The segregation of
submodalities in primary somatosensory cortex of the cat. Society for
Neuroscience Abstracts. St. Louis, Mo., 1978.
Jung, R. Visual perception and neurophysiology. In: R. Jung (ed.), Hand-
book of Sensory Physiology, VII. Springer-Verlag, Berlin,
Heidelberg, New York, pp. 1-152, 1973.
Libet, B. Electrical stimulation of cortex in humans, and conscious
sensory aspects. In: A. Iggo (ed.), Handbook of Sensory Physiology,
II. Springer-Verlag, Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, pp. 743-790,
1973.
Middlebrooks, J. C, Dykes, R. W., and Merzenich, M. M. Binaural
response-specific bands within AI in the cat: specialization within
isofrequency contours. Society for Neuroscience Abstracts. St.
Louis, Mo., 1978.
Mountcastle, V. B. Modality and topographic properties of single neurons
of cats' somatic sensory cortex. Journal of Neurophysiology. 20:408-
434,1957.
Sem-Jacobsen, C. Depth-Electro graphic Stimulation of the Human Brain
and Behavior. Thomas, Springfield, 111., 1968.
THE BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1978), 3
375

EXPERIMENTAL
NEUROBIOLOGY
A Laboratory Manual
by Bruce Oakley and Rollie Schafer
Here is a landmark in neurobiology—a laboratory manual whose ex-
periments fill a significant educational void in neuroscience and
allied disciplines. The exercises cover the spectrum of experimental
neuroscience—from single cell, to brain wave, to behavior—and are
fashioned to work in student hands. Detailed and lucid presentations
permit students to carry out experiments largely on their own, yet
enjoy a high rate of success. The experiments are prefaced by chapters
on neuroanatomy and electrophysiological instrumentation. The
final chapter for the instructor includes complete information on
laboratory organization, electrophysiological equipment, drugs and
perfusion solutions, and procurement of supplies. Neuroscience
programs will find this a superb foundation course .in experimental
techniques and concepts.
384 pages
268 illustrations, photographs
$12.95
The Beivef sity of Michigan Press
P.O.Box 1104 Ann Arbor, Michigan 48106
Call for papers (and topics, authors, nomina-
tions, and suggestions)
The Behavioral and Brain Sciences is now calling for papers (as
well as for recommendations of topics and already published
articles or books) for Open Peer Commentary. Respondents are
requested to provide an explicit rationale for seeking or recom-
mending Commentary and to include a list of possible com-
mentators (see Instructions to Authors and Commentators).
We are also accepting informal nominations for (A) Cor-
responding Associate Commentators (who perform Open Peer
Commentary on accepted articles) and for (B) members of the
Board of Editorial Commentators (who referee submitted
manuscripts in addition to performing Open Peer Commentary).
A list of those who have thus far joined the Associateship
hierarchy is available from the editorial office (and will appear in
Volume I, Number 4 of this Journal). Qualified professionals in
the behavioral and brain sciences who have either (1) been for-
mally nominated by a current BBS Associate, (2) refereed for
BBS, or (3) had a commentary or article accepted for publication
can serve in capacity A or B.
To help in optimizing the service oiOpen Peer Commentary to
the behavioral and brain science community, the editorial office
would welcome suggestions from readers and Associates as to
the optimal (1) length of a commentary, (2) number of com-
mentaries per treatment, and (3) format for treatments.
Communications regarding these matters should be addressed
to the Editorial Office, Behavioral and Brain Sciences, P.O. Box
777, Princeton, N.J. 08540.

