 
Royal Society for the Encouragement of Arts, Manufactures and Commerce is collaborating with JSTOR to digitize, 
 
preserve and extend access to RSA Journal.
http://www.jstor.org
Are religions a necessary evil? 
Author(s): Daniel Dennett 
Source: 
 
 
RSA Journal, Vol. 153, No. 5523 (June 2006), p. 58
Published by: 
 
Royal Society for the Encouragement of Arts, Manufactures and Commerce
Stable URL: 
 
http://www.jstor.org/stable/41380522
Accessed: 19-03-2016 02:22 UTC
Your use of the JSTOR archive indicates your acceptance of the Terms & Conditions of Use, available at http://www.jstor.org/page/
 
info/about/policies/terms.jsp
JSTOR is a not-for-profit service that helps scholars, researchers, and students discover, use, and build upon a wide range of content 
in a trusted digital archive. We use information technology and tools to increase productivity and facilitate new forms of scholarship. 
For more information about JSTOR, please contact support@jstor.org.
This content downloaded from 131.170.6.51 on Sat, 19 Mar 2016 02:22:15 UTC
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

 Below are extracts from two recent RSA debates. For a full listing of forthcoming events,
 please visit www.theRSA.org/events
 Are religions a necessary evil?
 Religion as a global phenomenon: extracts from a lecture by Professor 1 Daniel Dennett,  , director,
 Center for Cognitive Studies/Tufts University; on 13 March 2006
 The dairy cow was designed over millions of years
 by a process of natural selection. It was a wild
 species descended from the aurochs (a large wild
 ox). When the aurochs became domesticated it
 came under the conscious, deliberate design of
 breeders who were set on taking this beast and
 turning it into something for human purposes.
 Much the same thing is true of religion.
 Religions have not existed on the planet forever;
 they are quite a recent phenomenon. Organised
 religions are more recent than the domestic cow.
 They evolved from wild ancestors and they are
 still evolving. If we want to understand religions,
 we need to subject them to scientific scrutiny.
 Religions are brilliantly designed products. It is
 no wonder that they have the hold over us that
 they do. Some of them are the products of
 intelligent human re-engineering, some the
 products of essentially blind human tinkering
 such as 'early domestication' and some are more
 ancient still and owe their existence to evolution
 and natural selection.
 Go out in the meadow and you will see an ant
 climbing a blade of grass. As you watch this ant
 climbing and climbing, you think, "What is this
 ant doing?" He climbs until he gets to the very
 top of the blade of grass. And you think, "What's
 this all for? Is he hunting for food? Is he lost? Is
 he showing off to potential mates?" And that
 turns out to be the wrong question.
 Dicrocoelium dendriticum is a small parasitic
 brain worm that has to get into the belly of a
 sheep or a cow to continue its reproductive cycle.
 It commandeers a passing ant and hops into its
 brain and drives it like an all-terrain vehicle up
 the blade of grass to improve its chances of being
 eaten by a cow or a sheep. Here we have a
 hijacker, a parasite that infects the brain and
 induces suicidal behaviour on behalf of a cause
 other than one's own genetic fitness. Does
 anything like that ever happen to us?
 The Arabic word 'Islam' means 'submission.' It
 means surrender of self-interest to the will of
 Allah. But Islam is not alone in this. Consider
 these words: 'The heart of worship is surrender.
 Surrendered people obey God's Word even if it
 doesn't make sense.'
 They come from the recent book by Pastor Rick
 Warren, The Purpose Driven Life. So it's not that
 Christians abhor the image of themselves as
 selfless servants of an idea that has attached itself
 to them; they glory in it. We all do - religious and
 secular alike - because there are many ideas to
 die for, not just Islam and Christianity.
 Think of all the people in the 20th century who
 sacrificed their lives to further the well-being of
 the idea of Communism. They were making a
 terrible mistake, but they certainly devoted their
 lives to it. Or democracy. Probably everybody in
 this room has a relative who gave up his or her
 life to further this cause. Or justice. Or freedom.
 It is a remarkable biological fact about humans
 that we are in a position to replace our genetic
 imperative with other imperatives. It is the key to
 our civilisation and it is itself the gift of human
 culture. It is because we have language and
 culture that we have achieved this remarkable
 independence from our genetic imperatives.
 I often hear, "Oh! You've got an evolutionary
 theory of religion, do you? I've always wondered
 what religions are for. I'm sure they're good for
 us, after all every human group that has ever
 been studied has had religion."
 Well you might be right, but not so fast. Every
 human group that has ever been studied also had
 the common cold. What is it for? It is for itself
 and it survives because it can.
 For a complete transcript or audio download of 'Breaking the
 Spelt Religion as a global phenomenon', with remarks from
 Reverend Professor
 Allster McGrath,
 please visit
 www.theRSA.org/events
 lecture summaries
 58 RSA JOURNAL June 2006 www.theRSAopg
This content downloaded from 131.170.6.51 on Sat, 19 Mar 2016 02:22:15 UTC
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

