125
Chapter 4*

The Evolution of Culture
Daniel C. Dennett
Cultures evolve. In one sense, this is a truism; in other senses, it asserts one 
or another controversial, speculative, unconfirmed theory of culture. Consider 
a cultural inventory of some culture at some time—say 1900 AD. It should 
include all the languages, practices, ceremonies, edifices, methods, tools, myths, 
music, art, and so forth that compose that culture. Over time, that inven-
tory changes. Today, 100 years later, some items will have disappeared, some 
multiplied, some merged, some changed, and many new elements will appear 
for the first time. A verbatim record of this changing inventory through his-
tory would not be science; it would be a database. This is the truism: cultures 
evolve over time. Everybody agrees about that. Now let’s turn to the contro-
versial question: how are we to explain the patterns to be found in that data-
base? Are there any good theories or models of cultural evolution?
1. Science or Narrative?
One possibility is that the only patterns to be found in cultural evolution defy 
scientific explanation. They are, some might want to say, narrative patterns, 
not scientific patterns. There is clearly something to this, but it won’t do as 
it stands for many scientific patterns are also historical patterns, and hence 
are revealed and explained in narratives—of sorts. Cosmology, geology, and 
biology are all historical sciences. The great biologist D’Arcy Thompson once 
said: “Everything is the way it is because it got that way.”
If he is right—if everything is the way it is because it got that way—then 
every science must be, in part, a historical science. But not all history—the 
* The first Annual Charles Simonyi Lecture, Oxford University, 17 February 1999, posted at http://
www.edge.org/3rd_culture/dennett/dennett_p1.html and reprinted here by permission.

Cosmos and Culture
126
recounting of events in temporal sequence—is narrative, some might want 
to say. Human history is unique in that the patterns it exhibits require a 
different form of understanding: hermeneutical understanding or Verstehen, 
or—you can count on the Germans to have lots of words for claims like this—
Geisteswissenschaft (approximately: spiritual science). I think this, too is partly 
right; there is a particular sort of understanding that is used to make sense of 
narratives about human agents. It is also true that the mark of a good story is 
that its episodes unfold not as the predicted consequences of general laws and 
initial conditions, but in delightfully surprising ways. These important facts 
do not show, however, that cultural evolution escapes the clutches of science 
and must be addressed in some other realm of inquiry. Quite the contrary; 
the humanistic comprehension of narratives and the scientific explanation of 
life processes, for all their differences of style and emphasis, have the same 
logical backbone. We can see this by examining the special form of under-
standing we use when following—and creating—good narratives.
Mediocre narratives are either a pointless series of episodes in temporal 
order—just “one damn thing after another”—or else so utterly predictable as 
to be boring. Between randomness and routine lie the good stories, whose 
surprising moments make sense in retrospect, in the framework provided by 
the unsurprising moments. The perspective from which we can understand 
these narratives is what I have called the intentional stance: the strategy of ana-
lyzing the flux of events into agents and their (rational) actions and reactions. 
Such agents—people, in this case—do things for reasons, and can be predicted, 
up to a point, by cataloguing their reasons, their beliefs and desires, and cal-
culating what, given those reasons, the most rational course of action for each 
agent would be. Sometimes the most rational course is flat obvious, so while 
the narrative is predictive (or true), it is uninteresting and unenlightening. To 
take a usefully simple case, a particular game of chess is interesting to the 
extent that we are surprised by either the brilliant moves that outstrip our 
own calculations of what it would be rational to do, or the blunders, which we 
thought too suboptimal to predict.
In the wider world of human activity, the same holds true. We don’t 
find the tale of Jane going to the supermarket on her way home from work 
interesting precisely because it all unfolds so predictably from the intentional 
stance; today she never encountered any interesting options, given her circum-
stances. Other times, however, the most rational thing for an agent to do is far 
from obvious, and may be practically incalculable. When we encounter these 
narratives, we are surprised (sometimes delighted and sometimes appalled) by 
the actual outcome. It makes sense in retrospect, but who’d have guessed that 

The Evolution of Culture
127
she’d decide to do that? The vast mass of routinely rational human behavior 
doesn’t make good novels, but it is just such humdrum rational narrative that 
provides the background pattern that permits us to make sense, retrospec­
tively, of the intriguing vagaries we encounter, and to anticipate the complica­
tions that will arise when the trains of events they put in motion collide.
The traditional model used by historians and anthropologists to try 
to explain cultural evolution uses the intentional stance as its explanatory 
framework. These theorists treat culture as composed of goods—posses­
sions of the people, who husband them in various ways, wisely or foolishly. 
People carefully preserve their traditions of fire-lighting, house-building, 
speaking, counting, justice, etc. They trade cultural items as they trade other 
goods. And of course some cultural items (wagons, pasta, recipes for choco­
late cake, etc.) are definitely goods, and so we can plot their trajectories 
using the tools of economics. It is clear from this perspective that highly 
prized cultural entities will be protected at the expense of less favored cul­
tural entities, and there will be a competitive market where agents both 
“buy” and “sell” cultural wares. If a new method of house-building or farm­
ing or a new style of music sweeps through the culture, it will be because 
people perceive advantages to these novelties.
The people on this model are seen as having an autonomous rationality; 
deprive a person of his goods, and he stands there naked but rational and 
full of informed desires. When he clothes himself and arms himself and 
equips himself with goods, he increases his powers, complicates his desires. 
If Coca Cola bottles proliferate around the world, it is because more and 
more people prefer to buy a Coke. Advertising may fool them. But then 
we look to the advertisers or to those who have hired them, to find the 
relevant agents whose desires fix the values for our cost-benefit calculations. 
Cui bono? Who benefits? The purveyors of the goods, and those they hire 
to help them, etc. On this way of thinking, then, the relative “replicative” 
power of various cultural goods—whether Coke bottles, building styles or 
religious creeds—is measured in the marketplace of cost-benefit calcula­
tions performed by the people.
Biologists, too, can often make sense of the evolution (in the neutral sense) 
of features of the natural world by treating them as goods belonging to various 
members of various species—one’s food, one’s nest, one’s burrow, one’s terri­
tory, one’s mate[s], one’s time and energy. Cost-benefit analyses shed light on 
the husbandry engaged in by the members of the different species inhabiting 
some shared environment.1 Not every “possession” is considered a good, how­
ever. The dirt and grime that accumulates on one’s body, to say nothing of the 

Cosmos and Culture
128
accompanying flies and fleas, are of no value or of negative value, for instance. 
These hitchhikers are not normally considered as goods by biologists except 
when the benefits derived from them (by whom?) are manifest.
This traditional perspective can obviously explain many features of cul-
tural and biological evolution, but it is not uniformly illuminating, nor is it 
obligatory. I want to show how theorists of culture—historians, anthropolo-
gists, economists, psychologists, and others—can benefit from adopting a dif-
ferent vantage point on these phenomena. It is a different application of the 
intentional stance, one which still quite properly gives pride of place to the 
cui bono question, but which can provide alternative answers that are often 
overlooked. The perspective I am talking about is Richard Dawkins’s meme’s-
eye point of view, which recognizes—and takes seriously—the possibility that 
cultural entities may evolve according to selectional regimes that make sense 
only when the answer to the cui bono question is that it is the cultural items 
themselves that benefit from the adaptations they exhibit.2 
2. Memes as Cultural Viruses
Whenever costs and benefits are the issue we need to ask cui bono? A benefit 
by itself is not explanatory; a benefit in a vacuum is indeed a sort of mystery; 
until it can be shown how the benefit actually redounds to enhance the rep-
licative power of a replicator, it just sits there, alluring, perhaps, but incapable 
of explaining anything.
We see an ant laboriously climbing up a stalk of grass. Why is it doing 
that? Why is that adaptive? What good accrues to the ant by doing that? 
That is the wrong question to ask. No good at all accrues to the ant. Is it 
just a fluke, then? In fact, that’s exactly what it is: a fluke! Its brain has been 
invaded by a fluke (Dicrocoelium dendriticum)—one of a gang of tiny parasites 
that need to get themselves into the intestines of a sheep in order to repro-
duce.3 (Salmon swim up stream; these parasitic worms drive ants up grass 
stalks to improve their chances of being ingested by a passing sheep.) The 
benefit is not to the reproductive prospects of the ant but the reproductive 
prospects of the fluke.4 Dawkins points out that we can think of the cultural 
items, memes, as parasites, too. Actually, they are more like a simple virus 
than a worm. Memes are supposed to be analogous to genes, the replicating 
entities of the cultural media, but they also have vehicles, or phenotypes; they 
are like not-so-naked genes. They are like viruses.5 Basically, a virus is just a 
string of nucleic acid with an attitude—and a protein overcoat. A viroid is an 
even more naked gene. And similarly, a meme is an information packet with 
an attitude—with some phenotypic clothing that has differential effects in 

The Evolution of Culture
129
the world that thereby influence its chances of getting replicated. (What is a 
meme made of? It is made of information, which can be carried in any physi­
cal medium. More on this later.)
And in the domain of memes, the ultimate beneficiary, the beneficiary in 
terms of which of the final cost-benefit calculations must apply is the meme 
itself, not its carriers. This is not to be heard as a bold empirical claim, ruling 
out (for instance) the role of individual human agents in devising, appreciat­
ing, and securing the spread and prolongation of cultural items. As I have 
already noted, the traditional perspective on cultural evolution handsomely 
explains many of the patterns to be observed. My proposal is rather that we 
adopt a perspective or point of view from which a wide variety of different 
empirical claims can be compared, including the traditional claims, and the evi­
dence for them considered in a neutral setting, a setting that does not pre­
judge these hot-button questions.
In the analogy with the fluke, we are invited to consider a meme to be 
like a parasite which commandeers an organism for its own replicative benefit, 
but we should remember that such hitchhikers or symbionts can be classi­
fied into three fundamental categories: parasites, whose presence lowers the 
fitness of their host; commensals, whose presence is neutral (though, as the 
etymology reminds us, they “share the same table”); and mutualists, whose 
presence enhances the fitness of both host and guest. Since these varieties are 
arrayed along a continuum, the boundaries between them need not be too 
finely drawn; just where benefit drops to zero or turns to harm is not some­
thing to be directly measured by any practical test, though we can explore the 
consequences of these turning points in models.
We should expect memes to come in all three varieties, too. This means, 
for instance, that it is a mistake to assume that the “cultural selection” of a 
cultural trait is always “for cause”—always because of some perceived (or even 
misperceived) benefit it provides to the host. We can always ask if the hosts, 
the human agents that are the vectors, perceive some benefit and (for that 
reason, good or bad) assist in the preservation and replication of the cultural 
item in question, but we must also be prepared to entertain the answer that 
they do not. In other words, we must consider as a real possibility the hypoth­
esis that the human hosts are, individually or as a group, either oblivious to, or 
agnostic about, or even positively dead set against, some cultural item, which 
nevertheless is able to exploit its hosts as vectors.
The most familiar cases of cultural transmission and evolution—the cases 
that tend to be in the spotlight—are innovations that are obviously of some 
direct or indirect benefit to the genetic fitness of the host. A better fishhook 

Cosmos and Culture
130
catches more fish, feeds more bellies, makes for more surviving grandchildren, 
etc. The only difference between stronger arms and a better fishhook in the 
(imagined) calculation of impact on fitness is that the stronger arms might 
be passed on quite directly through the germ line, while the fishhook defi-
nitely must be culturally transmitted. (The stronger arms could be culturally 
transmitted as well. A tradition of body building, for instance, could explain 
why there was very low [genetic] heritability for strong adult arms, and yet a 
very high rate of strong adult arms in a population.) But however it might be 
that strong arms or fishhooks are transmitted, they are typically supposed to 
be a good bargain from the perspective of genetic fitness. The bargain might, 
however, be myopic—only good in the short run. After all, even agriculture, 
in the long run, may be a dubious bargain if what you are taking as your 
summum bonum is Darwinian fitness.6  What alternatives are there?
First, we need to note that in the short run (evolutionarily speaking—
that is, from the perspective of a few centuries or even millennia) something 
might flourish in a culture independently of whether it was of actual benefit 
to genetic fitness, but strongly linked to whether it was of apparent benefit to 
genetic fitness. Even if you think that Darwinian fitness enhancement is the 
principle driving engine of cultural evolution, you have to posit some swifter, 
more immediate mechanism of retention and transmission. It’s not hard 
to find one. We are genetically endowed with a biased quality space: some 
things feel good and some things don’t. We tend to live by the rule: if it feels 
good, keep it. This rough and ready rule can be tricked, of course. The sweet 
tooth is a standard example. The explosion of cultural items—artifacts, prac-
tices, recipes, patterns of agriculture, trade routes—that depend quite directly 
on the exploitation of the sweet tooth has probably had a considerable net 
negative effect on human genetic fitness. Notice that explaining the emer-
gence of these cultural items by citing their “apparent” benefit to genetic fit-
ness does not in any way commit us to the claim that people think that they 
are enhancing their genetic fitness by acquiring and consuming sugar. The 
rationale is not theirs, but Mother Nature’s. They just go with what they like.
Still, given what people innately like, they go on to figure out, ingeniously 
and often with impressive foresight, how to obtain what they like. This is 
still the traditional model of cultural evolution, with people husbanding their 
goods in order to maximize what they prefer—and getting their preferences 
quite directly from their genetic heritage. But this very process of rational 
calculation can lead to more interesting possibilities. As such an agent com-
plicates her life, she will almost certainly acquire new preferences that are 
themselves culturally transmitted symbionts of one sort or another. Her sweet 

The Evolution of Culture
131
tooth may lead her to buy a cookbook, which inspires her to enroll in a culi­
nary arts program, which turns out to be so poorly organized that she starts 
a student protest movement, in which she is so successful that she is invited 
to head an educational reform movement, for which a law degree would be 
a useful credential, and so on. Each new goal will have to bootstrap itself 
into the memosphere by exploiting some preestablished preference, but this 
recursive process, which can proceed at breakneck speed relative to the gla­
cial pace of genetic evolution, can transform human agents indefinitely far 
away from their genetic beginnings. In an oft-quoted passage, E. O. Wilson 
claimed otherwise: “The genes hold culture on a leash. The leash is very long, 
but inevitably values will be constrained in accordance with their effects on 
the human gene pool.”7  
But Wilson’s leash is indefinitely long and elastic. Consider the huge 
space of imaginable cultural entities, practices, values. Is there any point in 
that vast space that is utterly unreachable? Not that I can see. The constraints 
Wilson speaks of can be so co-opted, exploited, and blunted in a recursive 
cascade of cultural products and meta-products that there may well be tra­
versable paths to every point in that space of imaginable possibilities. I am 
suggesting, that is, that cultural possibility is less constrained than genetic 
possibility. We can articulate persuasive biological arguments to the effect 
that certain imaginable species are unlikely in the extreme—flying horses, 
unicorns, talking trees, carnivorous cows, spiders the size of whales—but 
neither Wilson nor anybody else to my knowledge has yet offered parallel 
grounds for believing that there are similar obstacles to trajectories in imagin­
able cultural design space. Many of these imaginable points in design space 
would no doubt be genetic cul-de-sacs, in the sense that any lineage of Homo 
sapiens that ever occupied them would eventually go extinct as a result, but 
this dire prospect is no barrier to the evolution and adoption of such memes 
in the swift time of cultural history.8 To combat Wilson’s metaphor with one 
of my own: the genes provide not a leash but a launching pad, from which 
you can get almost anywhere, by one devious route or another. It is precisely 
in order to explain the patterns in cultural evolution that are not strongly con­
strained by genetic forces that we need the memetic approach.
The memes that proliferate will be the memes that replicate one way 
or another—by hook or by crook. Think of them as entering the brains of 
culture members, making phenotypic alterations thereupon, and then sub­
mitting themselves to the great selection tournament—not the Darwinian 
genetic fitness tournament (life is too short for that) but the Dawkinsian 
meme-fitness tournament. It is their fitness as memes that is on the line, not 

Cosmos and Culture
132
their host’s genetic fitness. And the environments that embody the selective 
pressures that determine their fitness are composed in large measure of other 
memes. Why do their hosts put up with this? Why should the overhead costs 
of establishing a whole new system of differential reproduction be borne by 
members of Homo sapiens? Note that the question to be asked and answered 
here is parallel to the question we ask about any symbiont-host relationship: 
why do the hosts put up with it? And the short answer is that it is too costly 
to eradicate, but this just means that the benefits accruing to the machinery 
that is being exploited by the parasites are so great that keeping the machin­
ery and tolerating the parasites (to the extent that they are tolerated) has so 
far been the best deal available. And whether or not in the long run (mil­
lions of years) this infestation will be viewed as mutualism or commensalism 
or parasitism, in the short run (the last few millennia) the results have been 
spectacular—the creation of a new biological type of entity: a person.
I like to compare this development to the revolution that happened 
among the bacteria roughly a billion years ago. Relatively simple prokaryotes 
got invaded by some of their neighbors, and the resulting endosymbiotic teams 
were more fit than their uninfected cousins, and prospered. These eukaryotes, 
living alongside their prokaryotic cousins, but enormously more complex, 
versatile and competent thanks to their hitchhikers, opened up the design 
space of multicellular organisms. Similarly, the emergence of culture-infected 
hominids has opened up yet another region of hitherto unoccupied and 
untraversable design space. We live alongside our animal cousins, but we are 
enormously more complex, versatile, and competent. Our brains are bigger, to 
be sure, but it is mainly due to their infestation by memes that they gain their 
powers. Joining forces with our own memes, we create new candidates for the 
locus of benefit, new answers to cui bono?
3. Darwin’s Path to Memetic Engineering
The meme’s-eye view doesn’t just open up new vistas for the understanding 
of patterns in culture; it also provides the foundation for answering a ques­
tion left dangling by the traditional model of cultural evolution. The traditional 
view presupposes rational self-interested agents, intent on buying and selling, 
and improving their lot. Where did they come from? The standard background 
assumption is that they are just animals whose cui bono? question is to be dealt 
with in terms of the impact on genetic fitness, as we have seen. But when people 
acquire other interests, including interests directly opposed to their genetic 
interests, they enter a new space of possibilities—something no salmon or fruit 
fly or bear can do. How could this great river of novelty get started?

The Evolution of Culture
133
Here I think we can get help from Darwin’s opening exposition of the 
theory of natural selection. In the first chapter of Origin of Species, Darwin 
introduces his great idea of natural selection by an ingenious expository device, 
an instance of the very gradualism that he was about to discuss. He begins 
not with natural selection—his destination—but what he calls methodical 
selection: the deliberate, foresighted, intended “improvement of the breed” by 
animal and plant breeders. He begins, in short, with familiar and uncontro-
versial ground that he can expect his readers to share with him:
“We cannot suppose that all the breeds were suddenly produced as per-
fect and as useful as we now see them; indeed, in several cases, we know that 
this has not been their history. The key is man’s power of accumulative selec-
tion: nature gives successive variations; man adds them up in certain direc-
tions useful to him.”9  But, he goes on to note, in addition to such methodical 
selection, there is another process, which lacks the foresight and intention, 
which he calls unconscious selection:
At the present time, eminent breeders try by methodical 
selection, with a distinct object in view, to make a new strain 
or sub-breed, superior to anything existing in the country. 
But, for our purpose, a kind of Selection, which may be 
called Unconscious, and which results from every one trying 
to possess and breed from the best individual animals, is 
more important. Thus, a man who intends keeping pointers 
naturally tries to get as good dogs as he can, and afterwards 
breeds from his own best dogs, but he has no wish or 
expectation of permanently altering the breed.10
Long before there was deliberate breeding, unconscious selection was the 
process that created and refined all our domesticated species, and even at the 
present time, unconscious selection continues. Darwin gives a famous exam-
ple: “There is reason to believe that King Charles’s spaniel has been uncon-
sciously modified to a large extent since the time of that monarch.”11 There is 
no doubt that unconscious selection has been a major force in the evolution 
of domesticated species.12  In our own time, unconscious selection goes on 
apace, and one ignores it at our peril. Unconscious selection in bacteria and 
viruses for resistance to antibiotics is only the most notorious and impor-
tant example. Consider the “genes for longevity” that have recently been bred 
into laboratory animals such as mice and rats. It is probably true, however, 
that much if not all of the effect that has been obtained in these laboratory 

Cosmos and Culture
134
breeding experiments has simply undone the unconscious selection for short-
livedness at the hands of the suppliers of those laboratory animals. The stock 
the experimenters started with had shorter life expectancy than their wild 
cousins simply because they had been bred for many generations for early 
reproductive maturity, and robustness, and short lives came along as an unin­
tended (unconscious) side consequence.13 
Darwin pointed out that the line between unconscious and methodical 
selection was itself a fuzzy, gradual boundary: “The man who first selected a 
pigeon with a slightly larger tail, never dreamed what the descendants of that 
pigeon would become through long-continued, partly unconscious, and partly 
methodical selection.”14 And both unconscious and methodical selection, he 
notes finally, are but special cases of an even more inclusive process, natural 
selection, in which the role of human intelligence and choice stands at zero. 
From the perspective of natural selection, changes in lineages due to uncon­
scious or methodical selection are merely changes in which one of the most 
prominent selective pressures in the environment is human activity. It is not 
restricted, as we have seen, to domesticated species. White-tailed deer in New 
England now seldom exhibit the “white flag” of a bobbing tail during headlong 
flight that was famously observed by early hunters; the arrival of human beings 
today is much more likely to provoke them to hide silently in underbrush than 
to flee. Those white flags were too easy a target for hunters with guns, it seems.
This nesting of different processes of natural selection now has a new 
member: genetic engineering. How does it differ from the methodical selec­
tion of Darwin’s day? It is just less dependent on the preexisting variation in 
the gene pool, and proceeds more directly to new candidate genomes with 
less overt and time-consuming trial and error. Darwin had noted that in his 
day “Man can hardly select, or only with much difficulty, any deviation of 
structure excepting such as is externally visible; and indeed he rarely cares for 
what is internal.”15  But today’s genetic engineers have carried their insight 
into the molecular innards of the organisms they are trying to create. There is 
evermore accurate foresight, but even here, if we look closely at the practices 
in the laboratory, we will find a large measure of exploratory trial and error in 
their search of the best combinations of genes.
We can use Darwin’s three levels of genetic selection, plus our own fourth 
level, genetic engineering, as a model for four parallel levels of memetic selec­
tion in human culture. In a speculative spirit, I am going to sketch how it 
might go using an example that has particularly challenged some Darwinians, 
and hence been held up as a worthy stumbling block—a cultural treasure 
untouchable by evolutionists: music. Music is unique to our species, but 

The Evolution of Culture
135
found in every human culture. It is manifestly complex, intricately designed, 
an expensive consumer of time, energy and materials. How did music start? 
What was or is the answer to its cui bono question? Steven Pinker is one 
Darwinian who has recently declared himself baffled about the possible 
evolutionary origins and survival of music, but that is because he has been 
looking at music in the old-fashioned way, looking for music to have some 
contribution to make to the genetic fitness of those who make and partici-
pate in the proliferation of music.16  There may well be some such effect that 
is important, but I want to make the case that there might also be a purely 
memetic explanation of the origin of music. Here, then, is my Just-so Story, 
working gradually up Darwin’s hierarchy of kinds of selection.
Natural Selection of Musical Memes.
One day one of our distant hominid ancestors sitting on a fallen log hap-
pened to start banging on it with a stick—boom boom boom. For no good reason 
at all. This was just idle diddling, a by-product, perhaps, of a slightly out of 
balance endocrine system. This was, you might say, mere nervous fidgeting, 
but the repetitive sounds striking his ears just happened to feel to him like 
a slight improvement on silence. A feedback loop was closed, and the rep-
etition—boom boom boom—was “rewarding.” If we leave this individual all by 
himself, drumming away on his log, then we would say that he had simply 
developed a habit, possibly therapeutic in that it “relieved anxiety,” but just as 
possibly a bad habit—a habit that did him and his genes no good at all, but 
just exploited a wrinkle that happened to exist in his nervous system, creating 
a feedback loop that tended to lead to individual replications of drumming 
by him under various circumstances. No musical appreciation, no insight, no 
goal or ideal or project need be imputed to our solitary drummer.
Now introduce some other ancestors who happen to see and hear this 
drummer. They might pay no attention, or be irritated enough to make him 
stop or drive him away, or they might, again for no reason, find their imita-
tor-circuits tickled into action; they might feel an urge to drum along with 
musical Adam. What are these imitator circuits I’ve postulated? Just whatever 
it takes to make it somewhat more likely than not that some activities by 
conspecifics are imitated, a mere reflex if you like—of which we may see a 
fossil trace when spectators at a football match cannot help making shadow 
kicking motions more or less in unison with the players on the field. One 
can postulate reasons why having some such imitative talents built-in would 
be a valuable adaptation—one that enhances one’s genetic fitness—but while 
this is both plausible and widely accepted, it is, strictly speaking, unnecessary 

Cosmos and Culture
136
for my Just-so Story. The imitative urge might just as well be a function-
less by-product of some other adaptive feature of the human nervous system. 
Suppose, then, that for no good reason at all, the drumming habit is infectious. 
When one hominid starts drumming, soon others start drumming along in 
imitation. This could happen. A perfectly pointless practice, of no utility or 
fitness-enhancing benefit at all, could become established in a community. 
It might be positively detrimental: the drumming scares away the food, or 
uses up lots of precious energy. It would then be just like a disease, spreading 
simply because it could spread, and lasting as long as it could find hosts to 
infect. If it was detrimental in this way, variant habits that were less detri-
mental—less virulent—would tend to evolve to replace it, other things being 
equal, for they would tend to find more available healthy hosts to migrate to. 
And of course such a habit might even provide a positive benefit to its hosts 
(enhancing their reproductive chances—a familiar dream of musicians every-
where, and it might be true, or have been true in the past). But providing a 
genetic benefit of this sort is only one of the paths such a habit might pursue 
in its mindless quest for immortality. Habits—good, bad, and indifferent—
could persist and replicate, unappreciated and unrecognized, for an indefinite 
period of time, provided only that the replicative and dispersal machinery is 
provided for them. The drumming virus is born.
Let me pause to ask the question: what is such a habit made of? What 
gets passed from individual to individual when a habit is copied? Not stuff, 
not packets of material, but pure information, the information that generates 
the pattern of behavior that replicates. A cultural virus, unlike a biological 
virus, is not tethered to any particular physical medium of transmission.17
Unconscious Selection of Memes.
On with our Just-so Story. Some of the drummers begin to hum, and of all 
the different hums, a few are more infectious than the rest, and those homi-
nids who happen to start the humming in these ways become the focus of 
attention, as sources of humming. A competition between different humming 
patterns emerges. Here we can begin to see the gradual transition to uncon-
scious selection. Suppose that being such a focus of humming happens to 
feel good—whether or not it enhances one’s genetic fitness slightly (it might, 
of course; perhaps the females tend to be more receptive to those who start 
the winning hums). The same transition to unconscious selection can be seen 
among viruses and other pathogens, by the way. If scratching an itch feels 
good, and also has the side effect of keeping a ready supply of viral emigrés 
on one’s fingertips, the part of the body most likely to come in contact with 

The Evolution of Culture
137
another host, one is unconsciously selecting for just such a mode of trans­
mission by one’s myopic and uncomprehending preference for scratching 
when one itches—and this does not depend on scratching having any fitness-
enhancing benefits for you: it may be, like the ant’s hankering for the top of 
the grass stem, a desire that benefits the parasite, not the host. Similarly, if 
varying tempo and pitch of one’s hums feels good, and also happens to create 
a ready supply of more attention-holding noises for spreading to conspecif­
ics, one’s primitive aesthetic preference can begin to shape, unconsciously, the 
lineages of humming habit that spread through one’s community.
Brains in the community begin to be infected by a variety of these memes. 
Competition for time and space in these brains becomes more severe. The 
infected brains begin to take on a structure as the memes that enter “learn” to 
cooperate on the task of turning a brain into a proper meme-nest with lots of 
opportunities for entrance and exit (and hence replication).18 Meanwhile, any 
memes out there “looking for” hosts will have to compete for available space 
therein. Just like germs.
Methodical Selection of Memes.
As the structure grows, it begins to take on a more active role in selecting. 
That is to say, the brains of the hosts, like the brains of the owners of domes­
ticated animals, become evermore potent and discerning selective agencies—
still largely unwitting, but nevertheless having a powerful influence. Some 
people, it turns out, are better at this than others. As Darwin says of animal 
breeders, “Not one man in a thousand has accuracy of eye and judgment suf­
ficient to become an eminent breeder.”19 
We honor Bach, the artistic genius, but he was no “natural” doodler—an 
intuitive genius just “playing by ear.” He was the master musical technologist 
of his day, the inheritor of musical instruments that had had their designs 
honed over several millennia, as well as some relatively recent additions to 
the music maker’s toolbox—a fine system of musical notation and keyboard 
instruments that permitted the musician to play many notes at once and an 
explicit, codified, rationalized theory of counterpoint. These mind-tools were 
revolutionary in the way they opened up musical design space for Bach and 
his successors.
And Bach, like the one man in a thousand who has the discernment to be 
an eminent animal breeder, knew how to breed new strains of music from old. 
Consider, for instance, his hugely successful chorale cantatas. Bach shrewdly 
chose, for his breeding stock, chorales—hymn melodies that had already 
proven themselves to be robust inhabitors of their human hosts, already 

Cosmos and Culture
138
domesticated tunes his audiences had been humming for generations, build­
ing up associations and memories, memes that had already sunk their hooks 
deeply into the emotional habits and triggers of the brains where they had 
been replicating for years. Then he used his technology to create variations 
on these memes, seeking to strengthen their strengths and damp their weak­
nesses, putting them in new environments, inducing new hybrids.
Memetic Engineering.
What about memetic engineering? Was Bach, in virtue of his highly sophis­
ticated approach to the design of replicable musical memes, not just a meme 
breeder but a memetic engineer? In the light of Darwin’s admiring comment on 
the rare skill—the genius—of the good breeder, it is interesting to note how 
sharply our prevailing attitudes distinguish between our honoring the “art” of 
selective breeding and our deep suspicion and disapproval of the “technology” 
of gene-splicing. Let’s hear it for art, but not for technology, we say, forgetting 
that the words share a common ancestor, techné, the Greek word for art, skill, 
or craft in any work. We retreat in horror from genetically engineered toma­
toes, and turn up our noses at “artificial” fibers in our clothing, while extolling 
such “organic” and “natural” products as whole grain flour or cotton and wool, 
forgetting that grains and cotton plants and sheep are themselves products of 
human technology, of skillful hybridization and rearing techniques. He who 
would clothe himself in fibers unimproved by technology and live on food 
from nondomesticated sources is going to be cold and hungry indeed.
Besides, just as genetic engineers, for all their foresight and insight into 
the innards of things, are still at the mercy of natural selection when it comes 
to the fate of their creations (that is why, after all, we are so cautious about 
letting them release their brainchildren on the outside world), so, too, the 
memetic engineer, no matter how sophisticated, still has to contend with 
the daunting task of winning the replication tournaments in the memo­
sphere. One of the most sophisticated musical memetic engineers of the age, 
Leonard Bernstein, wryly noted this in a wonderful piece he published in 
1955 entitled “Why don’t you run upstairs and write a nice Gershwin tune?”20  
Bernstein had credentials and academic honors aplenty in 1955, but no songs 
on the Hit Parade. “A few weeks ago a serious composer-friend and I . . . got 
boiling mad about it. Why shouldn’t we be able to come up with a hit, we said, 
if the standard is as low as it seems to be? We decided that all we had to do 
was to put ourselves into the mental state of an idiot and write a ridiculous 
hillbilly tune.” They failed—and not for lack of trying. As Bernstein wistfully 
remarked, “It’s just that it would be nice to hear someone accidentally whistle 

The Evolution of Culture
139
something of mine, somewhere, just once.”21 His wish came true, of course, a 
few years later in 1961, when West Side Story burst into the memosphere.
4. Conclusions
There is surely much, much more to be said—to be discovered—about the 
evolution of music. I chose it as my topic because it so nicely illustrates the 
way the traditional perspective on culture and the evolutionary perspective 
can join forces, instead of being seen to be in irresolvable conflict. If you 
believe that music is sui generis, a wonderful, idiosyncratic feature of our spe­
cies that we prize in spite of the fact that it has not been created to enhance 
our chances of having more offspring, you may well be right—and if so, there 
is an evolutionary explanation of how this can be true. You cannot evade the 
obligation to explain how such an expensive, time-consuming activity came 
to flourish in this cruel world, and a Darwinian theory of culture is an ally, 
not an opponent, in this investigation.
While it is true that Darwin wished to contrast the utter lack of foresight 
or intention in natural selection with the deliberate goal-seeking of the artifi­
cial or methodical selectors in order to show how the natural process could in 
principle proceed without any mentality at all, he did not thereby establish (as 
many seem to have supposed) that deliberate, goal-directed, intentional selec­
tion is not a subvariety of natural selection! There is no conflict between the 
claim that artifacts (including abstract artifacts—memes) are the products of 
natural selection, and the claim that they are (often) the foreseen, designed 
products of intentional human activity.
Some memes are like domesticated animals; they are prized for their 
benefits, and their replication is closely fostered and relatively well under­
stood by their human owners. Some memes are more like rats; they thrive in 
the human environment in spite of being positively selected against—ineffec­
tually—by their unwilling hosts. And some are more like bacteria or viruses, 
commandeering aspects of human behavior (provoking sneezing, for instance) 
in their “efforts” to propagate from host to host. There is artificial selection of 
“good” memes—like the memes of arithmetic and writing, the theory of coun­
terpoint, and Bach’s cantatas, which are carefully taught to each new genera­
tion. And there is unconscious selection of memes of all sorts—like the subtle 
mutations in pronunciation that spread through linguistic groups, presumably 
with some efficiency advantage, but perhaps just hitchhiking on some quirk 
of human preference. And there is unconscious selection of memes that are 
positively a menace, but which prey on flaws in the human decision-making 
apparatus, as provided for in the genome and enhanced and adjusted by other 

Cosmos and Culture
140
cultural innovations—such as the “abducted-by-aliens” meme, which makes 
perfect sense when its own fitness as a cultural replicator is considered. Only 
the meme’s-eye perspective unites all these possibilities under one view.
Finally, one of the most persistent sources of discomfort about memes 
is the dreaded suspicion that an account of human minds in terms of brains 
being parasitized by memes will undermine the precious traditions of human 
creativity. On the contrary, I think it is clear that only an account of creativity 
in terms of memes has much of a chance of giving us any way to identify with 
the products of our own minds. We human beings extrude other products, 
on a daily basis, but after childhood, we don’t tend to view our feces with 
the pride of an author or artist. These are mere biological by-products, and 
although they have their own modest individuality and idiosyncrasy, it is not 
anything we cherish. How could we justify viewing the secretions of our poor 
infected brains with any more pride? Because we identify with some subset of 
the memes we harbor. Why? Because among the memes we harbor are those 
that put a premium on identifying with just such a subset of memes! Lacking 
that meme-borne attitude, we would be mere loci of interaction, but we have 
such memes—that is who we are.
Endnotes
1	
Such organisms need not be deemed to be making conscious decisions, 
of course, but the rationality, such as it is, of the “decisions” they make 
is typically anchored to the expected benefit to the individual organism. 
See Elliot Sober and David Sloan Wilson, Unto Others: The Evolution 
and Psychology of Unselfish Behavior (Cambridge: Harvard University 
Press, 1998), for important discussions of gene, individual, and group 
benefits of such decision-making. 
2.	 Sober and Wilson (1998) note that there is a gap in their model of cul­
tural evolution: “We can say that functionless [relative to human indi­
vidual and group fitness] behavior should be more common in humans 
than other species, but we cannot explain why a particular functionless 
behavior has evolved in a particular culture. That kind of understand­
ing probably requires detailed historical knowledge of the culture, and 
it may turn out that some behaviors evolved mainly by chance,” p. 171. 
Dawkins’s theory of memes, as briefly sketched in a single chapter of 
The Selfish Gene (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1976), but see also 
Dawkins, “Viruses of the Mind,” in Bo Dahlbom, ed., Dennett and his 
Critics (Oxford: Blackwell, 1993), is hardly a theory at all, especially 

The Evolution of Culture
141
compared to the models of cultural evolution developed by other biolo-
gists, such as Cavalli-Sforza and Feldman, Cultural Transmission and 
Evolution: A Quantitative Approach (Princeton, NJ: Princeton University 
Press, 1981); Lumsden and Wilson, Genes Mind and Culture: The 
Coevolutionary Process (Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 1981), 
and Boyd and Richerson, Culture and the Evolutionary Process (Chicago: 
The University of Chicago Press, 1985). Unlike these others, Dawkins 
offers no formal development, no mathematical models, no quantita-
tive predictions, and no systematic survey of relevant empirical findings. 
But Dawkins does present an idea that is overlooked by all the others, 
including Sober and Wilson in this passage, and it is, I think, a most 
important idea. It is the key to understanding how we can be not just 
guardians and transmitters of culture, but cultural entities ourselves—
all the way in.
3. Mark Ridley, Animal Behaviour, 2nd ed. (Boston: Blackwell Science, 
1995), p. 258.
4. 
Strictly speaking, to the reproductive prospects of the fluke’s genes (or 
the fluke’s group’s genes), for as Sober and Wilson (1998) point out (p. 
18) in their use of D. dendriticum as an example of altruistic behavior, the 
fluke that actually does the driving in the brain is a sort of kamikaze pilot 
who dies without any chance of passing on its own genes, benefiting its 
[asexually reproduced] near-clones in other parts of the ant.
5. Dawkins, 1993. 
6. See Jared Diamond, Guns, Germs, and Steel: The Fates of Human Societies 
(New York: W. W. Norton & Company, 1997) for fascinating reflections 
on the uncertain benefits of abandoning the hunter-gatherer lifestyle.
7. 
E. O. Wilson, On Human Nature (Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 
1978), p. 167.
8. Boyd and Richerson, “Punishment Allows the Evolution of Cooperation 
(or Anything Else) in Sizable Groups,” Ethology and Sociobiology 13 
(1992): 171–195) show that “Virtually any behavior can become stable 
within a social group if it is sufficiently buttressed by social norms.” 
(quoted from Sober and Wilson, 1998, p. 152). Our biology strongly 

Cosmos and Culture
142
biases us to value health, nutritious food, the avoidance of bodily injury, 
and of course having lots of offspring, so a sheltered theorist might sup­
pose that it is highly unlikely that any human group could ever support a 
fashion for, say, bodily fragility or bulimia, or the piercing of bodily parts, 
or suicide, or celibacy. If even these practices can so readily overturn our 
innate biases, where can Wilson’s leash do any serious constraining?
9.	 Charles Darwin, 1859, On the Origin of Species, Harvard Facsimile 
Edition, (Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 1964), p. 30.
10.	 Ibid., p. 34.
11.	 Ibid., p. 35.
12.	 On unconscious selection of both domesticated plants and animals, see 
Jared Diamond, Guns, Germs and Steel. 
13.	 Daniel Promislow, personal correspondence.
14.	 Darwin, p. 39.
15.	 Ibid., p. 38. 
16.	 Steven Pinker, How the Mind Works (New York: W. W. Norton & 
Company, 1997), writes: “What benefit could there be to diverting time 
and energy to the making of plinking noises, or to feeling sad when no 
one has died? . . . As far as biological cause and effect are concerned, 
music is useless,” p. 528. On p. 538, he contrasts music with the other 
topics of his book: “I chose them as topics because they show the clearest 
signs of being adaptations. I chose music because it shows the clearest 
signs of not being one.”
17.	 This is not the decisive difference some critics of memes have declared. 
We can readily enough imagine virus-like symbionts that have alternate 
transmission media—that are (roughly) indifferent to whether they arrive 
at new hosts by direct transportation (as with regular bacteria, viruses, 
viroids, fungi…) or by something akin to the messenger-RNA transcrip­
tion process: they stay in their original hosts, but imprint their informa­
tion on some messenger element (rather like a prion, we may imagine) 

The Evolution of Culture
143
that then is broadcast, only to get transcribed in the host into a copy of 
the “sender.” And if there could be two such communication channels, 
there could be twelve or a hundred, just as there are for transmission of 
cultural habits.
18.	 Sober and Wilson (1998) describe circumstances in which individuals 
of unrelated lineages thrown into group situations can be selected for 
cooperativity. Just how—if at all—this model can be adapted for memic 
coalescence is a topic for further research.
19.	 Darwin, p. 32.
20.	 New York Times, April 1955. Reprinted in The Joy of Music (New York: 
Simon and Schuster, 1959), pp. 52–62.
21.	 Ibid., p. 54.

Edited by 
Steven J. Dick 
and Mark L. Lupisella
NASA SP-2009-4802

Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Cosmos and Culture : Cultural Evolution in a Cosmic Context / Steven J. Dick and Mark 
Lupisella, editors.
       p. cm. -- (NASA SP ; 4802)
  Includes bibliographical references and index.
 1.  Cosmology--History. 2.  Astronomy--History. 3.  Culture--Origin. 4.  Social evolution. 5.  
Human evolution.  I. Dick, Steven J. II. Lupisella, Mark. 
  QB981.C8263 2009
  523.109--dc22
                                                            20090043482 Barcodes with serial numbers: I S B N 978-0-16-083119-5. Numbers located beneath the barcode on the left is: 9: 780160831195. Barcode on the right with numbers on the top are: 90000.
I S B N 978-0-16-083119-5
9 0 0 0 0
9
7 8 0 1 6 0 8 3 1 1 9 52 Barcodes with serial numbers: I S B N 978-0-16-083119-5. Numbers located beneath the barcode on the left is: 9: 780160831195. Barcode on the right with numbers on the top are: 90000.
For sale by the  Superintendent of Documents,  U.S. Government Printing Office
Internet: bookstore.gpo.gov   Phone: toll free (866) 512-1800;   DC area (202) 512-1800
Fax: (202) 512-2104 Mail: Stop IDCC, Washington, DC 20402-0001
ISBN 978-0-16-083119-5

