International Phenomenological Society
Commentary on John Dupré's "Human Nature and the Limits of Science"
Human Nature and the Limits of Science  by John Dupré
Review by: Daniel C. Dennett
Philosophy and Phenomenological Research, Vol. 69, No. 2 (Sep., 2004), pp. 473-483
Published by: International Phenomenological Society
Stable URL: http://www.jstor.org/stable/40040735 .
Accessed: 02/12/2012 04:45
Your use of the JSTOR archive indicates your acceptance of the Terms & Conditions of Use, available at .
http://www.jstor.org/page/info/about/policies/terms.jsp
 .
JSTOR is a not-for-profit service that helps scholars, researchers, and students discover, use, and build upon a wide range of
content in a trusted digital archive. We use information technology and tools to increase productivity and facilitate new forms
of scholarship. For more information about JSTOR, please contact support@jstor.org.
 .
International Phenomenological Society is collaborating with JSTOR to digitize, preserve and extend access to
Philosophy and Phenomenological Research.
http://www.jstor.org 
This content downloaded by the authorized user from 192.168.72.233 on Sun, 2 Dec 2012 04:45:11 AM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

Commentary on John Dupre's Human 
Nature and the Limits of Science 
DANIEL C. DENNETT 
Tufts University 
Philosophy and Phenomenological Research 
Vol. LXIX, No. 2, September 2004 
Holding a mirror up to Dupr6 
Suppose we discovered that all the women in the Slobbovian culture 
exhibit a strong preference for blue-handled knives and red-handled forks. They 
would rather starve than eat with utensils of the wrong color. We'd be rightly 
puzzled, and eager to find an explanation. 'Well," these women tell us, "blue- 
handled knives are snazzier, you know. And just look at them: these red-han- 
dled forks are, well, just plain beautiful!" This should not satisfy us. Why do 
they say this? Their answers may make sense to them, and even to us, once 
we've managed to insert ourselves to some degree into their culture, but that 
is not the end of it. We want to know why there is a culture with such appar- 
ently arbitrary and unmotivated preferences. To us outsiders, the need for an 
answer stands out, even if the Slobbovians themselves think their answers are 
self-evident and quite satisfying. Similarly, we may think it is just obvious 
that laughter (as opposed to, say, scratching one's ear or belching) is the 
appropriate response to humor. Why are some female shapes sexy and others 
not? Isn't it obvious? Just look at them! But that is not the end of it. The 
universalities, regularities and trends in our responses to the world do indeed 
guarantee, trivially, that they are part of "human nature," but that still leaves 
the question of why. Something must pay for these extravagant features. 
What? To answer, we need to adopt an evolutionary point of view, which 
encourages us to look at all aspects of human nature from the sort of alien, 
Martian perspective that science thrives on.1 This perspective, self-con- 
1 
This evolutionary perspective is not restricted to genes, of course; cultural change also 
requires, in the end, an evolutionary perspective. The imagined Slobbovians' preferences 
are no doubt culture-borne, not genetic, but we need to ask what it is about [some] cul- 
tures that supports such apparently unmotivated regularities. Compare the case of the 
puzzle about bright - and apparently ecologically arbitrary - color in many bird species. 
Runaway sexual selection provided the key to resolve the "paradox" and we should ask 
what features of cultures would support a similar fixation of preference among the Slob- 
bovians. 
REVIEW ESSAY 473 
This content downloaded by the authorized user from 192.168.72.233 on Sun, 2 Dec 2012 04:45:11 AM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

sciously objective and bristling with hooks for attachment to the rest of sci- 
ence, is anathema to John Dupre. It reeks of "reductionism" and "scientism" 
and "economism" (about which more later). He wants to preserve and even 
privilege the traditional "explanations" of such features of human nature, not 
just as part of the story (which they surely are) but as a part that excuses us 
from hunting for deeper, unifying explanations of the same features. Wittgen- 
stein famously said that explanation has to stop somewhere, and Dupre seems 
to want it to stop just before these curiously invasive evolutionary questions 
get posed. 
The fundamental error with the programmes that I have criticized in this book is the belief, 
explicit or implicit, that there is some fundamental perspective that will enable us to understand 
why people do what they do. It hardly needs insisting upon that it is important that humans 
evolved and have common ancestors with the other creatures we find around us. And nothing 
could be more important to us than the organization of society and of the labour of individuals 
in society in such as way as to provide us with a good deal of what we need and want; no doubt 
economics has something to tell us about such questions. These are important fragments of the 
picture that we, the uniquely self-reflective animals, have spent the last few millennia trying to 
put together. But they are fragments, and trying to make one or even a few such fragments 
stand for the whole presents us with a deformed image of ourselves, (p. 183) 
Aside from the lip service paid in this passage, Dupre gives us no exam- 
ples of evolutionary explanations that are "important fragments" of which he 
actually approves. If evolutionary thinking has any role at all to play in the 
understanding of human nature, it is left unexamined and unheralded in this 
book. Human Nature and the Limits of Science is an unrelenting attack on 
evolutionary psychologists 
and other thinkers, such as myself, who have 
defended taking an evolutionary perspective on human nature and human cul- 
ture. The multiple commentaries of this journal invites a division of labor; I 
will concentrate on Dupre' s reactions (and curious non-reactions) to my work 
and leave others the task of commenting on the rest of his criticisms and pro- 
posals. I found few if any serious arguments in this book. Instead I found a 
veritable museum of rhetorical ploys, so the first part of my commentary 
will be a catalogue of these specimens. In each case I will provide one or two 
examples. 
I 
1. Refutation by ill-defined epithet. Consider the following unenlightening 
footnote: "In parallel with my use of the term 'scientism' for the view that 
everything can and should be understood in terms of science (generally quite 
narrowly conceived), I use the term 'economism' to refer to the application of 
economic thought beyond its original home in the theory of the production 
and distribution of commodities."(p. 50n) One might suppose, given this 
minimalist account of economism, that Darwin's importation of Malthusian 
474 
DANIEL C. DENNETT 
This content downloaded by the authorized user from 192.168.72.233 on Sun, 2 Dec 2012 04:45:11 AM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

ideas into biology would be a prime example of this fallacy. Shame on Dar- 
win? Hardly. I am inspired by Dupre' s example to offer a parallel definition 
of my own: feministism, 
the application of feminist thought beyond its 
original home. Dupre commits many sins of feministism. Ah, but are they 
sins? That's what needs to be established, not presupposed. Note that his 
definition of scientism is also ill-defined. It yields a fallacy so extreme that 
probably nobody has ever espoused it. Does anybody think that everything 
can and should be understood in terms of science? A more measured definition 
would draw attention to the fact that the brandisher of such an epithet is 
obliged to establish, on a case-by-case basis, that the particular application is 
a mis-application, not a valuable extension, of scientific thinking, or eco- 
nomic thinking, or feminist thinking. Lacking such a demonstration, the use 
of such terms is mere name-calling. All we can tell from this book is that 
scientism is any extension of scientific thought that Dupr6 doesn't like. He 
speaks of the "complaint that reductionist scientism fails to take proper 
account of the cultural determinants of human behaviour" (p. 37) and says it 
has "real philosophical purchase," but he shirks the task of demonstrating 
this. He does not say what the proper limits of scientific thinking are, and the 
only common feature I can detect in the examples he gives of scientism is 
that they are instances of scientific thinking. Some of them are examples of 
bad scientific thinking, but then what is wrong with them is that they are bad 
science, not science where science doesn't belong. 
2. Caricature (three species) 
2a. Simple: "Dennett treats [the Library of Mendel, in Dennett, 1995] as if it 
were a representation of every possible organism. But it is nothing of the 
kind... "(p. 28) Well, the Library of Mendel does represent every possible 
organism, in the sense that every possible organism has a genome, which is 
uniquely represented therein. That is undeniable. But Dupre is falsely suggest- 
ing that I claim that there is a one-to-one mapping of genomes to organisms; 
he mentions the possible fates of identical twins, with different phenotypes 
but a shared genome, as if this were news to me or a serious objection to my 
view. It is not. After introducing the concept of the Library of Mendel, and 
defining it as the set of all possible genomes, I provide a section entitled 
"The Complex Relation between Genome and Organism," in which I go to 
some lengths to explain such matters. I have just reviewed every mention of 
the Library of Mendel in my book and find that none of them presupposes or 
implies a one-to-one mapping between possible organisms and possible 
genomes. 
REVIEW ESSAY 
475 
This content downloaded by the authorized user from 192.168.72.233 on Sun, 2 Dec 2012 04:45:11 AM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

2b. The Gould Two-Step, a device I described in print some years ago, which 
was then named by Robert Trivers (personal correspondence), in honor of its 
inventor: 
In the first stage, you create the strawperson, and "refute" it (everybody 
knows that trick). 
Second (this is the stroke of genius), you yourself draw attention to the evidence that you have 
taken the first step - the evidence that your opponents don't in fact hold the view you have 
attributed to them - but interpret these citations as their grudging concessions 
to your attack! 
(Dennett, 1993, p. 43) 
In Dupre's variation, you caricature the target, and then note as "uncharac- 
teristic" the evidence that exposes your caricature. Thus: "In fact, Dawkins, 
sensitive to the variety of human mating practices, remarks uncharacteristi- 
cally that these suggest 'that man's way of life is largely determined by cul- 
ture rather than genes.'" (pp. 47-8) and "Buss seems happy, in this case, to 
provide an uncharacteristic cultural explanation of these anomalies." (p. 53) 
In other words, Dawkins and Buss, not being idiots, hold nuanced views that 
acknowledge the very points Dupre is making. Now is their acknowledgment 
mere lip service? Do they do justice to his points? Tackling their actual 
views, with all their caveats duly considered - that's the real work that still 
needs to be done. 
2c. Pin the simple tail on the donkey. When subtle versions of a view are 
unobjectionable, concentrate on simplistic views and hammer them. For 
instance: "We can now see how massively simplistic is the assumption that 
genes build brains." (p. 29). But of course. It is his simplification, however. 
Dupre notes that three essays appeared in Behavioral and Brain Sciences 
about ten years ago, one showing that men are attracted to younger women 
and women are attracted to older men, one concerning rape as a sexual strat- 
egy, and one documenting the fact that women prefer men of high status. 
"Putting the three theses together presents a very simple politics of class and 
gender..." (p. 53). So it does, but may one not suspect that the authors of 
these three essays are as aware as he is of the complexities? They didn't put 
the three theses together; he did. In another instance, Dupre disparages "a kind 
of reductionism" (p. 72), but is it a good kind or a bad kind? There are both 
kinds, I have argued, and although he purports to criticize my distinction be- 
tween good and greedy reductionism (p. 74), I could not discover there any 
objections in need of a reply. Indeed, I found more caricature and plenty of 
disparagement (4an intellectual disorder'), so I conclude that he mightily dis- 
likes my views and hasn't yet figured out a way to discredit them. Under the 
circumstances, he does not get to dismiss something as a kind of reduction- 
ism any more than I get to rebut his view by calling it a kind of feminism. 
Some kinds of feminism are excellent. 
476 
DANIEL C. DENNETT 
This content downloaded by the authorized user from 192.168.72.233 on Sun, 2 Dec 2012 04:45:11 AM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

3. Rebuttal by eyebrow raising. When evolutionary psychology or sociobi- 
ology casts doubt on some received truth of (some kinds of) feminism, Dupre 
simply raises his eyebrows in wonder. Is he challenging these findings? He 
doesn't say. For instance, he describes some findings of Buss as "more sur- 
prising" and "somewhat more peculiar," (p. 52) but does not deign to offer 
any evidence to show that Buss is wrong. "The presupposition that one could 
make judgments of this sort on the basis of a line-drawing already incorpo- 
rates a view of sexual attraction on which it is perhaps politer not to dwell." 
(p. 55) Here he is sneering at Buss's research on men's preferences for hip-to- 
waist ratio. He is apparently unaware of the research on supernormal stimuli 
in many species, to cite the most obvious caveat. In another passage critical 
of the suggestion that a capacity to rape might have once been an adaptation 
for our ancestors, he says "it is not obvious how much insight into the 
occurrence of rape in a particular contemporary society all this provides." (p. 
25) Well of course it is not obvious. That is why it is interesting. That is 
why it requires careful consideration, not just shudders of disbelief and cluck- 
ing. Curiously enough, the distinction between rebutting and clucking seems 
not to have been grasped by feministicists such as Dupre. (Cf. "This is a 
transformation that Darwin brought about... and it is a transformation which, 
curiously enough, thinkers such as Dennett seem not to have grasped." (p. 
79).) 
A variation on eyebrow raising is the super-efficient "said to" move (e.g., 
p. 65) in which this study or that is "said to" have shown something or other 
that Dupre clearly doubts. He speaks, for instance, of "Derek Freeman's claim 
[sic] to have refuted the classic [sic] ethnography of Samoa by Margaret 
Mead" (p. 45) and this nicely nails his colors to mast: he sides with the 
anthropologists who continue to defend Mead's reputation while conceding 
that her findings were all wrong. Fair enough. Freeman went overboard with 
ad hominem attacks on the great lady, but one would never guess from 
Dupre's allusion that Freeman's refutation stands. As propaganda, this is 
effective for rallying the troops, but it doesn't even begin to be serious criti- 
cism. Yet another variation on this strategy is rebuttal by allusion. For 
instance, sociobiological claims about sexual behavior are said to have been 
"effectively dismantled" by Fausto-Sterling, who subjects them, we are told, 
to "trenchant criticism." I, for one, have not encountered any such refutations 
in the pages of Fausto-Sterling, but I suppose we each have our favorite 
authorities. 
He counters claims by evolutionary psychologists about women's prefer- 
ences for older men with such complacencies as "It is reported that typical 
members of contemporary Western societies watch several hours a day of 
television, and this points to an obvious way in which such cliches might 
affect people's assumptions about the normal and the natural." (p. 57). 
REVIEW ESSAY 
477 
This content downloaded by the authorized user from 192.168.72.233 on Sun, 2 Dec 2012 04:45:11 AM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

Might. I suppose they might. Why doesn't he do the research and find out? In 
this instance as in others, he is oblivious to the double standard he adopts: 
cultural hypotheses like these are deemed worthy rebuttals - even without any 
data-gathering at all - to evolutionary alternatives. The fact that he is oblivi- 
ous to this is itself one of the most interesting features of the book. 
At another point (p. 64) he slyly suggests that evolutionary psychologists 
have not noticed the tautology that every mating involves both a male and a 
female, so there are exactly as many male copulations as female. This is sup- 
posed to cast doubt on various evolutionary theses about typical male prom- 
iscuity. "Given that there is an approximately equal number of heterosexual 
males and females, the average number of matings per male and female will 
also be the same." But what is his point? It could still be the case that, in 
general, females are not promiscuous maters and males are - by a wide mar- 
gin.2 I suspect that Dupre has himself overlooked the distinction between the 
mean and the median. 
4. Insinuation followed by "I do not deny". This occurs again and again. 
First you insinuate something awful, and then you largely retract it, leaving 
only the bad smell behind. 
This is sometimes enhanced by an unkept promise to demonstrate "deep 
deficiencies" (p. 13) at some later point in the book. (See also, e.g., "a 
largely bankrupt approach," p. 17.) A particularly egregious case in the open- 
ing chapter is his outraged critique of psychopharmacological treatment of 
Attention Deficit Disorder, followed near the end of the book with the dis- 
claimer: "I do not suggest (nor consider myself qualified to suggest) that such 
responses are always or generally inappropriate." (p. 185). But that is just 
what he suggested and meant to suggest. I do not deny that Dupre has 
moments of lucidity and argument. I also do not deny that Dupre occasionally 
makes a sound criticism of an ill-considered claim by an evolutionary psy- 
chologist. 
5. Hooting at the crap. Sturgeon's Law - promulgated by the science fiction 
author, Ted Sturgeon - says that 90% of everything is crap.3 There are always 
Suppose 100 males and 100 females are paired, and there are a total of 500 matings. 
Each male mates with his mate, and has 4 extra-pair copulations. So all the males are 
four-fold promiscuous. Ninety-five of the females - the Penelopes - mate only with their 
mates, for a total of 95 copulations. The other 405 female copulations are handled by the 
five Sluts. Mean number of promiscuous female pairings: 4; median number: 0. 
It seems that Sturgeon was slightly more decorous in his original formulation in a speech 
at the World Science Fiction Convention in Philadelphia, September, 1953: 
When people talk about the mystery novel, they mention The Maltese Falcon 
and The Big Sleep. When they talk about the western, they say there's The 
Way West and Shane. But when they talk about science fiction, they call it 
'that Buck Rogers stuff,' and they say 'ninety percent of science fiction is 
478 
DANIEL C. DENNETT 
This content downloaded by the authorized user from 192.168.72.233 on Sun, 2 Dec 2012 04:45:11 AM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

plenty of bad examples to hoot at; serious criticism begins with taking the 
best exemplars of a school and showing what is wrong with them. Dupr6, 
however, tends to deplore the bad stuff and then mention the good stuff with- 
out really criticizing it, tarring it with guilt by association. In a particularly 
devious sidestep, he offers a note of apparently judicious appreciation while 
marginalizing (without argument) one of the central theoretical ideas of 
sociobiology: the disparity of investment between male and female: "it is fair 
to say that it is a story that has provided some insight into the variety of 
mating behaviour observed in nature." (p. 46). Indeed. 
I am presumably an embarrassment to Dupre since I too criticize some of 
the oversimplifications of Tooby and Cosmides and others, and I am not 
alone. Evolutionary psychology, 
inconveniently for Dupre, is actually a 
robust and many-faceted school, containing some superb science, some 
mediocre science, and some bad science - just like every field. By the way, I 
don't mean by this acknowledgment to concede that DuprS's critique of the 
Thornhills' work on rape (pp. 89-92) is justified. The level of invective he 
employs in this vicious section might be appropriate if the charges made 
were supported by either sound argument or carefully gathered empirical evi- 
dence, but since neither are in sight, the effect is self-discrediting. For 
instance, he convicts the Thornhills of defending a thesis that could be used 
in bad arguments to support socially malign conditions: "I leave the reader to 
decide whether the man thus stereotyped may also have predictable racial char- 
acteristics." (p. 88) In other words, don't ever say anything that a stupid racist 
might be able to (mis-)use. And, to mirror a sentence of his own (p. 91), in 
the interests of politeness it will be best not to pursue explicitly the extent to 
which the political consequences of feministicism provide motivations for its 
practitioners to pursue it. Those feminists - and they may well be only a 
small minority - who continue to applaud politically correct hatchet jobs like 
this contribute mightily to the bad reputation that feminism has in many 
quarters. 
If part I of my essay strikes the reader as an unhelpful, unanswerable, 
uncalled-for attack, I can only acknowledge that my model for all the details 
is Duprg's book. That is my point. This is no way to conduct serious phi- 
losophical disagreement. So much for deploring his rhetoric, then. What 
about substantive disagreements? Once again, I will concentrate on his dis- 
agreements with me, leaving the defense of his other targets to others, and 
firmly setting aside any insinuation that his treatment of others is as confused 
as his treatment of me. 
crud.' Well, they're right. Ninety percent of science fiction is crud. But then 
ninety percent of everything is crud, and it's the ten percent that isn't crud 
that is important, and the ten percent of science fiction that isn't crud is as 
good as or better than anything being written anywhere. 
REVIEW ESSAY 
479 
This content downloaded by the authorized user from 192.168.72.233 on Sun, 2 Dec 2012 04:45:11 AM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

II 
Dupre clearly finds my positions repugnant, but I find him again and again 
making claims that I myself have emphasized.. I will take part of the blame 
for not making my own positions clearer over the years, but it seems likely 
to me that his distaste for positions such as mine leaves him somewhat blind 
to their actual resources and powers. For instance he asserts early on that 
"there is not a shred of evidence for the completeness of physics" (p. 9), but 
it is far from clear what he means by this. The only elucidation I could find 
did not help: "Many, perhaps all, objects are subject to forces other than 
gravitation, and therefore do not behave in accordance with the law of gravita- 
tion." (p. 12). Since presumably "other than" means "in addition to" not 
"instead of," I am unable to see how this helps him. I don't know any scien- 
tists (scientististsl) 
who deny the existence of many levels of law and 
explanation. My own insistence over the years that the regularities observable 
from the design stance and intentional stance are unavailable from the per- 
spective of the physical stance would seem to be a fairly robust denial of the 
evil reductionism Dupre imagines, but if it counts as agreeing with him 
about the 'incompleteness' of physics, I wonder what his problem with my 
position is. He avers that "meaning, that which gives a symbol the capacity 
to represent, is a normative concept." (p. 35), a point I have been at some 
pains to make, over and over, for more than thirty years. In championing 
culture over genes, he credits Sober, 1994, with the point, stressed by me 
since 1974, that rapidly changing environments are inimical to hard- wired 
behavioral responses (p. 38n). When he mounts an attack on my view about 
the relation of brains to minds, he does so by reminding us that 'humans, at 
least, have complex languages." (p. 33) As the notorious maintainer of the 
meme-based view of minds, the idea that with complex language, a whole 
new virtual architecture of consciousness is created, this presumably comes as 
no news to me. 
But this is all just preamble to his closing chapter on freedom of the will, 
in which he tries to show that the "one-sided, reductive pictures of ourselves 
...leave no room for human autonomy or freedom" (p. 183). This is, as he 
notes, "one of the most traditional objections" to materialistic or mechanistic 
views such as mine, so it is not as if we haven't given it considerable atten- 
tion. I have felt the need to devote two books to the topic (1984, 2003), and 
while my more recent book postdates his own, he offers no discussion of my 
attempts in the earlier book to solve the very problems he brandishes in his 
closing chapter. (I will be curious to see what he makes of my more recent 
book, since it includes extended arguments against some of the claims 
advanced in his closing chapter, though I had not seen it at the time I wrote 
mine.) He acknowledges that compatibilist orthodoxy "holds that everything 
we have any right to want from freedom of the will can be had in a determi- 
480 
DANIEL C. DENNETT 
This content downloaded by the authorized user from 192.168.72.233 on Sun, 2 Dec 2012 04:45:11 AM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

nistic world," (p. 158) but then he proceeds to develop his own position in 
blithe disregard of the compatibilist arguments that either obviate or resolve 
his own perplexities. Discussing the waving of his arm, he notes the impor- 
tance of "Facts such as that my friend was leaving and that I thought it polite 
to wave to him and wanted to be polite," (p. 160) the facts discernible from 
the intentional stance, as I would say. He wonders if the compatibilist can 
possibly make sense of how these facts play a role alongside "microphysical 
antecedent conditions," and casting his eye swiftly over "putatively non-reduc- 
tive physicalist doctrines," he opines that "there will be no determinable prin- 
ciples on the basis of which a physical causal process will give rise to the 
causal processes at the mental level, and the co-occurrence of processes at 
these levels will be something of a mystery." (p. 161). Only if you refuse to 
consider over thirty years of writing about just how the intentional stance, 
the design stance and the physical stance co-exist. Are the intentional stance 
facts causally inert? No, he decides at length. "I see no reason why these 
higher-level wholes should not have causal properties just as real as those of 
the lower-level wholes out of which they are constructed." (pp. 162-3). 
Neither do I. The indispensability of the intentional stance both for prediction 
and explanation has been my message all along, and the fact that the explana- 
tions are causal (and so much the worse for doctrines of causation such as 
Kim's that cannot countenance this) is the main message of my thought 
experiment, "Two Black Boxes," in Dennett, 1995. 
He later tells us that "humans are fundamentally different from machines 
in that they have no controls. Self-control, in the sense of the absence of 
external controls, is of course nothing but the autonomy, or free will, that it 
was the goal of this chapter to illuminate." (p. 175) What about robots which 
have been given internal (self-)control systems (see, e.g., Dennett, 1984, 
ch3)? Dupre rejects the idea in a sentence: "Against this model, and as I have 
argued in more detail in earlier chapters, I propose that we should recognize 
that we are not designed at all, and consequently there is nothing we were 
designed to do in any situation." (p. 175). Oh. As simple as that. This might 
help explain his earlier attacks on evolutionary psychology and adaptation- 
ism; they excuse him from having to consider seriously the compatibilist 
perspective that has the resources to address autonomy and freedom as design 
features with an evolutionary history and rationale. With no such "reduction- 
istic" alternatives to combat, the way is cleared for his claims about microde- 
terminism and "causal incompleteness." I confess that am unable to find a 
coherent interpretation of these ideas, despite a review of Dupre 1993, in 
which they are expounded in more detail. I confess I also found unpersuasive 
his proposal that we resurrect Chisholm's doctrine of agent causation, espe- 
cially since it was not accompanied by any consideration of the wealth of 
objections which that bit of panicky metaphysics has gathered over the years. 
REVIEW ESSAY 
481 
This content downloaded by the authorized user from 192.168.72.233 on Sun, 2 Dec 2012 04:45:11 AM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

What I mainly got from Dupre's book is an example of the dark side of 
the principle of charity: if your hostility to a world view prevents you from 
taking it seriously, you will be blind to your own blindness. And as my clos- 
ing confessions in the previous paragraph should make clear, I do not view 
myself as immune to this disorder. I have tried, and failed, to make sense of a 
position that is presented as an antidote of sorts to my own world view. I 
shall bear in mind the possibility that I should simply have tried harder. But 
every cloud has a silver lining, and I can find some reassurance in his book: 
by inadvertently reinventing some of my arguments in favor of the 
ineliminability of the intentional stance, and self-control as the key to auton- 
omy, his diatribes against simplistic versions of materialism show that there 
is at least one brand of "reductionist scientism" - mine - that feminists 
should take seriously. 
Two final points: 
"It may be, as Richard Dawkins speculates, that the eye developed over 
aeons of time from a patch of light-sensitive cells somewhere on the surface 
of the body." (p. 78). Does Dupre have an alternative to this 'speculation'? 
What he has not grasped in this instance is that reverse engineering is pre- 
cisely what cuts through the imponderable and unknowable divagations of 
history. Reverse engineers don't have to know where or when some engineer 
figured out the function; and they certainly don't need to figure out who did 
it. That's the beauty of reverse engineering. It permits one to finesse the 
unknowable historical details. Dupre shows signs of not understanding this; 
he seems to think his remarks on historical unknowability cast doubt on the 
method of reverse engineering, when on the contrary, this very inaccessibility 
of the details of the history is what makes reverse engineering such a valuable 
perspective to adopt. This helps us see that Gould's frequent hymns to con- 
tingency really were mis-aimed at adaptationism. Dupre says: 'These two 
importantly historical processes [human evolution and human development] 
are involved in the production of individual humans, and the contingency of 
these historical processes lies at the heart of the inadequacy of the kind of 
reductive science that evolutionary psychology exemplifies." (p. 80). This is 
just about backwards. 
"We share common ancestors with all or most of the other organisms on 
the planet...." (p. 19). Does Dupre know something I don't know, or is this 
just reflex philosophical hypercaution? I daresay all or most plane triangles 
have interior angles summing to two right angles. 
482 
DANIEL C. DENNETT 
This content downloaded by the authorized user from 192.168.72.233 on Sun, 2 Dec 2012 04:45:11 AM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

References 
Dennett, Daniel C, 1984, Elbow Room: The Varieties of Free Will Worth 
Wanting, Cambridge, MA: MIT Press. 

			 
1993, "Confusion over Evolution: an exchange" (with S.J. 
Gould), The New York Review of Books, XL, (1 & 2), p. 43. 

			 
1995, Darwin's Dangerous Idea, New York: Simon & Schuster. 

			 
2003, Freedom Evolves, New York: Viking Penguin. 
Dupr6, John, 1993, The Disorder of Things: Metaphysical Foundations of 
the Disunity of Science, Cambridge: Harvard University Press. 

			 
2001, Human Nature and the Limits of Science, New York: 
Oxford University Press. 
Sober, Elliott, 1994, From a Biological Point of View, Cambridge: Cam- 
bridge University Press. 
REVIEW ESSAY 
483 
This content downloaded by the authorized user from 192.168.72.233 on Sun, 2 Dec 2012 04:45:11 AM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

