0 Blackwell Publishers Ltd. 1996, 108 Cmley Road, Oxford, OX4 IJF, UK 
and 238 Main Street, Cambridge, M A  02142, USA. 
Mind b Language, ISSN: 0268-1064 
Vol. 11. No. 1 March 1996, p p  76-77. 
Cow-sharks, Magnets, and Swampman 
DANIEL DENNETT 
It cannot have escaped philosophers' attention that our fellow academics in 
other fields-especially in the sciences-often have difficulty suppressing 
their incredulous amusement when such topics as Blockheads, Twin Earth, 
and Swampman are posed for apparently serious consideration. Are the 
scientists just being philistines, betraying their tin ears for the subtleties of 
philosophical investigation, or have the philosophers who indulge in these 
exercises lost their grip on reality? 
These bizarre examples all attempt to prove one 'conceptual' point or 
another by deliberately reducing something underappreciated to zero, so that 
What Really Counts can shine through. Blockheads hold peripheral behaviour 
constant and reduce internal structural details (and-what comes to the same 
thing-intervening internal processes) close to zero, and provoke the intuition 
that then there would be no mind there; internal structure Really Counts. 
Twin Earth sets internal similarity to maximum, so that external context can be 
demonstrated to be responsible for whatever our intuitions tell us. Swampman 
keeps both future dispositions and internal states constant and reduces 'his- 
tory' to zero. Thus these thought experiments mimic empirical experiments 
in their design, attempting to isolate a crucial interaction between variables 
by holding other variables constant. In the past I have often noted that a 
problem with such experiments is that the dependent variable is 'intuition'- 
they are intuition pumps-and 
the contribution of imagination in the gener- 
ation of intuitions is harder to control than philosophers have supposed. 
But there is also a deeper problem with them. It is child's play to dream 
up further such examples to 'prove' further conceptual points. Suppose a 
cow gave birth to something that was atom-for-atom indiscernible from a 
shark. Would it be a shark? If you posed that question to a biologist, the 
charitable reaction would be that you were making a laboured attempt at a 
joke. Or suppose an evil demon could make water turn solid at room tem- 
perature by smiling at it; would demon-water be ice? Too silly a hypothesis 
Excerpted, with revisions, from my reply to McLaughli and OLeary-Hawthorne, in Philo- 
sophical Topics (1995), 22, 517-30. 
Address for correspondence: Center for Cognitive Studies, Miner Hall, Tufts University, 
Medford, MA 02155, USA. 
Email: ddennett@diamond.tufts.edu. 

Cow-sharks, Magnets, and Swampman 
77 
to deserve a response. Smiling demons, cow-sharks, Blockheads, and 
Swampmen are all, some philosophers think, logically possible, even if they 
are not nomologically possible, and these philosophers think this is 
important. I do not. Presumably the reason for casting the net of counterfac- 
tuality so wide is so that the answer we retrieve will tell us about the 
'essence' of the topic in question. But who believes in real essences of this 
sort nowadays? Not I. 
Consider a parallel question we might ask about magnets, once we'd 
noticed that there were competing candidates for the 'truth-maker' for mag- 
nets: (a) all magnets are things that attract iron, and (b) all magnets are 
things that have a certain internal structure (call it M-alignment). Was the 
old, behavioural criterion (a) eventually superseded by the new, internal 
structure criterion (b), or did the latter merely reductively explain the for- 
mer? To find out, we must imagine posing scientists the following Swamp- 
man-style questions. Suppose you discovered a thing that attracted iron but 
was not M-aligned (like standard magnets). Would you call it a magnet? Or: 
Suppose you discovered a thing that was M-aligned but did not attract iron. 
Would you call it a magnet? The physicists would reply that if they were 
confronted with either of these imaginary objects, they would have much 
more important things to wony about than what to call them (Dennett, 1968, 
p. 234). Their whole scientific picture depends on there being a deep regu- 
larity between the alignment of atomic dipoles in magnetic domains and 
iron-attraction, and the 'fact' that it is logically possible to break this regu- 
larity is of vanishing interest to them. What is of interest, however, is the 
real covariance of 'structural' and 'behavioural' factors-and 
if they find 
violations of the regularities, they adjust their science accordingly, letting 
the terms fall where they may. Nominal essences are all the essences that 
science needs, and some are better than others, because they capture more 
regularity in nature. 
Does Swampman have thoughts and use language, or not? Is a cow-shark 
a shark? It swims like a shark, and mates successfully with other sharks. 
Oh, but didn't I tell you? It is atom-for-atom indiscernible from a shark, 
except that it has cow DNA in all its cells. Impossible? Not logically imposs- 
ible (say the philosophers). Just so obviously impossible as to render further 
discussion unnecessary. It is just as clearly physically impossible for the 'tra- 
ces' of, say, Davidson's memories to appear in the structure of Swampman's 
brain as it is for a shark to form itself of cells containing cow DNA. Swamp- 
man is not logically impossible, just not worth discussing. 
Center for Cognitive Studies 
Tufts University 
References 
Dennett, D. 1968: Features of Intentional Actions. Philosophy and Phenomenological 
Research, 29, 232-44. 
0 Blackwell Publishers Ltd. 1996 

