 
 
Duke University Press and Philosophical Review are collaborating with JSTOR to digitize, preserve and extend access to The
Philosophical Review.
http://www.jstor.org
Philosophical Review
Review 
Author(s): Daniel C. Dennett 
Review by: Daniel C. Dennett 
Source: 
 
 
The Philosophical Review, Vol. 95, No. 1 (Jan., 1986), pp. 137-139
Published by: 
 on behalf of 
 
Duke University Press
Philosophical Review
Stable URL: 
 
http://www.jstor.org/stable/2185146
Accessed: 26-02-2015 16:58 UTC
Your use of the JSTOR archive indicates your acceptance of the Terms & Conditions of Use, available at 
 
http://www.jstor.org/page/info/about/policies/terms.jsp
JSTOR is a not-for-profit service that helps scholars, researchers, and students discover, use, and build upon a wide range of content
in a trusted digital archive. We use information technology and tools to increase productivity and facilitate new forms of scholarship.
For more information about JSTOR, please contact support@jstor.org.
This content downloaded from 128.235.251.160 on Thu, 26 Feb 2015 16:58:33 UTC
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

BOOK REVIEWS 
Kitcher's book is a valuable contribution to the philosophy of mathemat- 
ics. It is gracefully and clearly written and will be informative and interest- 
ing for a wide variety of readers. By contemporary standards, it is reasona- 
bly priced. In appearance, the book is only of average quality, but it seems 
remarkably free of misprints. 
CHARLES PARSONS9 
Columbia University 
9I wish to thank the members of a seminar at Columbia University in the fall of 
1983, Charles Larmore, Mark Steiner, and especially Professor Kitcher for discus- 
sion of the book and comments on an earlier version of this review. 
The Philosophical Review, XCV, No. 1 (January 1986) 
VEHICLES: EXPERIMENTS 
IN 
SYNTHETIC PSYCHOLOGY. By 
VALENTINo BRAITENBERG. Cambridge, 
Bradford 
Books/MIT 
Press, 
1984. Pp. ix, 152. 
The working hypothesis that the mind is the brain may set us off on the 
right foot, but it doesn't take us very far. The problems that then confront 
the would-be empirical theorist are enormous: the human brain's billions 
of neurons overwhelm piecemeal analysis by the biologist, and the produc- 
tive variety and evanescence of the human mind's activities baffle the 
psychological modeler. In this elegant little gem of a book, Valentino 
Braitenberg, an eminent brain researcher at the University of Tubingen, 
proposes a method for cutting through this daunting complexity, and 
exhibits with delightful wit and enviable clarity the power of a strategic 
insight: "the law of uphill analysis and downhill invention." 
As Braitenberg observes, ". . . it is much more difficult to start from the 
outside and try to guess internal structure just from the observation of 
behavior" than it is to "create little machines that do certain tricks" and 
then "observe the full repertoire" of their behavior. Artificial Intelligence 
researchers have always exploited this "law," of course, and have often 
been delighted or dismayed by the actual repertoire of their creations. 
Braitenberg's strategy is to model whole organisms rather than bits of 
human micro-competence (playing chess, answering questions about res- 
taurants), and to obtain the needed oversimplification of his models by 
starting with comically simple, idealized organisms- "Vehicles"-and 
gradually adding complications and refinements, a process that fruitfully 
137 
This content downloaded from 128.235.251.160 on Thu, 26 Feb 2015 16:58:33 UTC
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

BOOK REVIEWS 
echoes evolution by natural selection and yields many insights into the 
historical and structural constraints on design-development 
in living 
things. 
Braitenberg's Vehicle 1 has a single "motor" and a single "sensor" con- 
nected to the motor so that the Vehicle is propelled forward with a force 
proportional to the intensity of whatever its sensor is sensing. Notice that 
simple as the "laws of behavior" are for such a simple Vehicle, they must 
already be hedged by ceteris paribus clauses about conditions; given the 
mechanism, it is easy to say what these complications and perturbations 
from "normal" behavior would look like, but an exhaustive catalogue of 
"stimulus and response" or input-output contingencies would by itself be 
quite inscrutable. Vehicle 2a is two of the first Vehicles tied together side- 
by-side, and Vehicle 2b simply crosses the leads of the sensors, creating a 
temptingly biological capacity for homing behavior-Vehicle 
2b turns to- 
ward higher concentrations of whatever its sensors sense and rushes to- 
wards them. Add inhibitory links, more sensors, and start fiddling with the 
response relations-non-linear, 
non-monotonic, thresholds and square 
waves-and 
pretty soon you have created in imagination Vehicles capable 
of astonishingly lifelike (I would say "biological" rather than "psychologi- 
cal") behavioral profiles. By the time we reach Vehicle 8 in the progres- 
sion, a lens has been mounted in front of a bank of sensors to create an eye, 
and the necessity of a psychological description of the resulting compe- 
tence is borne in on one with more persuasiveness than any formal argu- 
ment could provide. Vehicle 14, the last in this pioneering progression, is 
plausibly equipped with memory, the capacity for learning, foresight, 
planning, "egotism and optimism." As one might imagine, covering such a 
huge evolutionary distance in so few steps requires a bit of handwaving in 
the engineering department. Some connections have to be soldered of 
"Ergotrix" and "Mnemotrix" wire, which has rather special-but 
certainly 
physically realizable-properties. 
And by the time we have reached the last 
few Vehicles, it is hardly obvious that they will behave just as advertised. 
The harvest of this exercise in thought-experimental 
exploration is 
gloriously bountiful; deep insights and tempting hypotheses spring from 
almost every page. Why, for instance, are so many creatures-from 
fish to 
human beings-wonderfully 
sensitive to visual patterns exhibiting symme- 
try around a vertical axis? Try to figure out your own speculative, "ecologi- 
cal significance" answer before checking out Braitenberg's answer, which 
is too profoundly biological and satisfying to be wrong. The empirical 
underpinnings and inspirations for Braitenberg's speculations are well 
presented in a final chapter, "Biological Notes on the Vehicles," which 
shows the value of constraining one's armchair imaginings with solid and 
detailed empirical knowledge. 
138 
This content downloaded from 128.235.251.160 on Thu, 26 Feb 2015 16:58:33 UTC
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

BOOK REVIEWS 
These 14 Vehicles cry out for computer simulation, and just as I had 
resolved to spend the next year or so getting them-and 
dozens of cousins 
that occurred to me-to 
trundle about on the screen of my micro-comput- 
er, I learned from the publisher that Braitenberg is preparing just such 
software simulations, which should be available for several popular micro- 
computers from the publisher in the near future. At last: Dungeons and 
Dragons for grownups, and a completely serious method of investigating 
biological and psychological hypotheses at the same time. 
DANIEL C. DENNETT 
Tufts University 
The Philosophical Review, XCV, No. 1 (January 1986) 
TRUTH AND FALSEHOOD IN VISUAL IMAGES. By MARK ROSKILL and 
DAVID CARRIER. Amherst, University of Massachusetts Press, 1983. Pp. 
xvi, 145. $16.00 cloth; $8.95 paper. 
Pictures plainly enhance understanding-sharpening 
sensibilities, af- 
fording insights, revealing affinities, altering beliefs. They do so, accord- 
ing to Mark Roskill and David Carrier, because they are true or false. The 
authors recognize that pictures are not true in the way that 'Snow is white' 
is true. But they maintain that 'true' has a wider range of uses, many of 
which apply directly or by analogy to visual images. In Truth and Falsehood 
in Visual Images, they invoke generic concepts of truth and falsity to explain 
a variety of pictorial effects. They do not attempt to generate a theory of 
generic truth, but show how generic truth and related concepts apply to 
specific pictures-advertisements 
and photographs as well as paintings. 
An understanding of the network of generic concepts is supposed to 
emerge from an understanding of their applications. The book discusses 
visual truth, visual implication, and visual lying, and ends with an all too 
brief discussion of how to analyze visual truth and falsehood. 
The issues are important, and not just to aesthetics. Roskill and Carrier 
ask how and what symbols can communicate, and how our views can be 
altered-for 
better or worse-by 
the symbols we encounter. Such ques- 
tions should be central to epistemology. Although I doubt that truth is the 
proper medium of exchange, I am convinced of the importance of finding 
some conceptual currency for dealing in such issues. My reservations 
about the generic concepts may indeed stem from a failure to understand 
them. The authors eschew explication, preferring to let the examples 
speak for themselves. Unfortunately, the examples are often silent. 
139 
This content downloaded from 128.235.251.160 on Thu, 26 Feb 2015 16:58:33 UTC
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

