International Phenomenological Society
Philosophy and Phenomenological Research
 
Review: Précis of Consciousness Explained
Author(s): Daniel C. Dennett and  Daniel C. Dennett
Source: Philosophy and Phenomenological Research, Vol. 53, No. 4 (Dec., 1993), pp. 889-892
Published by: International Phenomenological Society
Stable URL: http://www.jstor.org/stable/2108259
Accessed: 09-06-2016 03:41 UTC
 
Your use of the JSTOR archive indicates your acceptance of the Terms & Conditions of Use, available at
http://about.jstor.org/terms
 
JSTOR is a not-for-profit service that helps scholars, researchers, and students discover, use, and build upon a wide range of content in a trusted
digital archive. We use information technology and tools to increase productivity and facilitate new forms of scholarship. For more information about
JSTOR, please contact support@jstor.org.
International Phenomenological Society, Wiley, Philosophy and Phenomenological
Research are collaborating with JSTOR to digitize, preserve and extend access to Philosophy and
Phenomenological Research
This content downloaded from 155.69.24.171 on Thu, 09 Jun 2016 03:41:18 UTC
All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms

 Philosophy and Phenomenological Research
 Vol. Lm, No. 4, December 1993
 Pr6cis of Consciousness Explained*
 DANIEL C. DENNEIT
 Tufts University
 Consciousness has always been a baffling phenomenon, and some have seen it
 to be fundamentally mysterious, irretrievably beyond human understanding.
 I argue, on the contrary, that its mysteries are beginning to dissolve, thanks
 largely to the onslaught of empirical and conceptual advances in cognitive
 science. So entrenched, however, are the traditional ways of addressing the
 philosophical problems, that a frontal assault on them is doomed. One can-
 not hope to convince philosophers by straightforward arguments to abandon
 the "obvious" assumptions whose mutual acceptance has defined the debates.
 A more indirect approach is called for ("Preview," pp. 16-18), postpon-
 ing a direct confrontation with the traditional categories until a new per-
 spective has been created, and the reader familiarized with some of its pow-
 ers. This is a three-stage operation. In Part I, a survey of phenomena and puta-
 tive difficulties sets the problem and establishes a method. The goal is to
 create a materialistic, scientifically supported but still deliberately sketchy,
 model that can actually explain all the puzzling phenomena. The method for
 achieving this goal requires a philosophically and scientifically neutral way
 of describing the data-a phenomenology in its original sense of a pre-theo-
 retical catalogue of phenomena. In Part II, the sketch of the model, the Mul-
 tiple Drafts Model, is developed and supported, and put through some of its
 paces. Finally, in Part III, the philosophical implications of the Multiple
 Drafts Model are examined. Only then do I confront the challenges invoking
 folk psychological categories, and such philosophical terms as qualia,
 epiphenomenalism, zombie, and finctionalism, the staple diet of philosophi-
 cal debate in recent years.
 (This indirect approach does not work for all readers, I have learned.
 Some find the temporary suspension of allegiance to traditional categories
 beyond them, or are unwilling to venture it. Those who insist on trying to
 impose their favorite philosophical distinctions on the book from the outset
 are almost bound to find the first two parts "exasperatingly elusive, even
 * Daniel C. Dennett, Consciousness Explained (Boston: Little, Brown and Co., 1991), pp.
 xiii, 511.
 DENNEIT SYMPOSIUM 889
This content downloaded from 155.69.24.171 on Thu, 09 Jun 2016 03:41:18 UTC
All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms

 self-contradictory" (Block, 1993). This can prevent such a reader from ever
 entertaining seriously the possibility that the arguments in Part In succeed
 in undercutting the traditional distinctions.)
 In Part I, the method of heterophenomenology is presented, motivated,
 and analyzed. It captures the actual practice and background assumptions of
 cognitive scientists studying consciousness, providing a framework within
 which theoretical disagreements regarding the explanation of the data can be
 expressed, while permitting the data to be acknowledged by all sides.
 In Part II, the method is put to the test by considering some initially
 counterintuitive phenomena involving the timing of "events in conscious-
 ness." The paradoxical flavor of these phenomena is due, I argue, to the
 widespread but tacit assumption of a certain picture of how consciousness
 must be related to the brain, which I call the Cartesian Theater. Contempo-
 rary theorists have abandoned Descartes' notoriously problem-ridden dual-
 ism, with its miraculous trans-substance interaction at the pineal gland, but
 they have not discarded enough; they have clung to the Cartesian idea that
 consciousness of a stimulus (or other event) happens when and only when
 trains of neural events caused by the event in question get transduced into
 some central medium (the Cartesian Theater). According to this doctrine,
 which I call Cartesian materialism, there is a cerebral seat of consciousness
 "where it all comes together." Exposing this bad idea is not very hard, and
 decrying it is fun for all, but finding an alternative vision is an uphill battle
 against intuitions that many persist in deeming innocent. The analysis and
 criticism of these intuitions, and a re-investigation of the phenomena, yields
 some constraints on models which are then elaborated into a sketch of an al-
 ternative model (or family of models), the Multiple Drafts Model. The ini-
 tially curious and unfamiliar features Qf the model are shown to have plau-
 sible evolutionary sources, and a chapter is devoted to how the model can
 deal with some of the most recalcitrant problems of language production.
 What emerges from all this is a cognitive "architecture" of conscious-
 ness, summarized in a Thumbnail Sketch:
 There is no single, definitive "stream of consciousness," because there is no central Head-
 quarters, no Cartesian Theater where "it all comes together" for the perusal of a Central
 Meaner. Instead of such a single stream (however wide), there are multiple channels in which
 specialist circuits try, in parallel pandemoniums, to do their various things, creating Multiple
 Drafts as they go. Most of these fragmentary drafts of "narrative" play short-lived roles in the
 modulation of current activity but some get promoted to further functional roles, in swift suc-
 cession, by the activity of a virtual machine in the brain. The seriality of this machine (its "von
 Neumannesque" character) is not a "hard-wired" design feature, but rather the upshot of a suc-
 cession of coalitions of these specialists.
 The basic specialists are part of our animal heritage. They were not developed to perform
 peculiarly human actions, such as reading and writing, but ducking, predator-avoiding, face-rec-
 ognizing, grasping, throwing, berry-picking, and other essential tasks. They are often oppor-
 890 DANIELC. DENNEIT
This content downloaded from 155.69.24.171 on Thu, 09 Jun 2016 03:41:18 UTC
All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms

 tunistically enlisted in new roles, for which their native talents more or less suit them. The re -
 sult is not bedlam only because the trends that are imposed on all this activity are themselves
 the product of design. Some of this design is innate, and is shared with other animals. But it is
 augmented, and sometimes even overwhelmed in importance, by microhabits of thought that are
 developed in the individual, partly idiosyncratic results of self-exploration and partly the pre -
 designed gifts of culture. Thousands of memes, mostly borne by language, but also by wordless
 'images" and other data-structures, take up residence in an individual brain, shaping its tenden -
 cies and thereby turning it into a mind. (pp. 253-54)
 This eclectic model draws heavily on the work of many researchers in
 cognitive science, and the final chapter of Part II orients the model with re-
 spect to that literature, acknowledging sources, adjudicating a few of the
 controversies, and elaborating some of the important details in preparation
 for the philosophical work of Part III.
 Part III opens with a challenge regarding the phenomena of mental im-
 agery, and addresses, in turn, the philosophical literature on the nature of
 mental representation, belief and thought, the status of folk psychology, the
 problematic (indeed incoherent) philosophical concept of zombies, the
 pathologies of blindsight and unilateral neglect, and the ubiquitous and be-
 guiling concept of "filling in" by the brain. The idea that there is something
 like a "phenomenal field" of "phenomenal properties" in addition to the in-
 formational/functional properties accommodated by my theory is shown to
 be a multi-faceted illusion, an artifact of bad theorizing. Otto, a fictional in-
 terlocutor, occasionally interrupts the proceedings in order to express under
 cover of anonymity the most persistent philosophical objections I encoun-
 tered in presentations of early drafts of these chapters. (This turns out to
 have been a valuable expository tactic, I think. Otto has been denounced as a
 stooge or strawman by some, but others have hailed him as my
 "philosophical conscience" and exp-ressed their allegiance to his doctrines
 and even endorsed his expression of them. In fact, everything Otto says was
 drawn, with scant editorial amendment, from heated discussions with
 philosophers with impeccable credentials.)
 Chapter 12, on qualia, exemplifies the "end run" strategy of the whole
 book, eschewing the direct confrontation (for which, see Dennett, 1988) for
 an explanation of why the whole idea of qualia is forlorn to begin with. A
 substitute is provided: an account of some relevant phenomena-color and
 our attitudes towards colors-that does the work qualia-theories were sup-
 posed to do without ever entangling the theorist in the definitional and
 methodological problems that beset that literature.
 The last two chapters defend answers to the perennial problems about
 the nature of the self, the problem of other minds (especially the minds of
 other animals and robots), and the hidden agenda that drives so much theo-
 rizing by philosophers of mind: the dimly imagined moral implications of a
 materialist theory of consciousness.
 DENNE'IT SYMPOSIUM 891
This content downloaded from 155.69.24.171 on Thu, 09 Jun 2016 03:41:18 UTC
All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms

 References
 Block, N., 1993, review of Consciousness Explained, Journal of Philosophy,
 90,pp.181-93.
 Dennett, D., 1988, "Quining Qualia," in A. Marcel and E. Bisiach, eds., Con-
 sciousness in Contemporary Science, Oxford: Oxford University Press,
 pp. 42-77.
 892 DANIEL C. DENNEIT
This content downloaded from 155.69.24.171 on Thu, 09 Jun 2016 03:41:18 UTC
All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms

