 
 
Foreword 
 
Daniel Dennett 
 
 
 
 
If there is one proposition that would-be memeticists agree on, it is that 
the flourishing of an idea – its success at replicating through a population 
of minds – and the value of an idea – its truth, its scientific or political or 
ethical excellence – are only contingently and imperfectly related.  Good 
ideas can go extinct and bad ideas can infect whole societies.  The future 
prospects of the meme idea are uncertain on both counts, and the point of 
this book is not to ensure that the meme meme flourishes, but to ensure 
that if it does, it ought to.  It works towards this worthy end by creating a 
landmark, a fixed point not of doctrine but of evidence and methods, some 
shared acknowledgement among the leading proponents and critics about 
how the issues ought to be addressed. 
The annual Superbowl of American football draws a huge television 
audience, and as a result attracts advertisers who are willing to pay more 
than a million dollars for half a minute of the viewers’ distracted attention.  
In the last few years, an interesting subspecies of Superbowl advertisers 
has sprung up: the fledging ‘dot.com’ Internet companies that pour a 
substantial portion of their initial capitalization into a single make-or-
break Superbowl debut, hoping that this brief exposure will launch them 
safely into the competitive future.  Why don’t they just advertise on the 
Internet, their chosen field of battle?  A similar question was raised a year 
earlier about Wired, the (traditional, printed-on-paper, on-sale-at-
newsstands) magazine of the Internet.  What do these traditional media 
offer that is not (yet) available on the Internet?  For one thing, they offer 
the guarantee of shared attention.  When you watch an ad during the 
Superbowl, you know that you are seeing the same ad, at the same time, as 
millions of other viewers, and you know that they know this as well.  
When you see stacks of the same magazine at every newsstand, you know 
that when you read it that you are not alone in reading it; many, many

viii    FOREWORD 
 
others will read or have already the very sentence you are reading.  These 
evanescent communities of shared – and knowingly shared – attention 
play a crucial role in engendering hard-to-achieve confidence in the 
message, however trivial the topic.  They do this by promising a plethora 
of paths for coordinating the distributed intelligence, making it possible 
for people to compare notes, pool their knowledge, confirm or disconfirm 
their individual opinions.  It’s not that people recognize this promise and 
reflect on it – and of course they almost never act on it, pursuing those 
paths of enquiry – but they just somehow feel better, knowing that they 
are part of a large audience, and this is why they are in fact right to feel 
better: it is hard to get away with telling a lie in such a public arena.  If 
you stumble upon a tempting but improbable claim during the Superbowl 
program, you may be skeptical, but at least you will realize (probably 
subliminally, without articulating it) that the advertiser has risked a 
contagion of disbelief by broadcasting instead of narrowcasting, this 
message.  A website may reach five million people, but they all engage, in 
effect, in five million private communications.  We may all be getting the 
same message, but unless we know this, we won’t reap the benefits of 
truly shared intelligence.  As the idiom goes, it helps to know that we are 
all on the same page. 
The advertising that goes on everywhere in science – all those vigorous 
campaigns mounted on behalf of theories or hypotheses – avoid 
degenerating into mere propagandizing because the academy creates 
structured networks of knowingly shared attention and mutual knowledge, 
so that more or less everybody can be on the same page.  It is not enough 
that a thousand clever thinkers have read many of the same books and 
articles and come to similar conclusions about them; they must know that 
this is so.  There needs to be a scientific community. 
Within such a community controversy can reign without rancor and 
constructive disagreement can prosper, because approximately all the 
accumulated knowledge of the participants can be brought to bear on a 
few focal points, a competitive but also concerted effort.  Now that there 
are more than a handful of serious contenders in the form of partisan 
proposals (see the bibliographies of the chapters), it is time to start sorting 
them out.  A start is all.  I am not entirely persuaded by any of the chapters 
in this book, but this Foreword is not the time and place for me to take 
issue with them.  This Foreword is the time and place for me to applaud 
the fact that serious consideration of the meme meme is now underway at 
last, after several decades of relatively ineffectual campaigns by

FOREWORD    ix 
 
proponents and critics.  The workshop from which this volume springs 
was heated but constructive, and now a wider audience can get on the 
same page.  It will be the first of many, I predict. 
Skeptics may be tempted to think that my Foreword itself demonstrates 
the futility of the idea of memetics, by emphasizing the underlying 
rationality, the intentionality, of the purported ‘vectors’ of the meme 
meme.  How can mindless Darwinian algorithms cope with such mindful 
culture-makers, subliminally sensitive to such issues as whether or not the 
environment 
includes 
many 
paths 
for 
coordinating 
distributed 
intelligence?  But in fact, evolutionary approaches to such underlying 
conditions of rationality have been leading the way, illuminating the 
background conditions for communication, cooperation, the establishment 
of norms and customs, and other phenomena familiar to students of 
culture.  The open question is not whether there will be a Darwinian 
theory of culture but what shape such a Darwinian theory will take. 
It is obvious that there are patterns of cultural change – evolution in the 
neutral sense – and any theory of cultural change worth more than a 
moment’s consideration will have to be Darwinian in the minimal sense of 
being consistent with the theory of evolution by natural selection of Homo 
sapiens.  The demand of this minimal Darwinism are far from trivial, and 
the ferocity with which Darwinian accounts of the evolution of language 
and sociality are attacked by some critics from the humanities and social 
sciences show that in some influential quarters, mere consistency with 
evolutionary theory is not yet the accepted constraint it ought to be.  This 
is a fact of life that we must deal with: fear of a thin edge of the wedge 
misleads many who hate the idea of a strong Darwinian theory of cultural 
evolution to resist conceding even consistency with evolutionary theory as 
the obvious requirement it is.  In this volume, minimal Darwinism is taken 
for granted; no skyhooks are sought within its pages.  But there are still 
plenty of grounds on offer in criticism of various versions of the strong 
Darwinian thesis of memetics.  It will be most interesting to see what 
settles out of this new exploration. 
 
August 2000 

DARWINIZING CULTURE 
 
     The status of memetics as a science
 
                          edited by 
                                               Robert Aunger 
 
 
 
 
                                          2000  
                                                     Oxford University Press 

