Royal Institute of Philosophy
Supplement
http://journals.cambridge.org/PHS
Additional services for Royal Institute of
Philosophy Supplement:
Email alerts: Click here
Subscriptions: Click here
Commercial reprints: Click here
Terms of use : Click here
How to do Other Things with Words
Daniel C. Dennett
Royal Institute of Philosophy Supplement / Volume 42 / March 1997, pp 219 - 235
DOI: 10.1017/S1358246100010262, Published online: 12 April 2010
Link to this article: http://journals.cambridge.org/abstract_S1358246100010262
How to cite this article:
Daniel C. Dennett (1997). How to do Other Things with Words. Royal Institute of
Philosophy Supplement, 42, pp 219-235 doi:10.1017/S1358246100010262
Request Permissions : Click here
Downloaded from http://journals.cambridge.org/PHS, IP address: 142.51.1.212 on 06 Dec 2014

How to do Other Things with Words
DANIEL C. DENNETT
Nomina si nescis, perit et cognitio rerum.1
(Lucretius, quoted by B. F. Skinner in Verbal Behavior, 1957,
p. 441).
John Austin's masterpiece, How to Do Things with Words, was not
just a contribution to philosophy; it has proven to be a major con-
tribution to linguistics, one of the founding documents of pragmat-
ics, the investigation of how we use words to accomplish various
ends in the social world. Strangely, not much attention has been
paid by philosophers - or by psychologists and linguists - to how we
use words in private, you might say, to think. As Wittgenstein (1967,
p. 17e) once noted, 'It is very noteworthy that what goes on in think-
ing practically never interests us.'
John Maynard Keynes was once asked if he thought in words or
pictures. His reply was 'I think in thoughts.' This is in one way an
admirable answer. It abruptly dismisses the two leading mistakes
about what thinking might be. But it also encourages that lack of
interest that Wittgenstein noted. What, then, are thoughts, if not
words or pictures? And more particularly, what is the role of words
in thinking? To this overdue question, I want to explore, very ten-
tatively, a few neglected avenues.
Wordless Thought: A Phenomenological Fact
First, I want to sound an alert about an all too familiar line of
thought: the idea that thinking goes on in a special functional area
of the brain. One of its many guises is what I have called the
Cartesian Theatre, but it also appears in the roles of Central
Processing, or the Central Executive, or Jerry Fodor's (1983) non-
modular central arena of belief fixation. What is wrong with this
idea is not (just) that it (apparently) postulates an anatomically dis-
cernible central region of the brain - a maximally non-peripheral
region, one might say - but that it supposes that there is a function-
ally identifiable subsystem (however located or distributed in the
brain) that has some all too remarkable competences achieved by
some all too remarkable means. There are many routes to it. Here is
1 If you are ignorant of names, knowledge of things perishes.
219

Daniel C. Dennett
one that starts off in an excellent direction but then veers off. The
mistaken fork is not explicitly endorsed by anybody that I can
name, but I daresay it has covertly influenced a lot of thinking on
the topic.
(a) One of the things we human beings do is talk to others.
(b) Another is that we talk to ourselves - out loud.
(c) A refinement of (b) is to talk silently to oneself, but still in the
words of a natural language, often with tone of voice and timing
still intact. (For instance, one can often answer such questions as
this: 'Are you thinking in English or French as you work on this
problem?')
So far, so good, an oft-told tale (going back at least to G. H. Mead
1930, Vygotsky 1934, and Skinner 1957), but watch out for the next
step:
(d) A further refinement of (c) is to drop the auditory/phonemic
features (indeed all the features that would tie one's act to a spe-
cific natural language) and just think to oneself in bare proposi-
tions.
Introspection declares that something like this does occur but we
must be circumspect in how we describe this phenomenon, since the
temptation is to use it to anchor a remarkable set of dubious impli-
cations, to wit:
(e) Since propositions, like numbers, are abstract objects, they
would need some vehicles of embodiment in the brain. Moreover,
when one thinks in bare propositions, one's thoughts still have
one feature of sentences: logical form.
(They must have logical form if we are going to explain the phe-
nomenon of reliable deductive inference as the manipulation of
these items.)
(f) So there must be a medium of representation distinct from any
natural language (call it the language of thought or Mentalese)
that has this feature.
and finally:
(g) This activity of manipulating formulae of Mentalese is the
fundamental variety of thinking — 'thinking proper' or 'real
thinking' or even (as somebody recently put it) 'where the under-
standing happens'.
It has seemed to some that this idea has been properly licensed by
an analogy to the central processing unit or CPU of a von Neumann
220

How to do Other Things with Words
machine, with its requirement that all instructions be in its propri-
etary machine language - the only language it 'understands'. But
this is a broken-backed analogy, a fantasy that has little or nothing
to do with how computers do their work. The 'machine language'
understood by the CPU of a traditional computer is entirely com-
posed of imperatives - commands or orders to execute basic tasks
which have no external world reference at all. You can't say 'Snow
is white' in machine language. You can't even say 'Look for some-
thing white' or 'Get some snow' in machine language. What you can
say is things like 'Get whatever is is memory location X and add it
to the number in the accumulator', or 'Output the result in the
accumulator' or 'Jump to the instruction in memory location Y'. So
machine language won't do as a model for Mentalese, even if we
want to be computationalists (as I do) about thinking.
We do introspect ourselves thinking, and sometimes it does seem
that our thinking is wordless but 'propositional'. This, then, is an
indisputable (hetero-)phenomenological fact, bolstered by such
widely acknowledged experiences as the tip-of-the-tongue phenom-
enon (in which we surely do have a particular content 'in mind' and
are frustrated in our attempts to find the word that normally clothes
it or accompanies it). Publishers have brought out humorous dic-
tionaries of neologisms to fill in the gaps in English: 'sniglets' is
proposed, I seem to recall, as a word for those handy little metal
sleeves on the ends of shoelaces, and 'yinks' would name the pathet-
ic strands of hair that some men drape carefully but ineffectively
over their bald spots. We have all thought of (noticed, reflected
upon) these items before - that's why these books are able to strike
a humorous chord in us - so it seems obvious that we can have bare
or wordless concepts in our consciousness. And so, it seems, we can
think bare propositions composed of them.
This kind of thinking is a personal level activity, an intentional
activity, something we do. It is not just something that happens in
our bodies. (Think of the sign that admonishes 'THINK!'). When
we think thoughts of this sort, we do, it seems, manipulate our
thoughts, and it can be difficult or easy work. This too is part of the
heterophenomenology of consciousness, and hence forms part of
the explicandum of any theory of thinking. But it is not given to
introspection that these processes, or our perceptual processes, or
any of the other cognitive transitions that are not personal actions
but do just happen in our bodies, involve the transformation or
manipulation of formulae of Mentalese.
Even if the (d) phenomenon occurs quite frequently in people like
us, professional thinkers, (e) and (f) do not follow, and there are good
reasons to resist them. Here is one that is often overlooked. If we
221

Daniel C. Dennett
view Mentalese as the lingua franca of all cognition, and view it as
'automatically understood', this apparently secures a 'solution' to
the problem of understanding. But in spite of declarations by Fodor
and others that Mentalese does not itself require interpretation by
the brain that speaks it, this solution-by-fiat is both unsupported
(except by an unsound analogy to machine language) and costly: it
creates an artefactual problem about the 'access' of consciousness.
How? If Mentalese is the lingua franca of all cognition, it must
be the lingua franca of all the unconscious cognition in addition to
the conscious thinking. Unconscious cognitive processes are grant-
ed on all sides, and if it is conducted in Mentalese (as is commonly
asserted or assumed by theorists of the language of thought per-
suasion), getting some content translated into Mentalese cannot be
sufficient for getting it into consciousness, even if it is sufficient for
getting it understood. There must then be some further translation
or transduction, into an even more central arena than central pro-
cessing, into some extra system - for instance, Ned Block's (1992)
postulated consciousness module. Beyond understanding lies con-
scious appreciation, according to this image, and it needs a place to
happen in.2 This is what I have called the myth of double transduc-
tion, and I have criticised it elsewhere (Dennett 1996), so will not
pursue it further here.
There are other ways of modelling human thinking, even 'word-
less' human thinking, that are much more plausible. Indeed, it is
retrospectively astonishing that an idea as bizarrely unbiological as
the language of thought has had as robust a career as it has. (What
about the genetic code found in DNA? Isn't it a well-attested bio-
logical language? Yes, but it too, like machine language, consists of
imperatives - orders to create proteins - combined into recipes. The
descriptions of body parts and behaviours that emerge from the
genetic code's recipes are amazingly indirect; you can't say 'Give
this body the belief that snow is white' in DNA, even if something
like this belief is innate in polar bears. So the genetic code is also a
poor model for the language of thought.)
Contrast the idea of a central processing unit in which orderly
transactions are conducted in a common code with the following: a
competitive arena in which many different sorts of things happen —
Grand Central Station, in which groups of visitors speaking many
tongues try to find like-minded cohorts by calling out to each other,
2 If we follow Jackendoff s idea (1987), this would not be the central
summit but a sort of ring surrounding that summit — a tempting idea, but
not, I think, one to run with. (I'd rather get the benefits of Jackendoff's
vision by other routes, other images, but that's a topic for another occa-
sion.)
222

How to do Other Things with Words
sweeping across the floor in growing crowds, waving their hands,
pushing and shoving and gesturing - and occasionally managing to
make contact and co-ordinate activity. How could such an alterna-
tive vision work? I have a few hints and hunches to offer.
Making Tools to Think with
Plato, in the Theaetetus (196c-d), compares human memory to a
huge cage of birds:
SOCRATES: Now consider whether knowledge is a thing you
can possess in that way without having it about you, like a man
who has caught some wild birds - pigeons or what-not - and
keeps them in an aviary for them at home. In a sense, of course,
we might say that he 'has' them all the time inasmuch as he pos-
sesses them, mightn't we?
THEAETETUS: Yes.
SOCRATES: But in another sense he 'has' none of them, though
he has got control of them, now that he has made them captive in
an enclosure of his own; he can take and have hold of them when-
ever he likes by catching any bird he chooses, and let them go
again; and it is open to him to do that as often as he pleases.
The trick is: getting the right bird to come when you need it. How
do we do it? By means of technology. We build elaborate systems of
mnemonic association - pointers, labels, chutes and ladders, hooks
and chains. We refine our resources by incessant rehearsal and tin-
kering, turning our brains (and all the associated peripheral gear we
acquire) into a huge structured network of competences. (No evi-
dence yet unearthed shows that any other animal does anything like
that.)
Getting the information into usable form, usable position - that is
the task of resource management or resource refinement that faces
us and, I want to suggest, we need words for that task. As Goethe
once said, 'When ideas fail, words come in very handy.'3
Noam Chomsky has often said that birds don't have to learn their
feathers and babies don't have to learn their language. I think there
is a better parallel between birds and language: a child acquiring
language is like a bird building a nest; it is a matter of 'instinctual'
3 I cited this in Dennett 1995 (p. 370), while doubting the attribution to
Goethe, but as several readers informed me, he did indeed have
Mephistopheles say it, in Faust: 'Denn eben wo Begriffe fehlen, Da stellt
ein Wort zur rechten Zeit sich ein'.
223

Daniel C. Dennett
or 'automatic' resource-enhancement, taking found objects and
constructing something of great biological value - part of what
Dawkins (1982) calls the extended phenotype - which blurs the
boundary between an organism (or agent) and the environment in
which it must act.
Many years ago, Bertrand Russell (1927, pp. 32-3) made a wry
observation:
Animals studied by Americans rush about frantically, with an
incredible display of hustle and pep, and at last achieve the
desired result by chance. Animals observed by Germans sit still
and think, and at last evolve the situation out of their inner con-
sciousness.
Wolfgang Kohler's (1925) early experiments with chimpanzees were
the inspiration for Russell's witticism, which helps to perpetuate a
common misunderstanding. Kohler's apes did not just sit and think
up the solutions. They had to have many hours of exposure to the
relevant props - the boxes and sticks, for instance - and they
engaged in much manipulation of these items. Those apes that dis-
covered the solutions — some never did — accomplished it with the
aid of many hours of trial and error manipulating.
Now were they thinking when they were fussing about in their
cages? What were they manipulating? Boxes and sticks. It is all too
tempting to suppose that their external, visible manipulations were
accompanied by, and driven by, internal, covert manipulations - of
thoughts about or representations of these objects, but succumbing
to this temptation is losing the main chance. What they were attend-
ing to, manipulating and turning over and rearranging were boxes
and sticks, not thoughts.
They were familiarising themselves with objects in their environ-
ments. What does that mean? It means that they were building up
some sort of perceptuo-locomotor structures tuned to the specific
objects, discovering the affordances of those objects, getting used to
them, making them salient, etc. So their behaviour was not all that
different from the incessant trial and error scrambling of the behav-
iourists' cats, rats and pigeons. They were acting in the world, re-
arranging things in the world — without any apparent plan or insight
or goal, at least at the outset.
Animals at all levels are designed to tidy up their immediate envi-
ronments, which are initially messy, confusing, intractable, danger-
ous, inscrutable, hard to move around in. They build nests, caches,
escape tunnels, ambush sites, scent trails, territorial boundaries.
They familiarise themselves with landmarks. They do all this to
help them keep better track of the things that matter - predators
224

How to do Other Things with Words
and prey, mates, etc. These are done by 'instinct': automated rou-
tines for improving the environment of action, making a better fit
between agent and world.
This wise husbandry of one's own behavioural territory is eco-
nomically focused on the most important and ubiquitous features.
Pre-eminent among these portions of the environment is the agent's
own body, of course, always present, its condition always intensely
relevant. Animals instinctively groom themselves and engage in
behaviours that are apparently designed (although they need not
realise this) to repair flaws, to maintain and improve their co-ordi-
nation and muscle tone, and, in effect, to familarise themselves with
their own bodies. A part of the body that must not be overlooked in
this maintenance and improvement schedule is the brain. It, too,
can become messy, confusing, inscrutable, an overwhelmingly com-
plex arena of action. So we should expect animals to be instinctual-
ly equipped to engage in mindless, automatic routines that tidy up
their own brains.
We should especially expect it in Homo sapiens, whose huge
brains are so plastic, so inundatable, so at the mercy of invading
memes and memories. Resource management for a young human
brain is, I think, a major task, and we should expect it to be accom-
plished by activities that are rooted, at the outset, in our biology, in
our 'instincts', but which also get enhanced in major ways by tech-
niques that are themselves part of the influx of new resources.
Human infants engage in exploratory activities much like those
exhibited by the chimpanzees, handling every object within reach,
bringing it to their mouths, looking at it, over and over. One of the
fruits of this repetitive activity is a strong capacity to recognise and
track individual things. Tracking and recognition are strictly differ-
ent phenomena - you can track something you cannot identify at all,
except as the whatever-it-is you're tracking. Recognition depends
heavily on this familiarisation process. Consider the potent experi-
ence of seeing, for the first time since you were, say, five years old,
a favourite toy or article of clothing from your childhood; the warm
rush of recognition suggests that there has been very little diminu-
tion in the associational structures built in your brain so many years
before. This strong capacity to recognise does not cover items or
individuals or places of mere passing acquaintance with which you
have not actively familiarised yourself. And yet active as the process
is, it need not be deliberate or directed or thoughtful - it can be
unthinking, automatic.
We more mature Homo sapiens also engage in a more directed ver-
sion of this behaviour, purposefully and attentively moving things
around in the world in order to solve problems. For instance, most
225

Daniel C. Dennett
Scrabble players would be seriously handicapped if they were pre-
vented from sliding the little tiles around on their little shelf. We
write words on index cards and slips of paper, doodle and diagram
and sketch. These concrete activities are crutches for thinking, and
once we get practised at these activities, we can to some degree
internalise these manipulations.
Can you alphabetise the words in this sentence in your head?
Yes, probably, but what you do is not easy. It is not easy because you
have to keep track of things. To perform this stunt, you need to use
visual imagery and auditory rehearsal. You work to make each com-
ponent as vivid as possible, to help you do the required tracking. If
we were to expand the task just a little bit by making the words hard
to distinguish visually, or by lengthening the sentence, you would
find it impossible to alphabetise in your head - and this very sen-
tence is such an instance. Try it.
Your capacity to alphabetise a list of words in your head, or do
mental arithmetic, is an advanced trick, not a novice trick, but it
doesn't differ in kind in any important way from the capacity to do
the same thing with the aid of paper and pencil. You have made a
somewhat fancier nest out of your resources - that's all.
What Can We Do with Our Tools?
Even very simple animals are capable of associative learning - what
I have called ABC learning (for Associative, Behaviourist,
Connectionist). We human beings have the capacity for another
kind of learning: swift, insightful learning that does not depend on
laborious training but is ours as soon as we contemplate a suitable
symbolic representation of the knowledge. When psychologists
devise a new experimental setup or paradigm in which to test such
non-human subjects as rats or cats or monkeys or dolphins, they
often have to devote dozens or even hundreds of hours to training
each subject on the new tasks. Human subjects, however, can usual-
ly just be told what is desired of them. After a brief question-and-
answer session and a few minutes of practice, we human subjects
will typically be as competent in the new environment as any agent
ever could be. Of course, we do have to understand the representa-
tions presented to us in these briefings, and that's where the transi-
tion from ABC learning to our kind of learning is still shrouded in
fog. An insight that may help clear the fog is a familiar maxim of
artefact making: if you 'make it yourself, you understand it.
Although ABC learning can yield remarkably subtle and power-
226

How to do Other Things with Words
ful discriminatory competences, capable of teasing out the patterns
lurking in voluminous arrays of data, these competences tend to be
anchored in the specific tissues that are modified by training. They
are 'embedded' competences, in the sense that they are incapable of
being 'transported' readily to be brought to bear on other problems
faced by the individual, or shared with other individuals. The
philosopher Andy Clark and the psychologist Annette Karmiloff-
Smith have recently been exploring the transition from a brain that
has only such embedded knowledge to a brain that, as they say,
'enriches itself from within by re-representing the knowledge that
it has already represented'. Clark and Karmiloff-Smith note that
while there are clear benefits to a design policy that 'intricately
interweave[s] the various aspects of our knowledge about a domain
in a single knowledge structure', there are costs as well: 'The inter-
weaving makes it practically impossible to operate on or otherwise
exploit the various dimensions of our knowledge independently of
one another' (Clark and Karmiloff-Smith 1993, pp. 494-5). So
opaquely is such knowledge hidden in the mesh of the connections
that 'it is knowledge in the system, but it is not yet knowledge to the
system' (ibid., p. 495) - like the wisdom revealed in the precocious
single-mindedness with which the newly hatched cuckoo shoulders
the competing eggs out of the nest. What would have to be added to
the cuckoo's computational architecture for it to be able to appreci-
ate, understand and exploit the wisdom interwoven in its neural
nets? (Cf. Dretske 1991, Dennett 1987, pp. 3O6ff, and Dennett
1992.)
A popular answer to this question, in its many guises, is 'sym-
bols!' The answer is well-nigh tautological, and hence is bound to
be right in some interpretation. How could it not be the case that
implicit or tacit knowledge becomes explicit by being expressed or
rendered in some medium of 'explicit' representation? Symbols,
unlike the nodes woven into connectionist networks, are movable;
they can be manipulated; they can be composed into larger struc-
tures in which their contribution to the meaning of the whole can be
a definite and generatable function of the structure - the syntactic
structure - of the parts. There is surely something right about this,
but we must proceed cautiously, since many pioneers have posed
these questions in ways that have turned out to be misleading.
To anchor a free-floating rationale (such as the cuckoo's) to an
agent in the strong way, so that it is the agent's own reason, the agent
must 'make' something. A representation of the reason must be
composed, designed, edited, revised, manipulated, endorsed. How
does any agent come to be able to do such a wonderful thing? Does
it have to grow a new organ in its brain? Or could it build this com-
227

Daniel C. Dennett
petence out of the sorts of external-world manipulations it has
already mastered?
Children enjoy talking to themselves. What might this be doing
to their minds?4 I cannot answer that question yet, but I have some
speculative suggestions for further research. Consider what happens
early in the linguistic life of any child. 'Hot!' says Mother. 'Don't
touch the stove!' At this point, the child doesn't have to know what
'hot' or 'touch' or 'stove' mean - these words are primarily just
sounds, auditory event-types that have a certain redolence, a certain
familiarity, a certain echoing memorability to the child. They come
to conjure up a situation-type - stove-approach-and-avoidance -
which is not just a situation in which a specific prohibition is typi-
cally heard but also a situation in which a mimicking auditory
rehearsal is encountered. Crudely simplifying, let's suppose that the
child acquires the habit of saying to itself (aloud) 'Hot!' 'Don't
touch!' without much of an idea what these words means, voicing
them merely as an associated part of the drill that goes with
approaching and then avoiding the stove - and also as a sort of
mantra, which might be uttered at any other time. After all, children
are taken with the habit of rehearsing words they have just heard -
rehearsing them in and out of context - building up recognition
links and association paths between the auditory properties and
concurrent sensory properties and other internal states. They are
familiarising themselves with these newfound tools.
That's a rough sketch of the sort of process that must go on. This
process could have the effect of initiating a habit of what we might
call semi-understood self-commentary. The child, prompted initially
by some insistent auditory associations provoked by its parents'
admonitions, acquires the habit of adding a soundtrack to its activ-
ities - 'commenting' on them. The actual utterances would consist
at the outset of large measures of what psychologists and linguists
have called 'scribble' - nonsense talk composed of wordlike sounds
- mixed with real words mouthed with much feeling but little or no
appreciation of their meaning, and a few understood words. There
would be mock exhortation, mock prohibition, mock praise, mock
description, and all these would eventually mature into real exhor-
tation, prohibition, praise and description. But the habit of adding
the 'labels' would thus be driven into place before the labels them-
selves were understood, or even partially understood.
I'm suggesting that it's such initially 'stupid' practices - the mere
mouthing of labels in circumstances appropriate and inappropriate
- that could eventually be turned into the habit of representing
4 For recent overviews of research in this area, see Diaz and Berk (1992),
and Fernyhough (1996).
228

How to do Other Things with Words
one's own states and activities to oneself in a new way. As the child
lays down more associations between the auditory and articulatory
processes on the one hand, and patterns of concurrent activity on
the other, this would create nodes of saliency in memory. A word
can become familiar even without being understood. And it is these
anchors of familiarity that could give a label an independent identi-
ty within the system. Without such independence, labels are invisi-
ble. For a word to serve as a useful, manipulable label in the refine-
ment of the resources of a brain, it must be a ready enhancer of
sought-for associations that are already to some extent laid down in
the system. Beyond that, words can be arbitrary, and their arbitrari-
ness is actually part of what makes them distinctive. There is little
risk of failing to notice the presence of the label; it doesn't just
blend into its surroundings. It wears its artificial status on its sleeve.
The habit of semi-understood self-commentary could, I am sug-
gesting, be the origin of the practice of deliberate labelling, in
words (or scribble words or other private neologisms), which in turn
could lead to a still more efficient practice: dropping all or most of
the auditory and articulatory associations and just relying on the rest
of the associations (and association-possibilities) to do the anchor-
ing. The child, I suggest, can abandon out-loud mouthings and cre-
ate private, unvoiced neologisms as labels for features of its own
activities.
We can take a linguistic object as a found object (even if we have
somehow blundered into making it ourselves rather than hearing it
from someone else) and store it away for further consideration, off-
line. Our ability to do this depends on our ability to re-identify or
recognise and track such a label on different occasions, and this in
turn depends on the label having some feature or features by which
to remember it — some guise independent of its meaning.
Once we have created labels and acquired the habit of attaching
them to experienced circumstances, we have created a new class of
objects that can themselves become the objects of all the pattern-
recognition machinery, association-building machinery, and so
forth. Like the scientists lingering retrospectively over an unhurried
examination of photographs they took in the heat of experimental
battle, we can reflect on whatever patterns there are to be discerned
in the various labelled exhibits we dredge out of memory.
As we improve, our labels become ever more refined, more per-
spicuous, ever better articulated, and the point is finally reached
when we approximate the near-magical human prowess we began
with: the mere contemplation of a representation is sufficient to call
to mind the appropriate lessons. At this point we are well on our way
to becoming understanders of the objects we have created. We might
229

Daniel C. Dennett
call these artefactual nodes in our memories, these pale shadows of
articulated and heard words, concepts. A concept, then, is a propri-
etary label which may or may not include among its many associa-
tions the auditory and articulatory features of a word (public or pri-
vate). But words, I am suggesting, are the prototypes or forebears of
concepts. Bickerton (1995, p. Ill) speaks of 'linguistic concepts
(undressed words)', and I am suggesting that the first concepts one
can manipulate are 'voiced' concepts or well-dressed words. Only
concepts that can be manipulated can become objects of scrutiny for
us.
If you have ever tried panning for gold, you know that the right
technique of swirling and swishing and draining is not transparent-
ly obvious. There is a simple trick, however, that can swiftly lead
you to competence or even expertise. Into each panful of muddy
sand and gravel you take up, sprinkle a few - half a dozen - tiny lead
shots. They are almost as dense as any gold particles present, and
will behave almost the same. As you near the end of your swirling,
most of the material having been sluiced away, you should be able
to see the little group of lead shot emerge once more from hiding.
(If they do not appear, you have been too vigorous, and thrown out
the baby with the bathwater! Try again, more gently.) Once you get
the hang of it, the cluster of lead spheres will chaperone any bits of
gold in the pan, which seem to be drawn to their neighborhood as if
by magnetism. This activity of seeding a confused mess with some-
thing known and reidentifiable, something familiar, and then lean-
ing on the familiar to help track the novel, has a striking parallel in
the use of symbols.
This comes out clearly in a recent experiment by Thompson,
Oden and Boyson (forthcoming). As Andy Clark explains, in anoth-
er forthcoming paper (this is fast-breaking news in a new research
area),
The idea...is that learning to associate concepts with discrete
arbitrary labels (words) somehow makes it easier to use those
concepts to constrain computational search and hence enables the
acquisition of a cascade of more complex and increasingly
abstract ideas. The claim...is thus that associating a perceptually
simple, stable, external item (such as a word) with an idea, con-
cept or piece of knowledge effectively freezes the concept into a
sort of cognitive building-block - an item that can then be treat-
ed as a simple baseline feature for future episodes of thought,
learning and search.
Consider a simple matching task - such as matching one cup to
another cup in an array of different objects. Compare that with the
230

How to do Other Things with Words
task of matching a relation-between-relations — such as matching a
pair of identical items (two shoes) to a different pair of identical
items (two cups) amidst a collection of odd pairs (cup and ball, shoe
and fork, etc). Or even harder, matching a pair of different items
with the only other pair of items that were different. It has been
shown that chimps can discriminate the basic relations of similari-
ty and difference, but only language-trained chimps (Premack 1986,
Premack and Premack 1983) can master the higher-order judgement
required to act on the fact that this pair, like that pair, consists of a
brace of different items. (Notice that I did not impute any language
of thought to these chimps. They pick up on a higher-order simi-
larity but need not be able to express this competence in any verbal
way, even to themselves.) As Thompson et al. show, this is due not
to the minimal syntactic competence such linguistic training has
imparted (to Premack's chimps), but to 'simply the experience of
associating abstract relations with arbitrary tokens'. The chimps
were given familiarity with an arbitrary symbol or label associated
with 'SAME' or 'DIFFERENT'; the token, then, is a cognitive
crutch, a simplifier of the perceptual world that helps the animal
track a pattern that is otherwise just beyond its ken.
So this tracking of higher-order categories is a stunt, not a prim-
itive building-block, and as we learn to throw away the sounds and
other associations, we make the stunt ever more sophisticated. In
this arena, wordless thought should be seen as a rather exotic spec-
imen instead of the foundation of all cognition. The image I want
to explore has it that these rare, hypersophisticated transitions occur
when very sketchy images of linguistic representations serve as
mnemonic triggers for 'inferential' processes that generate further
sketchy images of linguistic representations and so forth. (This sort
of short-cut transition can take place in any modality, any system of
associations. For a trained musician, the circle of fifths imposes
itself automatically and involuntarily on a fragment of heard or
imagined music, just the way modus ponens intrudes on the percep-
tions of a trained logician, or the offside line does on a trained soc-
cer player). This way of trying to imagine word-free 'logical infer-
ence' makes it look rather like barefoot waterskiing — a stunt that
professionals can make look easy, but that is hardly the basic build-
ing-block of successful transportation/cognition in the everyday
concrete world.
And even when we are very, very good, we sometimes fall back on
the old crutches. If your mother tongue is English, you may find
that long after you have achieved something approaching fluency in
French or German, you have to convert 'vierundzwanzig' or 'qua-
tre-vingt douze' into your more familiar mode of numerical repre-
231

Daniel C. Dennett
sentation. Why is this so? Because you have turned your mother-
tongue words into highly familiarised objects, anchored by a host of
associations. They are birds that not only come when you call, but
call forth flocks of further birds.
Consider a familiar human activity that we rely on in many prob-
lem-solving circumstances: we ask ourselves explicit questions.
This practice has no readily imaginable counterpart in non-linguis-
tic animals, but what does it gain us, if anything? We are calling the
birds. To get the right bird to come when you call is a task calling
for technical skills if your birds are stored somewhere in your
library or on your hard disk, but also if they are stored in your head.
You need to develop retrieval strategies, ways of manipulating your
own brain. These methods are themselves tools. You don't use the
tools; they jump into action on their own, bidden by circumstances,
and beneath your conscious control. They are tools that have to call
themselves into action when needed, beating out the competition.
Have you ever danced with a movie star? Do you know where to
buy live eels? Could you climb five flights of stairs carrying a bicy-
cle and a cello? These are questions the answers to which were prob-
ably not already formulated and handily stored in your brain (as
sentences of Mentalese in your belief box!), and yet these questions
are readily - even 'unthinkingly' - answered reliably by most peo-
ple. How do they do it? By engaging in relatively effortless and
automatic 'reasoning'. In the first case, if no recollection of the pre-
sumably memorable event is provoked by considering the question,
you conclude that the answer is No. The second question initiates a
swift survey (pet stores? fancy restaurants? fish markets or live bait
dealers?), and the third provokes some mental imagery which
reminds you of relevant facts about your own body and its compe-
tences. These are facts about oneself that wouldn't 'automatically'
come to mind when needed without a little extra provocation, a lit-
tle calling. The way to get this sort of information into useful posi-
tion for current purposes is to ask ourselves questions and see what
comes back!
Do we need to ask ourselves grammatical questions? Not neces-
sarily. If we look at the history of artificial intelligence, we can
detect a series of clashes over the years between the 'neats' and the
'scruffies'. The neats, epitomised by GOFAI (Good Old Fashioned
AI - Haugeland 1985), have worked out formal methods for 'query-
ing data-bases', and in these schemes, the logical or grammatical
structure of the probes is indeed all-important. The systems work
by mechanised formal deduction. This has proven feasible for many
real-world applications in which the information stored is itself
highly systematic and bounded — airline routes and timetables, stock
232

How to do Other Things with Words
market prices and other information, medical records. But such sys-
tems are often 'brittle' and hard to revise or expand. They are not
at all biological in their shape, at any level, and do not appear
remotely applicable to the sorts of open-ended, time-pressured,
freewheeling demands of controlling real world engagements. The
scruffies, meanwhile, have favoured various less disciplined, less
formal ways of teasing the relevant data out of their pigeonholes. At
some level of sophistication, and for certain advanced tasks, syntax
is surely obligatory. Turning mere 'labels' into names and predi-
cates, nouns and verbs and auxiliaries, is necessary to get the com-
positionality that permits us - and apparently only us - to extend
our comprehension to all topics.
But does this structure have to be in the brain from the outset,
part of the underlying computational architecture, or can it be
brought in, piecemeal, from the cultural environment, to discipline
our brains at a higher level? This is an empirical question, and now
that we can dimly see the scruffy alternative, it would be wise to
push it as far as we can, knowing that there is plenty of structure in
the artefactual world to avail ourselves of, for special purposes. The
elementary way to get the birds to come is the way real birds do it,
by just calling - yoohoo, in hundreds of varieties, but without syn-
tax. Once the birds have been trained to fly in formation, this will
provide further structures out of which to build further compe-
tences.
And where does consciousness come into the picture? It is already
there, unnoticed, in the activity just described. Mental contents
become conscious not by entering some special chamber in the
brain, not by being transduced into some privileged and mysterious
medium, but by winning the competitions against other mental con-
tents for domination in the control of behaviour, and hence for
achieving long-lasting effects - or as we misleadingly say, 'entering
into memory'. And since we are talkers, and since talking to our-
selves is one of our most influential activities, one of the most effec-
tive ways - not the only way - for a mental content to become influ-
ential is for it to get into position to drive the language-using parts
of the controls. All this has to happen in the arena of the brain, in
'central processing', but not under the direction of anything. The
Person is the virtual governor, not a real governor; it is the effect of
the processes, not their cause.
A common reaction to this suggestion about human conscious-
ness is frank bewilderment, expressed more or less as follows:
'Suppose all these strange competitive processes are going on in my
brain, and suppose that, as you say, the conscious processes are sim-
ply those that win the competitions. How does that make them con-
233

Daniel C. Dennett
scious? What happens next to them that makes it true that / know
about them? For after all, it is my consciousness, as I know it from
the first-person point of view, that needs explaining!' Such ques-
tions betray a deep confusion, for they presuppose that what you are
is something else, some Cartesian res cogitans in addition to all this
brain-and-body activity. What you are, however, just is this organi-
sation of all the competitive activity between a host of competences
that your body has developed. You 'automatically' know about these
things going on in your body, because if you didn't, it wouldn't be
your body!
The acts and events you can tell us about, and the reasons for
them, are yours because you made them — and because they made
you. What you are is that agent whose life you can tell about. You
can tell us, and you can tell yourself. The process of self-description
begins in earliest childhood, and includes a good deal of fantasy
from the outset. (Think of Snoopy in the Peanuts cartoon, sitting on
his doghouse and thinking 'Here's the World War I ace, flying into
battle...') It continues through life. (Think of the cafe waiter in Jean
Paul Sartre's discussion of 'bad faith' in Being and Nothingness
(1943), who is all wrapped up in learning how to live up to his self-
description as a waiter.) It is what we do. It is what we are.5
References
Bickerton, D. 1995. Language and Human Behavior. University of
Washington Press
Block, N. J. 1992. 'Begging the Question against Phenomenal
Consciousness', (commentary on Kinsbourne and Dennett), The
Behavioral and Brain Sciences 15, 205—6
Clark, A. and Karmiloff-Smith, A. 1993. 'The Cognizer's Innards: A
Psychological and Philosophical Perspective on the Development of
Thought', Mind and Language 8, 487-519
Clark, A. (forthcoming). 'Magic Words: How Language Augments
Human Computation' in P. Carruthers and J. Boucher (eds.), Language
and Thought: Interdisciplinary Themes. Cambridge University Press
Dawkins, R. 1982. The Extended Phenotype: The Gene as the Unit of
Selection. Oxford and San Francisco: Freeman
Dennett, D. C. 1987. The Intentional Stance. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press
1992. 'La Comprehension Artisanale', in Daniel C. Dennett et les
Strategies Intentionnelles, in Lekton 2, Universite de Quebec a Montreal
1993. 'Learning and Labeling' (commentary on Clark and
Karmiloff-Smith 1993), Mind and Language 8, 540-47
5 Parts of this paper are drawn, with slight revisions, from Dennett
(1993) and (1996).
234

How to do Other Things with Words
— 1995. Darwin's Dangerous Idea: Evolution Evaluation and the
Meanings of Life. New York: Simon & Schuster, and London: Allen
Lane
1996. Kinds of Minds. New York: Basic Books, and London:
Weidenfeld & Nicholson
Diaz, R. M. and Berk, L. E. 1992. Private Speech: From Social Interaction
to Self-Regulation. Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum
Dretske, F. I. 1991. 'Replies' in B. McLaughlin (ed.), Dretske and his
Critics. Oxford: Blackwell
Fernyhough, C. 1996. 'The Dialogic Mind: A Dialogic Approach to the
Higher Mental Functions', New Ideas in Psychology 14, 47-62
Fodor, J. A. 1983. The Modularity of Mind. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press
Haugeland, J. 1985. Artificial Intelligence: The Very Idea. Cambridge,
MA: MIT Press
Jackendoff, R. 1987. Consciousness and the Computational Mind.
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press
Kohler, W. 1925. The Mentality of Apes. New York: Harcourt Brace and
World
Mead, G. H. 1930. Mind, Self, and Society. University of Chicago Press
Premack, D. 1986. Gavagai! Or, the Future History of the Animal Language
Controversy. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press
Premack D. and Premack, A. J. 1983. The Mind of an Ape. New York and
London: Norton
Russell, B. A. W. 1927. An Outline of Philosophy. London: Allen & Unwin
Sartre, J.-P. 1943/1953. Being and Nothingness, translated by H. Barnes.
New York: Philosophical Library
Skinner, B. F. 1957. Verbal Behavior. New York: Appleton-Century-
Crofts
Thompson, R., Oden, D. and Boyson, S. (forthcoming). 'Language-Naive
Chimpanzees Judge Relations-between-relations in an Abstract
Matching Task', Journal of Experimental Psychology: Animal Behavior
Processes
Vygotsky, L. S. 1934/1962. Thought and Language, edited and translated
by E. Hanfmann and G. Vakar. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press
1934/1986. Thought and Language, translated by A. Kozulin.
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press
Wittgenstein, L. 1967. Zettel, edited by G. E. M. Anscombe, G. H. von
Wright, and translated by G. E. M. Anscombe. Oxford: Blackwell
235

