BEHAVIORAL AND BEAIN SCIENCES (1990) 13, 63-108
Printed in the United States of America
Jonathan Schyil
Department of Psychology, Haverford College, Haverford, PA 19041
Electronic mail: ischull@hvrford.hitnet
Abstracts Plant and animal species are information-processing entities of such complexity, integration, and adaptive competence that
it may be scientifically fruitful to consider them intelligent. The possibility arises from the analogy between learning (in organisms)
and evolution (in species), and from recent developments in evolutionary science, psychology and cognitive science. Species are now
described as spatiotemporally localized individuals in an expanded hierarchy of biological entities. Intentional and cognitive abilities
are now ascribed to animal, human, and artificial intelligence systems that process information adaptively, and that manifest
problem-solving abilities. The structural and functional similarities between such systems and species are extensive, although they
"are usually obscured by population-genetic metaphors that have nonetheless contributed much to our understanding of evolution.
In this target article, I use Sewall Wright's notion of the "adaptive landscape" to compare the performances of evolving species to
those of intelligent organisms. With regard to their adaptive achievements and the kinds of processes by which they are achieved,
biological species compare very favorably to intelligent animals by virtue of interactions between populations and their environ-
ments, between ontogeny and phylogeny, and between natural, interdemic, organic, and species selection. Addressing the question
of whether species are intelligent could help to refine our ideas about species, evolution, and intelligence, and could open new lines of
empirical and theoretical inquiry in many disciplines.
Keywords: animal behavior; artificial intelligence; cognitive science; evolution; insight; intelligence; interdemic selection; learning;
natural selection; organic selection; parallel distributed processing; punctuated equilibrium; species; species selection
1. introduction
In this target article I argue that plant and animal species
are information-processing entities of such complexity,
integration, and adaptive competence that it may be
scientifically fruitful to consider them intelligent. Al-
though I do not mean to suggest that species are sentient,
or conscious, even the idea that they might be intelligent
is admittedly unorthodox. Nonetheless, I hope to show
that the possibility follows from recent developments in
biology, psychology, philosophy, and cognitive science,
and that workers in these and other disciplines will have
to address a variety of novel issues before the idea can be
evaluated properly. I also hope to show that the effort
would be worthwhile, for it could lead to the clarification
and elaboration of our ideas of intelligence, species, and
evolution, and it could open new lines of empirical and
theoretical inquiry.
The analogy between learning (in individuals) and
evolution (of species) is at least as old as the idea of
evolution (e.g., Lamarck 1809). There are also deep
similarities underlying contemporary theories of learning
and of evolution, for at the heart of most such theories is a
variation on Darwin's theory of random variation and
natural selection. Indeed, it has been argued that learn-
ing, intelligence, and the acquisition of new knowledge
can only arise from selected variation, and that any theory
of elaborated intelligence or higher cognition will have to
acknowledge the operation of multiple, nested levels of
variation and selection (see, e.g., Campbell 1974; Csanyi
1989; Dennett 1975). [See also Skinner: "Selection By
Consequences" BBS 7(4) 1984.]
My thesis is that plant and animal species process
information via multiple nested levels of variation and
selection in a manner that is surprisingly similar to what
must go on in intelligent animals. As biological entities,
and as processors of information, plant and animal species
are no less complicated than, say, monkeys. Their adap-
tive achievements (the brilliant design and exquisite
production of biological organisms) are no less impres-
sive, and certainly rival those of the animal and electronic
systems to which the term "intelligence5' is routinely (and
perhaps validly) applied today. So perhaps we should
recognize them as intelligent systems of considerable
scope and study them for the light they can throw on the
nature of both evolution and intelligence.
Regardless of how we ultimately answer the question,
"Are species intelligent?" the attempt to answer it could
make it easier to perceive and investigate patterns of
populational change and adaptation, and could throw new
light on interactions of ontogeny and phylogeny, evolu-
tion and intelligence, natural, organic, interdemic, and
species selection, and artificial and natural intelligence.
Thus, I have two major goals: first, to construct a con-
ceptual "macroscope" for viewing aspects of biological
evolution that are usually obscured; and second, to pro-
voke a reappraisal of the concept of intelligence and of the
entities to which we apply it. To these ends, I develop the
concept of species as meta-organisms, and compare their
behavioral competence in evolutionary time to the com-
petencies of intelligent animals behaving in "real" time.
© 1990 Cambridge University Press
0140-525X190 $5.00+.00
63

Schull: Are species intelligent?
2B What kind of an entity is a species?
The idea that species are spatiotemporally localized indi-
viduals (rather than arbitrary categories, classes, or col-
lections) is gaining increasing currency in biology (Ghisel-
in 1981; Hull 1980). Although it does not follow from this
that species are intelligent (chairs and rocks are spa-
tiotemporally localized individuals too), it does encour-
age us to task what kinds of individuals they are.
According to many evolutionists today (Eldredge 1985a;
Gould 1982; Stanley 1979) species are rather like orga-
nisms: Speciation is like reproduction and birth, and
extinction is like death. More specifically, however, spe-
cies can be likened to giant amoebae: asexually reproduc-
ing (super)organisms whose genetic and somatic materials
are constantly renewed and gradually modified. Amoebae
and species clone (by fission), and it is reasonable to think of
such an event as a "birth"; however, each individual is also
potentially immortal and has existed continuously, albeit
with improvements, since the beginning. Like amoebae,
species are also relatively undifferentiated-in-the-large
(no head, no tail), and move through their environments in
a similarly amorphous, though effective, manner. And
both kinds of entities are comprised of highly differenti-
ated semiautonomous components: In amoebae the com-
ponents are organelles; in species the components are
organisms.
Species differ from amoebae with regard to the com-
plexity of their components, by their grouping into local
populations within the species, and by their adaptive
capacities. In these respects, species are more like multi-
cellular animals, which process large amounts of informa-
tion, adapt to their environments, and learn. Multi-
cellular organisms develop and adapt, and species evolve,
by the differential survival and reproduction of their
components. In multicellular organisms the reproducing
components are cells and cell assemblies; in species, they
are organisms and subpopulations. In both cases, how-
ever, adaptation is achieved by differential reproduction
of selected variants.
Species and animals share another organizational fea-
ture as well - informational integration. In animals, hier-
archically organized nervous systems integrate informa-
tion gathered by the interaction of peripheral organs with
the environment. In species, it is the generation-by-
generation turnover of hierarchically organized gene
pooh, subpopulations, and organisms that allows for the
adaptive pooling of information garnered from the in-
teraction of organisms and subpopulations with the en-
vironment (cf. Reidl 1977).
Species and gene pools are not often described as
information-processing systems, but it should be affirmed
at the outset that the information-processing capacities of
these massively parallel distributed processing systems
surpasses that of even the most sophisticated man-made
systems (cf. McClelland & Rumelhart 1986). Every orga-
nism embodies a tremendous amount of information
about Its evolutionary niche; this Information was ac-
quired and processed with exquisitely high fidelity by
complicated ecological "circuits," which operate in popu-
lations of organisms interacting with their environments.
Consider the anglerfish, from whose nose dangles a
three-dimensional, behaving replica of a small worm. The
Information embodied in this lure has been transmitted
through several species' gene pools, several networks of
selection pressures, and countless developmental histo-
ries: those of the anglerfish, those of its prey, and even
those of worms. The behavior of the anglerfish's prey, for
example, clearly embodies a great deal of information
about the size, shape, and behavior of worms; this infor-
mation was in turn indirectly transmitted to the anglerfish
species through selection pressures immanent in count-
less predator-prey interactions; a transform of the same
information was thence transmitted to the anglerfish's
lure.
This example (or any example of biological mimicry) is
exceptional only in that it is easy to see that the signal
comes through loud and clear. All organisms are products
of equally impressive ecological information-processing
networks. Clearly, then, gene pools in evolving popula-
tions acquire, store, transmit, transform, and use vast
amounts of fitness-relative information.
Thus, despite great differences in the mechanisms of
information processing in species versus animals, the
machinery embodied in a species Is, at least potentially,
adequate to the task of mediating Intelligence.
Henceforth, I will depict species as amoeboid (but
possibly intelligent) metaorganisms with information-
processing machinery that is at least potentially adequate
to deal with large amounts of fitness-relevant informa-
tion. Whether species realize this potential, or do it
intelligently, remains to be seen. The task at hand is to
examine their "adaptive competencies" (a phrase chosen
so as not to prejudge the issue of intelligence), and the
processes that mediate them, in a way which allows
comparison with Intelligent animals. I will do this by
developing a conceptual framework for describing pro-
gressively intelligent performances and for considering
whether species are capable of achieving such perfor-
mances. By thus describing performances, I forestall the
problem of defining intelligence (later, I enumerate fea-
tures of intelligent systems, and argue that species do in
fact possess those features).
mcies of species
The "adaptive landscape" Illustrated in Figure 1 is a slight
elaboration of Sewall Wright's (1932) way of representing
the "space" through which an evolving species moves. In
this representation, the two horizontal dimensions of the
surface stand for a multidimensional genotype-space ade-
quate to represent the genetic constitution of a species'
organisms, and the vertical dimension in the hilly surface
represents the individual inclusive fitness value of each
point on the surface. (I assume that fitness is an objective
relationship between organism and environment that
determines the ability of an organism to propagate its
genes.) Thus, If all the organisms of a species were
genetically Identical, the species would occupy a single
point on the adaptive landscape. If there is interorganism
diversity in the species, it spans some small region of the
landscape. If some organisms within the species have
greater Inclusive fitness than others, they lie slightly
uphill of their less fit conspecifics.
Now, according to the theory of natural selection,
64
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1990) 13:1

Schull: Are species intelligent?
evolving species will tend to behave in a characteristic
manner: Other things being equal, they will move to the
top of the nearest peak and remain there. Because orga-
nismic genotypes that are less fit will tend to die out, and
genotypes that are more fit will tend to multiply, the
location of the species on the adaptive surface will gradu-
ally move, like an amoeba with a negative geotropism, in
the direction of its "highest" parts. Once centered on top
of a peak, the species will tend to stay there, under the
influence of stabilizing selection. This, in visual terms, is
the theory of natural selection, which explains exactly as
much about the movement of a species through the
adaptive landscape as a theory of cytoplasmic streaming
might explain about the movement of a real amoeba
through real space (see Schull 1990 for a discussion on
what such theories do and do not explain).
It does not follow from this that the information-
processing capabilities of a species are as rudimentary as
those of an amoeba with a negative geotropism. On the
contrary, movement through the adaptive landscape rep-
resents change in the agent's internal organization, not
just transposition from one physical "place" to another.
Moreover, the trait-space through which a species moves
is incomparably more complex than the three-
dimensional space through which real amoebae move,
and the repertoire of responses by which species navigate
the adaptive landscape may also be much, much richer.
The difference this makes can be appreciated by noting
that since the law of effect was formulated by explicit
analogy to the theory of natural selection (Thorndike
1899), the same representation can depict the process of
learning by reinforcement (Schull 1990). In this case, the
horizontal dimensions would stand for the neural organi-
zation of an individual animal and the vertical dimensions
at each point on the surface would stand for the rate of
reinforcement achievable by an animal with the neural
organization represented by that point on the surface.
According to the law of effect, an animal's neural organi-
zation will be modified by reinforcement in such a way
that it will constantly move toward the configuration that
locally maximizes rate of reinforcement. (Whether this
actually accounts for the behavior of any existing animal is
not our immediate concern.) Thus, by formalizing the
theories of reinforcement and natural selection, the adap-
tive surface representation enables us to see that species
are at least as "intelligent" as Thorndikean law-of-effect
animals, and far more so than real amoebas.
Scrutinized closely, the representation also assumes
that there is a subtle but important difference in the
nature of adaptation and development in species versus
organisms. Individual organisms act and modify them-
selves in a way that tends to maximize their own inclusive
fitness, and not necessarily that of their components. For
example, maximizing the rate of reinforcement will tend
(see below) to maximize a Thorndikean animal's ability to
reproduce its genes; this will not necessarily maximize
the reproduction of the neural cell assemblies that em-
body the learning. In contrast, species tend to evolve in
directions that are determined by selection pressures
operating on the components (genes and organisms), not
necessarily on the species as a whole. Thus, evolution for
the good-of-the-species is not generally to be expected.
It would be a mistake, however, to conclude from this
that species evolution is a mere epiphenomenon of indi-
vidual selection. Individual organisms do not evolve, and
they cannot be given credit for many of their most
impressive adaptations. Species do evolve, and the "so-
phistication" with which they do so should not be under-
estimated. To demonstrate this, I will describe pro-
gressively more impressive feats of adaptive competence,
showing that species are capable of them.
32. Sawings, conditional discriminations, and what the
adaptiwe landscape obscures
Although the metaphor of the adaptive landscape allows
us to concretize and assess the adaptive competence of
evolutionary performances, which can never be observed
directly, it is far from perfect (Provine 1986). In this
section I will use it to describe an adaptive performance
that goes beyond that of the amoeba while pointing out
how the metaphor can mislead as well as enlighten.
One limitation of the amoeba could be made obvious by
placing it repeatedly in the same place on the surface.
Except for random perturbations of organization or en-
vironment, it would do the same thing, each time, with-
out improvement. A "smarter" creature would improve
from trial to trial, moving ever more rapidly to the nearest
peak.
Can species do this? Probably. When domesticated
pigs escape to the wild, they "reevolve" fur coats and
tusks in a few generations, far faster than was required
originally. (They can presumably do this because the
process of domestication does not involve the selective
elimination of well-entrenched genes responsible for the
earlier pattern, but rather the differential selection and
expression of masking genes that inhibit the earlier pat-
tern. "Re-evolution," then, merely involves derepres-
sion, rather than re-creation, of the earlier genotypic and
phenotypic patterns. A similar process explains why it has
been possible to coax reptilian teeth out of chicken
embryos by tampering with the embryonic environment;
Kollar & Fisher 1980.) Thus, besides being able to form
the equivalent of instrumental "habits," species have a
process akin to the psychological phenomena of memory
and "savings" (the retention-under-inhibition of "extin-
guished" conditioned behaviors). There is also little
doubt that species could form "conditional discrimina-
tions" as well, expressing (or even acquiring) domestic
characteristics in domestic circumstances, and feral char-
acteristics in the wild, because in each environment there
would be ecological stimuli that could serve as epigenetic
"supports" for the appropriate adaptations. Ecologists
would consider such a polymorphism an example of
plasticity, the ability of a single genotype to produce a
variety of phenotypes (see, e.g., Stearns 1982); but our
ability to pigeonhole these phenomenon should not blind
us to the "cognitive capacities" they entail.
Savings can be easily represented on the adaptive
landscape only if the horizontal dimensions of the surface
are given a phenotypic rather than genotypic interpreta-
tion. Then, it would be seen that species can move (evolve)
adaptively with increasing speed over increasingly familiar
ground. If, on the other hand, the horizontal dimensions
are given the more conventional genotypic interpretation,
then the species showing supra-Thorndikean capabilities
is indistinguishable from a merely-Thorndikean species: It
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1990) 13:1
65

Schull: Are species intelligent?
"simply" moves uphill to a fitter genetic configuration. But
this is seriously misleading (Schull 1990).
In fact, under the conventional genotypic interpreta-
tions, all adaptive genetic change in the species, no matter
how sophisticated, looks like "simple," "passive" hill-
climbing. The genotypic adaptive landscape, like the
population-genetic approach in general, systematically
obscures the character of the process of adaptation, much
as an account of intelligence couched in terms of synaptic
differentiation would obscure the very substantial dif-
ferences in intelligence of mice and men (Schull 1990).
Thus, while the genotypic representation of the adap-
tive landscape allows us to show that species are at least as
resourceful as Thorndikean animals, it makes it harder to
see that they might in fact be even more impressive. On
the other hand, if we were to adopt the phenotypic
interpretation of the adaptive landscape we would be left
in the position of nonanalytic observers of intelligent
performances, with less insight into the inner workings of
the process. Therefore, until we need to look at interac-
tions of phenotypic and genotypic adaptation, we will use
the genotypic interpretation, albeit cautiously.
33. Increasing variability when established solutions
fail
The agents considered so far have a simplistic tendency to
rush up the first slope they encounter, even if a much
higher one looms just beyond a neighboring valley. Spe-
cies could be prone to the same kind of trap - they might
"satisfice" rather than "maximize" (Herrnstein & Vau-
ghan 1980). As long as a local fitness peak remains higher
than its neighbors, stabilizing selection would be ex-
pected to cause the agents considered so far to stay at the
top of their hill, even if the hill itself were rapidly
subsiding (i.e., becoming nonadaptive) owing to chang-
ing circumstances. This could continue even to the point
of extinction.
A more adaptively competent agent would increase its
variability of movement when conditions took a turn for
the worse in order to find a new and more promising
adaptive slope. Real biological species must in fact do
something like this, increasing genetic variability under
adverse circumstances. This occurs for a variety of rea-
sons. First, developmental homeostasis must falter in the
absence of its usual environmental supports (Ho & Saun-
ders 1979; cf. Ashby 1960; see also below); this should
impair the operation of error-correcting mechanisms that
minimize mutation rates. Second, in species that usually
reproduce asexually, individual organisms begin repro-
ducing sexually under adverse conditions (Bell 1982). By
promoting novel genes and gene combinations, both of
these factors would correspond precisely to increased
variability of movement and extension of the species'
range on the adaptive surface. The first is an "accident";
the second, an adaptation that increases the probability
that the individual's offspring will have a more adaptive
genome. But both factors should increase the species'
ability to evolve new adaptations under adverse and
changed circumstances - precisely the circumstances in
which new adaptations may well be called for.
The improvement in "adaptability" afforded by these
random-factors-at-times-of-stress is limited, however,
because selection will hold mutation rates to a minimum
under all but the most extreme circumstances, since
random variation is more likely to be disruptive than
adaptive. (In fact, it has been extremely difficult for
evolutionary theorists to convince themselves that the
random recombination involved in sexual reproduction is
worth the cost - circumstantial evidence notwithstand-
ing; Bell 1982; Maynard Smith 1978; Williams 1975.)
Furthermore, in a large, randomly mating population,
genuine novelties would be rare and rapidly eliminated
by natural selection (because most would be maladap-
tive). They would also be limited by the "diluting" effects
of recombination (e.g., when the rare bearer of a novel
combination mates with a "wild type" individual). There-
fore, increased mutation and recombination alone will
often be inadequate to move large, "inertia-bound" pop-
ulations far enough to encounter the slopes of other,
higher peaks.
3AB Experimentation through nested selection
Sewall Wright was the creator of the adaptive landscape
metaphor and one of the founders of the modern syn-
thesis (1932; 1978; see also Provine 1986; Templeton
1982). He recognized that stabilizing selection would
prevent random mutation from moving species off subop-
timal local peaks and attempted to identify conditions in
which evolution could proceed. Wright pointed out that
with time, the landscape itself shifts around, and species
will tend to blunder onto higher and higher peaks. But he
also showed that species have considerable additional
resources when they are comprised of small lo-cal popula-
tions or "demes."
According to Wright's (1983) "shifting balance" theory,
small subpopulations must range more widely over the
adaptive landscape because sampling error in small popu-
lations increases the importance of mutation and genetic
drift relative to natural selection. Moreover, inbreeding
and the reduction of "diluting" gene flow from the species-
at-Iarge will allow novel gene combinations to persist in a
deme once they arise. Then, if a small population thus
stumbles upon a genuine improvement, its absolute num-
bers will increase and it will begin to "infect" the species-
at-large with emigrants and with genes for the new
adaptation. Population structure can thus create a context
for the serendipitous "discovery" of new adaptations.
This scenario is rather well visualized by our image of
the species as an amoeba in the adaptive landscape
(Figure 1). Most of the amoeba is well ensconced atop the
local hill that typifies the species. However, connected to
the main body of the population by an ongoing (though
thin and intermittent) flow of genes are the demes.
Liberated from the stabilizing constraints of natural selec-
tion and driven by genetic drift and inbreeding, the
demes rove rapidly over the surrounding area (rather like
amoeboid pseudopodia). Now here's the clever part:
These pseudopodia will in general occupy lower ground
than the main body of the population, because random
novelties tend to be maladaptive; but if one of these
pseudopodia does stumble onto a slope that leads to a new
and higher adaptive peak, it will tend to ascend that slope
and grow in size. The larger it gets, the less it will wander,
and the more systematically it will move uphill. At the
66
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1990) 13:1

Figure 1. A portion of the adaptive landscape containing two
fitness peaks. The two horizontal dimensions stand for the large
number of dimensions needed to represent the genotype of each
organism in the species. The vertical dimension represents the
fitness of each genotype. A species lies near the top of one of the
adaptive peaks. The theory of natural selection explains why
species will move to the top of the local peak, as the arrow
indicates. I have used the "thickness" of the species at each
point to represent numbers of individuals of each genotype in
the species. Thus, the "blobs" at the fringe of the species
represent small local populations (denies). Sewall Wright's
"shifting balance" theory of interdemic selection indicates that
demes should move more rapidly and randomly over the adap-
tive landscape than the species as a whole (see text).
same time, the main body of the population will begin to
shrink as the new genes spread, and the genotypic charac-
teristics of the population will shift in the direction of the
new adaptive configuration. With time, the amoeba -
that is, the species - will "flow" to its new peak.
Thus, in species so structured, demes represent an
additional "layer" of amplified variation and selection for
the generation of potential courses of species-wide evolu-
tion. The most promising variants that emerge from these
subpopulations are tested in the species-at-large. If they
outcompete other variants they will come to predominate,
and the species will jump to a new and higher adaptive
peak, which it could not otherwise have reached.
Note that while the denies' exploration of the adaptive
landscape is random and undirected, that of the species
no longer looks quite so blundering. It is as if our last best
amoeba had been given telereceptors that allowed it to
detect some of the other peaks, and to move to higher ones
with minimal descent into the valleys surrounding its
earlier location. (Furthermore, like the breakdown of
developmental homeostasis, Wright's "shifting balance"
process would be particularly enhanced when the domi-
nant peak was sinking, because a shrinking modal popula-
tion would have less "inertia" from stabilizing selection
and from the dilution of novel combinations.)
This, then, is a third improvement over our original
model. Its power is not infinite, however. Wright's theo-
ry only indicates that species will evolve most efficiently if
they are divided into thousands of demes. It remains an
empirical question how much of a species is comprised of
deviating demes, nondeviant demes, or large "inertia-
bound" populations (see Wright 1978). The answer prob-
ably varies from species to species and from time to time.
Thus, like other intelligent entities, species may have
intermittent periods of heightened acuity (mediated by
demes) and creativity (when a new peak is discovered),
interspersed by long periods of relative stasis. (The pro-
cess can produce a punctuational pattern of macroevolu-
tion; cf. Gould 1982; Templeton 1982; Wright 1982).
Schull: Are species intelligent?
3.5. Insight" and organic selection
The use of psychological terms in the previous paragraph
is of course intentional. As mentioned earlier, most ac-
counts of intelligence and creativity (and even some
theories of perception) invoke similar processes of multi-
layered variation and selection (see Campbell 1974).
Consider the phenomenon called "insight": An organism
is faced with a novel problem, pauses, and then, without
overt trial and error, comes up with a solution that works
the first time. There is, to my knowledge, only one kind of
account available to explain insightful performances (cf.
Campbell 1974; Dawkins 1976; Dennett 1975; James
1880). The intelligent agent is postulated to have some
kind of trial-and-error simulator that generates, in some
kind of surrogate environment, a variety of potential
plans of action. The surrogate environment selects from
these variants the "best bet," and implements it in real-
world action. Then, and thus, does the agent act in-
sightfully, reducing costs of real-world errors by "trying
out ideas" in a more forgiving arena (e.g., the mind, or the
cerebral cortex).
In Wright's shifting balance theory, interdemic selec-
tion is a layer of variation and selection nested within the
conventional gene pool/environment arena of interac-
tion. As such, his theory parallels such accounts of in-
sight. However, those theories also postulate the exis-
tence of multiple levels of selection, and of surrogate
environments, in which the slow and costly process of
real-time trial and error is augmented by a process in
which representations or "potential plans of action" are
selected or rejected. That these additional structural
features exist in intelligent animals is neither controver-
sial nor inexplicable: They are due to processes of natural
selection and/or learning in which less effective selectors
and variation generators (or their components) are re-
placed by others that work better, and so forth. (This is
itself an example of nested selection; see Dennett 1975;
Simon 1967). That a similar situation obtains in species is
what I will now attempt to show.
First, let us establish that nested selection systems could
greatly enhance species' adaptive competence. Note that
the advantages of nested and simulated variation-and-
selection systems increase with the complexity of the
problem facing the intelligent agent and with the cost-
liness, difficulty, slowness, or improbability of the real-
world variation or selection. Evolution is certainly one of
the most complex problems of all time; and even with the
shifting balance process, most of the adaptive landscape
would never be explored. This is so for several reasons.
First, there are limits to the distance a deme can stray from
the main population before it becomes genetically incom-
patible with the parental population (this could lead to
speciation, dissolution, or extinction of the deme, depend-
ing on a variety of factors). Second, the multidimen-
sionality of the genotypic space makes the number of
possible moves unfathomably large (see Dawkins 1986).
Third, most of the locations in this search space are not
viable. This includes many locations en route to what could
be an adaptive configuration, because many of the genetic
constituents of such a configuration would only be advan-
tageous in the presence of an improbable combination of
many other genes. Therefore, an arena for cheaply and
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1990) 13:1
67

Schull: Are species intelligent?
rapidly simulating the fitness value of distant regions of the
adaptive landscape and for moving toward those regions
once they were identified would enhance the adaptive
competence of species no less than it benefits that of
organisms.
Are species possessed of subsystems that evaluate and
generate potential courses of genetic evolution in a more
efficient fashion than random exploration of the adaptive
landscape? I think so: The subsystems are individual,
plastic organisms, and the screening process is on-
togenetic adaptation.
Suppose a plant species' environment changes. Be-
cause ontogenetic adaptation is so much more labile than
evolutionary change, it is necessarily going to be the
vanguard of a population's response to a novel situation.
Individual plants, born into an environment for which
their congenital adaptations are only marginally ade-
quate, will cope as best they can. Even in the absence of
genetic variation, a variety of new phenotypes will be
generated through undirected disturbances of epi-
genesis, and through processes of ontogenetic adapta-
tion.
These individual developmental responses will neces-
sarily lead to directed and nonrandom evolutionary
change. Let's watch our species in a novel environment.
With time, perhaps a single generation, the population
will settle on a relatively small number of developmental
responses. This winnowing of developmental responses
need not involve natural selection of genetic variants; it
could occur because each individual organism eventually
arrives at the best or most readily achievable combination
of physiological parameters available to It, or because
plants simply perish if they fail to hit upon a viable mode
of adaptation soon enough. In either case, the popula-
tion's phenotypic response (adaptive, or not) to a novel
ecological situation will often be achieved without differ-
ential survival of genes that might predispose the orga-
nism to that response.
Nonetheless, If the novel situation persists, popula-
tion-genetic change will inevitably follow In the train of
this new strategy because in the long run the mere
prevalence of the new strategy should promote the natu-
ral selection of genes and gene combinations that allow
the strategy to develop with greater rapidity, higher
probability, or lower cost (Bateson 1963). The idea is
simple, but the consequence is profound: As Bateson put
it, conventional population-genetic natural selection
merely "ratifies" an adaptation that has already been
developed, and tested, through nongenetic means. Like
the "insightful" animal that avoids tedious trial and ex-
pensive error through preevaluation of potential re-
sponses, the species may typically make its move in
genotype-space only after a viable solution has already
been found through nongenetic variation and selection in
phenotype space.
Different aspects of this process have been described
by a variety of theorists beginning with Baldwin (1896),
Morgan (1896), and Poulton (1897; see Braestrup 1971; c£
Bateson 1963; Hinton & Nowlan 1987; Ho & Saunders
1979; 1982; Piaget 1978; Tierney 1986; Waddington 1975)
and has been acknowledged by many others (e.g., Wilson
1975). However, the significance of the process Is still
tremendously under-appreciated. One problem is the
variety of names applied to the phenomena and its com-
ponents at various levels of organization: organic selec-
tion, Baldwin effects (see Richards 1987), phenocopy,
canalization, genetic assimilation (Waddington 1953;
1975), modificatory steering (Braestrup 1971), behavioral
drive (Wyles et al. 1983; see also Plotkin 1988a), and so
forth. They all fit the description above.
The process has two essential components: (1) phe-
notypic plasticity and (2) its consequent effects on popula-
tional selection pressures. The latter component provides
the crucial link between ontogeny and phylogeny, and
Braestrup suggests that it be given the name of "modi-
ficatory steering." From the species point of view, how-
ever, It is the combined effects of these components that
is important, and 1 am going to use Baldwin's original
term "organic selection" for this more inclusive process.
(The matter may warrant more discussion; Braestrup
suggests that Baldwin ruined the term "organic selec-
tion" by applying it Inconsistently to either or both of its
components (cf. Richards 1987). I suggest, however, that
we exploit Baldwin's imprecision and use "organic selec-
tion" as a generic term that refers to the two components
in interaction, and that also connotes no particular level of
organismic organization.)
Organic selection is a form of individual selection, but a
distinct one. It speeds up adaptive evolution (Plotkin
1988b; Wyles et al. 1983). It "steers" the species. And, by
occupying the high ground phenotypically, it can pro-
mote genes that would not be selected otherwise, for
example, genes that could only have supported the new
strategy In interaction with mutations that had not yet
arisen. Organic selection can tell the species when it is
"close" to a narrow adaptive peak that might otherwise be
missed (see Hinton & Nowlan 1987); consequently, sup-
porting mutations can be gathered gradually as they
become available.
As Important as It is, organic selection has perhaps
been neglected because traditional population genetics
can describe this situation quite glibly, while obscuring
its true significance: A new environment creates new
selection pressures, the terrain of the adaptive landscape
shifts, and genetic adaptation follows as the species "pas-
sively" slides uphill to a new peak. But look how mislead-
ing that is: The very shape of the landscape and the
accessibility of the peak are due to the action of the
species and its component organisms. First, the species
finds the new peak through phenotypic plasticity. Then,
by changing the selection pressures, it essentially builds
an up-sloping "land bridge" to the new peak (remember:
Fitness is a relationship between organism and environ-
ment; as organisms change through phenotypic plasticity,
they affect the selection pressures that determine the
topography of the adaptive surface). Only after all this
does the species then slide, "passively," uphill. The
difference in the apparent "character" of the species
under these two Interpretations is at least as dramatic as
the difference between a Thorndikean versus an in-
sightful animal.
3.6. Warieties of organic selection
The phrase "phenotypic plasticity" covers a variety of sins
(it need not be adaptive; see Caswell 1983; Stearns 1982)
68
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1990) 13:1

Schull: Are species intelligent?
as well as virtues (it can mediate ontogeeetic adaptation).
In this section, I discuss a few varieties and show how
they can influence organic selection, and evolution.
3ofL1o Undirected plasticity,. Consider first the limiting
case - aimless, nonadaptive, wanderings of a flailing
epigenetic network bereft of its environmental supports.
Even without assuming that there is any genetic variation
that influences these wanderings, we can expect that a
relatively small number of pheeotypes - the most viable
and/or achievable - will come to predominate. To the
extent that they do, they will systematically influence
selection pressures.
If undirected plasticity does occur in viable organisms,
it will function for the species much like Wright's roving
demes, except that these organisms roam over a phe-
notypic rather than a genotypic landscape. Like Wright's
demes, they can only wander within limits (determined
in this case by the epigenetic range of reaction). Also
similar to Wright's demes, if developing organisms do
happen to blunder into a phenotype that is adaptive for
the species' entire niche, their numbers should tend to
increase (through asexual reproduction or budding, so-
matic inheritance, social contagion, etc.); and (by affect-
ing selection pressures) they should tend to "attract" the
entire species toward genetic configurations that would
make this new phenotype the norm.
When undirected perturbations of epigenesis are the
cutting edge of genetic adaptation, the species benefits
from at least four nested layers of variation and selection.
It will be convenient to number them in reverse order: (4)
differential survival of lucky phenotypes generated by
undirected perturbations of epigenesis ("phenotypic ad-
justment"); (3) selection of genes made viable by the
prevalence of the lucky phenotype ("modificatory steer-
ing"); (2) Wrightian interdemic selection of the resulting
combinations of genes and genomes that can carry the
phenotype out of the trait-location or situation that posed
the original problem; (1) conventional natural selection of
those genes and individuals in the species-at-large.
3.6.2. Directed plasticity, or ontogenetic adaptation. It is
almost a truism that perturbations of epigenesis are not in
fact undirected, because every organism has some adap-
tive capability of its own and a structure that constrains or
selects possible courses of development. Rather than
attempt to catalogue the many forms of developmental
adaptation (cf. Rozin & Schull 1988, for a treatment of some
varieties involving behavioral plasticity), I will adopt a
generic and congenial description: "Ontogenetic adapta-
tion" Involves variation in physiological, neural, and/or
developmental parameters; when these parameters fall
into a relatively viable configuration, variation ceases. In
other words, ontogenetic adaptation is a within-organism
form of variation-selection (cf. Ashby 1960; Jennings 1906;
Ho & Saunders 1979; 1982; Powers 1973; Schull 1979); and
by virtue of organic selection, its population-wide opera-
tion constitutes a fifth layer of within-species variation-
selection. (To the extent that it reduces the individual's risk
of perishing with an unlucky phenotype, it also reduces the
impact of Level 4 above; and to the extent that there is
genetic variation for the ability to adapt ontogenetically, a
new subcategory of Layer 3 is created: the selection of
genes that will make the process of ontogenetic adaptation
itself more efficient [cf. Plotkin&Odling-Smeel981]. Life
is interesting, but not simple.)
My description of ontogenetic adaptation is general
enough to cover developmental homeostasis and revers-
ible or nonreversible plasticity in plants or animals as well
as learning and the acquisition of socially created and
socially transmitted adaptations. It is meant to apply to a
much broader range of cases than species in a novel and
hostile environment.
Consider an imaginary scenario involving Thorndikean
learning among the ancestors of the anglerfish discussed
earlier. Proto-anglerfish (I imagine) inherited from their
successful ancestors an instinct for lying in patches of
seagrass, a camouflaging pattern of coloration, a small
fleshy appendage on the front of their dorsal fin (which
made them look even more like sea grass), and the
Thorndikeae ability to be reinforced by the taste of
captured prey. With these congenital abilities it was
inevitable that proto-anglerfish would learn (ontogeneti-
cally) how to wiggle their dorsal fin so as to attract
swallowable prey just a little bit closer. Once this hap-
pens, natural selection might favor increased learning
abilities in general, as well as increased abilities to learn
how to move the lure, instincts for moving the lure (with
or without learning), modifications of the lures to make
them longer and more preylike, and a host of other
behavioral and somatic adaptations, none of which would
have been made adaptive if the behavior had not been
learned in the first place. This could be how anglerfishing
evolved.
At this level of organization, the whole process looks
very much like Lamarckian evolution - a learned behav-
ior leads to the evolution of instincts and somatic struc-
tures that support it - and this may be another reason why
organic selection has historically been viewed with a
skeptical and hostile eye (if it has been considered at all)
since Baldwin and Morgan first suggested it. However,
the inheritance of acquired characteristics is neither
assumed nor invoked. The whole account is entirely
consistent with conventional neo-Darwinism, because
development and evolution interact through selection
pressures at the populational level of organization, not
through inheritance at the individual level (cf. Ho &
Saunders 1979; 1982). Nor is any Lamarckiae tendency to
perfection assumed; organic selection is kosher. (In fair-
ness to Lamarck, it could be called Lamarckian in the
[unimpeachable] sense that organismic achievements in-
fluence the course of evolution and integrate processes of
development and evolution; see Lamarck 1809; Schull, in
preparation b.)
Nonetheless, although organic selection requires only
the most noncontroversial mechanisms (e.g., no good-of-
the-species arguments either), the phenomena do cast a
curiously psychologistic light on species evolution, es-
pecially (but not only) when behavioral adaptation is
considered. In species evolution, ontogenetic adaptation
plays a role like that of working memory in animal
learning; ongoing population-wide behavior plays a role
like rehearsal; this then leads to the establishment of a
"long-term memory" - the slower but more permanent
process of genetic change and fixation. Organic selection
can even lead to the replacement of ontogenetic adapta-
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1990) 13:1
69

Schull: Are species intelligent?
tion by an unlearned behavior pattern (the ethologist's
concept of "rituallzation"), and this too is reminiscent of a
psychological process in animals: habit formation. In
neurological terms, the adapting population of organisms
plays a role in evolution analogous to that of the cortex in
mammals, interacting with the environment to develop
and test new patterns, and then passing control of rou-
tinized patterns to more automatic and less plastic centers
of interaction with the environment (in animals these less
plastic systems would be subcortical circuits; in species,
they are nonplastic phenotypes, such as "closed pro-
grams" [Mayr 1974] in organisms).
Although the last examples highlight the Lamarckian
ramifications of organic selection, it is important to under-
stand that organic selection should be relevant to much of
biological evolution. The story will be essentially the same
in species of plants as well as in species of nonlearning
animals, whenever phenotypic plasticity is doing most of
the adaptation-generation (and since phenotypic plasticity
is so much faster than population-genetic adaptation, the
latter condition must often be met).
Thus, evolution is an extremely rich and powerful
multileveled process that exploits and amplifies processes
of populational and ontogenetic adaptation. This intel-
ligence-like adaptive competence in species does not
require that the organisms comprising the species them-
selves be intelligent (although we shall see below that
evolving species of large-brained mammals may go even
further by exploiting the intelligence of their component
organisms); and in some circumstances at least, adaptive
information processing by plant as well as animal species
must often be at least as complex and effective as that
which goes on in large-brained mammals.
Why, then, shouldn't we seriously consider the pos-
sibility that species are intelligent?
Structural features
Newell and Simon (1976) provide a convenient list of
structural characteristics of intelligent systems. The list
covers many of the capabilities i have been identifying in
species. Among these are (1) building selectivity into the
generator (successful demes generate pretested solutions
for species-wide evolution); (2) generating new strategies
by modifying partially successful strategies (that evolu-
tion does this is obvious); (3) accessing very large stores of
potentially useful information (embodied in the gene
pool, the population of individual genomes, and in orga-
nisms; they include "submerged" atavistic programs
available for derepression, and other information
gathered through ontogenetic adaptation); (4) concentrat-
ing search in the direction of probable solutions (the role
of organic selection); (5) replacing the search for solutions
with the ability to recognize solutions (under organic
selection, that is exactly what happens when organisms go
out into the world with adaptive abilities and success
detectors. For example, Thorndikean animals that are
rewarded by fitness-enhancing events like food and
punished by events like tissue damage reduce selection
pressures for genetically preprogrammed solutions to all
of life's vicissitudes).
We have identified other intelligence-amplifying fea-
tures in species as well: the hierarchical organization of
variation-selection networks; and the massively parallel
processing of problems and subproblems (cf. Brady 1985;
Holland 1975). It is also worth noting that natural selection
complemented by ontogenetic adaptation (that is, organic
selection) also instantiates what Dennett (1987a) calls "a
route to intelligence: oversimplify and self-monitor." On-
togenetic adaptation allows the species to send its orga-
nisms into the world embodying useful but imperfect
"rules of thumb" for the "average" niche. In their own
lifetimes organisms can make short-term corrections to
these "rules" (which can be somatic, physiological, or
behavioral), and then, If these corrections are required by
many organisms over many generations, organic selection
should promote the revision of the species-typical "rule"
and/or refinements in the species-typical self-monitoring
process.
We have still not reached the limit of species' adaptive
competence. The adaptation-generating features dis-
cussed so far are due to essentially three kinds of popula-
tion-wide processes of selection: natural, interdemic, and
organic. Further advances of adaptive competence
emerge when we consider synergistic Interactions among
these processes; and still others emerge when the particu-
lar adaptive competencies of a species' organisms are taken
Into account.
of natutnBs
9 and organic
Just as genetic variation Increases the efficacy of organic
selection, so should organic selection increase the utility
of genetic variations. No less than natural selection,
organic selection must rigorously evaluate and exploit
novel mutations and gene combinations (Hinton & Now-
lan 1987; Stearns 1982). Every organism must make the
most of the genes and traits it was dealt at birth. But when
organic selection Is operative, the organism simulta-
neously Increases the evolutionary potential of the genes
It has Inherited (cf. Plotkin and Odllng-Smee, 1981, who
point out that adaptive plasticity allows individuals to
cope with unpredictable circumstances; In this case 1 am
suggesting that each Individual's physical and behavioral
"quirks" are the most Important and least predictable
circumstances they ever have to deal with).
Organic selection should also Interact synergistlcally
with Interdemic selection. Novelties that would other-
wise be maladaptive could become the "inspiration" for a
new line of adaptive evolution. Such novelties will be
generated and exploited much more often In genetically
drifting and inbreeding demes. Furthermore, to the
extent that organic selection is operative within a deme,
the pseudopod-like movement on the adaptive landscape
of the deme Itself will be less random and more "Intelli-
gent."
The effect of all of this Is to greatly Increase species'
ability to navigate (and to modify) the adaptive landscape,
especially In those species whose organisms have the
greatest capacity for ontogenetic adaptation. We have
seen that the evolutionary efficacy of both genetic varia-
tion and phenotypic plasticity Is limited by the fact that
most undirected variation Is maladaptive. This limitation
Is eased by adaptive plasticity, which minimizes the
maladaptiveness of variation. Adaptive plasticity should
have an even more liberating effect upon the species'
movement through phenotypic space, because plasticity
70
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1990) 13:1

Schull: Are species intelligent?
reduces constraints imposed by the genotype, and be-
cause adaptive plasticity will (by definition) bias phe-
notypic variation in favorable directions.
Thus, by virtue of organic selection, the adaptive
achievements of individual organisms, as well as those of
subpopulations, can greatly increase the efficiency of
adaptive evolution. It is not that the organisms have
evolved to "care" about the course of evolution. Rather,
they have evolved to act as if they cared about maximizing
their own inclusive fitness. As a byproduct, these striv-
ings must often point the way for species evolution. So
although the adaptive competence of plant species is not
to be demeaned, in some animal species the intelligence
and foresight of component animals may enable the spe-
cies to "see" its way toward very distant adaptive peaks.
(Campbell 1974, develops the idea that perceptual sys-
tems function as vicarious trial-and-error locomotion de-
vices. Here I move the metaphor up to the level of the
species.)
3.9. The moduiaritf of ewoiution
33A, Adaptiwe specializations and deutero-ewoiution.
According to Newell and Simon (1976), another strategy
implemented in intelligent systems is the exploitation of
specialized subsystems that can deal especially well with
particular kinds of adaptive problems. In this section I
argue that through the operation of organic selection,
individual organisms must often act as specialized adaptive
subsystems that play a role analogous to that of the
"adaptive specializations in learning" (Rozin & Kalat
1971), "biological boundaries" (Seligman & Hager 1972),
"constraints" (Shettleworth 1972), and "modules" (Fodor
1983) for information processing that are currently being
studied by psychologists and cognitive scientists (see
Rozin & Schull 1988, for review). The gain in adaptive
competence this affords species is analogous to deutero-
learning (Bateson 1972b) or "learning to learn" (Harlow
1949) in, intelligent animals: With experience solving
particular kinds of problems over evolutionary time,
species should develop increased competence in solving
those kinds of problems.
In the 1960s and 1970s, general process learning theor-
ists began to recognize that there were "biological bound-
aries" to learning principles that had previously been
treated as potentially all-encompassing. "Constraints on
learning" (Shettleworth 1972) and adaptive specializa-
tions have now come to be seen as important determi-
nants of animal intelligence (Rozin & Schull 1988). In a
parallel (but apparently independent) development, evo-
lutionists have recently begun to recognize that the scope
of natural selection must be limited by organismic
hauplans, by linked processes of development, by differ-
ential plastic capacities in various developmental do-
mains, and so forth. These limitations have even come to
be called "constraints on evolution" (e.g., Gould 1980;
Maynard Smith et al. 1985). It is acknowledged, how-
ever, that in evolution as in learning, "constraint:" can
promote rapid adaptive change in particular directions
(Alberch 1982; Gould 1980). For example, while preexist-
ing organizational plans and the hierarchical organization
of gene expression would make it very difficult to produce
a vertebrate with an odd number of legs (see Gould 1980),
it also makes it possible for only two or three strategically
placed mutations to give a fruitfly four wings in place of
the normal two (see Hunkapiller et al. 1982). Preexisting
ontogenetic 
structure 
thus both constrains and
predisposes the course of species evolution.
Preexisting biases in ontogenetic adaptation (includ-
ing, but by no means restricted to, adaptive specializa-
tions in learning) must similarly cause adapting organisms
not only to exploit existing developmental "canals" but
also to "reach out" in the particular directions consistent
with the organisms' adaptive biases. Here in particular,
the term "adaptive predisposition" is more appropriate
than "constraint." Presuming (1) that there is some con-
sistency in the kinds of adaptive problems and solutions
that challenge an evolutionary lineage over time and (2)
that organic selection is operative, biases in ontogenetic
adaptation should enhance, rather than limit, the species'
adaptive competence by differentially facilitating adapta-
tion in directions that have proven promising in the past.
In species, then, adaptively biased organisms thus serve
as adaptively specialized subsystems for the generation of
adaptations.
Several investigable evolutionary issues arise from
these considerations. First, it should be possible to "pre-
dict" evolutionary trends within lineages by analyzing
organismic propensities for, and domains of, ontogenetic
adaptation. Second, there should be positive between-
lineage correlation of capacity for ontogenetic adaptation
on the one hand, with rate of adaptive evolution on the
other. An analysis of this sort was recently attempted by
Wyles, Kunkel, and Wilson (1983), who invoked a similar
hypothesis to explain rates of adaptive evolution in birds
and mammals (see also Plotkin 1988b).
Similarly, the more generalized the adaptive capabilit-
ies of a species' individuals, the greater should be the
lineage's potential for adaptive radiation and diversifica-
tion. As usual, the story applies to species of adaptable
plants as well as animals, but it should be especially
relevant to species of large-brained animals who may
themselves represent multiple nested levels of variation-
selection. (The case of our own species may be emblem-
atic of the whole business, for our line evolved and under-
went racial diversification with extraordinary speed at the
same time that the brain - the vertebrates' major organ of
ontogenetic adaptation - underwent spectacular evolu-
tionary changes.) In such cases, the burden of evolution-
ary creativity may shift almost completely away from
population-genetic selection to organic selection via in-
traorganismic selection (including insight), with all the
increased scope for adaptation that that entails. In such
cases, the amplifying effect on organic selection (itself an
amplifier of natural selection) would be analogous to the
amplifying effect of Wrightian population structure on
purely population-genetic natural selection.
It is interesting to note that this is an instance of
another of Newell and Simon's intelligence-amplifying
strategies: seeking a better space for representing a prob-
lem, rather than seeking a solution to the problem per se.
Species of large-brained animals may "use" the mental
world of their animal components to represent and there-
by solve evolutionary problems. For example, intelligent
primates must devote considerable thought to the ques-
tion of how to improve their own lot. To the extent that
their conclusions have an effect on behaviors, environ-
ments, and selection pressures, the collectivity of animal
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1990) 13:1
71

Schull: Are species intelligent?
minds should be a rich and diverse space for the represen-
tation of problems that are of evolutionary, as well as
individual, significance. (This is not to say that the popu-
lation's cogitations cannot lead the species astray. Here
too, our own species might be emblematic!)
3.9.2. increasing access to prewtausif iewised solutions*
The next and last parallel between mechanisms of animal
intelligence and mechanisms of species' adaptive compe-
tence does not involve further recursion of variation and
selection (although the hierarchically organized genome
may well constitute yet another arena in which multiple
levels of nested variation and selection occur; see J. H.
Campbell 1982). Rather, it is based on Rozin's (1967)
suggestion that animal intelligence evolves and develops
by increasing the individual's access to cognitive modules
originally designed for specific tasks. According to Rozin,
many relatively simple animals have complex and sophis-
ticated abilities (e.g., navigational abilities) but can only
apply them in the service of narrowly defined tasks (e.g.,
homing or migration to wintering sites). In contrast, more
intelligent animals access the same mechanisms in the
service of a much wider and more arbitrary set of tasks, for
example, drawing, or representing conceptual problems
as spatial ones. In the course of evolution or develop-
ment, access to specialized subsystems could increase in
either of two ways: by establishing new neural connec-
tions to specialized brain loci or by duplicating neural
circuitry through the utilization of the relevant genetic
codes common to all cells (Rozin 1967). In either case, the
effect is to increase what Fodor (1983) calls the "isotropy"
of intelligence: its exploitation of, and sensitivity to,
diverse and seemingly incommensurate conceptual dom-
ains.
The idea of increasing access is not restricted to neu-
rally mediated behavior, however; a similar strategy is
now being recognized as an important mode of within-
genome evolution and development, for example, when
new proteins and antibodies are created by linking up
already evolved subunits (Hunkapiller et al. 1982). It is
also applicable to species' adaptive competencies.
For example, no one who has watched elephants copu-
late could fail to notice that the male's penis moves about
in a manner that resembles nothing so much as an
elephant's trunk. This similarity is clearly not coinciden-
tal Rather, these two uniquely elephantine appendages
must either access the same motor centers, or must access
two motor programs with a common genetic ancestry. It
is doubtful that this phenomenon testifies to the indi-
vidual elephant's intelligence. But it does bear witness to
the nature of problem solving in the elephant species,
which developed a spectacular solution to one set of
problems in spatial manipulation and then applied it to
another. It also demonstrates that species manifest one
last intelligence-amplifying feature: the transfer of solu-
tions from one domain to another so that "the same facts
[do not] have to be rediscovered repeatedly at different
nodes of the search tree" (Newell & Simon 1976).
cialized subsystems that are profitably applied to new
problems. Exploration of trait-space is greatly enhanced
by a variety of within-species variation-selection pro-
cesses, some of them genetic (as postulated by Wright's
shifting balance theory) and some of them only secondarily
(if that) genetic. In particular, ontogenetic adaptation
(itself involving both general processes, and specialized
subsystems for individual adaptation) searches nonran-
domly through phenotypic space, and then, through
organic selection, promotes directed genetic change of the
sort that we call biological evolution, in these respects, and
with respect to their achievements, species stand up
remarkably well in comparison with other natural and
artificial intelligence systems.
Species are admirably endowed with information-gather-
ing and adaptation-generating features, and with spe-
©@ajld species hawe gotten so "smart"?
Although it has become commonplace to talk about the
"strategies," "goals," and "intentions" of genes, it is un-
derstood that this is just shorthand for describing the
effects of natural selection; no one really means to impute
cognitive capacities to structures as simple as genes. In
contrast, I have argued that natural selection in species,
like learning in animals, mediates cognition-like capaci-
ties that are more "real," than "as if." Regardless of
whether they justify the attribution of "intelligence," the
capacities described are impressive enough to raise the
question of how they could have become so elaborated.
It may be that these structural features of species are
simply byproducts of individual natural selection, and
that the elaboration of information-processing capacities
is inevitable in any network whose components are them-
selves subject to natural selection, and whose codes are
mixed and reshuffled in the manner of a gene pool. If this
is true, it is an important principle that could use consid-
erable refinement. I hope some readers and commen-
tators will accept the challenge.
On the other hand, it is possible to assume the primacy
of individual selection, and simultaneously inquire
whether species-adaptation has also occurred. After all,
organismic development can be described as the differen-
tial survival and reproduction of competing cell types
(Hamburger & Oppenheim 1982), but that does not
prevent us from recognizing that organisms are them-
selves integrated, adapting, and sometimes intelligent
systems. We recognize that every organism creates (or is)
a context in which the differential survival and reproduc-
tion of its components furthers its own development and
elaboration; perhaps each species has acquired a similar
ability to structure, in a nonaccidental fashion, the com-
petition of its components.
Species might have acquired this ability in at least two
ways. One is through the ontogeny-like phylogenetic
processes discussed in this paper; that is, species may
have "learned" how. The other way is through species
selection - the differential survival and speciation of more
competent species. These two possibilities are not incom-
patible, and might reinforce each other (as organic and
natural selection reinforce each other, albeit at another
level of organization), but this is a problem for the future.
The present account does not presume the operation of
species selection, nor is it clear (to me, at least) whether
species selection would generally favor adaptive compe-
tence in species; in this paper I have presumed only that a
72
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1990) 13:1

Schull: Are species intelligent?
species' adaptive competence is a byproduct of indi-
vidual, not species, selection. But the perspective devel-
oped here may have something to contribute to discus-
sions of species selection. Eldredge (1984; 1985b) stipu-
lates that species selection must, by definition, involve
selection for species characteristics, not organismic char-
acteristics. The kinds of structural features catalogued in
this paper might be exactly what investigators of species
selection should be looking for.1
The standard view of evolution (held by neo-Darwinian
straw men) is that evolution is a huge, slow, single-leveled
search through gene-space by a process of blind genetic
variation and environmental selection; it may seem like an
overwhelmingly difficult problem, but that's life. In con-
trast, I have tried to show that species navigate the
adaptive landscape in a manner that is rather more "cun-
ning" than "lucky" (Butler 1920). This is possible because
species are (at least sometimes) hierarchically organized,
informationally integrated systems in which solutions
generated through variation-selection in subsystems
(demes, organisms, and organismic subsystems) are pre-
served, amplified, selected, and adopted in the species as a
whole. While Darwinian random variation and natural
selection is the ultimate foundation of the whole process,
the overall impression that emerges when one adopts a
molar view of the evolutionary process, and gives inter-
demic and organic selection their proper emphasis, is
quite different from the impression that emerges from the
classical, molecular, population-genetic analysis. Blind
watchmakers may just have to be very, very smart.
These are investigable issues. In the laboratory, the
adaptation-enhancing "power" of the kinds of structural
features discussed here (separately and in interaction)
could be explored through mathematical and computer
models. Promising steps have already been taken in this
direction (Brady 1985; Hinton & Nowlan 1987; Holland
1975), but much more could be done. Such efforts might
turn up new algorithms for intelligence, and should make
it possible to assess and compare the competencies of
various kinds of adaptive systems, including species.
After all, evolution is a notoriously slow process when
measured in years, but how slow is it relative to orga-
nismic generation times, the complexity of the search
space, the gradualness of ecological change, and the
"wise" conservatism of any large and successful organiza-
tion? When these factors are taken into account, species
might turn out to be demoestrably intelligent, even
though (or even because) their information-processing
"cycles" are many orders of magnitude slower than the 50
msec "perceptual cycles" estimated for mammalian ner-
vous systems (Komisaruk 1977).
In the field, there are many issues that could be
profitably explored, even without further theoretical
work. How common are population structures and chan-
nels of information low that can support interdemic and
organic selection? (Wright, 1978, reviews literature rele-
vant to interdemic selection.) Do species with these dem-
ographic structures evolve more rapidly than species
without them? Do lineages whose organisms have
marked propensities for ontogenetic adaptation in partic-
ular domains provide evidence of rapid evolutionary
adaptation in those same domains?
Such questions should be of interest to zoologists,
botanists, and evolutionists, even to those who are not
interested in the nature of intelligent systems. On the
other hand, I hope that some commentators will take up
the possibility that species are adequately integrated,
unified, and organismic to mediate something we might
want to call intelligence. (Eldredge, for example, dis-
tinguishes between economic/ecological and informa-
tional/genealogical individuals in the evolutionary hier-
archy. Species, he suggests, are informational gene banks
that do not play a role as economic units, whereas orga-
nisms are both economic and informational units, and are
the highest level individuals with such "dual citizenship."
This is partly an empirical question, however; the answer
may vary from situation to situation.)
In the armchair, too, there is much to be done in
developing a conceptual framework that can accommodate
the commonalities inherent in hierarchically organized
adaptive systems (c£, Laszlo 1987). Although selfish-gene
(Dawkins 1976; 1982) approaches to evolution and recent
advances in genetics and molecular biology (see, e.g.,
Milkman 1982) are usually considered reductionistic be-
cause they deny individual organisms a privileged position
in the biological hierarchy, they also encourage the recog-
nition of supraorganismic as well as suborganismic levels of
organization, adaptation, and selection (Cloak, personal
communication; Eldredge 1985a; 1985b; Grene 1987).
Organisms may be the most tightly integrated biological
entities, but they are less long-lived and less stable than
genes or species, and they can no longer claim uniqueness
as loci of natural selection (given kin selection), nor as
processors of information, nor as channels of genetic
inheritance (given recent revelations about transin-
dividual and transpecies movement of functional genetic
information via bacterial and viral carriers; see, e.g.,
Hunkapiller et al. 1982).
As a matter of fact, with regard to biological features of
the sort just mentioned (longevity, stability, selectability,
ability to inherit, replicate, and process information cre-
atively, and ability to elaborate the hierarchically orga-
nized genetic and epigenetic mechanisms that imple-
ment these features), most species and some animals
arguably have more of the "right stuff' in the right pro-
portions than genes, ecosystems, the biosphere itself
(Lovelock 1988), or any of Gaia's other constituents.
It may eventually turn out that there is something about
nervous systems that is uniquely suited for the mediation
of intelligence (Searle 1980), but until that "something" is
identified, the objection seems both vitalistic and ae-
thropocentric. Meanwhile, my bet is that some suite of
information-processing, adaptation-developing, and ad-
aptation-implementing features will prove necessary and
sufficient for the implementation of intelligence, re-
gardless of the material which instantiates them. The
extent to which that suite includes the features I have
attributed to species remains to be seen.
4.3. Is it worth asking whether species are intelligent?
Although the recent recognition that species are natural
units in an expanded hierarchy of biological entities
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1990) 13:1
73

Schull: Are species intelligent?
(Eldredge 1985a; Ghiselin 1981; Gould 1982; Salthe 1985)
provides us for the first time with an agent to attribute
evolutionary intelligence to, the idea that intelligence
plays a role in evolution is not new. The first detailed
theory of evolution (Lamarck's) put psychological pro-
cesses at the heart of evolution. Similar efforts were made
by the likes of Ewald Hering, Gustav Fechner, and
William James (see Butler 1879; 1920; Schull, in prepara-
tion a; in preparation b). In James' case, at least, it is clear
that Lamarckian inheritance was not being invoked (as it
need not be). As Bateson pointed out,
The whole matter has had a curious history. It was
once intolerable to many people to suggest that evolu-
tion could have a random component. This was sup-
posedly contrary to all that was known about adaptation
and design and contrary to any belief in a creator with
mental characteristics. Samuel Butler's criticism of The
Origin of Species was essentially to accuse Darwin of
excluding mind from among the relevant explanatory
principles. Butler wanted to imagine a nonrandom mind
at work somewhere in the system and therefore pre-
ferred the theories of Lamarck to those of Darwin.
It turns out, however, that such critics were pre-
cisely wrong in their choice of the correction they
would apply to Darwinian theory. Today we see
thought and learning (and perhaps somatic change) as
stochastic. We would correct nineteenth-century
thinkers, not by adding a nonstochastic mind to the
evolutionary process, but by proposing that thought
and evolution are alike in a shared stochasticism. Both
are mental processes. . . . (Bateson 1979, p. 149)
Bateson (1972; 1979; Bateson & Bateson 1987) himself
theorized insightfully but cryptically about many of these
same issues, beginning in the heyday of behaviorism,
when talk of "mental processes" was considered retro-
gressive, counterproductive, and inadmissible. Philo-
sophical behaviorism is now largely passe, but a cognate
presumption that materialism and mentalism are incom-
patible will probably lead many biologists to eschew the
suggestion that evolution might be a teleological or intel-
ligent process.
Readers of this journal, however, know well that dur-
ing the last few decades, behavioral and brain scientists
have opened up new fields of inquiry by acknowledging
the existence of phenomena that could not be explained
(or even recognized) by behavioristic single-level rein-
forcement theories, and by analyzing their material and
structural mechanisms. I have tried to show that com-
parable biological vistas might be opened up if the "char-
acter" of evolving species were acknowledged, and if the
conceptual categories and research tools of psychologists
and cognitive scientists were adapted to the task. When
this has been undertaken, we may well have clearer and
richer ideas about what kinds of entities species are, what
intelligence is, and what evolution is really like.
Even if species are not intelligent, the attempt to
decide whether they are should be well worth the effort,
if only because of the increased communication and
collaboration that would be promoted between workers
in a variety of related fields.
For example, when biologists argue about punctua-
tionism versus gradualism in evolution, do they realize
that they are recapitulating arguments over insight versus
gradual learning, which dominated American learning
psychology earlier in this century? Do they realize that
Ashby's (1960) Design for a Brain is a theory of evolution
that is compatible with, but radically different from, the
"modern synthesis" (cf. Caswell 1983), and that predicts
and explains long periods of stasis punctuated by rapid
periods of adaptive change?
Similarly, it seems likely that an evolving species is a
better simulation of "real" intelligence than even the best
computer program likely to be produced by cognitive
scientists for many years. If that is so, shouldn't cognitive
scientists and students of parallel distributed processing
(who are centrally concerned with problems of adaptive
hill-climbing) be paying more attention to evolutionary
biology (and vice versa)?
This kind of inquiry could also broaden discussions of
artificial versus natural intelligence by showing that argu-
ments in this field have an exposed flank that has here-
tofore gone unnoticed. When Block (1981) argues that
even a totally competent "brute force" computer simula-
tion of intelligence testifies to the intelligence of the
programmers, rather than to that of the computer, does
he realize that he is recapitulating Paley's (1802/1831)
argument from design? When Block (1981) and Searle
(1980) ridicule such simulations of intelligence, do they
recognize that their arguments tend to support the im-
putation of intelligence to species? (Species acquire their
cognitive wealth the old-fashioned way - they learn it.)
When Dennett (1976) argues for the appropriateness of
intentional descriptions of evolutionary processes, does
he realize that the ascription of intentionality in evolution
may be convenient for precisely the same reason that it is
convenient in psychology?
If species are not intelligent systems of some sort, what
do they lack?
NOTE
1. I illustrate this with a speculative account of why the song-
learning passerines are among the most successful, the most
rapidly speciating, the most numerous, and the most behav-
iorally plastic of birds. These characteristics could be a product of
species selection, based on a tendency of passerines to cluster in
small populations, and of organic and sexual selection, based on
the ability of local populations to develop adaptations to their
local environments. I suppose that the tendency to cluster in
small populations results from sexual and natural selection of
song- and skill-learning abilities in males and females: Because
males who have had experience in a given environment are more
likely to possess skills that enhance fitness in that environment,
females have been (naturally) selected to learn the local dialect
and to choose mates who can demonstrate their local qualifica-
tions by singing the same dialect. (The song is rather like a
curriculum vitae; a similar account could be developed for
mimics such as mockingbirds.) Song learning and mate prefer-
ence in males and females are thus putatively products of
individual selection. However, combined in a population, these
individual characteristics create (1) a context in which organic
selection should lead to the genetic elaboration of on-
togenetically originated adaptations as well as (2) a species-
characteristic tendency to form local dialect-sharing populations.
This in turn creates conditions that favor interdemic selection (as
Baker, 1985, suggests), speciation, and the species selection of
the species-characteristic of forming denies.
The point is not that the ideas laid out in this target article
should be used to construct ever-more-complex "just so" sto-
ries. It is rather to illustrate how "intelligence-amplifying"
74
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1990) 13:1

Commentary/SchuW: Are species intelligent?
features of species could be products of both species selection
and individual selection, and to illustrate how species selection
might operate synergistically across hierarchical levels. Thus,
individual characteristics are assumed to be maintained within a
species through individual selection, while the prevalence of
species with such characteristics is attributed to species selec-
tion.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
I am very grateful to Robert Artigiani, Daniel C. Dennett,
Hugh Gelch, Curtis Greene, Nick Humphreys, Hillard Kaplan,
Ervin Laszlo, Alan Neuringer, Sidney I. Perloe, Paul Rozin,
Barry Schwartz, Jay Schulkin, Martin E. P. Seligman, David
Smith, David Williams, Terry Winegar, Beatrice Wood, the
participants and sponsors of the Haverford Symposium on
Evolution and Intelligence, and many others for discussion and
criticisms of earlier versions of this paper. Thanks also to Sue
Newhall. This paper is a contribution of the General Evolution
Research Group.
Commentaries submitted by the qualified professional readership of
this journal will be considered for publication in a later issue as
Continuing Commentary on this article. Integrative overviews and
syntheses are especially encouraged.
of "Intelligent species"
Philip Clayton
Department of Philosophy, Williams College, Williamstown, MA 01267
Electronic mail: pclayton@williams.hitnet
Schull has provided an important response to the question, Are
species intelligent? His proposal is intriguing in that it marks the
intersection of two highly publicized debates: the recent de-
fense of species as individuals by various evolutionary biologists
[seeGhiselin "Categories, Life, and Thinking" BBS 4(2) 1981.],
and the definition of intelligence in functional and evolutionary
terms in epistemology and cognitive psychology. I will speak
only briefly to the second debate and in more detail regarding
the first.
It is already de rigueur in cognitive psychology to construe
intelligence in functional terms. Given functionalism, there can
be no in-principle resistance to Seoul's approach: If a species
functions as intelligently as a machine, especially if species can
be construed as individuals (see below), why begrudge it the
predication "intelligent"? Schull's section 3, "The Adaptive
Competencies of Species," contains an impressive list of intel-
ligence-like behaviors at the species level. Now there are
admittedly reasons to wonder whether mental states are wholly
irrelevant in attributions of intelligence. Many of us continue to
nurse our Searlean "Chinese Room" intuitions, in private if not
in public (see Searle 1980 and Discussion); nor is it obvious that
Dennett, whom Schull uses uncritically, has written the final
word on intentionality. But the merits and demerits of func-
tionalism have been widely debated and need not be rehearsed
here.
Of course, even if we grant Schull his functionalism, species
as such may still turn out not to be entities that fulfill the
functional criteria for intelligence. For example, Eldredge has
argued effectively that species are information-storing devices,
not information-processing ones; they store information but are
not per se actors in the ecological arena. Indeed, the biggest
barrier to SehuH's approach is posed by the arguments for
sharply separating replicators from interactors, the genealogical
hierarchy from the ecological one (Hull 1980; Eldredge 1985).
Biologically, there are good reasons to keep these two hier-
archies separate.
But suppose Schull is able to convince us on this score; what of
the ontological question? Are species really actors in Schull's
sense? Note that much of his justification is drawn from outside
biology: from philosophy of mind (Dennett), from evolutionary
epistemology (Campbell), from systems analysis (Laszlo). By
contrast, other thinkers defend reifying species as individuals
within their ontologies for reasons drawn from evolutionary
biology itself. Their question is: Does considering species as
individuals allow us to expand the explanatory power of the
"modern synthesis" and to avoid specific empirical problems in
biology? Perhaps it is a necessary and sufficient condition to
individuate x in biology if x is a "spatiotemporally bounded
entity" (Eldredge 1985) or if reifying x provides biological
theories with "increased scope, consistency, and power" (Hull
1980, p. 317). I tend to think that more is required: Only those
entities that we find to be selected for can be taken unambig-
uously as individuals in evolutionary theory. Hence, if species
are not selected for as genes are, then they ought not to be added
to the "biotic furniture" (Bunge 1977).
Nevertheless, the selection criterion in contexts other than
biology may mandate a broader ontology. Consider evolution-
ary epistemology. Here the interactor/replicator distinction is
much hazier: Even theories can serve as interactors, and not just
genes but a variety of entities function as replicators. Hence,
theorists like Schull working in interdisciplinary contexts need
not be bound by the ontology of biological selection.
So how are we to arbitrate strange-soundieg predications
above and below the organismic level in interdisciplinary efforts
such as Schull's? Simply to dismiss talk of intelligent species as
derivative (everyone knows that intelligence was originally
defined in terms of organisms) or as counterintuitive (such talk is
at best only a strained metaphor) is unhelpful and unconvincing.
As physicists have taught us, a theoretical ontology need not be
commonsensical. Individuation in terms of organisms is basic in
ordinary language. Yet this• may only be due to the scale with
which we normally operate; spaces between atoms do no-
disturb our theories of personal identity only because they are
imperceptible to the naked eye.
"To each (scientist, discipline) his own ontology" is at least
part of the answer. In general, the a priori or commonsense
limits on a science's ontology ought to be minimal: An ontology
need only be coherent, consistently applied, and fruitful for
synthesizing various approaches. Putnam (1981; 1987) has given
us good reason to think that we lack any privileged position for
determining The True Ontology anyway. His shift to a "prag-
matic realism" offers good grounds for a rather more ready
acceptance of alternative ontological frameworks and predica-
tions a la Schull.
More specifically, though, I propose that we should acquiesce
to an innovative ontological suggestion when doing so creates a
new research program (as defined in Lakatos 1979, Chapter 1)
that is theoretically interesting and empirically fruitful. (In fact,
Schull lists something like this as a crucial reason for accepting
his view.) I believe that Schull's suggestion does create such a
research program. It extends the functionalist program, which
has been fruitful in cognitive psychology and artificial intel-
ligence (AI) debates, to evolutionary biology with its recent
emphasis on species-level phenomena. This fact is sufficient
reason for entertaining Schull's suggestions and beginning to
explore their theoretical and empirical fruitfulness.
Finally, note that, since the claims of Hull, Eldredge, and
Schull are explicitly ontological, it may be helpful to examine
the work of thinkers who have provided systematic treatments
of similar ontological moves. One resource for Schull's work
might be found in the later work of the biologist-cum-
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1990) 13:1
75

Commentary/Schull: Are species intelligent?
philosopher Alfred North Whitehead (1978). Whltehead's on-
tology is also based on a series of nested hierarchies. Entities
encountered as one focuses on different levels of the hierarchy
can be understood either as societies of lower-level entities, or
as individuals in their own right. Since no level of the hierarchy
is privileged, Intelligence can be predicated at various levels.
Philosophical analyses like Whitehead's can provide resources
for theoretical clarification In the case of new and intriguing
research programs such as Schull's.
jhts?
V. Csanyi
Department of Behavior Genetics, L Eotvos University, Budapest, H-2131,
Hungary
I like this target article. I also like to play with words, concepts,
and definitions; I would even like to stretch the framework of
Schull's thoughts a little further. Why are only species intel-
ligent? If we accept the criteria for Intelligence given by the
author, other entities can also be sorted Into this category.
There Is Gala, for example (Lovelock 1979; 1982). All that Is
valid for the species is valid for Gaia, too. Even more, because
Gala Is not simply the sum of the species but a complex
Interconnected network of them that can be characterized by
another level of nested selection, one by which species (Stanley
1972), ecosystems (Dunbar 1975) are continuously selected. It is
debatable whether a component of the biosphere like an orga-
nism or a species can be taken and examined as an Isolated
autonomous entity. The autonomy of Gala Is unquestionably
higher than that of any of Its components. Hence Gaia Is the first
to be examined concerning intelligence.
It can be safely assumed that In the earliest period of evolution
on Earth simple repllcatlve components were formed, among
which the vertical and horizontal transfer of Information were
quick and very effective. The early biosphere, the early Gala,
could not be characterized as intelligent by Schull's criteria. As
an environment, the earth was very variable; hence it is justified
to suppose that It was not favorable for a kind of "general" being.
Living components needed special mechanisms, which were
created by the Interaction with local conditions and were adap-
tive only' at the given locality. If Information concerning such
localities could quickly spread horizontally It would have diluted
to an extent that could prevent Its very emergence. Gala could
discriminate its local environments only by inhibiting much of
this local transfer of Information. Species came into being this
way.
Every species is a model of a local environment. As soon as
local environment changes, the species fit Into this locality will
also change, In the "organic" way Schull supposes. Ontogeny is
suitable for quick temporary changes; the gene pool accepts
slow but permanent changes. The totality of the species reflects
the characteristics of Earth exactly, proportionately, and simul-
taneously In more than one time scale. This Is one of the causes
of the variability of Gala's components. But there Is another,
even more Important cause:
A nonliving environment that could be perceived by Gala is a
condition for Its existence even in our time. But during evolu-
tion the existence of other beings has become the most Impor-
tant part of the environment of a living being (Csanyi 1987). That
Is, Gaia has slowly begun to perceive itself, and the information
that has been processed by it has concerned itself more and
more (Csanyi, 1989, see Appendix 2). In case of a predator
interacting with prey, both species might develop enormously
complex brains during evolution just by responding to one
another's challenges. The mass of Information that accumulated
In the structure of each species during its evolutionary history
reflects the other. If Gaia is Intelligent, then species are its mere
thoughts.
Similar arguments can be formulated concerning human
society (Csanyi 1989; Csanyi & Kampis 1987). Is human society
intelligent? If Gala Is then society is too. Animal brains, species,
biosphere, and society are therefore all alike In characteristics
that are the criteria of Intelligence.
Is It really to stretch Schull's framework to arrive at this
conclusion or we do find a common feature in these different
systems? I favor the latter. These systems and some others have
been classified by us (Csanyi 1985; 1988; Csanyi & Kampis 1985;
Kampis 1987a; 1987b) as replicative component systems and we
have described several of their characteristics. Component
systems are self-organizing, able to perceive their environment,
and able to act adaptively; they can therefore be regarded as
intelligent systems according to Schull's criteria.
feks
Daniel C. Dennett
Center for Cognitive Studies, Tufts University, Medford, MA 02155
Adaptationists are often charged with vastly overestimating the
effect of natural selection in evolution: Selection does happen,
say the critics, but other factors are as Important, or more
Important: genetic drift, developmental constraints, the sheer
historical paucity of alternatives from which selection might
choose, and so forth. From Schull's perspective, these critics are
asserting that species are idiots - capable of only trivial guidance
with carrot and stick, minimally educable within strict limits,
but otherwise quite hapless wanderers within structures whose
shapes owe little to the shapes of their wandering. A more
reasonable view would take a hint from psychology and recog-
nize that the different constraints on learning vary with time and
circumstance; some things are easy to learn at one stage of life,
and very hard or Impossible to learn at other stages. Under some
circumstances species are all but uneducable, and at others they
are Ideally poised to dash ahead through the problem-space of
alternatives.
Applied to Schull's claims, this suggests that It would be a
mistake to try to argue for, or against, any universal claim. It Is
not that all species are always intelligent, or that none ever are,
but just that sometimes species do move through design-space
much faster than one would expect (on the assumption of purely
blind trial and error), and when they do, it Is because they
exhibit organizations that have the same structure as the organi-
zations that seem to account for intelligence and learning In
organisms. Also, although Schull Ignores this point, sometimes
species fail to move through design-space as fast as one would
first expect - they get stuck on the threshold of an advance as If
they were too stupid even to benefit from blind trial and error.
Schull asks a series of excellent pointed questions at the close
of his piece, and the last is addressed to me: "When Dennett
(1983) argues for the appropriateness of Intentional descriptions
of evolutionary processes, does he realize that the ascription of
intentionality In evolution may be convenient for precisely the
same reason that It is convenient in psychology?"
Yes and no. I didn't then see that evolution might speed Its
way through search-space by the processes Schull describes so
well here, but I did see that even without such speed-up, the
Inexorable "discovery" of design solutions by the process of
natural selection can benefit from an intentional characteriza-
tion for the same reasons psychological phenomena benefit from
them: They reveal an order that Is there, however slowly and
Inefficiently It is eked out. In Dennett (1987), I wrote that the
Illusion of Intelligence [of natural selection] Is created because of
our limited perspective In the process; evolution may well have
tried all the 'stupid moves' in addition to the 'smart moves,' but
all we see Is the unbroken string of triumphs" (p. 317). Schull
shows that there are conditions under which evolution does not
76
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1990) 13:1

Commentary/Schull: Are species intelligent?
have to try all the stupid moves itself; it can benefit from the
filtering experience of swifter surrogates: for example, the
phenotypic plasticity of organisms in the Baldwin effect. I
welcome Schull's analysis of this bonus, but still insist that the
effects he cites are in no way a prerequisite for the appropri-
ateness of the intentional stance in evolutionary theory.
Schull expresses the hunch that "blind watchmakers may just
have to be very, very smart," and goes on to note that these are
"investigable issues." I agree. That is, we have known for a long
time that the characteristic process of natural selection is capa-
ble of undergoing multiple recursions, and it is always an
empirical question which level of the process is responsible for
any particular bit of design. For instance, does the organism
have to learn to walk, or is that capacity something "learned" by
its ancestors and innate in the organism? It could be either
(some organisms are born with a mature locomotor capacity;
others aren't), and only an empirical investigation will settle the
question. Schull proposes a new set of such questions: Did a
particular product of genetic evolution arise by the slow, basic
process of blind trial and error, or did it get accelerated by
various aspects of "species intelligence"? It might be, though
this would be hard to prove, that there hasn't been enough time
to explain the arrival on the scene of some particular complexity
unless it were the product of a "smart" blind watchmaker. I do
not think, however, that any other empirical test could demon-
strate the necessity of past species intelligence. This is related to
the claim I make in Dennett (1987) that no "Martian" biologists,
examining greyhounds and laying hens, cheetahs and barn
swallows, could prove, simply from an examination of the
organisms, that the former were the product of deliberate,
foresightful artificial selection, and the latter were entirely the
product of "natural" selection. No design could be so compli-
cated or wonderful that one could argue that it was inaccessible
to "stupid" natural selection but accessible to "intelligent spe-
cies" natural selection, unless the argument was based on
nothing but the shortage of "R and D" time.
Unfortunately, s©ale and time matter
Kim C. Derrickson and Russell S. Greenberg
Department of Zoological Research, National Zoological Park, Smithsonian
Institution, Washington, DC 20008
Electronic mail: nzpzr002@ssvm.bitnet
Schull attempts to combine perspectives from evolutionary
theory, psychology, and cognitive science to open a new area of
inquiry investigating species as intelligent entities and through
this exercise, one hopes to vivify the donating disciplines. Pre-
vious attempts to combine ideas from apparently disparate,
existing fields have had mixed success. Specifically, the use of
analogies can provide valuable insights, but just as often only
lead to reification of ideas, thus effectively eliminating from
investigation topics that should be pursued aggressively. That
is, for analogies to be useful they should avoid solely describing
similarities and should be used to generate testable predictions.
For example, animal communication was invigorated with the
application of linguistic theory to animal signals (Marler 1961;
Sebeok 1962; Smith 1963). The unquestioning adoption of
linguistic terminology, however, has introduced many an-
thropomorphic concepts about which ethologists still argue
(e.g., deception, internal/external referents). These arguments
are often semantic, typically devoid of evolutionary reasoning,
and have detracted from a more evolutionary approach (but see
Smith 1981). Thus, linguistic theory's ultimate utility in under-
standing the evolution of communication has been called into
question (Krebs & Dawkins 1984; Owings & Morton, in prepa-
ration; but see Smith 1977).
We feel that Schuli's use of analogy between learning and the
genetic tracking of a changing adaptive landscape by a species is
oversimplified and will only certify perceptions, thus reducing
the likelihood of insightful investigations. This will effectively
delay the vast potential contribution that behavior can make to
evolutionary theory. Schull's reliance on a heuristic model to
describe evolutionary change provides a weak foundation for his
thesis. Sewall Wright's (1932) adaptive landscape is an excellent
visual tool for introducing undergraduates to evolutionary theo-
ry. It is greatly simplified, however, attempting to distill numer-
ous mechanisms involved in evolutionary change, and, thus, has
many shortcomings, many of which are enumerated by Schull.
Similarly, his use of behavioristic single-level reinforcement
theories to represent a cognitive science's current attempts to
model learning seems, to nonpsychologists, oversimplified.
Thus, he misses the explanatory capabilities of both fields. The
utility of drawing analogies between two simple models by
noting similarities in their diagrammatic representation is du-
bious, especially when the major similarity is that they depict
change of something (your choice of what can change) through
time (also pick your favorite time scale).
Schull's choice of phrases and examples seems to indicate a
perception that evolution is progressive or goal directed (and
thus, another trait associated with cognitive theories of learn-
ing). We feel that species (i.e., collections of potentially in-
terbreeding individuals) do respond simply to the adaptive
landscape and only in hindsight do they appear goal directed.
This is not to suggest that ontogenetic changes, especially
behavioral plasticity, in individuals in the population (along with
changes in populations of competitors, predators, and prey) do
not alter the adaptive landscape, but that these changes should
not be viewed as progressive.
Our main point is one alluded to by Schull: Behavioral
plasticity and macroevolutionary processes have a relationship
that transcends analogy and is in fact dialectical. It is in the role
of behavioral plasticity in evolution that the dialectic is best
seen.
Behavioral plasticity has proved difficult to study because of
its dual nature. For one, the expression of plasticity may itself be
an adaptation shaped by natural selection in response to en-
vironmental variability. As Morgan, Wyles, and others have
argued, however, it is also a prime mover for exposing indi-
viduals to new environments which introduces new selection
pressures for specific adaptations. This leads to a potential
tension between plasticity (generalization) and specific adapta-
tions that characterize adaptive radiation (specialization).
If the role of behavioral plasticity in evolution has received
little more than lip service, this is probably for two reasons:
1. It is difficult to assess costs and benefits, let alone fitness
consequences, to a trait that operates at such a fundamental
level of decision making. It has proved difficult enough to assess
costs and benefits of more specific aspects of ecological decision
making such as foraging.
2. Plasticity is a vague term for describing responses to
environmental variation, and the mechanisms underlying its
expression are poorly known. Specific hypotheses, such as the
role of plasticity in adaptive radiation (Wyles et al. 1983; Green-
berg, in press) are impossible to test so long as the specific
substrate for plasticity are unknown.
Behavioral ecologists are beginning to worry about how to
study plasticity, which has become an integral topic in our own
research too. The question of costs and benefits of flexibility in
vocal communication has recently received more attention. For
example, Derrickson (1988) suggested that the many functions
proposed for singing are not necessarily mutually exclusive and,
further, that the organization of singing in Northern Mocking-
birds (Mimus polyglottos) is sufficiently complex and flexible, in
a predictive manner, to emphasize different functional aspects
as the social situation dictates. The effect of such behavioral
flexibility on fitness, however, is unknown and will be exceed-
ingly difficult to measure.
Greenberg has been exploring specific mechanisms that
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1990) 13:1
77

Commentary/Schulh Are species intelligent?
might regulate ecological plasticity. The Neophobia Threshold
Hypothesis (Greenberg 1983; in press) states that quantitative
shifts in aversion to novel stimuli in individuals may be a driving
force determining the ecological plasticity of species. Natural
selection could adjust the threshold of response to a given level
of novelty. Such adjustments can have pervasive ecological
implications, affecting, for example, foraging behavior or even
habitat selection. In this way, plasticity itself can be viewed as a
specific adaptation and amenable to study. This dynamic view of
neophobia as an adaptive characteristic and a source of selection
is exciting and should be pursued.
In contrast to focused research on behavioral plasticity, the
introduction of vague concepts, such as intelligence at the
species level, is likely to generate few testable ideas. The mixing
of such disparate scales (from neuronal mechanisms of intel-
ligence to its expression in individuals to the "intelligent"
amoeboid progression of species tracking a changing adaptive
landscape) and different units of time (from the milliseconds of
action potentials to the tenor of an individual's life to the time
between speciation and extinction of a species) could confuse
matters and result in a reification of ideas through the unques-
tioning adoption by other fields of terms developed by one
discipline to address questions on specific scales and of specific
temporal scales.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The authors were supported during the preparation of this commentary
by NSF grants BNS-8819812 and BSR-8705003, respectively.
Ar© libraries intelligent?
Michael T. Ghiselin
California Academy of Sciences, Golden Gate Park, San Francisco, CA
94118
Evolutionary biologists have good reason for being skeptical
about efforts to extrapolate from organisms to species. The
controversy over group selection made it clear that many
putative species-level adaptations would not withstand critical
examination (Williams 1966). There is always a danger of a
recrudescence of traditional organicism (see Ghiselin 1974a).
Neither the earth nor society is a "superorganism," as conceived
by Plato or Herbert Spencer. And there is also a danger of falling
into the logical fallacy of composition - attributing something to
the whole because it is true of the part.
The thesis that species are individuals (Ghiselin 1974b) stimu-
lated such theorists as Eldredge (1985 and earlier) to explore the
various ways in which species might participate in the evolution-
ary process. Being an individual is a necessary condition of doing
anything whatsoever, but not a sufficient condition. The result
of such analysis has been a general impression that species really
do very little. As Schull points out, Eldredge (1985) took excep-
tion to the view of Ghiselin (1974b) that species are "economic"
units, but really this was a semantic matter. I think we agree that
species are economic units itself as genes are resources. Species
help their component organisms to form diverse offspring.
The mere point that species themselves do very little and play
an essentially passive role in the natural economy would not
abolish the legitimacy of the analogy between learning and
evolution. Indeed, evolution provides a fine model for the
creative process in all of its ramifications (Ghiselin 1969; 1971).
One analogy one might draw would be a group of scientists who
work on a common group of problems. As scientists they ob-
viously have to be reasonably intelligent. But is the group itself
intelligent? Well, it does not think, but then again it might, as a
collective, possess more skills than any of the individual scien-
tists and be more effective at solving problems than any one of
them individually, especially when working as a team. Such a
group might share nothing more than a few books and journals,
sharing only a limited range of resources. Their common library
might become improved and contain more and better informa-
tion with the passage of time. This seems to be what species do:
They allow exchange of genetical materials, which surely accu-
mulate and contribute to the adaptedness of the component
organisms. A collection of books might be passed on from owner
to owner, becoming more informative and useful. But would we
call such a library intelligent, or erudite? Perhaps. But would we
expect it to have features that enable it to persist apart from its
utility to the individual users? Maybe. Books compete and
evolve through successive editions.
Schull raises the possibility that sex is a feature that helps jog
populations off suboptimal adaptive peaks. He invokes the
example of species that switch from asexual to sexual reproduc-
tion. Both Ghiselin (1974a) and Bell (1982) have looked into the
correlation between sexuality and asexuality on the one hand
and the conditions of existence on the other. This is not a matter
of the species switching to sex when the conditions become
adverse for it. Eather, sexual organisms often produce large
numbers of nonrecombinant offspring when the local environ-
ment is ecologically undersaturated. However, one can also
make a case for sex being a mechanism whereby parasites vary
their offspring and thereby keep adapted to their changing
hosts. (For an up-to-date review, see Michod and Levin, ed.,
1988.) Whatever the adaptive significance of sex, the empirical
data show two things: First, clones do tend to get squeezed out
by competition with species, especially in ecologically saturated
environments. Second, groups that have diversified extensively
are made up of species, not clones. Even the rare exceptions
such as the rotifer order Bdelloidea may be the remnants of
groups in which sexuality was formerly more widespread.
Therefore, although the species evidently are not only being
adaptively competent in the short run, they are also being more
"creative" in the long run. But use of the term "creative" here is
misleading.
To say that something is intelligent may mean merely that it
has the capacity to benefit from experience. When an organism
is said to be creative, however, there is more than just a hint that
it takes an active role in creating something. We therefore
hesitate to attribute creativity to the resources that it uses,
whether these be theories or libraries, money or banks, genes or
species. The mere fact that such entities participate in what may
be called creative processes does not imply that they are the
creative agents in any particular creative act. There are some
very interesting metaphysical puzzles here, but we may find
that we are being misled by the ambiguities of language. That
would be most disappointing.
illigence: Hazard!
Robert W. Hendersen
Department of Psychology, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign,
Champaign, IL 61820
Electronic mail: r-hendersen@h.psych.uiuc.edu
Near the beginning of his target article, Schull promises to
forestall the problem of defining intelligence, and he is true to
his word. He enumerates a number of structural parallels
between intelligence, as the term is applied to individuals, and
characteristics of species. However, rather than developing a
compelling argument that these parallels suffice to define intel-
ligence, he concludes by throwing the gauntlet at the reader: "If
species are not intelligent . . . ," he asks, "what do they lack?"
What they lack are functional features of intelligence, and in
particular, they lack agency (i.e., instrumentality), even though
Schull repeatedly ascribes it to them. In section 3.1, he has
species navigating the adaptive landscape; by section 3.3 a
78
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1990) 13:1

Commentary/Schull: Are species intelligent?
species has become an "adaptively competent agent," and, in
section 3.5, an "intelligent agent." Perhaps it is no wonder,
then, that Schull soon has species finding peaks and building
bridges. Such metaphors seriously mislead when they are ap-
plied to the process of organic evolution, because they inaccu-
rately imply an agency and purposefulness on the part of the
species.
It is easy, but misleading, to confuse the embodiment of
information with the processing of information (a confusion of
structure with function),' and this confusion makes it appear that
the species, rather than the process of natural selection, is the
agent of information storage. Any species is indeed a repository
of an enormous amount of information, but the mechanism
whereby that information was stored was the thoughtless and
purposeless process of natural selection. The opportunities and
constraints embodied in the species (including such features as
the hierarchical nesting of information, demic subcomponents,
and phenotypic plasticity) partly determine the path of its
continuing evolution, but the process is neither goal-directed
nor species-controlled.
This, of course, is the wonder of natural selection. It trans-
forms and modifies stored information without benefit of the
complicated, albeit speedier, functional mechanisms of infor-
mation processing that comprise intelligence. That the informa-
tion stored through natural selection has structural complexity
as great as or greater than that of, say, human memory, is
testimony to the long-term, accretional power of natural selec-
tion, rather than evidence that species are intelligent.
Schull. performs a service by describing the importance of
interdemic and organic selection, but the fact that structural
features of species affect evolution does not imply that the
species directs evolution. Sometimes what Schull calls "organic
selection" may occur, while at other times phenotypic plasticity
has the opposite effect, reducing selection pressures for pre-
programmed solutions. Schull describes both kinds of case. It
remains an interesting question to determine when and why
phenotypic variation steers species toward or away from particu-
lar genotypic patterns, but calling the process "intelligence"
does little to answer this question.
The closest Schull comes to arguing that species actually are
agents in their evolution is when he suggests that "ongoing
population-wide behavior plays a role like rehearsal." This is an
argument worth developing, because if the parallel to rehearsal
can withstand close scrutiny, it may include features that give it
the character of a controlling process, rather than a structural
feature, in an information-processing model.
What happens if we apply Schull's methods to inanimate
objects? Because they embody information structurally, and
because Schull focuses on structural features of intelligence,
classes of objects evince features of intelligence. Are, for exam-
ple, books intelligent? Certainly they embody a lot of informa-
tion, information that is hierarchically nested; some of that
information is specific to individual books, while other informa-
tion reflects the evolutionary history of books (e.g., the discov-
ery of movable type). Some books succeed and are reprinted,
while others fail. There are mainstream books, but there are also
smaller "demes," published by smaller houses or individually,
through desktop publishing, and these smaller demes are often
at the forefront of new trends. Books take on different phe-
notypes depending on environmental conditions (e.g., hard-
bound or paperback). Structurally, an individual adaptation can
be seen to have started a broader trend in publication patterns.
Moreover, at present it appears that books have stabilized at a
peak of fitness that involves the co-evolution of a legal system
(e.g., copyright law) and a marketing system, so a deep valley
exists between where books are now and the next peak (elec-
tronic publishing), but that unreached peak may represent
greater "fitness." The problem in ascribing intelligence to books
is that the books themselves are not the agents through which
their structurally complex information was acquired. Similarly,
species are structurally complex, but this does not imply that
they are functional agents of their own evolution.
In short, many information-laden classes, including groups of
inanimate objects, share structural features that are charac-
teristic of intelligent systems. While such structural features
may be necessary indicants of intelligence, they are not suffi-
cient. Instead, it is necessary to examine the functional proper-
ties of intelligence.
The concept of intelligence is murky enough in the form it is
applied to individuals of only one species: humans. It retains just
enough meaning to be marginally useful when applied to indi-
viduals of other species. When it is applied to the species as a
unit, as Schull proposes, it obscures rather than sharpens the
view we have of such important processes as interdemic and
organic selection.
.Similarities and dissimilarities between
adaptation and learning
Mark H. Johnson
MRC Cognitive Development Unit, 17 Gordon Street, London WC1H OAH,
England
Electronic mail: fbjudmj@euclid.ucl.ac.uk
Are species intelligent? Let me begin by reformulating the
question as What parallels, if any, are there between the dyna-
mics of the evolution of a species and the dynamics of behavioral
change in an individual organism? And What might be the value
of discovering these parallels for the study of species or for the
study of cognitive capacities in individuals?
In his target article, Schull identifies a number of charac-
teristics of the adaptive competence of species that he suggests
are indicative of "intelligence." I would like to focus on one of
these characteristics: that species actively investigate potential
plans of action by means of demes and nested selection, i.e., that
they have "representations." Two points should be made about
this issue. First, there are two ways of looking at any complex
dynamical system. What appears as the automatic passive re-
sponding or adaptation of many elements at a lower level can be
viewed as active anticipation when the behavior of the system as
a whole is considered. The same problem arises when studying
the brain. In the target article, Schull makes a contrast between
a "Thorndikean" (differential reinforcement driven) animal and
an "insightful" one. Again, one is seen as the passive responder
and the other as an active agent. This same dichotomy surfaces
in the debate about the extent to which PDF models can account
for human behavior (see Smolensky 1988b). Obviously, at a
lower level of explanation all cognitive functions can be de-
scribed in terms of the "automatic" responses of very complex
networks of neurones. When the emergent properties of the
whole network are observed, however, seemingly "intelligent"
behavior is the result.
My second point - about viewing species as having anticipato-
ry plans of action - concerns a dissimilarity with cognition.
Unlike the case of internal representations in cognition, deter-
mining which of the exploratory demes of a species is successful
depends on the environment. This is merely the general point
made by Susan Oyama (1986) and others. Schull states that
"every organism embodies a tremendous amount of information
about its evolutionary niche." As Oyama has argued, the infor-
mation in this case is not merely in the organism or in the
environment but is an emergent property of the interaction
between the two (Oyama 1986; Johnson 1987). In contrast,
internal cognitive representations are powerful precisely be-
cause they can be manipulated independently of environmental
or sensory fluctuations.
We now come to the second of the two questions posed at the
beginning of this commentary: What is the utility of regarding
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1990) 13:1
79

Commentary/Schulh Are species intelligent?
species as "intelligent"? Schull states that treating species as
intelligent will give rise to "clearer and richer ideas about what
kinds of entities species are, what intelligence is, and what
evolution is really like." A better understanding of these kinds of
complex dynamical systems may indeed help us to conceptual-
ise species adaptation. However, it is less clear how it will help
us understand "intelligence." Definitions of the term "intel-
ligence" vary widely; the theoretical basis of the concept is still a
matter for some debate (e.g., Anderson 1989). The use of the
term "intelligence" in the present context not only seems
unnecessary but may even be misleading. Why not just be
content with identifying those properties of dynamical systems
that are common to adaptation and thought? The dissimilarities
between the two may even turn out to be more informative than
the similarities.
Sped©! intelligence:
Analogy without homoiogy
James W. Kalat
Department of Psychology, North Carolina State University, Raleigh, NC
27695-7801
In a 1987 article in this journal, E. M. Macphail argued that we
cannot distinguish between the intelligence of a frog and that of
a monkey. Here, Jonathan Schull states that, "as processors of
information, plant and animal species are no less complicated
than, say, monkeys." A casual interpretation might be that this
journal has some sort of vendetta against monkeys. A more
serious implication is that psychologists throw the word "intel-
ligence" around rather loosely. Neither Macphail nor Schull
explained precisely what they mean by "intelligence." Certain-
ly it is possible to define the word in such a way that a monkey's
intelligence is equal to that of a frog, or to that of the Loblolly
Pine species. I suspect, however, that we are stretching the
concept of intelligence so far that we may have to abandon it. (If
so, I suspect psychology may benefit, because the concept has
frequently proved to be more trouble than it is worth!)
Schull poses his key question in the final sentence of his article:
"If species are not intelligent systems of some sort, what do they
lack?" Schull has impressively and cleverly shown how the
evolution of a species resembles learning, savings, learning sets,
insight, and other phenomena. What else, if anything, does an
intelligent individual do that an evolving species does not? I
believe that the way we ordinarily use the term intelligence
includes making plans, directing one's behavior toward a per-
ceived goal. Kohler's apes directed an ever-changing variety of
behaviors toward visible but hard-to-reach bananas (Kohler
1917/1976). Rensch (1973) gave chimpanzees problems such as a
series of 10 locked boxes with glass covers, each containing a key,
except for one with a piece of fruit and one that was empty. A
chimp was then given a choice between two keys. One key would
open a box containing a key that would open another box, and so
on until the chimp reached the fruit box. The other key would
open a box containing a key that would open another box, and so
on until the empty box. Eensch observed that the chimp would
work backwards, first finding the fruit box, then finding the box
with a key that opened the fruit box, then the box with a key that
opened the penultimate box, and so on. Eventually it came to a
box that could be opened with one of the two available keys; at
that point it selected the correct key.
Does goal-directed behavior like this differ from mutation and
selection? I believe it does. Mutation and selection are analo-
gous to trial-and-error learning, as Schull has persuasively
argued. But mutations are not guided by their eventual conse-
quences, any more than trial-and-error responses are. Muta-
tions have no plan, no goal.
Schull argues that ontogenetic changes in a species' way of life
can guide future evolution, and in that sense provide for goal-
directed evolution. I concede that point to some extent; how-
ever, the "goal" (if we call it that) guides the selection process,
not the mutation process. It does not increase the mutation rate
or the probability of one mutation over another. In contrast, the
sight of a piece of fruit causes a chimpanzee to increase its
number of behavioral variations and to try particular new behav-
iors.
The fundamental problem is that the intelligence of a species,
even if closely analogous to the intelligence of an individual, is
not homologous with it. An evolving species achieves certain
complex outcomes, as an intelligent individual does, but it has
no central coordinator, nothing similar to the central nervous
system. In science we often rely on analogies to guide our search
for similarities in underlying mechanisms. If the "intelligence"
of a species and the "intelligence" of an individual rely on quite
dissimilar mechanisms, then the analogy between them, while
highly interesting, is of uncertain usefulness.
Finally, one detailed point: Schull points out that an indi-
vidual increases its rate of behavioral variation when conditions
take "a turn for the worse" (i.e., when the rate of reinforcement
for a given response decreases). Similarly, he suggests, a species
increases its rate of genetic variability when its current way of
life becomes less successful. There is a second way to increase
the variability of behavior in an individual: Let conditions take a
marked turn for the better - for example, provide reinforce-
ment for a variety of responses other than the one that has been
reinforced in the past. Similarly, a species is likely to increase its
rate of genetic variability when the environment becomes high-
ly tolerant - for example, when a species is introduced into an
environment in which it has few competitors and few predators.
Perhaps the most general statement is that variability increases
when there is not much difference in elevation between the
adaptive peaks and the adaptive valleys.
iS©pmentf and learning in
David Leiser
Department of Behavioral Sciences, Ben-Gurion University of the Negev,
Beer Sheva 84105, Israel
Electronic snail: kdhg100@hgunos.bitnet
Schull suggests considering species as intelligent. He shows that
their constant quest for better adaptation may be seen as a
search, and that the search method is anything but blind: The
move generator is not random, moves can be tried out before
the species commits itself to one, it can backtrack over some
mistakes, evolution and progress can proceed along several
dimensions simultaneously.
This construction conflates two aspects of increasing adapta-
tion and success: successive problem solving (by the species)
and long-range evolution (cf. the adaptedness and adaptability
distinction; Bickhard 1988). Problem solving is fairly satisfac-
torily treated by the information-processing approach, and this
may have led Schull to rely on it. For the evolutionary/ develop-
mental aspect, however, this paradigm has been conspicuously
less successful. Much revolves on whether all intelligent cog-
nitive activity is taken to be represented in some representa-
tional language. Some years back, Fodor (1975) argued per-
suasively that no new concepts can be learned if that learning
relies on hypothesis formation and testing, expressed in an
intentional language of thought attributed to the learning sys-
tem. True development is impossible; at most there can be
"belief fixation."
What are the relations between learning of particulars (e.g.,
problem solving), and development in cognitive science? There
are several contestants, none with a decisive advantage. The
80
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1990) 13:1

Commentary/Schu\\: Are species intelligent?
first, which accepts Factor's strictures, is the explicit informa-
tion-processing approach. Pinker (1984), for instance, sees the
acquisition of grammar as a rational explicit information-pro-
cessing task whereby a child deduces what the grammar of his
native language is, using, in so doing, an extensive inborn set of
grammatical concepts.
In machine learning, one might mention the series of scien-
tific discovery programs (Bacon, Glauber, and others) by Lan-
gley et al. (1987), whose authors insist that scientific discovery is
a variety of problem solving. In machine learning research,
which is biased in favor of explicit representation, the invention
of new concepts would require the use of putative constructive
generalization rules: "Unfortunately," knowledgeable review-
ers lament, "most existing systems have not implemented
constructive induction rules in any general way" (Dietterich &
Michalski 1984, p. 48).
The second approach, still within the information-processing
paradigm, uses classifier systems or production rules. This
approach aims at "an explanatory framework for understanding
inductive reasoning and learning in organisms and machines,
from rat conditioning to scientific creativity." In Holland et al.
(1986; see Leiser 1989), rules are reinforced both for leading to a
successful action and for appropriate stage-setting activity. Over
time, the collection of rules should structure itself, and emer-
gent levels of organization (schemata, theories, paradigms,
concepts, bundles of rules,) are expected to emerge, by gener-
alization, specialization, and tying together of individual rules.
The theory of the development of production systems is not very
satisfactory either. Young (1976), Anderson (1986), Lewis (1987)
and Wallace et al. (1987) have suggested some principles of
learning. Ideally, the rules should evolve as coherent systems of
coadapted elements. Although cognitive functioning can be
described by sets of rules (production or classifier rules), it is far
from obvious that the proposed mechanisms of development are
sufficient for the emergence of adapted systems.
Much the same is true of connectionism. PDF (connee-
tionism) makes do without any explicit representation. Smol-
ensky (1988) summarizes the current vigorous debate about
which way the reduction goes: Are rules more or less idealized
descriptions of subcognitive functions, or on the contrary, are
neural network models (sometimes) approximations to rule-
based behavior (Pinker & Prince 1988). In particular, it is not at
all clear how what is learned in neural networks can be applied
to other problems, and used to make appropriate inferences.
(See also Smolensky: "On the Proper Treatment of Connec-
tionism" BBS 11(1) 1988.)
Finally, some theorists explicitly decouple macrocognitive
and microcognitive evolution, much as Gould, Eldredge, Vrba,
and others did for macroevolution and microevolution. The
leading figure associated with this approach is Piaget, and no
wonder: He was explicitly influenced by Baldwin, and a biolo-
gist and philosopher by training. Piaget devoted one of his last
books (1974, pp. 71 & 73 to drawing an extended parallel
between phenocopy "in the broad [i.e., nonhiochemical] sense"
and the "cognitive equivalent of phenocopy." What he meant by
this was the internalization of structure, its reconstruction on
internal principles, the transition from exogenously to endoge-
nously determined structure.
This dimension is extremely important. One aspect of intel-
ligence missed in the description of its development as search is
precisely the restructuring of knowledge, the development of
causal and logico-mathematical models. Leiser (1987) illustrates
this transition where a better adapted representational method
is being used, assuming structural constraints that thereby
become entrenched. The result is a more compact representa-
tion at a cost of a loss in local flexibility, but also a wider range of
applicability.
Piaget claimed to have identified several general develop-
mental forces: coadaptation to the same level (e.g., rever-
sibility), equilibration with higher levels (reflecting abstrac-
tion), the alpha-beta-gamma sequence, which describes stages
in the adaptation of a structure to a phenomenon, and the inter-
intra-trans sequence (Piaget & Garcia 1983), which describes
equilibration across domains. In his work, he documents abun-
dant instances of all those forces. At the same time, mechanisms
are still lacking.
This situation is typical of the approach: One can trace the
development of operational structures without knowing what
mechanisms are responsible for their links with individual
adaptations and accommodations. Indeed, several distinct
routes can lead to the same operational structure. The same is
also claimed with regard to evolution: "A certain causal mecha-
nism - species selection - is distinct from the array of mecha-
nisms acknowledged by the individual level science" (Sober
1984, p. 359), so that "a given kind of macro-evolutionary event
arguably can have many different possible micro-evolutionary
realizations" (p. 359n).
From this very brief survey it can be seen that (1) the same
questions about the origins of novel adaptations arise in the
cognate domains of machine learning and cognitive science; but
(2) the relation between cumulative development and day-to-
day adaptation is no clearer in cognitive science than it is in
evolutionary theory.
"intelligent"
straw men
Elisabeth A. Lloyd
Department of Philosophy, University of California, Berkeley, Berkeley, CA
94720
Electronic mail: lloyd@cogsc/.herkeley.edu
"Organic selection," defined as having two essential compo-
nents - phenotypic plasticity and its consequent effects upon
population selection pressures - plays the leading role in
Schull's vision of the evolutionary process. There seem to be
some problems with the concept.
First, Schull offers a long list of different "components" of
organic selection at different levels of organization. This list is a
motley collection of processes, effects, and conditions, includ-
ing "genetic assimilation" and "canalization." Waddington
(1956, p. 11) in fact explicitly denied that his "genetic assimila-
tion" was the same as "organic selection," though Schull in-
cludes Waddington's terms in his definition of organic selection,
and cites Waddington's results in support of his own conclusions
about organic selection.
More important, Schull seems to want to appropriate the
advantages of phenotypic plasticity for organic selection. Organ-
ic selection, to the extent that it produces evolutionary change,
eliminates phenotypic plasticity and replaces it with the genes
that produce the local optimal phenotype. That Schull has not
reckoned with this problem is clear in his discussion of the role
of bird song learning in producing a population structure that
would support species selection. The efficacy of the species-
level selection process depends on local song learning, that is,
genuine phenotypic plasticity, which is precisely what would be
eliminated by organic selection, Nevertheless, Schull claims
that organic selection would help maintain and contribute to this
population structure. I conclude that he is equating the pres-
ence of phenotypic plasticity with organic selection itself.
Third, the relation between organic selection and natural
selection on organisms is unclear. While Schull claims that
"organic selection is a form of individual selection, but a distinct
one," the rest of his argument suggests that he sees organic and
natural selection on organismic traits to be completely different
processes, rather than organic selection's being a kind of natural
selection. For example, consider this description of "three kinds
of population-wide processes of selection: natural, interdemic,
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1990) 13:1
81

Commentary/SchnW: Are species intelligent?
and organic," or: "No less than natural selection, organic selec-
tion must rigorously evaluate and exploit novel mutations and
gene combinations" (c£ Simpson 1953). Schull thinks that
organic selection has one important difference compared to
(other forms of) natural selection: It "speeds up adaptive evolu-
tion." Stearns, however, in arguing for the importance of ca-
nalization (which Schull includes in his definition of organic
selection), claimed that plasticity and canalization retard the
rate of genetic change within species (1982, p. 254).
Schull's presentation of organic selection as some kind offeree
additional to natural selection on organisms (and as "neglected"
and "underappreciated") seems to rest on his cartoonish image
of what evolutionary theory is like. For example, Schull wants to
contrast his view with something called "population-genetic
selection." I believe that this includes only allelic-level selection
models with no population structure. He then calls this ap-
proach "the standard view of evolution (held by neo-Darwinian
straw men)." Actually, the view he defends as his own is quite
close to a contemporary description of modern evolutionary
theory (see Lloyd 1988), in spite of the fact that he characterizes
his own view as "quite different" from the "classical, molecular,
population-genetic analysis."
Caricatures aside, Schull's own analysis displays the dangers
of applying psychologistic categories to the evolutionary pro-
cess. First, he has completely neglected the central role of
genetic variation in evolution. Second, he seems to believe in a
type of necessity that is not part of any modern understanding of
evolution. I think these two problems are related; it is because
Schull misses the role of chance, random genetic variations that
he ends up emphasizing teleology and purposiveness where it is
not appropriate.
Consider the role of genetic variation. In older accounts of the
Baldwin effect,1 the story was that phenotypic plasticity allowed
the population to hang on long enough to accumulate, through
selection on randomly arising genetic variation, adaptations to
the new local environment (e.g., Richards 1987, p. 471). In
contrast, Schull says, "genetic variation increases the efficacy of
organic selection." This is highly misleading, at best; evolution
by organic selection does not occur at all in the absence of
genetic variation. Schull seems both to take genetic variation for
granted, and to assume that it's an option.
For example, in the context of describing how organic selec-
tion works, Schull claims that "population-genetic change will
inevitably follow in the train of this new strategy"; this is because
"the mere prevalence of the new strategy should promote the
natural selection of genes and gene combinations." (sect. 3.5
and Note 1) This is simply incorrect. If there is no genetic
variability for the relevant traits, nothing will happen evolution-
arily. Genetic variation is not optional, it is necessary.
A similar notion of necessity appears in other places in
Schull's argument. For example, in his anglerfish example, he
claims that "it was inevitable" that anglerfish would learn to
wiggle their dorsal fins, given that they had certain inherited
abilities. This is not correct; it depends on whether those
neurophysiological pathways were among the possible rein-
forced behaviors, and even then it is not inevitable, it is merely
possible.
Schull also claims that biases in ontogenetic adaptation "must
cause" the organisms to "reach out" in the particular directions
consistent with the organisms' adaptive biases." The issue of
developmental constraints is a complicated one, but Schull
helps himself to the assumption that the direction of develop-
mental constraints "can promote rapid adaptive change in par-
ticular directions," citing Alberch (1982) and Gould (1980). Nei-
ther Alberch nor Gould claims that developmental constraints
dispose change in adaptive directions; Alberch, for example,
simply claims that the large developmental changes can serve as
preadaptations to a different environment, that is, that these
changes are big and can "open up a new adaptive realm for the
organism" (1982, p. 330). Hence, Alberch's actual point contra-
dicts Schull's interpretation, because Alberch emphasizes the
new demands of a new environment.
There are several points at which Schull acts as if the existence
of the selection pressure alone were enough to produce the
variation (sect. 3.3, para. 2; sect. 3.5, para. 7; sect. 3.7, para. 2;
Note 1). This is a misreading of the biology, and I think it arises
out of Schull's psychologistic approach to the evolutionary
process.
Biologists and philosophers have spent the better part of the
twentieth century disabusing people of anthropomorphic mis-
takes about the mechanisms that produce evolution. Schull
claims that he is promoting new insights in evolutionary biology
by this adoption of psychologistic tools. On the evidence, I
would say rather that he is obscuring present insights about
evolutionary processes by introducing confusions, neologisms,
and mischaracterizations of evolutionary theory. I do think he
has done a service, however, by getting readers to think about
evolution in suitably complex terms, and by offering what I
think are quite good accounts of interdemic selection and
species selection. I also agree with Schull that the future interac-
tion between cognitive science and evolutionary theory will be a
fruitful one, but I do think a real evolutionary theory should be
used, not a caricatured one.
NOTE
1. The Baldwin effect describes a population that reaches fixation for
a locally optimal phenotype aided by pheeotypic plasticity.
TSie way of ail matter
William A. MacKay
Department of Physiology, University of Toronto, Toronto M5S 1A8,
Canada
Eieetronic mail: mackay%mmedac1@neat.ai.toronto.edu
Schull is suspiciously (but admittedly) loathe to give the reader a
definition of intelligence, and when he does so it goes under the
guise of "insight." The definition is nonetheless a rather good
one. "The intelligent agent is postulated to have some kind of
trial-and-error simulator that generates, in some kind of surro-
gate environment, a variety of potential plans of action" (section
3.5). Conventionally, that substitute environment is taken to
mean the brain's multiple representations of the world. The
more complete the representations, the greater the potential for
intelligent behavior. The definition implies that it is impossible
to dissociate intelligence from consciousness, where the latter is
defined as the recognition of one's existence as a distinct entity
within a larger field of reality. I think that Schull made a tactical
error in neglecting to establish a basis for species' self-aware-
ness. Starting in the first paragraph in fact, Schull abandons the
concept of species consciousness, and thereby throws away a
foundation for his thesis. As a result, one may claim not that
species are intelligent, but rather than they act as if they were
intelligent.
Everything that Schull has to say about the adaptive mecha-
nisms of plant and animal species is true enough and well
presented. Yet the essential aspect of intelligence is not effec-
tively argued. It goes no further than the simile "ongoing
population-wide behavior plays a role like rehearsal." The nuts
and bolts of adaptability - random variation, meandering
denies, organic selection - however much they are analogous to
the processes that go on in the cerebral cortex of a thinking
animal, actually occur in the "real" environment. Hence, they
are readily distinguishable from mental simulations, which are
only externalized when they are deemed feasible and worth-
while.
Virus types possess with a vengeance all of the adaptive
qualities, but they are not "species." Even chromatin did not
invent the adaptive drive, but was a product of it. The species
82
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1990) 13:1

Commentary/SchuW: Are species intelligent?
characteristics that Schull would label as "intelligent" are proba-
bly universal attributes of matter to some degree. Chromatin-
based systems are simply the most sophisticated exploiters of
the physicochemical properties of molecular chains. These
properties are visibly expressed in the crystalization and poly-
merization of inanimate structures given the appropriate en-
vironment. On a cosmic scale, the "life cycle" of star clusters
bom from amorphous (amoeboid) nebulae manifests features
that parallel the major adaptive mechanisms outlined by Schull.
Nonbiological evolution, however, suffers the fate of Sisyphus.
Without a genetic code, every cycle starts back at its elemental
beginnings.
The host environment for a highly mutable pathogen (e.g.,
spirochetes of the genus Borrelia) mirrors each of the antigen's
"intelligent" DNA rearrangements with its own DNA rear-
rangements to produce appropriate antibodies. This constantly
shifting and improving antibody response of the host provides
the selective pressure on the infectious antigen with the inevita-
ble result that new variants, for which there is no antibody as
yet, always survive (Pachner 1989). Both host and spirochete
play the same game. Is the Borrelia species intelligent and the
host (often a human) stupid? Such terms are really quite mis-
leading and inadequate to describe the situation. Species appear
clever only in their unique goal of expanding and multiplying.
This expansion often leads to environmental breakdown, which
-can hardly be deemed an intelligent mode of control.
The themes of intelligence and species evolution have been
explored with characteristic wit by Bernard Shaw (1959) in his
philosophic comedy Man and superman, written in 1903. Shaw
borrowed the vitalists' unfortunate term "Life Force" to label
the drive of a species to perpetuate, improve and adapt itself,
but clearly distinguished it from intelligence (although intel-
ligence can greatly aid adaptive mechanisms). Again, I would
deny that life has any more claim to this "Force" than does the
Milky Way. Nevertheless, the Shavian view, expressed by a
loquacious Don Juan in Hell, provides an interesting echo of
some of SchulTs asides. "But to Life, the force behind the Man,
intellect is a necessity, because without it he blunders into
death. Just as Life, after ages of struggle evolved that wonderful
bodily organ the eye, . . . so it is evolving today a mind's eye
that shall see, not the physical world, but the purpose of life, and
thereby enable the individual to work for that purpose . . ." (p.
126). Similarly, Schull notes that "in some animal species the
intelligence and foresight of component animals may enable the
species to 'see' its way toward very distant adaptive peaks." In
both quotations, intelligence is invoked at the individual level in
order that the species may subsequently appear to behave intel-
ligently.
There is no reason to upset the traditional view that intel-
ligence is a recent evolutionary development. Biological sys-
tems evolved from the organic fraction of matter to produce
species with a baseline genetic code. Evolution and reproduc-
tion in the nonbiological world drift in the casino of the universe,
with no mechanism to maintain or profit from past gains. The
advent of gene banks marked a revolution that ensured the
continuation of a nest-egg, which selectively acquired interest
over the millennia. The evolution of intelligence is an advance of
comparable stature, which allows for more goal-directed steer-
ing of deme adaptation by moving some of the roulette wheels
into the simulated environment of the mind. This metaphor
could become stark reality as intelligence strives to usher inani-
mate machines into our species, at least phenotypically.
Blotlc intelligence (Bl)?
F. J. Odling-Smee
Department of Biology and Biochemistry, Brunei University, Uxhridge UB8
3PH, England
Schull's thesis seems to me to be both important and correct. I
applaud it, and support it. To do less would be apostasy because,
like others, I have been trying to develop the same basic ideas
for some time. However, I have two reservations. First, too
little is said about mechanisms. Second, some of the termi-
nology and some of the analogies are unhelpful. I'll deal with
these issues under three headings.
The analogy between ewoSution and learning. The analogy
between genetic evolution and learning has frequently been
recognised [see Skinner: "Selection By Consequences" BBS
7(4) 1984] yet never turned into an empirical program. Why
not? I suggest a threefold answer.
First, we need to establish the limits of this analogy, that is,
where it does not imply as well as where it does. In essence, the
analogy claims that there is a recursive information-gaining
heuristic in nature, which works at multiple levels, in a nested
hierarchy of levels, including both evolution and learning. This
heuristic involves processes that generate variety, and other
processes that test and sort that variety at each level. The
analogy does not imply much else. For example, it cannot say
much about the interactions that occur between levels (in this
case between genes and learning). Nor can it say anything about
the kinds of units, nor the selective mechanisms, that occur
within levels. The logic of the heuristic may be the same at each
level, but the units and the selection mechanisms certainly are
not (Odling-Smee & Plotkin 1984). Hence, one early step must
be to classify the units and the selection mechanisms that are
supposed to be analogous at each level. Schull starts on this road
by pointing out that a species at the genetic level is analogous to
an individual at the learning level, and that natural selection at
the genetic level is analogous to Thorndikean reinforcement at
the learning level - but that much has often been said before.
We need to go further. For example, what units are analogous to
a gene pool, to a phenotype, or to a single gene at the learning
level?
The second requirement is a common, multidisciplinary lan-
guage to enable us to talk about this "generate and test"
heuristic at any level without immediately erecting barriers of
incomprehension between disciplines by inflicting a "con-
creteness" that is appropriate at one level (say, genetic) or to
some other level (say, learning) where it is completely mis-
placed. At present this concreteness comes from the preoccupa-
tion of each different discipline with the physical "bits and
pieces" that compose the units and selective mechanisms of the
particular information-gaining process it calls its own. To avoid
this confusion we need a set of abstract terms that are not tied to
the "bits and pieces" of any one discipline, but that can equally
well be used by all disciplines, to their mutual enlightenment.
Third, the analogy must be run in both directions. It should
be possible for those who study learning to gain insights from
those who study evolution, and vice versa. For example, the
analogy implies that there must be unknown mechanisms re-
sponsible for generating behavioral variety at the learning level
that are analogous to the known mechanisms which generate
phenotypic variety at the species level. Psychologists and neu-
roscientists should therefore start to look for mechanisms that
are capable of recombining behaviors at the learning level,
analogous to the mechanisms of recombinant DNA at the genet-
ic level. That would constitute a new research program based on
the analogy. In practice, psychologists have been slow to see this
challenge, which suggests that the analogy is still not working.
Conversely, the lessons that population geneticists could learn
from psychologists are rather nicely presented by Schull. To
date, population geneticists have hardly begun to understand
the epistemological aspects of their subject. Schull's thesis
might encourage them to start.
It is in this context, however, that I find some of Schull's own
terms and analogies unhelpful. Two examples must suffice.
Baldwin's "organic selection" is a bad choice because this term
conspicuously fails to indicate whether we are talking about
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1990) 13:1
83

Commentary/Schull: Are species intelligent?
between-organism or within-organism selection. It therefore
blurs what is probably the main distinction between the genetic
and learning levels. Similarly, the analogy between a species
and an amoeba is likewise unhelpful. The organelles in an
amoeba are fundamentally different in kind, some even carrying
their own DNA; but members of a species are basically the same
kind (sex and caste apart). This implies the existence of different
kinds of sorting processes at these two levels (Margulis 1982;
Buss 1987), making an amoeba a poor analogy for a species.
Nawigating an adaptive landscape. A better analogy is the
extended use of Wright's adaptive landscape, and the proposal
that phenotypes modify the topography of such landscapes in
"intelligent" ways. Here Schull correctly points out that the
relationship between organisms and their environments is a
"two-way" relationship. Local environments cause and direct
changes in local organisms, but plastic phenotypes also cause
and direct changes in their local environments.
My doubt this time is whether all the ways in which pheno-
types navigate their adaptive landscapes really are as "kosher"
as Schull claims (i.e., whether they are compatible with the
synthetic theory of evolution). I don't think they are. There is a
"phenotypic drive" in evolution (elsewhere called "niche con-
struction"; Odling-Smee 1988) that is not captured by the
orthodox "selfish gene" and "survival machine" approaches
(Dawkins 1976). Niche construction incorporates development
(Buss 1987; Campbell 1985; Lewontin 1983) and behavioral
drive (Wylie et al. 1983). The main point here is that plastic
phenotypes can modify genes in their own populations and each
other's, not via a Lamarckian route, but simply by causing
nonrandom changes in some of the naturally selecting inputs
that they later get back from their environments via their niche
constructing outputs. They thereby partly regulate some of the
natural selection pressures that they themselves confront. This
leads to various kinds of co-evolutionary feedback cycles be-
tween organisms and their environments, only some of which
are compatible with the synthetic theory.
For example, population-by-population interactions, such as
a predator—prey "arms race" can be modelled conventionally in
terms of reciprocal natural selection and reciprocal genetics
(Futuyma & Slatkin 1983). However, other kinds of interac-
tions, for example, those between a plant species and an abiotic
component in its soil (e.g., soil pH, or moisture) cannot be,
because there are no reciprocal genetics in such soil compo-
nents, making any orthodox plant-by-soil co-evolutionary model
impossible. This forces us to regard what a plant does to its soil as
evolutionarily irrelevant even if the ecological consequences
(e.g., ecological succession) are acknowledged. Nevertheless,
plants may still co-evolve with abiotic components in their soils,
thereby driving their own successive evolution. Consider this
fanciful sequence: Plants in species P capture water; less water
in soil; modified selection in favour of variants in F that grow
more roots and capture more water; still less moisture in the
soil . . . and so forth (see also Lovelock's, 1988, "daisyworld"
for a negative feedback example). Thus, plastic phenotypes may
navigate their adaptive landscapes in some "nonkosher" ways.
This issue will be settled only empirically, so once again the lack
of proposed mechanisms In SchulTs scheme Is unhelpful.
Intelligence." Finally there Is Schull's novel use of the word
"intelligence." If his approach helps emphasise that Information
flows through species as well as energy and matter, and that
evolution is fundamentally an information-gaining process, then
I welcome it. In this context, however, the word "Intelligence"
carries unwanted connotations, mostly derived from the human
sciences. Rather than get Into distracting squabbles, I suggest
adding a prefix. How about "biotic intelligence" (BI) to describe
the phenomena Schull is discussing, for much the same reasons
that we now use "artificial intelligence" (AI) to describe machine
"intelligence?" Human Intelligence would then be a special case
of BI, reverting to just Intelligence, without any prefix, when-
ever the human context was obvious.
it,
Massimo Piattelli-Palmarini
Center for Cognitive Science, Massachusetts Institute of Technology,
Cambridge, MA 02139
Electronic mail: Massimo@cogito.mit.edu
1 take It to be a truism that conceptual assimilations volunteered
under the banner of a vague analogy are not necessarily condu-
cive to advances in scientific knowledge (I am putting this very
mildly). Schull's promise of new, fruitful, and simultaneous
insights into the nature of learning and into the mechanisms of
biological evolution seems to me especially unrewarding be-
cause he connects a dubious model of "learning" (exploration of
new problem-spaces through a reshuffling of pre-existing strat-
egies) with a dubious model of biological evolution. Here I
should put things less mildly and emphasize that Schull is
indeed resuscitating old nightmares. One would have hoped
that, In 1990, all talk of the Baldwin effect, of canalization,
genetic assimilation, organic selection, and the like would have
been mercifully forgotten. Schull claims that these theories
have been "tremendously under-appreciated" and that their
true significance has been obscured. I do not deny that this may
well be the case. What remains to be shown, in spite of Schull's
valiant attempts, is that this is something we should regret. I can
bear witness to one momentous occasion in which Plaget and
Bateson tried out their mysterious cognitive-evolutionary con-
coctions (Phenocopies, deutero-learnlng, directional selection,
selection in the internal milieu, etc.) with the best and the
brightest of the molecular biologists and the cognitive scientists,
and were briskly called back to the blackboard (In Piattelli-
Palmarinl 1980). The Royaumont debate took place in October
1975 and It was already very late in the day for those theories.
We had assumed (wrongly, as it turns out) that only the quite
advanced age of their proponents justified the fact that we were
still spending time and energy discussing these hopeless meta-
phors. All that needed to be said against a literal interpretation
of those hypotheses was said during that debate, on the biolog-
ical front by Monod, Jacob, Changeux, and Danchln, and on the
cognitive front by Chomsky and Fodor. Sound data, better
theories, and scientific good taste are evidently unable to coun-
ter the appeal of these other "grand" theories, for a variety of
extrascientlfic reasons that are discussed at some length In the
book (Piattelli-Palmarini 1980). The proceedings of that debate
have circulated enough for me to be spared making a needless
recapitulation of those arguments.
What I will try to do here Is explain why a certain kind of
wrong cognitive theory needs a certain kind of wrong evolution-
ary theory and why we cannot expect (alas!) to see them both
dissolve into thin air as time goes by. First and foremost, grand
theorizing of the sort propounded by Plaget, Bateson, Ashby,
Waddington, Campbell, Plotkin, and other heroes in Schull's
paper is mostly metaphorical and takes pride In being vague,
allusive, all-encompassing and all-explanatory. Schull under-
lines In more than one passage that he Is basically concerned
with metaphors, and that the basic metaphor of the present ^
paper (species are Intelligent) Is to be recommended because,
"even If species are not Intelligent (his emphasis), the attempt to
decide whether they are" can promote communication between
scientists of different backgrounds. I could not imagine a similar
suggestion being made In mathematics, physics, biology, geol-
ogy, or engineering. Evidently, In the behavioral sciences,
there Is vastly greater leniency, because it is believed that
indeed the field can benefit from these grand metaphorical
speculations, even If they turn out to be false. It is this curious
state of affairs that will be the aim of my commentary.
As I said, I will not attempt to translate Schull's metaphors
Into more precise and committal claims, in order to test them
against scientific data and theories. Even if we managed to
84
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1990) 13:1

Commentary/Schulh Are species intelligent?
specify in exact terms what is meant by "vicarious trial and
error" (after Campbell and, although Schull does not mention
the name, Popper), "ability to navigate the adaptive landscape"
(after Sewall Wright) and "intraorganismic selection" (in the
wake of Bateson and Piaget), it would not help us understand
what is at stake. The (alleged) captivating power of these notions
lies entirely in their vagueness. Schull's paper is the living proof
that serious efforts to refute them have proven totally useless.
The resiliency of this enterprise recommends that we adopt a
different strategy. We have to ask ourselves why it is considered
so important that species be dubbed "intelligent." Why is it
necessary to produce such long elaborate metaphorical restate-
ments of well-known biological theories and facts? Why is it
necessary to twist other theories and other facts almost to the
point of perversion (vaulting, by fractions of an inch, over the
inheritance of acquired traits, over finalism in biological evolu-
tion, and over the attribution of collective intentionality to the
species)? Why remodel these scientific ruins? The reason, I
surmise, is precisely to save these misleading metaphors in the
teeth of overwhelming contrary evidence. To save them means
to save the underlying ideology: adaptationist continuisra-grad-
ualism and the magic of general intelligence.
In the world of big business they say: When you cannot beat
them, join them. This is what Schull attempts to do here.
Cognitive science and artificial intelligence have revealed the
crucial role of modularity and task-specificity? No problem, save
general intelligence by enlarging the horizon: Compensate for
the domain topicality of Individual intelligence by means of an
all-purposive species intelligence. Genetics, molecular biology,
and extra-adaptationist evolutionary theory have disclosed ail
sorts of myopias, trade-offs, and satisficing, all sorts of species-
specific contingencies and quirks? No fear, plot it all in an
abstract metaphorical space of such generality that a steady
"intelligent hill-climbing" becomes a truism. Population genet-•
ics, theoretical ecology, and chaos theory have shown that even
a minimal uncertainty in the characterization of the initial state
can lead to dramatic and unpredictable differences in the final
state? Stay unruffled and hope that "in some animal species the
intelligence and foresight of component animals may enable the
species to 'see' its way toward very distant adaptive peaks." I am
not surprised that the price for saving the notions of "learning"
and "general intelligence" Is to regress from natural science
back to natural theology. What surprises me Is Schull's read-
iness to pay this price down to the last penny.
After Darwin, Mendel, and the new synthesis, and after the
more recent synthesis of modern evolutionary theory and mo-
lecular genetics, the point is not to explain how the anglerfish
may have evolved a nose that looks a lot, and moves a lot, like the
worms it feeds on. Schull tells, in fact, a quite plausible story.
But if one believes in general intelligence, nay, in the general
Intelligence of all species, then the problem is to explain why we
have not developed a nose appendage that looks a lot like one-
hundred dollar bills. Or why the anglerfish did not develop the
"intelligence" to build a sort of aquatic spider-web to "solve" Its
perennial problem. Or why It did not develop the necessary
digestive machinery to eat the seagrass, instead of hiding in it.
(Many animals do eat grass, after all.) Is it not strange (if general
intelligence and general problem solving indeed exist) that one
animal "solves" the problem by eating grass, while another
solves what allegedly Is "the same problem" by hiding in the
grass and developing the most unusual lure to capture some-
thing totally different? What is the general problem to which
both species have to "find a solution"? Capture worms? Clearly
not, because that Is not a problem at all for the deer and the cow
and the goat. Find some kind of foodstuff, any kind? Clearly not,
because what counts as foodstuff for one species is often poison
to another species. Even what generically counts as "environ-
ment" is species-specific. John's intestinal tract is an environ-
ment for the Escherichia coli, but not for Bill. The seagrass is an
environment for the anglerfish, but not for the hawk. The
environment is always specific and the "problems" a given
species has to "solve" In It are even more so. As Lewontln (1982;
1983) is rightly keen to emphasize, the problems and the
solutions come together, and are species-specific. There is no
such thing as an antecedent universal problem for the universal
species, to which there are different possible solutions In the
abstract. In evolution there are specific solutions to specific
problems, and it Is methodologically wrong to make problems in
any sense anterior to, or more general than, the solutions.
Of course, there are higher taxa than the species, and In these
higher, more encompassing, units some structures and some
functions are sometimes common. Accordingly, some common
"solutions" can be detected. However, many of these superficial
commonalities are not very "cute" (to borrow Schull's term) and
the higher we ascend into more and more encompassing biolog-
ical taxa, the less "Intelligence" we detect in the generic com-
mon solutions. The beaver's capacity to build dams is "cute,"
and so is the ant's capacity to develop social castes, but I do not
see much that is "cute" in mammals "in general," or in insects
"in general." I hence see nothing at all that is cute or intelligent
in all species, over and above the tautology that the living ones
manage to live and reproduce. What, indeed, gives us the
feeling of an extraordinary subtlety of evolution, of Nature
having been really "cute," is always the special solution a
species finds for a special problem. The wormlike lure on the
nose of the anglerfish, is "cute," but the explanation of how it
came into being Is logically dependent on the many weird
idiosyncrasies of that particular species. In biology, as in ar-
tificial intelligence, when a system is really "Intelligent," then it
is not "general," and when a solution is really general, then it is
not very "intelligent." The notions of "general Intelligence" and
"general problem solving" are as useless in the evolutionary
realm as they are in the cognitive realm.
I gladly grant that It is silly to ask why the anglerfish does not
eat the seagrass, or why the sparrow did not develop a worm-like
lure and why the hawk did not choose to capture its prey by
hiding motionless in the foliage. Schull and all those who believe
in "general intelligence," "general adaptation" and "problem
solving" have to demonstrate that these questions are silly also
in the framework of their assumptions. I do not see how they can
embrace generalized adaptationism and general Intelligence
and evade hosts of silly questions like these. The way out is, of
course, to stress the extreme contingency of biological struc-
tures, of behaviors, habitats, strategies, and local ecological
interdependencies. Once these contingencies are acknowl-
edged as the rock bottom of the inquiry, grand theory becomes
irrelevant and the "why-questions" I have hinted at appear as
silly as they must. Not every conceivable contingency can occur,
as It is the business of physics, biochemistry, genetics, ethology,
evolutionary theory, and ecology to specify this in great detail.
These (and other) sciences sift out the impossible contingencies
and spell out how the ensuing chains of further events are rigidly
constrained in many ways. Yet, within this restricted, but still
immense range of possibilities, down at bottom, many of these
contingencies just happened for no reason at all. Something
drastically different might also have happened, but didn't. Just-
so adaptive stories cannot bypass the original gratuitous quirks;
we cannot explain, or explain away, these Irredeemable con-
tingencies. Well, unless we are also ready to accept as perfectly
legitimate and relevant many, many "silly" questions like the
above. And have a persuasive answer for each of them.
The origins of species are loaded with unaccountable genetic
and developmental contingencies and It would do us a lot of
good to accept this fact. It is hopeless to try to explain, on
deductive grounds, on the basis of some grand super-theory,
why this "solution" was chosen rather than any other solution
(Piattelli-Palmarini 1989), particularly when we have to explain
why a totally different solution, one that has been adopted quite
successfully by other species, was not chosen. If we acknowl-
edge the irreducible status^of contingencies and specificities,
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1990) 13:1
85

Commentary/Schnlh Are species intelligent?
then we can avoid the silly why-questions. If, on the contrary,
we maintain the notions of general intelligence and problem
solving, if we insist on constructing metaphorical quality-spaces
open to intelligent "navigation" and "hill-climbing," then we
breed the sort of finalistic theology in which Schull excels. I
admire him for his virtuosity, but I prefer other cognitive tunes
played on other evolutionary instruments.
"intelligence" as dles©ription and as
explanation
P. A. Russell
Psychology Department, King's College, University of Aberdeen, Old
Aberdeen AB9 2UB, Scotland
Efl@©tronic mail: udaaOOO@vaxa.cc.kcl.ac.uk
Schull has given us an ingenious "thought experiment." Others
before him have recognised that biological evolution is a very
much more complex set of processes than a passing acquain-
tance with the standard textbook neo-Darwinian picture might
suggest. Seoul's imaginative leap is to see that aspects of these
processes have something in common with processes which, in
other contexts, we recognise as involving information process-
ing and that the nature and extent of this processing may not be
so very different from that which goes on in organisms and
machines which we are prepared to describe as intelligent.
Details aside, I agree that grappling with the question of
whether species are intelligent may enrich and clarify our
understanding of biological evolution. I would, however, like to
draw attention to some of the implications of using the term
"intelligence" in this context.
In its original, psychological context the most fundamental
question relating to intelligence is probably whether the term
should be regarded as having any real explanatory power or as
merely being a convenient descriptive label for a set of loosely
related cognitive abilities. These abilities include the acquisi-
tion and utilisation of information, the development of strategies
for solving problems, for reasoning, for thinking, and for gener-
ally adapting successfully to the demands of a varying environ-
ment. The issues here have been raised most recently, and
particularly clearly, by Howe (1988a; 1988b). Howe points out
that any explanatory power the intelligence concept has derives
from the traditional assumption that intelligence is something
that individuals possess in varying degrees and that accounts for
differences in their performance on tasks involving cognitive
ability. (Howe is concerned with humans but the point applies
equally to animals and machines.) Howe argues that in fact there
is no convincing evidence of "a common quality which underlies
and makes explicable the many varieties of mental achieve-
ments" (Howe 1988a, p. 358). Consequently, to say that one
individual performs better than another on some cognitive task
because the first is more intelligent is akin to saying that one
factory produces more goods than another because it is more
productive: neither intelligence nor productivity has much real
explanatory power here.
The reasons for Howe's scepticism centre on the argument
that to show that there was an underlying common quality of
intelligence one would have to show that each of a number of
different cognitive tasks, all purporting to be measures of the
underlying quality, all correlated highly with an intelligence
test score. Such demonstrations have never been forthcoming
and the relatively small correlations that have been reported
(e.g., Sternberg 1982; 1985) may be explainable without re-
course to the intelligence concept as they could reflect the fact
that the tasks and tests sampled shared specific cognitive skills
or knowledge or drew on a variety of "nonintellectual" factors
such as motivation, interest, perseverance, and many more.
[See also Sternberg: "Toward a triarchic theory of human
intelligence" BBS 7:2 1984.] Howe concludes that as long as the
term intelligence is used to imply a common quality "it will be
more a barrier than an aid to real understanding" (1988a, p.
358). A somewhat similar conclusion has been reached from a
different starting point by Mackintosh, reviewing studies of
animal intelligence: "The central task of a comparative psychol-
ogy of intelligence is . . . to analyse the idea of intelligence - in
the limit to the point where we can probably dispense with it
entirely" (1988, p. 522). Both Howe and Mackintosh argue that
labelling an organism as intelligent or specifying a measure of its
intelligence serve not to identify or pinpoint the qualities or
mechanisms that account for its performance on a particular task
but rather to obscure the need to probe those qualities and
mechanisms.
What are the implications of these challenges to the conven-
tional wisdom for Schull's analysis? Schull's use of the term
intelligence is essentially descriptive, referring to a set of "struc-
tural features" (section 3.7) that centre on the acquisition of
information and the generation and use of strategies for solving
problems. When Schull asks the question "Are species intel-
ligent?" it is clear that what he means is "Are the parallels
between the features of species and of organisms (and machines)
sufficiently close to warrant extending the description 'intel-
ligent' to the former?". Answering this question involves at-
tempting to understand as completely as possible the features
(qualities and mechanisms) of species. Schull's analysis makes an
important start on this task. It should be realised, however, that
once these features have been explicated (if this proves possible)
then the term intelligence will add very little to our understand-
ing of them. Of course, the term may have played an important
heuristic role meantime. Also, we may still wish to retain it as a
handy shorthand label.
If the term intelligence is to have any real explanatory function
in evolutionary biology, however, it must pass the sort of test
that it has so far failed to pass in psychology. That is, there is a
need for evidence of a general quality that varies quantitatively
from species to species and that explains why some species are
more successful in evolutionary terms than others. [See also
Macphail: "The comparative psychology of intelligence" BBS
10:4 1987. ] The various structural features of a species would
have to be correlated, so that a species which is particularly
adept, relative to others, at forming "habits" would also be
better at "conditional discriminations," at increasing variability
when established solutions fail, and so on. Whether this is the
case, or even whether such questions can be satisfactorily
answered, remains to be seen. In the meantime, evolutionary
biologists might do well to remember the scope that the intel-
ligence concept has shown in psychology for generating misun-
derstanding and for distracting attention from questions about
qualities and mechanisms.
Misplaced predicates and misconstrued
intelligence
Stanley N. Salthe
Department of Biology, Brooklyn College, Brooklyn, NY 11210
Schull tries to construe intelligence to be a general process, like
growth, for then it could be more easily exemplified in many
kinds of systems. He takes it to be a kind of adaptive problem
solving. Do species solve problems? We look to evolutionary
theory for the answer since species are theoretical entities. To
be material, adaptive problems must involve niche construc-
tion. But the widely used Hutchinsonian niche concept, which
it seems that Schull must have in mind, applies, not to species,
but to populations (e.g., Damuth 1985). The Eltonian niche
concept does apply to species (Colwell & Fuentes 1975; James et
al. 1984), but its role in theory was to serve as a basis for
86
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1990) 13:1

Commentary/Schnlh Are species intelligent?
comparing ecological vicars between biomes, that is, to examine
similarities - just the opposite of the differences constructed by
competition in Hutchinsonian niches. The use of Elton's niche
concept implies that kinds of organisms (species) are entrained
by ecosystemic structures (a matter of parallel evolution of no
evident interest to Schull here), whereas the use of Hutchin-
son's concept of niche implies the selection of genotypes in the
context of local interspecific competition (of interest, but not
associated with species).
Now, this kind of faulty attribution of properties seems
endemic to Schull's thinking. In particular, he takes species to
have the properties of organisms - features that are classically
viewed to evolve by way of natural, interdemic, and organic
selection. In section 4.2, he disclaims species selection for the
very (incorrect) reason that it could not be involved with organ-
ismic adaptation. The only species level property Schull allows
is intelligence itself. But, if species are valid higher level
entities, they must have their own higher level properties - and
they do. Species are known to have at least: areographic patterns
(Rapoport 1982), beginnings and ends, and spatiotemporal con-
tinuity (Eldredge & Cracraft 1980), cohension (Brooks & Wiley
1988), density, durations (Eldredge 1985; Wiley 1981), Eltonian
niches, grain, growth rates, patterns of ebb and flow, and
coevolved partners in covicarian.t lineages (Mitter & Brooks
1983). Without such properties species would be merely collec-
tions of specimens conforming to diagnoses.
These kinds of species level features could, however, be taken
as irrelevant to Schull's argument about the hypothesized prop-
erty of species he calls intelligence because he argues that the
latter is only an effect of selection at lower (organismic and
population) levels, which cannot be said of items in the above
list. This follows the usual reductionist pattern of reasoning
about organismic intelligence, which is taken to emerge from
cellular properties, and presumably from selection on those
properties themselves (in the manner, for example, of Buss
1987) rather than in connection with their contributions to a
larger system (as, for example, with the "second selection
process" in Edelman 1987, Chapter 7). Here is a peculiar
pattern of argument! The higher level property of importance to
Schull is said to be produced only from the bottom up, entrained
by no functions other than its own survival.
Now, material higher level properties would have constraint
capabilities with respect to lower level components (Salthe
1985). All the ones I have listed above affect the behaviors of
populations, demes or organisms. Does intelligence have a
species level function other than the survival that defines it?
Does it have functions, for example, in regulating lower level
entities like populations, demes, neighborhoods, or societies?
We need to know these things before we can accept species
intelligence as a bonafide theoretical object.
What belongs to species is not organismic features or genes,
but the deployment of genotypes over a landscape or in a liquid
column. But if we instead take species to have the kinds of
properties listed in species diagnoses, then they are only inter-
sections of descriptions of organisms. Curiously, if such an
entity could be taken to be a system (which seems doubtful), it
could in principle have a general systemic property of intel-
ligence in Schull's sense because such a general form of intel-
ligence could belong to both the more highly specified orga-
nisms and (in this case) the less specified species. So, species
might formally have a general intelligence if they were tax-
onomists' artefacts (which could not have such properties)!
If, on the other hand, diagnoses are only labels, and species
are actual material systems, then our own, organismic, intel-
ligence would have to be taken to be a less highly specified kind
of intelligence than that possessed by species, much as cellular
eyclosis is less highly specified (because less precisely elabo-
rated) than blood circulation - because organisms would in that
case be parts of species. Material species could not have a kind of
intelligence generalized from our own because they would have
entities with organismic intelligence as functional components.
If species had such a more elaborate kind of intelligence, it could
not be characterized merely by the concept of survival or as a
generalization of our own intelligence. It would be a more
highly specified subclass of our own kind of intelligence, and
would presumably make species agents capable of exerting
intelligent constraints over their lower level components.
So, Schull postulates a general systemic intelligence based on
our own kind that could belong to species as well as to other
complex systems. But if species are actual material systems,
their intelligence would not be an instance of that general kind.
It would have to be of a more highly specified kind that would go
beyond our own. Because it is doubtful that anyone is ready for
that, I cannot believe Schull really intends this species property
to be an actual material organization at a higher level of scale;
rather, it only consists of the effects of the activities of organisms
in populations. If this is true, then the point of the paper reduces
to the harmless enough suggestion that computer people might
look to organic evolution discourse as a source of ideas on
complex systems.
Natural teleology and species intelligence
Albert Silverstein
Psychology Department, University of Rhode Island, Kingston, Rl 02881
Schull's central proposition that evolving species are intelligent
entities is one of the most fantastic hypotheses ever put forward
regarding intelligence, a close second to Douglas Adams' (1982)
science-fiction fantasy proposal that the entire planet earth is
intelligent (the most intelligent computing system ever to exist).
Despite the persuasive arguments Schull adduces in its support,
the hypothesis seems to violate two very widely and deeply held
intuitions about life forms by proposing that: biological species
are entities of some kind rather than collections of entities, and
that these species have goals that are superimposed somehow
upon the adaptations of individual organisms. Schull's meta-
hypothesis, that it is scientifically valuable to attempt to decide
whether species are intelligent, however, is amply supported by
the data he produces in his target article.
Even if the hypothesis itself should turn out to be completely
without merit, the challenging comparisons Schull presents
between the formal characteristics of organismic adaptive func-
tioning and those of genetically driven evolutionary functioning
both raise new kinds of considerations within each of those fields
and loosen the arbitrary restraints under which discipline-
bound scientists cultivating those fields have labored. Indeed,
his comparisons manage to explicate and enlarge the concept of
"natural teleology," which has recently found new favor with a
number of biological and behavioral scientists (cf., Ayala 1970;
Delbruck 1976; Goodwin 1972; Robinson, in press; Rychlak
1987; Silverstein 1988; Slife 1987; Taylor 1970; Williams 1987),
often in the form of "functional analysis" or "feedback systems."
Perhaps, then, it will be possible to enrich the argument for
species intelligence, as well as to clarify some of the intuitions
opposing it, by applying the focus achieved by natural teleology
- i.e., explaining of events by immanent final causes.
The doctrine of natural teleology traces its roots to the works
of Aristotle, in particular Metaphysics VII, Physics II, De Ani-
ma, De Partibus Animalium, Book I, and De Motu Animalium
(Barnes 1984; Nussbaum 1978). Aristotle's teleology has faced
broad rejection by modern biology and psychology, largely as a
result of misrepresentations of it imposed on us by medieval
interpreters who have given it a transcendental cast and con-
flated the rules by which final and efficient causes operate. A
close examination of the doctrine reveals that the ideological
account grows out of Aristotle's defense of the formal principle
in science and his consequent criticism of reductionistic mate-
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1990) 13:1
87

Commentary/Schvlh Are species intelligent?
rial explanations for all events in nature (Cooper 1982). More-
over, it can be demonstrated that ideological argument is
applied to no nonliving natural substances, that it reveals no
mysterious nonempirical forces, and that it leaves no efficient
causal gaps (Nussbaum 1978, pp. 59-99). The overwhelming
majority of cases in which Aristotle invokes ideological explana-
tion are limited to three classes of relationship: those in which
the "form" of an organism accounts for the developmental
changes it undergoes, for its voluntary behavior, and for the
functioning of its organismic subsystems.
Aristotle states that the form of a complex substance, its rules
of organization, is what allows us to identify it. For living
substances, this form must include the rules by which they
function. As long as a particular organism is in existence, its form
persists through any material transformations it may undergo,
and this allows us to re-identify it. This is a view of living matter
as "informed" by its organizational structure (Campbell 1982).
For this reason, the growth and development that living things
reveal also conform to an orderly structure or "plan." Matter is
possibility, the potential for becoming something different;
change is a rule-governed process of actualizing this potential,
allowing it to assume different characteristics (under appropri-
ate ecological circumstances - i.e., efficient causes), and con-
straining it against assuming others. The form of any organism is
always tied to the normal way in which a mature organism of that
type functions, and the latter may be construed as the end or
"goal" (i.e., telos), both for its developmental changes and for
the intentional or quasi intentional actions it engages in
(Nussbaum 1978, pp. 76-85). Because life unfolds according to a
structure of rules, that rule system is a "good" for each organism
to achieve. Moreover, because animals and plants are organic
unities and, thus, self-maintaining systems, the interrelated
functions of the subsystems that make up their parts maintain
and enhance the normal functioning of the total system and help
to perpetuate it across generations. Thus, a third way in which
invoking the ideological principle is illuminating is to show how
the form of the mature organism is enhanced by the operations
of the subsystems, how it is a goal for interrelated functioning of
those subsystems. Though Aristotle finds the telos to be the
most enlightening organizing principle for explaining the fore-
going three classes of function, he never succumbs to the
temptation of later teleologists to insert-it into the efficient
causal chain as a surrogate propelling force.
In two important ways, Aristotle's natural teleology rested
upon an inaccurate factual foundation, though the observations
possible in his time made his conclusions the most reasonable
ones to come to. First, he supposed that the present organiza-
tion of the world was eternal and therefore a good one. Cooper
(1982, pp. 216-217) argues that the conclusion of the perma-
nence of living species is what required Aristotle to explain their
doings in a ideological manner. Of course, this conclusion rules
out both the evolution of species and the development of the
other physical features of the planet. Second, he never devel-
oped the concept of the ecosystem, so that he could not apply
ideological analysis beyond the form of the individual organism
to, say, the rules of adaptation for an entire species (Nussbaum
1978, p. 97). Ironically, if Aristotle had been acquainted with
these two facts, he would have had to insist upon teleological
explanation to an even greater degree, and the reasons for this
highlights one of the most persuasive aspects of SchulTs essay.
Indeed, they help us remove one of the intuitive objections to
SchulFs species intelligence hypothesis: If Aristotle had accept-
ed the facts of evolutionary changes in species that are parts of
larger and evolving ecosystems, while maintaining his belief
that these species tend toward maintaining or increasing the
adaptiveness of their functioning (i.e., that the "fit" of organisms
to ecology tends to be good regardless of the changes that take
place in the adaptive landscape), this would have compelled him
to accept the functioning of individual organisms as being a
component of a superordinate configuration of species adapt-
ability. The conclusion from this is clear: The functioning of the
individual organism has as a goal the species' adaptability to its
ecological niche. Moreover, phenotypic shifts in the functioning
of organisms must be viewed as being in the service of adaptive
genotypic shifts. So long as the facts seemed to show eternally
fixed species, it made no sense to go beyond the life and survival
of the individual organism in applying final causes. With clear
evidence of evolving species, it makes sense to expand that same
teleological structure to include the survival of those species.
Our reservations against seeing species as having goals which
are superimposed upon the adaptations of individual organisms
must vanish in the light of the foregoing analysis. A species clearly
has a goal or a self-interest, as Schull's presentation of Wright's
(1932) model of the adaptive landscape clearly reveals. Thus it is
completely coherent to explain a number of the adaptive actions
of organisms as being for the "good" of the species (i.e., the fit
between the species' characteristics and the ecology it must
survive in), without implying any intention in this regard on the
part of the organisms or any hidden forces that propel them in that
direction. Although we may quarrel with the aptness of some of
Schull's specific metaphpric comparisons between organismic
and species' adaptive strategies (e.g., that "ontogenetic adapta-
tion plays a role [for species] like that of working memory in
animal learning" [p. 13] or the parallel between predominantly
replicate population demes and specialized bodily organs or
systems in an animal), we need have no qualms at all about
construing the latter as organizing principles for the former.
Moreover, teleological analysis of evolving species removes ail
ground for scientific reservations about the formal basis for
describing their adaptive plasticity as "intelligent." The formal
rules for describing the adaptive maneuvers of any large-scale
biological system, if demonstrated also to promote the adaptive
fit of the component subsystems, are rational - a logos - in a
fundamental way. All that remains is to document the details of
those roles in order to assess just how intelligent they are, a task
which Schull begins in an impressive manner.
Schull comments that the commonplace current talk about
the intentions and strategies of genes is merely a convenient
shorthand because no one really means to impute cognitive
capacities to structures as simple as genes. It appears, however,
that just such an imputation lies at the bottom of Wilson's (1975)
form of sociobiology, which assumes that such genetic goals are
realized fairly directly in the adaptations of animals. By contrast,
Schull argues for a form of sociobiology that is founded on the
assumption that natural selection in species, like learning in
animals, mediates cognition-like capacities that are more real
than "as if," an assumption which teleological analysis reveals to
be far more coherent than Wilson's. What is still not entirely
clear, however, is whether it would be coherent to suppose that
species' goals operate in an intentional manner, as do those of
organisms. In the latter case, Aristotle assumes that they do
because he can impute phantasia, or representations to organ-
isms on the basis of their patterns of behavior (cf., Nussbaum
1978, pp. 87 & 221-269). Such representations of organisms'
intentional goals mediate between the events they experience
and the actions they pursue. Schull has not presented a careful
analysis of whether the "information" processed by a species
should be construed as representational, but this would be an
ambitious project requiring a separate essay.
Finally, we must confront our intuitions that it is not reason-
able to construe a biological species as an entity of any sort. If it is
not a reasonable characterization, then ascribing any property of
an entity (like intelligence) to a species is merely loose meta-
phorizing. Schull cites a few biological authorities who are
convinced that it is reasonable, but he does not himself seriously
analyze the issue apart from the parallel drawn to amoeba (as
organisms that are not geographically contained in a stable way).
We may want to consult Aristotle once again, as the philosopher
of common sense with regard to the identification of substances.
The things that he states can be said to exist as substances (in an
88
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1990) 13:1

Commentary/Schulh 
Are species Intelligent?
argument first encountered in the Categories and developed in
Book VII of the Metaphysics (Barnes 1984)), are those about
which other terms can be predicated, but whose identifying
names cannot be predicated of other things. According to such a
linguistic criterion, entitles are identified by those common,
concrete, count nouns that denote what we can show to be
instances of "a this." Each such instance is
1. clearly and distinctly separate from all other things in our
experience,
2. has a unity (of time, place, motion),
3. may be counted in number, and
4. (above all) does not depend logically for its existence on
any other mode of existence, collection of qualities, or class of
existents.
I would urge the view that this list of criteria is as sound a point of
departure today as it was 2,400 years ago. A first sweep seems to
indicate that a species will have trouble only in satisfying
criterion 2, but a thorough application of this list to species will
require a great deal of careful explication.
for genetic
knowledge structures
J.. David Smith
Psychology Department, New School for Social Research, New York, NY
10003
SchulTs target article begins to answer an intriguing question.
Starting with basics, he parallels animal learning (behavioral
selection) and evolutionary change (e.g., natural selection).
Then he extends species behavior to other principles of animal
learning and behavior, to show savings, conditional discrimina-
tions, even internal evaluations of behavioral solutions by the
organism (species). The case is compelling that species behave
and learn, as animals behave and learn. One awaits the demon-
stration that protohorses arrive at modern horsiness by a curve
approximating the Rescorla—Wagner model.
However, Schull seems reluctant to leave behaviorism and
learning theory behind. He emphasizes "adaptive competen-
cies" in animals and species, "so as not to prejudge the issue of
intelligence." He focuses on performance, to "forestall the
problem of defining intelligence." As a result, the ways species
represent their knowledge of the ecology - their genetic knowl-
edge structures - are left in the black box. In their absence, a
particular metaphor of intelligent behavior suffices. It empha-
sizes an objective problem-space and takes a Markovian view of
adaptive change, with successive choice points, and indepen-
dent adaptive decisions emitted at each. Yet, in many cases,
such stochastic models of human intelligence and creativity
have failed; in all these cases it has proved critical to start
theorizing with the domain-relevant knowledge structures
available to the organism.
In aesthetics, stochastic creativity was described in informa-
tion theory. Music, for example, was considered a vast Marko-
vian state-space, linking all the possible sound atoms of Western
tonal music in probabilistic trees of succession. A composition
was an adaptive (aesthetic) path through the space, emitted
particle by particle. The listener heard each sound particle as
another discrete trial, and these were aesthetic in accord with
their informational value (Berlyne 1971; Cohen 1962; Crozier
1974; Meyer 1967).
Current theories of music cognition reject these notions.
These theories emphasize knowledge structures - of key,
motive, rhythm, and so forth, to which musical events are
assimilated and thereby given meaning. Musical events do not
come in sequential sound bytes - instead, whole structures, on
many hierarchical levels, are predicting forwards, reflecting
backwards, reaching completion, growing expectant, as the
piece progresses. One misunderstands musical intelligence if
one does not begin with hierarchical mental representations and
their subjective coloring of the stimulus world (Bharucha 1987;
Krumhansl & Castellano 1983; Rosner & Meyer 1983).
Similarly, one can view human problem solving as the genera-
tion, through discrete trials, of an adaptive (winning) path
through the objective problem-space. However, studies on the
memory, perception, and performance of chess masters, for
example, show how structured and schematic their knowledge
and play are. With single thoughts, the whole board and prob-
lem-space shifts, in every relation, in every possibility (Uh oh -
Danish Gambit; Ouch - my center's weak). No stochastic model
can capture these sweeping changes of perspective. The objec-
tive state-space is inconsequential; the person's subjective con-
strual of it,, given highly textured knowledge, is critical. In a real
sense, the knowledge structures are the intelligence, not the
clever behaviors they allow (Chase & Simon 1973a; 1973b; de
Groot 1965; 1966; Simon & Gilmartin 1973).
Linguists also gave up on Markovian grammars, given ambigu-
ous sentences like, "Anthropomorphizing species can be dan-
gerous." A new schema, a transformed parse, and it becomes
implausible that words, or understanding, come in successive
bits.
One can argue that schemas are illusions, that it only feels like
sudden perspective shifts. Perhaps knowledge structures and
schemas are epiphenomena, not really the assimilative struc-
ture of intelligence, while smart-wired, whirring, connec-
tionist-PDP networks are. This move attacks the core meta-
phors that have been used to model creative, intelligent
thinking, and it is an open question whether the attack prevails.
But Seoul's enterprise is not to reject some metaphors for
intelligence. He is seeking possible creative perspectives for
asking whether species are intelligent. A perspective starting
with the "mental" structures of a species could add a new
dimension to his presentation.
In fact, Schull needs metaphors of intelligence that allow
textured knowledge representations, not just parallels to animal
learning and behavior. For example, his description of the
"insightful" species is totally biological and topographical (phe-
notypic plasticity, peaks, land bridges, and so forth) - the
learning vocabulary allows no psychological description. The
behavior is deemed insightful only for its strong contrast with
Thorndikean evolution. In section'3.9.1 he presses the notion
(Newell & Simon) that species may engender a better space for
representing a problem, rather than seeking a path through the
current space. Such a perspective shift is exactly what the
instantiation of a new schema allows. Finally, we are told that
elephants move their penises like their trunks (amazing if true).
No model of stochastic emission and selection will give you this
borrowing of a whole behavioral system. The "correct psycho-
logical" description of this adaptation is that a mental represen-
tation in the genome, a genetic knowledge structure, has been
instantiated in a new domain.
Does such a metaphor work for species? To a biological
novice, it seems it might. The trunk-penis connection is a
perfect example of a genetic knowledge structure transferred to
a new problem. There are figure-ground-like reversals, when
the species suddenly reconstrues an old system (superfluous
jawbones), for its new use (earbone). And it seems likely that
adaptive strategies usually come not as blundering, single-trait
trial balloons, but as hierarchically structured trait packages (Oh
- the hiomeothermic gambit - tuck legs, shorten jaw, chew food,
swallow faster, breathe more often, raise temperature, grow
insulation). Once this adaptive knowledge structure was in
place, all the "subjective" (actually operative) fitness landscape
was altered forever, in every adaptive peak and death valley.
Such a schematic view of genetic knowledge gives easy access
to many evolutionary phenomena. The problem solver's present
schema guarantees that solution attempts will go in a certain
direction. This is exactly what an adaptive predisposition en-
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1990) 13:1

Commentary/SchuW: Are species intelligent?
sures. In fact, the subject may even be blind to other solutions
(such blindness, or fixedness, is one cost of schematic cognition).
Surely one can find missed opportunities in evolution where the
overcommitment to one strategy has blinded the group to
options.
Comprehension and problem solving both stall until the
proper mental structure clicks in and then progress is rapid.
Obviously evolutionary lines also stagnate for eons, committed
to a strategy that canalizes the adaptive surface and guarantees
more of the same, until a new idea such as horsiness or social
insectness somehow takes hold causing rapid evolutionary
change. The result is an account of both punctuated equilibria
and adaptive radiation. In this respect, Piaget's child is a perfect
analogy to evolutionary change. That child was a structured
ensemble of schemas. While one structure prevailed, there was
equilibrium and developmental stasis with no possibility for
change. Then a new group of mental structures emerged, with
sudden developmental change that one can only call an adaptive
radiation of new cognitive achievements.
Notice that now the evolving species is paralleled to the
mental repertoire of the developing child, not just the behavior
of the learning animal. So to answer SchulFs question - Are
species intelligent? - I say, yes, watch what they do, but also
describe what they know and believe.
Learning, selection., and species
Kim Sterelny
Department of Philosophy, Victoria University of Wellington, Wellington,
New Zealand
Block (1978) tried to trivialize information-processing theories
of the mind by alleging that circumstances existed in which the
Chinese nation would count as an information processing -
indeed conscious - entity. Schull's lively and provocative paper
outsmarts him. I enjoyed the paper, but am unconvinced. I will
discuss my reservations under three heads.
Learning and selection. Evolutionary epistemologists and
others emphasize the similarities between learning (especially
through theory change and growth) and natural selection. Schull
joins this community: He argues that species display selected
adaptive responses that parallel learning to the extent that we
can regard species as intelligent. There are important dis-
analogies, however, between evolution mediated by natural
selection and learning.
1. Natural selection acts on random variation, and hence, is
gradual and slow. For if changes are random, only small changes
stand a chance of being adaptive. There is no reason to suppose
that individual learning of the kind that qualifies an individual as
intelligent, or theoretical growth, acts on a randomly produced
range of variants. Adaptive large mutations are either rare or
nonexistent; there are few jumps in natural selection. Adaptive
1-trial learning, insight and theory change in science can all be
big jumps. Schull suggests (following Campbell 1974) that there
are little jumps inside the mind: a vicarious selection process.
The idea that insight is the result of a selection process carried
out in an internal model of the world is worse than an unhelpful
metaphor.,. It is misleading, because it suggests a theory of
learning where there is no theory; the metaphor conceals a
circularity. If an internally modeled selection process is to select
the right response, the model must incorporate knowledge of
just those features of the actual world that learning is supposed
to produce. An internally modeled selection process might
make knowledge explicit or usable, but can hardly produce it ex
nihila.
2. Natural selection is not progressive. It does not proceed
from the maladapted to the well-adapted. Intelligent learning is
progressive. Adaptedness changes; knowledge grows. We and
doubtless other sentiences work out objectively better and
better representations of our environment.
3. Natural selection obeys the No Credit Constraint. The
selection of a trait requires that it is now advantageous, not just
that it will be. Each stage in the development of the anglerfish
lure, if it is the result of natural selection, must confer greater
fitness than its immediate predecessor. That is why natural
selection can drive a population to an inescapable local fitness
peak. Learning does not obey the No Credit Constraint. It is a
commonplace of philosophy of science that early versions of new
ideas are often less predictively successful, and more problem
ridden, than the ideas they replace.
4. Ideas blend and rejoin. They are not discrete and particu-
late in the way natural selection requires. Lineages do not blend
and rejoin.
These seem to me to be important differences between the
selected response of a lineage and intelligent learning. Now,
Schull does not rely entirely on this parallel. He argues that
there are selective responses of species that are not the opera-
tions of natural selection at the level of individuals or species.
For example, ontogenetic individual selection can systemat-
ically blend the phenotype of the members of a species without
genetic change. But here too the disanalogies are just as strong:
Ontogenetic selection is an undirected variation, not clearly
progressive; and individuals do not blend or rejoin.
Am species Information processors? This question divides
into two. Can we correctly view species as individuals that
process information? Is there any explanatory point in doing so?
I think the main problem with Schull's target article is its failure
to attend explicitly to this distinction. Schull provides all sorts of
cases where we can see aspects of the life history of a species as
processing information and making an appropriate response.
Sometimes we need some pushing and squeezing to see this;
Schull's parallel between ontogenetic selection and short-term
memory, and genetic evolution and long-term memory seems
stretched. But even granting all SchulFs cases, so what? We can
often see systems this way. We can represent the planets as
processing all sorts of astrophysical information and exhibiting it
in the stability of their orbits. Gaia (Lovelock 1979) and her
friends don't want to be vaporized. But everyone agrees that
such a story is at best redundant; the information-processing
story buys no explanatory power here. There are examples
closer to Schull's home. Ullman (1979) has shown that we can
make sense of our ability to recover a 3-D interpretation of a 2-D
retinal projection if we suppose that neural systems in our visual
systems are running an algorithm. It gives a unique solution
only if the class of candidate solutions is constrained. Just about
everyone (myself included) wants to report this as the claim that
our visual systems implicitly know that our environment con-
sists of rigid 3-D objects in motion, rather than plastic ones
undergoing deformation. But what does this representational
story buy us? Why is it superior to the combination of (1) a
mechanical account of the neural processes involved, and (2) the
statement that those mechanisms are adaptive only in a world
where most objects are rigid and in motion. It's very hard to
answer this question, yet Schull hardly notices the problem.
Consider one of Schull's examples: an information processing
account of the adaptedness of the anglerfish species (actually, of
a lineage of species; SchulFs individuals are neither individual
organisms nor species). We can, sure enough, see the anglerfish
lure as carrying information about the environment and prey of
anglerfish. But what can we thus explain that is not equally well
explained by an account of the natural selection of the individual
fish (or their genes, for those like me who prefer that picture of
natural selection)? Nothing that I can see. Schull asks the right
question in the title of the final section of his paper: "Is it worth
asking whether species are intelligent?" But his answer turns
into a plea for a multilevel picture of evolution together with a
remainder of analogies noted earlier. Because Schull does not
show that the attribution of information-processing capacities to
90
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1990) 13:1

the species itself explains anything otherwise inexplicable, I
suspect that this is a vacuous attribution. If so, the issue of
whether the processing capacities of a species are sophisticated
enough to count as intelligent hardly arises.
This brings me to my third worry.
Species adaptations. Schull very sensibly wants to avoid
making a commitment to species selection, that is, the produc-
tion of a species-level adaptation by the differential extinction of
species. Intelligence is such a complex adaptation that the
differential extinction of species lineages Is most unlikely to
build It. For if It exists at all, differential extinction is a horribly
slow and clumsy mechanism. But I doubt that he can avoid
species selection. For I suspect (but cannot prove) that only a
property produced by species selection resists a reasonably
straightforward reduction to Individual selection. If there is a
clean, straightforward reduction there is nothing we can explain
by talking of species that cannot be just as well explained by
talking of Individuals.
The reduction of species phenomena to Individual phe-
nomena need not be simple minded. G. C. Williams (1966, p.
108) pointed out long ago that though the speed of a herd of
horses is a biologically important fact (since fast herds escape
predatioe better than slow ones), It is a property that reduces
easily to properties of horses. So there Is not a lot to be gained
from asking how the herd knows it has to be fast. No one
disagrees. A reduction can preserve explanatory power, yet not
be so crude. Schull, for example, discuss the Importance of
population structure, for certain structures help promote escape
from local fitness maxima. Now (1) no organism can have a
population structure, for that Is a group property if anything Is,
and (2) population structure Is Important, so one might think we
have here a species phenomenon that cannot be reduced to the
Individual level without loss of explanatory power. I think not.
Suppose, for example, that the organisms In question are bats. If
the bats are (a) cave nesting, and (b) caves are fairly small and
widely scattered, then the nature of individual habit and en-
vironment will automatically produce a population divided Into
denies. As far as I can see, the trajectory of that population
through fitness-space will be fully explained by the operation of
natural selection and other selective forces on Individual bats (or
bat genes).
I cannot show that such reductions are always available,
though I suspect they are. For when we have a stable, nonacci-
dental population-level property (density, extent In niche space,
or the like) It seems to me that we will have an individual level
mechanism that sustains that property. If so, then (perhaps!)
anything we can explain via the population-level property we can
explain via its Individual mechanism and the environment.
A final point. Schull wisely avoids tedious definitional forays
into the meaning of "intelligence." I have followed his lead on
that. But there is one point worth making. One reason ther-
mostats aren't Intelligent Is that their Information processing
Isn't sophisticated. Schull tries to show that species do better.
But another strike against thermostats Is their limited goal
structures. Thermostats are monomanic. So are species. They
just want to keep splitting.
Finally I should say that this target article was fun to read.
And at least Schull turns the claim that species are individuals
into one that has biological significance. Until now It has mostly
been arldly philosophical in the worse sense.
Of cockroaches as kings
Robert J. Sternberg
Department of Psychology, Yale University, New Haven, CT 06520-7447
Electronic mail: sterohj@yalevm.ycc.yale.edu
Perhaps there Is no species of house quite so intelligent as the
California house, especially the rather more expensive sub-
Commentary/ Schull: Are species Intelligent?
species near the San Andreas fault. This marvel of evolution in
housing Is fire-proof, earthquake-proof, burglar-proof (if you can
afford to live there, you can afford to wire the house up), and
highly resistant to other natural and unnatural disasters as well.
At worst, it Is 80 proof. This wonder house reflects
1. building selectivity into the generator of housing,
2. generating new strategies for building houses by modify-
ing partially successful strategies for building,
3. accessing very large stores of potentially useful informa-
tion about what makes houses durable,
4. concentrating search in the direction of probable solutions
to housing problems, and
5. replacing the search for solutions with the ability to recog-
nize solutions to problems in housing.
Of course, there Is no reason to limit our extension of the alleged
criteria for the ascription of intelligence to animals, plants, and
now houses. The Mercedes-Benz proves to be a remarkably
intelligent car, but that's for another day.
This target article is a case study in overanalogizing, the kind
that leads Schull to conclude that because the way the male
elephant's penis moves resembles nothing so much as an ele-
phant's trunk, therefore the elephantine penis and trunk must
both access the same motor program, or at worst, motor pro-
grams with common genetic ancestry. Maybe so, but claims
about similarities that are clearly not coincidental are typical of
the overstatement of analogy In the target article.
If houses don't win the intelligence sweepstakes, perhaps
amoebae do. They have shown adaptive resilience that is most
Impressive; they have been around a lot longer than human-
kind, and they will probably outlast humankind by a substantial
margin. Cockroaches fare quite well, too. The question Is
whether we want to use adaptation to the global ecosystem, or
adaptive longevity, as the (or even a) criterion for Intelligence.
Perhaps It should be a criterion for a kind of intelligence (say,
contextual Intelligence); but because no theory of intelligence Is
specified in Schull's article, It is hard to know just what he has In
mind. Indeed, he does not cite any of the major contemporary or
historical theories of intelligence, so It is not clear whether he
really makes contact with what his historically been meant by
the term. Galois could be faulted on contextual intelligence for
letting himself get killed in a duel at an early age, but certainly
we would not wish to label him unintelligent because he fared so
poorly In the global ecosystem!
As Schull himself points out, "phenotyplc plasticity" covers a
variety of sins, among which is the ever-expanding base of things
that can be labeled intelligent in the absence of a theory of
Intelligence. Because the target article does not make clear what
the standards are for something being constituted as Intelligent,
we end up in the uncomfortable position of crowning the
amoeba or possibly the cockroach as king. What, exactly, does
constitute the new and higher adaptive peak that Schull modes-
tly views as "the clever part" of his analogy?
Evolution may Indeed be "cunning" rather than "lucky," but
the question is whether we gain anything by viewing it as
"Intelligent," other than what we would gain by, say, labeling
God as "Intelligent." When we speak of "adaptive hill-climb-
ing, " are we returning to species chauvinism that puts human-
kind at the top of the ladder, or are we introducing a new kind of
species chauvinism that puts amoebae or possibly cockroaches
at the top? Amoebae may genuinely prove to be among the most
evolutionarily flexible of species, but are they the most Intel-
ligent? Do we really need to extend the word so far, and when
we do, doesn't the rubber band eventually break? Schull is to be
commended for an ambitious creative leap, but I think the leap
is In the wrong direction for furthering our understanding of
Intelligence, or of species, for that matter.
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1990) 13:1

Commentary/Schulh Are species Intelligent?
Gary W. Strong
College of Information Studies, Drexei University, Philadelphia, PA 19104
Electronic mail: strong@duvm.hitnet
The target article by Schull may be making a valuable point, but
this is difficult to discern for two reasons. First, it is a specula-
tion: SchulTs main point seems to be that ontogenetic adapta-
tions influence the gene pool. In spite of his claims to the con-
trary, this appears to be straightforward population level
Lamarckism — or neo-Lamarckism, because Lamarck intended
his theory to apply to individual inheritance and not to popula-
tion gene pools. It would have helped the argument consider-
ably if a mechanism had been presented for how the effect might
work. Second, there are a number of ambiguous terms in the
target article that are either undefined or unreferenced (e.g.,
"bauplans" "cognitive capacity," "cognitive modules," "Gaia,"
"neural cell assemblies," "surrogate environment," "synaptic
differentiation," and "trait-space"). These two problems make it
very difficult for the reader to understand. In any case, I will
comment on two features of the target article as I have under-
stood it: the concept of a generalized culture and the genetic
algorithm.
The concept of a generalized culture. It appears that Schull is
hypothesizing an ability for a species to test adaptations at the
less risky level of the ontogeny of a fraction of the population
before committing the whole gene pool to them. Whereas this
idea seems to ascribe purposeful action to species, it is very
similar to Boehm's (1978) theory of "rational preselection."
Boehm presents a model of adaptive decision making in which
baboon and human groups are observed to resolve competing
proposals offered by individuals. Boehm uses an analogy con-
cerning how baboons determine a hunting direction that is quite
similar to Schull's analogy for the movement of a species over an
"adaptive landscape." Boehm quotes Kummer (1971, pp. 24-
25) in describing how the troop gradually shifts its shape "like an
amoeba," protruding "in a kind of pseudopod which may persist
or withdraw again." Kummer claims that "it is reasonable to
assume that the pseudopods were proposals for particular direc-
tions by peripheral males, and that some influential male near
the center finally made a decision. On another morning a
different male may initiate the departure." Examples of the
same kind of adaptive group decision making in human groups
are reported by Boehm.
WhfV;eas it would be ecologically maladaptive for genes to
code specific behaviors such as hunting directions for baboon
groups, it is likely that they code simple individual responses
that work collectively to make the group intelligent. Species
that develop such responses in its individuals are not only able to
be highly discriminating as a group to short-term ecological
changes, but they are also not bound to hard-wired responses.
There seems to be at least two components to such a "propen-
sity" for group behavior: communication and learning. Commu-
nication allows the group to bypass genes in passing along
adaptations to other members of the group. Learning extends
the process by developing generalized adaptations that can then
be communicated. Army ants exhibit little or no learning; thus
the intelligence they show as a species is bound to the adaptation
encoded in ongoing group activity. For example, Franks (1989)
describes situations in which the activity an army ant undertakes
is determined by some parameter of the swarm, such as nest
temperature or rate of trail movement. Franks even speculates
on the possibility that the swarm collectively uses the simple
eyes of individuals as a multifaceted, compound eye. All this is
accomplished with no global coordination. Such parallel dis-
tributed responses seem very similar to the neural population
coding studies of Georgopoulos et al. (1986; 1989).
What we are describing here is the operation of an inheritance
system that is capable of evolving separately from genes. Such a
system might be referred to as a very primitive form of culture.
Culture is described by Boyd and Richerson (1985) as half of a
dual inheritance system, which comprises genes, which support
the ability to communicate and learn, and culture, which main-
tains adaptations more specific to time and place. [See also BBS
multiple book review of Lumsden & Wilson's Genes, Mind and
Culture, BBS 5(1) 1982.] Culture therefore evolves separately
from and more rapidly than the gene pool which supports it, as
described by Abruzzi (1982) for human cultures. Culture how-
ever, is not used strictly in the human sense here. It is a general
system for passing on learned adaptations, one that does not
require them to be passed on genetically (Lamarckism). Such
cultures can be observed in birds that learn the songs of the
group into which they are born and in most social species in
some form or other. The ways such cultures differ are likely to be
related to how each species develops the ability to communicate
and to learn. Thus, I am claiming that it is the organic selection
referred to by Schull that "steers" culture, not the gene pool,
which merely has to refine the general communication and
learning capabilities.
Genetic algorithms. A farther problem with the target article
is its characterization of genetics as a slow process of random
variation. This is misleading and presumably derives from
conceiving organisms as the units of genetic evolution. Although
organisms may be units of selection, they are not units of
evolution. Natural selection, acting upon each individual orga-
nism, tests a large number of gene schemata (Schull's "adaptive
competencies"?). This is referred to as "intrinsic parallelism" by
Holland (Davis 1987; Goldberg 1989; Holland 1975; 1986). Such
a parallel, distributed system can simultaneously climb multiple
hills of a genetic landscape, as opposed to climbing only the most
local hill. Thus, the system is less likely to get stuck on a local
maximum that is not also a global maximum. [See also Ghiselin:
"Categories, Life, and Thinking" BBS 4(2) 1981.]
Another apparent misconception in the target article is that
biological systems increase variability under adverse conditions
and that such an increase Is the primary determinant of adaptive
change. Genetic algorithms that did this would be too likely to
throw away hard-earned gains during temporary hardships and
thus would not survive for long. Pure randomness (mutation) Is
only a background genetic operator. Most evolutionary gains are
made by crossover, which might be termed "cautionary ran-
domness." Crossover tends to keep "basic building blocks"
(Goldberg 1989) while exploring new adaptations. This is what
makes the "blind watchmakers" of genetic algorithms "very,
very smart," to borrow Schull's description. I doubt that recent
evolutionary theorists would find it "extremely difficult . . . to
convince themselves that the random recombination Involved
In sexual reproduction is worth the cost." (Holland has proved
that a simple genetic algorithm based on recombination can
search a multidimensional space far faster than any explicit
search, such as Schull's random walk.) In fairness, the genetic
algorithm proposed by Holland also has Its problems. One of the
problems Is referred to In the literature as the "coding problem"
(Goldberg 1989). This Is the problem of finding a genetic code
that provides both discrimination (so that organisms can exploit
a niche) and coverage (so that recombination can explore new
adaptations).
An argument for an effective genetic algorithm based on the
recombination of building blocks can be made on the basis of
Schull's Figure 1 depicting a species on an adaptive "land-
scape." If the species' genetic code could be factored such that
Independent genes code each axis of the landscape, then an
allele for one of them (allele 1) is capable of coding both hills
simultaneously by coding a strip that runs across them. If the
species Is currently on the smaller hill, then the predominant
allele for the other gene (allele 2) codes an orthogonal strip
running through the small hill. Allele 1 will have a higher fitness
than Allele 2 because It runs through both hills. Thus, there Is an
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1990) 13:1

Commentary/Schull: Are species Intelligent?
increased probability of recombining allele 1 with random
alieles for the second gene, resulting in dramatically increased
chances of finding the optimum. The fitter gene pools are those
which solve coding problems in such a manner.
In conclusion, I would have to agree with Schull's statement
that his "whole process looks very much like Lamarckian evolu-
tion. " I remain unconvinced that ontogenetic adaptation "pro-
motes directed genetic change" as claimed in the target article.
Schull's analogy between ontogenetic adaptation and memory
doesn't work in the context of species evolution, but it appears to
work very nicely for cultural evolution.
Effective search using SewalS Wright's
balance hypothesis
B. H. Sumida
Department of Zoology, Animal Behaviour Research Group, Oxford
University, Oxford 0X1 3PS, England
Electronic mail: sumida@vax.oxford.ac.uk
Schull's target article adds to the growing list of applications of
population genetic principles to other areas of research (Axelrod
1987; Goldberg 1989; Holland 1975). When concepts are trans-
posed from one discipline to another, it must be made clear
whether it is the metaphor or the mechanism that is being
borrowed. The former does not require fidelity with the original
concepts, whereas the latter does. If Schull is invoking the
shifting balance theory as an explanatory principle in his pro-
posal, then I feel that some of the details of the genetics must be
clarified.
Sewall Wright (1977 and earlier) visualized the evolutionary
process as a search through a multidimensional space, each
dimension representing, for example, an allele frequency for an
optimal genotype. Wright referred to this search space meta-
phorically as the adaptive landscape where the fitness dimen-
sion maps onto the landscape. The dimensionality of this space is
likely to be very high. Not only is the search space large, but, in
addition, the space is complex, containing many local optima
("hills") surrounded by local minima ("valleys"). Valleys sur-
rounding the hills impede the search for the global optimum
because selection will not act to lower fitness (descend into the
valley) once the population has reached a local optimum. The
shifting balance hypothesis was proposed by Wright (1977) as a
process that was well suited for searching through large and
complex spaces for a global optimum. The shifting balance
hypothesis allows a search for the global optimum by providing a
mechanism for populations to move from one local optimum
(peak), crossing the intervening valley, to another optimum.
Wright (1977) calls this mechanism "peak shifting."
If a population is divided into small subpopulations with little
or no migration between them, it will contain a proportion of
genotypes that differ significantly from the mean (Schull's
"novel gene combinations"), because of the effects of random
drift and inbreeding in the small subpopulations. In Schull's
(1989) terminology the amoeboid pseudopod is near the peak's
base or in the valley. According to Schull, the random effects of
drift and inbreeding (and presumably mutation) may cause the
neighborhood to "stumble onto a slope which leads to a new and
higher adaptive peak," thereby crossing the valley. Presum-
ably, this event is rare, as he says, "random novelties tend to be
raaladaptive." What may be of greater potential importance is
the pool of "novel gene combinations." Intrapopulation matings
with immigrants, or interpopulation matings with its emigrants
may lead to a genotype that successfully crosses the valley.
When a superior genotype arises it comprises only a small
fraction of the population. How can it spread through ("infect")
the rest of the population? There is an immediate problem.
When an individual carrying the superior genotype arises in one
neighborhood, then emigrates and mates with an individual in
another neighborhood the superior genotype is immediately
broken up ("diluted") through sexual recombination.
Perhaps Schull does not consider this a problem as he sug-
gests (section 3.6) that once the superior genotype is found, the
corresponding phenotype will spread in the population. But
how might the superior genotype increase in the population?
Wright (1945) suggests that the probability of migration is
proportional to the fitness of the neighborhood, that is, the
higher fitness neighborhoods are sending out more emigrants;
Schull might call it "more infectious." The rate of gene flow
between neighborhoods is crucial to preserving the population
structure. High rates result in a degeneration of the population
structure and the population behaves as a single neighborhood.
Low rates will isolate the neighborhoods, resulting in each
neighborhood behaving as a single population.
Whether or not the shifting balance process finds the global
optimum rests upon a delicate balance between various factors
such as migration, mutation, and population size. John Holland
(1975), in his work on genetic algorithms, recognized this fact
and concluded that efficiency of search in (artificial) genetic
systems is dependent upon the correct tension between the
conflicting requirements of exploration and exploitation. It is
not trivial to achieve the right balance; as Schull points out, the
ideal setting "probably varies from species to species and from
time to time." Given the difficulties outlined above, what can be
said about the usefulness of Sewall Wright's theory? Schull has
shown that the shifting balance hypothesis provides a useful
metaphorical framework with which to illustrate his view that
intelligence can be thought of as an interactive, multileveiled
nexus. If, however, he was also making the claim that concrete
and precise results could emerge, then I remain unconvinced.
Computational results using a shifting balance model have,
however, been obtained elsewhere (Sumida 1989; Sumida et
aL, submitted) using a shifting balance genetic algorithm
(SBGA). The model is flexible and has been used to simulate
individual learning as well as the evolution of behavior - analysis
at different levels is feasible. In addition, these studies have
shown that when multiple optima are present in the search
space the shifting balance model exhibits better performance
when compared to a model that has no population structure. In
developing the SBGA it was seen that its performance was
highly dependent on the details of the genetics, details that are
absent in Schull's proposal. With the shifting balance genetic
algorithm, some of Schull's questions can be addressed.
In section 4.2, Schull claims that the "standard view of
evolution" is a slow, single-levelled random search. I am given
the impression that what he means by single-levelled search is a
serial exhaustive search, that is, individually examining each
possible genotypic combination. It is not possible to search for a
genotype in this fashion when the chromosome is even absurdly
small. A chromosome of only 256 loci with two alieles per loci
already produces an astronomical number of gene combina-
tions. Faced with this fact, Schull quickly abandons a gene-
centered view and recruits the species as his unit of selection.
This retreat away from "classical" analysis is premature. Indeed,
how is it that evolution has managed? Evolution is not testing
each and every genotype seriatim. A chromosome embodies
sets of information. Evolution through sexual reproduction tests
entire subsets of information. Holland (1975) uses the term
"implicit parallelism" to describe this feature. Our SBGA, using
only "classical" genetics, can easily find the optimum genotype
from among 3 X 1038 possible combinations in a landscape of 10
X 106 peaks!
In section 3.4, Schull implies that Wright's theory may
require thousands of demes to evolve most effectively. We have
found that this requirement is unnecessary (Sumida et aL,
submitted). Relatively small populations (<100) are sufficient
for all types of environments that we have studied. It may be
that this will be noneffective for other kinds of problems.
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1990) 13:1
93

Response/SchuW: Are species intelligent?
Nicholas S. Thompson
Departments of Biology and Psychology, Clark University, Worcester, MA
01610
Electronic mail: nthompson@clarku.bitnet
Intelligence is the apt application of information, technique, or
structure to the situation of an individual. Intelligence is a
teleonomic concept (Pittendrigh 1958; Thompson 1987a). To say
that an individual is intelligent is to make a value judgment
concerning the quality of the design of its behavior. We judge
the intelligence of an individual by watching it apply its knowl-
edge to the various situations it encounters. If it repeatedly
applies the appropriate technique from its repertoire to each
situation it encounters, we say its behavior is intelligent. Intel-
ligent behavior is well-designed behavior.
Adaptation is the apt application of information, technique, or
structure to the situation of aphyletic individual. Adaptation is
also a teleonomic concept. To say that a phylum has adapted
involves a value judgment about the quality of the responses of
that phylum to the situations it has encountered. If a phylum
repeatedly applies the appropriate technique from its repertoire
of techniques to each situation it encounters, we say that it has
adapted. Adapted behavior is also well-designed behavior
(Thompson 1981; 1986).
Operationally speaking, our procedures for identifying intel-
ligence in individuals and adaptation in phyla are precisely the
same. If we eliminate the difference in time scale envisaged by
the two concepts, they become indistinguishable. To see this,
engage in the following thought experiments: Imagine an indi-
vidual who made the kinds of adjustments in a daily time scale
that we expect of adapted phyla in a geological time scale.
Would we not call that individual's behavior intelligent? Fur-
ther, imagine a phylum that made the kinds of adjustments in a
geologic time scale that we expect of intelligent individuals in a
daily time scale. Would we not call that phylum adapted? The
answer to both questions is obviously yes.
If one grants the argument so far, and if one grants also that a
belief in evolution entails a belief in adaptation, then it follows
that belief in evolution entails a belief in the intelligence of
species. Because I would assume that all readers of this journal
believe in evolution, I cannot see how anybody could disagree
with Schull's proposition.
The idea that phyla are intelligent is controversial is because
many people still hold doctrines of causal mentalism and private
access. Causal mentalism is the notion that behavior can be
explained by reference to mental kinds (Thompson 1987b). We
appeal to causal mentalism whenever we explain behavior by
reference to thoughts, to feelings, or to attributes of persons
such as intelligence. Because causal mentalism is a convention
of every day speech, we are justly afraid that if we say that phyla
are intelligent, somebody will soon assert that they adapt
because of their intelligence. The hazard is a real one; circular
reasoning is a frequent component of evolutionary and behav-
ioral discourse (Lipton & Thompson 1988).
The doctrine of private access is the additional notion that
individuals have privileged awareness of the mental kinds that
cause their own behavior. We make use of the doctrine of
private access whenever we claim to know our own actions in
advance because we have direct knowledge of the thoughts,
feelings, or personal attributes on which they are based. Be-
cause the doctrine of private access is a convention of everyday
speech, we are afraid that if we say that phyla are intelligent,
somebody will soon assert that phyla consciously weigh the
alternatives before they take action. This hazard is also real,
because the doctrine of private access still lies at the core of
many behavioral scientists' approaches to their craft (Thompson
1987b).
That the truth may be misused by the unthinking is never a
reason not to speak it, not at least in academic discourse. Schull
is right. Species are intelligent. I only wish the target article had
addressed more frankly the question of why the issue is contro-
versial. Schull does so implicitly when he asserts that he does
not mean that phyla are "sentient." In making this disclaimer,
he seems to concede that although causal mentalism and private
access have no role in explaining the intelligent behavior of
phyla, they may have a role in explaining intelligent behavior in
other entities. I think this tactical concession is unwise. What is
most exciting about Schull's enterprise is the manner in which it
challenges common dualistic assumptions about what sorts of
entities can be properly described by reference to mental kinds.
Any concession to causal mentalism, in general, and to the
notion of private access, in particular, blunts that challenge.
Editorial commentary
We are, of course, free to use "intelligent" as we see fit: to so dub
any activity of a person, creature, gadget, ant colony, or geo-
logical process that we regard as clever. We can even commit
ourselves to objective necessary and sufficient conditions on
processes and products that will dignify an activity as "intel-
ligent" no matter who or what is performing it, so long as it
meets those conditions. And we may be right to do so. We may
be successfully picking out a natural kind that way, much as we
pick out matter, energy, flight, or language. Or we may be
wrong. After all, the primal intuition on which our notion of
intelligence draws is subjective (and is hence wedded, for better
or for worse, to the mind/body problem). We all know what it's
like to do something intelligent because we each know what it's
like to be intelligent. And, at bottom, when we deny that of a
teacup, it has less to do with what we think a teacup can or
cannot do than with what we think a teacup can or cannot be. It
is a useful exercise, for example, to reflect on how intimately our
primal intuition about intelligence is linked to our intuitions
about who/what can or cannot have (something like) a tooth-
ache: Is a nation or a corporation or a species the kind of thing
that can, like the compact symbiotic population of living cells we
are, have a toothache? If not, is it really the kind of thing that can
be intelligent?
•r
intelligent?: Not a yes or no
Jonathan Schull
Department of Psychology, Haverford College, Haverford PA 19041
Electronic mail: [_schuli@hvrford.bitnet
1. introduction
Are species intelligent? I think it is clear from the diver-
sity of positions represented in the commentaries that the
question remains open. Although most of this Response is
devoted to rebuttal and clarification, I was pleased that
virtually all of the commentators used the target article as
94
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1990) 13:1

Response/Schulh Are species intelligent?
an opportunity for thought and argument about some
fundamental and unresolved issues. In this reply, issues
raised by the commentators are discussed in roughly the
order in which they were raised in the target article itself.
If it has no other virtue, this strategy allows the Response
to serve as an interpretive guide to both the commen-
taries and the target article.
2B Are species 0 . „ ?
The word "species" may be a misnomer, and can mean
many things, as Salthe points out (see also Mayr 1988).
The entities I am discussing are really phyletic lineages,
as Sterelny notes and each individual living species is a
lineage's contemporary representative. The situation is
like that for many protozoa. A particular paramecium, for
example, is the unique, living instantiation of a lineage.
When a paramecium divides, each "new" paramecium is
largely unchanged, yet each one is now the unique
representative of its unique, just-branched, lineage. So
with species: When I entertain the hypothesis that spe-
cies are intelligent, I am really referring to the lineage
that extends continuously back in time from the spatio-
temporal present of a species, to an earlier time when it
was different, and quite possibly less well adapted to its
current circumstances. Impressive adaptive changes oc-
cur in that entity-with-a-history, and the question is
whether they occur in a manner that warrants the attribu-
tion of intelligence to that entity (which I will continue to
call a species).
I take it that any "thing" to which genuine intelligence
can, even conceivably, be attributed must at least satisfy
certain basic conditions. It must be an entity or indi-
vidual, with some spatio-temporal stability and localiza-
bility, some degree of autonomy and informational inte-
gration, some capacity to acquire, process, and transform
information.1 Although species have been recognized as
biological individuals for a relatively short time, (see
Ghiselin's commentary, and Ghiselin 1974a) most com-
mentators apparently accept, at least for the sake of
argument, that species possess those characteristics ade-
quately to proceed. Clayton further suggests that in
biology, the category of "individual" should be restricted
to units of selection (thus yoking the attribution to species
selection), but he and I both seem to agree that this
should not be presumed nor required when considering
whether species are intelligent. After all, we would not
doubt that Philip Clayton was intelligent even if it turned
out he had miraculously come into existence mere min-
utes before composing his commentary; yet he would be
neither a product of evolution, nor a unit of selection. (His
ideas might be units of intrapsychic selection, and that
might even by the reason he is intelligent, but that issue is
discussed below.)
3a Intelligence: Explanation and description
The commentaries clarify, explicate, or demonstrate the
persistence of some long-standing philosophical prob-
lems in biology, psychology, and cognitive science. I con-
sider them first.
Kalat9 Hendersen, and Russell question whether the
concept of intelligence explains anything at all, and sug-
gest that it may not be worth the effort. It seems to me
that the concept is indispensable, if only as a name for a
particular complex of capacities and dispositions found in
some of the most interesting entities we know of -
humans and some animals, at least. As for species,
Stereley suggests it is vacuous to attribute intelligence to
species unless this explains something that is not equally
well explained by an account of natural selection (Salthe
may be making a similar point). If that were so, it would
be vacuous to attribute intelligence to Sterelny (or any-
one) unless this could explain something that was not
equally well explained by an account of his nervous sys-
tem and its stimulus history. But, although such an
account might indeed explain Sterelny's thoughts and
behavior (albeit mind-numbingly), attributing intel-
ligence to him would clearly remain informative, appro-
priate, useful, and nonvacuous. Indeed, without this at-
tribution, we might well overlook some of the most
interesting and important things about him, and there
would be little hope of ever achieving a mechanistic
account in the first place.
Thus, although in some contexts using the term intel-
ligence can obscure the need to probe qualities or mecha-
nisms of intelligent performances as Mussel points out, I
agree with Silverstein and Johnson that the correct at-
tribution of intelligence to an appropriate entity can help
us perceive and investigate its molar properties, as well as
its molecular mechanisms, and that the two perspectives
are ultimately complementary, rather than competitive
(see Rachlin 1976, and Rozin & Schull [1988] for further
explication of the molar/molecular distinction in behav-
ioral science). For this reason, and to avoid unnecessary
controversy, I intentionally restricted my presentation to
phenomena that were entirely consistent with non-
controversial mechanisms of individual (and genie) selec-
tion. This is not to say that such theories are certain to
stand the test of time without significant modification (a
point well taken from Odling-Smee). Nor, as explicated
below, does it preclude the possibility that the molar
property of intelligence can play a causal role by influenc-
ing the operation, development or selection of lower level
components (I agree with Salthe that one wants to know
much more about this as it applies to species). Rather, it is
to show that even with this restraint, the present hypoth-
esis demands attention from hard-headed thinkers in a
number of disciplines.
4B Metaphf sical problems
As Ghiselin remarks, there are interesting metaphysical
puzzles here. They are not new. In 1802, William Paley
advanced his Argument from Design, alleging that the
very existence of well-designed (adapted) organisms
proved the existence of an intelligent designer. For
Paley, that Intelligence was the God of the Bible. Paley's
writings inspired Darwin to study biological adaptations,
and, eventually, to demonstrate that purely natural pro-
cesses could explain their evolution (this should remind
Piatelli-Palmarini that even wrong-headed ideas can be
worth pursuing). Natural selection thus clearly disproved
Paley's claim about the necessity of a supernatural deity.
But did it determine the role of intelligence in evolution?
Only if one assumes, dualistically, that intelligence is a
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1990) 13:1
95

Response/Schulh Are species intelligent?
mental, and therefore nonphysical, phenomenon. Many
of Darwin's contemporaries and successors did make that
assumption, which may explain why they neglected the
possibility that some other kind of (purely natural) intel-
ligence might be implicated in the process of evolution.
Indeed, Thompson suggests that all controversy about,
whether species are intelligent is traceable to lingering
vestiges of dualism: the doctrines of causal mentalism and
private access. He underestimated our collective conten-
tiousness, but some commentaries confirmed his diag-
noses. Thus, although Thompson and Mussel! understood
that I did not claim that species adapt because of their
intelligence, the failure to understand this was the basis
for much of Piatelli-Palmarini's commentary. And al-
though Thompson appreciated my disavowal of species'
sentience, he correctly anticipated MacKay's suggestion
and the editorial commentary to the effect that they must
be conscious, or have felt experiences, if they are to be
considered intelligent.
Although Thompson and I agree in rejecting dualism,
however, our rejections are really quite different. I will try
to provide the "franker" discussion he requested. Where-
as Thompson and Sterelny deny (and Russell doubts) that
"mental kinds" can explain anything, I think we may
eventually understand how "mental processes" do play
causal roles (see Schull 1990). Intelligence is a molar
property of an intelligent entity, which is not (necessarily) a
property of the entity's mechanisms. Hence, intelligence
will not be localizable in those mechanisms. Nonetheless,
the collective interactions of these mechanisms (i.e.,
intelligence) may have causal influences on the behavior of
the entity, and its mechanisms. Furthermore, I have
suggested (in Schull 1990) that among the true mecha-
nisms of intelligence are objective interactions between an
individual's physiological components and its external
environment. These not-merely-neural mechanisms of
intelligent behavior clearly have causal efficacy, and for a
variety of reasons I suggest that they are appropriately
called "mental processes," the objective phenomena to
which mind corresponds. I return to this issue below,
when discussing the molar consequences of organic
selection.
These working assumptions allow me to stand apart from
Thompson's denial that mental processes may be causally
efficacious, and from the assumption that our private
experiences of efficaciousness are all necessarily illusory.
For present purposes, however, the reader needs only to
accept that mechanisms of intelligence play a causal role in
the behavior of intelligent systems.
Although I am thus taking a fairly nonbehavioristic
position, I do not see why MacKay and the editorial
commentary insist that felt experiences are required
before we deem an Individual Intelligent. Every absent-
minded professor knows that one can become maximally
unaware of one's surroundings, feelings, and so on when
exercising one's intellect to the fullest. It is easy to
conceive of an entity that is intelligent but not sentient,
but 1 find it hard to conceive of one that is sentient but not
Intelligent. So I suspect that intelligence arises prior to,
or independent of, sentience, and do not see why the two
phenomena must be yoked.2 The matter is in any case
unresolvable because we lack criteria for deciding wheth-
er other individuals (even other people!) have felt experi-
ences. (MacKay does suggest some objective charac-
teristics of systems that are Intelligent, or conscious - that
they have representation of their actions, and so on - and
the relevance of those to species will be considered
below.)
§a Criteria for deciding whether an entity is
intelligent
We do have criteria for deciding whether an individual is
intelligent, although the ones I advocate are not those
attributed to me by many commentators. StereSey and
the editorial commentary suggest that I have taken the
position that a system is to be considered intelligent
whenever it Is possible or convenient to describe it as
such, but I have not taken that position. In this respect,
my position on intelligence differs from Dennett's on
intentionality, and I think it is a mistake to think that all
the phenomena of intentionality will admit to a single
solution. Thoughts, feelings, beliefs, attitudes, and intel-
ligence, may all require separate analyses before their
integration and patterns of co-occurrence will be
understood.
Although several commentators appreciated my de-
clining to define intelligence (and some did not), more
should be said about the standards one might apply in
analyzing the phenomenon and identifying systems to
which it can be attributed.
To begin, geological processes (editorial commentary),
planetary orbits (Sterelny), and other systems that evi-
dence neither complexity nor good design can be dis-
qualified on the basis of an Argument from Non-Design:
In the absence of these characteristics there is no reason
to suspect that the system might be genuinely intelligent.
In contrast, although the existence of a well-designed
system may suggest the action of an intelligent agency, I
do not claim (as Paley [1802] did claim) that this proves
the existence of such an agent, nor that it justifies the
imputation of intelligent agency to the adapted system
itself. Many commentators seem to presume that I did. (I
may have encouraged this confusion by using the phrase
"structural features" Interchangeably with phrases like
"adaptation-generating" and "intelligence-amplifying"
features. In fact, most of the features referred to were
characteristics of the species' adaptive processes - al-
gorithms, if you will - not characteristics of the species
Itself.)
Thus, Ghiselin asks, "Are libraries intelligent?" and
other commentators nominate books (Henctersen), Cal-
ifornia houses, cockroaches, amoebae, and BMWs
(Stereberg).3The question, however, is not, as Sternberg
supposes, "whether we want to use adaptation to the global
ecosystem . . . as the or even a criterion for intelligence."
Rather, the answer to Ghiselin's question is another
question.
Are species mere "resources" for the evolutionary pro-
cess, as Ghiselin says, playing an "essentially passive role
in the natural economy," or are they active, Intelligent
problem solvers? I was trying to defend the latter proposi-
tion, but the commentaries have helped me appreciate
96
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1990) 13:1

Response/Schull: Are species intelligent?
the necessity of distinguishing the state of adaptedness
from the dynamic ability to change oneself to achieve that
state (Leiser's commentary deals with this most ex-
plicitly). This distinction (between what Bickhard (1988)
calls "adaptedness" and "adaptability") is important be-
cause the terms "intelligence" and "adaptation" are ap-
plied in the presence of both conditions, even though (I
submit) neither condition establishes that the entity in
question is intelligent. The concepts are further inter-
twined because in genuinely intelligent systems, adapt-
ability does give rise to adaptedness.
Turing's test and other operational tests of intelligent
performance assume that the state of adaptedness is
criterial by itself: To the extent that an individual can emit
a rich variety of appropriate responses to challenging
problems, queries, and so on, it is intelligent (Thompson
applies a similar standard to species). In contrast, Block
(1981) and Searle (1980) argue that systems that pass such
tests because they have been provided with prepro-
grammed rule books do not warrant the attribution of
intelligence. Block points out that the intelligence such
systems manifest is the programmer's, not the comput-
er's. Much the same can be said about the intelligence of
cars, houses, libraries, amoebae, and cockroaches (as-
suming that cockroaches are stupid): Their design may be
intelligent, and intelligence may have been involved in
their design, but the intelligence is not theirs, and they
are not intelligent.
It seems to me that this argument hinges on an impor-
tant and correct intuition (shared by Block, Searle, Ghi-
selin, and Heedersen, among others): Genuinely intel-
ligent systems have the ability to create actively, and not
merely implement, adaptive solutions. For that reason,
much of the target article was devoted to demonstrating
that the solution-generating abilities of species are in fact
quite substantial. I also tried to show, however, that the
processes that mediate these abilities are remarkably like
the processes that mediate intelligence in animals.
And so, the claim that species are intelligent is stronger
than the mere assertion that species incorporate many
adaptations or the assertion that they have the ability to
generate novel adaptations. Rather, the claim is that spec-
ies generate solutions in roughly the same way that
intelligent animals do it (i.e., systems whose intelligence
is not a matter of controversy). If that claim stands up
under detailed scrutiny, it would be appropriate to con-
clude that species are intelligent. If the claim turns out to
be false, it might still be appropriate to think of species as
intelligent, if the mediating processes and ths resulting
performances come close enough to satisfying our (now
more sophisticated) understanding of what intelligence
is. In this case, we might well want to adopt Odlieg-
Smee's helpful suggestion that we distinguish "biotic
Intelligence" from animal intelligence. But in any case,
we need to understand the similarities and differences
between the two cases.
7. When do differences make a difference with
regard to intelligence?
One set of differences I think should not be accepted a
priori are the obvious ones mentioned in the title of
Derrickson & Greenberg's commentary: "Unfortunate-
ly, time and scale matter." Unfortunately, they neglect to
say under what circumstances, and with regard to what.
That they matter with regard to intelligence is not at all
clear, as Clayton and Thompson point out. (Clayton
anticipates and counters Derrickson & Greenberg's ma-
jor objection by arguing that the question at hand cannot
simply be dismissed because it is counterintuitive or
based on an analogy, or because it applies psychological
concepts to a new domain. After all, the theory of natural
selection was counterintuitively analogized from eco-
nomics to the then-novel domain of biology (see Ghiselin
1974a, and his commentary). For that matter, Darwin
made use of the analogy between intelligence and evolu-
tion in formulating the theory of natural selection (Gruber
1974).
Similarly, Kalat notes that species have no "central
coordinator, nothing similar to the nervous system/' But
as Odling-Smee points out, excessive preoccupation with
the "bits and pieces" of each domain can blind us to
genuine correspondences. Odling-Smee also advocates a
common multidisciplinary language and calls for a more
detailed specification of the corresponding units in each
discipline (e.g., the units in intelligent animals, analo-
gous to gene pools, phenotypes, and single genes.) I
agree, but caution that the proper referents of such a
language may turn out to be less concrete than in the
special case of biological evolution. It may be, for exam-
ple, that we owe our superior understanding of evolu-
tion's units, mechanisms, and codes to the domain-specif-
ic constraint that the code for adaptive strategies must be
"packageable" in gametes during reproduction. Since
there may be no comparably stringent constraint in other
domains such as learning, a comparably tidy solution to
the problems of units and codes may be impossible. The
appropriate terms of the multidisciplinary language may
end up being such generic "things" as heuristics, adap-
tive strategies, kinds-of-interactions, and so on.
(Calls for such a multi-disciplinary language have been
heard with increasing frequency in the last few decades
and have been accompanied by the creation of new
multidisciplines. Ironically and unfortunately, each has its
own special language, and cross-communication among
them is still difficult, but all the more to be desired.
Research on genetic algorithms, as represented by
Sumlda's and Strong's commentaries (see also Holland
1975; and Goldberg 1989) provides the most prominent
example at the moment, and establishes the existence of an
interesting set of cross-disciplinary research problems
relevant to the present enterprise, but the literature on
general systems theory (Bertalanfly 1968), and general
evolution, as represented by Csanyl's (1989) book and
commentary (see also Laszlo 1987; Schull 1988) serves to
make the point as well.)
How important are the differences among nervous
systems, gene pools, and silicon chips in distinguishing
intelligences? Many workers in the field of artificial intel-
ligence will agree that the way to answer this question is
to compare capabilities of systems based on the different
"technologies." My attempt at such a comparison led me
to conclude that something very similar to a "central
coordinator" may, in fact, emerge in the absence of a
nervous system, when a population of developing orga-
nisms interacts with an environment under conditions
that favor interdemic, and especially organic, selection.
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1990) 13:1
97

Response/Schulh Are species intelligent?
from what perspectiwi
an amoeba?
The preceding conclusion was reached, however, by
representing evolving species as amoeboid meta-orga-
nisms moving through adaptive landscapes; this approach
elicited its share of comment and criticism.
It is important to note that 1 really used two different
amoeba analogies. Odlieg-Smee objected to the organiza-
tional analogy offered in section 2, because, "sex and caste
apart," a species' component entities (organisms) are
fundamentally homogeneous, whereas an amoeba's
organelles are genetically diverse and of distinct types,
implying different kinds of sorting processes. He is clearly
right in pointing out that differentiation is different in these
two kinds of individuals (although it is not clear when and
why it is appropriate to exclude sex and caste from the
discussion). But the matter is even more complex than
that, and the differences between species and organisms
are even more pronounced when the organisms in ques-
tion are highly differentiated metazoans such as verte-
brates. Structurally and functionally, within-metazoan
cell types are much more heterogeneous than within-
species organism-types (brain cells and bone cells are more
different than two organisms within a species.) With
regard to genetic heterogeneity, however, the situation is
reversed: All of a metazoan's cells have the same genome,
whereas each of a species' component organisms may have
unique genomes. (And as Odling-Smee observed in the
first place, the situation reverses again when you go down
to the subcellular level).
I profess no clarity about the upshot of these biological
considerations, especially considering that an organism's
components are simultaneously (sub)components of the
species to which the organism belongs. Buss (1987) deals
with them in a stimulating and sophisticated fashion,
however, and a "fundamental thesis" of his is perhaps the
best I can offer at this time: "The evolution of indi-
viduality becomes comprehensible not by the study of
ancient constraint, nor by the study of selection upon
individuals, nor even by the study of selection on cell
lineages, but only through the study of their interaction"
(p. 67). I believe we need to undertake similar cross-level
analyses of the evolution of intelligence, as well as (per-
haps) the intelligence of evolution, indeed, my use and
critique of the adaptive landscape metaphor was intended
to foster exactly this kind of levels-in-interaction perspec-
tive.
iw from
:Swe landscape
Whatever the relationships between the internal organi-
zation of a species and an amoeba, it is important to
understand that the visual depiction of a species as an
amoeba (the second amoeba analogy, introduced in sec-
tion 3.1) is virtually unavoidable once one adopts the
conceptual framework of the adaptive landscape (lucidly
discussed in Semida's commentary). My only liberty was
the use of "thickness" in the figure to represent numbers
of each genotype. Hendersen suggests that my quasi-
psychological word pictures "seriously mislead . . .
because they inaccurately imply an agency and purpose-
fulness on the part of the species," but the species'
"behaviors" I describe - the "pseudopodial" movements
of the demes, the nonrandom movement through uneven
terrain to distant adaptive peaks - are absolutely man-
dated by modern evolutionary theory, a point affirmed by
Lloyd (whose many critical points are addressed below),
and reinforced in Sumida's commentary.
So the function of the visual model in my target article
was not merely to depict change through time (as
Derrickson & Creeeberg assert), but to show that the
pattern of change produced by the theories just men-
tioned is similar to the pattern of change we recognize (in
animals) as symptomatic of learning, insight, and intel-
ligence. As Strong points out, the same pattern of change
in groups of ants and baboons moving through "real space
and time" has stimulated similarly suggestive descrip-
tions of adaptive information processing at the supra-
individual level.
The visual model is also illuminating (I believe) be-
cause it allows, one to see how acts of active, self-guided,
multilevelled adaptation can be successfully but mis-
leadingly portrayed as passive single-levelled responses
to mutations. So when Hendersee (and the rest of us)
describes natural selection as a "thoughtless and pur-
poseless process," he may merely be voicing a conven-
tional, but not necessarily warranted, assumption that is
an artifact of conventional single-levelled theories of
selection and reinforcement (c.£, Odling-Smee 1988).
I hasten to qualify the previous sentence by acknowl-
edging that single-levelled theories of selection may be
mythical beasts in modern evolutionary theory (though
they are still common in animal learning theory). I have
come to regret writing (in section 4.2) that "the standard
view of evolution (held by neo-Darwinian straw men) is
that evolution is a huge, slow, single-levelled search
through gene-space by a process of blind genetic variation
and environmental selection." This passage led Lloyd to
charge that I have a "caricatur(ed)" view of contemporary
evolutionary theory. (In fact, I was trying to caricature
what Lloyd (1988) refers to as "population genetics theo-
ry, the most formal and developed subtheory of contem-
porary evolutionary theory.)" The same passage made
Semlda think that by "single-levelled" I meant "serial
exhaustive search," whereas I was really trying to offer a
contrast to the view that includes interdemic and organic
selection. Strong and Sutnida both call attention to work
on genetic algorithms by Holland (1975) and followers
whose (nonclassical) analyses of classical genetic mecha-
nisms can search gene-space extremely efficiently, even
without supplementation by organic or interdemic selec-
tion. All of these clarifications are consistent with the
point I was trying to make in the first place: The entirety
of contemporary theory, and the conception of the evolu-
tionary process that emerges from it, is far richer than is
generally recognized by those who take classical popula-
tion genetics to be exemplary. I can turn now to the
processes and phenomena that were intended to make
that point.
10. increasing variability
Section 8.8 dealt with the first of several ways in which
species are putatively able to move from local adaptive
peaks toward better ones: "increasing variability when
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1990) 13:1

Response/Schulh Are species intelligent?
established solutions fail." The commentaries on this
subject and on the subject of organic selection showed me
that it is important to distinguish "genetic variation" (the
existence of variant genes and gene combinations) from
"genetic variability" (the generation of this variation by
processes such as mutation, recombination, crossing
over, and sexual reproduction). It is important in turn to
distinguish these from their effects on the species' ability
to move through the adaptive landscape.
My claim was that genetic variability and the species'
"variability of movement" would increase when the adap-
tiveness of the predominant strategy decreased. One
reason is the empirical observation that facultatively
sexual organisms switch to sexual reproduction at such
times. Ghiselin cautions that this is not because condi-
tions have become adverse for the species, and I agree
(and did not indicate otherwise: I defined fitness in terms
of individual inclusive fitness.) The fact remains, how-
ever, that this should increase the species variability of
movement just when that may be what is required to find
the new optimum.
Ghiselin (1974) theorized that this switch to sexual
reproduction increases the organism's fitness by enabling
its offspring to "specialize" in subniches, but it is fair to
say that the adaptive function of sex remains an unsettled
issue in evolutionary theory, despite general agreement
on the principle that the long-term adaptive potential of
species is maintained by recombination. Strong also cites
work on genetic algorithms that affirms that principle as a
reason for "doubting" that there is a problem - but there
is, and it is relevant to much of what follows: When
mutation and recombination rates are made naturally
selectable parameters, most models show that individual
selection will drive variability to a minimum (because
variability is random, and more likely to disrupt than
"construct").
This leads most theorists (including me) to assume that
physiological mechanisms have evolved to hold vari-
ability to a minimum. And this in turn leads to my second
reason why genetic variability and genetic variation
should increase when conditions deteriorate: When con-
ditions differ from those to which error-reduction mecha-
nisms are adapted, the mechanisms should falter. A third
condition in which suppression of variability might be
relaxed was suggested by Kalat: When conditions take a
turn for the better, adaptive valleys are shallow relative to
adaptive peaks.
Note that of the three reasons mentioned, none invoke
"good of the species" rationales, and only the third as-
sumes that the increased variability is adaptive for the
individual. Yet the species' movement through the adap-
tive landscape is affected in a way that should enhance its
ability to navigate to the highest adaptive peak.
This raises a general point about the theoretical stance I
am trying to maintain. On the one hand, I have foresworn
good-of-the-larger-system arguments. On the other
hand, I claim that the behavior of species, and the
processes that generate and mediate that behavior, are
similar to those of intelligent animals and humans. There
is a necessary tension between these two positions be-
cause much of the behavior and physiology of an intel-
ligent animal does seem to occur in the service of the
larger system — that is, of the animal itself. Now there is a
strong evolutionary reason why animals should act co-
herently, intelligently, and as if they had goals: It takes a
whole animal to reproduce, so cooperation by the ani-
mal's parts is often a reproductive necessity. And there is
no analogous constraint at the species level (unless spe-
cies-selection is a much more potent factor than is cur-
rently thought) or at the level of the group, which is why
"good of the species" and "good of the group" arguments
are suspect. (It is not clear to me whether Silversteie is
sensitive to this point, but this is what keeps me from
endorsing completely his interesting account of Aristo-
telian explanation.)
This tension (between resisting what Ghiselin calls
"organicism," while remaining receptive to genuine
emergent properties of populations) is balanced and miti-
gated by several other facts of life. First, the "common
cause" constraint at the organismic level is not total, since
there are situations in which personal survival is pitted
against survival and reproduction of genes in close rela-
tives (this is what kin selection is all about; see Dawkins
1976; Wilson 1975). And even where the constraint is not
operative, as in mixed flocks, herds, and schools offish,
these multi-organism collectivities clearly can act in a
coordinated and synergistic fashion. In species, this syn-
ergy might itself be promoted by species selection, and
that is why I examined the possibility in the target article.
But none of the claims made in the target article depend on
species selection, a point misunderstood by Sumidae
11. Interdemic selection
Interdemic selection provides an especially clear case in
which seemingly purposive intelligence emerges as a
collective property of unguided and unintelligent compo-
nents: Randomly meandering denies provide the species
as a whole with information about nonmodal genotypes,
and then, to the extent that a deme does blunder into a
more adaptive region, it becomes less random and leads
the "clever" species to that new region. (Steinberg and I
should both be embarrassed that he thought I applied the
adjective to what he calls "my analogy." This adjective
may also be the actual source for Piatelli-Palmarini's
multiple quotations of the word "cute," although I used
that word nowhere in the article.)
More can be said about interdemic selection, and
Siimida performs a service by saying it. Neither Wright,
Sumida nor I maintain that verbal arguments about things
interdemic selection can do establishes the conditions
under which it will do such things. That is why quan-
titative work of the sort Sumida is doing is so important. It
sounds as if his results so far, however, support and
strengthen the arguments and exhortations offered in the
target article: Hundreds rather than thousands of demes
may suffice to find the best of a million peaks in an
environment of 1038 combinations of genes(!), and the
model has been used to simulate learning as well as
evolution.
12- Organic selection: The nitty gritty
Lloyd astutely notes that organic selection plays a leading
role in my view of the evolutionary process, and a proper
understanding of it should rebut several commentators'
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1990) 13:1
99

Response/Schull: Are species intelligent?
charges of disanalogy between learning and evolution.
My exposition of organic selection, however, failed to
prevent misunderstandings from showing up in several
commentaries. In this section, I will try to clarify the
technical issues. In the next, I will try to demonstrate the
extent to which organic selection reduces the disanalogies
alleged.
Lloyd herself provides a detailed critique of my ac-
count and suggests that our disagreements arise because I
have misunderstood the role of "chance, random genetic
variations." I think the errors in her critique are them-
selves traceable to her misdiagnosis, to my broader-than-
traditional use of the term "organic selection," and to the
failure (by both of us) to distinguish "genetic variability"
from the random "genetic variations" it generates.
As Lloyd notes, Baldwin, Morgan, and other early
theorists originally saw organic selection as an "ultra-
Darwinian" mechanism that allowed the consciousness
and intelligence of individual animals a role in directing
evolution (Richards 1987, p. 480). The theory was that
intelligent and conscious behavioral adjustments by indi-
vidual animals to their local circumstances could enable
them and their descendants to survive and reproduce
long enough to allow natural selection to accumulate
genetic variations that would support the behaviors in
question. Over time, the need for intelligent adjustment
would be eliminated, and the burden for developmental
production of the adaptive traits would be shifted entirely
to inherited factors: The originally learned behavior
would become innate.
This "Baldwin effect" as it came to be known, thus
mimics Lamarckian evolution (but without invoking the
inheritance of acquired characteristics), and at the turn of
the century, was hailed as a way of reconciling the
Darwinian and Lamarckian views of evolution. (This
seeming virtue may also have led to its subsequent
neglect during the present century, when "Lamarckism"
was an epithet as often as it was a tool for theoretical
discussion, but that is another story.) For this reason, I
take exception to Strong's characterization of my own
account as "population level Lamarckism, or neo-
Lamarckism." Rightly or wrongly, the term connotes
individual inheritance of acquired characteristics, and for
that reason, it does not apply to either the classical, or the
broad views of organic selection.) It is also interesting that
B. F. Skinner advanced the same theory in 1969, when he
suggested that natural selection could, over many genera-
tions, transform a behavior that originated through in-
strumental learning into an "instinctive" behavior [see
Schull 1990]). [See BBS Special Issue on Skinner, BBS
7(4) 1984.]
In this context, it makes sense for Lloyd to have written
that "organic selection, to the extent that it produces
evolutionary change, eliminates phenotypic plasticity"
[her italics]. But that is not the context I established.
On the contrary, in sections 3.5 and 3.6, I announced
that I was going to use "organic selection" as a much-
needed generic term to cover a variety of related phe-
nomena operating at many levels of organismic organiza-
tion. Lloyd complains about my "motley collection of
related "processes, effects, and conditions," and reports
that Waddington denied that his "genetic assimilation"
was the same as "organic selection." But the proliferation
of terminology is precisely why a generic concept is
needed. (Besides, Waddington himself applied the term
"genetic assimilation" to "both a phenomenon and a
mechanism by which this phenomenon is brought about"
(p. 61), and was inconsistent and idiosyncratic in his
characterization of the Baldwin effect and its relation to
his own work (contrast the figure and text on p. 53 of his
1975 book with his discussion on pages 89 -92.) Some
term must be used, and rather than introduce yet another
one, I proposed to use the original one in a consistent
fashion (something originators and critics of the concept
often fail to do). In the next few paragraphs I will explicate
my use of the concept, and show how it relates to the
admittedly motley list of other terms.
My (broader-than-traditional) usage of "organic selec-
tion" is most directly related to Bateson's (1963) discus-
sion of "the role of somatic change in evolution." One
problem with the classical formulation of organic selec-
tion was that if an animal could use intelligence or
learning in place of genes that promote that behavior, this
would weaken selection pressures for making the behav-
ior innate (thus undercutting the theory that ontogenetic
adaptation could promote selection of the relevant
genes). Bateson's (1963) article simultaneously answered
this criticism and generalized the argument so that it
applied to all forms of ontogenetic adaptation and not just
those involving behavior, organismic intelligence, or con-
sciousness. His formulation also predicts a broader range
of evolutionary consequences.
Bateson pointed out that an individual's ontogenetic
adaptability Is itself both valuable and limited. An orga-
nism's investments in adapting to one domain will tend to
limit its capacity to adapt to other domains or in other
directions. Therefore, the mere prevalence in a popula-
tion of an ontogenetically generated response (physiologi-
cal or behavioral) will create and maintain, rather than
undercut, selection pressures for genes that allow that
response to develop more rapidly, with greater proba-
bility, or at lower cost to the organism. (Each of these
factors warrants further elaboration and analysis, but not
here.)
One evolutionary consequence of these population-
created selection pressures could be the accumulation of
genes that eliminate the need for the ontogenetic adapta-
tion. This outcome is consistent with the classical for-
mulations of organic selection but is more general, since
neither organismic intelligence nor motor behavior is
necessarily involved.
Another consequence when a population of organisms
is adapting ontogenetically to a common problem is that
organismic adaptability will itself be evolutionarily modi-
fied (rather than eliminated). This could occur through
selection of genes that facilitate, elaborate or "canalize"
the particular adaptabilities involved in generating the
response (this is what Waddington calls "genetic assimila-
tion"), or through the selection of genes that reduce other
demands on phenotypic plasticity, or through increases
in the animal's capacity for phenotypic plasticity In gener-
al. Finally, the ontogenetically adapting population
might influence selection (for or against) subsidiary traits
whose adaptiveness is changed by the presence of the
plastic response in question.
All but the last possible outcome fall under the rubric of
what Piaget calls "phenocopy" - the general case in which
genetic adaptedness comes to supplement or replace
100
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1990) 13:1

Response/Schull: Are species intelligent?
phenotypic adaptability, with little change in the observ-
able phenotype. Now, Piattelli-Palmarini claims in his
commentary and in his edited volume on the Piaget-
Chomsky debate (Piattelli-Palmarini 1980) that Piaget's
conception of phenocopy was discredited by the molecular
biologists at that meeting (especially Danchin 1980). He
consistently fails, however, to appreciate the distinction
between populational and intra-organismic processes.
Thus, in the book, Piaget seems to be invoking an ornate
form of Lamarcltism when he says that genetic variation
"will be selected, not by the external environment, but by
[the] internal or epigenetic environment, which will then
channel it in the same direction as the trend already
acquired by the phenotype" (p. 59-60). But the correct
interpretation (and the legitimate claim) is that the selec-
tion and channeling to which Piaget refers is good old
populational natural selection of genes that are compatible
with and supportive of the acquired phenotype (which is
part of the epigenetic environment). This interpretation is
consistent with Piaget's repeated claims of consistency
with neo-Darwinian theory, and with his references to
Baldwin effects and to Waddington, who is fairly clear on
this point. Yet Piattelli-Palmarini and the molecular biolo-
gists he cites (for whom "phenocopy" has a different
technical meaning) do not consider this interpretation.
Piattelli-Palmarini even suggests that the appeal of notions
like the Baldwin effect "lies entirely in their vagueness"
and in the "quite advanced age of their proponents"
(referring to Bateson and Piaget, whose contributions to
the published proceedings of the Piaget-Chomsky meet-
ing Piattelli-Palmarini edited). Both these suggestions
must be wrong, however, since these notions have been
understood, computationally implemented, and corrobo-
rated by other (young and living) investigators such as
Hinton & Nowlan (1987).
Thus, I use organic selection to refer to this entire
range of cases in which ontogenetic adaptability provides
the initial impetus and direction for changes in gene
frequencies by influencing selection pressures in a sys-
tematic fashion. Which of these possible outcomes of
populational phenotypic adaptability will prevail de-
pends (among other things) on the existence of suitable
genetic variation, and in the absence of such variation,
organic selection cannot occur at all, as Lloyd insists. But
I insist in reply that neither can (traditional) natural
selection of the genetic variants occur at all when phe-
notypic plasticity is absent, at least in the situations in
which organic selection is operative.
How. often should organic selection be operative?
Lloyd wrongly concludes that I equate the presence of
phenotypic plasticity with organic selection. Rather,
organic selection is the synergistic interaction, through
natural selection, of phenotypic adaptability and genetic
variation. However, given (1) the fact that phenotypic
plasticity can influence selection pressures in so many
ways, (2) the relative speed of ontogenetic versus phy-
logenetic adaptation, and (3) the empirically observed
ubiquity of genetic variation, I do not think it is unre-
alistic to suppose that some kind of organic selection is
operative whenever populationwide phenotypic adapta-
tion is present.
Thus, Lloyd and I hold vsuch different views about the
relationship of phenotypic plasticity and genetic variation
because we have different views of the scope of organic
selection, not (as she supposes) because I believe that
selection pressures can generate the genetic variations on
which evolution ultimately depends. (This is one place
where more precision would have helped: When I wrote
that natural selection promotes "directed genetic change
of the sort which we call biological evolution" I meant to
refer to population-genetic changes in gene frequencies,
not to the generation through mutation of the alleles in
question. I must also agree with Lloyd that little in
evolution should be described as "inevitable," least of all
stochastic phenomena like adaptation and intelligence.)
I'm not so sure that I should agree with Lloyd that it is
inconsistent to contrast three "kinds" of selection (indi-
vidual/natural, interdemic, and organic) while maintain-
ing that the latter two are special cases of the former. The
situation is the same as with sexual and kin selection.
With all of these kinds of selection, differential reproduc-
tion of genes and individual organisms results in changes
in gene frequencies in the species; if that is your defini-
tion of natural selection, then all are forms of natural
selection. The "character" of natural selection, adapta-
tion, and species, however, is different when circum-
stances permit the operation of interdemic, organic,
sexual, or kin selection, and it is useful to contrast natural
selection with and without these interesting complica-
tions.
In particular, it seems to me that the contribution of
organic selection to the molar character of evolving spe-
cies is quite remarkable. Having completed my defense
of the theory, I can try to show how it makes species'
evolution appear much more "intelligent" than it appears
when viewed as (unadorned) natural selection.
13. What differences does organic selection
make?
In the target article, I suggested that organic selection
augments a species' adaptive potential the way insight
augments an animal's intelligence. MacKay endorses the
idea that a genuine intelligence evaluates potential plans
of action in a surrogate environment before committing
itself to real world action, but he denies the analogy to
species because all of the species' testing goes on in the
"real" environment. I think this overlooks an important
difference between interdemic and organic selection.
When a deme "explores" a region of gene space, it does
test (in the "real world" of the genotypic adaptive land-
scape) the fitness of actual genes the species as a whole
may later commit itself to. In organic selection, however,
when a population of adapting organisms "explores" a
novel phenotype, it tests an indefinitely large class of
potential genes (which may not even exist yet). If the
phenotype is sufficiently adaptive (indeed, if it is merely
prevalent but not too maladaptive) it will create selection
pressures which change gene frequencies as described
above, and only thus drive the species through the "real"
genotypic space. In effect, the ontogenetically acquired
phenotype is a simulation, in phenotype-space, of the
possibly potentially achievable genotype for genetic
adaptedness.
Now this account may seem to hinge on an arbitrary
decision to consider gene-space "real," and phenotype-
space "unreal," but that is not the essential issue. It all
occurs in the real world - for example, even mental
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1990) 13:1
101

Response/Schull: Are species intelligent?
rehearsal in animals occurs in the real world of the brain
(-in-the-body-in-the-external-environment). The essen-
tial issue is the existence of two domains: one in which the
experimentation occurs with relative rapidity, and another
that implements (albeit flexibly, and with further testing)
the more promising strategies that emerge. Distinct do-
mains of this sort are possessed by both insightful animals
and species evolving via organic selection; and in both
kinds of individuals, the "testing domain" is complex,
versatile, internal to the adaptive system, active (in that
individuals themselves generate the adaptations) and
involves representations (in that the organism is itself a
representation of the environment, and the ontogenetical-
ly achieved phenotype is a representation of a potential
genetic achievement). Csanyi's point that there is a sense
in which a species is also a representation of its niche is well
taken, but it is not clear that that plays a functional role in
evolution. (See also my response to Johnson, below.)
However, Sterelny argues that, in principle, an inter-
nal selection process cannot enhance discovery of new
knowledge, because in order to be selected appropri-
ately, the requisite knowledge would have had to be
present in the first place. This problem evaporates when
one recognizes that, first, the ontogenetic environment is
part of the "internal" selection process, and second,
ontogenetic adaptation by the population only identifies
promising ends and establishes fitness gradients leading
to those ends; it doesn't (and needn't) specify means, and
these means - genes - need not be present from the
outset. If the population could report on what is happen-
ing, it might say, "Gene pool, here's a phenotype that
seems to work pretty well, which each of us has worked
out at non-negligible ontogenetic cost. Maybe someday
there will be genes that could increase our fitness by
somehow reducing this cost, but about this we are totally
ignorant (so don't worry about Sterelny). Meanwhile,
we're doing this, so any randomly generated help you can
provide will be selected as soon as it arises." (Of course, I
do not mean to imply that they can so report, or that
organic selection involves any channel of communication
between ontogeny and phylogeny other than the auto-
matic effect on selection pressures.)
It is not surprising that Dennett is sympathetic to this
notion, for he has argued that random variability in a
selective system is, at base, the only possible source for
genuinely novel adaptations (Dennett 1975). This is so for
the very reason Sterelny gives: If the adaptation is de-
rived from existing internal knowledge bases, or is copied
from the outside world, it is not genuinely novel. None-
theless, if the randomness is strategically exploited in
nested selection systems, it can produce behavior in the
larger system that is decidedly wowrandom. That is why I
am not troubled by Sterelny's and Kalat's observation
that natural selection acts on random variation, whereas
learning in intelligent animals does not: In organic selec-
tion, it is not the variation but rather the selection
pressure that is directed, and there is no biological
proscription against that. Kalat recognizes this, but he
apparently doesn't accept that the nonrandom behavioral
variations produced by intelligent chimpanzees are simi-
larly nonrandom precisely because they are outputs of an
internalized nested selection system. (At this point, Kalat
or Sterelny might note another disanalogy: We all pre-
sume that species cannot, passively copy solutions from
outside, but animals with nervous systems and memory
operate under no such constraint. This wouldn't get them
very far, however. Insofar as an allegedly intelligent
animal actually copies a clever solution from an outside
source, we give it less intellectual credit. This is one
reason why blind watchmakers have to be so smart - they
can't copy.)
So when Sterelny characterizes natural selection as
gradual, slow, and nonprogressive (does this sound like a
neo-Darwinian straw man?), I can only repeat that to the
extent that organic selection is operative, natural selec-
tion should in fact be speeded up and directed. Similarly,
while Sterelny is right that population-genetic selection
obeys the no-credit constraint (each step must confer
greater fitness than its predecessor), this very fact is
organic selection's modus operandi: populationally modi-
fied fitness gradients lead the species towards the new
adaptive peak (when and if suitable genetic variation is
available).4
Finally, Stereley is right that lineages do not blend and
rejoin the way ideas do. My question, however, is not
whether "species are ideas"; it is whether they process
information and solve problems as animals with ideas do.
In fact, dynamic patterns of gene-pool environment in-
teractions (including organisms and their adaptive re-
sponses) of the sort that mediate organic selection do
share a number of interesting theoretical and meta-
theoretical properties with such "mental processes" as
ideas and representations (see also Schull 1990). Like
ideas, they are more evanescent than their relatively
"solid" material mechanisms (e.g., the organisms them-
selves), yet they can be more stable than, and determin-
ative of, those mechanisms (the underlying mechanisms
may change from those of ontogenetic adaptation to those
of innate genetic encoding, while the dynamic pattern of
interaction - the behavioral or somatic phenotype - can
remain relatively unchanged). And, as mentioned earlier,
since some of the mechanisms of these interactions are
located in the environment, there is a very real sense in
which these processes exert causal influence over the
species' behavior and over the endogenous mechanisms
of that behavior. This is the analogue of mental processes
influencing (and not just being influenced by) neural
processes. To that list of "mental-process-like" properties
one might want to add that these patterns of interaction
do blend and rejoin (as in individual organisms), and that
when successful combinations arise, they can organize
selection pressures in such a way as to encourage the
"fixation" of those combinations.
In a similar vein, I accept Johnson's reminder that the
information embodied in an organism is an emergent
property of organism-environment interactions (Oyama
1986; Schull 1990) but I disagree that cognitive represen-
tations are different in this regard. What is different is the
time scale. An animal's mental representations are an
emergent property of interactions between its cerebral
cortex and the cortex's environment (which includes the
rest of the organism, and the sensory environment). In
the short term, representations can be manipulated rela-
tively freely, as Johnson observes. But if representations
are to be of pragmatic consequence, they will modify, and
be modified by, their material mechanisms. The same is
true of behavior (which is the relatively dynamic interac-
tion of organism and environment), and of the organism,
102
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1990) 13:1

Response/Schulh Are species intelligent?
including the cortex, when one adopts a developmental
interactioeist perspective. So also at the species level,
ontogeeetic adaptations by populations of individuals are
relatively dynamic interactions (between organisms and
environment) which, according to the theory of organic
selection, are of evolutionary consequence because they
modify, and are modified by5 gene pool and environment.
This is not the place to argue that such analogies may shed
light on the nature and relations of mind and brain. But 1
find that the analogies stand up well enough to encourage
rather than discourage further inquiry.
It seems to me, then, that organic selection really does
promote the discovery of genuinely novel evolutionary
solutions (and does not just make already-existing solu-
tions explicit, as Sterelny maintains) and that it plays the
active role Ghiselin demands of a creative intelligence.
There is a sense in which the ontogenetically adapting
population can be said to direct the species' behavior
toward goals (as Katat demands). And in this same sense,
it may be that evolution is (sometimes) progressive and
purposive, even though genetic variability is not. We've
even gone some way toward meeting MacKay's objective
conditions for consciousness, although the problem of
subjective sentience remains mysterious (see Schull, in
preparation a). Organic selection thus does provide a
possible way of reconciling the nonpurposive mecha-
nisms of differential reproduction and random mutation
with the functional phenomena of adaptation and appar-
ently intelligent design, although unlike the original for-
mulation of organic selection, this more generalized con-
ception does not depend on intelligence (or even
behavior) at the organismic level. (When present, behav-
ior can play an important role.)
It is noteworthy that most commentators implicitly or
explicitly endorsed my "yardstick of intelligence" - the
continuum of progressively intelligent performances -
even though they did not agree that species measure up,
nor that they achieve those performances the way intel-
ligent animals do. I have tried to show that organic selec-
tion, and to a lesser extent interdemic selection, may
move species far enough out on the continuum (and by
way of processes similar to those used by intelligent
animals), and that species can be located beyond the
(possibly arbitrary) line that separates the nonintelligent
from the intelligent.
Of course, to get a clearer picture of the conditions
under which this can occur and the frequency with which
it does occur, much more work will have to be done.
Hinton and Nowlan's (1987) paper is virtually the only
formal analysis of organic selection, and Derrickson &
Greenberg's commentary cites some of the few empirical
studies that have even approached the problem (Plotkin
1988a). Thus, I agree with Odling-Smee that mechanisms
of within- and between-organism selection need more
study, but I do not see that calling attention to the
importance of their interactions must blur the distinction
between them.
In this context, it may be appropriate to deal with
Cs&nyi's friendly act of one-up-manship. He asks, "Are
species Gaia's thoughts?" In his commentary, and in his
recent book (Csanyi 1989), Csanyi applies generalized
conceptions of evolution, cognition, and intelligence to
replicative component systems, including animals and
species. If the biosphere is a kind of super-organism as
Lovelock (1988) proposes, and Csanyi presumes, why
shouldn't it be considered an intelligent one?
I'm not prepared to say. As generic as my theorizing
about intelligence is, it has been constrained in an impor-
tant way by considerations specific to the particular levels
and relationships under consideration: population genet-
ics, individual selection, development, learning, and so
on. It is not clear to me how straightforwardly the argu-
ments advanced here can be applied to Gaia. Does Gaia
have as much organized complexity as a species? Is it
structured as in species that have the kind of tight
informational integration across levels of temporal and
spatial organization afforded by sexual reproduction, in-
terdemic and organic selection? Are selective pressures
marshalled in a comparably rich and systematic fashion?
Is it significant that selection-from-above (i.e., the ana-
logue of species-selection for species) is an impossibility
in the case of Gaia, and that the evolution of Gaia's
immediate subcomponents .(ecosystems?) may be epi-
phenomena of individual or species selection several
levels down? Answers to such questions, and to the kind
of issues raised in the target article and commentaries
may be requisites for a serious look at the "character" of
the larger systems of which we, our own species, and
other species are part (see Schull, in preparation a, for a
discussion and analysis of William James's position on
such questions).
ficity and ISie notion of genera!
!i-Palmarini both note that through
most of the target article I treat intelligence in a domain-
general fashion, whereas many of the most interesting
and impressive phenomena of human and animal intel-
ligence are domain-specific. Piattelli-Palmarini goes on, to
charge that the fundamental motivation underlying the
present work is to salvage the notion of general intel-
ligence, but he apparently missed the sections on "modu-
larity" and "access" which shows that no such commit-
ment is entailed in the proposition that species are
intelligent. Indeed, I argued there that specific adapta-
tions and modes of ontogenetic adaptability prevalent in a
particular lineage ought to predispose the lineage toward
certain directions of future evolution.
Now Lloyd is critical of me for "assuming" that these
directions will tend to be adaptive ones, but that was
justified (not assumed) on the basis of two explicit pre-
sumptions: (1) that there is some consistency over time in
the kinds of problems and solutions confronting a lineage,
and (2) that organic selection is operative. If these condi-
tions are met, the adaptability of individual organisms
will tend to be channeled in, directions that have proven
useful in the past, and if those directions do tend to be
useful ones for further evolutionary development, the
efforts of the population will, via organic selection, tend
to steer the species in particular directions that have
already proven (phenotypically) promising. Much of this
is a natural concomitant of adaptive constraint in any
domain (see Rozin & Schull 1988), and is implicit in
Alberch (1982). It is quite explicit in Gould (1982), who
writes that "every constraint entails a suit of nonadaptive
consequences that might be commandeered later for
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1990) 13:1
1,03

Response/Schull: Are species intelligent?
some (perhaps novel) function" (p. 92). My point is that
organic selection promotes well-guided commandeering.
Smith avers, however, that general talk about specific
adaptations can only go so far, and discusses a number of
specific domains in psychology where explanatory insight
is gained by identifying domain-relevant knowledge
structures. He offers an exact counterpoint to Russell's
discussion of "general intelligence" in species. Whereas
Russell points out that if organic selection is an important
phenomenon, organisms with relatively high degrees of
general ontogenetic adaptability should tend to be found
in species with relatively rapid rates of evolutionary
change, Smith elaborates the idea that a close analysis of
the particular traits and adaptabilities of the organisms of
a species should provide much deeper insight into the
species' past and future. Analyses of this sort could indeed
throw light on specific evolutionary histories of stasis,
punctuated change, and adaptive radiation, and with a
sufficient number of such analyses, more general prin-
ciples could emerge, as well.
Smith also points out that the concept of species' intelli-
gence that would emerge from this kind of approach is
more like the intelligence of Piagefs child than like that of
the traditional general-process theorist's laboratory ani-
mal (see also Leiser), and the point is a testimony both to
the robustness of the analogies involved and to the poten-
tial insights that might be garnered by evolutionary
biologists who make the effort to take them seriously.
There is a difference, however. Adaptability in a develop-
ing organism occurs in the context of a relatively pre-
ordained sequence of developmental stages over the
lifetime of the individual Species' adaptability should not
be temporally staged in this manner.
I am thus sympathetic to those who emphasize the
importance of specific schemas, constraints, mechanisms,
and so on, and I am not advancing an all-inclusive "grand
theory" of the sort Piattelli-Palmarini inveighs against. It
should be noted that general-process theory (be it neo-
Darwinian evolutionary theory, or general process learn-
ing theory) can take two forms - a reductive form, which
claims to be all-encompassing, eliminating the need for
subsidiary investigation or for other kinds of explanation,
and a more realistic form, which recognizes that specific
principles are necessarily part of any complete account of a
specific product of learning (Rozin & Schull 1987) or
evolution (Schull 1990). I believe that my formulation is of
the latter sort, and that it would only be complemented and
strengthened by the attempt to clothe the general frame-
work in specific detail. But I do think the bright raiments of
natural history are shown to best advantage when they are
hung on an appropriate general skeleton.
11
In the past, the intuition that cognitive development and
biological evolution were similar and closely related phe-
nomena has been an important source of insight (e.g., for
Piaget, Bateson, James, Darwin, as mentioned previous-
ly, Freud, as documented in Sulloway 1979, and doubt-
less for others as well). If this intuition reflects an underly-
ing truth (and I have tried to show that it does),
disciplinary boundaries and unwarranted preconceptions
should not be allowed to prevent more recent advances in
each of the relevant disciplines from stimulating progress
in the others. The hypothesis that species are intelligent
stretches such boundaries and questions such preconcep-
tions. It might help generate new insights, or rehabilitate
old ones. While this Response has focused on the clearing
of conceptual undergrowth, more substantive progress
will depend on further exploration, both empirical and
theoretical, of uncharted territory. For this reason, I
thank the commentators and reader for giving the matter
some thought, and hope it will not stop here.
NOTES
1. Note that these characteristics, as well as those listed by
Salthe3 are species-level properties. Salthe read me wrong when
he says that intelligence is the only species-level property I allow.
My intent was rather to call attention to a variety of species-level
properties that may be relevant to species intelligence, while
leaving open the question of how those properties evolved. They
might be byproducts of individual selection, or they might be
products of higher level selection favoring those very properties.
2. It is interesting to note, however, that William James did
invoke the phenomenology of religious experience to advance
Ms own theological speculations about super-organismic intel-
ligence, and his discussions of these and related matters were, in
fact, based on a sophisticated hierarchical view of natural selec-
tion much like that presented here (Schull, in preparation a).
Clayton points out that Whitehead's ontology may be particu-
larly compatible with my views. That is no accident, for White-
head drew much of his inspiration from James.
3o To avoid going out on more limbs than is absolutely
necessary, I am assuming for the moment that all credit for the
design of such artifacts as automobiles can be given to intelligent
humans. If cultural evolution is involved, however, and if
cultures are intelligent, as Strong and Csanyi suggest (and as I
would not rule out), the credit for cultural artifacts must be
apportioned among humans and culture (Lloyd's 1988 analysis
of how this apportionment might proceed is quite illuminating.
In any case, the battle over the intelligence of cultures, commit-
tees (Ghiselin), baboon troops, or ant colonies (Strong) might be
more easily joined when more clarity has been achieved with
regard to species. One point should be reiterated, however: The
fact that cultures, committees, and baboon troops are constitu-
ted in part of human intelligence says nothing about the intel-
ligence of the culture or committee. The intelligence of a
collectivity is not necessarily superior to that of its components,
as most academic committee members will agree. Salthe seems
to miss this point when he draws the (false) implication that the
intelligence of species comprised of intelligent animals such as
ourselves would necessarily go beyond our own. On the con-
trary, as I understand it, the intelligence of a species of plant
might exceed that of a species of intelligent animals, and might
conceivably exceed that of an individual monkey. (Nonhuman
primates should address all correspondence regarding this last
claim to James Kalat.) [See also Macphail: "The comparative
psychology of intelligence" BBS 10(4) 1987.]
4* Organic selection comes with no guarantees, however.
One of the risks of intelligence is that one can be too smart for
one's own good. As Sterelny notes, early versions of new ideas
can be less adaptive than their predecessors. Organic selection
should occasionally permit the same kind of thing to happen in
species, when fitness gradients are changed in such a way that
the formerly best peak is lowered, or made inaccessible, That is,
"runaway" organic selection might be possible under circum-
stances in which selection against organismic adaptability is
weaker than the selection pressures created by the specific
adaptability involved. This is an example of the kind of problem
that cries out for formal modelling, but the theoretical pos-
sibility seems worth mentioning.
104
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1990) 13:1

References/SchuM: Are species intelligent?
References
Letters "a" and "r" appearing before authors' Initials refer to target article
and response respectively.
Abruzzi, W. S. (1982) Ecological theory and ethnic differentiation among
human populations. Current Anthropology 23(1): 13-35. 
[GWS]
Adams, D. (1982) Life, the universe and everything. Harmony Books. 
[AS]
Alberch, P. (1.982) Developmental constraints in evolutionary processes. In:
Evolution and development, ed. J. T. Bonner. Springer-Verlag. 
[aJS]
Anderson, J. A. (1986) Knowledge compilation .-.The general learning
mechanism. In: Machine learning: An artificial intelligence approach,
vol. 2, ed. R. S. Michalski, J. G. Carbonneil & T. M. Mitchell. Tioga
Press. 
[DL]
Anderson, M. (1989) New ideas in intelligence. The Psychologist 3:92-
94. 
[MJ]
Ashby, W. R. (1960) Design for a brain. John Wiley. 
[aJS]
Ayala, F. J. (1970) Teleological explanations in evolutionary biology.
Philosophy of Science 37:1-15. 
[AS]
Axelrod, R. (1987) The evolution of strategies in the iterated prisoner's
dilemma. In: Genetic algorithms and simulated annealing, ed. L. Davis.
London. 
[BHS]
Baker, M. C. (1985) The biology of bird-song dialects. Behavioral and Brain
Sciences 8:85-134. 
[aJS]
Baldwin, J. M. (1896) A new factor in evolution. American Naturalist 30:441-
51. 
[aJS]
Barnes, J., ed. (1984) The complete works of Aristotle, vol. 1 and vol 2.
Princeton University Press. 
[AS]
Bateson, G. (1963) The role of somatic change in evolution. Evolution 17:529-
39. 
[aJS]
(1972a) Steps to an ecology of mind., Ballantine Books. 
[aJS]
(1972b) The logical categories of learning and communication. In: Steps to
an ecology of mind. Ballantine Books. 
[aJS]
(1979) Mind and nature. E. P. Dutton. 
[aJS]
Bateson, G. & Bateson, M. C. (1987) Angels' fear: Towards an epistemology
of the sacred. Macmillan. [aJS]
Bell, G. (1982) The masterpiece of nature: The evolution and genetics of
sexuality. University of California Press. 
[aJS, MTG]
Berlyne, D. E. (1971) Aesthetics and psychobiology. Appleton-Century-
Crofts. 
[JDS]
Bertalanfly, L. (1968) General systems theory: Foundation, development and
applications. G. Braziller. [rJS]
Bharucha, J. J. (1987) Music cognition and perceptual facilitation: A
connectionist framework. Music Perception 5:1-30. 
[JDS]
Bickhard, M. H. (1988) Piaget on variation and selection models. Human
Development 31:274-312. 
[DL]
Block, N. (1978) Troubles with functionalism. In: Perception and Cognition,
ed. C. Wade Savage. University of Minnesota Press. 
[KS]
(1981) Psychologism and behaviorism. Philosophical Review 90:5-43. 
[aJS]
Boehra, C. (1978) Rational preselection from Hamadryas to Homo sapients:
The place of decisions in adaptive process. American Anthropologist
80:265-96. 
[GWS]
Boyd, R. & Richerson, P. J. (1985). Culture and evolutionary process.
University of Chicago Press. 
[GWS]
Brady, R. M. (1985) Optimization strategies gleaned from biological evolution.
Nature 317:804-6. 
[aJS]
Braestrup, F. W. (1971) The evolutionary significance of learning. Vidensk
abelige Meddelelser Fra Dansk Naturhistorisk Forening i Kjebenhaun
134:89-102. 
[aJS]
Brooks, D. R. & Wiley, E. O. (1988) Evolution as entropy: Toward a unified
theory of biology. University of Chicago Press. 
[SNS]
Bunge, M. (1977) (Treatise of basic philosophy) The furniture of the world,
vol. 3. D. Reidel. 
[PC]
Buss, L. W. (1987) The evolution of individuality. Princeton University
Press. 
[FJO-S, SNS]
Butler, S. (1879) Evolution, old and new: Or the theories ofBuffon, 
Dr.
Erasmus Darwin, and Lamarck, as compared with that of Mr. Charles
Darwin. Salem S. E. Cassino. 
[aJS]
(1920) Luck, or cunning as the main means of organic modification? 2d ed.
Jonathan Cape. 
[aJS]
Campbell, D. T. (1974) Evolutionary epistemology. In: The philosophy of
Karl R. Popper, ed. P. A. Schilpp. Open Court. 
[aJS, KS]
Campbell, J. (1982) Grammatical man. Simon & Schuster. 
[AS]
Campbell, J. H. (1982) Autonomy in evolution. In: Perspectives on evolution,
ed. R. Milkman. Sinauer. 
[aJS]
(1985) An organizational interpretation of evolution. In: Evolution at a
crossroads, ed. D. J. Depew & B. H. Weber. MIT Press. 
[FJO-S]
Caswell, H. (1983) Phenotypic plasticity in life-history traits: Demographic
effects and evolutionary consequences. American Zoologist 23:35-
46. 
[aJS]
Chase, W. G. & Simon, H. A. (1973a) The mind's eye in chess. In: Visual
information processing, ed. W. G. Chase. Academic Press. 
[JDS]
(1973b) Perception in chess. Cognitive Psychology 4:55-81. 
[JDS]
Cohen, J. E. (1962) Information theory and music. Behavioral Science
7(2): 137-63. 
[JDS]
Colwell, R. K. & Fuentes, E. R. (1975) Experimental studies on the niche.
Annual Review of Ecology and systematics 6:281-310. 
[SNS]
Cooper, J. M. (1982) Aristotle on natural teleology. In: Language and logos,
ed. M. Schofield & M. C. Nussbaum. Cambridge University
Press. 
[AS]
Crozier, J. B. (1974) Verbal and exploratory responses to sound sequences
varying in uncertainty level. In: Studies in the new experimental
aesthetics, ed. D. E. Berlyne. Hemisphere. 
[JDS]
Csanyi, V. (1985) Autogenesis: Evolution of selforganizing systems. In:
Dynamics of macrosystems, ed. J.-P. Aubin, D. Saari & K. Sigmund.
Proceedings, Laxenburg, Austria 1984. Springer-Verlag. 
[VC]
(1987) The replicative model of evolution: A general theory. World Futures
23:31-65. 
[VC]
(1988) Contribution of the genetical and neural memory to animal
intelligence. In: Intelligence and evolutionary biology, ed. H. Jerison &
Irene Jerison. Springer-Verlag. 
[VC]
(1989) Evolutionary systems and society: A general theory. Duke University
Press. 
[aJS, VC]
Csanyi, V. & Kampis, G. (1985) Autogenesis: Evolution of replicative systems.
Journal of Theoretical Biology 114:303-21. 
[VC]
(1987) Modelling society: Dynamical replicative systems. Cybernetics and
Systems 18:233-49. 
[VC]
Damuth, J. (1985) Selection among species: A reformulation in terms of
natural functional units. Evolution 39:1132-46. 
[SNS]
Danchin, A. (1980) A critical note on the use of the term "phenocopy." In:
Language and learning: The debate between Jean Piaget and Noam
Chomsky, ed. M. Piattelli-Palmarini. Harvard University Press. 
[rJS]
Davis, L., ed. (1987) Genetic algorithms and simulated annealing.
Pitman. 
[GWS]
Dawkins, R. (1976) The selfish gene. Oxford University Press. 
[aJS, FJO-S]
(1982) The extended phenotype. W. H. Freeman. 
[aJS]
(1986) The blind watchmaker. W. W. Norton. 
[aJS]
de Groot, A. D. (1965) Thought and choice in chess. Mouton. 
[JDS]
(1966) Perception and memory versus thought: Some old ideas and recent
findings. In: Problem solving: Research, method, and theory, ed. B.
Kleinmuntz. Wiley. 
[JDS]
Delbruck, M. (1976) How Aristotle discovered DNA. In: Physics and our
world, ed. K. Huang. American Institute of Physics. 
[AS]
Dennett, D. C. (1975) Why the law of effect will not go away. Journal of the
Theory of Social Behavior 5:169-87. 
[aJS]
(1987a) A route to intelligence: Oversimplify and self-monitor. In: Can
intelligence be explained?, ed. J. Khalfa. Oxford University Press. 
[aJS]
(1987b) The intentional stance. MIT Press/Bradford Books. 
[aJS, DCD]
Derrickson, K. C. (1988) Variation in repertoire presentation in Northern
Mockingbirds. Condor 90:592-606. 
[KCD]
Dietterich, T. G. & Michalski, R. S. (1984) A comparative review of selected
methods for learning from examples. In: Machine learning: An artificial
intelligence approach, vol. 1, ed. R. S. Michalski, J. G. Carbonneil & T.
M. Mitchell. Kaufman. 
[DL]
Dunbar, M. Y. (1972) The ecosystem as a unit of natural selection. In:
Growth by intussusception: Ecological essays in honor of G. Evelyn
Hutchinson, ed. E. S. Deevey. Transactions of the Academy 44:114-30.
Connecticut Academy of Arts and Sciences. 
[VC]
Edelman, G. M. (1987) Neural Darwinism: The theory of neuronal group
selection. Basic Books. [SNS]
Eldredge, N. (1984) Individuals, hierarchies, and processes. Toward a more
complete evolutionary theory. Paleobiology 10(2): 146-71. 
[aJS]
(1985a) Time frames: The rethinking of Darwinian evolution and the theory
of punctuated equilibria. Simon & Schuster. 
[aJS]
(1985b) Unfinished synthesis: Biological hierarchies and modern
evolutionary thought. Oxford University Press. 
[aJS, PC, MTG, SNS]
Eldredge, N. & Cracraft, J. (1980) Phylogenetic patterns and the evolutionary
process: Method and theory in comparative biology. Columbia University
Press. 
[SNS]
Fodor, J. A. (1975) The language of thought. Crowell. 
[DL]
(1983) The modularity of mind: An essay on faculty psychology. MIT
Press. 
[aJS]
Franks, N. R. (1989) Army ants: A collective intelligence. American Scientist
77(2):139-45. 
[GWS]
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1990) 13:1
105

References/SchuM: Are species intelligent?
Futuyrna, D. J. & Slatkin, M., eds. (1983) Coevolution. Sinauer. 
[FJO-S]
Georgopoulos, A. P., Schwartz, A. B. & Kettner, R. E. (1986) Neuronal
population coding of movement direction. Science 233:1416-19. 
[GWS]
Georgopoulos, A. P., Lurito, J. T., Petrides, M., Schwartz, A. B. & Massey,
J. T. (1989) Mental rotation of the neuronal population vector. Science
243:234-6. 
[GWS]
Ghiselin, M. T. (1969) The triumph of the Darwinian method. University of
California Press. 
[MTG]
(1971) The individual in the Darwinian revolution. New Lit. Hist. 3:113—
34. 
[MTG]
(1974a) The economy of nature and the evolution of sex. University of
California Press. 
[MTG]
(1974b) A radical solution to the species problem. Syst. Zool. 23:536—
44. 
[MTG]
(1981) Categories, life, and thinking. Behavioral and Brain Sciences 4:269-
83. 
[aJS]
Goldberg, D. E. (1989) Genetic algorithms. Addison-Wesley. 
[GWS, BHS]
Goodwin, B. G. (1972) Biology and meaning. In: Towards a theoretical
biology, ed. C. H. Waddington. Aldine-Atherton. 
[AS]
Gould, S. J. (1980) The evolutionary biology of constraint. Daedelus 109:39-
52. 
[aJS]
(1982) Darwinism and the expansion of evolutionary theory. Science
216:380-87. 
[aJS]
Greenberg, R. (1983) The role of neophobia in foraging specialization of some
migrant warblers. American Naturalist 122:444-53. 
[KCD]
Grene, M. (1987) Hierarchies in biology. American Scientist 75:504-
610. 
[aJS]
Gruber, H. E. (1974) Darwin on Man: A psychological study of scientific
creativity. Wildwood House.
Harlow, H. (1949) The formation of learning sets. Psychological Review 56:51-
65. 
[aJS]
Hamburger, V. & Oppenheim, R. W. (1982) Naturally occurring neuronal
death in vertebrates. Neuroscience Commentary 1:39-55. 
[aJS]
Hemstein, R. J. & Vaughan, W. (1980) Melioration and behavioral allocation.
In: Limits to action: The allocation of individual behavior, ed. J. E. R.
Staddon. Academic Press. 
[aJS]
Hinton, G. E. & Nowlan, S. J. (1987) How learning can guide evolution.
Complex Systems 1:495-502. Technical Report CMU-CS-86-128,
Carnegie-Mellon University. 
[aJS]
Ho, M. W. & Saunders, P. T. (1979) Beyond neo-Darwinism: An epi-
genetic approach to evolution. Journal of Theoretical Biology 78:573-
91. 
[aJS]
(1982) The epigenetic approach to the evolution of organisms - with notes
on its relevance to social and cultural evolution: In: Learning,
development, and culture, ed. H. C. Plotldn. John Wiley. 
[aJS]
Holland, J. (1975) Adaptation in natural and artificial systems. University of
Michigan Press. [aJS, GWS, BHS]
(1986) Escaping brittleness: The possibilities of general-purpose learning
algorithms applied to parallel rule-based systems. In: Machine learning:
An artificial intelligence approach, vol. 2, ed. R. S. Michalski, J. G.
Carbonell & T. M. Mitchell. Morgan Kauftnann. 
[GWS]
Holland, J. H., Holyoak, K. J., Nisbett, R. E. & Thagard, P. R. (1986)
Induction - Processes of inference, learning, and discovery. MIT
Press. 
[DL]
Howe, M. J. A. (1988a) Intelligence as an explanation. British Journal of
Psychology 79:349-60. 
[PAR]
(1988b) The hazards of using correlation evidence as a means of identifying
the causes of individual differences: A rejoinder to Sternberg and a reply
to Miles. British Journal of Psychology 79:539-45. 
[PAR]
Hull, D. L. (1980) Individuality and selection. Annual Review of Ecology and
systematics 11:311-22. 
[aJS, PC]
Hunkapiller, T., Huang, H., Hood, L. & Campbell, J. H. (1982) The impact
of modern genetics on evolutionary theory. In: Perspectives on evolution,
ed. R. Milkman. Sinauer. 
[aJS]
James, F. C , Johnston, R. F., Warner, N. O., Niemi, G. J. & Boecklen, W.
J. (1984) The Grinnellian niche of the wood thrush. American Naturalist
124:17-47. 
[SNS]
James, W. (1880) Great men, great thoughts, and the environment. Atlantic
Monthly 46:441-59. 
[aJS]
Jennings, H. S. (1906) The behavior of the lower organisms. Columbia
University Press. 
[aJS]
Johnson, M. (1987) Review of "The ontogeny of information: Developmental
systems and evolution" by Susan Oyama. Quarterly Journal of
Experimental Psychology 39A:819-21. 
[MJ]
Kampis, G. (1987a) Some problems of system descriptions. I. Function.
International Journal of General Systems 13:143-56. 
[VC]
(1987b) Some problems of system descriptions. II. Information.
International Journal of General Systems 13:157-71. 
[VC]
(1957) An introduction to genetic statistics. John Wiley. Reprinted (1969)
The Iowa State University Press. 
[OK]
(1978) Logical, epistemological, and statistical aspects of nature-nurture data
interpretation. Biometrics 34:1-23. 
[OK]
Kohler, W. (1917/1976) The mentality of apes. Liveright. 
[JWK]
Kollar, E. J. & Fisher, C. (1980) Tooth induction in chick epithelium:
Expression of quiescent genes for enamel synthesis. Science 207:993-
95. 
[aJS]
Komisaruk, B. (1977) The role of rhythmical brain activity in sensorimotor
integration. In: Progress in Psychobiology and physiological psychology,
ed. J. M. Sprague & A. N. Epstein. Academic Press. 
[aJS]
Krebs, J. R. & Dawkins, R. (1984) animal signals: Mind-reading and
manipulation. In: Behavioural ecology: An evolutionary approach, ed. J.
R. Krebs & N. B. Davies. Blackwell Scientific Publishers. 
[KCD]
Krumhansl, C. L. & Castellano, M. A. (1983) Dynamic processes in music
and perception. Memory and Cognition ll(4):325-34. 
[JDS]
Kummer, H. (1971) Primate societies: Group techniques of ecological
adaptation. Aldine. 
[GWS]
Lakatos, I. (1979) The methodology of scientific research programmes, vol. 1,
Philosophical papers, ed. J. Worrall & G. Currie. Cambridge University
Press. 
[PC]
Lamarck, J. (1809) Philosophie zoologique, 2 vols. English translation (1984):
Zoological philosophy: An exposition with regard to the natural history of
animals. University of Chicago Press. 
[aJS]
Langley, P., Simon, H. A., Bradshaw, G. L. & Zytkow, J. M. (1987)
Scientific discovery: Computational explorations of the creative processes.
MIT Press. 
[DL]
Laszlo, E. (1987) Evolution: The new paradigm. World Futures: The Journal
of General Evolution 23(3): 151-60. 
[aJS]
Leiser, D. (1987) The changing relations of representation and cognitive
structure during the development of a cognitive map. New Ideas in
Psychology 5:95-110. 
[DL]
(1989) Theorizing by pronouncement: A review of "Induction - Processes of
inference, learning, and discovery" by Holland, Holyoak, Nisbet &
Thagard. Journal of Mind and Behavior 4. 
[DL]
Lewis, C. (1987) Composition of productions. In: Production system models of
learning and development, ed. D. Klahr, P. Langley & R. Neeches. MIT
Press.. 
[DL]
Lewontin, R. C. (1982) Organism and environment. In: Learning,
development and culture, ed. H. Plotkin. John Wiley. 
[MP-P]
(1983) Gene, organism and environment. In: Evolution from molecules to
men, ed. D. S. Bendall. Cambridge Press. 
[FJO-S]
(1983) The organism as the subject and object of evolution. Scientia 118:63-
82. 
[MP-P]
Lipton, P. & Thompson, N. S. (1988) Comparative psychology and the
recursive structure of filter explanations. International Journal of
Comparative Psychology, vol. 1, 4:215-29. 
[NST]
Lloyd, E. A. (1988) The structure and confirmation of evolutionary theory.
Greenwood Press. 
[EAL]
Lovelock, J. E. (1979) Gaia. Oxford University Press. 
[KS]
(1988) The ages of Gaia. Oxford University Press. 
[aJS, FJO-S]
Mackintosh, N. J. (1988) Approaches to the study of animal intelligence.
British Journal of Psychology 79:509-25. 
[PAR]
Macphail, E. M. (1987) The comparative psychology of intelligence.
Behavioral and Brain Sciences 10:645-95. 
[JWK]
Margulis, L. (1982) Symbiosis in cell evolution. Freeman. 
[FJO-S]
Marler, P. (1961) The logical analysis of animal communication. Journal of
Theoretical Biology 1:295-317. 
[KCD]
Maynard Smith, J. (1978) The evolution of sex. Cambridge University
Press. 
[aJS]
Maynard Smith, J., Burian, R., Kauffiman, S., Alberch, P., Campbell, J.,
Goodwin, G., Lande, R., Raup, D. & Wolpert, L. (1985) Developmental
constraints and evolution. Quarterly Review of Biology 60:265-87. 
[aJS]
Mayr, E. (1974) Behavior programs and evolutionary strategies. American
Scientist 62:650-59. 
[aJS]
(1988) The growth of biological thought: Diversity, evolution and
inheritance. Harvard University Press. 
[rJS]
McClelland, J. L., Rumelhart, D. E. & the PDP Research Group (1986)
Parallel distributed processing: Explorations in the microstructure of
cognition. MIT Press. 
[aJS]
Meyer, L. B. (1967) Music, the arts, and ideas: Patterns and predictions in
twentieth-century culture. University of Chicago Press. 
[JDS]
Michod, R. E. & Levin, G., ed. (1988) The evolution of sex: An examination
of current ideas. Sinauer Associates. 
[MTG]
Milkman, R., ed. (1982) Perspectives on evolution. Sinauer. 
[aJS]
Minsky, M. (1986) Societies of mind. Simon & Schuster. 
[aJS]
Mitter, C. & Brooks, D. R. (1983) Phylogenetic aspects of coevolution. In:
Coevolution, ed. D. J. Futuyma & M. Slatkin. Sinauer. 
[SNS]
106
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1990) 13:1

References/Schvlh Are species intelligent?
Morgan, L. (1896) On modification and variation. Science 4:733-40. 
[aJS]
Newell, A. & Simon, H. A. (1976) Computer science as empirical inquiry:
Symbols and search. Communications of the ACM 19:113-26. 
[aJS]
Nussbaum, M. C. (1978) Aristotle's De motu animalium. Princeton University
Press. 
[AS]
Odling-Smee, F. J. (1988) Niche constructing phenotypes. In: The role of
behavior in evolution, ed. H. C. Plotkin. MIT Press. 
[FJO-S]
Odling-Smee, F. J. & Plotkin, H. C. (1984) Evolution: Its levels and its units.
Behavioral and Brain Sciences 7:318-20. 
[FJO-S]
Oyama, S. (1986) The Ontogeny of information. Cambridge University
Press. 
[MJ]
Pachner, A. R. (1989) Lyme disease. Trends in Neurosciences 12:177-
81. 
[WAM]
Paley, W. (1802) Natural theology: Or evidences of the existence and
attributes of the Deity collected from the appearances of nature. R.
Faulder. 
[aJS]
Piaget, J. (1974) Adaptation vitale et psychologie de Fintelligence: Selection
organique et phenocopie. Hermann. 
[DL]
(1978) Behavior and evolution. Pantheon. 
[aJS]
Piaget, J. & Garcia, R. (1983) Psychogenese et histoire des sciences.
Flammarion. 
[DL]
Piattelli-Palmarini, M., ed. (1980) Language and learning: The debate between
Jean Piaget and Noam Chomsky. Harvard University Press. 
[MP-P]
(1989) Evolution, selection and cognition: From "learning" to parameter
setting in biology and in the study of language. Cognition 31:1—
44. 
[MP-P]
Pinker, S. (1984) Language learnability and language development. Harvard
University Press. 
[DL]
Pinker, S. & Prince, A. (1988) On language and connectionism: Analysis of a
parallel distributed processing model of language acquisition. Cognition
28:73-193. 
[DL]
Pittendrigh, C. S. (1958) Adaptation, natural selection and behavior. In:
Behavior and evolution, ed. A. Roe & G. G. Simpson. Yale University
Press. 
[NST]
Plotkin, H. C , ed. (1988a) The role of behavior in evolution. MIT
Press. 
[aJS]
(1988b) Learning and evolution. In: The role of behavior in evolution, ed.
H. C. Plotkin. MIT Press. 
[aJS]
Plotkin, H. C. & Odling-Smee, F. J. (1981) A multiple-level model of
evolution and its implications for sociobiology. Behavioral and Brain
Sciences 4:225-68. 
[aJS]
Poulton, E. B. (1897) Letter on Baldwin Effect. Science 6:585-87. 
[aJS]
Powers, W. R. (1973) Behavior: The control of perception. Aldine. 
[aJS]
Pringle, J. W. S. (1951) On the parallel between learning and evolution.
Behaviour 3:174-214. 
[aJS]
Provine, W. B. (1986) Sewall Wright and evolutionary biology. University of
Chicago Press. 
[aJS]
Putnam, H. (1981) Reason, truth and history. Cambridge University
Press. 
[PC]
(1987) The many faces of realism. Open Court. 
[PC]
Rachlin, H. (1.976) Modern behaviorism. W. H. Freeman. 
[rJS]
Rapoport, E. H. (1982) Areography: Geographical strategies of species.
Pergamon. 
[SNS]
Reidl, R. (1977) Systems-analytical approach to macro-evolutionary
phenomena. Quarterly Review of Biology 52:351—70. 
[aJS]
Rensch, B. (1973) Gedachtnis Begriffshildung und Planhandlungen bei Tieren.
Verlag Paul Parey. 
[JWK]
Richards, R. (1987) Darwin and the emergence of evolutionary theories of
mind and behavior. University of Chicago Press. 
[aJS]
Robinson, D. N. (in press) The psychology of Aristotle. Columbia University
Press. 
[AS]
Rosner, B. S. & Meyer, L. B. (1983) Melodic processes and the perception of
music. In: The psychology of music, ed. D. Deutsch. Academic
Press. 
[JDS]
Rossler, O. E. (1979) Recursive evolution. Biosystems 11:193-99. 
[aJS]
Rozin, P. (1976) The evolution of intelligence and access to the cognitive
unconscious. In: Progress in psychobiology and physiological psychology,
ed. J. A. Sprague & A. N. Epstein. 
[aJS]
Rozin, P. & Kalat, J. (1971) Specific hungers and poison avoidance as adaptive
specializations of learning. Psychological Review 78:459-86. 
[aJS]
Rozin, P. & Schull, J. (1988) The adaptive-evolutionary point of view in
experimental psychology. In: Handbook of experimental psychology, ed.
R. Atkinson, R. J. Hernstein, G. Lindsey & R. D. Luce. John
Wiley. 
[aJS]
Rychlak, J. F. (1987) Can the strength of past associations account for the
direction of thought? The Journal of Mind and Behavior 8:185-94. 
[AS]
Salthe, S. N. (1985) Evolving hierarchical systems: Their structure and
representation. Columbia University Press. 
[aJS, SNS]
Schull, J. (1979) A conditioned opponent theory of Pavlovian conditioning and
habituation. In: The psychology of learning and motivation, vol. 13, ed.
G. Bower. Academic Press. 
[aJS]
(1988) Intelligence and mind in evolution. World Futures 23(4):263-
73. 
[aJS]
(1990) Evolution and learning: Analogies and interactions. In: The
evolutionary paradigm, ed. E. Laszlo. Gordon and Breach Science
Publishers. 
[aJS]
(in preparation a) William James and the nature of selection. 
[aJS]
(in preparation b) Lamarck as biopsychologist. 
[aJS]
Searle, J. R. (1980) Minds, brains, and programs. Behavioral and Brain
Sciences 3:417-58. 
[aJS, PC]
Sebeok, T. A. (1962) Coding in the evolution of signaling behavior. Behavioral
Science 7:430-42. 
[KCD]
(1965) Animal communication. Science 147:1006-14. 
[KCD]
Seligman, M. E. P. & Hager, J. L., eds. (1972) Biological boundaries of
learning. Appleton Century Crofts. 
[aJS]
Shaw, G. B. (1959) Man and superman. Bantam Books. 
[WAM]
Shettleworth, S. (1972) Constraints on learning. In: Advances in the study of
behavior, vol. 4, ed. R. A. Hinde & E. Shaw. Academic Press. 
[aJS]
Silverstein, A. (1988) An Aristotelian resolution of the idiographic versus
monothetic tension. American Psychologist 43:425-30. 
[AS]
Simon, H. A. (1967) The architecture of complexity. Proceedings of the
American Philosophical Society 106:467-82. 
[aJS]
Simon, H. A. & Gilmartin, K. (1973) A simulation of memory for chess
positions. Cognitive Psychology 5:29-46. 
[JDS]
Simpson, G. G. (1953) The Baldwin effect. Evolution 7:110-17. 
[EAL]
Slife, B. D. (1987) Can cognitive psychology account for metacognitive
functions of mind? Journal of Mind and Behavior 8:195-208. 
[AS]
Smith, W. J. (1963) Vocal communication of information in birds. American
Naturalist 97:117-25. 
[KCD]
(1977) The behavior of communicating: An ethological approach. Harvard
University Press. 
[KCD]
(1981) Referents of animal communication. Animal Behaviour 29:1273-
75. 
[KCD]
Smolensky, P. (1988a) The constituent structure of connectionist mental states
- A reply to Fodor and Pylyshyn. Technical report CU-CS-394-88.
Department of Computer Science, University of Colorado. 
[DL]
(1988b) On the proper treatment of connectionism. Behavioral and Brain
Sciences ll(l):l-74.
Sober, R. (1984) The nature of selection: Evolutionary theory in philosophical
focus. Bradford Books/MIT Press. 
[DL]
Staddon, J. E. R. & Simmelhag, V. L. (1971) The "superstition" experiment:
A reexamination of its implications for the principles of adaptive behavior.
Psychological Review 78:3-43. 
[aJS]
Stanley, S. M. (1975) A theory of evolution above the species level.
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 72:646-50. 
[VC]
(1979) Macroevolution: Pattern and process. W. H. Freeman. 
[aJS]
Stearns, S. (1982) The role of development in the evolution of life-histories.
In: Evolution and development, ed. J. T. Bonner. Springer-Verlag. 
[aJS]
Sternberg, R. J. (1982) Reasoning, problem solving and intelligence. In:
Handbook of human intelligence, ed. R. J. Sternberg. Cambridge
University Press. 
[PAR]
(1985) Beyond IQ: A triarchic theory of human intelligence. Cambridge
University Press. 
[PAR]
Sumida, B. H. (1989) Models of decision making. Unpublished doctoral
thesis. Oxford University Press. 
[BHS]
Sumida, B. H., Houston, A. I. H., McNamara, J. M. & Hamilton, W. D.
(submitted) Genetic algorithms and evolution. 
[BHS]
Taylor, C. (1970) The explanation of purposive behavior. In: Explanation in
the behavioral sciences, ed. R. Borger & P. Cioffi. Cambridge University
Press. 
[AS]
Templeton, A. R. (1982) Adaptation and the integration of evolutionary forces.
In: Perspectives on evolution, ed. R. Milkman. Sinauer. 
[aJS]
Thompson, N. S. (1981) Toward a falsifiable theory of evolution. In:
Perspectives in ethology, ed. P. P. G. Bateson & P. H. Klopfer.
Plenum. 
[NST]
(1986) Ethology and the birth of comparative teleonomy. In: Relevance of
models and theories of ethology, ed. R. Campan & R. Zayan. Privat, I.
E. C. 
[NST]
(1987a) The misappropriation of teleonomy. In: Perspectives in ethology, ed.
P. P. G. Bateson & P. H. Klopfer. 6:259-74. 
[NST]
(1987b) Natural design and the future of comparative psychology. Journal of
Comparative Psychology 101, 3:282-86. 
[NST]
Thorndike, E. L. (1899) The associative processes in animals. Biological
lectures from the Marine Biological Laboratory at Woods Hole.
Atheneum. 
[aJS]
Tierney, A. J. (1986) The evolution of learned and innate behavior:
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1990) 13:1
107

References/SchuM: Are species intelligent?
Contributions from genetics and neurobiology to a theory of behavioral
evolution. Animal Learning ir Behavior 14:339-48. 
[aJS]
Ullman, S. (1979) The interpretation of visual motion. MIT Press. 
[KS]
Vigotsky, L. S. (1934/86) Thought and language, revised ed. MIT
Press. 
[DL]
Waddington, C. (1953) Genetic assimilation of an acquired character.
Evolution 10:1-13. 
[aJS]
(1975) The evolution of an evolutionist. Cornell University Press.
[aJS]
Wallace, I., Klahr, D. & Bluff, K. (1987) A self-modifying production system
model of cognitive development. In: Production system models of
learning and development, ed. D. Klahr, P. Langley & R. Neeches. MIT
Press. 
[DL]
Whitehead, A. N. (1978) Process and reality, corrected edition, ed. D. R.
Griffin & D. W. Sherburne. The Free Press. 
[PC]
Wiley, E. O. (1981) Phylogenetics: The theory and practice of phylogenetic
systematics. Wiley. 
[SNS]
Williams, G. C. (1966) Adaptation and natural selection. Princeton University
Press. 
[KS]
(1975) Sex and evolution. Princeton University Press. 
[aJS]
(1986) Evolution and adaptation: A critique of some current evolutionary
thought. Princeton University Press. 
[MTG]
Williams, E. N. (1987) Can cognitive psychology offer a meaningful account of
meaningful human action? Journal of Mind and Behavior 8:209-22. 
[AS]
Wilson, E. O. (1975) Sociobiology: The new synthesis. Harvard University
Press. 
[aJS, AS]
Wright, S. (1932) The roles of mutation, inbreeding, crossbreeding and
selection in evolution. Proceedings of the XI International Congress of
Genetics 1:356-66. 
[aJS, KCD, AS]
(1945) Tempo and mode in evolution: A critical review. Ecology 26:415-
19. 
[BHS]
(1977) Evolution and the genetics of populations. Vol. 4: Variability within
and among natural populations. University of Chicago Press. 
[aJS]
(1982) Character change, speciation, and the higher taxa. Evolution 36:427-
43. 
[aJS]
Wyles, J. S., Kunkel, J. G. & Wilson, A. C. (1983) Birds, behavior and
anatomical evolution. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences
8:4394-97. 
[aJS, KCD, FJO-S]
Young, R. M. (1976) Children's sedation behavior - an artificial intelligence
analysis of a Piagetian task. Birhauser. 
[DL]
108
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1990) 13:1

