ESSAY REVIEWS 
Author's Response 
By Daniel C. Dennett 
R 
OBERT Campbell has a daunting task: to convince just about 
everyone in cognitive science and analytic philosophy that he or 
she has been barking up the wrong trees for years. Perhaps he is 
right, but he is unlikely to convince the rest of us by taking one book from 
the purportedly mistaken tradition and attempting to convict it of the 
cardinal sins by what might be called guilt by free association. As he 
admits, my book is not mainly about the epistemological issues that are 
central to him, so he must read a lot into my decisions about what not to 
discuss at length, and into various phrases he plucks out of discussions of 
other topics. Still, the tactic might have worked, if it weren't for some 
misconstruals. 
First, Campbell construes my intentional stance as an anti-realist 
doctrine: "he needs to abandon the 'intentional stance' and make a firm 
commitment to realism". Since many others have also construed me thus, 
this is my fault not Campbell's, but I have laboured mightily to correct 
it, in Darwin's Dangerous Idea, in "Real Patterns" (Dennett 1991) and 
more recently in "Get Real" (Dennett 1994). The intentional stance is a 
perspective that one adopts in order to discover real patterns that are 
objectively in the world. Second, he construes me as endorsing (at least 
indirectly) 'knowledge-atoms' and 'encoding' of a variety he and Bickhard 
have purportedly discredited. I cannot tell from what is said in the review 
whether I would agree with their criticisms of these doctrines--quite 
probably I would agree with a great deal--but considering that I have been 
an indefatigable opponent of all brands of the 'language of thought' 
(Dennett 1977, 1987a) and 'High Church Computationalism' (Dermett 
1987b) (otherwise known as GOFAI) for almost thirty years, I am 
unpersuaded by this exegesis of my own work. Certainly the objections 
raised here do not find their targets in my own views, nor are they 
compelling in their own right. Consider Campbell's claim that it is a 
mistake to treat DNA as an informational code (like a language in that 
regard). He quotes a series of rhetorical questions designed to expose this 
confusion: "If DNA contains denoting symbols, then why doesn't rain 
denote clouds? Why doesn't smoke denote fire?" Well, there are a number 
a reasons, but the chief one is this: DNA is part of a system which does 
500 
9 AAHPSSS, 1998. 

ESSAY REVIEWS 
indeed include a 'reader'--the elaborate system that constructs the 
proteins called-for (or denoted, if you like) by the codons, while clouds 
and smoke are not part of any such system. 
My chief reason for replying to Campbell's review is to rebut a charge 
that he makes about memetics: "if memetics is correct, our very notions of 
truth and falsehood, evidence and reasons, good and bad arguments, and 
so on, are themselves memes, whose acceptance need have nothing to do 
with their epistemic virtue, or lack thereof ... memetics, like epistemic 
relativism or hard psychological determinism, embroils its proponents in 
self-referential inconsistency". As Campbell notes, I myself draw attention 
to the independence of meme-spreading and meme-virtue in general, but 
am not, as he says, fazed by it. Why not? Because the conclusion he draws 
from it is simply a non sequitur. There is indeed no guarantee that a meme 
that spreads is good (true, valid, right) or that a good meme wiU spread, 
but this permits one to discover the complex relationships between truth 
and memes, and show how, and why, true memes flourish (when they do). 
This topic was slighted by me, apparently, in my book; I have since turned 
to it as a major topic of my work. 
For instance, in "Faith in the Truth" (forthcoming in the Oxford 
Amnesty Lectures volume on the values of science), I attempt to show that 
epistemic relativism (which Campbell and I both abhor) does not at all 
follow from the epistemic doctrines of Quine, Kuhn, Dawkins, or myself, 
in spite of declarations to that effect from Rorty and various other 
postmodernists. I think that Campbell and I are actually much closer to 
agreement than he supposes. But let me close with one final rhetorical 
question of my own. I would have thought that his disapproval of 
relativism and his love of "a commitment to realism" would put him 
squarely on my side against the self-styled multiculturalists who won't 
dare to criticise the disinformation campaigns of various religious cultures. 
He seems to disapprove of my disapproval of religious schools teaching 
falsehoods to young children. He quotes me as saying: "Misinforming a 
child is a terrible offense." Isn't it? 
Center for Cognitive Studies, Tufts University, 
Medford, Massachusetts, USA. 
References 
Dennett, D.C. (1977) "Critical Notice of J. Fodor, The Language of Thought'~ 
Mind, 86. 
9 AA.H_PSSS, 1998. 
501 

ESSAY REVIEWS 
Dermett, D.C. (1987a) The Intentional Stance. Cambridge, Mass.: Bradford Books/ 
MIT Press. 
Dermert, D.C. (1987b) "The Logical Geography of Computational Approaches: a 
View from the East Pole", in M. Harnish and M. Brand (eds), Problems in the 
Representation of Knowledge. Tuscon : University of Arizona Press. 
Dennett, D.C. (1991) "Real Patterns ~, Journal of Philosophy, 87. 
Dermett, D.C. (1994) "Get Real s, Philosophical Topics, 22. 
502 
9 ~a~PSSS, 1998. 

