39
3
How to Protect Human Dignity 
from Science
Daniel C. Dennett
M
any people fear that science and technology are encroaching 
on domains of life in a way that undermines human dignity, 
and they see this as a threat that needs to be resisted vigorously. They 
are right. There is a real crisis, and it needs our attention now, be­
fore irreparable damage is done to the fragile environment of mutu­
ally shared beliefs and attitudes on which a precious conception of 
human dignity does indeed depend for its existence. I will try to 
show both that the problem is real and that the most widely favored 
responses to the problem are deeply misguided and bound to fail. 
There is a solution that has a good chance of success, however, and it 
employs principles that we already understand and accept in less mo­
mentous roles. The solution is natural, reasonable, and robust instead 
of fragile, and it does not require us to try to put the genie of sci­
ence back in the bottle—a good thing, since that is almost certainly 
impossible. Science and technology can flourish open-endedly while 
abiding by restrictive principles that are powerful enough to reassure 
the anxious and mild enough to secure the unqualified endorsement 
of all but the most reckless investigators. We can have dignity and 
science too, but only if we face the conflict with open minds and a 
sense of common cause.

40  | Daniel C. Dennett
The Problem
Human life, tradition says, is infinitely valuable, and even sacred: 
not to be tampered with, not to be subjected to “unnatural” proce­
dures, and of course not to be terminated deliberately, except (per­
haps) in special cases such as capital punishment or in the waging 
of a just war: “Thou shalt not kill.” Human life, science says, is a 
complex phenomenon admitting of countless degrees and variations, 
not markedly different from animal life or plant life or bacterial life 
in most regards, and amenable to countless varieties of extensions, 
redirections, divisions, and terminations. The questions of when (hu­
man) life begins and ends, and of which possible variants “count” as 
(sacred) human lives in the first place are, according to science, more 
like the question of the area of a mountain than of its altitude above 
sea level: it all depends on what can only be conventional definitions 
of the boundary conditions. Science promises—or threatens—to re­
place the traditional absolutes about the conditions of human life 
with a host of relativistic complications and the denial of any sharp 
boundaries on which to hang tradition.
Plato spoke of seeking the universals that “carve Nature at its 
joints,”* and science has given us wonderful taxonomies that do just 
that. It has identified electrons and protons (which have the mass of 
1,836 electrons and a positive charge), distinguished the chemical 
elements from each other, and articulated and largely confirmed a 
Tree of Life that shows why “creature with a backbone” carves Nature 
better than “creature with wings.” But the crisp, logical boundar­
ies that science gives us don’t include any joints where tradition de­
mands them. In particular, there is no moment of ensoulment to be 
discovered in the breathtakingly complicated processes that ensue af­
ter sperm meets egg and they begin producing an embryo (or maybe 
twins or triplets—when do they get their individual souls?), and there 
is no moment at which the soul leaves the body and human life ends. 
Moreover, the more we understand, scientifically, about these com­
plexities, the more practical it becomes, technologically, to exploit 
them in entirely novel ways for which tradition is utterly unprepared: 
in vitro fertilization and cloning, organ harvest and transplant, and, 
*	 Phaedrus 265d-266a.

How to Protect Human Dignity from Science |  41
at the end of life, the artificial prolongation of life—of one sort or 
another—after most if not all the sacred aspects of life have ceased. 
When we start treating living bodies as motherboards on which to 
assemble cyborgs, or as spare parts collections to be sold to the high­
est bidder, where will it all end? It is not as if we could halt the slide 
by just prohibiting (some of) the technology. Technology may pro­
vide the faits accomplis that demonstrate beyond all controversy that 
the science is on the right track, but long before the technology is 
available, science provides the huge changes in conceptualization, the 
new vistas on possibility, that will flavor our imaginations henceforth 
whether or not the possibilities become practical. We are entering a 
new conceptual world, thanks to science, and it does not harmonize 
comfortably with our traditional conceptions of our lives and what 
they mean.*
In particular, those who fear this swiftly growing scientific vista 
think that it will destroy something precious and irreplaceable in our 
traditional scheme, subverting the last presumptions of human spe­
cialness which ground—they believe—our world of morality. Oddly 
enough, not much attention has been paid to the question of ex­
actly how the rise of the scientific vista would subvert these cherished 
principles—in this regard, it is a close kin to the widespread belief 
that homosexual marriage would somehow subvert traditional “fam­
ily values”—but in fact there is a good explanation for this gap in the 
analysis. The psychologist Philip Tetlock identifies values as sacred 
when they are so important to those who hold them that the very act 
of considering them is offensive.1 The comedian Jack Benny was fa­
mously stingy—or so he presented himself on radio and television—
and one of his best bits was the skit in which a mugger puts a gun in 
*	 The philosopher Wilfrid Sellars, in his essay “Philosophy and the Scientific Im­
age of Man” (in Science, Perception, and Reality [London: Routledge and Kegan 
Paul, 1963]), distinguished between the manifest image of everyday life, with its 
tables and chairs, trees and rainbows, people and dreams, and the scientific image 
of atoms and particles and waves of electromagnetic radiation, and noted that the 
task of putting these two images into registration is far from straightforward. The 
dimension of meaning, which resides solely—it seems—in the manifest image, is 
resistant both to reduction (the way chemistry, supposedly, reduces to physics) and 
to any less demanding sort of unification or coordination with the scientific image. 
The tension we are exploring here is a particularly vivid and troubling case of the 
tension between these two images.

42  | Daniel C. Dennett
his back and barks “Your money or your life!” Benny just stands there 
silently. “Your money or your life!” repeats the mugger, with mount­
ing impatience. “I’m thinking, I’m thinking,” Benny replies. This is 
funny because most of us think that nobody should even think about 
such a trade-off. Nobody should have to think about such a trade-
off. It should be unthinkable, a “no-brainer.” Life is sacred, and no 
amount of money would be a fair exchange for a life, and if you don’t 
already know that, what’s wrong with you? “To transgress this bound­
ary, to attach a monetary value, to one’s friendships, children, or loy­
alty to one’s country, is to disqualify oneself from the accompanying 
social roles.”2 That is what makes life a sacred value.
Tetlock and his colleagues have conducted ingenious (and some­
times troubling) experiments in which subjects are obliged to consid­
er “taboo trade-offs,” such as whether or not to purchase live human 
body parts for some worthy end, or whether or not to pay somebody 
to have a baby that you then raise, or pay somebody to perform 
your military service. As their model predicts, many subjects exhibit 
a strong “mere contemplation effect”: they feel guilty and some­
times get angry about being lured into even thinking about such dire 
choices, even when they make all the right choices. When given the 
opportunity by the experimenters to engage in “moral cleansing” (by 
volunteering for some relevant community service, for instance) sub­
jects who have had to think about taboo trade-offs are significantly 
more likely than control subjects to volunteer—for real—for such 
good deeds. (Control subjects had been asked to think about purely 
non-sacred trade-offs, such as whether to hire a house-cleaner or buy 
food instead of something else.)3
So it is not surprising that relatively little attention has been paid 
to charting the paths by which science and technology might subvert 
the value of life. If you feel the force of the admonition, “Don’t even 
think about it!”, you will shun the topic by distracting your own at­
tention from it, if at all possible. I know from experience that some 
readers of this essay will already be feeling some discomfort and even 
guilt for allowing themselves to broach these topics at all, so strong is 
the taboo against thinking the unthinkable, but I urge them to bear 
with me, since the policy that I will propose may have more going 
for it than their own.
The fact that the threat has not been well articulated does not 

How to Protect Human Dignity from Science |  43
mean it is not real and important. Let me try to make it plain by 
drawing some parallels. Like climate change, the threat is environ­
mental and global (which means you can’t just move to a different 
place where the environment hasn’t yet been damaged), and time is 
running out. While global warming threatens to affect many aspects 
of the physical environment—the atmosphere, the flora and fauna, 
the ice caps and ocean levels—and hence alter our geography in cata­
strophic ways from which recovery may be difficult or impossible, 
the threat to human dignity affects many aspects of what we may call 
the belief environment, the manifold of ambient attitudes, presump­
tions, common expectations—the things that are “taken for granted” 
by just about everybody, and that just about everybody expects just 
about everybody to take for granted.
The belief environment plays just as potent a role in human wel­
fare as the physical environment, and in some regards it is both more 
important and more fragile. Much of this has been well-known for 
centuries, particularly to economists, who have long appreciated the 
way a currency can become worthless almost overnight, for example, 
and the way public trust in financial institutions needs to be pre­
served as a condition for economic activity in general. Today we con­
front the appalling societal black holes known as failed states, where 
the breakdown of law and order makes the restoration of decent life 
all but impossible. (If you have to pay off the warlords and bribe the 
judges and tolerate the drug traffic…just to keep enough power and 
water and sanitation going to make life bearable, let alone permit 
agriculture and commerce to thrive, your chances of long-term suc­
cess are minimal.) What matters in these terrible conditions is what 
people in general assume whether they are right or wrong. It might in 
fact be safe for them to venture out and go shopping, or to invest in a 
clothing factory, or plant their crops, but if they don’t, in general, be­
lieve that, they cannot resume anything like normal life and rekindle 
a working society. This creates a belief environment in which there is 
a powerful incentive for the most virtuous and civic-minded to lie, 
vigorously, just to preserve what remains of the belief environment. 
Faced with a deteriorating situation, admitting the truth may only 
accelerate the decline, while a little creative myth-making might—
might—save the day. Not a happy situation.
And this is what people fear might happen if we pursue our 

44  | Daniel C. Dennett
current scientific and technological exploration of the boundaries of 
human life: we will soon find ourselves in a deteriorating situation 
where people—rightly or wrongly—start jumping to conclusions 
about the non-sanctity of life, the commodification of all aspects of 
life, and it will be too late to salvage the prevailing attitudes that pro­
tect us all from something rather like a failed state, a society in which 
the sheer security needed for normal interpersonal relations has dis­
solved, making trust, and respect, and even love, all but impossible. 
Faced with that dire prospect, it becomes tempting indeed to think 
of promulgating a holy lie, a myth that might carry us along for long 
enough to shore up our flagging confidence until we can restore “law 
and order.”
That is where the doctrine of the soul comes in. People have im­
mortal souls, according to tradition, and that is what makes them 
so special. Let me put the problem unequivocally: the traditional 
concept of the soul as an immaterial thinking thing, Descartes’s res 
cogitans, the internal locus in each human body of all suffering, and 
meaning, and decisions, both moral and immoral, has been utterly 
discredited. Science has banished the soul as firmly as it has banished 
mermaids, unicorns, and perpetual motion machines. There are no 
such things. There is no more scientific justification for believing in 
an immaterial immortal soul than there is for believing that each of 
your kidneys has a tap-dancing poltergeist living in it. The latter idea 
is clearly preposterous. Why are we so reluctant to dismiss the former 
idea? It is obvious that there must be some non-scientific motivation 
for believing in it. It is seen as being needed to play a crucial role in 
preserving our self-image, our dignity. If we don’t have souls, we are 
just animals! (And how could you love, or respect, or grant responsi­
bility to something that was just an animal?)
Doesn’t the very meaning of our lives depend on the reality of 
our immaterial souls? No. We don’t need to be made of two fun­
damentally different kinds of substance, matter and mind-stuff, to 
have morally meaningful lives. On the face of it, the idea that all 
our striving and loving, our yearning and regretting, our hopes and 
fears, depend on some secret ingredient, some science-proof nug­
get of specialness that defies the laws of nature, is an almost child­
ish ploy: “Let’s gather up all the wonderfulness of human life and 
sweep it into the special hidey-hole where science can never get at 

How to Protect Human Dignity from Science |  45
it!” Although this fortress mentality has a certain medieval charm, 
looked at in the cold light of day, this idea is transparently desper­
ate, implausible, and risky: putting all your eggs in one basket, and a 
remarkably vulnerable basket at that. It is vulnerable because it must 
declare science to be unable to shed any light on the various aspects 
of human consciousness and human morality at a time when excit­
ing progress is being made on these very issues. One of Aristotle’s few 
major mistakes was declaring “the heavens” to be made of a different 
kind of stuff, entirely unlike the matter here on Earth—a tactical 
error whose brittleness became obvious once Galileo and company 
began their still-expanding campaign to understand the physics of 
the cosmos. Clinging similarly to an immaterial concept of a soul at 
a time when every day brings more understanding of how the mate­
rial basis of the mind has evolved (and goes on evolving within each 
brain) is a likely path to obsolescence and extinction.
The alternative is to look to the life sciences for an understanding 
of what does in fact make us different from other animals, in morally 
relevant ways. We are the only species with language, and art, and 
music, and religion, and humor, and the ability to imagine the time 
before our birth and after our death, and the ability to plan projects 
that take centuries to unfold, and the ability to create, defend, revise, 
and live by codes of conduct, and—sad to say—to wage war on a 
global scale. The ability of our brains to help us see into the future, 
thanks to the culture we impart to our young, so far surpasses that 
of any other species, that it gives us the powers that in turn give us 
the responsibilities of moral agents. Noblesse oblige. We are the only 
species that can know enough about the world to be reasonably held 
responsible for protecting its precious treasures. And who on earth 
could hold us responsible? Only ourselves. Some other species—the 
dolphins and the other great apes—exhibit fascinating signs of proto-
morality, a capacity to cooperate and to care about others, but we 
persons are the only animals that can conceive of the project of leading 
a good life. This is not a mysterious talent; it can be explained.*
*	 My 2003 book, Freedom Evolves, is devoted to an explanation of how our capac­
ity for moral agency evolved and continues to evolve. It begins with a quotation 
from a 1997 interview with Giulio Giorelli: “Sì, abbiamo un’anima. Ma è fatta 
di tanti piccoli robot.—Yes, we have a soul, but it’s made of lots of tiny robots!” 
These “robots” are the mindless swarms of neurons and other cells that cooperate 

46  | Daniel C. Dennett
Here I will not attempt to survey the many threads of that still 
unfolding explanation, but rather to construct and defend a perspec­
tive and a set of policies that could protect what needs to be pro­
tected as we scramble, with many false steps, towards an appreciation 
of the foundations of human dignity. Scientists make their mistakes 
in public, but mostly only other scientists notice them. This topic has 
such momentous consequences, however, that we can anticipate that 
public attention—and reaction—will be intense, and could engen­
der runaway misconstruals that could do serious harm to the delicate 
belief environment in which we (almost) all would like to live.
I have mentioned the analogy with the ominous slide into a 
failed state; here is a less dire example of the importance of the be­
lief environment, and the way small changes in society can engender 
unwanted changes in it. In many parts of rural America people feel 
comfortable leaving their cars and homes unlocked, day and night, 
but any country mouse who tries to live this way in the big city 
soon learns how foolish that amiably trusting policy is. City life is 
not intolerable, but it is certainly different. Wouldn’t it be fine if 
we could somehow re-engineer the belief environment of cities so 
that people seldom felt the need to lock up! An all but impossible 
dream. At the same time, rural America is far from utopia and is slid­
ing toward urbanity. The felicitous folkways of the countryside can 
absorb a modest amount of theft and trespass without collapse, but 
it wouldn’t take much to extinguish them forever. Those of us who 
get to live in this blissfully secure world cherish it, for good reason, 
and would hate to abandon it, but we also must recognize that any 
day could be the last day of unlocked doors in our neighborhood, 
and once the change happened, it would be very hard to change 
back. That too is like global climate change; these changes are apt to 
be irreversible. And unlike global climate change, drawing attention 
to the prospect may actually hasten it, by kindling and spreading 
what Douglas Hofstadter once called “reverberant doubt.”4 The day 
that our local newspaper begins running a series about what percent­
age of local people lock their doors under what circumstances is the 
day that door-locking is apt to become the norm. So those who are 
in favor of diverting attention from too exhaustive an examination 
to produce a thinking thing—just not an immaterial thinking thing, as Descartes 
imagined and tradition has tended to suppose.

How to Protect Human Dignity from Science |  47
of these delicate topics might have the right idea. This is the chief 
reason, I think, for the taboo against thinking about sacred values: 
it can sometimes jeopardize their protected status. But in this case, 
I think it is already too late to follow the tip-toe approach. There is 
already a tidal wave of interest in the ways in which the life sciences 
are illuminating the nature of “the soul,” so we had better shift from 
distraction to concentration and see what we can make of the belief 
environment for human dignity and its vulnerabilities.
The Solution
How are we to protect the ideal of human dignity from the various 
incursions of science and technology? The first step in the solution 
is to notice that the grounds for our practices regarding this are not 
going to be local features of particular human lives, but rather more 
distributed in space and time. There is already a clear precedent in 
our attitude toward human corpses. Even people who believe in im­
mortal immaterial souls don’t believe that human “remains” harbor a 
soul. They think that the soul has departed, and what is left behind 
is just a body, just unfeeling matter. A corpse can’t feel pain, can’t suf­
fer, can’t be aware of any indignities—and yet still we feel a powerful 
obligation to handle a corpse with respect, and even with ceremony, 
and even when nobody else is watching. Why? Because we appreci­
ate, whether acutely or dimly, that how we handle this corpse now 
has repercussions for how other people, still alive, will be able to 
imagine their own demise and its aftermath. Our capacity to imagine 
the future is both the source of our moral power and a condition of 
our vulnerability. We cannot help but see all the events in our lives 
against the backdrop of what Hofstadter calls the implicosphere of 
readily imaginable alternatives—and the great amplifier of human 
suffering (and human joy) is our irresistible tendency to anticipate, 
with dread or delight, what is in store for us.5
We live not just in the moment, but in the past and the future 
as well. Consider the well-known advice given to golfers: keep your 
head down through the whole swing. “Wait a minute,” comes the 
objection: “that’s got to be voodoo superstition! Once the ball leaves 
the club head, the position of my head couldn’t possibly affect the 

48  | Daniel C. Dennett
trajectory of the ball. This has to be scientifically unsound advice!” 
Not at all. Since we plan and execute all our actions in an anticipa­
tory belief environment, and have only limited and indirect control 
over our time-pressured skeletal actions, it can well be the case that 
the only way to get the part of the golf swing that does affect the tra­
jectory of the ball to have the desirable properties is to concentrate on 
making the later part of it, which indeed could not affect the trajec­
tory, take on a certain shape. Far from being superstitious, the advice 
can be seen to follow quite logically from facts we can discover from 
a careful analysis of the way our nervous systems guide our muscles.
Our respect for corpses provides us with a clear case of a wise 
practice that does not at all depend on finding, locally, a special (even 
supernatural) ingredient that justifies or demands this treatment. 
There are other examples that have the same feature. Nobody has to 
endorse magical thinking about the gold in Fort Knox to recognize 
the effect of its (believed-in) presence there on the stability of cur­
rencies. Symbols play an important role in helping to maintain social 
equilibria, and we tamper with them at our peril. If we began to 
adopt the “efficient” policy of disposing of human corpses by putting 
them in large biodegradable plastic bags to be taken to the landfill 
along with the rest of the “garbage,” this would flavor our imagina­
tions in ways that would be hard to ignore, and hard to tolerate. No 
doubt we could get used to it, the same way city folk get used to 
locking their doors, but we have good reasons for avoiding that path. 
(Medical schools have learned to be diligent in their maintenance of 
respect and decorum in the handling of bodies in their teaching and 
research, for while those who decide to donate their bodies to medi­
cine presumably have come to terms with the imagined prospect of 
students dissecting and discussing their innards, they have limits on 
what they find tolerable.)
The same policy and rationale apply to end-of-life decisions. We 
handle a corpse with decorum even though we know it cannot suf­
fer, so we can appreciate the wisdom of extending the same practice 
to cases where we don’t know. For instance, a person in a persistent 
vegetative state might be suffering, or might not, but in either case, 
we have plenty of grounds for adopting a policy that creates a com­
forting buffer zone that errs on the side of concern. And, once again, 
the long-range effect on community beliefs is just as important as, 

How to Protect Human Dignity from Science |  49
or even more important than, any locally measurable symptoms of 
suffering. (In a similar spirit, it is important that wolves and grizzly 
bears still survive in the wilder regions of our world even if we almost 
never see them. Just knowing that they are there is a source of wonder 
and delight and makes the world a better place. Given our invincible 
curiosity and penchant for skepticism, we have to keep checking up 
on their continued existence, of course, and could not countenance 
an official myth of their continued presence if they had in fact gone 
extinct. This too has its implications for our topic.)
What happens when we apply the same principle to the other 
boundary of human life, its inception? The scientific fact is that there 
is no good candidate, and there will almost certainly never be a good 
candidate, for a moment of ensoulment, when a mere bundle of liv­
ing human tissue becomes a person with all the rights and privileges 
pertaining thereunto. This should not be seen as a sign of the weak­
ness of scientific insight, but rather as a familiar implication of what 
science has already discovered. One of the fascinating facts about 
living things is the way they thrive on gradualism. Consider specia­
tion: there are uncounted millions of different species, and each of 
them had its inception “at some point” in the nearly four billion year 
history of life on this planet, but there is literally no telling exactly 
when any species came into existence because what counts as specia­
tion is something that only gradually and cumulatively emerges over 
very many generations. Speciation can emerge only in the aftermath. 
Consider dogs, the millions of members of hundreds of varieties of 
Canis familiaris that populate the world today. As different as these 
varieties are—think of St. Bernards and Pekinese—they all count as a 
single species, cross-fertile (with a little mechanical help from their 
human caretakers) and all readily identifiable as belonging to the 
same species, descended from wolves, by their highly similar DNA. 
Might one or more of these varieties or subspecies become a spe­
cies of its own some day? Absolutely. In fact, every puppy born is a 
potential founder of a new species, but nothing about that puppy 
on the day of its birth (or for that matter on any day of its life) 
could be singled out as the special feature that marked it as the 
Adam or Eve of a new species. If it dies without issue, it definitely 
won’t found a new species, but as long as it has offspring that have 
offspring…it might turn out, in the fullness of time, to be a good 

50  | Daniel C. Dennett
candidate for the first member of a new species.
Or consider our own species, Homo sapiens. Might it divide in 
two some day? Yes it might, and in fact, it might, in a certain sense, 
already have happened. Consider two human groups alive today that 
probably haven’t had any common ancestors in the last thirty thou­
sand years: the Inuit of Cornwallis Island in the Arctic, and the An­
daman Islanders living in remarkable isolation in the Indian Ocean. 
Suppose some global plague sweeps the planet sometime in the next 
hundred years (far from an impossibility, sad to say), leaving behind 
only these two small populations. Suppose that over the next five 
hundred or a thousand years, say, they flourish and come to reinhabit 
the parts of the world vacated by us—and discover that they are not 
cross-fertile with the other group! Two species, remarkably similar in 
appearance, physiology and ancestry, but nevertheless as reproduc­
tively isolated as lions are from tigers. When, then, did the speciation 
occur? Before the dawn of agriculture about ten thousand years ago, 
or after the birth of the Internet? There would be no principled way 
of saying. We can presume that today, Inuits and Andaman Islanders 
are cross-fertile, but who knows? The difference between “in prin­
ciple” reproductive isolation (because of the accumulation of genetic 
and behavioral differences that make offspring “impossible”) and de 
facto reproductive isolation, which has already been the case for many 
thousands of years, is not itself a principled distinction.
A less striking instance of the same phenomenon of gradualism is 
coming of age, in the sense of being mature enough and well enough 
informed to be suitable for marriage, or—to take a particularly clear 
case—to drive a car. It will come as no surprise, I take it, that there is 
no special moment of driver-edment, when a teenager crisply crossed 
the boundary between being too immature to have the right to ap­
ply for a driver’s license, and being adult enough to be allowed the 
freedom of the highway behind the wheel. Some youngsters are 
manifestly mature enough at fourteen to be reasonable candidates 
for a driver’s license, and others are still so heedless and impulsive 
at eighteen that one trembles at the prospect of letting them on the 
road. We have settled (in most jurisdictions) on the policy that age 
sixteen is a suitable threshold, and what this means is that we simply 
refuse to consider special pleading on behalf of unusually mature 
younger people, and also refrain from imposing extra hurdles on 

How to Protect Human Dignity from Science |  51
those sixteen-year-olds who manage to pass their driving test fair and 
square in spite of our misgivings about the safety of letting them on 
the road. In short, we settle on a conventional threshold which we 
know does not mark any special internal mark (brain myelination, 
IQ, factual knowledge, onset of puberty) but strikes us as a good-
enough compromise between freedom and public safety. And once 
we settle on it, we stop treating the location of the threshold as a suitable 
subject for debate. There are many important controversies to consider 
and explore, and this isn’t one of them. Not as a general rule. Surpris­
ing new discoveries may in principle trigger a reconsideration at any 
time, but we foster a sort of inertia that puts boundary disputes out 
of bounds for the time being.
Why isn’t there constant pressure from fifteen-year-olds to lower 
the legal driving age? It is not just that they tend not to be a particu­
larly well-organized or articulate constituency. Even they can recog­
nize that soon enough they will be sixteen, and there are better ways 
to spend their energy than trying to adjust a policy that is, all things 
considered, quite reasonable. Moreover, there are useful features of 
the social dynamics that make it systematically difficult for them to 
mount a campaign for changing the age. We adults have created a 
tacit scaffolding of presumption, holding teenagers responsible be­
fore many of them have actually achieved the requisite competence, 
thereby encouraging them to try to grow into the status we purport 
to grant them and discouraging any behavior—any action that could 
be interpreted as throwing a tantrum, for instance—that would un­
dercut their claim to maturity. They are caught in a bind: the more 
vehemently they protest, the more they cast doubt on the wisdom of 
their cause. In the vast array of projects that confront them, this is 
not an appealing choice.
The minimum driving age is not quite a sacred value, then, but 
it shares with sacred values the interesting feature of being consid­
ered best left unexamined, by common consensus among a sizable 
portion of the community. And there is a readily accessible reason 
for this inertia. We human beings lead lives that cast long beams of 
anticipation into the foggy future, and we appreciate—implicitly or 
explicitly—almost any fixed points that can reduce our uncertainty. 
Sometimes this is so obvious as to be trivial. Why save money for 
your children’s education if money may not be worth anything in the 

52  | Daniel C. Dennett
future? How could you justify going to all the trouble of building a 
house if you couldn’t count on the presumption that you will be able 
to occupy it without challenge? Law and order are preconditions for 
the sorts of ambitious life-planning we want to engage in. But we 
want more than just a strong state apparatus that can be counted on 
not to be vacillating in its legislation, or whimsical in enforcement. 
We, as a society, do need to draw some lines—“bright” lines in legal­
istic jargon—and stick with them. That means not just promulgating 
them and voting on them, but putting an unequal burden on any 
second-guessing, so that people can organize their life projects with 
the reasonable expectation that these are fixed points that aren’t going 
to shift constantly under the pressure of one faction or another. We 
want there to be an ambient attitude of mutual recognition of the sta­
bility of the moral—not legal—presumptions that can be taken for 
granted, something approximating a meta-consensus among those 
who achieve the initial consensus about the threshold: let’s leave well 
enough alone now that we’ve fixed it. In a world where every can­
didate for a bright line of morality is constantly under siege from 
partisans who would like to change it, one’s confidence is shaken 
that one’s everyday conduct is going to be above reproach. Consider 
that nowadays, in many parts of the world, women simply cannot 
wear fur coats in public with the attitudes their mothers could adopt. 
Today, wearing a fur coat is making a political statement, and one 
cannot escape that by simply disavowing the intent. Driving a gas-
guzzling SUV carries a similar burden. People may resent the activi­
ties of the partisans who have achieved these shifts in opinion even 
though they may share many of their attitudes about animal rights 
or energy policy; they have made investments—in all innocence, let 
us suppose—that now are being disvalued. Had they been able to 
anticipate this shift in public opinion, they could have spent their 
money better.
These observations are not contentious, I think. How, though, 
can we apply this familiar understanding to the vexing issues sur­
rounding the inception—and manipulation and termination—of 
human life, and the special status it is supposed to enjoy? By rec­
ognizing, first, that we are going to have to walk away from the tra­
ditional means of securing these boundaries, which are not going 
to keep on working. They are just too brittle for the 21st century. 

How to Protect Human Dignity from Science |  53
We know too much. Unlike traditional sacred values that depend on 
widespread acceptance of myths (which, even if true, are manifestly 
unjustifiable—that’s why we call them myths rather than common 
knowledge), we need to foster values that can withstand scrutiny 
about their own creation. That is to say, we have to become self-
conscious about our reliance on such policies, without in the process 
destroying our faith in them.
Belief in Belief
We need to appreciate the importance in general of the phenomenon 
of belief in belief.6 Consider a few cases that are potent today. Because 
many of us believe in democracy and recognize that the security of 
democracy in the future depends critically on maintaining the belief 
in democracy, we are eager to quote (and quote and quote) Winston 
Churchill’s famous line: “Democracy is the worst form of govern­
ment except for all the others that have been tried.” As stewards of 
democracy, we are often conflicted, eager to point to flaws that ought 
to be repaired, while just as eager to reassure people that the flaws are 
not that bad, that democracy can police itself, so their faith in it is 
not misplaced.
The same point can be made about science. Since the belief in 
the integrity of scientific procedures is almost as important as the 
actual integrity, there is always a tension between a whistle-blower 
and the authorities, even when they know that they have mistakenly 
conferred scientific respectability on a fraudulently obtained result. 
Should they quietly reject the offending work and discreetly dismiss 
the perpetrator, or make a big stink?*
And certainly some of the intense public fascination with celeb­
rity trials is to be explained by the fact that belief in the rule of law is 
*	 As Richard Lewontin recently observed, “To survive, science must expose dis­
honesty, but every such public exposure produces cynicism about the purity and 
disinterestedness of the institution and provides fuel for ideological anti-
rationalism. The revelation that the paradoxical Piltdown Man fossil skull was, 
in fact, a hoax was a great relief to perplexed paleontologists but a cause for great 
exultation in Texas tabernacles.” See his “Dishonesty in Science,” New York Review 
of Books, November 18, 2004, pp. 38-40.

54  | Daniel C. Dennett
considered to be a vital ingredient in our society, so if famous people 
are seen to be above the law, this jeopardizes the general trust in the 
rule of law. Hence we are not just interested in the trial, but in the 
public reactions to the trial, and the reactions to those reactions, cre­
ating a spiraling inflation of media coverage. We who live in democ­
racies have become somewhat obsessed with gauging public opinion 
on all manner of topics, and for good reason: in a democracy it really 
matters what the people believe. If the public cannot be mobilized 
into extended periods of outrage by reports of corruption, or of the 
torturing of prisoners by our agents, for instance, our democratic 
checks and balances are in jeopardy. In his hopeful book, Development 
as Freedom and elsewhere,7 the Nobel laureate economist Amartya 
Sen makes the important point that you don’t have to win an election 
to achieve your political aims. Even in shaky democracies, what the 
leaders believe about the beliefs that prevail in their countries influ­
ences what they take their realistic options to be, so belief-mainte­
nance is an important political goal in its own right.
Even more important than political beliefs, in the eyes of many, 
are what we might call metaphysical beliefs. Nihilism—the belief in 
nothing—has been seen by many to be a deeply dangerous virus, for 
obvious reasons. When Friedrich Nietzsche hit upon his idea of the 
Eternal Recurrence—he thought he had proved that we relive our 
lives infinitely many times—his first inclination (according to some 
stories) was that he should kill himself without revealing the proof, in 
order to spare others from this life-destroying belief.8 Belief in the be­
lief that something matters is understandably strong and widespread. 
Belief in free will is another vigorously protected vision, for the same 
reasons, and those whose investigations seem to others to jeopardize 
it are sometimes deliberately misrepresented in order to discredit 
what is seen as a dangerous trend.9 The physicist Paul Davies has 
recently defended the view that belief in free will is so important that 
it may be “a fiction worth maintaining.”10 It is interesting that he 
doesn’t seem to think that his own discovery of the awful truth (what 
he takes to be the awful truth) incapacitates him morally, but that 
others, more fragile than he, will need to be protected from it.
This illustrates the ever-present risk of paternalism when belief 
in belief encounters a threat: we must keep these facts from “the 
children,” who cannot be expected to deal with them safely. And so 

How to Protect Human Dignity from Science |  55
people often become systematically disingenuous when defending a 
value. Being the unwitting or uncaring bearer of good news or bad 
news is one thing; being the self-appointed champion of an idea is 
something quite different. Once people start committing themselves 
(in public, or just in their “hearts”) to particular ideas, a strange dy­
namic process is brought into being, in which the original commit­
ment gets buried in pearly layers of defensive reaction and meta-
reaction. “Personal rules are a recursive mechanism; they continually 
take their own pulse, and if they feel it falter, that very fact will cause 
further faltering,” the psychiatrist George Ainslie observes in his re­
markable book, Breakdown of Will.11 He describes the dynamic of 
these processes in terms of competing strategic commitments that 
can contest for control in an organization—or an individual. Once 
you start living by a set of explicit rules, the stakes are raised: when 
you lapse, what should you do? Punish yourself? Forgive yourself? 
Pretend you didn’t notice?
After a lapse, the long-range interest is in the awkward posi­
tion of a country that has threatened to go to war in a partic­
ular circumstance that has then occurred. The country wants 
to avoid war without destroying the credibility of its threat 
and may therefore look for ways to be seen as not having 
detected the circumstance. Your long-range interest will suf­
fer if you catch yourself ignoring a lapse, but perhaps not if 
you can arrange to ignore it without catching yourself. This 
arrangement, too, must go undetected, which means that 
a successful process of ignoring must be among the many 
mental expedients that arise by trial and error—the ones you 
keep simply because they make you feel better without your 
realizing why.12
This idea that there are myths we live by, myths that must not 
be disturbed at any cost, is always in conflict with our ideal of truth-
seeking and truth-telling, sometimes with lamentable results. For ex­
ample, racism is at long last widely recognized as a great social evil, so 
many reflective people have come to endorse the second-order belief 
that belief in the equality of all people regardless of their race is to be 
vigorously fostered. How vigorously? Here people of good will differ 

56  | Daniel C. Dennett
sharply. Some believe that belief in racial differences is so pernicious 
that even when it is true it is to be squelched. This has led to some 
truly unfortunate excesses. For instance, there are clear clinical data 
about how people of different ethnicity are differently susceptible 
to disease, or respond differently to various drugs, but such data are 
considered off-limits by some researchers, and by some funders of 
research. This has the perverse effect that strongly indicated avenues 
of research are deliberately avoided, much to the detriment of the 
health of the ethnic groups involved.*
Ainslie uncovers strategic belief-maintenance in a wide variety of 
cherished human practices:
Activities that are spoiled by counting them, or counting on 
them, have to be undertaken through indirection if they are 
to stay valuable. For instance, romance undertaken for sex 
or even “to be loved” is thought of as crass, as are some of 
the most lucrative professions if undertaken for money, or 
performance art if done for effect. Too great an awareness 
of the motivational contingencies for sex, affection, money, 
or applause spoils the effort, and not only because it unde­
ceives the other people involved. Beliefs about the intrinsic 
worth of these activities are valued beyond whatever accuracy 
these beliefs might have, because they promote the needed 
indirection.13
So what sort of equilibrium can we reach? If we want to maintain 
the momentousness of all decisions about life and death, and take 
the steps that elevate the decision beyond the practicalities of the 
moment, we need to secure the appreciation of this very fact and 
enliven the imaginations of people so that they can recognize, and 
avoid wherever possible, and condemn, activities that would tend 
to erode the public trust in the presuppositions about what is—and 
*	 There are significant differences in breast cancer, hypertension and diabetes, alco­
hol tolerance, and many other well-studied conditions. See Christopher Li, et al., 
“Differences in Breast Cancer Stage, Treatment, and Survival by Race and Ethnic­
ity,” Archives of Internal Medicine 163 (2003): 49-56; for an overview, see Health 
Sciences Policy Board (HSP) 2003, Unequal Treatment: Confronting Racial and 
Ethnic Disparities in Health Care.

How to Protect Human Dignity from Science |  57
should be—unthinkable. A striking instance of failure to appreciate 
this is the proposal by President Bush to reconsider and unilater­
ally refine the Geneva Convention’s deliberately vague characteriza­
tion of torture as “outrages on personal dignity.” By declaring that 
the United States is eager to be a pioneer in the adjustment of what 
has heretofore been mutually agreed to be unthinkable, this policy is 
deeply subversive of international trust, and of national integrity. We 
as a nation can no longer be plausibly viewed as above thinking of 
arguable exceptions to the sacred value of not torturing people, and 
this diminishes us in ways that will be difficult if not impossible to 
repair.
What forces can we hope to direct in our desire to preserve re­
spect for human dignity? Laws prohibit; traditions encourage and 
discourage, and in the long run, laws are powerless to hold the line 
unless they are supported by a tradition, by the mutual recognition 
of most of the people that they preserve conditions that deserve pres­
ervation. Global opinion, as we have just seen, cannot be counted on 
to discourage all acts of degradation of the belief environment, but 
it can be enhanced by more local traditions. Doctors, for instance, 
have their proprietary code of ethics, and most of them rightly covet 
the continuing respect of their colleagues, a motivation intensified 
by the system of legal liability and by the insurance that has become 
a prerequisite for practice. Then there are strict liability laws, which 
target particularly sensitive occupations such as pharmacist and doc­
tor, preemptively removing the excuse of ignorance and thereby put­
ting all who occupy these positions on notice that they will be held 
accountable whether or not they have what otherwise would be a 
reasonable claim of innocent ignorance. So forewarned, they adjust 
their standards and projects accordingly, erring on the side of ex­
treme caution and keeping a healthy distance between themselves 
and legal consequences. Anyone who attempts to erect such a net­
work of flexible and mutually supporting discouragements of further 
tampering with traditional ideas about human dignity will fail unless 
they attend to the carrot as well as the stick. How can we kindle and 
preserve a sincere allegiance to the ideals of human dignity? The same 
way we foster the love of a democratic and free society: by ensuring 
that the lives one can live in such a regime are so manifestly better 
than the available alternatives.

58  | Daniel C. Dennett
And what of those who are frankly impatient with tradition, and 
even with the values that tradition endorses? We must recognize that 
there are a vocal minority of people who profess unworried accep­
tance of an entirely practical and matter-of-fact approach to life, who 
scoff at romantic concerns with Frankensteinian visions. Given the 
presence and articulateness of these proponents, we do well to have 
a home base that can withstand scrutiny and that is prepared to de­
fend, in terms other than nostalgia, the particular values that we are 
trying to protect. That is the germ of truth in multiculturalism. We 
need to articulate these values in open forum. When we attempt this, 
we need to resist the strong temptation to resort to the old myths, 
since they are increasingly incredible, and will only foster incredulity 
and cynicism in those we need to persuade. Tantrums in support of 
traditional myths will backfire, in other words. Our only chance of 
preserving a respectable remnant of the tradition is to ensure that the 
values we defend deserve the respect of all.*
*	 Thanks to Gary Wolf, Tori McGeer and Philip Pettit for asking questions that 
crystallized my thinking on these topics.

How to Protect Human Dignity from Science |  59
Notes
1	 See Philip Tetlock, “Coping with Trade-offs: Psychological Constraints and 
Political Implications,” in Political Reasoning and Choice, ed. Arthur Lupia, Mat­
thew D. McCubbins and Samuel L. Popkin (Berkeley, California: University of 
California Press, 1999); “Thinking the unthinkable: sacred values and taboo cog­
nitions,” Trends in Cognitive Science 7 (2003): 320-324; and Philip Tetlock, A. 
Peter McGraw, and Orie V. Kristel, “Proscribed Forms of Social Cognition: Taboo 
Trade-Offs, Forbidden Base Rates, and Heretical Counterfactuals,” in Relational 
Models Theory: A Contemporary Overview, ed. Nick Haslam (Mahway, New Jersey: 
Erlbaum, 2004), pp. 247-262, the latter also available online as Philip E. Tetlock, 
Orie V. Kristel, S. Beth Elson, Melanie C. Green, and Jennifer Lerner, “The Psy­
chology of the Unthinkable: Taboo Trade-Offs, Forbidden Base Rates, and Heretical 
Counterfactuals,” at http://faculty.haas.berkeley.edu/tetlock/docs/thepsy~1.doc.
2	 Tetlock, et al., op. cit., p. 6 of online version.
3	 Material in the previous two paragraphs is drawn from my Breaking the Spell: 
Religion as a Natural Phenomenon (New York: Viking Penguin, 2006), pp. 22-23.
4	 Douglas Hofstadter, “Dilemmas for Superrational Thinkers, Leading up to a 
Luring Lottery,” Scientific American, June, 1983, reprinted with a discussion of 
reverberant doubt in Metamagical Themas (New York: Basic Books, 1985), pp. 
752-755.
5	 Douglas Hofstadter, “Metafont, Metamathematics and Metaphysics,” in Visible 
Language, August, 1982, reprinted with comments in Hofstadter, Metamagical 
Themas, pp. 290, 595.
6	 What follows is drawn, with revisions, from my Breaking the Spell, chapter 8.
7	 Amartya Sen, Development as Freedom (New York: Knopf, 1999); see also his 
“Democracy and Its Global Roots,” New Republic, October 6, 2003, pp. 28-35.
8	 For a discussion of Nietzsche and his philosophical response to Darwin’s theory 
of evolution by natural selection, see my Darwin’s Dangerous Idea: Evolution and 
the Meanings of Life (New York: Simon & Schuster, 1995).
9	 Daniel C. Dennett, Freedom Evolves (New York: Viking Penguin, 2003).
10	Paul Davies, “Undermining Free Will,” Foreign Policy, September/October, 
2004.
11	George Ainslie, Breakdown of Will (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 
2001), p. 88.
12	Ibid., p. 150.
13	George Ainslie, précis of Breakdown of Will, in Behavioral and Brain Sciences 28 
(2005): 635-650, p. 649.

Human Dignity and Bioethics
Essays Commissioned 
by the President’s Council 
on Bioethics
 
Washington, D.C.
WWW.BIOETHICS.GOV
 
March 2008

