❝
Sue
Why do you think consciousness seems to be a harder problem than
many other problems in science? For you, what’s special about the prob-
lem of consciousness?
Dan
Human brains are just the most complicated thing that’s yet
evolved, and we’re trying to understand them using our brains. There
are people who have suggested that this was impossible. That’s just
nonsense, but I think the reason that we find consciousness so hard
is that we have evolved a certain capacity for self-knowledge, a 
Daniel Dennett
You have to give 
up your intuitions
about consciousness
Dan Dennett was born (1942) in Boston, studied at Harvard, and took his
DPhil in Oxford in 1965, where he studied with Gilbert Ryle. Since 1971 he
has been at Tufts University in Massachusetts where he is Director of the
Center for Cognitive Studies. In the field of consciousness studies he is best
known for his rejection of the Cartesian theatre in favour of his theory of mul-
tiple drafts, and for the method of heterophenomenology, but he has a long
standing interest in artificial intelligence and robots, in evolutionary theory
and memetics, and in the problems of free will. He spends the summers 
on his farm in Maine where he thinks about consciousness while sailing,
mowing the hay, or making his own cider. Among his many books are The
Intentional Stance (1987), Consciousness Explained (1991), Darwin’s Dangerous
Idea (1996), and Freedom Evolves (2003).

 Daniel Dennett
80
certain access to ourselves which gives us subjective experience—
which gives us a way of looking out at the world from where we are.
And this just turns out to be very hard to understand.
How can something have that perspective? It might be just a thing,
but it’s a thing with a point of view, and with the capacity to reflect
on that point of view and talk about it. Each one of us is trapped
within a point of view. I can’t ever get inside your head, and you can’t
ever get inside mine. The undeniable fact that we have these perspec-
tives is not closely parallelled with anything else we know about
anything else. It isn’t that atoms have that sort of thing, or that
molecules do, or that volcanoes or continents or trees or galaxies
do; the only thing we know in the whole universe that has this fea-
ture is ourselves, and we’re not even sure about each other—that’s the
problem of other minds.
Now, we are, in a sense, artefacts (and I mean that in the good sense
of the term). We have been created by the process of evolution, both
genetic and cultural. And what we’re now trying to do is to reverse
engineer ourselves, to understand what kind of a machine we are that
this can be true of us.
Sue
Are you equating subjective experience with having a point of view?
Dan
Yes, but having a point of view is not a simple matter. There’s an
easy sense of having a point of view where lobsters have a point of
view, and mosquitoes have a point of view. With a little stretching
and pulling you might even say that a pine tree had a point of view;
that is to say a pine tree responds to the world selectively—there’s
only some features of the environment around the pine tree that it’s
sensitive to and the rest of the world is indiscernible, as it were, by
the pine tree.
But that’s indiscernible ‘as it were’. In our case there’s ‘real discern-
ing’; and ‘real discerning’, in the eyes of many people who have
thought about this, has got to be worlds away from the sort of dis-
criminative capacities of that pine tree or that mosquito.
This creates an artefact in the bad sense of that term. To many
people there’s an imaginative chasm between us with our ‘real dis-
cerning’ and our ‘real points of view’, and the mere robots, or discrim-
inating-but-not-sentient things. I think that the gap between me and
a pine tree, or me and a mosquito, is huge but it’s traversable by a se-
ries of steps. But I do have to say that some of the steps are quite
counter-intuitive, and there’s not yet in place the sort of firm ‘take it
or leave it’ science that can force people to abandon their intuitions.

Right now it’s a struggle to get people working in consciousness
even to think about abandoning their intuitions. They have these
powerful, seductive intuitions about how it has to be, or how it can’t
be, that are just wrong. Nothing new there! We’ve always had false
intuitions about the way the world is, and counter-intuitive science
has come along and changed them. But in this case, we don’t yet
know which intuitions to abandon and why. So the problem is very
much a problem of persuasion and self-persuasion and a sort of
self-manipulation of one’s own imagination, which is scary to many
people. So instead they try to have a theory which doesn’t require
them to tweak their intuitions at all, and then they end up down
one cul-de-sac or another, because the theories that are not counter-
intuitive are just wrong.
Sue
I imagine that you may be thinking here of the zombic hunch?
Dan
Yes. The zombic hunch is the idea that there could be a being that
behaved exactly the way you or I behave, in every regard—it could cry
at sad movies, be thrilled by joyous sunsets, enjoy ice cream and the
whole thing, and yet not be conscious at all. It would just be a zombie.
Now I think that many people are sure that hunch is right, and they
don’t know why they’re sure. If you show them that the arguments for
taking zombies seriously are all flawed, this doesn’t stop them from
clinging to the hunch. They’re afraid to let go of it, for fear they’re
leaving something deeply important out. And so we get a bifurcation
of theorists into those who take the zombic hunch seriously, and those
who, like myself, have sort of overcome it. I can feel it, but I just don’t
have it any more.
Sue
What do you think the nature of this fear is? And, more personally,
did you once have this fear yourself and have to overcome it? Or was it
really quite easy for you to see that you shouldn’t succumb to some
slight desire to fall into the zombic hunch?
Dan
Well let me start with that first. It wasn’t a momentous occasion for
me when, as an undergraduate, one day it just hit me that ‘Oh yeah,
Alan Turing had the basic move that we could replace Kant’s question
of how it was possible for there to be thought, with an engineering
question—let’s think how can we make a thought come into existence.
Oh, we could build a robot. And what would it be for a robot to have
a thought?’
So, resolutely, from the third person point of view, you sneak up
on consciousness from the outside, not from the inside. You keep

Daniel Dennett
81

 Daniel Dennett
82
looking side-long at the inside, all along the way, and seeing if you
can make the difference evaporate. There are powerful reasons for
thinking that of course you can make the difference evaporate even-
tually, because it’s got to; because we’re part of the physical world;
there’s no mystery stuff; dualism is hopeless. So, since dualism is
hopeless, let’s see if we can figure out what the sufficient conditions
are in purely material terms for there to be something that it is like
something to be; something that has an inside; something that has a
subjective point of view. And once I had that project clearly in my
head, then it all fell into place. Now the question was just working out
the details.
Sue
But you implied that sometimes the zombic hunch does tempt you…
Dan
Oh, it doesn’t just tempt me. I deliberately go out of my way, every
now and then, to give myself a good instance of the zombic hunch. I
talk to myself, ‘Come on Dan, think about it this way. Now can you
feel it?’ Oh, I can feel it all right. It reminds me of how you can look
out on a clear night and, if you think about it right, and look at the
sky and sort of tip your head just so, you can actually feel the earth
in its orbit around the sun. You can see what your position is, how the
earth is turning, how it’s also in orbit, and it all sort of falls into place.
You think ‘Oh, isn’t that quaint?’
This is a lovely perspective shift, but it takes knowledge and some
very specific direction of attention to get into that frame of mind.
Well, I think for people who have the zombic hunch and don’t know
how to abandon it, they have to learn to do something like that too.
But they just haven’t tried, and they don’t want to.
Sue
Why don’t they want to? What is this fear of letting go of the zombic
hunch, even for people who might rationally understand the arguments
for getting rid of it?
Dan
I think they’re afraid that zombies would have no moral signifi-
cance. Zombies would be just stuff, and you can chop stuff up, break
stuff up, throw it away, burn it, whatever. It doesn’t make any differ-
ence; it’s just stuff. Whereas if we have immortal souls, or anything
that’s the moral equivalent, then we preserve our moral point of view.
I think the idea of a soul is a curious fossil trace of the desire to treat
ourselves as absolute.
Sue
Is it just about morality and mattering; that it matters to something or
someone what we do? Or is it also about continuity—that we want to
survive?

Dan
Well, I think those two are intertwined. Darwin made a great inver-
sion of reasoning when he realized that you can have a bottom-up
theory of creativity: that all the wonderful design that we see in the
biosphere could be the products, direct and indirect, of a mindless,
purposeless process. This simply inverts an idea that I think is as old
as our species. It’s what you might call a top-down theory of creativ-
ity: that it takes a big fancy thing to make a less fancy thing. Potters
make pots; you never see a pot making a potter, or a horseshoe
making a blacksmith. It’s always big fancy, wise, wonderful things
making lesser things. And so here we are; we’re pretty wonderful, and
so we must be made by something more wonderful still. I think it’s
very scary for people to give that up, and to begin to think about how
our importance doesn’t depend on the importance of something still
more important.
You know, a good bumper sticker recipe for happiness is, find some-
thing more important than yourself to think about, but there are many
such things that can replace the one big, important thing which many
people think they have to have, which is God.
Sue
I assume you don’t believe in God. Do you think anything of the
person survives physical death?
Dan
Well, of course, many of the effects of a person’s words and deeds
can reverberate through human culture for some time after their
death, and these can in rare cases be remarkably powerful and coher-
ent. Abraham Lincoln is a more familiar presence today, better known,
more recognizable, and more often thought about now, than most of
the people who are actually alive today. I think that many people
would love to have that sort of ‘immortality’ of effect, and would hap-
pily trade it for the more traditional prospect of a disembodied eter-
nity in ‘heaven’—an idea whose popularity is matched only by its
incoherence.
But competition for admission into that pantheon guarantees that
only a tiny minority will ever enter it, since the attention span of
human culture is strictly limited. I wonder what the maximum value
of p is, where p is the population of ‘recognized immortals’. 1000?
10,000? When Elvis Presley finds his seat, does this force Dietrich
Buxtehude out? That’s the only sort of life after death, and it is in
short supply.
Sue
What do you think is your greatest contribution to consciousness
studies? After all, the field has grown enormously since 1991 when you

Daniel Dennett
83

 Daniel Dennett
84
published Consciousness Explained, and consciousness studies has
become all the rage. Where do you see your own contribution fitting in?
Dan
I think, oddly enough, perhaps my most important or influential
contribution was showing people that materialism was harder than
they thought—that it was more counter-intuitive than they thought.
Some of the reactions to that book have fascinated me, such as the
people who’ve come up to me and said, ‘I thought I was a good ma-
terialist until I read your book, and then I began to get really queasy
because I realized I have to give up a lot more of my intuitions about
consciousness than I thought.’
I said ‘Absolutely right! You have to embrace the counter-intuitive-
ness of some of these ideas. You can’t just trust your common sense.
There are some deeply disturbing aspects of any proper materialist
theory of consciousness. So let’s get on with it and expose them.’
One of my favourite sequels to the book, is that a lot of subsequent
work confirms that I’m right. I think I was pretty much the first to put
forward things that have now become well established phenomena,
like change blindness, which I predicted. At the time, this provoked
outrage or frank disbelief. People said, ‘You’re out of your skull there,’
but I said, ‘You wait, you’ll see,’ and sure enough, the effects are 
real. In fact they’re much more potent than I dared claim. I sort of
wish I could go back and put a little more vim into some of my state-
ments there because, in retrospect, I was more cautious than I should
have been.
Sue
Can we take change blindness as an example there? I think that if you
take the findings seriously you have to wonder about every act of vision
you make. All the time, in your everyday life, looking around you, you
have to realize that you’re conjuring something out of nothing; that you
have far less information in your head than it seems. It should, and for
me to some extent does, change the way you feel about your role in the
world.
Does it have that effect on you personally? Has predicting change
blindness, and then realizing it was an even more powerful phenome-
non than you’d thought—has that changed for you what it’s like being
Dan Dennett alive and looking around the world?
Dan
I wish I could say ‘yes’, but in fact I think the answer is ‘no’. I was
thinking about those things even when I was an undergraduate.
Here’s another way of looking at what my contribution has been:
consciousness looks like an insoluble mystery when you have an

inflated vision of what consciousness is, and our introspective lives
tend to give us that inflated vision. We tend to think we’re conscious
of a lot more than we are; we tend to think that consciousness has
properties that it just doesn’t have. If it did have those properties, boy
oh boy it would be much harder to explain than it is. So the first thing
you have to do is deflate the phenomena so that you can see that
they’re not quite so gosh-darn wonderful—so truly mysterious—as
you thought they were. Then they’re sort of tamed. Then we can
explain them.
Of course, there’s tremendous resistance to the deflationary move.
People don’t like me saying that they’re not conscious of as much as
they thought they are, and what they are conscious of doesn’t have
the features that they say it has. Their reaction to this is ‘Oh Dan’s just
denying the existence of consciousness.’ No, I’m not. I’m just saying
it’s not what they thought it was. Now it’s interesting if you look 
at the history of science. The term used for talking about the pre-
theoretical catalogue of the properties that have to be explained was
the ‘phenomenology’. So Gilbert worked out the ‘phenomenology of
magnets’, for instance. These are the phenomena, this is what has 
to be explained. As for the ‘phenomenology of consciousness’; if you
are an auto-phenomenologist, if you are an introspectionist, if you
adopt the first person point of view, you’re just going to get it wrong.
You’re going to con yourself into supposing that your consciousness
has many features it just doesn’t have. So the trick is to characterize
the method which neutrally categorizes the phenomenology of 
consciousness, and then, go to work. Explain it! And when you’ve 
explained all the phenomenology, you’re done. You’ve explained 
consciousness.
Sue
And is that what you call heterophenomenology?
Dan
That’s heterophenomenology. Heterophenomenology is the scien-
tific catalogue of what has to be explained.
Sue
You’re very hard there on the first person point of view, but can you
see no role for disciplined self-observation? I’m thinking in particular of
meditation, where it’s said that if you keep practising long enough, some
of these things become obvious. The visual world starts to disintegrate.
Our illusions of the continuity of self, the continuity of the perceived
world, the simultaneity of events, all start to fall apart and you see more
clearly. Do you think there’s any truth in that, or do you dismiss that
completely?

Daniel Dennett
85

 Daniel Dennett
86
Dan
No, I think there is truth in it, but this is in the context of discovery
not the context of justification. Every experimenter should, of course,
put herself in the apparatus, and see what it’s like from the inside. You
should certainly treat yourself informally as a subject and see if you’ve
overlooked something, for instance. But having done that, then you
do the experiment. You use naive subjects, and you figure out some
way to get what you’ve discovered from the first person point of view
to manifest itself for neutral observers from the third person point of
view. And if you can’t do that, then you have to be suspicious of the
insights that you thought you had.
In a sense this is obvious. Nobody in the scientific world working
on consciousness would think of submitting a paper that said, ‘Well I
introspected under the following circumstances and these are the
things that I thought.’ If you think you’ve discovered a phenomenon,
then you go out and test it using the scientific method, and that means
the third person point of view.
This could be just a typical philosopher’s hypersensitivity to form
and rigour, if it weren’t for the fact that so many people are just wrong
about the results of their own introspection. People cannot prevent
themselves from theorizing when they think they’re observing.
Sue
One of the things that’s amazed me over the years, is how systemat-
ically and deeply you are misunderstood. I’m thinking of things like
heterophenomenology, the third person perspective, the zombic hunch,
the Cartesian theatre. Do you understand why people find them so
difficult? You write clearly; you explain things well, at least I think you
do. How come you get so misunderstood all the time?
Dan
Well, I wish I knew. I wish I knew. I’ve got hunches about it, and
here’s what I think happens. I’ve caught myself doing this with others,
so I can see how they can do it with me too. When somebody tries to
tell you something which is initially very counter-intuitive for you, you
put your best effort into it and then translate it into your own terms,
so that you can understand it. So you’re not just listening cold, you’re
actively translating what you’re hearing into your own dialect. But of
course this can horribly backfire. If somebody is trying to put forward
something that really is counter-intuitive, you almost certainly get it
wrong. You’ll throw out the most important part and you’ll turn it into
one kind of nonsense or another. And if you’re not alert to that, you’ll
think ‘Look, I did my level best to understand this person, and here’s
what I come up with. That’s just crazy, so she’s just crazy.’ Nobody
wants to hear that maybe your level best wasn’t good enough.

I also think that in a way my writing style traps me, because at least
superficially its not hard to see what I’m doing. It goes down quite
smoothly, not like reading Hegel or Heidegger. So people think it’s
easier than it is. No, it’s actually very hard. I tried to make it as easy
as I can, but it’s still very hard, and if you make the mistake of think-
ing that it’s actually a pretty simple idea or two, you’re just wrong. But
I can see why people would think that.
Sue
I’m particularly interested in one of your central arguments: the 
non-existence of the Cartesian theatre. You explain why there can’t
be a Cartesian theatre in the mind or the brain, why there isn’t a show
going on in the head, and why there isn’t somebody watching. You call
people who think they are materialists but are still trapped in imagining
a Cartesian theatre, Cartesian materialists. Can you say something about
what you take to be the signs of being a Cartesian materialist, and how
common they are?
Dan
The sure sign of Cartesian materialism is anybody who tells the
story of consciousness and doesn’t go on to answer the ‘and then what
happens?’ question. So it’s as if we work so hard to get this stuff up
and presented to the Queen and then what happens? We get inside
the audience chamber but why does that make it consciousness? Any
theory that’s still got a place for the show to happen has not yet done
the job.
A curious feature of this is that if you then go on and answer the
‘and then what happens?’ question, a lot of theorists are sure that
you’ve left something out. Because now we’re back explaining behav-
iours and reactions, and the effects on vocalization and memory, they
want to say, ‘Wait a minute, where’s the consciousness?’
There’s a bi-modal distribution between people who think that
any theory of consciousness that leaves out the first person is a hope-
less theory, and those who think that any theory of consciousness
that doesn’t leave out the first person is a hopeless theory. You’ve
got to leave the first person out of your final theory. You won’t have
a theory of consciousness if you still have the first person in there,
because that was what it was your job to explain. All the parapherna-
lia that doesn’t make any sense unless you’ve still got a first person
in there, has to be turned into something else. You’ve got to figure
out some way to break it up and distribute its powers and opportuni-
ties into the system in some other way. So the Cartesian materialist
is the one who describes large parts of the machine, but it’s still
inhabited.

Daniel Dennett
87

 Daniel Dennett
88
Sue
I think I see it in things like, ‘and then it’s displayed’, and ‘then it 
enters consciousness’. Would you count those as signs of being a
Cartesian materialist?
Dan
Those are certainly danger signs, unless the person goes on and
cashes that out very carefully.
Or there might be a theory that says, ‘And then our brains tell us 
blah blah blah’. So who’s this ‘us’?
Sue
I like your idea that you deliberately throw yourself into the zombic
hunch. Perhaps I should sometimes throw myself into the Cartesian
theatre more willingly than I do.
I do sometimes get into it. I can get quite upset thinking about—say—
the brownness of this desk here; the ‘how it is to me’. I have the very
powerful conviction that I am in here experiencing this ineffable, unique,
private sensation of the brownness. Can you help me? I know quite a
bit about your theory, but when I get really badly into that feeling, how
can I get out of it?
Dan
The way I recommend is to ask yourself, ‘What am I pointing to?
What am I ostending when I say this?’ What I think you’ll find is that
you can start elaborating a sort of catalogue of the facts that matter
to you at this moment. Maybe it’s the particular deliciousness of this
taste in my mouth; so what is that deliciousness? Well I’d like some
more, and I can recall it at a later date, and so on. We’re going to take
care of all that. We’re going to include your disposition to want some
more, your capacity to recollect, and even the likelihood that you will
find yourself pleasurably recollecting this experience of it. There’s a
huge manifold of reactive dispositions that you’re pointing to when
you’re saying ‘This very yumminess right now,’ and what you have to
do is recognize that however indissoluble, however unanalysable,
however intrinsically present that all seems to you, what has to be
explained is that it seems to you, not that it is so.
Sue
But you have said there that it seems so to me. Presumably you would
say that we not only have to explain why it seems so to me but why it
seems there is a me to whom it seems.
Dan
Yes, exactly. Those are the two halves you’ve got to explain.
And people—wonderfully conveniently for them, and inconve-
niently for the truth—forget that it seems that way to the zombie too.
Sue
Do you think you have free will?
Dan
Yes.

Sue
And what do you mean?
Dan
I mean that in all the things that matter to me I can make a deci-
sion based on my consideration of what matters the most and why. I
wouldn’t have free will if I were obsessive, or were an addict, or were
seriously deranged so that I couldn’t keep track of reasons, or if I had
a memory disorder that meant that I couldn’t keep track of a project
from minute to minute. Then my free will would be pointless.
The model that we want to have for free will is of an agent that is
autonomous, not in some metaphysical sense, but in the sense of being
able to act on the reasons that matter to the agent, and who’s got the 
information that is needed to act in a timely fashion. In order to appre-
ciate this you have to realize what brains are for. Brains are for generat-
ing expectations about the future. The simplest imaginable thing a
brain is for, is for ducking an incoming brick. You see the brick coming.
You see it’s heading for you. You expend a little energy to duck so it
doesn’t hit you. There’s a lot of things to avoid in life; and there’s a lot of
things to try to accomplish, but let’s take the verb ‘avoid’. It’s key in one
particular regard, that the word inevitable comes from it. Inevitable
means unavoidable, and it doesn’t really make sense in a context where
there isn’t avoiding. Where there’s avoiding, there are things that are
inevitable and there are things that are, if you like, ‘evitable’. What
makes it possible to avoid things is having some foreknowledge of
what’s going to happen. So, that’s what our brains are for.
If you’ve got that equipment and it gets used, you can have reasons
for acting that are good reasons, that are your reasons. You didn’t
make them out of nothing, you made them out of all the information
and all the values that you’ve ever considered and reflected upon and
decided upon, and for better or for worse, you’ve come up with a par-
ticular set of values, and now you’re ready to act.
Just take a simple case of a chess player who makes a move. Why
did he make that move now? I might say, ‘Well the clock was running,
I had to decide sooner or later. OK, enough thinking, it’s time to move.
This is my move. It may not be the best move. I may live to regret it.
I may discover a better move in a few seconds. I may get checkmated.
But I wasn’t deceived about the position of the board. I wasn’t
deceived about the rules. I wasn’t deceived about the point of the
game. That was the best I could come up with. So that’s my free will,
that’s my move.’
Sue
In all of that description of free will, you kept saying ‘I, I, my, my’. I
want to know how you relate this to your ideas that there’s no audience

Daniel Dennett
89

 Daniel Dennett
90
in the Cartesian theatre, that the self is a benign user illusion and so on.
Who is it who’s having the free will?
Dan
The agent.
Sue
By ‘the agent’ do you mean the whole body?
Dan
Sure.
Sue
Then isn’t it important that you distinguish that view from what many
people feel about free will, which is that they, the audience in the 
Cartesian theatre, the little special conscious me inside here, is the one
that has the free will?
Dan
One of the most curious ironies to me, in my earlier writing on this,
is that the most important sentence in my book Elbow Room, I put in
parentheses, and so nobody paid much attention to it. I said—and it
was meant ironically—that if you make yourself really small you can
externalize virtually everything.
The imaginative pressure to think of yourself as very small is easy
enough to find. When I raise my arm, well what is it? There must be
some part of my brain that is sort of sending out the signal and then
my arm is obeying me, and then when I think about the reasons why,
it’s very natural to suppose that my reason store is over there some-
where, and I asked my reason store to send me some good reasons. So
the imagery keeps shrinking back to a singularity; a point, a sort of
Cartesian point at the intersection of two lines and that’s where I am.
That’s the deadly error, to retreat into the punctate self. You’ve got to
make yourself big; really big.
One aspect of this has been very nicely expressed in recent years by
Andy Clark, in Being There, that we offload a lot of our minds into the
world, we then do our thinking using those peripheral devices
as part of our equipment. We don’t have to do it all in our heads, we
can do it out there with slide rules, or calculators, or laptops, or with
a little help from our friends.
In fact I think most of us who manage to live moral lives, lives that
we’re not ashamed of, in fact rely a great deal more on the support of
our friends than we readily acknowledge.
Sue
You told me that you had many of your ideas as an undergraduate, and
that what you’ve been doing since has really been fleshing those out and
explaining them, but I’d like to know this: has anything happened in
your life as a philosopher of consciousness that’s really changed you, or
changed the way you feel about yourself?

❞
Dan
I haven’t had any conversion experiences that I can think of! But I
certainly think my interactions with people outside philosophy have
had a huge effect. Probably the first five years of my career, back in
the upper Neolithic and the late ’60s, I was still hanging out most
of the time with philosophers, and a rather small, but cherished and
fascinated percentage of the time, I spent talking to people of other
disciplines. Gradually I came to realize that I learned more, and found
it philosophically more interesting, talking to people about artificial
intelligence, biology, neuroscience, and psychology, than I did talking
with my fellow philosophers. So over the years I went where the fun
was for me, and it fed on itself. I got invited to more and more non-
philosophical occasions and conferences, and I read more and more
articles and books, to the point now where I read the philosophy as a
duty. It staggers me to realize how much less fun it is to read most phi-
losophy than it is to read good biology or good psychology or good
artificial intelligence. And so that’s made a huge difference to me.
Of course, this means that a lot of people in the field of philosophy
say, ‘Well you know Dennett’s just no longer a philosopher, he may
have been a philosopher once but he isn’t now.’ Well, I don’t want
to argue about that, but if so, then maybe all philosophers should
cease being philosophers and try to do the sort of thing that I’m doing,
because I think I’m getting philosophical results, and making philo-
sophical progress. I think it’s far better than the sort of vacuum
philosophy that we all used to engage in back in the old days.
Sue
And what is philosophy?
Dan
Philosophy is what you do when you don’t yet know what the right
questions are to ask.

Daniel Dennett
91

❝
❝
Susan Blackmore
1
CONVERSATIONS
ON
CONSCIOUSNESS

3
Great Clarendon Street, Oxford ox2 6dp
Oxford University Press is a department of the University of Oxford. 
It furthers the University’s objective of excellence in research, scholarship, 
and education by publishing worldwide in
Oxford New York
Auckland Cape Town Dar es Salaam Hong Kong Karachi
Kuala Lumpur Madrid Melbourne Mexico City Nairobi
New Delhi Shanghai Taipei Toronto
With offices in
Argentina Austria Brazil Chile Czech Republic France Greece
Guatemala Hungary Italy Japan Poland Portugal Singapore
South Korea Switzerland Thailand Turkey Ukraine Vietnam
Oxford is a registered trade mark of Oxford University Press
in the UK and in certain other countries
Published in the United States
by Oxford University Press Inc., New York
© Susan Blackmore 2005
The moral rights of the author have been asserted
Database right Oxford University Press (maker)
First published 2005
All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced, 
stored in a retrieval system, or transmitted, in any form or by any means, 
without the prior permission in writing of Oxford University Press, 
or as expressly permitted by law, or under terms agreed with the appropriate 
reprographics rights organization. Enquiries concerning reproduction 
outside the scope of the above should be sent to the Rights Department, 
Oxford University Press, at the address above
You must not circulate this book in any other binding or cover 
and you must impose this same condition on any acquirer
British Library Cataloguing in Publication Data
Data available
Library of Congress Cataloging in Publication Data
Data to follow
ISBN 0 19 280622-X
EAN 978-0-19-280622–2
1 3 5 7 9 10 8 6 4 2
Typeset by RefineCatch Limited, Bungay, Suffolk
Printed in Great Britain by
Clays Ltd., St Ives plc

