Abstract
Many projects in contemporary philosophy
are artifactual puzzles of no abiding signiﬁcance, but it
is treacherously easy for graduate students to be lured
into devoting their careers to them, so advice is prof-
fered on how to avoid this trap.
Keywords
a priori truth Æ chess Æ graduate students Æ
Hebb
Philosophy is an a priori discipline, like mathematics,
or at least it has an a priori methodology at its core,
and this fact cuts two ways. On the one hand, it excuses
philosophers from spending tedious hours in the lab or
the ﬁeld, and from learning data-gathering techniques,
statistical methods, geography, history, foreign lan-
guages ..., empirical science, so they have plenty of
time for honing their philosophical skills. On the other
hand, as is often noted, you can make philosophy out
of just about anything, and this is not always a blessing.
Consider, as a paradigm of a priori truths, the truths
of chess. It is an empirical fact that people play chess,
and there are mountains of other empirical facts about
chess, about how people have been playing it for cen-
turies, often use handsomely carved pieces on inlaid
boards, and so forth. No knowledge of these empirical
facts plays an indispensable role in the activity of
working out the a priori truths of chess, which also exist
in abundance. All you need to know are the rules of
the game. There are exactly 20 legal opening moves for
white (16 pawn moves and four knight moves); a king
and lone bishop cannot achieve checkmate, and neither
can a king and lone knight, and so forth.1 Working out
these a priori truths about chess is not child’s play.
Proving just what is and is not possible within the rules
of chess is an intricate task, and mistakes can be made
that get perpetuated. For instance, a few years ago, a
computer chess program discovered a mating net—a
guaranteed win—consisting of over 200 moves without
a capture. This disproved a long-standing ‘‘theorem’’ of
chess and has forced a change in the rules of the game.
It used to be that 50 moves without a capture by either
side constituted a draw (stalemate), but since this
lengthy mating net is unbreakable, and leads to a win,
it is unreasonable to maintain the ﬁfty-move stalemate.
(Before
computers
began
playing
chess,
nobody
imagined that there could be a guaranteed win of
anywhere near this length.) All this can be pretty
interesting, and many highly intelligent people have
devoted their minds to investigating this system of a
priori truths of chess.
Some philosophical research projects—or proble-
matics, to speak with the more literary types—are
rather like working out the truths of chess. A set of
mutually agreed upon rules are presupposed—and
seldom discussed—and the implications of those rules
are worked out, articulated, debated, reﬁned. So far, so
good. Chess is a deep and important human artifact,
about which much of value has been written. But some
philosophical research projects are more like working
out the truths of chmess. Chmess is just like chess
D. C. Dennett (&)
Center for Cognitive Studies, Tufts University, Medford,
MA 02155, USA
e-mail: Daniel.Dennett@tufts.edu
1 A few days after I wrote this, the chess column in the Boston
Globe published a special case in which it is, in fact, possible to
achieve checkmate with a lone knight. But in general, it is not
possible. The special case is shown in the accompanying ﬁgure.
Topoi (2006) 25:39–41
DOI 10.1007/s11245-006-0005-2
123
Higher-order truths about chmess
Daniel C. Dennett
 Springer Science+Business Media B.V. 2006

except that the king can move two squares in any
direction, not one. I just invented it—though no doubt
others have explored it in depth to see if it is worth
playing. Probably it isn’t. It probably has other names.
I didn’t bother investigating these questions because
although they have true answers, they just aren’t worth
my time and energy to discover. Or so I think. There
are just as many a priori truths of chmess as there are
of chess (an inﬁnity), and they are just as hard to dis-
cover. And that means that if people actually did get
involved in investigating the truths of chmess, they
would make mistakes, which would need to be cor-
rected, and this opens up a whole new ﬁeld of a priori
investigation, the higher-order truths of chmess, such as
the following:
1.
Jones’ (1989) proof that p is a truth of chmess is
ﬂawed: he overlooks the following possibility ...
2.
Smith’s (2002) claim that Jones’ (1989) proof is
ﬂawed presupposes the truth of Brown’s lemma
(1975), which has recently been challenged by
Garﬁnkle (2002) ...
Now none of this is child’s play. In fact, one might be
able to demonstrate considerable brilliance in the
group activity of working out the higher-order truths of
chmess. Here is where Donald Hebb’s dictum comes in
handy:
If it isn’t worth doing, it isn’t worth doing well.
Each of us can readily think of an ongoing contro-
versy in philosophy whose participants would be out of
work if Hebb’s dictum were ruthlessly applied, but we
no doubt disagree on just which cottage industries
should be shut down. Probably there is no investigation
in our capacious discipline that is not believed by some
school of thought to be wasted effort, brilliance
squandered on taking in each other’s laundry. Voting
would not yield results worth heeding, and dictatorship
would be even worse, so let a thousand ﬂowers bloom,
I say. But just remember: if you let a thousand ﬂowers
bloom, count on 995 of them to wilt. The alert I want to
offer you is just this: try to avoid committing your
precious formative years to a research agenda with a
short shelf life. Philosophical fads quickly go extinct
and there may be some truth to the rule of thumb: the
hotter the topic, the sooner it will burn out.
One good test to make sure you’re not just
exploring the higher-order truths of chmess is to see if
people aside from philosophers actually play the
game. Can anybody outside of academic philosophy
be made to care whether you’re right about whether
Jones’ counterexample works against Smith’s principle?
Another such test is to try to teach the stuff to
uninitiated undergraduates. If they don’t ‘‘get it,’’ you
really should consider the hypothesis that you’re
following a self-supporting community of experts into
an artifactual trap.
Here is one way the trap works. Philosophy is to
some extent an unnatural act, and the more intelligent
you are, the more qualms and reservations you are
likely to have about whether you get it, whether you’re
‘‘doing it right,’’ whether you have any talent for this
discipline and even on whether the discipline is worth
entering in the ﬁrst place. So bright student Jones is
appropriately insecure about going into philosophy.
Intrigued by Professor Brown’s discussion, Jones takes
a stab at it, writing a paper on hot topic H that is given
an ‘‘A’’ by Professor Brown. ‘‘You’ve got real talent,
Jones,’’ says Brown, and Jones has just discovered
something that might make suitable life work. Jones
begins to invest in learning the rules of this particular
game, and playing it ferociously with the other young
aspirants. ‘‘Hey, we’re good at this!’’ they say, egging
each other on. Doubts about the enabling assumptions
of the enterprise tend to be mufﬂed or squelched ‘‘for
the sake of argument.’’ Publications follow.
So don’t count on the validation of your fellow
graduate students or your favorite professors to settle
the issue. They all have a vested interest in keeping the
enterprise going. It’s what they know how to do; it’s
what they are good at. This is a problem in other ﬁelds
too, of course, and it can be even harder to break out
of. Experimentalists who master a technique and equip
an expensive lab for pursuing it often get stuck ﬁlling in
the blanks of data matrices that nobody cares about
any longer. What are they supposed to do? Throw
away all that expensive apparatus? It can be a nasty
problem. It is actually easier and cheaper for philoso-
phers to re-tool. After all, our ‘‘training’’ is not, in
general, high-tech. It’s mainly a matter of learning our
way around in various literatures, learning the moves
that have been tried and tested. And here the trap to
avoid is simply this: you see that somebody eminent
has asserted something untenable or dubious in print;
Professor Goofmaker’s clever but ﬂawed piece is a
sitting duck, just the right target for an eye-catching
debut publication. Go for it. You weigh in, along with a
dozen others, and now you must watch your step,
because by the time you’ve all cited each other and
responded to the responses, you’re a budding expert on
How to Deal with How to Deal with Responses to
Goofmaker’s minor overstatement. (And remember,
too, that if Goofmaker hadn’t made his thesis a little
too bold, he never would have attracted all the atten-
40
D. C. Dennett
123

tion in the ﬁrst place; the temptation to be provocative
is not restricted to graduate students on the lookout for
a splashy entrance into the ﬁeld.)
Of course some people are quite content to ﬁnd a
congenial group of smart people with whom to share
‘‘the fun of discovery, the pleasures of cooperation,
and the satisfaction of reaching agreement,’’ as John
Austin once put it (see Austin 1961, p. 175), without
worrying about whether the joint task is worth doing.
And if enough people do it, it eventually becomes a
phenomenon in its own right, worth studying. As
Burton Dreben used to say to the graduate students at
Harvard, ‘‘Philosophy is garbage, but the history of
garbage
is
scholarship.’’
Some
garbage
is
more
important than other garbage, however, and it’s hard to
decide which of it is worthy of scholarship. In another
lecture published in the same book, Austin gave us the
following snide masterpiece:
It is not unusual for an audience at a lecture to
include some who prefer things to be important,
and to them now, in case there are any such
present, there is owed a peroration. (‘‘Ifs and
cans,’’ pp. 230–31)
Austin was a brilliant philosopher, but most of the
very promising philosophers who orbited around him,
no doubt chuckling at this remark, have vanished
without a trace, their oh-so-clever work in ordinary-
language philosophy duly published and then utterly
and deservedly ignored within a few years of publica-
tion. It has happened many times.
So what should you do? The tests I have men-
tioned—seeing if folks outside philosophy, or bright
undergraduates,
can
be
made
to
care—are
only
warning signs, not deﬁnitive. Certainly there have
been, and will be, forbiddingly abstruse and difﬁcult
topics of philosophical investigation well worth pur-
suing, in spite of the fact that the uninitiated remain
unimpressed. I certainly don’t want to discourage
explorations that defy the ambient presumptions about
what is interesting and important. On the contrary, the
best bold strokes in the ﬁeld will almost always be met
by stony incredulity or ridicule at ﬁrst, and these
should not deter you. My point is just that you should
not settle complacently into a seat on the bandwagon
just because you have found some brilliant fellow
travelers who ﬁnd your work on the issue as unignor-
able as you ﬁnd theirs. You may all be taking each
other for a ride.
Acknowledgements
This piece grew out of informal discussions
with graduate students attending the Brown University Graduate
Philosophy Conference on February 16, 2002, and my own
graduate students at Tufts. I thank them, and colleagues at Tufts
and elsewhere, for valuable reactions and suggestions.
Reference
Austin JL (1961) ‘‘A plea for excuses,’’ in his Philosophical
papers. Oxford University Press, Oxford, pp. 175–204
Higher-order truths
41
123

