daniel c. dennett
8
Atheism and Evolution
Descartes, in the Meditations (1641), notes that “there are only two
ways of proving the existence of God, one by means of his effects, and
the other by means of his nature or essence” (AT VII, 120). The latter,
a priori path, represented paradigmatically by the ontological argument
of St. Anselm (and its offspring, including Descartes’ own version), has
perennial appeal to a certain sort of philosopher, but leaves most people
cold. The former, represented paradigmatically by the argument from
design, is surely the most compelling of all arguments against atheism,
and it apparently arises spontaneously whenever people anywhere are
challenged to justify their belief in God. William Paley’s example of
finding a watch while strolling on the heath epitomizes the theme and
leads, he says, to “the inference we think is inevitable, that the watch
must have had a maker – that there must have existed, at some time and
at some place or other, an artificer or artificers who formed it for the
purpose which we find it actually to answer, who comprehended its con-
struction and designed its use” (Paley 1800). Until Darwin came along,
this was a respectable argument, worthy of Hume’s corrosive but inde-
cisive broadside in his Dialogues Concerning Natural Religion (1779).
Descartes himself subscribed to a version of the argument from design,
in his notorious Third Meditation argument that his idea of God was
too wonderful to have been created by him. Though Descartes surely
considered himself intelligent, and moreover an accomplished designer
of ideas, he could not imagine that he could be the intelligent designer
of his own idea of God.
The familiar idea that the marvels of the universe prove the existence
of God as its creator is perhaps as old as our species, or even older. Did
Homo habilis, the “handy” man who made the first crude tools, have
some dim and inarticulate sense that it always takes a big fancy smart
thing to make a less fancy thing? We never saw a pot making a potter,
or a horseshoe making a blacksmith, after all. This trickle-down, mind-
first vision of design seems self-evident at first. A creationist propaganda
Passages in this chapter are drawn, with revisions, from Dennett 1995 and 2005.
135
Cambridge Collections Online © Cambridge University Press, 2007

136
daniel c. dennett
pamphlet I was once given by a student exploits this intuition with a
mock questionnaire:
TEST TWO
Do you know of any building that didn’t have a builder? [YES] [NO]
Do you know of any painting that didn’t have a painter? [YES] [NO]
Do you know of any car that didn’t have a maker? [YES] [NO]
If you answered YES for any of the above, give details:
The presumed embarrassment of the test taker when faced with this
tall order evokes the incredulity that many – probably most – people
feel when they confront Darwin’s great idea. It does seem just obvious,
doesn’t it, that there couldn’t be any such designs without designers, any
such creations without a creator! The vertigo and revulsion this prospect
provokes in many was perfectly expressed in an early attack on Darwin,
published anonymously in 1868:
In the theory with which we have to deal, Absolute Ignorance is the artificer; so
that we may enunciate as the fundamental principle of the whole system, that,
in order to make a perfect and beautiful machine, it is not requisite to
know how to make it. This proposition will be found, on careful examination, to
express, in condensed form, the essential purport of the Theory, and to express in
a few words all Mr. Darwin’s meaning; who, by a strange inversion of reasoning,
seems to think Absolute Ignorance fully qualified to take the place of Absolute
Wisdom in all the achievements of creative skill. (MacKenzie 1868)
Exactly! Darwin’s “strange inversion of reasoning” was in fact a new
and wonderful way of thinking, completely overturning the mind-first
way that even David Hume had been unable to cast aside, and replac-
ing it with a bubble-up vision in which intelligence – the concentrated,
forward-looking intelligence of an anthropomorphic agent – eventually
emerges as just one of the products of mindless, mechanistic processes.
These processes are fueled by untold billions of pointless, undesigned
collisions, some vanishing small fraction of which fortuitously lead to
tiny improvements in the lineages in which they occur. Thanks to Dar-
win’s principle of “descent with modification,” these ruthlessly tested
design innovations accumulate over the eons, yielding breathtakingly
brilliant designs that never had a designer – other than the purposeless,
distributed process of natural selection itself.
The signatures of these unplanned innovations are everywhere to be
found in a close examination of the marvels of nature, in the inside-out
retina of the vertebrate eye, the half-discarded leftovers in the genes and
organs of every species, the prodigious wastefulness and apparent cruelty
of so many of nature’s processes. These departures from wisdom, “frozen
Cambridge Collections Online © Cambridge University Press, 2007

Atheism and Evolution
137
accidents,” in the apt phrase of Francis Crick, confront the theist with
a dilemma: if God is responsible for these designs, then his intelligence
looks disturbingly like human obtuseness and callousness. Moreover, as
our understanding of the mechanisms of evolution grows, we can sketch
out ever more detailed accounts of the historical sequence of events by
which the design innovations appeared and were incorporated into the
branching tree of genomes. A voluminously predictive account of the
creative process is now emerging, replete with thousands of mutually
supporting details, and no contradictions at all. As the pieces of this
mega–jigsaw puzzle fall into place with increasing rapidity, there can be
no reasonable doubt that it is, in all its broad outlines if not yet in all
its unsettled details, the true story of how all living things came to have
the designs we observe.
Unreasonable doubt flourishes, however, thanks to the incessant pro-
paganda efforts of creationists and intelligent design (ID) spokespeople,
such as William Dembski and Michael Behe, who have managed to per-
suade a distressingly large proportion of the lay population that there are
genuine scientific controversies brewing in biology about its backbone
theory, evolution by natural selection. There are not. Genuine scientific
controversies abound in every corner of biology, but none of them chal-
lenges evolution. The legitimate way to stir up a storm in any scientific
discipline is to come up with an alternative theory that
1. makes a prediction that is crisply denied by the reigning theory but
turns out to be true or
2. explains something that has been baffling defenders of the status
quo or
3. unifies two distant theories, at the cost of some element of the
currently accepted view
To date, the proponents of ID have not produced a single instance of
anything like that. There are no experiments with results that challenge
any standard neo-Darwinian understanding, no observations from the
fossil record or genomics or biogeography or comparative anatomy that
undermine standard evolutionary thinking, no theoretical unifications
or simplifications, and no surprising predictions that have turned out
to be true. In short, no science – just advertising. No ID hypothesis
has even been ventured as a rival explanation of any biological phe-
nomenon. To formulate a competing hypothesis, you have to get down
in the trenches and offer some details that have testable implications, but
the ID proponents conveniently sidestep that requirement, claiming that
they have no specifics in mind about who or what the intelligent designer
might be.
Cambridge Collections Online © Cambridge University Press, 2007

138
daniel c. dennett
To see this shortcoming in relief, consider an imaginary hypothesis
of intelligent design that could explain the emergence of human beings
on this planet:
About six million years ago, intelligent genetic engineers from another galaxy
visited Earth and decided that it would be a more interesting planet if there was a
language-using, religion-forming species on it, so they sequestered some primates
(from among the ancestors of both humans and chimpanzees and bonobos), and
genetically re-engineered them to give them the language instinct, and enlarged
frontal lobes for planning and reflection. It worked.
If some version of this hypothesis were true, it could actually explain
how and why human beings differ from their nearest relatives, and it
would disconfirm all the competing neo-Darwinian hypotheses that are
currently being pursued on this fascinating question. We’d still have the
problem of how these intelligent genetic engineers came to exist on their
home planet, but we could safely ignore that complication for the time
being, since there is not the slightest shred of evidence in favor of this
hypothesis. And – here is something the ID community is reluctant
to discuss – no other intelligent-design hypothesis has anything more
going for it. In fact, my farfetched – but possible – hypothesis has the
distinct advantage of being testable in principle: we could look in the
human and chimpanzee genome for unmistakable signs of tampering by
these genetic engineers (maybe they left a “Kilroy was here” message
in human DNA for us to decode!). Finding some sort of user’s manual
neatly embedded in the apparently functionless “junk DNA” that makes
up most of the human genome would be a Nobel Prize–winning knock-
out coup for the ID gang, but if they are even looking, they are not telling
anyone. They know better. Ironically, William Dembski’s “design infer-
ence” argument is supposed to set up a sure-fire test for finding just such
telltale signs of intelligent tinkering in the causal ancestry of phenom-
ena, but instead of trying to demonstrate the test in action, Dembski
(2005) settles for the observation that the ID perspective “encourages
biologists to investigate whether systems that first appear functionless
might in fact have a function” – and no neo-Darwinian would disagree
with that strategy.
Between the richly detailed and ever-ramifying evolutionary story
and the featureless mystery of God the creator of all creatures great and
small, there is no contest. This is a momentous reversal for the ancient
conviction that God’s existence can be read off the wonders of nature.
Anyone who has ever been struck by the magnificent intricacy of design
and prodigious variety of the living world and wondered what – if not
God – could possibly account for its existence must now confront not just
Cambridge Collections Online © Cambridge University Press, 2007

Atheism and Evolution
139
a plausible alternative, but an alternative of breathtaking explanatory
power supported by literally thousands of confirmed predictions and
solved puzzles. Richard Dawkins has put the point crisply: “Although
atheism might have been logically tenable before Darwin, Darwin made
it possible to be an intellectually fulfilled atheist” (1986: 6).
Undermining the best argument anybody ever thought of for the exis-
tence of God is not, of course, proving the nonexistence of God, and
many careful thinkers who have accepted evolution by natural selec-
tion as the explanation of the wonders of the living world have cast
about for other supports for their continuing belief in God. The idea of
treating mind as an effect rather than as a first cause is too revolutionary
for some. Alfred Russel Wallace, the codiscoverer with Darwin of nat-
ural selection, could never accept the full inversion, proclaiming that
“the marvelous complexity of forces which appear to control matter, if
not actually to constitute it, are and must be mind-products” (quoted by
Gould 1985: 397). More recently, the physicist Paul Davies, in his book,
The Mind of God (1992: 232), opines that the reflective power of human
minds can be “no trivial detail, no minor by-product of mindless purpose-
less forces.” This is a most revealing way of expressing a familiar denial,
for it betrays an ill-examined prejudice. Why, we might ask Davies,
would its being a by-product of mindless, purposeless forces make it
trivial? Why couldn’t the most important thing of all be something that
arose from unimportant things? Why should the importance or excel-
lence of anything have to rain down on it from on high, from something
more important, a gift from God? Darwin’s inversion suggests that we
abandon that presumption and look for sorts of excellence, of worth and
purpose, that can emerge, bubbling up out of “mindless, purposeless
forces.”
But before we settle into the bubble-up perspective on ultimate impor-
tance, with whatever comfort we can muster, we need to deal with the
residual skepticism of the traditional trickle-down perspective: once
mindless, purposeless evolution gets under way, it generates magnifi-
cent design over time, but how did it get started? Don’t we need God
to kindle the process by miraculously and improbably assembling the
first self-replicating thing? This hope – and the contrary conviction that
the origin of life can be accounted for somehow by a natural series of
events of low but not negligible probability – grounds the intense inter-
est, not to say passion, surrounding contemporary research on the ori-
gin of life. The details of the process are not yet settled, but the pres-
ence of fairly complex building blocks – not just amino acids and basic
“organic” molecules – in the prebiotic world is now established, and the
problem confronting scientists today is less a matter of imponderable
Cambridge Collections Online © Cambridge University Press, 2007

140
daniel c. dennett
mystery than an embarrassment of riches: so many possibilities are not
yet excluded. The conviction that it must have taken a miracle – a
temporary violation of the standing laws of physics and chemistry –
for life to get initiated has lost whatever plausibility it ever had.
But, then, those standing laws themselves require an explanation,
do they not? If God the Artificer and God the Kindler have lost their
jobs, what of God the Lawgiver? This suggestion has been popular since
the earliest days of Darwinian thinking, and Darwin himself toyed with
this attractive retreat. In a letter in 1860 to the American naturalist,
Asa Gray, an early supporter, Darwin wrote, “I am inclined to look at
everything as resulting from designed [emphasis added] laws, with the
details whether good or bad, left to the working out of what we may call
chance” (Darwin 1911: 105).
Automatic processes are themselves often creations of great bril-
liance. From today’s vantage point, we can see that the inventors of the
automatic transmission and the automatic door-opener were no idiots,
and their genius lay in seeing how to create something that could do
something “clever” without having to think about it. Indulging in some
anachronism, we could say that to some observers in Darwin’s day, it
seemed that he had left open the possibility that God did his handiwork
by designing an automatic design maker. And to some of these, the idea
was not just a desperate stop-gap but a positive improvement on tradi-
tion. The first chapter of Genesis describes the successive waves of Cre-
ation and ends each with the refrain “and God saw that it was good.”
Darwin had discovered a way to eliminate this retail application of intel-
ligent quality control; natural selection would take care of that without
further intervention from God. (The seventeenth-century philosopher
Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz had defended a similar hands-off vision of
God the Creator.) As Henry Ward Beecher put it, “Design by wholesale
is grander than design by retail” (Rachels 1991: 99). Asa Gray, capti-
vated by Darwin’s new idea but trying to reconcile it with as much of
his traditional religious creed as possible, came up with this marriage of
convenience: God intended the “stream of variations” and foresaw just
how the laws of nature he had laid down would prune this stream over
the eons. As John Dewey later aptly remarked (1910: 12), invoking yet
another mercantile metaphor, “Gray held to what may be called design
on the installment plan.”
What is the difference between order and design? As a first stab, we
might say that order is mere regularity, mere pattern; design is Aristotle’s
“telos,” an exploitation of order for a purpose, such as we see in a clev-
erly designed artifact. The solar system exhibits stupendous order, but
does not (apparently) have a purpose – it isn’t for anything. An eye, in
Cambridge Collections Online © Cambridge University Press, 2007

Atheism and Evolution
141
contrast is for seeing. Before Darwin, this distinction was not always
clearly marked. Indeed, it was positively blurred:
In the thirteenth century, Aquinas offered the view that natural bodies [such as
planets, raindrops, or volcanos] act as if guided toward a definite goal or end “so as
to obtain the best result.” This fitting of means to ends implies, argued Aquinas,
an intention. But, seeing as natural bodies lack consciousness, they cannot supply
that intention themselves. “Therefore some intelligent being exists by whom all
natural things are directed to their end, and this being we call God.” (Davies
1992: 200)
Hume’s Cleanthes, following in this tradition, lumps the adapted mar-
vels of the living world with the regularities of the heavens – it’s all
like a wonderful clockwork to him. But Darwin suggests a division: give
me order, he says, and time, and I will give you design. Let me start
with regularity – the mere purposeless, mindless, pointless regularity of
physics – and I will show you a process that eventually will yield prod-
ucts that exhibit not just regularity but purposive design. (This was just
what Karl Marx thought he saw when he declared that Darwin had dealt
a deathblow to teleology: Darwin had reduced teleology to nonteleology,
design to order.)
A more recent idea about the difference – and tight relation – between
design and order will help to clarify the picture. This is the proposal, first
popularized by the physicist Erwin Schr¨odinger (1967), that life can be
defined in terms of the second law of thermodynamics. In physics, order
or organization can be measured in terms of heat differences between
regions of space-time; entropy is simply disorder, the opposite of order,
and according to the second law, the entropy of any isolated system
increases with time. In other words, things run down, inevitably. Accord-
ing to the second law, the universe is unwinding out of a more ordered
state into the ultimately disordered state known as the heat death of
the universe. What then are living things? They are things that defy this
crumbling into dust, at least for awhile, by not being isolated – by tak-
ing in from their environment the wherewithal to keep life and limb
together. The psychologist Richard Gregory summarizes the idea:
Time’s arrow given by Entropy – the loss of organization, or loss of tempera-
ture differences – is statistical and it is subject to local small-scale reversals.
Most striking: life is a systematic reversal of Entropy, and intelligence creates
structures and energy differences against the supposed gradual “death” through
Entropy of the physical Universe. (1981: 136)
Gregory goes on to credit Darwin with the fundamental enabling idea:
“It is the measure of the concept of Natural Selection that increases in
Cambridge Collections Online © Cambridge University Press, 2007

142
daniel c. dennett
the complexity and order of organisms in biological time can now be
understood.” Not just individual organisms, then, but the whole process
of evolution that creates them, can thus be seen as fundamental physical
phenomena running contrary to the larger trend of cosmic time.
A designed thing, then, is either a living thing or a part of a living
thing, or the artifact of a living thing, organized in any case in aid of
this battle against disorder. It is not impossible to oppose the trend of
the Second Law, but it is costly. Gregory dramatizes this with an unfor-
gettable example. A standard textbook expression of the directionality
imposed by the second law of thermodynamics is the claim that you can’t
unscramble an egg. Well, not that you absolutely can’t, but that it would
be an extremely costly, sophisticated task, uphill all the way against the
second law. Now consider: how expensive would it be to make a device
that would take scrambled eggs as input and deliver unscrambled eggs
as output? There is one ready solution: put a live hen in the box! Feed
it scrambled eggs, and it will be able to make eggs for you – for a while.
Hens don’t normally strike us as near-miraculously sophisticated enti-
ties, but here is one thing a hen can do, thanks to the design that has
organized it, that is still way beyond the reach of the devices created by
human engineers.
The more design a thing exhibits, the more R&D work had to have
occurred to produce it. Minds are among the most designed of entities
(in part because they are the self-redesigning things). But this means
that they are among the most advanced effects (to date) of the creative
process, not – as in the old version – its cause or source. Their products
in turn – the human artifacts that were our initial model – must count as
more designed still. This may seem counterintuitive at first. A Keats ode
may seem to have some claim to having a grander R&D pedigree than
a nightingale – at least it might seem so to a poet ignorant of biology –
but what about a paper clip? Surely, a paper clip is a trivial product of
design compared with any living thing, however rudimentary. In one
obvious sense, this is true, but reflect for a moment. Put yourself in
Paley’s shoes, but walking along the apparently deserted beach on an
alien planet. Which discovery would excite you the most: a clam or a
clam rake? Before the planet could make a clam rake, it would have to
make a clam rake maker, and that is a more designed thing by far than
a clam.
Only a theory with the logical shape of Darwin’s could explain how
designed things came to exist, because any other sort of explanation
would be either viciously circular or an infinite regress (Dennett 1975).
The old way, the mind-first way, endorsed the principle that it takes
an intelligence to make an intelligence. Children chant, “It takes one
to know one,” but an even more persuasive slogan would seem to be
Cambridge Collections Online © Cambridge University Press, 2007

Atheism and Evolution
143
“It takes a greater one to make a lesser one.” Any view inspired by
this slogan immediately faces an embarrassing question, however, as
Hume had noted: If God created and designed all these wonderful things,
who created God? Supergod? And who created Supergod? Superduper-
god? Or did God create himself? Was it hard work? Did it take time?
Don’t ask! Well then, we may ask instead whether this bland embrace
is any improvement over just denying the principle that intelligence (or
design) must spring from intelligence. Darwin offered an explanatory
path that actually honored Paley’s insight: real work went into design-
ing this watch, and work isn’t free. Richard Dawkins summarizes the
point:
Organized complexity is the thing we are having difficulty explaining. Once
we are allowed simply to postulate organized complexity, if only the organized
complexity of the DNA/protein replicating engine, it is relatively easy to invoke
it as a generator of yet more organized complexity. . . . But of course any God
capable of intelligently designing something as complex as the DNA/protein
replicating machine must have been at least as complex and organized as the
machine itself. . . . To explain the origin of the DNA/protein machine by invoking
a supernatural Designer is to explain precisely nothing, for it leaves unexplained
the origin of the Designer. (1986: 141)
As Dawkins goes on to say, “The one thing that makes evolution
such a neat theory is that it explains how organized complexity can
arise out of primeval simplicity” (p. 316). But still, that primeval sim-
plicity exhibits order, and what of the laws of nature themselves? Don’t
they manifest the existence of a lawgiver? The physicist and cosmolo-
gist Freeman Dyson puts the point cautiously: “I do not claim that the
architecture of the universe proves the existence of God. I claim only
that the architecture of the universe is consistent with the hypothesis
that mind plays an essential role in its functioning” (Dyson 1979: 251).
Since, as Dawkins notes, the hypothesis that (organized, complex) mind
plays such a role could not possibly be explanatory, we should ask: With
what other hypotheses is the architecture of the universe consistent?
There are several.
As more and more has been learned about the development of the uni-
verse since the big bang, about the conditions that permitted the forma-
tion of galaxies and stars and the heavy elements from which planets can
be formed, physicists and cosmologists have been more and more struck
by the exquisite sensitivity of the laws of nature. The speed of light is
approximately 186,000 miles per second. What if it were only 185,000
miles per second, or 187,000 miles per second? Would that change much
of anything? What if the force of gravity were 1 percent more or less
than it is? The fundamental constants of physics – the speed of light, the
Cambridge Collections Online © Cambridge University Press, 2007

144
daniel c. dennett
constant of gravitational attraction, the weak and strong forces of sub-
atomic interaction, Planck’s constant – have values that of course permit
the actual development of the universe as we know it to have happened.
But it turns out that if in imagination we change any of these values by
just the tiniest amount, we thereby posit a universe in which none of
this could have happened, and indeed in which apparently nothing life-
like could ever have emerged: no planets, no atmospheres, no solids at
all, no elements except hydrogen and helium, or maybe not even that –
just some boring plasma of hot, undifferentiated stuff, or an equally
boring nothingness. So isn’t it a wonderful fact that the laws are just
right for us to exist? Indeed, one might want to add, we almost didn’t
make it!
Is this wonderful fact something that needs an explanation, and if so,
what kind of explanation might it receive? According to the anthropic
principle, we are entitled to infer facts about the universe and its laws
from the undisputed fact that we (we anthropoi, we human beings) are
here to do the inferring and observing. The anthropic principle comes
in several flavors. In the “weak form” it is a sound, harmless, and on
occasion useful application of elementary logic: if x is a necessary con-
dition for the existence of y, and y exists, then x exists. Believers in any
of the proposed strong versions of the anthropic principle think they
can deduce something wonderful and surprising from the fact that we
conscious observers are here – for instance, that in some sense the uni-
verse exists for us, or perhaps that we exist so that the universe as a
whole can exist, or even that God created the universe the way he did
so that we would be possible. Construed in this way, these proposals are
attempts to restore Paley’s argument from design, readdressing it to the
design of the universe’s most general laws of physics, not the particular
constructions those laws make possible. Here, once again, Darwinian
countermoves are available.
The boldest is that somehow there might have been some sort of dif-
ferential reproduction of whole universes, with some varieties having
more “offspring” than others, due to their more fecund laws of nature.
Hume’s mouthpiece Philo toyed with this idea, in the Dialogues Con-
cerning Natural Religion, when he imagined a designer-god who was far
from intelligent:
And what surprise must we entertain, when we find him a stupid mechanic,
who imitated others, and copied an art, which, through a long succession of
ages, after multiplied trials, mistakes, corrections, deliberations, and controver-
sies, had been gradually improving? Many worlds might have been botched and
bungled, throughout an eternity, ere this system was struck out: Much labour
lost: Many fruitless trials made: And a slow, but continued improvement carried
on during infinite ages of world-making. (part V)
Cambridge Collections Online © Cambridge University Press, 2007

Atheism and Evolution
145
Hume imputes the “continued improvement” to the minimal selec-
tive bias of a “stupid mechanic,” but we can replace the stupid mechanic
with something even stupider without dissipating the lifting power: a
purely algorithmic Darwinian process of world-trying. Hume obviously
didn’t think this was anything but an amusing philosophical fantasy, but
the idea has recently been developed in some detail by the physicist Lee
Smolin (1992). The basic idea is that the singularities known as black
holes are in effect the birthplaces of offspring universes, in which the
fundamental physical constants would differ slightly, in random ways,
from the physical constants in the parent universe. So, according to
Smolin’s hypothesis, we have differential reproduction and mutation,
the two essential features of any Darwinian selection algorithm. Those
universes that just happened to have physical constants that encouraged
the development of black holes would ipso facto have more offspring,
which would have more offspring, and so forth – that’s the selection
step. Note that there is no grim reaper of universes in this scenario; they
all live and “die” in due course, but some merely have more offspring.
According to this idea, then, it is no mere interesting coincidence that we
live in a universe in which there are black holes. But neither is it an abso-
lute logical necessity; it is rather the sort of conditional near-necessity
you find in any evolutionary account. The link, Smolin claims, is car-
bon, which plays a role both in the collapse of gaseous clouds (or in other
words, the birth of stars, a precursor to the birth of black holes) and, of
course, in our molecular engineering.
Is the theory testable? Smolin offers some predictions that would,
if disconfirmed, pretty well eliminate his idea: it should be the case
that all the “near” variations in physical constants from the values we
enjoy should yield universes in which black holes are less probable or
less frequent than in our own. In short, he thinks our universe should
manifest at least a local, if not global, optimum in the black hole–making
competition. The trouble is that there are too few constraints, so far as
I can see, on what should count as a “near” variation and why, but
perhaps further elaboration on the theory will clarify this. Needless to
say, it is hard to know what to make of this idea yet, but whatever
the eventual verdict of scientists, the idea already serves to secure a
philosophical point. Freeman Dyson, and others who think they see a
wonderful pattern in the laws of physics, might be tempted to make
the tactical mistake of asking the rhetorical question, “What else but
God could possibly explain it?” Smolin offers a nicely deflating reply. If
we follow the Darwinian down this path, God the Artificer turns first
into God the Lawgiver, who then can be seen to merge with God the
Lawfinder, who does not invent the laws of nature, but just eventually
stumbles across them in the course of blind trial and error of universes.
Cambridge Collections Online © Cambridge University Press, 2007

146
daniel c. dennett
God’s hypothesized contribution is becoming less personal – and hence
more readily performable by something dogged and mindless!
But suppose, for the sake of argument, that Smolin’s speculations are
all flawed; suppose selection of universes doesn’t work after all. There is
a weaker, semi-Darwinian speculation that also answers the rhetorical
question handily. Hume also toyed with this weaker idea, in part VIII of
his Dialogues:
Instead of supposing matter infinite, as Epicurus did, let us suppose it finite.
A finite number of particles is only susceptible of finite transpositions: And it
must happen, in an eternal duration, that every possible order or position must
be tried an infinite number of times. . . . .
Suppose . . . that matter were thrown into any position, by a blind, unguided force;
it is evident that this first position must in all probability be the most confused
and most disorderly imaginable, without any resemblance to those works of
human contrivance, which, along with a symmetry of parts, discover an adjust-
ment of means to ends and a tendency to self-preservation. . . . [S]uppose, that the
actuating force, whatever it be, still continues in matter. . . . Thus the universe
goes on for many ages in a continued succession of chaos and disorder. But is it
not possible that it may settle at last . . . ? May we not hope for such a position,
or rather be assured of it, from the eternal revolutions of unguided matter, and
may not this account for all the appearing wisdom and contrivance, which is in
the universe?
This idea exploits no version of selection at all, but simply draws
attention to the fact that we have eternity to play with. There is no
five-billion-year deadline in this instance, the way there is for the evo-
lution of life on Earth. Several versions of this speculation have been
seriously considered by physicists and cosmologists in recent years. John
Archibald Wheeler (1974), for instance, has proposed that the universe
oscillates back and forth for eternity: a big bang is followed by expansion,
which is followed by contraction into a big crunch, which is followed
by another big bang, and so forth forever, with random variations in the
constants and other crucial parameters occurring in each oscillation.
Each possible setting is tried an infinity of times, and so every variation
on every theme, both those that “make sense” and those that are absurd,
spins itself out, not once but an infinity of times.
It is hard to believe that this idea is empirically testable in any mean-
ingful way, but we should reserve judgment. Variations or elaborations
on the theme just might have implications that could be confirmed or
disconfirmed. In the meantime it is worth noting that this family of
hypotheses does have the virtue of extending the principles of explana-
tion that work so well in testable domains all the way out. Consistency
and simplicity are in its favor. And that, once again, is certainly enough
to blunt the appeal of the traditional alternative. Here’s why: if the
Cambridge Collections Online © Cambridge University Press, 2007

Atheism and Evolution
147
universe were structured in such a way that an infinity of different “laws
of physics” get tried out in the fullness of time, we would be mistaken
to think that there is anything special about our finding ourselves with
such exquisitely well-tuned laws. It had to happen eventually, with or
without help from a benign God. This is not an argument for the conclu-
sion that the universe is, or must be, so structured, but just an argument
for the more modest conclusion that no feature of the observable “laws
of nature” could be invulnerable to this alternative, deflationary inter-
pretation.
Once these ever more speculative, ever more attenuated Darwinian
hypotheses are formulated, they serve – in classic Darwinian fashion –
to diminish by small steps the explanatory task facing us. All that is
left over in need of explanation at this point is a certain perceived ele-
gance or wonderfulness in the observed laws of physics. If you doubt
that the hypothesis of an infinity of variant universes could actually
explain this elegance, you should reflect that this has at least as much
claim to being a non-question-begging explanation as any traditional
alternative; by the time God has been depersonalized to the point of
being some abstract and timeless principle of beauty or goodness, not
an artificer or a lawgiver or even a lawfinder but at best a sort of master
of ceremonies, it is hard to see how the existence of God could explain
anything. What would be asserted by the “explanation” that was not
already given in the description of the wonderful phenomenon to be
explained? The Darwinian perspective doesn’t prove that God – in any
of these guises – couldn’t exist, but only that we have no good reason to
think God does exist. Not a classical reductio ad absurdum argument,
then, but nevertheless a rational challenge that reduces the believer’s
options to an absurdly minimalist base. As the Reverend Mackerel says,
in Peter De Vries’s comic novel, The Mackerel Plaza (1958), “It is the
final proof of God’s omnipotence that he need not exist in order to
save us.”
Evolutionary biology also supports atheism indirectly by providing
an explanatory framework for what we might call the genealogy of the-
ology. Since belief in God cannot be justified by any scientific or logical
argument, but is nevertheless a nearly ubiquitous ingredient in human
civilization, what explains the maintenance of this belief? This is an
oft-neglected part of the atheist’s burden of proof: not merely show-
ing the fallacies and dubieties in the various arguments that have been
offered for the existence of God, but explaining why such a dubious
proposition would be favored by anybody in the first place. There has
been no shortage of dismissive hypotheses offered over the centuries:
neuroses that are the inevitable by-products of civilization, a conspir-
acy of ultimately selfish priests, and sheer stupidity, for instance, are
Cambridge Collections Online © Cambridge University Press, 2007

148
daniel c. dennett
perennially popular hunches. Recent works in evolutionary social sci-
ence (Boyer 2001; Atran 2002; Dennett 2006) demonstrate that there
are both more interesting and more plausible – and scientifically con-
firmable – hypotheses to pursue.
references
Atran, Scott. 2002. In Gods We Trust: The Evolutionary Landscape of Religion. New
York: Oxford University Press.
Boyer, Pascal. 2001. Religion Explained: The Evolutionary Origins of Religious
Thought. New York: Basic Books.
Darwin, Francis. 1911. The Life and Letters of Charles Darwin. 2 vols. New York:
Appleton (original edition, 1887).
Davies, Paul. 1992. The Mind of God. London: Simon and Schuster.
Dawkins, Richard. 1986. The Blind Watchmaker. London: Longmans.
De Vries, Peter. 1958. The Mackerel Plaza. Boston: Little, Brown.
Dembski,
William.
2005.
“In
Defense
of
Intelligent
Design.”
Http://www.
designinference.com. Forthcoming in Philip Clayton (ed)., Oxford Handbook of
Religion and Science.
Dennett, Daniel. 1975. “Why the Law of Effect Will Not Go Away.” Journal of the
Theory of Social Behaviour 5: 179–87.
Dennett, Daniel. 1995. Darwin’s Dangerous Idea. New York: Simon & Schuster.
Dennett, Daniel. 2005. “Show Me the Science.” New York Times op/ed page, August
28, 2005.
Dennett, Daniel C. 2006. Breaking the Spell: Religion as a Natural Phenomenon.
New York: Viking Penguin.
Descartes, Rene. 1641. Meditations on First Philosophy. Paris: Michel Soly.
Dewey, John. 1910. The Inﬂuence of Darwin on Philosophy. New York: Henry Holt;
Bloomington: Indiana University Press, 1965.
Dyson, Freeman. 1979. Disturbing the Universe. New York: Harper and Row.
Gould, Stephen Jay. 1985. The Flamingo’s Smile. New York: Norton.
Gregory, Richard L. 1981. Mind in Science: A History of Explanations in Psychology
and Physics. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Hume, David. 1779. Dialogues Concerning Natural Religion. London.
MacKenzie, Robert Beverley. 1868. The Darwinian Theory of the Transmutation of
Species Examined. London: Nisbet & Co. Quoted in a review, Athenaeum, no. 2102
(February 8): 217.
Paley, William. 1800. Natural Theology. Oxford: J. Vincent.
Rachels, James. 1991. Created from Animals: The Moral Implications of Darwinism.
Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Schr¨odinger, Erwin. 1967. What Is Life? Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Smolin, Lee. 1992. “Did the Universe Evolve?” Classical and Quantum Gravity
9:173–91.
Wheeler, John Archibald. 1974. “Beyond the End of Time.” In Martin Rees, Remo
Ruffini, and John Archibald Wheeler (eds.), Black Holes, Gravitational Waves and
Cosmology: An Introduction to Current Research. New York: Gordon and Breach.
Cambridge Collections Online © Cambridge University Press, 2007

The Cambridge Companion to
ATHEISM
Edited by Michael Martin
Boston University
Cambridge Collections Online © Cambridge University Press, 2007

cambridge university press
Cambridge, New York, Melbourne, Madrid, Cape Town, Singapore, S˜ao Paulo
Cambridge University Press
32 Avenue of the Americas, New York, ny 10013-2473, usa
www.cambridge.org
Information on this title: www.cambridge.org/9780521842709
c
⃝Cambridge University Press 2007
This publication is in copyright. Subject to statutory exception
and to the provisions of relevant collective licensing agreements,
no reproduction of any part may take place without
the written permission of Cambridge University Press.
First published 2007
Printed in the United States of America
A catalog record for this publication is available from the British Library.
Library of Congress Cataloging in Publication Data
The Cambridge companion to atheism / edited by Michael Martin.
p.
cm. – (Cambridge companions to philosophy)
Includes bibliographical references.
isbn 0-521-84270-0 (hardback) – isbn 0-521-60367-6 (pbk.)
1. Atheism.
I. Martin, Michael, 1932 Feb. 3–
II. Title.
III. Series.
bl2747.3.c36
2007
211′.8–dc22
2006005949
isbn-13
978-0-521-84270-9 hardback
isbn-10
0-521-84270-0 hardback
isbn-13
978-0-521-60367-6 paperback
isbn-10
0-521-60367-6 paperback
Cambridge University Press has no responsibility for
the persistence or accuracy of urls for external or
third-party Internet Web sites referred to in this publication
and does not guarantee that any content on such
Web sites is, or will remain, accurate or appropriate.
Cambridge Collections Online © Cambridge University Press, 2007

