Cognition, 12 (1982) 219-227 
Why we think what we do about why we think what we 
Discussion on Goodman’s “On thoughts without vwwds’” 
DANIEL C. DENNETT” 
Tufts 
University 
I find myself in almost complete agreement with Goodman’s remarks about 
thought without words, so I am not going to pick a fight or chime .3gree- 
ment. Everything Goodman says here is plausible. Better yet, Goodman’s 
major claims have the virtue of not being altogether obvious. How then did 
he get to them? What kind of investigation or research is Goodman conduc- 
ting- 
and what methods has he used? Are the methods reliable? What ~i’ir’:~d 
of results do they yield? On what basis do we respond with agreement, or 
judgments of plausibility? 
What Goodman i:s doing, clearly enough, is philosophy. It is not even the 
disguised sort of philosophy that is everywhere discernible in the discussiorts 
of cognitive scientists. It is straight, traditional philosophy, but it is also a 
special sort of straight philosophy of mind, a brand of phenomenology 
practiced, for instance, b:y Descartes, Locke, Hume, Kant-but 
also1 Witt- 
genstein and Ryle. The products of this traditional method in philosophy of 
mind are not presented as discoveries ST cl&ms or hypotheses, but as obwr- 
v~~tions. The reader is reminded (it seems) of this or that; various things are 
pointed out to the reader, who can presumably acknowledge their truth. 
Philosophers are used to this diction, but it is, or ought to be, puzzling. What 
kind of pointing out is it really? What is the method behind the production 
of these observations? 
The method, I think, has two components 
that are traditionally 
(and 
utterly unwittingly:) blended together into near total indiscernibility. 
One 
component 
is aprioristic reasoning about tilt~al~ mhcsf be-what 
thoughts 
must be, what meaning must be, what symbols must be, and so forth. This 
reasoning is based on tacit assumptions-perhiaps 
‘obvious’ ones--about 
what thoughts, symbols, and so forth are for, so this is functionalistic aprior- 
istic reasoning. It in; also enriched by the facts, concepts and metaphors of 
the science of the day, but again, the reliance on th.ese ideas is typically 
unannounced. 
The other component is a reliance on (and generahkion 
from) quite casual self-observation: 
‘introspection’ 
in the most theory- 
neutral, garden-variety sense. 
*Reprint requ e t should be sent to Daniel @. Dennett, I%losIophy Department, Tufts Wniwrsity, 
s s 
Medford, Massachusetts 02155, U.S.A. 
001 W?77/8:!/0502 
1949/$02 
SO 
0 Elsetier Sequoia/Printed 
in The Netherlirnds 

It is only recently that anyone has come up with any program of 1 q search 
that might actually succeed in distinguishing these two very different com- 
ponents-though 
there have been plenty of hints in the history of philos- 
for the division. Locke tkrotight he was championing the latter compo- 
the unbiased self-observatixr componeart, when he unveiled his ‘histor- 
, p;Sin method’ in the Essay Concerning Human Understanding (1690).’ 
eke took himself to be an honest observer of what happened in his own 
nd, and while he could not in(r rite the reader to observe with him numer- 
ically the same mental operations (due to the unfortunate 
barrier of the 
privacy of one’s own mental life), he could confidently invite the reader to 
look into his own mind and observe just the same sorts of things happening. 
Wad I&eke reflected at length on why he thought he could so confidently 
gmeralize to others, he might have been brough.t to realize that the true 
source of hi!; confidence lay in his utterly minimal use sf the ‘historical, 
plain method’. Locke wasn’t observing; he was conatrucSting a grand a priori 
themy 
about how ‘understandi& 
had to work. It continues to amaze me 
that student:; reading the Essay :oday cheerfully acknowledge, as Locke in- 
ss thiem to do, that when they ‘look inside’ they find themselves doing 
t what Locke says he himself does. They can in fact seldom ‘observe’ what 
eke describes. Consider a typical Lockean claim: 
When HT set before our eyes a. round globe of any uniform colour, e.g.. gold, 
alabaster. or jet. it is certain that the idea thereby imprinted on our mind is of a 
flak circle, variously shadowed, with several degrees of light and brightness coming 
to our eyes. But we having, by use, been accustomed to perceive what kind of ap- 
pearance convex bodies are wont to make in us; what alterations are made in the 
reflections of light by the difference of the sensible figures of bodies;-the 
judg 
ment presently, by ’ u ! habitual custom, alters “he appearances into their causes. 
(11, Ix, 8). 
locke hasn’t directly observec1! my of this in his personal visual experi- 
ence: he has more or less deduced this from general (and tacit) considera- 
tions of optics, perspective, and reflection on how information about three- 
tensional shapes and surfaces must enter our ‘minds’. It is, lo be sure, an 
pi&ally 
enriched bit of aprioristic thinking, depending as it must on 
aentioned but well known discoveries (by artists and others) about per-’ 
ctive, light, color and vision in general. But thi: is not thk; radical first- 
rspective empiricism of phenomenalism, but matter=sf-fact; objeo 
calaworld empiricism, disguised and. concealed by the rhetorical 
at of the new ‘historical, plain methotd’. 
L&R %B 
hating invented ‘a new way of certainty by meaqs of ideas, instead 
nty by mean8 of rmsm’. Quoted by A. C. Fraser in his (1894) edition of 
tion, 1959, Vol. 1, p. 4~). 

Why we think what we do about why we think what we do 
221 
Kant, famously, championed the other, aprioristic component: the adum- 
bration of the pure, ‘transcendental’ conditions of experie,.ce, knowledge, 
understanding -the 
a priori conditions of mentality, in short. But he failed, 
notoriously, to transcend the potent scientific metaphors of his time, and to 
cleanse his method of unacknowledged deliverances of unreliable in trospec- 
tion. The resulting Kantian account of the mind is full of strange items of 
mental machinery and process that can neither be deduced to be indispens- 
able to thought, nor directly introspected 
to operate in our own cases. 
Strawson, deploring Kant’s descent into ‘the imaginary subject of transcen- 
dental psychology’, attempts to recreate Kant’s defensible doctrines in a 
metaphysically and epistemologically more austere form.* But whatever we 
think of Kant’s particular version of faculty psychology, ‘transcendental 
psychology’ is not in one sense an imaginary subject at all: it is just what 
philosophers of mind have been producing since Descartes. 
This traditional mixture of self-observation and aprioristic reflection on 
it seems inevitable, given the subject matter. The inescapable brute facts of 
our own mental activity are so obvious, it sec~ms, that when radical behavior- 
ists, for instance, claim to deny them they only succeed in undermining theiT 
own credibility or sincerity. What can one do with those brute facts but 
reflect on them in an armchair sort of way, devising aprioristic accounts of 
their &.tiion to the rest of the brute facts? 
Here, for example, is Wittgenstein (writing with his characteristic irony): 
“Can one think without speaking?” -And 
what is thinking?-Well, 
don’t you 
ever think? Can’t you observe yourself and see what is going on? It should be (quite 
simple. You do not have to wait for it as for an astronomical 
event and %en per- 
haps make your observation in a hurry... 
When I think in language, there aren’t ‘rrea~aings’ going through my mincl in ad- 
dition to the verbal expressions: the language is itself the vehicle of thought. Is 
thinking a kind of speaking? One would like to say it is what distinguishes speech 
with thought from talking without thinking. -And 
so it seems to be an accomps- 
niment of speech. A process, which may accompany something else or can glo on 
by itself. 
Say: “Yes, this pen is blunt. Oh well, it’ll do.” First, thinking it; then without 
thought; then just think the thought withoslt the words,-Well, 
while doing some 
writing I might test the point of my pen, make a face-and 
go ‘on with a gesture of 
resignation... 
But what constitutes 
thought here is not some process which has to accompany 
the words if they are not to be spoken without thought3 
2Ttre Bounds of Sense: An Esmy on Kant’s Ckitiquc of Pure Reason. London, Methuen., 1966, 
p. 32. 
3See i327-330 and pp. 107-7 
in G. E. M. Anscombe (ed.) (i958), 
Philosophical InveeJtigations. 
London, Rlaclkwells. 

-‘)r 
CIA. 
Dmiel C. Dennett 
e of Wittgenstein’s great contributions 
to thmking about the mind is 
xs:raordinary suspicion he musters about the apparent deliverances of 
ection; his relentless skepticism on *this matter then sets an example 
rest of us. But note that his suspicion is not aimless uncooperative- 
th the hapless introspecter; it is guided by what he takes to be insights 
Faow thoughts must happen, what thinking could nod be. I-Ie has (tacit) 
2s’ for disbelieving the plausible claims of the introspectcr. 
u note that Goodman’s paper consists in the main of observations of 
rt I have just described. (There are virtually no arguments in it.) Many 
is observations 
are reminders and warnings about conclusions we 
uldn’t jump to when thinking about thinking-all 
well taken, I think. 
‘tere are other sorts of observations a.s 
well. For instance: 
First, a thought may involve not, or not only, ac:‘;ivities on the way towards but 
W, or also, the state of readiness for production. Second, and more important, 
k.ing :n words or pictures may often involve preparing or being ready not, 
or not only, to produce such words or pictures, but rather, or also, to ju Ige a 
*xd 
or picture produced as agreeing or not agreeing with one in mind. When I 
ucceed in ‘cahing up a mental picturfe’ or a place I saw briefly long ago my ability 
t praduce a picture may be negligible but I am much readier than before to accept 
*me pictures as right and reject others as wrong, and to suggest changes. (See this 
is:;rne p. 2.:9.) 
hat ; :&e--could be-Goodman’s 
grounds for these observations? (That 
cal question. I’m not challenging them, but asking, flatly, 
rts of reasons Goodman might have for thinking them true, and I 
awe for agreeing with him.) ‘The first two sentences apparently ex- 
hy bit of presumably empirical theory about the different func- 
es of verbal or pictorial thought. Recalling Wilfrid Sellars’ claims 
as ‘proximate propensities to speak’4 we can say that Good- 
two varieties of verbal thought: prolximate propensities to 
and proximate propensities to kear. This is all very plausible, but why? 
we zrII start with the brute and unignorable fact that we find ourselves 
e talking, and something like listening when we know 
are no recordable sounds in the environment, and our 
task becomes the armchair task of asking what in the world 
t phenomenon could possib2’ be. Not wanting to bog down in utterly 
e and barely investigatable neurophysiological hypotheses, we settle 
abstract, functionalistic, speculative theorizing--and 
come up with 
3ng like the view of Wittgenstein, or Ryle, or Sellars-or 
Goodman. 
tral but traditionally tacit move in the reasoning behind such produc- 
-- 
as F~ttctiond Classification’. Synrhese, 27 (3/4) (1974) 417--437. 

Why we think what we do about why we think what we do 
123 
tions has recently been brought out of the closet by Jerry Podor 
; one pre- 
sents one’s hunch and then asks in effect: what else could it be? 
The last sentence of the Goodman passage is admirably forthright. 
It 
makes what is not only a clearly empirical claim, but one we could probably 
put to the test now, with a little ingenuity. The heightened readiness Good 
man speaks of is a close kin of the heightened readinesses provoked and mtta- 
sured in a host of reaction time experinlcnts.6 One suspects, however, th.at 
Goodman isn’t terribly curious to know the results of an experiment here, 
since if they did not support his claim about heightened readiness, he would 
be deeply skeptical of their design or the arguments relating his thesis to 
the experiments in question. (This ad hominenz speculation is impertinence 
on my part. Perhaps Goodman’s intent on this occasion is to provoke such 
experiments, but I will suppose that he is a more traditional philosopher 
than that, and is SO sure that his observations must capture a function of 
th0ugh.t that he would find experiments almost beside the point.) 
There is another way of defending Goodman’s (imagined) lack of interest 
in experimental confirmation here. While he has offered, in somewhat dis- 
guised form, an empirical theory sketch of what some of the functions of 
thoughts are, he might not so much care that it were true as that some sta~dz 
story were true- 
where ‘some such’ means something like ‘such as would 
be physicalistically 
can-anomolous -a 
portion of demystified, 
kosher sci- 
ence, whatever its details’. This attitude would make good sense if Goodman 
were to cast himself in the role of theory critic. In this paper one of Good - 
man’s main objectives -nicely 
achieved, in my opinion-is 
to convinc d 
theorists that ‘undrawn pictures or invisible images’ are just as well c: ff, 
theoretically 
and metaphysically, as inaudible utterances. Thought as sil - G * 
soliloquy is one good idea; thought as silent music-making or invisible skete+ 
ing is just as good. If the philosopher’s role here is to fend off bad theoriziplg , 
and illustrate the foibles of certain tempting lines of thought, then it d:lel: 
not matter particularly if this critic proffers the wrong explanation of some 
phenomenon, just so long as he gets the right sort of explanation-in 
this 
case just so lo.ig as he points to the sort of explanation that could be com- 
fortably accommodated within some secure scientific enterprise. So viewed, 
the philosopher is a sort of theory tugboat, nudging and pulling the unwieldy 
edifices of science in the right general direction, averting embarrassing : Ali- 
siors atnd unmotivated drift, while not himself always moving in just 
the 
right 
direction” This is by its very nature an informal and uncertain activity 
‘The Langwge o,f Thought. New York, Crowell, l!VS 
%ee e.g., R. Shepsd and L. Cocyer, and other chapters in W. G. Chase (ed.), J%mzZ Information 
Processing. Academic Press, 1973. Dependent variablle other than heaction time can also tease out such 
‘readiness’ differences, of COUTS. 

224 
Lhsniel C Dennett 
owever acutely practiced, and not at all the fount of certitudes philosophy 
often presents itself to be. And of course it is continuous with the informal 
int&ioln-mongefing 
that surrounds and guides all scientific exploration. 
philosophy of mind thus demythologized looks as if it might on occasion 
usefull--as surely it is, whether we: are looking at Locke or Kant OP Witt- 
stein or Goodman -but 
hardly 
reliable. Considering its traditional 
nce about the source of its own somewhat oracular observations, and 
considering how often the characteristic plausibility of those observations 
turned out to be spurious, we might hope to develop a better method for 
performing the same task. Suppose for instance we were to attempt a de’lib- 
erate and explicit separation-- so far as that was psychologically possible- 
of the two sorts of sources: aprioristic functional hypotheses and self- 
observation. What would the resulting enterprise look like? It would look 
like Artificial Intelligence (AI). In fact, of course, people in AI have notori- 
usly relied on casual self-observation for their ideas about the likely break- 
n of processes and events in cognitive systems, and have often been 
u&f, like many philosophers F -fore them, into reading strict necessity 
into whatever eccentricities of their a A: n cognitive styles first captured their 
attention and imagination. But at least in AI the rhetoric of the enterprise 
is importantly different: AI, even at its most ‘philosophical’, does not consist 
of &.r~mtitions, but of hypotheses, hunches, suggestions of ideas worth 
trying, claims about what might be shown to be right. 
Consider, for instance, the questions lurking just beneath the surface of 
@ 
man’s paper: what are these various types of thinking for? 
Why do we 
engage in them? Why should these sorts of thinking be so slow and clunky 
and one-track and uncertain in operation-and 
conscious? Why couldn’t 
all the readinesses and rehearsals and processes of preparation go on much 
tter ti some unconscisus 
speedways of cognition? A vivid way of addres- 
asmg these questions would be: if we were to build a robot, a truly sophis- 
ticated robot, would there be any reason to endow it with (analogues of) the 
pacitks Goodman is sketchily describing? To what sort of use would what 
rt of’ cognitive system put the preparations, 
readinesses, propensities 
man describes? Perhaps answers to these questions are implicit in 
man’s account, but devising explicit versions of them would not be 
plausible idea is that many of the forms of thinking Goodman alludes 
i.n effect makeshift techniques of self+timulation 
hit upon in the 
ory of social interaction, and rendered traditional. Just as we learned 
‘COWS, 
and then to domesticate ,them for our own benefit, so we 
to milk each others’ (and then our own) minds in certain ways, and 
fh: techniques of mutual- and self-stimulation are deeply embedded 

Why we think what we do about why we think what we do 
225 
in our culture 2nd training. A rich philosophical source of hints on this score 
is Gilbert Ryle’s posthumous collection On Thinking. 7 How surprising that 
the notorious ‘!ogical behaviorist’, the philosopher 
who most adamantly 
disparaged loose talk about the supposed inner life of the mind, should have 
the most acute suggestions to offer about the point of silent soliloquy! 
We are not often enough or deeply enough puzzled by the notions of thinking, 
pondering, reflecting, and the like, namely of what Rodin’s Le Perweur looks as 
if he is absorbed in. . . . What is Le Penseur doing, seemingly in his Cartesian insides? 
Or, to sound scientific, what are the mental processes like, which are going on in 
that Cartesian camera obscura? . . . Notoriously some of our ponderings, but not all, 
terminate in the solution of our problems; we had been fogged, but at last we came 
out into the clear. But if sometimes successful, why not always? If belatedly, why 
not promptly? If with difficulty, why not easily? Why indeed does it ever work? 
How possibly can it work?8 
What Le Penseur is doing, Ryle suggests, is ‘plying himself with might-be 
cues, clues, reminders, snubs, exercises, spurs, and the like, of types that are 
sometimes or often employed unexperimentally 
by teachers...’ (p. 67). But 
what good would giving oneself cues do? Why isn’t t5at as pointless as leav- 
ing yourself a generous tip after preparing yourself a nice lunch? Ryle could 
not bring himself to peer too deeply into that abyss, for he had long set 
himself implacably against any theorizing that divided a person into sub- 
personal parts and theorized about their interrelations. 
I am this morning ;oing over my oration for this evening, but I am not orating to 
a tiny audience, namely my Alter Ego, this morning, else why do I begin ‘Ladies 
and gentlemen... ‘? And why do my jokes elicit no laughter, or my appeals for sub- 
scriptions fetch not even a penny from my left-hand pocket? Obviously I am not 
orating yet - we cannot orate silently or sutto vote. I am, perhaps, in solitude and 
silence, rehearsing my words for my public oration-to-be. Even if I mutter these 
words audibly, and you are there to hear them, I am not muttering them for ysu or 
for anyone, even for ime, to hear them.’ 
Plausible, but just falsle. Mere Ryle’s a priori theoretical predilections get 
in the way of both his self-observation and his functionalistic speculation, 
and lead him away from the good idea that a main function of silent oration 
(or out loud oration alone in a room) is preciseZ,v so our own ears--or 
whatever lies just inboard of our ears- 
can ‘hear’ those words. AI1 one needs 
to suppose in order to make sense of this idea is the by now familiar idea 
‘Edited by Konstantin Koh&a. Totowa, New Jersey, Rowman and Littlefield, 1979. 
*‘Thinking and Self-Teaching’, in Ost Thinking, op. cit. See also ‘Thought and Soliloquy’ and other 
chapters in that book. 
“Thought and Wiloquy’, p. 36. 

is some partial isolation and specialization of cognitive subsys- 
dely put, pushing some information through one’s ears-and-audito- 
ry*ystem 
may stimulate just the sorts of. connecti:)ns one is seeking, may 
trip jlust the right associative mechanisms, tease ju& the right mental morsel 
to the tip of one’s tongue.‘” 
Just as one can notice that, say, strokin,g oiliself in a certain way can pro- 
duce certain only partiailjr and indirectly 
controllable but desirable side 
nd one can then devote so:me time and ingenuity to developing and 
the te&niques for producing those side effects) so one can come 
nize that talking to cneself-- ---sotto Yoce or notI r -often 
has desir- 
hard to control or predict side e;ffects: nifty ideas come bubbling 
dissinate, lconnections stand forth for the first time. Some people 
are better at this activity than others. It’s an acquired technique with many 
diffe fenl: peFona1 styles. 
Al1 integral part of acquiring techniques of such self-stimulation is acquir- 
g fluency in new media of (mental) representation. 
The effects of these 
new fluencies on ou:: cognitive capacities h,ave been insightfully explored by 
Gooctman in his earlier work. As Goodman says here, ‘...the forms of what 
Oink of are by no means independent of the forms of what we think 
in. The form of classical music heard is affected and constrained by the 
structure of the notation in which the score is written’. A familiar point in 
me quarters, no doubt, but it has an implication not sufficient& ncknowl- 
edge& the human cognitive systezar must have an extraordinary 
lability if 
it is ~:o mould it&f to e.ncountered :forma so deftly. WC al! l~ow the experi- 
ence of the access of power when we leaa our wag- arotknd ir? 3 new language 
or a new forr~alism, but these are not the only cases. kming 
to use a new 
tooI---an adze or paintbrush or word processor or vio!in-also 
engages our 
capacity for achieving fluency in new media of representation 
with new 
furmztl propetiies, 
It 
is often suggested. with a bit OIE’ 
wishful handwaving that this capacity 
of ours is roughly tut 
usefully analogous to a computer’s chameleonic 
capacity 
ta emulate other lcompute:rs, or interpret new programming lan- 
‘s, but I doubt that the analogy is all that useful. No computer is 
zleonic without a great deal af help from programmers who must 
tion its new softviare costume with exquisite precision and attention to 
~“Epistemologists and philosophers of mind have traditionally overlooked or underestimated the 
tacticrr. This is surpw7 
since, as Lawrence Powers shows in ‘Knowledge by Deduc- 
Review, 8978, pp. 337-72, it WH a cen~tral but disguised theme in Plato’s Meno. 
this may well not be a negligible diffaFence in techniques, as any lecturer may discover ori 
hearing himself say the words he has m~:MaMy mouthed a hundred times while preparing tht! 

Why we think what we do about wh_y we think what we do 
22’7 
detail if the computer is to don it successfully. Getting a computer to let 
some found portion of the world impose aspects of its form on the: cohriyci- 
ter’s representation of it is proving immensely difficult. John McCarthy once 
described to me an elegant unsolved problem of robotics: make a robot that 
has two mechanical hands and that can hold a broomstick firmly with both 
hands several feet apart -and 
then can waggle the broomstick around with- 
out either breaking or dropping it. One sees ‘intuitively’ that such a robot 
must in some fashion let the broomstick itself control the relative orienta- 
tions of the hands, but only partially, of course. The robot must after all 
move: the broomstick, ntit vice versa. And if the robot is to be psychological- 
ly realistic, the broomstick itself mustn’t directly c+-Intro1 the hands; that 
task must fall to a representation of the broomstick. For note how effortless- 
ly and realistically you can waggle an imaginary broomstick in your hands. 
(If you are Marcel Marceau you can perform virtuoso feats of this sort, but 
we are all quite good at it.) The capacity to engulf and digest the formad 
properties of objxts 
and environments in such high fidelity and high effi- 
ciency representations 
has not yet beNen well modeled by AI. Philosophen 
don,‘t have any working models of this either, but they have: been thinking 
about it informally, and often powerfully, for some time. 

