 
Duke University Press and Porter Institute for Poetics and Semiotics are collaborating with JSTOR to digitize, preserve 
 
and extend access to Poetics Today.
http://www.jstor.org
Duke University Press
Porter Institute for Poetics and Semiotics
Out of the Armchair and into the Field 
Author(s): Daniel C. Dennett 
Source: 
 
Poetics Today, Vol. 9, No. 1, Interpretation in Context in Science and Culture (1988), pp. 
 
205-221
Published by: 
 
Duke University Press
Stable URL: 
 
http://www.jstor.org/stable/1772895
Accessed: 26-10-2015 23:48 UTC
Your use of the JSTOR archive indicates your acceptance of the Terms & Conditions of Use, available at http://www.jstor.org/page/
 
info/about/policies/terms.jsp
JSTOR is a not-for-profit service that helps scholars, researchers, and students discover, use, and build upon a wide range of content 
in a trusted digital archive. We use information technology and tools to increase productivity and facilitate new forms of scholarship. 
For more information about JSTOR, please contact support@jstor.org.
This content downloaded from 128.255.6.125 on Mon, 26 Oct 2015 23:48:21 UTC
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

Out of the Armchair and 
into the Field 
Daniel C. Dennett 
Philosophy, Tufts 
As a philospher of mind, I have often imagined myself in exotic sur- 
roundings, engaged in one fantastic thought experiment or another 
-stranded 
on Mars or living as a brain in a vat or attempting to deci- 
pher the alien tongue of apparently intelligent creatures-but 
in June 
1983 I had an opportunity to set aside thought experiments in favor 
of real experiments designed to explore the minds-and 
"language" 
-of 
some real alien creatures: vervet monkeys, living not in lab cages 
or enclosures but fending for themselves against a daunting array of 
predators in the beautiful, dangerous world of the East African savan- 
nah. 
What makes vervet monkeys particularly interesting to a philoso- 
pher-or 
to anyone interested in the origins of human language and 
consciousness-is 
that they have the rudiments of a language, which 
serves them well in circumstances that must be quite similar to the 
world our ancestors faced at the dawn of human language and cul- 
ture. Vervets have a variety of different vocalizations-calls and grunts 
-which 
seem to have clearly definable meanings. The most obvious 
(to an alien observer) are the alarm calls: one for snakes, another 
for eagles, a third for leopards, and each call evokes its own distinct 
and appropriate sort of behavior-for 
instance, scanning the sky and 
heading for cover in response to the eagle alarm. These might have 
been nothing more than instinctual cries, of course, no more like real, 
versatile human language than the famous dance of the honeybee, or 
Poetics Today 9:1 (1988). Copyright ? The Porter Institute for Poetics and Semi- 
otics. ccc 0333-5372/88/$2.50. 
This content downloaded from 128.255.6.125 on Mon, 26 Oct 2015 23:48:21 UTC
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

206 
Poetics Today 9:1 
the alarm calls of birds, but there is some tantalizing evidence suggest- 
ing that something more is going on with these monkeys. Unlike the 
birds and the bees, vervets seem to be engaged in a practice that could 
involve learning, insincerity, trustworthiness, deception, divided loy- 
alty. While it would be wildly romantic to suppose that a vervet could 
tell a joke, it is not so clear that there isn't room in their way of life for 
one to tell a lie. 
For instance, two bands or groups of vervets were once observed 
in a territorial skirmish; one group was losing ground and one of 
the losing-side monkeys, temporarily out of the fray, seemed to get 
a bright idea: it suddenly issued a leopard-alarm (in the absence of 
any leopards), leading all the vervets to head for the trees-creating 
a truce and regaining the ground his side had been losing. Does this 
anecdote reveal real cleverness and versatility among the speakers of 
Vervetese or was itjust a coincidence or bit of dumb luck for the losing- 
side monkeys-or 
a case of over-eager interpretation on the part of 
the observers? Could further observation-or 
better: experiments- 
shed light on these questions? This is what I had come to Kenya to 
investigate. 
Several years ago, at the Dahlem Conference on animal intelligence 
in Berlin, I had been delighted to discover that some of my "purely 
philosophical" ideas about how to interpret creatures as having minds 
-having 
beliefs and desires and intentions-had 
struck a chord in 
some of the animal behavior experts. It might just be, they thought, 
that my philosophical theory provided a theoretical framework in 
which to describe their investigations and perhaps some of my philo- 
sophical suggestions could be harnessed to good effect in field re- 
search. Among those I met at the conference was Robert Seyfarth, 
who, with his wife Dorothy Cheney, has spent years studying the social 
organization and communication system of bands of vervets living in 
Amboseli National Park, in Kenya. In the aftermath of the conference, 
I continued discussing these prospects with Seyfarth and others in the 
field and even wrote a scholarly article on the subject (1983). But read- 
ing, writing and discussing were still just armchair work. I would never 
be able to tell whether my suggestions were capable of doing real work 
until I had had some field experience and seen first-hand the sort of 
difficulties that researchers face. Philosophical thought experiments, 
unlike real ones, have the happy property of never running into snags 
-the 
weather is always perfect, there is always film in your camera 
and no distracting circumstances intrude on the scenario. Proposals 
that make sense in such idealized situations are often hopeless in the 
real world. 
So I was delighted when Seyfarth invited me to visit their research 
camp and spend some time actually observing and experimenting on 
This content downloaded from 128.255.6.125 on Mon, 26 Oct 2015 23:48:21 UTC
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

Dennett * Out of the Armchair 
207 
the monkeys. Before my visit, I had devoted considerable armchair 
time to pondering the presuppositions and implications of everything 
I had learned about vervet monkeys but, as one would expect, reality 
outstripped all my anticipatory imaginings. 
Vervets are monkeys, not apes, so they are millions of years less 
closely related to us than chimps, for instance. You can actually see 
-and 
feel-the 
difference quite directly; their faces and facial ex- 
pressions are nowhere near as human and evocative as the mugging 
of chimps or gorillas and, in many other ways, they are strangely- 
often disappointingly-alien. 
For instance, while they exhibit terror 
and sometimes prolonged grief when one of the group is killed, a mon- 
key won't bring food to a starving or injured member of the group, 
even though they cooperate in other ways and spend a great deal of 
time in mutual grooming. But in one important regard they seem to 
be more like our ancestors than are the larger apes and monkeys: their 
lives are more harrowing, more fraught with danger. While baboons, 
for instance, are nonchalant, swaggering bullies, able to defend them- 
selves, the much smaller vervets are fearful, defenseless and hence 
supercautious. (Occasionally a wild vervet will die under circumstances 
that permit an autopsy; most are found to suffer from gastric ulcers.) 
Perhaps the reason vervets have such a surprisingly advanced "lan- 
guage" is that they are more desperately in need of communicating 
with each other than many other species. 
How does one go about learning the language of these monkeys? 
This is a case of what the philosopher W. V. 0. Quine calls "radi- 
cal translation"-since 
there are no bilingual interpreters to help the 
investigator compile the Vervetese-English manual. Here is where phi- 
losophy might come in handy, for this is not just a question of another 
language; it is the traditional philosophical problem of Other Minds. 
My proposal, in simplest terms, was this. First, observe their behav- 
ior for a while and make a tentative catalogue of their needs-their 
immediate biological needs as well as their derivative, informational 
needs-what 
they need to know about the world they live in. Then adopt 
what I call the intentional stance: treat the monkeys as if they were 
-as 
they may well turn out to be-rational 
agents with the "right" 
beliefs and desires. Frame hypotheses about what they believe and de- 
sire by figuring out what they ought to believe and desire, given their 
circumstances, and then test these hypotheses by assuming that they 
are rational enough to do what they ought to do, given those beliefs 
and desires. The method yields predictions of behavior under various 
conditions; if the predictions are falsified, something has to give in the 
set of tentative hypotheses and further tests will sift out what should 
give. 
There is nothing particularly novel or "scientific" about the method; 
This content downloaded from 128.255.6.125 on Mon, 26 Oct 2015 23:48:21 UTC
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

208 
Poetics Today 9:1 
it is, I claim, the method we all habitually use to interpret each other, 
after all. But if it is done self-consciously and carefully, it can become 
a powerful and reliable strategy of discovery. In particular, the tactic 
of assuming some particular beliefs and desires in the monkeys and 
then asking what ought to follow from those assumptions can lead to 
the design of particularly telling experiments-setting 
up situations 
where the monkeys will "betray" their beliefs by doing otherwise un- 
likely things. I call this the "Sherlock Holmes method"-since 
it is the 
attempt to play the sort of tricks in the real world that catch the cul- 
prits in thousands of mystery stories. (Only someone who believed there 
was a corpse in the closet would go to such lengths to prevent Sherlock 
from opening the closet door-that 
sort of trick.) But would the sort 
of stunt that works so deliciously in fiction-and philosophers' thought 
experiments-be 
at all practical in the field? 
After breakfast the first day, we drove the 10 kilometers from the 
camp to the vervets' home ranges. Robert and Dorothy always drive 
as close as possible to the place they expect the monkeys to be and 
Dorothy explained to me that this is not just to save walking in the hot 
sun. We must be careful never to get more than about a hundred yards 
from the jeep and must keep an eye on the intervening ground for in- 
terlopers. We were unarmed-no 
firearms are permitted in Amboseli 
-and 
if a lion or elephant or buffalo should suddenly appear, we 
would retreat as swiftly and noiselessly as possible to the safety of the 
enclosed vehicle. Since keeping an eye out for lions and elephants is 
not part of my normal routine, I found this all very romantic and not 
a little frightening but for Robert and Dorothy, such precautions are 
as routine as the precautions I take when crossing a busy street. 
Seyfarth and Cheney study three adjacent groups of vervets inten- 
sively and several other neighboring groups quite comprehensively. 
The first task of the day is simply to find the group of monkeys in 
whose territory we have decided to begin. While the home ranges of 
groups are small-less 
than a kilometer across in any direction-find- 
ing the monkeys (more than a dozen in a group, usually)-can 
be a 
time-consuming process. The task was made slightly more difficult by 
my presence. I was a novel and hence suspect creature; the monkeys 
could be expected to take some time to "habituate" to me. Robert and 
Dorothy, after more than six years of observing these monkeys at close 
range, are utterly familiar-and 
uninteresting-to 
the monkeys and 
can stand within a few feet of them, apparently without disturbing 
their behavior at all. Since I was accompanied by these familiar beings, 
the monkeys habituated to me after only fifteen or twenty minutes and 
I too could then walk in their midst so long as I didn't make prolonged 
eye contact. 
At first it bothered me that the three of us could stand around in the 
This content downloaded from 128.255.6.125 on Mon, 26 Oct 2015 23:48:21 UTC
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

Dennett * Out of the Armchair 
209 
open, talking quietly, taking photos and moving equipment around, 
without provoking any apparent reaction in the monkeys. Were they 
so stupid, so oblivious, so incurious that these noisy, looming bipeds- 
with-clothes made no difference to them? "But remember," Robert 
reminded me, "that you would provoke their curiosity and fear if you 
came here by yourself. It is only because they are habituated to us that 
you can come in under our protective mantle." 
"How do you get the animals to habituate to you in the first in- 
stance?" 
"It takes weeks of patient waiting," Robert replied. "Bring along a 
few good books and just sit down as close to them as you can get. 
Gradually they lose their fear of you and you can move closer." 
The rule to follow is best expressed from the intentional stance: 
never act in such a way as to give a vervet a reason to pay attention to 
you in the future. That is the general rule, of which these are a few 
instances: never provide food or show the monkeys that you have food 
(we were careful to eat our box lunches some distance away from the 
monkeys); never warn the monkeys of danger or help them out of a 
difficulty; never interact with them by responding to threats. Make 
sure, in other words, that paying attention to you is an investment that 
never pays the monkeys a dividend; then you can count on the rational, 
self-interested vervets to ignore that unattractive investment opportu- 
nity. If you follow the general rule scrupulously, you soon disappear, 
for the vervets, into the background-which 
after all contains a lot 
of other large, moving, things that are irrelevant to vervet concerns: 
wildebeests and wart hogs-and 
elephants. The ideal is to be as boring 
to a vervet as any wildebeest; that puts you almost in the observer's 
dream position: the proverbial fly on the wall, who sees and hears all 
but is perfectly unobtrusive. 
Whatever further doubts I had about the extent of the vervets' ha- 
bituation to me were erased as we rode home in the jeep that evening 
and I suddenly realized that we had just continued an animated con- 
versation without the tiniest hitch or reaction while half a dozen zebras 
had galloped across the road in front of us. After only three or four 
days of driving through Kenya's fabulous game parks, I had become so 
habituated to zebras-zebras!-that 
I paid no more attention to their 
crossing in front of us than I would to a pedestrian in Boston. A few 
days later in camp, the point was brought home to me again when an 
elephant briefly interrupted our breakfast conversation by emerging 
from the thicket and grazing on the tall grass next to the clothesline. 
After taking note of the elephant, we went on with our conversation, 
while the elephant continued to graze, more or less ignored, for about 
half an hour. Advice to eavesdroppers: if you want to listen in un- 
obtrusively on Seyfarth and Cheney in the dining tent, why not try 
This content downloaded from 128.255.6.125 on Mon, 26 Oct 2015 23:48:21 UTC
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

210 
Poetics Today 9:1 
dressing up as an elephant and standing in broad daylight about thirty 
feet in front of them. 
Once we had found the monkeys, the daily census began. Each mon- 
key has been given a name and each of the more than seventy monkeys 
in the studied groups is readily identifiable by Robert and Dorothy. 
There is a system: each season's new babies get names with a common 
theme. There are the London underground stations: Picadilly, Char- 
ing Cross and Holborn; the prisons: Sing Sing, Wormwood Scrubs, 
Attica; the dictators: Amin, Marcos, Pinochet, Somoza and Duvalier; 
and the cooks: Escoffier, Claiborne, Brillat-Savarin and "Julian" Child. 
The infants are named before their gender can be determined; Julia 
turned out to be a Julian but you just have to get used to the fact that 
Amin, Newton (from the cosmologist cohort), Burgess, McLean, and 
Philby are all females. 
I was frankly skeptical, at first, witnessing Robert and Dorothy 
glancing at distant monkeys scampering through trees or facing away 
or in silhouette and tallying up: "There's Runnymede, and Tycho. 
Have you seen Jenkin's Ear?" "Yes, she's in the top of the tortilis tree." 
(I could barely make her out to be a monkey with my binoculars.) But 
I gradually had to grant that they were not playing a trick on me; 
they really could identify these monkeys, with complete reliability. To 
me, the monkeys looked as indistinguishable as any identical twins- 
but that of course is the point. After a while it is uncannily easy to 
tell identical twins apart-often 
without being able to say just how you 
do it. 
It is not enough just to keep track of the monkeys as individuals. 
You have to know how they are related, what their rank in the group is 
and their recent history of alliances and confrontations. When I asked 
Robert if there was any background reading that would particularly 
prepare me for participating in the experiments, he had suggested 
-only 
partly in jest-that 
I refresh my acquaintance with the nov- 
els of Jane Austen. In fact, my first day or so of monkey-watching 
with Robert and Dorothy was full of the sort of confusion I often 
suffer when reading the open chapters of a complicated novel of man- 
ners. "Look," Dorothy would say, "that's Wormwood trying to sup- 
plant Tycho, who's grooming Amin; but here comes Holborn, who 
will no doubt side with Tycho-they're 
sisters, after all-but 
Pica- 
dilly outranks them both, and . .."-I 
would flip back through my 
notes, utterly confused, muttering "Isn't Picadilly Wormwood's aunt? 
I thought Wormwood and Sing Sing were sisters. No, wait, Marcos 
is Wormwood's mother and she's from the low-ranking family...." 
I 
wanted to go back to Chapter One and get a reminder of who all the 
characters were. 
Without a good fix on all these relationships, the significance of 
This content downloaded from 128.255.6.125 on Mon, 26 Oct 2015 23:48:21 UTC
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

Dennett * Out of the Armchair 
211 
much of the communication and interaction is completely inscrutable. 
(Imagine trying to make sense of the knowing glances and frowns- 
to say nothing of the words-in a foreign film without having any idea 
how the characters were related to each other.) In one experiment, 
for instance, Robert played tape recordings of the screams of juveniles 
where their mothers (and other adults) could hear them. Not only did 
the mother-and 
only the mother-drop 
everything to go to the aid 
of her child but as soon as the other mothers heard the cries, they 
looked at the mother of the juvenile. They not only know which cry 
belongs to which juvenile, they know which offspring belong to which 
mother. (It seems unlikely that they have much knowledge, if any, of 
paternity but experiments soon to be conducted may shed light on 
this.) Those telltale glances betray their knowledge just as surely as the 
guilty glances in many a mystery story, but interpreting those glances 
requires a mountain of reliable background information. 
Only after witnessing the births in a group over several seasons can 
one reliably sort a group into its families, siblings, cousins and more 
distant relatives. It takes years to gather this information-something 
a philosopher is apt to forget when concentrating on what the "observ- 
able evidence" is; you can't observe directly that Nut is the granddaugh- 
ter of Marcos but it's an empirical fact with plenty of implications in 
experiments. That is why it is so important to take a census of the 
monkeys in the watched groups every day. Only thus can accurate 
records of deaths, births and shifting social relationships be main- 
tained. Every now and then, for one reason or another, a daily census 
must be missed but it is the first order of business on a normal day 
and it can be frustrating, especially if a group of monkeys has moved 
deep into the swamp where they cannot be followed. 
After the census of a group, which includes taking notes on any 
noteworthy behavior, changes of appearance and the like, Robert and 
Dorothy can think about trying to run an experiment or two. Most 
of their voluminous data on a wide variety of ecological factors have 
been gathered by patient observation, not experiment, and this in- 
formation is an invaluable asset when it comes to designing and in- 
terpreting experiments. Robert and Dorothy can already confidently 
answer many of the questions that come up. When a male matures 
and leaves his natal group for another, are the relations between those 
two groups more cordial than between groups where there has been 
no recent male interchange? Yes. Are higher-ranking animals more 
likely to fall to predation than to illness or starvation? Yes, much more 
so. Do low-ranking monkeys scan the habitat with the same frequency 
as high-ranking monkeys? Yes, but they issue fewer alarm calls. Aha! 
Are they perhaps keeping mum in hopes of seeing a higher-ranking 
competitor knocked off? This would seem to make evolutionary sense. 
This content downloaded from 128.255.6.125 on Mon, 26 Oct 2015 23:48:21 UTC
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

212 
Poetics Today 9:1 
(Robert and Dorothy, working with a group of captive vervets back in 
the States, have shown that under controlled conditions, if an adult 
male sees a predator and he's in the presence of a higher-ranking 
male, he doesn't alarm-call at all; but if the same male sees a predator 
when in the presence of a female, he gives alarm calls.) 
Most of their experiments have involved playing recordings of vo- 
calizations and other sounds from a hidden speaker and filming and 
recording the monkeys' reactions. This means figuring out oppor- 
tunistically where to hide the speaker for a more or less definite experi- 
ment, from a long menu of experiments-to-be-done. All experiments 
are one-shot and non-repeatable. No practice runs and no allowance 
for technical foul-up. For instance, if all the juveniles in a group are 
to be tested to see whether they react in a certain way to a particular 
sound, each juvenile gets just one exposure to the test and care must 
be taken to ensure that, when the test runs, the subject is generally fac- 
ing in the right direction (not in the direction of the hidden speaker) 
and not running out of camera range and not being harrassed by a 
higher-ranking monkey and so forth. Some experiments are designed 
to answer questions that have much more particular conditions: will 
a monkey who has been recently groomed (within a half hour) by 
another be more ready to respond to a request for alliance from that 
monkey (whose call will be played on the speaker) than one who has 
not been so groomed? 
How do you run a single trial of this experiment? First observe the 
grooming of a monkey who has yet to be tested; then try to predict 
where that target monkey is apt to be during the next half hour. Then 
hide the speaker in an appropriate place, locate the groomer's call for 
assistance on the tape and get it ready to roll and wait for the groomer 
to move out of sight in the right general direction (to be consistent 
with a call for help from that area). Then make sure that no other 
monkey (e.g., the groomer's mother) is in a position to interfere. If 
all is well, turn on the movie camera, start the countdown to playback 
and cross your fingers hoping that no sudden change in conditions 
will ruin your "take." 
Sometimes, after the speaker is set out, the "right" monkey or mon- 
keys will wander out of range but others will move in who can be 
subjected to another experiment, with no more bother than advancing 
the tape on the playback machine. But that is a rare and lucky break. 
Patience, patience, patience. Most often, when the speaker is set out 
and everything is made ready for an experiment, something happens 
to call off the test. But this is actually an important generality, however 
frustrating it is on the occasion. The monkeys have seen Robert walk- 
ing around a bush with a speaker in his hand and returning empty- 
handed hundreds of times and it is important that they not be able 
This content downloaded from 128.255.6.125 on Mon, 26 Oct 2015 23:48:21 UTC
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

Dennett * Out of the Armchair 
213 
to associate this with a subsequent interesting noise from the bush. 
Usually, such hiding episodes are followed by ... nothing memorable 
at all. So the monkeys are not interested in the speaker; it has never 
been associated with any interesting regularities at all in their experi- 
ence. If they acquired an interest in it and began to investigate it, no 
further experimentation using speakers would be possible. 
One of the most puzzling facts about vervets is that they are appar- 
ently so smart about some things-social 
relations among their con- 
specifics, in particular-and 
so stupid about other things one would 
think were at least equally important to them and no more difficult. 
As Dorothy puts it, they seem to have "laser beam" intelligence: bril- 
liant, narrowly specialized cognitive talents, with almost no carry-over 
of skill to other topics. They seem to be able to reason by analogy and 
recognize one thing as a sign or symptom of another, for instance, 
so long as the topic is social relations but then they appear unable to 
draw the same sort of conclusions about other matters. What are the 
boundaries of their competence? This is where the intentional stance 
and the Sherlock Holmes method ought to yield the results wc want 
-by 
showing us just where knowledge or belief shades off into igno- 
rance. Thought experiments suggest just which circumstances would 
be particularly telling but designing actual experiments to rig these 
circumstances is a frustrating business. 
A big difference between real experiments and thought experi- 
ments is that, whereas thought experiments are usually taken to wear 
their meanings on their sleeves-or 
worse, their intended interpreta- 
tion is simply stipulated-when 
you try to design a real experiment, 
you often notice to your initial dismay that any result you get is open 
to multiple interpretations. This is a concern in any science, of course, 
but when you adopt the intentional stance and use it to chart the 
(likely) beliefs and desires of some (possibly) rational agents, any single 
experiment suggests a profusion of serious hypotheses, ranging from 
romantic to killjoy and only a large family of related experiments 
taken together can narrow the field. There are no short cuts. 
This was brought home vividly to me one evening. Earlier in the 
year, Robert had made a recording of a leopard "sawing"-marking 
its territorial boundary by stopping and scratching the ground and 
growling in a peculiar, loud rhythmic rasping way. To any knowledge- 
able human naturalist, the sound is unmistakable evidence of a nearby 
leopard. Can the monkeys also draw this conclusion? They almost cer- 
tainly have heard the sound and probably witnessed leopards making 
it; but can they recognize its import in isolation? One evening after 
supper, in an exploratory mood, Robert and Dorothy and I drove out 
of camp in the jeep and parked quietly under the nearby sleeping 
tree of a group of vervets-not 
a habituated group but one that had 
This content downloaded from 128.255.6.125 on Mon, 26 Oct 2015 23:48:21 UTC
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

214 
Poetics Today 9:1 
often seen the jeep. After waiting a bit, I held the loudspeaker out 
the window and Robert played the leopardsawing tape. Silence from 
the tree. We tried it again. Again silence. A third playing also yielded 
nothing. No audible reaction at all-even 
though during the day, if 
the monkeys spot a leopard they leap from branch to branch, warning 
each other and making a great hullabaloo. 
How is this silence to be interpreted? Maybe the monkeys just don't 
recognize the sound. Perhaps this is one of those topics that are outside 
the monkey's narrow competence. That is what Robert and Dorothy 
think and they may be right. But what other candidate explanations 
offer themselves? The monkeys are heavy sleepers? Almost certainly 
not. The monkeys are on to the playback tricks? Again, almost cer- 
tainly not-this 
was an unhabituated group that had never been ex- 
perimented upon. But perhaps the monkeys are confused by the 
simultaneous presence of a jeep and a leopard? Would silence be the 
expected sign of such confusion, though? And in any case, there is 
nothing particularly odd about a jeep and a leopard in close prox- 
imity; after all, the leopard sawing Robert had recorded had been 
right at the edge of their camp. Perhaps, though, the monkeys realize 
that a sawing leopard is not a (stealthy) hunting leopard and hence is 
temporarily no threat. Perhaps but there is no obvious reason why a 
sawing leopard would refrain from taking advantage of any easy pre- 
dation that came his way. Sawing would not seem to be a high-priority 
behavior. 
Then how about this: at night the risk-benefit payoff of giving an 
alarm changes dramatically; if you make a noise at night you give away 
your presence-which 
may be entirely unsuspected-and 
for what? If 
you heard the leopard sawing, presumably any vervet who could hear 
your alarm also heard the sawing. Seeing a leopard is apt to create a 
radical information-gradient: the sharp-eyed one is alone in having the 
information about the leopard. Hearing a leopard, on the other hand, 
is apt to be an occasion of group or mutual knowledge; everyone gets 
the bad news at once. But then if vervets did disturb the night with 
a chorus of alarms on hearing a leopard sawing, this would seem less 
intelligent than the discrimination they (apparently) make. (Note, by 
the way, that this wily calculation of the risks and benefits might not 
"run through each vervet's head" and yet still be the rationale that 
actually explains why the vervets are silent; it would be what I call 
a "free-floating" rationale-a 
rationale that explains the evolutionary 
development of this instinctual policy-if it is merely instinctual.) 
Passive observation, no matter how patient and careful, is not likely 
to settle the issue between these hypotheses, since every particular 
telling observation raises the question "But would they have done the 
This content downloaded from 128.255.6.125 on Mon, 26 Oct 2015 23:48:21 UTC
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

Dennett * Out of the Armchair 
215 
same thing if the circumstance were altered in this way or that?" And 
the likelihood of all the right variations on the theme showing up 
without the experimenter's connivance is minuscule. Only a series of 
carefully designed experiments can put enough pressure on the hy- 
potheses to sort them out. It could turn out that much of the puzzling 
"stupidity" of the vervets is actually disguised cleverness (or "cleverly 
designed" instincts). Or it could turn out that vervets are caught in the 
evolutionary trap of specialization: they developed special-purpose 
cognitive mechanisms that served them well enough to make the devel- 
opment of general-purpose problem-solving or reasoning mechanisms 
(like ours) too costly. (After all, researchers in artificial intelligence are 
finding that it is much, much easier to design weirdly narrow-minded 
"expert systems" than it is to design a general-purpose common-sense 
reasoner, and natural selection may have discovered a similar way to 
get some of the benefits of intelligence via a cheap substitute.) 
The vervets' different alarm calls were identified (or, one might say, 
translated) by Robert and Dorothy several years ago and these trans- 
lations have stood up well and been further sharpened and confirmed 
during their subsequent efforts to decipher the other vocalizations. 
(One day around noon we heard the eagle alarm of a superb star- 
ling, which the monkeys immediately heeded. Amin, the dominant 
female in the group, looked up, found the eagle in a treetop about 
a hundred and fifty meters away and gave a vervet eagle alarm. The 
others followed her gaze, but didn't take up the alarm. They saw, as she 
did on second glance, that it was not a martial eagle, which preys on 
vervets, but a snake eagle-just about the same size and with very simi- 
lar markings but no threat to vervets. Only through binoculars could 
I observe the minor differences in the eagle's crest and coloration that 
had put the monkeys' minds at ease.) 
Among the other vocalizations that have been identified are "grunt 
to a dominant" and "grunt to a subordinate" and a chutter that could 
be translated "I spy vervets from another group." A vocalization that 
Robert and Dorothy are currently studying has been dubbed the Mov- 
ing Into the Open (or MIO) grunt. Shortly before a monkey in a bush 
moves out into the open, it often gives a MIO grunt. Other monkeys 
in the bush will often repeat it-spectrographic 
analysis has not (yet) 
revealed a clear mark of difference between the initial grunt and this 
response. If no such echo is made, the original grunter will often stay 
in the bush for five or ten minutes and then repeat the MIO. Often, 
when the MIO is echoed by one or more other monkeys, the original 
grunter will thereupon move cautiously into the open. 
But what does the MIO grunt mean? I suggested to Robert and 
Dorothy that we sit down and make a list of possible translations and 
This content downloaded from 128.255.6.125 on Mon, 26 Oct 2015 23:48:21 UTC
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

216 
Poetics Today 9:1 
see which we could eliminate or support on the basis of evidence 
already at hand. I started with what seemed the most straightforward 
and obvious possibility: 
"I'm going" 
"I read you. You're going." 
But what would be the use of saying this? Vervets are in fact a taciturn 
lot, who keep silent most of the time and are not given to anything 
that looks like passing the time of day by making obvious remarks. 
Like E. F. Hutton, when a vervet talks, the others listen. "Well, then," 
I asked, "could it be a request for permission to leave?" 
"May I go, please?" 
"Yes, you have my permission to go." 
This hypothesis could be knocked out if higher ranking vervets ever 
originated the MIO in the presence of their subordinates. In fact, 
higher-ranking vervets do tend to move into the open first, so it doesn't 
seem that MIO is a request for permission. Could it be a command, 
then? 
"Follow me!" 
"Aye, Aye, Cap'n." 
Not very plausible, Dorothy thought. "Why waste words with such an 
order when it would seem to go without saying in vervet society that low- 
ranking animals follow the lead of their superiors? For instance, you 
would think that there would be a vocalization meaning 'May I?' to be 
said by a monkey when approaching a dominant in hopes of grooming 
it. And you'd expect there to be two responses: 'You may' and 'You 
may not' but there is no sign of any such vocalization. Apparently such 
interchanges would not be useful enough to be worth the effort. There 
are gestures and facial expressions which may serve this purpose but 
no audible signals." 
Perhaps, Dorothy thought, the MIO grunt served simply to acknowl- 
edge and share the fear: 
"I'm really scared." 
"Yeah. Me too." 
Another interesting 
possibility was that the grunt helped with coordi- 
nation of the group's movements: 
"Ready for me to go?" 
"Ready whenever you are." 
A monkey that gives the echo is apt to be the next to leave. Or perhaps 
even better: 
"Coast clear?" 
"Coast is clear. We're covering you." 
This content downloaded from 128.255.6.125 on Mon, 26 Oct 2015 23:48:21 UTC
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

Dennett * Out of the Armchair 
217 
The behavior so far observed is compatible with this reading, which 
would give the MIO grunt a robust purpose, orienting the monkeys 
to a task of cooperative vigilance. The responding monkeys do watch 
the leave-taker and look in the right directions to be keeping an eye 
out. 
"Suppose then, that this is our best candidate hypothesis," I said. 
"Can we think of anything to look for that would particularly shed 
light on it?" Among males, competition overshadows cooperation more 
than among females. Would a male bother giving the MIO if its only 
company in a bush was another male? Robert had a better idea: sup- 
pose a male originated the MIO grunt; would a rival male be devious 
enough to give a dangerously misleading MIO response when he saw 
that the originator was about to step into trouble? The likelihood of 
ever getting any good evidence of this is minuscule, for you would have 
to observe a case in which Originator didn't see and Responder did 
see a nearby predator and Responder saw that Originator didn't see 
the predator. (Otherwise Responder would just waste his credibility 
and incur the wrath and mistrust of Originator for no gain.) Such a 
coincidence of conditions must be extremely rare. 
"But perhaps we could contrive it," Robert went on. "Perhaps we 
could do it with something like a stuffed python that we could very 
slyly and surreptitiously reveal to just one of two males who seemed 
about to venture out of a bush." The technical problems would clearly 
be nasty and at best it would be a long shot but with luck we might 
just manage to lure a liar into our trap. 
But on further reflection, the technical problems looked virtually in- 
surmountable. How would we establish that the "liar" had actually seen 
(and been taken in by) the "predator" and wasn't just innocently and 
sincerely reporting that the coast was clear? I found myself tempted 
(as often before in our discussions) to indulge in a fantasy: "If only 
I were small enough to dress up in a vervet suit, or if only we could 
introduce a trained vervet, or a robot or puppet vervet who could ..." 
and slowly it dawned on me that this recurring escape from reality had 
a point: there is really no substitute, in the radical translation business, 
for going in and talking with the natives. You can test more hypotheses 
in half an hour of attempted chitchat than you can in a month of ob- 
servation and unobtrusive manipulation. But to take advantage of this 
you have to become obtrusive; you-or 
your puppet-have 
to enter 
into communicative encounters with the natives, if only to go around 
pointing to things and asking "Gavagai?" in an attempt to figure out 
what "Gavagai" means. Similarly, in your typical mystery story caper, 
some crucial part of the setting up of the "Sherlock Holmes method" 
trap is-must be-accomplished 
by imparting some (mis)information 
verbally. Maneuvering your subjects into the right frame of mind- 
This content downloaded from 128.255.6.125 on Mon, 26 Oct 2015 23:48:21 UTC
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

218 
Poetics Today 9:1 
and knowing you've succeeded-without 
the luxurious efficiency of 
words can prove to be arduous at best and often next to impossible. 
In particular, it is often next to impossible in the field to establish 
that particular monkeys have been shielded from a particular bit of in- 
formation. Since many of the theoretically most interesting hypotheses 
depend on just such circumstances, it is often very tempting to think 
of moving the monkeys into a lab, where a monkey can be physically 
removed from the group and given opportunities to acquire informa- 
tion that the others don't have and that the test monkey knows they don't 
have. Just such experiments are being done, by Robert and Dorothy 
with a group of captive vervets in California, and by other researchers 
with chimpanzees. The early results are tantalizing but equivocal (of 
course) and perhaps the lab environment, with its isolation booths, will 
be just the tool we need to open up the monkey's minds but my hunch 
is that being isolated in that way is such an unusual predicament for 
vervet monkeys that they will prove to be unprepared by evolution to 
take advantage of it. 
The most important thing I think I learned from actually watching 
the vervets is that they live in a world in which secrets are virtually 
impossible. Unlike orangutans, who are solitary and get together only 
to mate and when mothers are rearing offspring, and unlike chimps, 
who have a fluid social organization in which individuals come and go, 
seeing each other fairly often but also venturing out on their own a 
large proportion of the time, vervets live in the open in close proximity 
to the other members of their groups and have no solitary projects 
of any scope. So it is a rare occasion indeed when one vervet is in 
a position to learn something it alone knows and knows that it alone 
knows. (The knowledge of the others' ignorance and of the possibility 
of maintaining it is critical. Even when one monkey is the first to see a 
predator or a rival group and knows it, it is almost never in a position 
to be sure the others won't very soon make the same discovery.) But 
without such occasions in abundance, there is little to impart to others. 
Moreover, without frequent opportunities to recognize that one knows 
something the others don't know, devious reasons for or against im- 
parting information cannot even exist-let 
alone be recognized and 
acted upon. People who live in glass houses have no stones to throw- 
or hoard-and 
hence have no use for a sophisticated delivery system 
with lots of options and decision points. 
In sum, the vervets couldn't really make use of most of the features 
of a human language, for their world-or 
you might even say their 
lifestyle-is 
too simple. Their communicative needs are few but in- 
tense and their communicative opportunities are limited. Like honey- 
mooners who have not been out of each other's sight for days, they 
This content downloaded from 128.255.6.125 on Mon, 26 Oct 2015 23:48:21 UTC
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

Dennett * Out of the Armchair 
219 
find themselves with not much to say to each other (or to decide to 
withhold). But if they couldn't make use of a fancy, humanlike lan- 
guage, we can be quite sure that evolution hasn't provided them with 
one. Of course if evolution provided them with an elaborate language 
in which to communicate, the language itself would radically change 
their world and permit them to create and pass secrets as profusely as 
we do. Then they could go on to use their language, as we use ours, 
in hundreds of diverting and marginally "useful" ways. But without 
the original information-gradients needed to prime the evolutionary 
pump, such a language couldn't get established. 
So we can be quite sure that the MIO grunt, for instance, is not 
crisply and properly translated by any familiar human interchange. 
It can't be a (pure, perfect) command or request or question or ex- 
clamation because it isn't part of a system that is elaborate enough to 
make room for such sophisticated distinctions. When you say "Wanna 
go for a walk?" to your dog and he jumps up with a lively bark and 
expectant wag of the tail, this is not really a question and answer. 
There are only a few ways of "replying" available to the dog. It can't 
do anything tantamount to saying "I'd rather wait till sundown" or 
"Not if you're going to cross the highway" or even "No thanks." Your 
utterance is a question in English but a sort of melted-together mix- 
ture of question, command, exclamation and mere harbinger (you've 
made some of those going-out-noises again) to your dog. The vervets' 
MIO grunt is no doubt a similar mixture but while that means we 
shouldn't get our hopes too high about learning Vervetese and finding 
out all about monkey life by having conversations with the vervets, it 
doesn't at all rule out the utility of these somewhat fanciful translation 
hypotheses as ways of interpreting-and 
uncovering-the 
actual in- 
formational roles or functions of these vocalizations. When you think 
of the MIO as "Coast clear?" your attention is directed to a variety 
of testable hypotheses about further relationships and dependencies 
that ought to be discoverable if that is what MIO means-or 
even just 
"sort of" means. 
Alas, some of the most interesting hypotheses are testable "in prin- 
ciple" (as a philosopher would say) but not really testable in practice. 
Sometimes this is due to the sort of technical difficulties that would 
make our MIO liar-trap so hard to set up. But it was brought home 
to me that there are other obstacles I hadn't counted on as well. Over- 
experimentation is a constant temptation but must be resisted. These 
monkeys have been scrupulously and unobtrusively studied for years 
and enough is now known about them-as individuals-to 
make them 
gloriously valuable subjects in these subtle probes into their beliefs. 
They could easily be spoiled for further research, however, by being 
This content downloaded from 128.255.6.125 on Mon, 26 Oct 2015 23:48:21 UTC
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

220 
Poetics Today 9:1 
subjected to experiments that drew their attention to their human 
observers or to the equipment or that disrupted their lives in other 
ways. 
For instance, a good way to try to refute the "Coast clear?" hypothesis 
about MIO-and 
such an attempt should of course be made-would 
be to originate MIO from a speaker hidden in the same bush with 
some monkeys. If they respond without being able to see just where the 
originator is, it is very unlikely that their response means "I'm covering 
you." But if our hypothesis turns out to be correct, the monkeys should 
be motivated to find the originator before responding and this would 
lead them to the hidden speaker in a state of heightened curiosity. 
The experiment threatens to blow the cover of the hidden speakers. 
Robert and Dorothy have an informal list of experiments like this, 
what you might call last-one-out-the-door experiments, which they 
may someday run. If they ever learned, for instance, that changes in 
Kenya's political or social circumstances were about to make further 
experimentation impossible, then on the eve of their departure and 
knowing that no one else would be in a position to continue study- 
ing their groups, they might run through these experiments, roughly 
ranked in order of the damage they might do, as best they could. 
Other experiments which at first glance seem tempting would in- 
volve getting the monkeys into a certain frame of mind by repeatedly 
presenting them with certain evidence, but nothing that smacks of 
training must enter their lives. They are well situated to be studied for 
what they know now or can pick up easily with a normal investment of 
normally motivated attention, not for what can be dinned into them 
under extraordinary conditions. (You can train a bear to ride a bicycle 
-an 
astonishing fact of elusive theoretical significance.) But without 
resorting to intensive training and without the luxury of a rich lan- 
guage with which you can simply tell your subjects the information 
that gets them into the "right" state for the experiment, it is often just 
impossible to assure yourself that your subjects have the one or two 
critical (and typically false) beliefs that can make a Sherlock Holmes 
trap so devastatingly revealing. 
So this is what I learned. I learned that my methods, which work so 
well on people (especially in thought experiments and other fictional 
settings!), are strictly limited in application to animals who cannot be 
prepared as subjects with the help of language. But (looking on the 
bright side) the attempt to apply the methods helps uncover the very 
features of the monkeys' predicament that make them poor customers 
for a language that would give more power to the methods. Wittgen- 
stein once said "If a lion could speak, we could not understand him." 
I disagree. If a monkey could speak-really 
speak a language-we 
This content downloaded from 128.255.6.125 on Mon, 26 Oct 2015 23:48:21 UTC
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

Dennett * Out of the Armchair 
221 
could understand him just fine because, if a monkey could speak, his 
way of life would have to be very much more like ours than it is. 
References 
Dennett, Daniel C. 
1983 "Intentional Systems in Cognitive Ethology: the Panglossian Paradigms 
Defended," Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 343-390. 
This content downloaded from 128.255.6.125 on Mon, 26 Oct 2015 23:48:21 UTC
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

