Preston on Exaptation: Herons, Apples, and Eggs
Daniel C. Dennett
The Journal of Philosophy, Vol. 95, No. 11. (Nov., 1998), pp. 576-580.
Stable URL:
http://links.jstor.org/sici?sici=0022-362X%28199811%2995%3A11%3C576%3APOEHAA%3E2.0.CO%3B2-U
The Journal of Philosophy is currently published by Journal of Philosophy, Inc..
Your use of the JSTOR archive indicates your acceptance of JSTOR's Terms and Conditions of Use, available at
http://www.jstor.org/about/terms.html. JSTOR's Terms and Conditions of Use provides, in part, that unless you have obtained
prior permission, you may not download an entire issue of a journal or multiple copies of articles, and you may use content in
the JSTOR archive only for your personal, non-commercial use.
Please contact the publisher regarding any further use of this work. Publisher contact information may be obtained at
http://www.jstor.org/journals/jphil.html.
Each copy of any part of a JSTOR transmission must contain the same copyright notice that appears on the screen or printed
page of such transmission.
JSTOR is an independent not-for-profit organization dedicated to and preserving a digital archive of scholarly journals. For
more information regarding JSTOR, please contact support@jstor.org.
http://www.jstor.org
Fri May 18 08:30:47 2007

576 
THEJOURNALOF PHILOSOPHI' 
COMMENTS AND CRITICISM 
PRESTON ON EXAPTATION: HERONS, APPLES, AND EGGS 
B
eth Preston's1 attempt to exploit the concept of exaptation in 
her proposed theory of function puts a salutary strain on it, 
thereby exposing its weaknesses better than its critics have 
done. Stephen Jay Gould and Elizabeth S. Vrba2 once proposed a 
contrast between adaptations and what they called exaptntions: "char-
acters evolved for other usages (or for no function at all) and later 
'coopted' for their current role" (ibid., p. 6). The term never caught 
on among evolutionary biologists (I can find only one use of the 
term by Gould himself outside the original article3), and Ruth Mil- 
likan4 and I have independently argued that exaptation is nothing 
but the early stage of any adaptation, rather than a distinguished 
phenomenon in its own right. As I put it: 
every adaptation is one sort of exaptation or the other-this 
is trivial, 
since no function is eternal; if you go back far enough, you will find that 
every adaptation has developed out of predecessor structures each of 
which either had some other use or no use at a1l.j 
Preston claims that Millikan and I both make the same mistake: we 
"neglect to ask whether there are any ongoing exaptations that do 
not get transformed into adaptations [in the way just 
described]...and so enjoy an independent status" (242 fn. 31). Let us 
see, then, if there are exaptations that are not just the juvenile 
stages-as 
one might say-of 
adaptations. 
Preston: "The case of the mantling heron shows that there are in- 
deed ongoing exaptations" (241). African black herons use their out- 
' ''Why Is a Wing Like a Spoon? X Pluralist Theory of Function," this J O U ~ K ,  
xcv, 5 (May 1998): 215-54. 
"Exaptation: A Missing Term in the Science of Form," Paleobiolog3', RII (1982): 
415. The paper is often cited by philosophers, and is reprinted in David L. Hull 
and Michael Ruse, eds., The Philosophy ofBiolog3' (New York: Oxford, 1998). 
"~ulbfor B~ontosaurus: Reflections on iVatural Histo? (New York: Norton, 1991), p. 
14411. "Gould and ITrba offer the term 'exaptation' for such traits, but even though 
their paper was published 16 years ago the term has found little use in bio1og)"- 
R. McN. Alexander, "Finding Purpose in Life" (review of Colin Allen, Marc Bekoff, 
and George IT. Lauder, eds., Nature's Purposes: Anabses ofFunction and Design in Biol- 
ogy), Science, CCLXXXI, 14 (August 14, 1998): 927. 
Language, Thought, and Other Biological Categories (Cambridge: MIT, 1984); PlV~ite 
Queen Psjcholog3' and Other Essaysfor Alice (Cambridge: MIT, 1993). 
j Dawin's Dangerous Idea: Evolution and the Meanings of L f e  (New York: Simon and 
Schuster, 1995), p. 281. 
0022-362X/98/9511/5i6-80 
O 1998 The Journal of Philosophy, Inc. 

577 
COMMENTS AND CRITICISM 
spread wings to shade the shallow water in which they wade, cutting 
the reflective glare and permitting them to see their prey. The exam- 
ple is drawn from Gould and Vrba's paper, but instead of providing 
the support she supposes, it actually undermines her reading of their 
concept. As Gould and Vrba point out, there is a genetic basis for 
the mantling behavior pattern. So, although the shape of the wings 
may not (yet) have been significantly adjusted to this new use, there 
is no doubt that the use has been shaped by selection pressure, and 
hence that mantling is an adaptation after all. Preston surmises that 
"the fact that only one species of heron does do it indicates that the 
selection pressures favoring it are not very strong. Since wings of 
birds that do not fly rapidly become vestigial, the pressure would 
have to be strong to maintain wings suitable for mantling in a flight- 
less heron" (240-41). This hypothetical speculation is both dubious 
and beside the point. Compare the prospects of herons that can 
mantle but not fly with herons that cannot do either; the selection 
pressure for mantling would be very strong indeed in that imagined 
scenario, and the fact that the behavior is found in only one species 
of heron is no indication at all of weakness of selection pressure. But 
in any case, since multiple-selection pressures act simultaneously, 
and since the mantling behavior is clearly under selection, we need 
not attempt the thankless task of apportioning the relative contribu- 
tion of flight and mantling (and other yet unnoticed functions) to 
the maintainance of the shape (and opacity, and weight, and so on) 
of the wings. 
All adaptations start with some fortuitous aptness, a lot or a little, 
which then gets further refined (a little or a lot) to serve the new 
function better. If we want, we can honor the cases at one extreme 
with a term of their own-we 
can call exaptations those cases in which 
there is lots of initial aptness (by somebody's lights) and relatively lit- 
tle if any later adjustment (so far). Gould and Vrba observe that the 
objets trouvis that form the basis of adaptations are very often exapta- 
tions in this sense, and this is important, since it alerts us to the om- 
nipresent possibility that features of adaptations may owe more to 
selection pressure under an earlier selectional regime than to any se- 
lectional shaping for current use. This salutary reminder may well 
serve to correct a variety of temporal myopia that sometimes afflicts 
adaptationists, but does not mark a major challenge or alternative to 
adaptationism, as Gould and Vrba suggest. 
Preston tries to make good on their suggestion. She sees that, if 
exaptation is to be something that contrasts with adaptation, rather 
than just an early phase of adaptation, she needs to find cases which 

5 78 
THEJOURNALOF PHILOSOPHY 
are not evanescent and in which the aptness of a feature for a func- 
tion is clearly independent of any "ongoing" selection pressure shap- 
ing or maintaining it. Gould and Vrba do not offer any such 
examples, nor do they harbor any such ambitions for their exapta- 
tions. One can see why. So long as the genetic variation for an 
exapted feature shares a genome with the genetic variation for what- 
ever feature underlies the "exapting," the selection pressures deter- 
mining their respective fates are inevitably intertwined, dissolving 
the imagined barrier between exaptation and adaptation. This be- 
comes clear if we imagine vaiying the case of the mantling heron so 
that the chances for the sought-for independence are maximized. 
Suppose herons mantled by holding a large, broad leaf in their bills, 
flipping it aside at the last instant as they plunged their bills into the 
water. The shape of the leaf so used would be under selection pres- 
sure in the heron genome (shaping the leaf-choosing machinery, or 
even the leaf-shape-altering machinery, in the heron's brain), while 
the original shape of the leaf would be presumably beyond the reach 
of the heron's genome, under "independent" selection pressure to 
serve other ends in the plant's genome. I flag the presumption of in- 
dependence, however, since even here, with two entirely distinct 
genomes, there is the omnipresent possibility of interaction effects: 
such herons would presumably favor fishing in locales with good 
shade leaves, and might even enter a symbiotic partnership with the 
favored plants, providing some benefit in exchange for leaves, 
thereby getting in position to have a selectional effect on the origi- 
nal leaf shape for mantling!6 
Exaptation-without-adaptation can thus be unstable even when the 
phenomenon is split between two different species. But other inter- 
specific cases might provide the sort of independence Preston seeks. 
Consider a difference between apples and eggs. Both are mighty 
good eating. Apples are adaptations, naturally selected for being 
good to eat, in payment to frugivores for spreading seeds. (Culti- 
vated apples enhance this adaptation, of course.) Eggs are not adap- 
tations for being good to eat; there is no selection pressure for 
deliciousness in eggs. (Domesticated hen eggs are an interesting ex- 
ception, of course, since they have been under artificial selection 
T h i s  sort of interaction is often o~erlooked, but its significance for e~olutionary 
theory is the main message of Richard Dawkins's most important book, The Ex-
tended Phenotfie (San Francisco: Freeman, 1982), which proposes and defends a 
new "central theorem": "An animalk behaviozcr tends to maximize the surciival of the 
genes 'j?orbr' 
that behavioul; whether or not those genes happen to be in the bod)) of the particu- 
lar animal performing it" (p. 233). 

579 
COMMENTS AND CRITICISM 
pressure for excellence as food.) Even wild eggs are delicious and 
nutritious; they are apt for eating, as many ovivores attest. Haunch of 
antelope is also delicious and nutritious, I gather, and certainly lions 
often select it as food, but it was not designed to be food even 
though lions and other carnivores have been designed to use it as 
food. What if we were to consider eggs and antelope haunches as 
exaptations? This is clearly not what Gould and Vrba had in mind, 
however ubiquitous such aptnesses are in nature. They are better for 
Preston's purposes, though, since they are parallels, in biology, for 
the "standardized exaptations of artifacts" Preston proposes in her 
pluralistic theory. All living things are food for some other living 
things, and food is certainly a functional category (like medicine, lubri-
cant, and the like). Yet living things and their parts are not in gen- 
eral designed by natural selection to be food. 
Nature is full of items which are not artifacts at all but which nev- 
ertheless are prized by one organism or another for performing 
some function. The gravel in a hen's gizzard is not designed for its 
grinding role, or for any other role; hens may be quite picky, 
though, about what bits of gravel end up in their gizzards. Or con- 
sider salt, which plays such a life-enhancing role in the lives of us all, 
to say nothing of the air we breathe (try living without it) and the 
very ground we stand on, for that matter. If hemoglobin molecules 
have the function of transporting oxygen molecules around in the 
blood stream, what is the function of the oxygen molecules? These 
items maintain their aptness for their functional roles independently 
of any shaping by natural selection of their properties; natural selec- 
tion designs the surrounding systems to take advantage of them. 
How shall we apply the concept of exaptation to this ubiquitous fea- 
ture of evolution? Shall we call all these cases exaptations? If it were 
not for Preston's attempt to keep Gould and Vrba's concept of exap- 
tation from evaporating under scrutiny, these problems with it might 
have gone ~ n n o t i c e d . ~  
' In a long footnote, Preston claims that I make "a rather elementary mistake in 
moving from 'every adaptation developed out of an exaptation' to 'e~ery adapta- 
tion is an exaptation'." ih she points out: "We do not say that because every bird 
developed out of an egg, every bird is an egg" (243 fn. 31). True indeed. I make a 
similar point in Dnnuin's Dnnge~ous Idea (p. 206). But in the context in which I 
make the claim (quoted above), my meaning is clear: every adaptation is an exap- 
tation at some point in its career, just as every bird is an egg at some point in its ca- 
reer. Contrary to what Preston says, 1do not "repeat the slogan that all adaptations 
are exaptations at intervals," though it is true that the many adaptations I discuss 
all start out as exaptations, as I sometimes note. I do say (once, p. 390) that all exap 
tations are adaptations, and Preston attempts to rebut this claim as well, by finding 
me (and Millikan) guilty of a fatal equivocation: "in the case of exaptation, 'selec- 

580 
THEJOURNAL OF PHILOSOPHY 
Preston is right to deplore the paucity of work on artifacts by 
philosophers, but the lacuna is not quite so gaping as she supposes. 
Some, but not all, of the good points in Preston's essay are made by 
me in my various discussions of "artifact hermeneutics."' 
DrnIEL C. DENNETT 
Tufts University 
tion' means adoption for a particular use on a particular occasion regardless of 
whether that use is successful or is repeated" (243 fn. 31). I doubt if this is what 
Preston meant to say, since it licenses a profligacy of function beyond all imagin- 
able theoretical interest. On this definition of exaptation, "selection" is so leniently 
defined that every stone a creature stepped on would become a stepping stone, 
elen if the creature stumbled on it. Since this was probably not her intention, her 
objection to Millikan and me remains unclear. 
"Beyond Belief," in A. Woodfield, ed., Thought and Object: Essays on Intentionality 
(New York: Oxford, 1982); "Evolution, Error, and Intentionality-," in The Intentional 
Stance (Cambridge: MIT, 1987); and "The Interpretation of Texts, People, and 
Other Artifacts," Philosoplzy and Phenomenological Xesea~ch, L, Supplement (1990): 
177-94. 

