Daniel C. Dennett
Who’s On First?
Heterophenomenology Explained
There is a pattern of miscommunication bedeviling the people working on con-
sciousness that is reminiscent of the classic Abbott and Costello ‘Who’s on
First?’ routine. With the best of intentions, people are talking past each other,
seeing major disagreements when there are only terminological or tactical pref-
erences — or even just matters of emphasis — that divide the sides. Since some
substantive differences also lurk in this confusion, it is well worth trying to sort
out. Much of the problem seems to have been caused by some misdirection in my
apologia for heterophenomenology (Dennett, 1982; 1991), advertised as an
explicitly third-person approach to human consciousness, so I will try to make
amends by first removing those misleading signposts and sending us back to the
real issues.
On the face of it, the study of human consciousness involves phenomena that
seem to occupy something rather like another dimension: the private, subjective,
‘first-person’ dimension. Everybody agrees that this is where we start. What,
then, is the relation between the standard ‘third-person’ objective methodologies
for studying meteors or magnets (or human metabolism or bone density), and the
methodologies for studying human consciousness? Can the standard methods be
extended in such a way as to do justice to the phenomena of human conscious-
ness? Or do we have to find some quite radical or revolutionary alternative sci-
ence? I have defended the hypothesis that there is a straightforward, conservative
extension of objective science that handsomely covers the ground — all the
ground — of human consciousness, doing justice to all the data without ever
having to abandon the rules and constraints of the experimental method that have
worked so well in the rest of science. This third-person methodology, dubbed
heterophenomenology (phenomenology of another not oneself), is, I have
claimed, the sound way to take the first person point of view as seriously as it can
be taken.
Journal of Consciousness Studies, 10, No. ??, 2003, pp. ??–??
Correspondence:
D.C. Dennett, Center for Cognitive Studies, Tufts University, Medford, MA
02155-5555, USA.
Email: daniel.dennett@tufts.edu

To place heterophenomenology in context, consider the following ascending
scale of methods of scientific investigation:
experiments conducted on anaesthetized animals;
experiments conducted on awake animals;
experiments on human subjects conducted in ‘behaviorese’
— subjects are treated as much as possible like laboratory rats, trained
to criterion with the use of small rewards, with minimal briefing and
debriefing, etc.;
experiments in which human subjects collaborate with experimenters
— making suggestions, interacting verbally, telling what it is like.
Only the last of these methods holds out much hope of taking human subjectivity
seriously, and at first blush it may seem to be a first-person (or, with its emphasis
on communicative interaction with the subjects, second-person) methodology,
but in fact it is still a third-person methodology if conducted properly. It is
heterophenomenology.
Most of the method is so obvious and uncontroversial that some scientists are
baffled that I would even call it a method: basically, you have to take the vocal
sounds emanating from the subjects’ mouths (and your own mouth) and interpret
them! Well of course. What else could you do? Those sounds aren’t just belches
and moans; they’re speech acts, reporting, questioning, correcting, requesting,
and so forth. Using such standard speech acts, other events such as button-
presses can be set up to be interpreted as speech acts as well, with highly specific
meanings and fine temporal resolution. What this interpersonal communication
enables you, the investigator, to do is to compose a catalogue of what the subject
believes to be true about his or her conscious experience. This catalogue of
beliefs fleshes out the subject’s heterophenomenological world, the world
according to S — the subjective world of one subject — not to be confused with
the real world. The total set of details of heterophenomenology, plus all the data
we can gather about concurrent events in the brains of subjects and in the sur-
rounding environment, comprise the total data set for a theory of human con-
sciousness. It leaves out no objective phenomena and no subjective phenomena
of consciousness.
Just what kinds of things does this methodology commit us to? Beyond the
unproblematic things all of science is committed to (neurons and electrons,
clocks and microscopes, . . . ) just to beliefs — the beliefs expressed by subjects
and deemed constitutive of their subjectivity. And what kind of things are
beliefs? Are they sentences in the head written in brain writing? Are they non-
physical states of dualist ectoplasm? Are they structures composed of proteins or
neural assemblies or electrical fields? We may stay maximally noncommittal
about this by adopting, at least for the time being (I recommend: for ever), the
position I have defended (Dennett, 1971; 1987; 1991) that treats beliefs from the
intentional stance as theorists’ fictions similar to centres of mass, the Equator,
and parallelograms of forces. In short, we may treat beliefs as abstractions that
measure or describe the complex cognitive state of a subject rather the way
2
D.C. DENNETT

horsepower indirectly but accurately measures the power of engines (don’t look
in the engine for the horses). As Churchland (1979) has pointed out, physics
already has hundreds of well-understood measure predicates, such as x has
weight-in-grams n, or x is moving up at n meters per second, which describe a
physical property of x by relating it to a number. Statements that attribute beliefs
using the standard propositional attitude format, x believes that p, describe x’s
internal state by relating it to a proposition, another kind of useful abstraction,
systematized in logic, not arithmetic. We need beliefs anyway for the rest of
social science, which is almost entirely conducted in terms of the intentional
stance, so this is a conservative exploitation of already quite well-behaved and
well-understood methods.
A catalogue of beliefs about experience is not the same as a catalogue of expe-
riences themselves, and it has been objected (Levine, 1994) that ‘conscious
experiences themselves, not merely our verbal judgments about them, are the pri-
mary data to which a theory must answer’. But how, in advance of theory, could
we catalogue the experiences themselves? We can see the problem most clearly
in terms of a nesting of proximal sources that are presupposed as we work our
way up from raw data to heterophenomenological worlds:
(a) ‘conscious experiences themselves’
(b) beliefs about these experiences
(c) ‘verbal judgments’ expressing those beliefs
(d) utterances of one sort or another
What are the ‘primary data’? For heterophenomenologists, the primary data are
the utterances, the raw, uninterpreted data. But before we get to theory, we can
interpret these data, carrying us via (c) speech acts to (b) beliefs about experi-
ences.1 These are the primary interpreted data, the pretheoretical data, the quod
erat explicatum (as organized into heterophenomenological worlds), for a sci-
ence of consciousness. In the quest for primary data, Levine wants to go all the
way to (a) conscious experiences themselves, instead of stopping with (b) sub-
jects’ beliefs about their experiences, but this is not a good idea. If (a) outruns (b)
— if you have conscious experiences you don’t believe you have — those extra
conscious experiences are just as inaccessible to you as to the external observers.
So Levine’s proposed alternative garners you no more usable data than hetero-
phenomenology does. Moreover, if (b) outruns (a) — if you believe you have
conscious experiences that you don’t in fact have — then it is your beliefs that we
need to explain, not the non-existent experiences! Sticking to the heteropheno-
menological standard, then, and treating (b) as the maximal set of primary data,
is the way to avoid any commitment to spurious data.
HETEROPHENOMENOLOGY EXPLAINED
3
[1] Doesn’t interpretation require theory? Only in the minimal sense of presupposing that the entity inter-
preted is an intentional system, capable of meaningful communication. The task of unifying the inter-
pretation of all the verbal judgments into a heterophenomenological world is akin to reading a novel,
in contrast to reading what purports to be true history or biography. The issue of truth and evidence
does not arise, and hence the interpretation is as neutral as possible between different theories of what
is actually happening in the subject.

But what if some of your beliefs are inexpressible in verbal judgments? If you
believe that, you can tell us, and we can add that belief to the list of beliefs in our
primary data: ‘S claims that he has ineffable beliefs about X’. If this belief is true,
then we encounter the obligation to explain what these beliefs are and why they
are ineffable. If this belief is false, we still have to explain why S believes
(falsely) that there are these particular ineffable beliefs. As I put it in Conscious-
ness Explained,
You are not authoritative about what is happening in you, but only about what seems
to be happening in you, and we are giving you total, dictatorial authority over the
account of how it seems to you, about what it is like to be you. And if you complain
that some parts of how it seems to you are ineffable, we heterophenomenologists
will grant that too. What better grounds could we have for believing that you are
unable to describe something than that (1) you don’t describe it, and (2) confess that
you cannot? Of course you might be lying, but we’ll give you the benefit of the
doubt (Dennett, 1991, pp. 96–7).
This is all quite obvious, but it has some under-appreciated implications.
Exploiting linguistic communication in this way, you get a fine window into the
subject’s subjectivity but at the cost of a peculiar lapse in normal interpersonal
relations. You reserve judgment about whether the subject’s beliefs, as expressed
in their communication, are true, or even well-grounded, but then you treat them
as constitutive of that subject’s subjectivity. (As far as I can see, this is the
third-person parallel to Husserl’s notion of bracketing or epoché, in which the
normal presuppositions and inferences of one’s own subjective experience are
put on hold, as best one can manage, in order to get at the core experience, as the-
ory-neutral and unencumbered as possible.) This interpersonal reserve can be
somewhat creepy. To put it fancifully, suppose you burst into my heterophenom-
enology lab to warn me that the building is on fire. I don’t leap to my feet and
head for the door; I write down ‘subject S believes the building is on fire’. ‘No,
really, it’s on fire!’ you insist, and I ask ‘Would you like to expand on that? What
is it like for you to think the building is on fire?’ and so forth. In one way I am tak-
ing you as seriously as you could ever hope to be taken, but in another way I am
not. I am not assuming that you are right in what you tell me, but just that that is
what you do believe. Of course most of the data-gathering is not done by any
such simple interview. Experiments are run in which subjects are prepared by
various conversations, hooked up to all manner of apparatus, etc., and carefully
debriefed. In short, heterophenomenology is nothing new; it is nothing other than
the method that has been used by psychophysicists, cognitive psychologists,
clinical neuropsychologists, and just about everybody who has ever purported to
study human consciousness in a serious, scientific way.
This point has sometimes been misunderstood by scientists who suppose,
quite reasonably, that since I am philosopher I must want to scold somebody for
something, and hence must be proposing restrictions on standard scientific
method, or discovering limitations therein. On the contrary, I am urging that the
prevailing methodology of scientific investigation on human consciousness is
not only sound, but readily extendable in non-revolutionary ways to incorporate
4
D.C. DENNETT

all the purported exotica and hard cases of human subjectivity. I want to put the
burden of proof on those who insist that third-person science is incapable of
grasping the nettle of consciousness.
Let me try to secure the boundaries of the heterophenomenological method
more clearly, then, since this has apparently been a cause of confusion. As
Anthony Jack has said to me:
It strikes me that heterophenomenology is a method in the same way that ‘empiri-
cism’ is a method, but no more specific nor clearly defined than that. Given how
general you seem to allow your definition of heterophenomenology to be, it is no
surprise that everything conforms! Perhaps it would be clearer if you explained
more clearly what it is supposed to be a counterpoint to — what it is that you object
to. I know I am not the only one who has a feeling that you make the goalposts sur-
prisingly wide. So what exactly is a foul? (Jack, personal correspondence).
Lone-wolf autophenomenology, in which the subject and experimenter are one
and the same person, is a foul, not because you can’t do it, but because it isn’t sci-
ence until you turn your self-administered pilot studies into heterophenomeno-
logical experiments. It has always been good practice for scientists to put them-
selves in their own experimental apparatus as informal subjects, to confirm their
hunches about what it feels like, and to check for any overlooked or underesti-
mated features of the circumstances that could interfere with their interpretations
of their experiments. But scientists have always recognized the need to confirm
the insights they have gained from introspection by conducting properly con-
trolled experiments with naive subjects. As long as this obligation is met, what-
ever insights one may garner from ‘first-person’ investigations fall happily into
place in ‘third-person’ heterophenomenology. Purported discoveries that cannot
meet this obligation may inspire, guide, motivate, illuminate one’s scientific the-
ory, but they are not data — the beliefs of subjects about them are the data. Thus if
some phenomenologist becomes convinced by her own (first-)personal experi-
ence, however encountered, transformed, reflected upon, of the existence of a
feature of consciousness in need of explanation and accommodation within her
theory, her conviction that this is so is itself a fine datum in need of explanation,
by her or by others, but the truth of her conviction must not be presupposed by
science.
Does anybody working on consciousness disagree with this? Does anybody
think that one can take personal introspection by the investigator as constituting
stand-alone evidence (publishable in a peer-reviewed journal, etc.) for any sub-
stantive scientific claim about consciousness? I don’t think so. It is taken for
granted, so far as I can see, by all the authors in this volume that there is no defen-
sible ‘first-person science’ lying in this quarter, even though that would be the
most obvious meaning of the phrase ‘taking a first-person approach’. Thus
Cytowic, and Hubbard and Jack, discuss the difficulties in confirming that
synaesthesia is more or less what synaesthetes say it is, and never question the
requirement that ‘taking the phenomenological reports of these subjects seri-
ously’ (Hubbard and Jack, abstract) requires ‘the personal interaction between
subject and experimenter’. And when Hurlburt and Heavey say (abstract) ‘For
HETEROPHENOMENOLOGY EXPLAINED
5

example, first-person investigators often rely on questions such as “What were
you thinking when you . . . .?” or “How were you feeling when you. . . .?”’ it
apparently does not occur to them that these aren’t first-person investigations;
they are third-person investigations of the special kind that exploit the subject’s
capacity for verbal communication. They are heterophenomenological inquiries.
So I think we can set aside lone-wolf autophenomenology in all its guises. It is
not an attractive option, for familiar reasons. The experimenter/subject duality is
not what is being challenged by those who want to go beyond the ‘third-person’
methodology. What other alternatives should we consider?
Several critics have supposed that heterophenomenology, as I have described
it, is too agnostic or too neutral. Goldman (1997) says that heterophenomenology
is not, as I claim, the standard method of consciousness research, since research-
ers ‘rely substantially on subjects’ introspective beliefs about their conscious
experience (or lack thereof)’ (p. 532). In personal correspondence (Feb 21, 2001,
available as part of my debate with Chalmers, on my website, at http://
ase.tufts.edu/cogstud/papers/chalmersdeb3dft.htm) he puts the point this way:
The objection lodged in my paper [Goldman, 1997] to heterophenomenology is that
what cognitive scientists actually do in this territory is not to practice agnosticism.
Instead, they rely substantially on subjects’ introspective beliefs (or reports). So my
claim is that the heterophenomenological method is not an accurate description of
what cognitive scientists (of consciousness) standardly do. Of course, you can say
(and perhaps intended to say, but if so it wasn’t entirely clear) that this is what scien-
tists should do, not what they do do.
I certainly would play the role of reformer if it were necessary, but Goldman is
simply mistaken; the adoption of agnosticism is so firmly built into practice these
days that it goes without saying, which is perhaps why he missed it. Consider, for
instance, the decades-long controversy about mental imagery, starring Roger
Shepard, Steven Kosslyn, and Zenon Pylyshyn among many others. It was initi-
ated by the brilliant experiments by Shepard and his students in which subjects
were shown pairs of line drawings like the pair in figure 1, and asked to press one
6
D.C. DENNETT
Figure 1

button if the figures were different views of the same object (rotated in space)
and another button if they were of different objects. Most subjects claim to solve
the problem by rotating one of the two figures in their ‘mind’s eye’ or imagina-
tion, to see if it could be superimposed on the other. Were subjects really doing
this ‘mental rotation’? By varying the angular distance actually required to rotate
the two figures into congruence, and timing the responses, Shepard was able to
establish a remarkably regular linear relation between latency of response and
angular displacement. Practiced subjects, he reported, are able to rotate such
mental images at an angular velocity of roughly 60 per second (Shepard and
Metzler, 1971). This didn’t settle the issue, since Pylyshyn and others were quick
to compose alternative hypotheses that could account for this striking temporal
relationship. Further studies were called for and executed, and the controversy
continues to generate new experiments and analysis today (see Pylyshyn, forth-
coming, for an excellent survey of the history of this debate; also my commen-
tary, Dennett, forthcoming, both in Behavioral and Brain Sciences). Subjects
always say that they are rotating their mental images, so if agnosticism were not
the tacit order of the day, Shepard and Kosslyn would have never needed to do
their experiments to support subjects’ claims that what they were doing (at least
if described metaphorically) really was a process of image manipulation. Agnos-
ticism is built into all good psychological research with human subjects. In
psychophysics, for instance, the use of signal detection theory has been part of
the canon since the 1960s, and it specifically commands researchers to control
for the fact that the response criterion is under the subject’s control although the
subject is not himself or herself a reliable source on the topic. Or consider the
voluminous research literature on illusions, both perceptual and cognitive, which
standardly assumes that the data are what subjects judge to be the case, and never
makes the mistake of ‘relying substantially on subjects’ introspective beliefs’.
The diagnosis of Goldman’s error is particularly clear here: of course experi-
menters on illusions rely on subjects’ introspective beliefs (as expressed in their
judgments) about how it seems to them, but that is the agnosticism of heterophe-
nomenology; to go beyond it would be, for instance, to assume that in size illu-
sions there really were visual images of different sizes somewhere in subjects’
brains (or minds), which of course no researcher would dream of doing.2
David Chalmers has recently made a similar, if vaguer, claim:
Dennett . . . says scientists have to take a neutral attitude (taking reports themselves
as data, but making no claims about their truth), because reports can go wrong. But
this misses the natural intermediate option that Max Velmans has called critical phe-
nomenology: accept verbal reports as a prima facie guide to a subject’s conscious
experience, except where there are specific reasons to doubt their reliability. This
seems to be most scientists’ attitude toward verbal reports and consciousness: it’s
not ‘uncritical acceptance’, but it’s also far from the ‘neutrality’ of heterophenom-
enology (Chalmers, 2003).
HETEROPHENOMENOLOGY EXPLAINED
7
[2] Goldman has responded to this paragraph in a series of emails to me, which I have included in an
Appendix on the website mentioned above.

Chalmers neglects to say how Velmans’ critical phenomenology is ‘far from’ the
neutrality of heterophenomenology. I conducted a lengthy correspondence with
Velmans on this score and was unable to discover what the purported difference
is, beyond Velmans’ insisting that his method ‘accepts the reality of first-person
experience’, but since it is unclear what this means, this is something a good
scientific method should be agnostic about. Neither Chalmers nor Velmans has
responded to my challenge to describe an experiment that is licensed by, or moti-
vated by, or approved by ‘critical phenomenology’ but off-limits to heteropheno-
menology, so if there is a difference here, it is one of style or emphasis, not sub-
stance. Chalmers has acknowledged this, in a way:
Dennett ‘challenges’ me to name an experiment that ‘transcends’ the heteropheno-
menological method. But of course both views can accommodate experiments
equally: every time I say we’re using a verbal report or introspective judgment as a
guide to first-person data, he can say we’re using it as third-person data, and vice
versa. So the difference between the views doesn’t lie in the range of experiments
‘compatible’ with them. Rather, it lies in the way that experimental results are inter-
preted. And I think the interpretation I’m giving (on which reports are given prima
facie credence as a guide to conscious experience) is by far the most common atti-
tude among scientists in the field. Witness the debate about unconscious perception
among cognitive psychologists about precisely which third-person measures
(direct report, discrimination, etc.) are the best guide to the presence of conscious
perception. Here, third-person data are being used as a (fallible) guide to first-
person data about consciousness, which are of primary interest. On the hetero-
phenomenological view, this debate is without much content: some states subserve
report, some subserve discrimination, etc., and that’s about all there is to say. I think
something like this is Dennett’s attitude to those debates, but it’s not the attitude of
most of the scientists working in the field (Chalmers, 2003).
Chalmers misconstrues my view, as we can see if we look more closely at a
particular debate about unconscious perception, to see how heterophenomeno-
logy sorts out the issues. Consider masked priming. It has been demonstrated in
hundreds of different experiments that if you present subjects with a ‘priming’
stimulus, such as a word or picture flashed briefly on a screen in front of the sub-
ject, followed very swiftly by a ‘mask’ — a blank or sometimes randomly pat-
terned rectangle — before presenting the subjects with a ‘target’ stimulus to
identify or otherwise respond to, there are conditions under which subjects will
manifest behaviour that shows they have disciminated the priming stimulus,
while they candidly and sincerely report that they were entirely unaware of any
such stimulus. For instance, asked to complete the word stem fri___, subjects
who have been shown the priming stimulus cold are more likely to comply with
frigid and subjects who have been shown the priming stimulus scared are more
likely to comply with fright or frightened, even though both groups of subjects
claim not to have seen anything but first a blank rectangle followed by the target
to be completed. Now are subjects to be trusted when they say that they were not
conscious of the priming stimulus? There are apparently two ways theory can go
here:
8
D.C. DENNETT

A. Subjects are conscious of the priming stimulus and then the mask makes
them immediately forget this conscious experience, but it nevertheless
influences their later performance on the target.
B. Subjects unconsciously extract information from the priming stimulus,
which is prevented from ‘reaching consciousness’ by the mask.
Chalmers suggests that it is my ‘attitude’ that there is nothing to choose between
these two hypotheses, but my point is different. It is open for scientific investiga-
tion to develop reasons for preferring one of these theoretical paths to the other,
but at the outset, heterophenomenology is neutral, leaving the subject’s hetero-
phenomenological worlds bereft of any priming stimuli — that is how it seems to
the subjects, after all — while postponing an answer to the question of how or
why it seems thus to the subjects. Heterophenomenology is the beginning of a
science of consciousness, not the end. It is the organization of the data, a cata-
logue of what must be explained, not itself an explanation or a theory. (This was
the original meaning of ‘phenomenology’: a pretheoretical catalogue of the phe-
nomena theory must account for.) And in maintaining this neutrality, it is actually
doing justice to the first-person perspective, because you yourself, as a subject in
a masked priming experiment, cannot discover anything in your experience that
favours A or B. (If you think you can discover something — if you notice some
glimmer of a hint in the experience, speak up! You’re the subject, and you’re sup-
posed to tell it like it is. Don’t mislead the experimenters by concealing some-
thing you discover in your experience. Maybe they’ve set the timing wrong for
you. Let them know. But if they’ve done the experiment right, and you really
find, so far as you can tell from your own first-person perspective, that you were
not conscious of any priming stimulus, then say so, and note that both A and B
are still options between which you are powerless to offer any further evidence.)
But now suppose scientists look for a good reason to favour A or B and find it.
What could it be? A theory that could provide a good reason would be one that is
well-confirmed in other domains or contexts and that distinguishes, say, the sorts
of discriminations that can be made unconsciously from the sorts that require
consciousness. If in this case the masked discrimination was of a feature that in
all other circumstances could only be discriminated by a conscious subject, this
would be a (fairly) good reason for supposing that, however it may be with other
discriminations, in this case the discrimination was conscious-and-then-forgotten,
not unconscious. Notice that if anything at all like this were discovered, and used
as a ground for distinguishing A from B, it would be a triumph of third-person
science, not due to anything that is accessible only to the subject’s introspection.
Subjects would learn for the first time that they were, or were not, conscious of
these stimuli when they were taught the theory. It is the neutrality of heteropheno-
menology that permits such a question to be left open, pending further develop-
ment of theory. And of course anyone proposing such a theory would have to
have bootstrapped their way to their own proprietary understanding of what they
meant by conscious and unconscious subjects, finding a consilience between our
everyday assumptions about what we are conscious of and what we are not, on
HETEROPHENOMENOLOGY EXPLAINED
9

the one hand, and their own classificatory scheme on the other. Anything too
extreme (‘It turns out on our theory that most people are conscious for only a few
seconds a day, and nobody is conscious of sounds at all; hearing is entirely
unconscious perception’) will be rightly dismissed as an abuse of common
understanding of the terms, but a theory that is predictively fecund and elegant
can motivate substantial abandonment of this anchoring lore. Only when such a
theory is in place will we be able, for the first time, to know what we mean when
we talk about ‘the experiences themselves’ as distinct from what we each, sub-
jectively, take our experiences to be.
This sketches a clear path to settling the issue between A and B, or to discover-
ing good reasons for declaring the question ill-posed. If Chalmers thinks that sci-
entists do, and should, prefer a different attitude towards such questions, he
should describe in some detail what it is and why it is preferable. In fact, I think
that while there has been some confusion on this score (and some spinning of
wheels about just what would count as favouring unconscious perception over
conscious perception with forgetting), scientists are comfortable with the hetero-
phenomenological standards.
Varela and Shear (1999) describe the empathy of the experimenter that they
see as the distinguishing feature of a method they describe as first-person:
In fact, that is how he sees his role: as an empathic resonator with experiences that
are familiar to him and which find in himself a resonant chord. This empathic posi-
tion is still partly heterophenomenological, since a modicum of critical distance and
of critical evaluation is necessary, but the intention is entirely other: to meet on the
same ground, as members of the same kind. . . . Such encounters would not be possi-
ble without the mediator being steeped in the domain of experiences under exami-
nation, as nothing can replace that first-hand knowledge. This, then, is a radically
different style of validation from the others we have discussed so far (p. 10).
One can hardly quarrel with the recommendation that the experimenter be
‘steeped in the domain of experiences’ under examination, but is there more to
this empathy than just good, knowledgeable interpretation? If so, what is it? In a
supporting paper, Thompson speaks of ‘sensual empathy’, and opines: ‘Clearly,
for this kind of sensual empathy to be possible, one’s own body and the Other’s
body must be of a similar type’ (2001, p. 33). This may be clear to Thompson, but
in fact it raises a highly contentious set of questions: Can women not conduct
research on the consciousness of men? Can slender investigators not explore the
phenomenology of the obese? Perhaps more to the point, can researchers with no
musical training or experience (‘tin ears’) effectively conduct experiments on the
phenomenology of musicians? When guidance from experts is available, one
should certainly avail oneself of it, but the claim that one must be an expert (an
expert musician, an expert woman, an expert obese person) before conducting
the research is an extravagant one. Suppose, however, that it is true. If so, we
should be able to discover this by attempting, and detectably failing, to conduct
the research as well as the relevant experts conduct the research. That discovery
would itself be something that could only be made by first adopting the neutral
heterophenomenological method and then assaying the results in comparison
10
D.C. DENNETT

studies. So once again, the neutral course to pursue is not to assume that men
can’t investigate the consciousness of women, etc., but to investigate the ques-
tion of whether we can discover any good scientific reason to believe this. If we
can, then we should adjust the standards of heterophenomenology accordingly. It
is just common sense to design one’s experiments in such a way as to minimize
interference and maximize efficiency and acuity of data-gathering.
Is there, then, any ‘radically different style of validation’ on offer in these pro-
posals? I cannot find any. Some are uneasy about the noncommital stance of the
heterophenomenologist. Wouldn’t the cultivation of deep trust between subject
and experimenter be better? Apparently not. The history of folie à deux and
Clever Hans phenomena suggests that quite unwittingly the experimenter and the
subject may reinforce each other into artifactual mutual beliefs that evaporate
when properly probed. But we can explore the question. It is certainly wise for
the experimenter not to antagonize subjects, and to encourage an atmosphere of
‘trust’ — note the scare quotes. The question is whether experimenters should go
beyond this and actually trust their subjects, or should instead (as in standard
experimental practice) quietly erect the usual barriers and foils that keep subjects
from too intimate an appreciation of what the experimenters have in mind. Trust
is a two-way street, surely, and the experimenter who gets in a position where the
subject can do the manipulating has lost control of the investigation.
I suspect that some of the dissatisfaction with heterophenomenology that has
been expressed is due to my not having elaborated fully enough the potential
resources of this methodology. There are surely many subtleties of hetero-
phenomenological method that have yet to be fully canvassed. The policy of
training subjects, in spite of its uneven history in the early days of psychology,
may yet yield some valuable wrinkles. For instance, it might in some circum-
stances heighten the powers of subjects to articulate or otherwise manifest their
subjectivity to investigators. The use of closed loop procedures, in which sub-
jects to some degree control the timing and other properties of the stimuli they
receive is another promising avenue. But these are not alternatives to heterophe-
nomenology, which is, after all, just the conservative extension of standard scien-
tific methods to data gathering from awake, communicating subjects.
Why not live by the heterophenomenological rules? It is important to appreci-
ate that the reluctance to acquiesce in heterophenomenology as one’s method is
ideology-driven, not data-driven. Nobody has yet pointed to any variety of data
that are inaccessible to heterophenomenology. Instead, they have objected ‘in
principle’, perhaps playing a little gorgeous Bach for the audience and then ask-
ing the rhetorical question, ‘Can anybody seriously believe that the wonders of
human consciousness can be exhaustively plumbed by third-person methods??’
Those who are tempted to pose this question should either temper their incredu-
lity for the time being or put their money where their mouth is by providing the
scientific world with some phenomena that defy such methods, or by describing
some experiments that are clearly worth doing but that would be ruled out by
heterophenomenology. I suspect that some of the antagonism to heteropheno-
menology is generated by the fact that the very neutrality of the methodology
HETEROPHENOMENOLOGY EXPLAINED
11

opens the door to a wide spectrum of theories, including some — such as my own
— that are surprisingly austere, deflationary theories according to which con-
sciousness is more like stage magic than black magic, requiring no revolution in
either physics or metaphysics. Some opponents to heterophenomenology seem
intent on building the mystery into the very setting of the problem, so that such
deflationary theories are disqualified at the outset. Winning by philosophical
footwork what ought to be won by empirical demonstration has, as Bertrand Rus-
sell famously remarked, all the advantages of theft over honest toil. A more
constructive approach recognizes the neutrality of heterophenomenology and
accepts the challenge of demonstrating, empirically, in its terms, that there are
marvels of consciousness that cannot be captured by conservative theories.
References
Chalmers, David J. (2003), ‘Responses to articles on my work’
http://www.u.arizona.edu/~chalmers/responses.html#dennett2)
Churchland, Paul M. (1979), Scientific Realism and the Plasticity of Mind (Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press).
Dennett, Daniel C. (1971), ‘Intentional Systems’, J. Phil., 68, pp. 87–106.
Dennett, Daniel C. (1982), ‘How to study consciousness empirically, or Nothing comes to mind’,
Synthese, 59, pp. 159–80.
Dennett, Daniel C. (1987), The Intentional Stance (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press/Bradford).
Dennett, Daniel C. (1991), Consciousness Explained (Boston, MA: Little Brown).
Dennett, Daniel C. (forthcoming), ‘Does your brain use the images in it, and if so, how?’ commen-
tary on Pylyshyn (forthcoming).
Goldman, Alvin (1997), ‘Science, Publicity and Consciousness’, Philosophy of Science, 64,
pp. 525–45.
Levine, Joseph (1994), ‘Out of the closet: A qualophile confronts qualophobia’, Philosophical
Topics, 22, pp. 107–26.
Pylyshyn, Zenon W. (forthcoming), ‘Mental Imagery: In search of a theory’, Target article in
Behavioral and Brain Sciences.
Shepard, R.N. and Metzler, J. (1971), ‘Mental rotation of three-dimensional objects’, Science, 171,
pp. 701–3.
Thompson, Evan (2001), ‘Empathy and consciousness’, Journal of Consciousness Studies,
8 (5–7), pp. 1–33.
Varela, Francisco and Shear, Jonathan (1999), ‘First-person methodologies: What, Why, How?’,
Journal of Consciousness Studies, 6 (2–3), pp. 1–14.
12
D.C. DENNETT

