Continuing Commentary
References
Brown, J. L. (1982) The adaptationist program. Science 217:884. 
[RA]
Dawkins, E. (1982) The extended phenotype. Oxford University Press. 
[RA]
(1983a) Adaptationism was always predictive and needed no defense.
Behavioral and Brain Sciences 6:360-61. 
[RA]
(1983b) Universal Darwinism. In Evolution from molecules to men, ed. D.
S. Bendall. Cambridge University Press. 
[RA]
Dennett, D. C. (1975) Why the Law of Effect will not go away. Journal of the
Theory of Social Behavior 5:169-87. 
[RA]
(1983) Intentional systems in cognitive ethology: The "Panglossian
paradigm" defended. Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 6:343-90. 
[RA]
(1985) When does the intentional stance work? Behavioral and Brain
Sciences 8:763-66. 
[RA]
(1987) The intentional stance. MIT Press. 
[RA, rDCD]
(1988) Science, philosophy, and interpretation. Behavioral and Brain
Sciences ll(3):535-44. 
[rDCD]
(1989) "Cognitive ethology: Hunting for bargains or a wild goose chase?" In:
Goals, No-Goals and Own Goals: A debate on goal-directed and
intentional behaviour, ed. A. Montefiore & D. Noble. Unwin
Hyman. 
[rDCD]
Gould, S. J., & Lewontin, R. C. (1979) The spandrels of San Marco and the
Paeglossian paradigm: A critique of the adaptationist programme.
Proceedings of the Royal Society of London 6205:581-98. 
[RA]
Grant, V. (1983) The synthetic theory strikes back. Biobgisches 
Zentralblatt,
102:149-58. 
[RA]
Kitcher, P. (1985) Vaulting ambition. MIT Press. 
[RA]
Lewontin, R. C. (1982) Organism and environment. In: Learning,
development and culture, ed. H. C. Plotkin. Wiley. 
[RA]
Maynard Smith, J., Burian, R., Kaufrman, S., Alberch, P., Campbell, J.,
Goodwin, B., Lande, R., Raup, D. & Wolpert, L. (1985) Developmental
constraints and evolution. The Quarterly Review of Biology 60:265-
87. 
[RA]
Maynard Smith, J. (1984) Optimalization theory in evolution. In: Conceptual
Issues in Evolutionary Biology, ed. E. Sober. MIT Press. 
[RA]
Plotkin, H. C. (ed) (1982) Learning, Development, and Culture. John Wiley
and Sons. 
[RA]
Quine, W. V. O. (1960) Word and object. MIT Press. 
[RA]
Shubin, N. H., & Alberch, P. (1986) A morphological approach to the origin
and basic organization of the tetrapod limb. Evolutionary Biology 20:319-
87. 
[RA]
Skinner, B. F. (1981) Selection by consequences. Science 213:501-4.
Stich, S. (1985) Could man be an irrational animal? In: Naturalizing
Epistemology, ed. H. Komblith. MIT Press. 
[RA]
Commentary on Daniel C. Dennett (1988) Precis of The Intentional Stance. BBS 11:495-546.
Abstract of the original article: The intentional stance is the strategy of prediction and explanation that attributes beliefs, desires, and
other "intentional" states to systems - living and nonliving - and predicts future behavior from what it would be rational for an
agent to do, given those beliefs and desires. Any system whose performance can be thus predicted and explained is an intentional
system, whatever its innards. The strategy of treating parts of the world as intentional systems is the foundation of "folk
psychology," but is also exploited (and is virtually unavoidable) in artificial intelligence and cognitive science more generally, as
well as in evolutionary theory. An analysis of the role of the intentional stance and its presuppositions supports a naturalistic theory
of mental states and events, their content or intentionality, and the relation between "mentalistic" levels of explanation and
neurophysiological or mechanistic levels of explanation. As such, the analysis of the intentional stance grounds a theory of the mind
and its relation to the body.
The matter of other minds
Beatrice de Gelder
Departments of Psychology and Philosophy, Tilburg University, Tilburg
5000 LE, The Netherlands
Electronic mail: beadegel/htikubS.bitnet
Dennett's (1987; 1988) The Intentional Stance (henceforth
Stance) continues a long tradition of philosophers' writing pre-
scriptions for psychology. In the past, prescriptions were part of
cures for uncertainties about what we can know (epistemology)
and doubts about what we must do (ethics). The current philo-
sophical discussion about psychology is often limited to the
scientific status of the concepts of folk psychology. Stance is also
devoted to such matters (but see Dennett 1984). In this com-
mentary we examine the relevance to autism of the meth-
odology advocated in Stance. Autism also raises questions relat-
ed to the practical, ethical side of folk psychology not discussed
here.
When it was first described by Kanner in 1943, autism was
defined as an "innate inability to form the usual biologically
provided affective contact with people." Subsequent research
has confirmed that autism is a matter of severe social unadapted-
ness which is only remotely related to the syntactic aspects of
linguistic and intellectual skills. For example, linguistic impair-
ments are specifically in the domain of semantic-pragmatic
competence. Impairments in the basic skills needed for interac-
tion with others lead in turn to difficulties autists have in (to use
Dennett's words) "making sense of themselves." In the face of
this diagnosis, one is tempted to use the notion of a "theory of
mind." Should we conclude that, unlike chimpanzees (Premack
& Woodruff 1978), autists. do not have a theory of mind (Baron-
Cohen et al. 1985), that they are specifically retarded in the
development of a theory of mind (Baron-Cohen 1989), or alter-
natively, that autists might have only a theory of mind and lack
an ability for ascribing mental states in natural interaction (de
Gelder et al. 1988)? Such conclusions sound very much like
answers from folk psychology. We understand them but we do
not know what they mean. Stance promises to extricate us from
the predicament we find ourselves in when for the best of
scientific reasons we refuse to dump folk psychology. The
trouble is that Stance speaks in many tongues. It defends surface
intentionalism (SI), deep realism (DE) and it promotes a distinc-
tion between notions and beliefs (NBD). In this commentary I
point out that each of these views taken separately suggests a
perspective on autism. It appears difficult to combine and to
elaborate these perspectives.
1. Stance confirms at length the SI standpoint Dennett is
well known for: To be predictable by the intentional stance is all
there is to having beliefs. On most occasions we can effortlessly
predict autistic behavior by treating autists as if they had beliefs
and desires. If so, we must conclude on the strength of SI that
autists are real believers. This gets the intentionalist in conflict
with the current diagnosis of autism as a specific deficit that
manifests itself in interaction with other people but does not
affect perceptual beliefs. The conflict is of a peculiar kind
because SI is unhelpful in clarifying what the disagreement is
about and how far it extends. Moreover, the student of autism
searches for internal causes, mechanisms and processes to be
blamed for the deficit. SI declares that when it comes to
deciding about the intentionality of the system none of that
582
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1990) 13:3

Continuing Commentary
matters. Two interesting moves are possible, but SI can make
neither of them. One is to conceptualise in an interesting way
the intuition that autists can have beliefs about objects but not
about other people. SI is not sensitive to this distinction. The
other is to push the idea that "real" believers, in contrast to "as
if' believers, are able to reciprocate the intentional stance taken
toward them. Stance does not explore this possibility because it
does not matter for the SI perspective.
2. Stance shows Dennett as a deep realist (DR) defending the
innateness of "large parts of folk physics and folk psychology" (p.
495). Autism lends support to DR in the sense that genetic
determination of autism is increasingly likely. Happily, unlike
SI, DR does not override the existence of autism. Instead, it
leads to the conclusion that autists are not true believers. Now
our success at predicting their behavior becomes a mystery.
DR, just like SI, gives us no grip on the conflict. The reason is
straightforward. When it comes to saying just what it is about
folk psychology that is innate, Stance chooses the "via negativa."
It offers very few indications about the way intentional compe-
tence attributed by an SI theorist is realised (implemented or
approximated as Dennett says) in the organism. For example,
Stance offers little help to elaborate the distinction between
sympathetic understanding (the natural, innate capacity to at-
tribute beliefs and desires to others as part of ongoing daily
interaction, for example, preverbal social exchanges in babies,
recognising caretakers, interpreting emotional expressions by
reacting appropriately, or in the verbal domain, achieving joint
reference in conversation) and theoretical understanding (hav-
ing a theory of mind in the sense of engaging in conscious
inferential thinking and mastering the set of typical mentalist
concepts). The distinction (or similar ones derived from concern
with the implementation of our natural intentional competence)
is obviously not relevant from the point of view of SI, and the DR
claim is too unspeciic. The consequence is that in the context of
SI, claims about DR are easy prey for messianic eliminativists.
3. Stance also contains the outline of a distinction between
having beliefs and having notions. This aspect of Stance seems
particularly promising for understanding results from research
on autism but it leads to conclusions that Stance does not
envisage and may not welcome. It appears that, notwithstand-
ing their deficit, intellectually and verbally competent autistic
children do develop a theory of mind as measured in experi-
ments of interpersonal belief attribution (for recent results with
autistic subjects see Baron-Cohen 1989; Wimmer & Perner
1983, but see de Gelder 1987). Moreover, when no generalised
verbal impairment is present, autists do actually use intentional
language and are able to reason about mental states in an explicit
way (de Gelder & van der Heide, in press).
Experimental data are by no means our only source of infor-
mation on the autistic theory of mind. We observe that genetic
determination of autism is not incompatible with the gradual
improvements in social adaptedness observed in some cases. As
a matter of fact, progress in our understanding of the innate basis
of autism has led to a better understanding of appropriate
learning programs for autists. Some remedial tutoring programs
offer explicit instruction in social interaction. They try to famil-
iarize young autists with social situations by explaining how
people are likely to react to various moves, conversational and
other. Often the aim is to make visible the "scenario" behind a
series of events. The result is a better adapted behavioral
repertoire, providing a cover up and a strategy for compensating
for the original deficit. One might say that autists have devel-
oped an indirect, explicit, and theoretical route to natural
intentional behavior.
The contrast between direct and indirect routes, processes
and compensation strategies is borrowed from cognitive neuro-
psychology. It fits with modular models of cognition and with
the distinction between tacit, implicit representation and ex-
plicit propositional processing (e.g. Dennett 1988). In this view,
the autistic deficit has to do with implicit and modular pro-
cesses. At the behavioral level, the relative adaptedness of
autistic behavior illustrates the existence of the multiple levels
of control noted by Premack (1988). By the same token it shows
that the brain has more than one way of coping with the task
assigned by the intentional theorist to be intentionally compe-
tent.
Lets us now cast the situation just sketched in terms of
Dennett's NBD. Autism would be related to the fact that there
is no "concept" of other minds in the notional world of autists.
This is a plausible suggestion but it leads to implications not
envisaged in Stance. We saw that some autists show the sophis-
ticated intellectual achievements and the mastery of language
that are the conventional hallmarks of high order or ("real")
intentionality and that would no doubt qualify them as true
believers. Must Stance then conclude that organisms capable of
sophisticated verbal behavior but lacking intentional notions are
still true believers? If so, SI neutralises the positive contribu-
tions from DR and NBD.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This paper describes research supported by grants from The Dutch
National Science Foundations and Tilburg University. I thank Paul
Bertelson and Andy Clark for assistance with the manuscript and Peter
Hobson and Tim Shallice for discussions on the research.
nse
Abstracting from mechanism
Daniel C. Dennett
Center for Cognitive Studies, Tufts University, Medford, MA 02155
With regard to (1), de Gelder is just wrong in claiming
that my view is "not sensitive" to the distinction between
having beliefs "about things" and "about people." Pre-
sumably some beliefs "about people" are about them only
insofar as they are mere "things" - e.g., the belief that a
particular person is visible, weighs more than a hundred
pounds, is too large to squeeze through a porthole, and so
on. These do not warrant distinguishing from similar
beliefs about tables and chairs and other things. The
special class of beliefs "about people" are those that are
about their beliefs and other mental or intentional at-
tributes. The mark of these is, in my terms, that they are
higher-order beliefs, and this distinction is central to my
view. As for the other alternative suggested - the idea
that only "real" believers can reciprocate the intentional
stance - this is discussed and rejected by me in the book,
and more explicitly in my response to Premack (1988, p.
522), who made the same proposal in his commentary.
With regard to (2), I agree with de Gelder that I missed
a trick in not distinguishing, as (in particular) her research
does, between what she calls sympathetic understanding
and theoretical understanding. But I see no reason why I
cannot incorporate her findings into my theory. Some
jazz musicians get by thanks to a hard-won mastery of
harmony theory, which permits them to figure out quick-
ly which notes "go" with a particular chord change, while
others - often innocent of music theory - just "do it by
ear." The differences in both competence and underlying
mechanisms are real and important, but so are the sim-
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1990) 13:3
583

Continuing Commentary
ilarities in competence. Autistic children seem to "have a
tin ear" for intentional attributions - a fact my theory
permits one to explore, though I grant that it not only did
not encourage this, but may well have contributed to
some researchers' overlooking this prospect. I like the
idea that the therapies de Gelder discusses are rather like
formal training in music theory for those who are not born
with good ears.
I think de Gelder's (3) misapprehends the point of my
notion-belief distinction, which Is really "just for philoso-
phers" and concerns theoretical niceties of reference -
such as what to do about beliefs about Santa Claus, or the
beliefs of those who don't know that the Morning Star is
the Evening Star. As far as i can see, its wheels turn quite
independently of any empirical issues arising from cog-
nitive neuropsychology. That might be a reason for crit-
icizing my distinction - or at least ignoring it, if puzzles in
formal semantics are outside one's concerns.
De Gelder's commentary points to a particular weak-
ness of the intentional stance which is a necessary con-
comitant -to its strength: Since it abstracts from mecha-
nisms (from the "design stance" point of view), it lumps
together those cases where different mechanisms (with
different details of competence and Incompetence) are
responsible for a shared competence. Sometimes this is
theoretically desirable; sometimes not. One must keep
this fact in mind.
References
Baron-Cohen, S. (1989) The autistic child's theory of mind: A case of specific
developmental delay. Journal of Child Psychology and
Psychiatry. 
[BDG]
Baron-Cohen, S., Leslie, A. & Frith, U. (1985) Does the autistic child have a
theory of mind? Cognition 21:37-46. [BDG]
De Gelder, B. (1987) On not having a theory of mind. Cognition 27(3):285-
90. [BDG]
De Gelder, B. & Van der Heide, L. (in press) The fragility of autistic
discourse. In: Discourse on the construction of language and self.
Harvester Press.
Dennett, D. (1984) Elbow room: The varieties of free will worth wanting.
Bradford Books. [BDG]
Dennett, D. (1988) Science, philosophy, and interpretation. Behavioral and
Brain Sciences ll(3):535-44. 
[rDCD, BDG]
Premack, D. (1988) Intentionality: How to tell Mae West from a crocodile.
Behavioral and Brain Sciences 11(4):522. 
[rDCD]
Premack, D. & Woodruff, G. (1978) Does the chimpanzee have a theory of
mind? Behavioral and Brain Sciences 1:515—26. [BDG]
^i W w m
i1 .ii^y^^lir>,
Edited by'M. HeSander, State University of New York at Buffalo, L/.S.A
This Handbook is concerned with principles of
human factors engineering for design of the
human-computer interface, it is most useful to
computer scientists, human factors engineers,
designers and design engineers, cognitive
scientists and experimental psychologists,
systems engineers, managers and executives
working with systems development.
Paperback: 
1990 1204 pages
Price: US$ 83.00 / Dfl. 185.00
ISBN 0-444-88673-7
Hardbound: 
1988 xxxiv + 1168 pages
Price: US$ 251.25 / Dfl. 490.00
ISBN 0-444-70536-8
The Dutch Guilder (Dfl.) price is definitive. US$ price is subject to
exchange rate fluctuations.
Contents: Models and Theories of
Human-Computer Interaction (9 chapters). User
Interface Design (14 chapters). Individual
Differences and Training (5 chapters). Applications
of Computer Technology (6 chapters). Tools for
Design and Evaluation (8 chapters). Artificial
Intelligence (5 chapters). Psychological and
Organizational Issues (5 chapters). Author index
(8,000 references). Subject index (4,000 Items).
Write to:
Eisewier Science Publishers
Attn.: Marlene Hamers, P.O. Box 103
1000 AC Amsterdam, The Netherlands
In the U.S.A. and Canada:
Eisewier Science Publishers
P.O. Box 882, Madison Square Station
New York, NY 10159, U.S.A.
(An Imprint of Elsevier Science Publishers)
584
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1990) 13:3

