 4  
 The Evolution of Reasons 
 Daniel C. Dennett  
 How should we think about teleology and purpose in these post-Darwinian 
times?  1  Long ago, Karl Marx thought he knew what  On the Origin of 
 Species had accomplished: 
 It is here that, for the ﬁ rst time, “teleology” in natural science is not 
only dealt a death blow but its rational meaning is empirically ex-
plained. (1861) 
 But a closer look shows that Marx is equivocating between two views that 
continue to be defended: 
 We should banish all teleological formulations from the natural  sciences, 
 or 
 now that we can “empirically explain” the “rational meaning” of nat-
ural phenomena without ancient ideology (of entelechies, Intelligent 
Creators and the like), we can replace old-fashioned, capital T “Te-
leology” with new, post-Darwinian teleology. 
 This equivocation is ﬁ rmly knitted into the practice and declarations of many 
thoughtful scientists to this day. On the one hand, biologists routinely and 
ubiquitously refer to the  functions of behaviors such as foraging and territory 
marking, organs such as eyes and swim bladders, subcellular “machinery” 
such as ribosomes, chemical cycles such as the Krebs cycle, macromolecules 
such as motor proteins and hemoglobin. But some thoughtful biologists and 
philosophers of biology insist that all this talk of function and purposes is re-
ally just a shorthand, a metaphorical façon de parler, and that, strictly speak-
ing, there are no functions, no purposes, no teleology at all in the world. 
Among the epithets hurled at unrepentant teleologists are “Darwinian para-
noia” (Richard Francis, Peter Godfrey-Smith) and “conspiracy theorists” 
(Alexander Rosenberg). It is, of course, open to defend an intermediate posi-
tion that forbids certain teleological excesses but licenses more staid and cir-
cumscribed varieties. My informal sense is that many scientists assume that 
just such a sane middle position is in place and must have been adequately 

48 Daniel C. Dennett
defended in some book or article that they probably read years ago. So far as 
I know, however, no such consensus classic text exists and many of the scien-
tists who guiltlessly allude to the functions of whatever they are studying still 
insist that they would never commit the sin of teleology. 
 One of the subtle forces in operation here is the desire not to give aid and 
comfort to the creationists and Intelligent Design crowd. By speaking of 
purpose and design in nature, we (apparently) give them half their case; it 
is better, they think, to maintain a stern embargo on such themes and in-
sist that,  strictly speaking,  nothing in the biosphere is designed unless it is 
designed by human artiﬁ cers. Nature’s way of generating complex systems 
(organs, behaviors, etc.) is so unlike an artiﬁ cer’s way that we should not 
use the same language to describe them. Thus Richard Dawkins speaks (on 
occasion—e.g., Dawkins 1976, 4) of  designoid features of organisms, and in 
 The Ancestor’s Tale,  he says, “The illusion of design conjured by Darwinian 
natural selection is so breathtakingly powerful” (Dawkins 2004, 457). I 
recently overheard a conversation among some young people in a bar about 
the marvels of the nanomachinery discovered inside all cells. “When you see 
all those fantastic little robots working away, how can you possibly believe 
in evolution!” one exclaimed, and another nodded wisely. Somehow these 
folks had gotten the impression that evolutionary biologists thought that 
life wasn’t all that complex, wasn’t made of components that were all that 
wonderful. These evolution doubters were not rednecks; they were Harvard 
medical students! They hugely underestimated the power of natural selec-
tion because they had been told by evolutionary biologists, again and again, 
that there is no  actual design in nature, only the  appearance of design. This 
episode strongly suggested to me that “common knowledge” is beginning to 
incorporate the mistaken idea that evolutionary biologists are reluctant to 
“admit” or “acknowledge” all the obvious design in nature. 
 Consider in this regard Christoph Schönborn, Catholic archbishop of 
Vienna, the chap duped by the Intelligent Design folks. He said, notoriously, 
in a  New York Times  op-ed piece titled “Finding Design in Nature” (July 7, 
2005), 
 The Catholic Church, while leaving to science many details about the 
history of life on earth, proclaims that by the light of reason the human 
intellect can readily and clearly discern purpose and design in the nat-
ural world, including the world of living things. Evolution in the sense 
of common ancestry might be true, but evolution in the neo-Darwinian 
sense—an unguided, unplanned process of random variation and natu-
ral selection—is not. Any system of thought that denies or seeks to ex-
plain away the overwhelming evidence for design in biology is ideology, 
not science. 
 Which campaign do we evolutionists want to lead? Do we want to try to 
convince lay people that they don’t really see the design that is stunningly 

The Evolution of Reasons 49
obvious at every scale in biology, or would we rather try to show that, won-
derful to say, what Darwin has shown is that there can be design—real de-
sign, as real as it gets—without an Intelligent Designer? We have persuaded 
the world that atoms are not atomic and that the earth goes around the sun. 
Why shrink from the pedagogical task of showing that there can be design 
without a designer? So I am defending here (once again, with new emphasis) 
the following claim. 
 The biosphere is utterly saturated with design, with purpose, with rea-
sons . What I call the design stance predicts and explains features throughout 
the living world using exactly the same assumptions that work so well when 
reverse-engineering artifacts are made by (somewhat) intelligent human de-
signers. Evolution by natural selection is a set of processes that “ﬁ nd” and 
“track” reasons for things to be arranged one way rather than another. The 
chief difference between the reasons found by evolution and the reasons 
found by human designers is that the latter are typically (but not always) 
represented in the minds of the designers, whereas the reasons uncovered by 
natural selection are typically represented for the ﬁ rst time by those human 
investigators who succeed in reverse engineering nature’s productions. That 
is to say, human designers think about the reasons for the features of their 
artifacts and hence have ideas that represent the reasons. They typically 
notice, appreciate, formulate, reﬁ ne, and then convey, discuss, and criticize 
the reasons for their designs. Evolution doesn’t do any of this; it just sifts 
mindlessly through the variation it generates, and the good stuff (which is 
good for reasons, reasons undreamed of or unrepresented by the process of 
natural selection) gets copied. 
 Evolutionary processes brought purposes and reasons into existence the 
same way they brought color vision (and hence colors) into existence: grad-
ually. If we understand the way our human world of reasons grew out of a 
simpler world, we will see that purposes and reasons are as real as colors, as 
real as life. Thinkers who insist that Darwin has banished teleology should 
in all consistency add that he also demonstrated the unreality of colors. 
Atoms are all there is, and atoms aren’t colored, and there are no reasons 
for the things they do, but that doesn’t mean that there are no colors and no 
reasons. There are reasons for what proteins do, and there are reasons for 
what bacteria do, what trees do, what animals do, what we do. (And there 
are colors as well, of course.) 
 1. DIFFERENT SENSES OF  WHY 
 Perhaps the best way of seeing this is to reﬂ ect on the different meanings of 
 why . The English word is equivocal, and the main ambiguity is marked by a 
familiar pair of substitute phrases:  what for? and  how come? 
 “Why are you handing me your camera?” asks  what  you are doing this 
 for . 

50 Daniel C. Dennett
 “Why does ice ﬂ oat?” asks  how come : what it is about the way ice forms 
that makes it lower density than liquid water. 
 The latter question asks for a  process narrative  that explains the phenom-
enon without saying it is  for anything. It is often said that answers to the 
latter question cite the  cause, not a  reason —a proper, telic reason. “Why 
is the sky blue?” “Why is the sand on the beach sorted by size?” “Why 
did the ground just shake?” “Why does hail accompany thunderstorms?” 
“Why is this dry mud cracked in such a fashion?” but also “Why did this 
turbine blade fail?” Some folks might wish to treat the question of why ice 
ﬂ oats as  demanding a  what for, telic  reason—God’s reason, presumably—
for this feature of the inanimate world, but this is just a mistake born of 
the ambiguity in the word. We can see the mistake clearly in an exchange 
that occurred in a debate I had with an ardent champion of Skinnerian 
behaviorism, Lou Michaels, at Western Michigan University in 1974. I had 
presented my paper “Skinner Skinned” (published in  Brainstorms,  1978) 
and Michaels, in his rebuttal, delivered a particularly bold bit of behaviorist 
ideology, to which I responded, “But why do you say that, Lou?” to which 
his instant reply was, “Because I have been reinforced for saying that in the 
past.” I was demanding a  what for  reason and getting a process narrative in 
reply. There is a difference, and the Skinnerians’ failed attempt to make it go 
away is one of the reasons—both  what for  and  how come —behaviorism is 
no longer a dominant school of psychology. That fate should alert positiv-
istically minded scientists that they pay a big price in understanding if they 
try to banish “what for.” 
 Aristotle’s four “causes,” or  aitia, mark a somewhat different set of ques-
tions. The “material cause” answers the question of what something is made 
of; since different things can be made of the same materials, the “formal 
cause” answers the question of what the difference is in such cases. The “ef-
ﬁ cient cause” answers the question of what triggered or started some event 
or process and is closest to how we use the word “cause” in most English 
usage (cause and effect), and then there is the  telic or “ﬁ nal cause,” which is 
indeed our  what for  sense of why: the purpose, the raison d’être, the reason 
for something to be or to be the way it is. 
 2.  THE EVOLUTION OF REASONS: FROM  HOW COME 
TO  WHAT FOR 
 Evolution by natural selection starts with  how come  and arrives at  what 
for . We start with a lifeless world in which there are lots of causes but no 
reasons, no purposes at all. There are just processes that happen. Some of 
those processes happen to generate other processes that happen to generate 
other processes until at some “point” (but don’t look for a bright line) we 

The Evolution of Reasons 51
ﬁ nd it appropriate to describe the  reasons why some things are arranged as 
they now are. We need to look at this transition in detail. 
 Following Wilfrid Sellars, Pittsburg philosophers, especially Robert 
Brandom and John Haugeland, have stressed that “the space of reasons,” 
as we ﬁ nd it in the ubiquitous human practice of asking for and criticizing 
one another’s reasons, is bound by  norms . Wherever there are reasons, there 
is room for, and a need for, some kind of  justiﬁ cation  and the possibility of 
 correction . They are right, but they tend to elide the distinction between two 
kinds of norms and their modes of correction, which I will call  Pittsburgh 
normativity and  Consumer Reports normativity . The former is concerned 
with the  social norms that arise within the practice of communication and 
collaboration. Hence, Haugeland (1998) speaks of the “censoriousness” of 
members of society as the force that does the correcting. The latter, in con-
trast, is concerned with quality control or efﬁ ciency, the norms of engineer-
ing, you could say, as revealed by market forces or just by natural failures. 
This is nicely highlighted by the distinction between a good deed and a good 
tool, or, negatively, between  naughty and  stupid . People may punish you 
for being naughty, by their lights, but nature itself may mindlessly punish 
you for being stupid. Wherever there are  what for  reasons why, an implicit 
norm may be invoked: real reasons are supposed always to be good reasons, 
reasons that justify the feature in question. No demand for justiﬁ cation is 
implied by any  how come question (beyond the ever-present but usually 
tacit demand expressed as “and how do you know?”). As we shall see, we 
need both kinds of norms to create the perspective from which  what for 
reasons are  discernible in nature. Reason appreciation did not coevolve with 
reasons the way color vision coevolved with color. Reason appreciation is a 
later, more advanced product of evolution than reasons. 
 In  Darwin’s Dangerous Idea  (1995), I argued that natural selection is an 
algorithmic process, a collection of sorting algorithms that are themselves 
composed of generate-and-test algorithms that exploit randomness (pseudo-
randomness, chaos) in the generation phase, and some sort of mindless 
quality-control testing phase, with the winners advancing in the tournament 
by having more offspring. But how does this cascade of generative processes 
get underway? That is, of course, a major puzzle in evolutionary theory: the 
origins of life are still shrouded in perplexity, but we can dissipate some of 
the fog by noting that, as usual, a variety of gradual processes of revision are 
available to get the ball rolling. 
 The prebiotic world was not utterly chaotic, a random confetti of atoms 
in motion. In particular, there were  cycles, at many spatiotemporal scales: 
seasons, night and day, tides, the water cycle, and thousands of chemical 
cycles discoverable at the atomic and molecular level. Think of cycles as 
“do-loops” in algorithms, actions that return to a starting point after “ac-
complishing” something—for example, accumulating something, moving 
something, or sorting something—and then repeating (and repeating and 
repeating), gradually changing the conditions in the world and this  raising 

52 Daniel C. Dennett
the probability that something new will happen  (Dennett 2011). A striking 
abiotic example is shown in this photograph by Kessler and Werner: 
 This phenomenon looks “man-made” (e.g., it resembles sculptures by 
Andy Goldsworthy) but is the natural outcome of mindless cycles of freez-
ing and thawing in the Arctic, creating feedback processes elegantly mod-
eled by an algorithm presented by Kessler and Werner. There is a “how 
come” explanation of the Arctic formation but no “what for” explanation; 
it isn’t for anything. Goldsworthy, in contrast, is an Intelligent Designer, 
who works out the reasons for his designs, usually in advance. 
 In the abiotic world, many similar cycles occur concurrently, a variety 
of parallel processing or mass production that turns eventually into mass 
 Figure 4.1  Photograph of self-organized Arctic rock circles taken by Mark A. Kessler, 
A. Brad Murray, and Bernard Hallet. 

The Evolution of Reasons 53
 re production. What begins as differential  persistence  gradually turns into 
differential  reproduction . From this perspective, we can see that Darwinian 
algorithms always have winners and losers, differential “survival,” and mere 
persistence gives things extra time to pick up revisions and adjustments. 
Biotic replication then is “just” a special case of differential persistence, a 
particularly explosive type that multiplies its advantage by . . . multiplica-
tion! It generates  tokens of  types, which can then “explore” slightly different 
corners of the world. “A diamond is forever” according to the advertising 
slogan, but that is an exaggeration. A diamond is magniﬁ cently persistent, 
much more persistent than its typical competition, but its persistence is well 
modeled by its linear descent through time, Tuesday’s diamond being like 
its parent, Monday’s diamond, and so forth. It never multiplies. But it can 
accumulate changes, wear and tear, a coating of mud that hardens, and so 
forth. It is affected by many cycles, many do-loops that involve it in one way 
or another. Usually these effects do not accumulate for long, but rather get 
wiped out by later effects, but sometimes a barrier happens to get erected: 
a membrane of sorts. 
 In the world of software, two well-recognized phenomena are  serendip-
ity and its opposite,  clobbering . The former is the chance collision of two 
unrelated processes with a happy result, and clobbering is such a collision 
with a destructive result. Membranes that tend for whatever reason to pre-
vent clobbering will be particularly persistent and will permit internal cycles 
(do-loops) to operate without interference. And so we see the engineering 
necessity of membranes to house the collection of chemical cycles—the 
Krebs cycle and  thousands  of others—that together permit life to emerge. 
(An excellent source on this algorithmic view of chemical cycles in cells is 
Dennis Bray’s  Wetware, 2009.) Even the simplest bacterial cells have a sort 
of nervous system composed of chemical networks of exquisite efﬁ ciency 
and elegance. But how could just the right combination of membranes and 
do-loops ever arise in the prebiotic world? “Not in a million years!” some 
say. Fair enough, but then how about once in a hundred million years? It 
only has to happen once to set off the multiplication. 
 Imagine we are back in the early days of this process where persistence 
is on the verge of turning into multiplication and we see a proliferation of 
some type of items where before there were none and we ask, “Why are we 
seeing these here?” The question is  becoming  equivocal. For now, there is 
both a process narrative answer,  how come,  and, for the ﬁ rst time, a justi-
ﬁ cation,  what for . We are confronting a situation in which some chemical 
structures are present while chemically possible alternatives are absent, and 
what we are looking at are things that are  better at persisting/reproducing 
in the local circumstances than the alternatives. We are witnessing an “au-
tomatic” (algorithmic) paring away of the  nonfunctional,  crowded out by 
the functional. And by the time we get to a reproducing bacterium, there is 
functional virtuosity galore. In other words, there are  reasons why  the parts 
are shaped and ordered as they are. We can reverse engineer any reproducing 

54 Daniel C. Dennett
entity, determining its good and its bad, and saying  why it is good or bad. 
This is the birth of reasons, and it is satisfying to note that this is a case of 
Darwinism about Darwinism: we see a proto-Darwinian algorithm mor-
phing into a Darwinian algorithm, the gradual emergence of the species of 
reasons out of the species of mere causes,  what fors  out of  how comes,  with no 
“essential” dividing line between them. Just as there is no prime mammal—
the ﬁ rst mammal that didn’t have a mammal for a mother—there is no 
prime reason, the ﬁ rst feature of the biosphere that helped something exist 
because it made it better at existing than the “competition.” (Glenn Adelson 
is the coiner of the valuable term “Darwinism about Darwinism,” as quoted 
by Godfrey-Smith 2009.) 
 Natural selection is thus an automatic reason ﬁ nder that “discovers,” 
“endorses,” and “focuses” reasons over many generations. The scare quotes 
are to remind us that natural selection doesn’t have a mind, doesn’t itself 
have reasons, but is nevertheless competent to perform this “task” of design 
reﬁ nement. This is competence without comprehension (Dennett 2009  ). 
Let’s just be sure we know how to cash out the scare quotes. Consider a 
population with lots of variation in it. Some do well (at multiplying); most 
do not. In each case, we can ask  why,  and we ask it equivocally. In many 
cases, most cases, the answer is  no reason at all;  it’s just dumb luck, good or 
bad. In which case we have only a  how come  answer to our question. But 
if there is a subset, perhaps very small, of cases in which there is an answer, 
a difference that happens to make a difference, then what those cases have 
in common provides the germ of a reason. The process narrative explains 
how it came about and also, in the process, points to why these are better 
than those, why they won the competition. “Let the best entity win!” is the 
slogan of the evolution tournament, and the winners, being better, wear the 
justiﬁ cation of their enhancements on their sleeves. This process accounts 
for the accumulation of function by a process that blindly tracks reasons, 
creating things that have purposes but don’t need to know them. The need-
to-know principle reigns in the biosphere, and natural selection itself doesn’t 
need to know what it’s doing. (See Dennett 2009 for more on this.) 
 So there were reasons before there were reason representers. The reasons 
tracked by evolution I have called “free-ﬂ oating rationales” (1983, 1995, 
and elsewhere), a term that has apparently jangled the nerves of more than a 
few thinkers, who suspect I am conjuring up ghosts of some sort. Not at all. 
Free-ﬂ oating rationales are no more ghostly or problematic than numbers 
or centers of gravity. There were nine planets before people invented ways 
of articulating arithmetic, and asteroids had centers of gravity before there 
were physicists to dream up the idea and calculate with it. I am not relent-
ing; instead, I am hoping here to calm their fears and convince them that we 
should all be happy to speak of the reasons uncovered by evolution before 
they were ever expressed or represented by human investigators or any other 
minds. Consider the strikingly similar constructions in the following ﬁ gures: 

The Evolution of Reasons 55
 Figure 4.2  Photograph of termite mound in Cape York by Fiona Stewart, North 
Queensland, Australia. 
 Figure 4.3  Photograph of  Sagrada Familia  taken by Bernard Gagnon. Reprinted 
under the Creative Commons license. Source: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/File:
Sagrada_Familia_01.jpg. 

56 Daniel C. Dennett
 The termite castle and Gaudi’s La Sagrada Familia are very similar in 
shape but utterly different in genesis and construction.  There are reasons 
for the architectural structures and shapes of the termite castle, but they 
are not represented by any of the termites. There is no architect termite 
who planned the structure, nor do any individual termites have the slightest 
clue about how their individual contributions contribute to the whole; they 
have at most a myopic appreciation of the discriminations that trigger their 
behaviors. Competence without comprehension. There are also reasons for 
the structures and shapes of Gaudi’s masterpiece, but they are (in the main) 
Gaudi’s reasons. Gaudi  had reasons for the shapes he ordered created;  there 
are reasons for the shapes created by the termites, but the termites don’t 
 have those reasons. There are reasons why trees spread their branches, but 
they are not in any strong sense the trees’ reasons. Sponges do things for rea-
sons, bacteria do things for reasons, and even viruses do things for reasons. 
But they don’t  have the reasons; they don’t need to have the reasons. 
 3. ARE  WE THE ONLY REASON REPRESENTERS? 
 Do animals, aside from human beings,  have reasons? That is a good ques-
tion, and the answer is less obvious than common sense understanding of 
animals allows. Notice ﬁ rst that we human beings do lots of things for rea-
sons that we have only recently been able to deduce: we sneeze, we cough, 
we shiver, we swing our arms when we walk, and so forth. There are good 
reasons for all these patterns in our behavior (and thousands of others) that 
beneﬁ t us without our needing to know why we engage in them. Might all 
nonhuman animal behavior be similar in this regard? Consider the ape: Is 
it more like Gaudi or the termite colony? The termite colony is resourceful, 
ingenious, evidence utilizing, activity modulating to a remarkable degree. 
But (I submit) termites individually have no reasons, and the collective agent 
they compose, although it does things for reasons, doesn’t ever get to—or 
need to—represent those reasons to itself. So why should an ape need to do 
this? 
 Elizabeth Marshall Thomas imagines that dogs enjoy a wise under-
standing of their own ways: “For reasons known to dogs but not to us, 
many dog mothers won’t mate with their sons” (1993, 76). Nonsense. 
There is no more reason to think dogs know the reason than that we know 
the reason why we yawn. There probably is a reason, but we don’t know 
it yet, and it doesn’t stop us from yawning. Probably she means something 
much milder and apparently defensible: she means that we don’t know 
what the discriminated feature is that triggers dog mothers’ reluctance to 
mate with their sons. Well, but we can ﬁ nd out by doing experiments. The 
ﬁ rst and simplest is to isolate a male puppy from its mother as soon as 
it is feasible, raise it elsewhere, and return it and see what happens. Will 
she recognize it? If so, the discriminated feature is very probably an odor. 

The Evolution of Reasons 57
 There is a reason  why that odor provokes that aversion, but dogs don’t 
know that reason. 
 So we should start with the recognition that free-ﬂ oating rationales can 
explain a lot of impressive animal behavior without endowing the animals 
with comprehension of those rationales. The ﬂ edgling cuckoo, when it 
pushes the rival eggs out of the nest in order to maximize the food it will get 
from its foster parents, does not need to understand its murderous project. 
When a low-nesting bird leads the predator away from her nestlings by 
doing a  distraction display,  she is making a convincing sham of a broken 
wing, creating the tempting illusion of an easy supper for the observing 
predator, but she need not understand this clever rationale. She  does need 
to understand the conditions of likely success so that she can adjust her 
behavior to better ﬁ t the variations encountered, but she no more needs to 
be aware of the deeper rationale for her actions than does the cuckoo chick. 
The rationale of such deception is quite elaborate, and adopting Dawkins’s 
(1976) useful expository tactic of inventing “soliloquies,” we can imagine 
the bird’s soliloquy: 
 I’m a low-nesting bird, whose chicks are not protectable against a pred-
ator who discovers them. This approaching predator can be  expected 
soon to discover them unless I distract it; it could be distracted by its 
 desire to catch and eat me, but only if it  thought  there was a  reasonable 
chance of its actually catching me (it’s no dummy); it would contract 
just that  belief if I  gave it evidence that  I couldn’t ﬂ y anymore; I could 
do that by feigning a broken wing, etc. 
 Talk about sophistication! It is unlikely in the extreme that any feathered 
“deceiver” is an intentional system of this intelligence. A more realistic 
soliloquy for any bird would probably be more along the lines of, “Here 
comes a predator; all of a sudden I feel this tremendous urge to do that silly  
broken-wing dance. I wonder why?” (Yes, I know, it would be wildly ro-
mantic to suppose such a bird would be up to such a metalevel wondering 
about its sudden urge.) (The last two paragraphs are drawn from Dennett 
1983, 350.) 
 This sort of account may do justice to much “clever” animal behavior, 
but it still leaves wide open the question of whether  all animal cleverness is 
unaccompanied by reason representing. And as usual, the Darwinian refrain 
should be heard: look for a gradual path from mere “instinct” to rational 
action planning, with no “principled” dividing line. Ruth Millikan, noting 
the ubiquity and importance in animal cognitive systems of what she calls 
“pushmi-pullyu” representations, which are simultaneously declarative (in-
forming) and imperative (action controlling), goes on to draw attention to 
a promising intermediate category: “animals that represent their goals in 
the same representational system in which they represent their facts” (2000, 
170). This good proposal does not by itself create a sharp boundary, since 

58 Daniel C. Dennett
what is to count as a goal representation independent of a fact representa-
tion is itself a good place to look for further intermediate cases. 
 The “theory of mind” literature attempting to describe and account for 
animal perception and “understanding” of other animals is equally unlikely 
to yield crisp verdicts about this. Apes may well be what Nicholas Humphrey 
calls “natural psychologists,” but they never get to compare notes with their 
colleagues or to argue over attributions. In Sellarsian, Pittsburghian terms, 
apes do not engage in the space of reasons, even if they are, in a weaker 
sense, reasonable creatures. 
 In what weaker sense? They, like many animals, are not just intentional 
systems, predictable by us from the intentional stance with its tacit ratio-
nality assumption; they themselves—some of them—can anticipate some of 
the reasonable behavior of other animals so that we do best to treat them as 
higher-order intentional systems. Do they  really  have beliefs about the beliefs 
and desires of other animals? There is no reason (yet) to attribute to them 
the capacity to  think about thinking  (Dennett 2000), but if we gloss their 
competence via intentional attributions, it often amounts to an appreciation 
of reasons why others do what they do. (There is, of course, much more that 
needs saying about the theory of mind controversies and about the role of 
evolved culture in making our minds so unlike ape minds, but I will leave 
those topics for other occasions. See, e.g., Dennett 1996 and 2009b.) 
 We language-endowed animals are the only ones who clearly have both 
the equipment and the proclivity for representing reasons to each other and, 
derivatively, to ourselves. We alone are “moved by reasons” in two senses: 
we respond appropriately, as all intelligent creatures do, to changes in the 
world that matter to us, but we also respond appropriately to the mere artic-
ulation of reasons in the Sellarsian game of reason giving and criticism. Rea-
sons have become objects of attention in our manifest image in a way that is 
apparently unparalleled in any other species. It is one of our most valuable 
adaptations, but it is not an unmixed blessing. Representing reasons to each 
other and to ourselves proves to be a rich source of deception, of others and 
especially ourselves. Much of the activity in the space of reasons involves 
misleading feints and delusional justiﬁ cations. These moves themselves are 
done for reasons, unconscious, evolutionarily endorsed reasons that we 
are only in recent years beginning to uncover systematically—though the 
world’s great literature is replete with insightful examples of how we use 
words to misdirect. As Talleyrand once said, “Language was invented so 
that people could conceal their thoughts from each other.” 
 4. READING REASONS BACK INTO NATURE 
 Our natural tendency to interpret  all design as top-down, as representation-
driven, is both anachronistic and anthropocentric. “In the beginning was the 
word . . .” according to the Bible, but this is simply mistaken. Words are a 
very recent invention, one of the most recent products of blind, purposeless 

The Evolution of Reasons 59
natural selection. But words  are the beginning of Intelligent Design. Al-
though there have been termite castle builders and bird’s-nest builders and 
beaver dam builders for millions of years, architects and engineers have 
been with us for only a few thousand years. 
 If we look at Leonard Eisenberg’s elegant diagram of the Tree of Life, we 
can see on the far right the most recent branchings among the mammals and 
we may choose one of the shortest-shown branchings as a good candidate 
for our divergence from our ape cousins about six million years ago: 
 (Do not make the mistake of seeing our branch as the last twig on the 
lower right—there is no sense in which we are the “last branch” on the Tree 
of Life, and in any case, there is no signiﬁ cance to the linear order of the 
branches on the diagram.) Then remember that words do not appear in our 
hominid branch for millions of years. So there has been hardly any time at 
all in the history of life on earth in which Intelligent Design has ﬂ ourished. 
 But that does not mean that reasoning, with words, is an insigniﬁ cant 
tool when it comes to probing the history of life. We, the reason represent-
ers, can now look back and discover the reasons everywhere in the Tree 
of Life. It took Darwin to ﬁ gure out that a  mindless process discovered all 
those reasons. We Intelligent Designers are among the effects, not the cause, 
of all those purposes. 
 We are the reason representers. In  Making It Explicit  (1998), Robert 
Brandom is remarkably inexplicit about  why we represent reasons. We just 
do: we’re people and that’s what people do. This willingness to terminate 
curiosity prematurely has a long and distinguished tradition in philosophy, 
of course. Wittgenstein famously said that explanation has to stop some-
where, and that remark is often respectfully quoted by philosophers who 
choose not to delve into issues where science might have something to say 
about us. A famous example of this brand of philosophical neglect is P. F. 
Strawson on the reactive attitudes (in his classic paper “Freedom and Re-
sentment,” 1962). Why should resentment as a human emotion exist? It 
just does.  This will not do . Human beings devote a lot of time and energy to 
their game of reason giving, and however stable and satisfying the view ap-
pears from inside the space of reasons, the existence of this elaborate set of 
human behaviors is just as much in need of a biological account as the dis-
traction displays of the birds or the dam-building enterprises of the beavers. 
Sellars, unlike his more recent Pittsburgh followers, took this question seri-
ously, and while he didn’t—apparently—develop anything beyond a sketch 
of an evolutionary account of the origins of the practice of asking and giving 
reasons, he recognized the need for such an account and also pointed to the 
deep similarity between the law of effect (or Skinnerian operant condition-
ing) and evolution by natural selection (Sellars 1963, 325ff, 353). 
 Why do we represent reasons? My answer to the question, elaborated 
elsewhere at great length, is that our insuppressible and highly valuable 
proclivity for reading meaning and purpose into complex things, the in-
tentional stance, is an “instinct” we share with all other mammals, birds, 
cephalopods for sure, and probably ﬁ sh and reptiles. In other species, the 

 Figure 4.4  The Great Tree of Life, Leonard Eisenberg. Ashland, Oregon, USA. Source: http://www.evogeneao.com. 

The Evolution of Reasons 61
individual mind readers do not have to realize they are reading minds; they 
just respond in a different mode to agent-like things, and the free-ﬂ oating 
rationale for their having this urge is also shared by us. But in us, with our 
gift (or is it a curse?) of language, the words we use render “visible” and 
“audible” the purposes, reasons, beliefs, and desires, of ourselves and other 
agents; these become  objects to consider, to investigate, to evaluate . And in 
the early days, we overshot, treating  all complicated, interesting things from 
the intentional stance. Rivers wanted to return to the sea, rain gods might 
be bribed, the lodestone had a soul, and so forth. (And animals, of course, 
had minds like ours.) From today’s Olympian perch—thanks to science in 
general and Darwin in particular—we can retrospect that this was an over-
extension, a good tactic used indiscriminately. 
 And, amusingly, when science discovered this error, it overcorrected 
in the opposite direction. Thou shalt not speak teleology! Thou shalt not 
endow any material things with minds! Sidney Morgenbesser nicely cap-
tured this excess in his challenge to Skinner: “Are you telling me it’s wrong 
to anthropomorphize  people ?” 
 We can have our cake and eat it too. We can use the intentional stance 
to discover and articulate the reasons evolution (Mother Nature) has mind-
lessly unearthed—remember Crick’s joke about Leslie Orgel’s Second Rule 
that “evolution is cleverer than you are” (Dennett 1995, 74). We can use 
the intentional stance with a clear conscience, but only because Darwin has 
shown us how to cash out the intentional language in suitably austere talk 
about algorithmic processes of design generation and reﬁ nement. Darwin 
showed us how to get to  what for  from  how come,  and just as bacteria are 
still the majority life-form on the planet despite the proliferation of fancier, 
visible, multicellular life-forms with fancier reasons for what they do, every 
Darwinian  what for  explanation coexists with its obligatory  how come 
backing. Often, however, biologists conﬁ dently—and justiﬁ ably, I claim—
extrapolate from purely  what for  considerations to hypothetical process 
narratives for which there is currently precious little independent support. 
We don’t yet know in detail  how come  bats ﬂ y, for instance, but we are in no 
doubt at all that this manifestly valuable function arose by some Darwinian 
process or other, which empirical research will surely pin down to some 
degree eventually. (We now use  what for  speculative hypotheses to help us 
frame testable  how come  hypotheses to test.) Some biologists are particu-
larly leery of such adaptationist reasoning, but it is interesting to note that 
they almost always reserve their scruples for cases of adaptationist reasoning 
about politically sensitive topics—in particular, human evolution. We don’t 
and can’t have a highly detailed account of the environment of selection 
for many human traits that some evolutionists conﬁ dently explain, but we 
have much less detailed knowledge about the environment of selection of, 
say, whales from terrestrial mammals, and yet nobody complains when bi-
ologists sketch the likely sequence of transformations and use their sketches 
to guide their hunt for better accounts. If you understand intentional-stance  

62 Daniel C. Dennett
talk in the evolutionist’s way, you  can see the woods for the trees, which is 
a good thing, because you can’t do biology without assuming function, and 
you can’t assume function without seeing reasons everywhere. 
 Peter Godfrey-Smith may call this “Darwinian paranoia” and Alex 
Rosenberg may call it a “conspiracy theory.” These are just the latest over-
reactions to the recognition that the intentional stance is a strategic tool of 
undeniable power, not a describer of unvarnished facts. Sometimes, they 
should realize, varnish is just what is called for, an indispensable Good Trick. 
 NOTE 
 1. I am grateful for the comments of the participants at the wonderful Beirut 
conference, and further comments from Ruth Millikan, Bryce Heubner, and 
Arnon Lotem, which saved this essay from a variety of confusions and errors. 
 REFERENCES 
 Brandom, Robert.  Making It Explicit: Reasoning, Representing, and Discursive 
Commitment . Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1988. 
 Bray, Dennis.  Wetware . New Haven: Yale University Press, 2009. 
 Dawkins, Richard.  The Selﬁ sh Gene . Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1976. 
 Dawkins, Richard.  The Ancestor’s Tale . New York: Mariner Books, 2005. 
 Dennett, Daniel. “Intentional Systems in Cognitive Ethology: The ‘Panglossian 
 Paradigm’ Defended.”  Behavioral and Brain Sciences 6 (1983): 343–90. 
 ———.  Darwin’s Dangerous Idea . New York: Simon & Schuster, 1995. 
 ———.  Kinds of Minds . New York: Basic Books, 1996. 
 ———. “Making Tools for Thinking.” In  Metarepresentations: A Multidisciplinary 
Perspective, edited by D. Sperber, 17–29. New York: Oxford University Press, 2000. 
 ———. “Darwin’s ‘Strange Inversion of Reasoning.’ ”  Proceedings of the National 
Academy of Sciences 106, suppl. 1 (2009a): 10061–65f. 
 ———. “The Cultural Evolution of Words and Other Thinking Tools.”  Cold Spring 
Harbor Symposia on Quantitative Biology, published online August 17, 2009b. 
 ———. “Cycles,” Edge World Question Center, 2011, http://edge.org/q2011/q11_5.
html#dennett, subsequently published in  This Will Make You Smarter,  edited by 
J. Brockman, 170–74. New York: Perennial/HarperCollins, 2012. 
 ———.  Intuition Pumps and Other Tools for Thinking . New York: Norton; Lon-
don: Penguin, 2013. 
 Godfrey-Smith, Peter.  Darwinian Populations and Natural Selection . Oxford: Ox-
ford University Press, 2009. 
 Haugeland, John.  Having Thought: Essays in the Metaphysics of Mind . Cambridge, 
MA: Harvard University Press, 1998. 
 Marx, K. Marx to Ferdinand Lassalle?in Berlin, 16 January 1861. Marx & Engels 
Internet Archive: Letters. http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1861/ 
letters/61_01_16.htm. 
 Millikan, Ruth.  On Clear and Confused Ideas: An Essay about Substance Concepts . 
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2000. 
 Sellars, Wilfrid.  Science, Perception and Reality . Austin: Ridgeview Publishing Co., 
1963. 
 Thomas, Elizabeth Marshall.  The Hidden Life of Dogs . Boston: Houghton Mifﬂ in, 
1993. 
 

 Contemporary Philosophical 
Naturalism and Its 
Implications 
 Edited by  Bana Bashour and 
Hans D. Muller 

 First published 2014 
 by Routledge 
 711 Third Avenue, New York, NY 10017 
 Simultaneously published in the UK 
 by Routledge 
 2 Park Square, Milton Park, Abingdon, Oxon OX14 4RN 
 Routledge is an imprint of the Taylor & Francis Group, 
an informa business 
 © 2014 Taylor & Francis 
 The right of the editors to be identiﬁ ed as the author of the editorial 
material, and of the authors for their individual chapters, has been 
asserted in accordance with sections 77 and 78 of the Copyright, 
Designs and Patents Act 1988. 
 All rights reserved. No part of this book may be reprinted or reproduced or 
utilized in any form or by any electronic, mechanical, or other means, now 
known or hereafter invented, including photocopying and recording, or in any 
information storage or retrieval system, without permission in writing from 
the publishers. 
 Trademark Notice: Product or corporate names may be trademarks or 
registered trademarks, and are used only for identiﬁ cation and explanation 
without intent to infringe. 
 Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data 
Contemporary philosophical naturalism and its implications / edited by  
Bana Bashour and Hans D. Muller. — 1 [edition].
 pages cm. — (Routledge studies in the philosophy of science ; 13)
Includes bibliographical references and index.
 
1. Naturalism. I. Bashour, Bana, 1980– editor of compilation. 
 B828.2.C63 2013
 146—dc23
  2013017822 
 Typeset in Sabon 
 by Apex CoVantage, LLC 
ISBN: 978-0-415-81309-9 (hbk)
ISBN: 978-0-203-06827-4 (ebk)

