DANIEL DENNETT 
COMMENT 
ON WILFRID 
SELLARS 
I might say, by way of introduction, that unlike the earlier commentators, 
both Putnam and I did have a chance to see a version of this paper before 
the session. In fact about two weeks ago I got the wind up about the con- 
ference and called Wilfrid to see if a paper was forthcoming. He immedi- 
ately, very generously, sent me not one but six papers. The paper that he 
read today was not among them. But he did tell me that the paper he 
would read would consist of various parts of the six that he did send me 
and would come mainly from one paper central to which was an analysis 
of transparent belief in terms of opaque belief. I thought this analysis 
was entirely wrong, so I worked very hard to produce an elegant and con- 
cise refutation of it. When the real paper arrived a week later, I found that 
wasn't the part I was supposed to take. At that point I was so mentally 
exhausted that I put away the paper until last night about midnight, when 
I sat down to write these comments. I think I may have been in a hallu- 
cinatory frame of mind by the time I got through. So if a look of horror 
and disbelief comes over my face as I read these remarks, you should not 
be surprised. Of course, maybe I'm still in a hallucinatory frame of mind. 
I rather hope I am. 
Yesterday we saw David Lewis' ingenious suggestions about how to 
put Gil Harman's three levels of meaning together into a single theory. 
Sellars explicitly is setting out to do part of that job; namely to provide a 
level-one theory of meaning. Which is roughly, I take it, in terms of Lewis" 
diagram, a matter of filling in the relations between Ao, agent's beliefs 
and desires as expressed in our language, and P, agent's physical system. 
But Sellars is going to do this via a functional analysis of the agent's 
thoughts, for these are viewed as being in language, in some sense. In set- 
ting out in this way Sellars is, I think, explicitly confirming an interpreta- 
tion of his program offered by Harman in 'Three Levels of Meaning'. 
There Harman said, speaking of Sellars' early paper 'Some Reflections on 
Language Games': "Sellars is simply offering a functional account of 
psychological states in the guise of a theory of meaning." The program, I 
Synthese 27 (1974) 439 A AA. All Rights Reserved 
Copyright © 1974 by D. Reidel Publishing Company, Dordrecht-Holland 

440 
DANIEL DENNETT 
take it, is to isolate a certain variety of agent's speakings and dispositions 
to speak, namely his candid or spontaneous thinkings out loud and proxi- 
mate propensities to do so, and to identify these as the agent's thoughts, 
even though this identification is acknowledged to be an oversimplifica- 
tion and distortion in some regards. I want to say why this seems reason- 
able to Sellars and, to some extent, to myself. We want, it seems, a psycho- 
logical theory of an agent's thoughts, and thoughts are individuated by 
their contents or meanings. Since Sellars' proposed theory of meaning 
is that meaning is functional classification, psychological states and 
events are to be individuated by their function. But how are we to examine 
psychological states and events to determine their functions? Lacking, at 
least temporarily, a detailed neurophysiological identity theory, we cannot 
very well examine psychological states and events the way we can examine 
hormonal or metabolic states and events, i.e. by seeing what happens 
mechanically under various conditions and then doping out a functional 
account of internal design. That, in this instance, would be putting the 
cart before the horse. Rather we must start with the meanings of thoughts 
as psychological states and events as the given, and work out functional 
accounts of these (perhaps later to find realizations of these functions, 
of whose existence we are assured by our theory of meaning, in the hard- 
ware of the brain). Thus, the program is roughly analogous to that of pre- 
Watson-Crick genetics. So how do we get at the meanings of the thoughts 
in order to do our functional analysis? We cannot look at the thoughts, 
and our access to our own thoughts, let alone the thoughts of others, is 
complicated by their fleeting and protean passage through our mind. If 
one is a Cartesian of the sort Sellars alludes to (I'm not quite sure what 
this sort is), or if at any rate one maintains the view that thoughts, at least 
some of them, are imageless, wordless, speechless meaning-bearers, then 
function would appear to be utterly inscrutable. For such thoughts 
would appear to be both atomic to analysis and indefinitely bountiful 
and various; lacking parts, their functions cannot be determined to be a 
function of the function of their parts. And there are too many of them 
to catalog their functions individually. If, on the other hand, it is true 
that language is the medium in which we think, the psychological theorist 
will be most fortunate. For language does have parts, and these seem just 
the right sorts of parts to be subject to analysis in terms of functional in- 
dividuation. But the claim that language is the medium of our thought is 

COMMENT ON WILFRID SELLARS 
441 
multiply ambiguous and, I think, vulnerable to doubts and misgivings 
on all its readings. SeUars acknowledges this to some extent, and has some 
suggestions for qualifying the thesis to make it more attractive; but not 
yet attractive enough for me. However I am not at all sure that he needs 
the thesis that language is the medium of our thoughts in any form, either 
as an implication of some larger thesis in his proposed theory of meaning 
or as a permitting condition for his program. 
I may have badly misunderstood Sellars here, but in any case I think he 
commits himself to the view that thoughts that are somehow verbal are, 
as psychological events and states, actual mediators in human behavioral 
reaction to experience. That is, I take him to hold that the actual proces- 
ses that take a person from experience to action are perspicuously divisible 
into parts analogous to the functional parts of the verbal chain of reason- 
ing we can or do use to predict and explain that passage from experience 
to action. Perhaps, though, I put it too strongly. Perhaps Sellars is only 
claiming that the thoughts he is talking about, the thinkings out loud and 
so forth, are in fact actual episodes and are properly verbal in an extended 
sense, and that while they are not themselves always mediators in our 
action, they provide a model for the other real episodes that are. The 
latter claim in any case permits a certain division of the issue which allows 
me to say what I'm inclined to agree with in Sellars' view. The candid 
thinkings out loud, or inhibited would-be thinkings out loud, are, I think, 
a real and important category of episode. And Sellars' description of them 
is acute and accurate. Such thoughts thought out loud are the protocol 
statements used as data in many psychological investigations of problem- 
solving and the like. Such thoughts are not actions, but there are reasons, 
as Sellars points out, for calling them acts. They are not, or need not in 
volve, the occurrence 
of a sequence in time, a phonological analog; nor 
are they necessarily bound to a particular natural language, even if the 
agent is not multi-lingual. I would say that these thoughts realize our 
semantic intentions of the moment, in this sense: they are that against 
which we test our utterances' execution. Slips of the tongue, misuse of 
words, even distorted expressions of what we intended to say at the mo- 
ment, are judged by us against the standard set by these episodes. That is, 
these episodes are, you might say, feedback standards. 
Now perhaps Sellars would not agree with all of this characterization 
I've given so far to his episodes. But I suspect our disagreement would be 

442 
DANIEL DENNETT 
minor and readily resolvable. Now to the disagreement. I think that these 
episodes, while actual, and while they play an essential role in the media- 
tion of our actual linguistic behavior, do not mediate behavior generally. 
They are relatively peripheral, and their absence or presence on a partic- 
ular occasion is seldom critical to the accuracy of intentional explanation 
of the non-linguistic behavior of the agent at the time. Some of Sellars' 
remarks tend to suggest that he disagrees. In discussing language depar- 
ture transitions, he says: "The speaker responds to such linguistic con- 
ceptual episodes as 'I will now raise my hand' with an upward motion of 
the hand, etc.," and later he says: "according to the verbal behavior it sup- 
ports, a volition is a thinking out loud or a proximate propensity to think 
out loud, 'I shall' ...." But perhaps, as I suggested before, Sellars holds 
a more circumspect view. Thinkings out loud or proximate propensities 
to think out loud are only a model for the deeper, less scrutable and 
accessible episodes, and it is just here that verbal behaviorism is to be 
viewed as a permissible oversimplification. But then why should we sup- 
pose that the rules that govern functioning that form the substance of the 
proposed theory of meaning govern our model episodes at all? That is, 
the theory of meaning has rules in it which govern function and thereby 
determine meaning, but why should we suppose that these rules govern 
the thinkings out loud that actually occur? We think enthymematically, 
in the sense of thinking that we're talking about. The transitions exhibited 
in our actual thinking are almost never warranted directly by any plausible 
rules. These loose-jointed transitions of our protocols are hints, but as 
hints of deeper episodes they are unreliable. Consider an example. 
Mr. Tortoise, asked how much 12 x 37 is, thinks out loud as follows: 
"2 × 7 is 14, carry the 1 ; 2 × 6 is 3 and 1 is 7; 1 × 37 is 37; add them up, 
thats 444." There's a protocol par excellence. That's Mr. Tortoise. Now 
Mr. Hare, not to be confused with Professor Hare, is asked the same 
question and says straight out, "12 x 37 is 444". Now this act of his may 
puzzle us. But certainly it can happen. He may have an explanation. He 
may say, "Well I once worked at S. S. Pierce where they sold Mouton 
Rothschild at $ 37.00 a bottle and most people bought it by the case." 
(Devaluation has forced S. S. Pierce to discontinue case discounts.) Or 
he may have no explanation. He may simply say, "I just can do that." 
"You asked me and I told you; 12 × 37 is 444". Perhaps he's a mathemat- 
ical prodigy. Now the fact that he says "I just can do it" and can give no 

COMMENT ON WILFRID SELLARS 
443 
other explanation shouldn't puzzle us, because after all if we ask Mr. 
Tortoise how he knew the first step of his protocol, "2 x 7 is 14", he has 
no answer to that. "I just can do that." Or if he does offer an answer, he's 
just guessing or providing some sort of a theory that he has no special 
access to himself. 
Now it seems more probable, I suppose, that in Mr. Tortoise "2 x 7 is 
14" is somehow a fact stored raw. This is more probable than that Mr. 
Tortoise unconsciously added 7 pairs and then gave the answer, but the 
latter is presumably possible. Now when it comes to hypotheses about 
how the prodigy, Mr. Hare, answered the question, we have initially no 
clues at all. That is, neither we nor he has any clues about how he does it. 
It is conceivable, for all we know, that he unconsciously converted the 
two numbers into binary notation and did a series of additions computer- 
style. Very possibly, however, he solved our mathematical problem in just 
the way Mr. Tortoise did, only unconsciously. Now, if so, then there is 
reason to suppose that some things function in Mr. Hare in such a way 
that Mr. Tortoise's protocol could tell the story of their operation as well 
as the story of operations in Mr. Tortoise. They could tell the story of the 
covert operations in Mr. Hare as well as they could tell the story of the 
more accessible operations of Mr. Tortoise. But from the fact that Tor- 
toise's protocol could be used to make a prediction of the answer Hare 
gave (and it will do this however Hare has arrived at his answer), we can- 
not assume it is a model of any function in him. If there are functional 
parts Tortoise-style in Hare, then they can be assigned the meanings of 
the words in Tortoise's protocol. If there are different functional parts 
which mesh with a different rational reconstruction taking us from 12 x 37 
to 444 then these parts can be endowed with those meanings. And if we 
can't find a reconstruction that matches well with whatever engineering 
we might find in Hate's brain, if the sort of functioning that does go on in 
his brain is not amenable to this sort of analysis, what should we conclude? 
That language does not express our thought? Hardly. That since no actual 
physical things in Hare have the function of the words in our rational re- 
construction, there must be some other actual non-physical things that do ? 
No. A failure to find the presumed functional isomorphism would not 
diminish the utility of intentional explanation of behavior via a Setlarsian, 
or other, theory of meaning. Nor would it impugn the correctness of such 
an account in particular cases. That is, it seems to me the best way to put 

444 
DANIEL DENNETT 
this is that SeUars distinguishes between the coarse-grained theory of 
verbal behaviorism, and the fine-grained theory, but there is no reason to 
view Sellars' coarse-grained theory as an empirical theory, in any sense, of 
any actual episodes. Now in talking with Hilary about this, I said that it 
seemed to me that one probably ought to be able to construct a compelling 
argument to the effect that the brain couldn't function in such a way that 
intentional explanations work to the extent that they do unless there were 
in fact perspicuous functional divisions, with the functions of larger divi- 
sions being functions of functions of smaller or subsidiary brain parts, such 
that we could consider these functional parts as representations in some 
sense. The argument that Hilary suggests is that it's just clear that the 
brain has to have some sort of what he calls 'generaticity' which can only 
be gotten in this way. I'm not quite sure how this argument would run, 
but in any case, if there is such an argument with such a conclusion, and 
it's a sound one, it still would not follow (and this is I guess my main dis- 
agreement with Sellars), from the adequacy of a theory of meaning as 
functional classification, that that theory was also a psychological theory 
of the entities that used the language for which Sellars had the theory. 

