7 
Th ree Kinds of I ntentional 
Psyc hology* 
Dan iel C. Dennett 
Tufts University 
FOLK PSYCHOLOGY AS A SOURCE OF THEORY 
Suppose you and I both believe that cats eat fish. Exactly what feature must 
we share for this to be true of us? More generally, recalling Socrates' 
favorite style of question, what must be in common between things truly 
ascribed an intentional predicate - such as "wants to visit China" or 
"expects noodles for supper"? As Socrates points out, in the Meno and 
elsewhere, such questions are ambiguous or vague in their intent. One can 
be asking on the one hand for something rather like a definition, or on the 
other hand for something rather like a theory. (Socrates of course preferred 
the former sort of answer.) What do all magnets have in common? First 
answer: they all attract iron. Second answer: they all have such-and-such a 
microphysical property (a property that explains their capacity to attract 
iron). In one sense people knew what magnets were - they were things that 
attracted iron - long before science told them what magnets were. A child 
learns what the word "magnet" means not, typically, by learning an explicit 
definition, but by learning the "folk physics" of magnets, in which the 
ordinary term "magnet" is embedded or implicitly defined as a theoretical 
term. 
Sometimes terms are embedded in more powerful theories, and some­
times they are embedded by explicit definition. What do all chemical 
elements with the same valence have in common? First answer: they are 
*Reprinted from R. Healey (Ed .), Reduction, Time and Reality (New York : Cambridge 
University Press, 1 98 1 ,  pp. 37-6 1 )  by permission of the author and publisher. 
1 2 1 

1 22 
DENNETI 
disposed to combine with other elements in the same integral ratios. Second 
answer: they all have such-and-such a microphysical property (a property 
which explains their capacity so to combine). The theory of valences in 
chemistry was well in hand before its microphysical explanation was 
known. In one sense chemists knew what valences were before physicists 
told them. 
So what appears in Plato to be a contrast between giving a definition and 
giving a theory can be viewed as just a special case of the contrast between 
giving one theoretical answer and giving another, more "reductive" theo­
retical answer. Fodor ( 1 975) draws the same contrast between "conceptual" 
and "causal" answers to such questions and argues that Ryle ( 1 949) 
champions conceptual answers at the expense of causal answers, wrongly 
supposing them to be in conflict. There is justice in Fodor's charge against 
Ryle, for there are certainly many passages in which Ryle seems to propose 
his conceptual answers as a bulwark against the possibility of any causal, 
scientific, psychological answers, but there is a better view of Ryle's (or 
perhaps at best a view he ought to have held) that deserves rehabilitation. 
Ryle's "logical behaviorism" is composed of his steadfastly conceptual 
answers to the Socratic questions about matters mental. If Ryle thought 
these answers ruled out psychology, ruled out causal (or reductive) answers 
to the Socratic questions, he was wrong, but if he thought only that the 
conceptual answers to the questions were not to be given by a microreduc­
tive psychology, he was on firmer ground. It is one thing to give a causal 
explanation of some phenomenon and quite another to cite the cause of a 
phenomenon in the analysis of the concept of it. 
Some concepts have what might be called an essential causal element (see 
Fodor 1 975 , p. 7, n6). For instance, the concept of a genuine Winston 
Churchill autograph has it that how the trail of ink was in fact caused is 
essential to its status as an autograph. Photocopies, forgeries, inadvertently 
indistinguishable signatures - but perhaps not carbon copies - are ruled 
out. These considerations are part of the conceptual answer to the Socratic 
question about autographs. 
Now some, including Fodor, have held that such concepts as the concept 
of intelligent action also have an essential causal element; behavior that 
appeared to be intelligent might be shown not to be by being shown to have 
the wrong sort of cause. Against such positions Ryle can argue that even if 
it is true that every instance of intelligent behavior is caused (and hence has 
a causal explanation), exactly how it is caused is inessential to its being 
intelligent - something that could be true even if all intelligent behavior 
exhibited in fact some common pattern of causation. That is, Ryle can 
plausibly claim that no account in causal terms could capture the class of 
intelligent actions except per accidens. In aid of such a position - for which 
there is much to be said in spite of the current infatuation with causal 

7. T H R E E  KI N DS OF INTENTIONAL PSYCHOLOGY 
1 23 
theories - Ryle can make claims of the sort Fodor disparages ("it's not the 
mental activity that makes the clowning clever because what makes the 
clowning clever is such facts as that it took place out where the children can 
see it") without committing the error of supposing causal and conceptual 
answers are incompatible. 1 
Ryle's logical behaviorism was in fact tainted by a groundless anti­
scientific bias, but it need not have been. Note that the introduction of the 
concept of valence in chemistry was a bit of logical chemical behaviorism: 
to have valence n was "by definition" to be disposed to behave in 
such-and-such ways under such-and-such conditions, however that dispo­
sition to behave might someday be explained by physics. In this particular 
instance the relation between the chemical theory and the physical theory is 
now well charted and understood - even if in the throes of ideology people 
sometimes misdescribe it - and the explanation of those dispositional 
combinatorial properties by physics is a prime example of the sort of success 
in science that inspires reductionist doctrines. Chemistry has been shown to 
reduce, in some sense, to physics, and this is clearly a Good Thing, the sort 
of thing we should try for more of. 
Such progress invites the prospect of a parallel development in psychol­
ogy. First we will answerthe question "What do all believers-that-p have in 
common?" the first way, the "conceptual" way, and then see if we can go on 
to "reduce" the theory that emerges in our first answer to something else ­
neurophysiology most likely. Many theorists seem to take it for granted that 
some such reduction is both possible and desirable, and perhaps even 
inevitable, even while recent critics of reductionism, such as Putnam and 
Fodor, have warned us of the excesses of "classical" reductionist creeds. No 
one today hopes to conduct the psychology of the future in the vocabulary 
of the neurophysiologist, let alone that of the physicist, and principled ways 
of relaxing the classical "rules" of reduction have been proposed. The issue, 
then, is what kind of theoretical bonds can we expect - or ought we to 
hope - to find uniting psychological claims about beliefs, desires, and so 
forth with the claims of neurophysiologists, biologists, and other physical 
scientists? 
Since the terms "belief' and "desire" and their kin are parts of ordinary 
language, like "magnet," rather than technical terms like "valence," we must 
first look to "folk psychology" to see what kind of things we are being asked 
to explain. What do we learn beliefs are when we learn how to use the words 
"believe" and "belief'? The first point to make is that we do not really learn 
what beliefs are when we learn how to use these words. 2 Certainly no one 
tells us what beliefs are, or if someone does, or if we happen to speculate on 
the topic on our own, the answer we come to, wise or foolish, will figure 
only weakly in our habits ·or thought about what people believe. We learn 
to use folk psychology as a vernacular social technology, a craft; but we 

1 24 
DENNETT 
don't learn it self-consciously as a theory - we learn no metatheory with the 
theory - and in this regard our knowledge of folk psychology is like our 
knowledge of the grammar of our native tongue. This fact does not make 
our knowledge of folk psychology entirely unlike human knowledge of 
explicit academic theories, however; one could probably be a good prac­
ticing chemist and yet find it embarrassingly difficult to produce a 
satisfactory textbook definition of a metal or an ion. 
There are no introductory textbooks on folk psychology (although Ryle's 
The Concept of Mind might be pressed into service), but many explorations 
of the field have been undertaken by ordinary language philosophers (under 
slightly different intentions) and more recently by more theoretically 
minded philosophers of mind, and from all this work an account of folk 
psychology - part truism and the rest controversy - can be gleaned. What 
are beliefs? Very roughly, folk psychology has it that beliefs are information­
bearing states of people that arise from perceptions and that, together with 
appropriately related desires, lead to intelligent action. That much is 
relatively uncontroversial, but does folk psychology also have it that 
nonhuman animals have beliefs? If so, what is the role of language in 
belief? Are beliefs constructed of parts? If so, what are the parts? Ideas? 
Concepts? Words? Pictures? Are beliefs like speech acts or maps or 
instruction manuals or sentences? Is it implicit in folk psychology that 
beliefs enter into causal relations, or that they don't? How do decisions and 
intentions intervene between belief-desire complexes and actions? Are 
beliefs introspectible, and if so, what authority do the believer's pronounce­
ments have? 
All these questions deserve answers, but one must bear in mind that there 
are different reasons for being interested in the details of folk psychology. 
One reason is that it exists as a phenomenon, like a religion or a language 
or a dress code, to be studied with the techniques and attitudes of 
anthropology. It may be a myth, but it is a myth we live in, so it is an 
"important" phenomenon in nature. A different reason is that it seems to be 
a true theory, by and large, and hence is a candidate - like the folk physics 
of magnets and unlike the folk science of astrology - for incorporation into 
science. These different reasons generate different but overlapping investi­
gations. The anthropological question should include in its account of folk 
psychology whatever folk actually include in their theory, however mis­
guided, incoherent, gratuitous some of it may be. (When the anthropologist 
marks part of the catalogue of folk theory as false, he may speak of f a/se 
consciousness or ideology, but the role of such false theory qua anthropo­
logical phenomenon is not thereby diminished.) The proto-scientific quest, 
on the other hand, as an attempt to prepare folk theory for subsequent 
incorporation into, or reduction to, the rest of science, should be critical 
and should eliminate all that is false or ill founded, however well entrenched 

7. THREE KI N DS OF I N TENTIONAL PSYCHOLOGY 
1 25 
in popular doctrine. (Thales thought that lodestones had souls, we are told. 
Even if most people agreed, this would be something to eliminate from the 
folk physics of magnets prior to "reduction.") One way of distinguishing the 
good from the bad, the essential from the gratuitous, in folk theory is to see 
what must be included in the theory to account for whatevҙr predictive or 
explanatory success it seems to have in ordinary use. In this way we can 
criticize as we analyze, and it is even open to us in the end to discard folk 
psychology if it turns out to be a bad theory, and with it the presumed 
theoretical entities named therein. If we discard folk psychology as a 
theory, we would have to replace it with another theory, which, while it did 
violence to many ordinary intuitions, would explain the predictive power of 
the residual folk craft. 
We use folk psychology all the time, to explain and predict each other's 
behavior; we attribute beliefs and desires to each other with confidence -
and quite unself-consciously - and spend a substantial portion of our waking 
lives formulating the world - not excluding ourselves - in these terms. Folk 
psychology is about as pervasive a part of our second nature as is our folk 
physics of middle-sized objects. How good is folk psychology? If we 
concentrate on its weaknesses we will notice that we often are unable to 
make sense of particular bits of human behavior (our own included) in 
terms of belief and desire, even in retrospect; we often cannot predict 
accurately or reliably what a person will do or when; we often can find no 
resources within the theory for settling disagreements about particular 
attributions of belief or desire. If we concentrate on its strengths we find 
first that there are large areas in which it is extraordinarily reliable in its 
predictive power. Every time we venture out on a highway, for example, we 
stake our lives on the reliability of our general expectations about the 
perceptual beliefs, normal desires, and decision proclivities of the other 
motorists. Second, we find that it is a theory of great generative power and 
efficiency. For instance, watching a film with a highly original and 
unstereotypical plot, we see the hero smile at the villain and we all swiftly 
and effortlessly arrive at the same complex theoretical diagnosis: "Aha! "  we 
conclude (but perhaps not consciously), "he wants her to think he doesn't 
know she intends to defraud his brother! "  Third, we find that even small 
children pick up facility with the theory at a time when they have a very 
limited experience of human activity from which to induce a theory. 
Fourth, we find that we all use folk psychology knowing next to nothing 
about what actually happens inside people's skulls. "Use your head," we are 
told, and we know some people are brainier than others, but our capacity 
to use folk psychology is quite unaffected by ignorance about brain 
processes - or even by large-scale misinformation about brain processes. 
As many philosophers have observed, a feature of folk psychology that 
sets it apart from both folk physics and the academic physical sciences is 

1 26 
DENNETT 
that explanations of actions citing beliefs and desires normally not only 
describe the provenance of the actions, but at the same time defend them as 
reasonable under the circumstances. They are reason-giving explanations, 
which make an ineliminable allusion to the rationality of the agent. 
Primarily for this reason, but also because of the pattern of strengths and 
weaknesses just described, I suggest that folk psychology might best be 
viewed as a rationalistic calculus of interpretation and prediction - an 
idealizing, abstract, instrumentalistic interpretation method that has 
evolved because it works and works because we have evolved. We approach 
each other as intentional systems (Dennett 197 1  ), that is, as entities whose 
behavior can be predicted by the method of attributing beliefs, desires, and 
rational acumen according to the following rough and ready principles: 
(1) A system's beliefs are those it ought to have, given its perceptual 
capacities, its epistemic needs, and its biography. Thus, in general, its 
beliefs are both true and relevant to its life, and when false beliefs are 
attributed, special stories must be told to explain how the error resulted 
from the presence of features in the environment that are deceptive relative 
to the perceptual capacities of the system. 
(2) A system's desires are those it ought to have, given its biological needs 
and the most practicable means of satisfying them . Thus intentional systems 
desire survival and procreation, and hence desire food, security, health, sex, 
wealth, power, influence, and so forth, and also whatever local arrange­
ments tend (in their eyes - given their beliefs) to further these ends in 
appropriate measure. Again, "abnormal" desires are attributable if special 
stories can be told. 
(3) A system's behavior will consist of those acts that it would be rational 
for an agent with those beliefs and desires to perform. 
In (1) and (2) "ought to have" means "would have if it were ideally 
ensconced in its environmental niche." Thus all dangers and vicissitudes in 
its environment it will recognize as such (i.e. , believe to be dangers) and all 
the benefits - relative to its needs, of course - it will desire. When a fact 
about its surroundings is particularly relevant to its current projects (which 
themselves will be the projects such a being ought to have in order to get 
ahead in its world), it will know that fact and act accordingly. And so forth 
and so on. This gives us the notion of an ideal epistemic and conative 
operator or agent, relativized to a set of needs for survival and procreation 
and to the environment(s) in which its ancestors have evolved and to which 
it is adapted. But this notion is still too crude and overstated. For instance, 
a being may come to have an epistemic need that its perceptual apparatus 
cannot provide for (suddenly all the green food is poisonous, but alas it is 
colorblind), hence the relativity to perceptual capacities. Moreover, it may 

7. T H R E E  KI N DS OF INTENTIONAL PSYCHOLOGY 
1 27 
or may not have had the occasion to learn from experience about 
something, so its beliefs are also relative to its biography in this way: it will 
have learned what it ought to have learned, viz., what it had been given 
evidence for in a form compatible with its cognitive apparatus - providing 
the evidence was "relevant" to its project then. 
But this is still too crude, for evolution does not give us a best of all 
possible worlds, but only a passable jury-rig, so we should look for design 
shortcuts that in specifiably abnormal circumstances yield false perceptual 
beliefs, etc. (We are not immune to illusions - which we would be if our 
perceptual systems were perfect. ) To offset the design shortcuts we should 
also expect design bonmҚes: circumstances in which the "cheap" way for 
nature to design a cognitive system has the side benefit of giving good, 
reliable results even outside the environment in which the system evolved. 
Our eyes are well adapted for giving us true beliefs on Mars as well as on 
Earth, because the cheap solution for our Earth-evolving eyes happens to be 
a more general solution (cf. Sober 1 98 1). 
I propose that we can continue the mode of thinking just illustrated all 
the way in - not just for eye design, but for deliberation design and belief 
design and strategy-concocter design. In using this optimistic set of 
assumptions (nature has . built us to do things right; look for systems to 
believe the truth and love the good), we impute no occult powers to 
epistemic needs, perceptual capacities, and biography but only the powers 
common sense already imputes to evolution and learning. 
In short, we treat each other as if we were rational agents, and this 
myth - for surely we are not all that rational - works very well because we 
are pretty rational. This single assumption, in combination with home 
truths about our needs, capacities and typical circumstances, generates both 
an intentional interpretation of us as believers and desirers and actual 
predictions of behavior in great profusion. I am claiming, then, that folk 
psychology can best be viewed as a sort of logical behaviorism: what it 
means to say that someone believes that p, is that that person is disposed to 
behave in certain ways under certain conditions. What ways under what 
conditions? The ways it would be rational to behave, given the person's 
other beliefs and desires. The answer looks in danger of being circular, but 
consider: an account of what it is for an element to have a particular valence 
will similarly make ineliminable reference to the valences of other elements. 
What one is given with valence talk is a whole system of interlocking 
attributions, which is saved from vacuity by yielding independently testable 
predictions. 
I have just described in outline a method of predicting and explaining the 
behavior of people and other intelligent creatures. Let me distinguish two 
questions about it: is it something we could do, and is it something we in 
fact do? I think the answer to the first is obviously yes, which is not to say 

1 28 
DENNETI 
the method will always yield good results. That much one can ascertain by 
reflection and thought experiment. Moreover, one can recognize that the 
method is familiar. Although we don't usually use the method self­
consciously, we do use it self-consciously on those occasions when we are 
perplexed by a person's behavior, and then it often yields satisfactory 
results. Moreover, the ease and naturalness with which we resort to this 
self-conscious and deliberate form of problem-solving provide some sup­
port for the claim that what we are doing on those occasions is not switching 
methods but simply becoming self-conscious and explicit about what we 
ordinarily accomplish tacitly or unconsciously. 
No other view of folk psychology, I think, can explain the fact that we do 
so well predicting each other's behavior on such slender and peripheral 
evidence; treating each other as intentional systems works (to the extent that 
it does) because we really are well designed by evolution and hence we 
approximate to the ideal version of ourselves exploited to yield the 
predictions. But not only does evolution not guarantee that we will always 
do what is rational; it guarantees that we won't . If we are designed by 
evolution, then we are almost certainly nothing more than a bag of tricks, 
patched together by a satisficing Nature - Herbert Simon's term ( 1 957) ­
and no better than our ancestors had to be to get by. Moreover, the 
demands of nature and the demands of a logic course are not the same. 
Sometimes - even normally in certain circumstances - it pays to jump to 
conclusions swiftly (and even to forget that you've done so), so by most 
philosophical measures of rationality (logical consistency, refraining from 
invalid inference) there has probably been some positive evolutionary 
pressure in favor of "irrational" methods.3 
How rational are we? Recent research in social and cognitive psychology 
(e.g. , Tversky and Kahneman 1 974; Nisbett and Ross 1978) suggests we are 
only minimally rational, appallingly ready to leap to conclusions or be 
swayed by logically irrelevant features of situations, but this jaundiced view 
is an illusion engendered by the fact that these psychologists are deliberately 
trying to produce situations that provoke irrational responses - inducing 
pathology in a system by putting strain on it - and succeeding, being good 
psychologists. No one would hire a psychologist to prove that people will 
choose a paid vacation to a week in jail if offered an informed choice. At 
least not in the better psychology departments. A more optimistic impres­
sion of our rationality is engendered by a review of the difficulties 
encountered in artificial intelligence research .  Even the most sophisticated 
AI programs stumble blindly into misinterpretations and misunderstand­
ings that even small children reliably evade without a second thought (see, 
e.g., Schank 1 976; Schank and Abelson 1 977). From this vantage point we 
seem marvelously rational . 

7. THREE KINDS OF INTENTIONAL PSYCH O LOGY 
1 29 
However rational we are, it is the myth of our rational agenthood that 
structures and organizes our attributions of belief and desire to others and 
that regulates our own deliberations and investigations. We aspire to 
rationality, and without the myth of our rationality the concepts of belief 
and desire would be uprooted. Folk psychology, then, is idealized in that it 
produces its predictions and explanations by calculating in a normative 
system; it predicts what we will believe, desire, and do, by determining what 
we ought to believe, desire, and do.4 
Folk psychology is abstract in that the beliefs and desires it attributes are 
not - or need riot be - presumed to be intervening distinguishable states of 
an internal behavior-causing system. (The point will be enlarged upon 
later.) The role of the concept of belief is like the role of the concept of a 
center of gravity, and the calculations that yield the predictions are more 
like the calculations one performs with a parallelogram of forces than like 
the calculations one performs with a blueprint of internal levers and cogs. 
Folk psychology is thus instrumentalistic in a way the most ardent realist 
should permit: people really do have beliefs and desires, on my version of 
folk psychology, just the way they really have centers of gravity and the 
earth has an Equator. 5 Reichenbach distinguished between two sorts of 
referents for theoretical terms: ii/ala- posited theoretical entities - and 
abstracta - calculation-bound entities or logical constructs. 6 Beliefs and 
desires of folk psychology (but not all mental events and states) are 
abstracta. 
This view of folk psychology emerges more clearly when contrasted to a 
diametrically opposed view, each of whose tenets has been held by some 
philosopher, and at least most of which have been espoused by Fodor: 
Beliefs and desires, just like pains, thoughts, sensations and other episodes, 
are taken by folk psychology to be real, intervening, internal states or events, 
in causal interaction, subsumed under covering laws of causal stripe. Folk 
psychology is not an idealized, rationalistic calculus but a naturalistic, 
empirical, descriptive theory, imputing causal regularities discovered by 
extensive induction over experience. To suppose two people share a belief is to 
suppose them to be ultimately in some structurally similar internal condition, 
e.g. for them to have the same words of Mentalese written in the functionally 
relevant places in their brains. 
I want to deflect this head-on collision of analyses by taking two steps. 
First, I am prepared to grant a measure of the claims made by the 
opposition. Of course we don't all sit in the dark in our studies like mad 
Leibnizians rationalistically excogitating behavioral predictions from pure, 
idealized concepts of our .neighbors, nor do we derive all our readiness to 

1 30 
DEN N ETI 
attribute desires from a careful generation of them from the ultimate goal 
of survival. We may observe that some folks seem to desire cigarettes, or 
pain, or notoriety (we observe this by hearing them tell us, seeing what they 
choose, etc.) and without any conviction that these people, given their 
circumstances, ought to have these desires, we attribute them anyway. So 
rationalistic generation of attributions is augmented and even corrected on 
occasion by empirical generalizations about belief and desire that guide our 
attributions and are learned more or less inductively. For instance, small 
children believe in Santa Claus, people are inclined to believe the more 
self-serving of two interpretations of an event in which they are involved 
(unless they are depressed), and people can be made to want things they 
don't need by making them believe that glamorous people like those things. 
And so forth in familiar profusion. This folklore does not consist in /aws ­
even probabilistic Jaws - but some of it is being turned into science of a sort, 
for example theories of "hot cognition" and cognitive dissonance. I grant 
the existence of all this naturalistic generalization, and its role in the normal 
calculations of folk psychologists - that is, all of us. People do rely on their 
own parochial group of neighbors when framing intentional interpreta­
tions. That is why people have so much difficulty understanding for­
eigners - their behavior, to say nothing of their languages. They impute 
more of their own beliefs and desires, and those of their neighbors, than 
they would if they followed my principles of attribution slavishly. Of course 
this is a perfectly reasonable shortcut for people to take, even when it often 
leads to bad results. We are in this matter, as in most, satisficers, not 
optimizers, when it comes to information gathering and theory construc­
tion. I would insist, however, that all this empirically obtained Jore is laid 
over a fundamental generative and normative framework that has the 
features I have described. 
My second step away from the conflict I have set up is to recall that the 
issue is not what folk psychology as found in the field truly is, but what it 
is at its best, what deserves to be taken seriously and incorporated into 
science. It is not particularly to the point to argue against me that folk 
psychology is in fact committed to beliefs and desires as distinguishable, 
causally interacting illata; what must be shown is that it ought to be. The 
latter claim I will deal with in due course. The former claim I could concede 
without embarrassment to my overall project, but I do not concede it, for 
it seems to me that the evidence is quite strong that our ordinary notion of 
belief has next to nothing of the concrete in it. Jacques shoots his uncle dead 
in Trafalgar Square and is apprehended on the spot by Sherlock; Tom reads 
about it in the Guardian and Boris learns of it in Pravda. Now Jacques, 
Sherlock, Tom, and Boris have had remarkably different experiences - to 
say nothing of their earlier biographies and future prospects - but there is 
one thing they share: they all believe that a Frenchman has committed 

7. TH R E E  KI N DS OF INTENTIONAL PSYCHOLOGY 
1 31 
murder in Trafalgar Square. They did not all say this, not even "to 
themselves"; that proposition did not, we can suppose, "occur to" any of 
them, and even if it had, it would have had entirely different import for 
Jacques, Sherlock, Tom, and Boris. Yet they all believe that a Frenchman 
committed murder in Trafalgar Square. This is a shared property that is 
visible, as it were, only from one very limited point of view - the point of 
view of folk psychology. Ordinary folk psychologists have no difficulty 
imputing such useful but elusive commonalities to people. If they then insist 
that in doing so they are postulating a similarly structured object in each 
head, this is a gratuitous bit of misplaced concreteness, a regrettable lapse 
in ideology. 
. 
But in any case there is no doubt that folk psychology is a mixed bag, like 
folk productions generally, and there is no reason in the end not to grant 
that it is much more complex, variegated (and in danger of incoherence) 
than my sketch has made it out to be. The ordinary notion of belief no 
doubt does place beliefs somewhere midway between being il/ata and being 
abstracta. What this suggests to me is that the concept of belief found in 
ordinary understanding, that is, in folk psychology, is unappealing as a 
scientific concept. I am reminded of Anaxagoras's strange precursor to 
atomism: the theory of seeds. There is a portion of everything in everything, 
he is reputed to have claimed. Every object consists of an infinity of seeds, 
of all possible varieties. How do you make bread out of flour, yeast, and 
water? Flour contains bread seeds in abundance (but flour seeds predomi­
nate - that's what makes it flour), and so do yeast and water, and when 
these ingredients are mixed together, the bread seeds form a new majority, 
so bread is what you get. Bread nourishes by containing flesh and blood and 
bone seeds in addition to its majority of bread seeds. Not good theoretical 
entities, these seeds, for as a sort of bastardized cross between properties 
and proper parts they have a penchant for generating vicious regresses, and 
their identity conditions are problematic to say the least. 
Beliefs are rather like that. There seems no comfortable way of avoiding 
the claim that we have an infinity of beliefs, and common intuition does not 
give us a stable answer to such puzzles as whether the belief that 3 is greater 
than 2 is none other than the belief that 2 is less than 3 .  The obvious 
response to the challenge of an infinity of beliefs with slippery identity 
conditions is to suppose these beliefs are not all "stored separately"; many ­
in fact most if we are really talking about infinity - will be stored implicitly 
in virtue of the explicit storage of a few (or a few million) - the core beliefs 
(see Dennett 1 975; also Fodor 1 975 and Field 1 978). The core beliefs will be 
"stored separately, "  and they look like promising illata in contrast to the 
virtual or implicit beliefs which look like paradigmatic abstracta. But 
although this might turn out to be the way our brains are organized, I 
suspect things will be more complicated than this: there is no reason to 

1 32 
DENN ETT 
suppose the core elements, the concrete, salient, separately stored represen­
tation tokens (and there must be some such elements in any complex 
information processing system), will explicitly represent (or be) a subset of 
our beliefs at all. That is, if you were to sit down and write out a list of a 
thousand or so of your paradigmatic beliefs, all of them could turn out to 
be virtual, only implicitly stored or represented, and what was explicitly 
stored would be information (e.g. about memory addresses, procedures for 
problem-solving, or recognition, etc.) that was entirely unfamiliar. It would 
be folly to prejudge this empirical issue by insisting that our core represen­
tations of information (whichever they turn out to be) are beliefs par 
excellence, for when the facts are in, our intuitions may instead support the 
contrary view: the least controversial self-attributions of belief may pick out 
beliefs that from the vantage point of developed cognitive theory are 
invariably virtual. 7 
In such an eventuality what could we say about the causal roles we assign 
ordinarily to beliefs (e.g. "Her belief that John knew her secret caused her 
to blush")? We could say that whatever the core elements were in virtue of 
which she virtually believed that John knew her secret, they, the core 
elements, played a direct causal role (somehow) in triggering the blushing 
response. We would be wise, as this example shows, not to tamper with our 
ordinary catalogue of beliefs (virtual though they might all turn out to be), 
for these are predictable, readily understandable, manipulable regularities 
in psychological phenomena in spite of their apparent neutrality with regard 
to the explicit/implicit (or core/virtual) distinction. What Jacques, Sher­
lock, Boris, and Tom have in common is probably only a virtual belief 
"derived" from largely different explicit stores of information in each of 
them, but virtual or not, it is their sharing of this belief that would explain 
(or permit us to predict) in some imagined circumstances their all taking the 
same action when given the same new information. ("And now for one 
million dollars, Tom [Jacques, Sherlock, Boris] , answer our jackpot 
question correctly: has a French citizen ever committed a major crime in 
London?") 
At the same time we want to cling to the equally ordinary notion that 
beliefs can cause not only actions, but blushes, verbal slips, heart attacks, 
and the like. Much of the debate over whether or not intentional explana­
tions are causal explanations can be bypassed by noting how the core 
elements, whatever they may be, can be cited as playing the causal role, 
while belief remains virtual. "Had Tom not believed that p and wanted that 
q, he would not have done A . "  Is this a causal explanation? It is tantamount 
to this: Tom was in some one of an indefinitely large number of structurally 
different states of type B that have in common just that each one of them 
licenses attribution of belief that p and desire that q in virtue of its normal 
relations with many other states of Tom, and this state, whichever one it 

7. THREE KINDS OF INTENTIONAL PSYCHOLOGY 
1 33 
was, was causally sufficient, given the "background conditions" of course, 
to initiate the intention to perform A, and thereupon A was performed, and 
had he not been in one of those indefinitely many type B states, he would 
not have done A .  One can call this a causal explanation because it talks 
about causes, but it is surely as unspecific and unhelpful as a causal 
explanation can get. It commits itself to there being some causal explana­
tion or other falling within a very broad area (i.e. , the intentional 
interpretation is held to be supervenient on Tom's bodily condition), but its 
true informativeness and utility in actual prediction lie, not surprisingly, in 
its assertion that Tom, however his body is currently structured, has a 
particular set of these el1:1sive intentional properties, beliefs, and desires. 
The ordinary notion of belief is pulled in two directions. If we want to 
have good theoretical entities, good ilata, or good logical constructs, good 
abstracta, we will have to jettison some of the ordinary freight of the 
concepts of belief and desire. So I propose a divorce. Since we seem to have 
both notions wedded in folk psychology, let's split them apart and create 
two new theories: one strictly abstract, idealizing, holistic, instrumenta­
listic - pure intentional system theory - and the other a concrete, micro­
theoretical science of the actual realization of those intentional systems -
what I will call subpersonal cognitive psychology. By exploring their 
differences and interrelations, we should be able to tell whether any 
plausible "reductions" are in the offing. 
I NTENTI ONAL SYSTEM THEORY AS A COMPETENCE 
THEORY 
The first new theory, intentional system theory, is envisaged as a close kin 
of, and overlapping with, such already existing disciplines as decision 
theory and game theory, which are similarly abstract, normative, and 
couched in intentional language. It borrows the ordinary terms "belier• and 
"desire" but gives them a technical meaning within the theory. It is a sort of 
holistic logical behaviorism because it deals with the prediction and 
explanation from belief-desire profiles of the actions of whole systems 
(either alone in environments or in interaction with other intentional 
systems), but it treats the individual realizations of the systems as black 
boxes. The subject of all the intentional attributions is the whole system (the 
person, the animal, or even the corporation or nation [see Dennett 1 976]) 
rather than any of its parts, and individual beliefs and desires are not 
attributable in isolation, independently of other belief and desire attribu­
tions. The latter point distinguishes intentional system theory most clearly 
from Ryle's logical behaviorism, which took on the impossible burden of 

1 34 
DEN N ETT 
characterizing individual beliefs (and other mental states) as particular 
individual dispositions to outward behavior. 
The theory deals with the "production" of new beliefs and desires from 
old, via an interaction among old beliefs and desires, features in the 
environment, and the system's actions; and this creates the illusion that the 
theory contains naturalistic descriptions of internal processing in the 
systems the theory is about, when in fact the processing is all in the 
manipulation of the theory and consists in updating the intentional 
characterization of the whole system according to the rules of attribution. 
An analogous illusion of process would befall a naive student who, when 
confronted with a parallelogram of forces, supposed that it pictured a 
mechanical linkage of rods and pivots of some kind instead of being simply 
a graphic way of representing and plotting the effect of several simulta­
neously acting forces. 
Richard Jeffrey (1 970), in developing his concept of probability kinemat­
ics, has usefully drawn attention to an analogy with the distinction in 
physics between kinematics and dynamics. In kinematics, 
you talk about the propagation of motions through a system in terms of such 
constraints as rigidity and manner of linkage. It is the physics of position and 
time, in terms of which you can talk about velocity and acceleration , but not 
about force and mass. When you talk about forces - causes of accelerations -
you are in the realm of dynamics. (p. 1 72) 
Kinematics provides a simplified and idealized level of abstraction appro­
priate for many purposes - for example, for the initial design development 
of a gearbox - but when one must deal with more concrete details of 
systems - when the gearbox designer must worry about friction, bending, 
energetic efficiency, and the like - one must switch to dynamics for more 
detailed and reliable predictions, at the cost of increased complexity and 
diminished generality. Similarly, one can approach the study of belief (and 
desire and so forth) at a highly abstract level, ignoring problems of 
realization and simply setting out what the normative demands on the 
design of a believer are. For instance, one can ask such questions as "What 
must a system's epistemic capabilities and propensities be for it to survive in 
environment A ?" (cf. Campbell 1973, 1 977) or "What must this system 
already know in order for it to be able to learn B?" or "What intentions 
must this system have in order to mean something by saying something?" 
Intentional system theory deals just with the performance specifications 
of believers while remaining silent on how the systems are to be imple­
mented . In fact this neutrality with regard to implementation is the most 
useful feature of intentional characterizations. Consider, for instance, the 
role of intentional characterizations in evolutionary biology. If we are to 

7. T H R E E  KINDS O F  INTENTIONAL PSYCH OLOGY 
1 35 
explain the evolution of complex behavioral capabilities or cognitive talents 
by natural selection, we must note that it is the intentionally characterized 
capacity (e.g. , the capacity to acquire a belief, a desire, to perform an 
intentional action) that has survival value, however it happens to be realized 
as a result of mutation. If a particularly noxious insect makes its appearance 
in an environment, the birds and bats with a survival advantage will be 
those that come to believe this insect is not good to eat. In view of the vast 
differences in neural structure, genetic background, and perceptual capacity 
between birds and bats, it is highly unlikely that this useful trait they may 
come to share has a common description at any level more concrete or less 
abstract than intentional SY.Stem theory. It is not only that the intentional 
predicate is a projectible predicate in evolutionary theory; since it is more 
general than its species-specific counterpart predicates (which characterize 
the successful mutation just in birds, or just in bats), it is preferable. So 
from the point of view of evolutionary biology, we would not want to 
"reduce" all intentional characterizations even if we knew in particular 
instances what the physiological implementation was. 
This level of generality is essential if we want a theory to have anything 
meaningful and defensible to say about such topics as intelligence in general 
(as opposed, say, to just human or even terrestrial or natural intelligence) or 
such grand topics as meaning or reference or representation. Suppose, to 
pursue a familiar philosophical theme, we are invaded by Martians, and the 
question arises: do they have beliefs and desires? Are they that much like 
us? According to intentional system theory, if these Martians are smart 
enough to get here, then they most certainly have beliefs and desires - in the 
technical sense proprietary to the theory- no matter what their internal 
structure, and no matter how our folk-psychological intuitions rebel at the 
thought. 
This principled blindness of intentional system theory to internal struc­
ture seems to invite the retort: but there has to be some explanation of the 
success of intentional prediction of the behavior of systems (e.g. , Fodor, 
1 985, p. 79). It isn't just magic. It isn't a mere coincidence that one can 
generate all these abstracta, manipulate them via some version of practical 
reasoning, and come up with an action prediction that has a good chance of 
being true. There must be some way in which the internal processes of the 
system mirror the complexities of the intentional interpretation, or its 
success would be a miracle. 
Of course. This is all quite true and important. Nothing without a great 
deal of structural and processing complexity could conceivably realize an 
intentional system of any interest, and the complexity of the realization will 
surely bear a striking resemblance to the complexity of the instrumentalistic 
interpretation. Similarly, the success of valence theory in chemistry is no 
coincidence, and people were entirely right to expect that deep microphy-

1 36 
DENNETT 
sical similarities would be discovered between elements with the same 
valence and that the structural similarities found would explain the dispo­
sitional similarities. But since people and animals are unlike atoms and 
molecules not only in being the products of a complex evolutionary history, 
but also in being the products of their individual learning histories, there is 
no reason to suppose that individual (human) believers that p - like 
individual (carbon) atoms with valence 4- regulate their dispositions with 
exactly the same machinery. Discovering the constraints on design and 
implementation variation, and demonstrating how particular species and 
individuals in fact succeed in realizing intentional systems, is the job for the 
third theory: subpersonal cognitive psychology. 
SU BPERSONAL COGNITIVE PSYCHOLOGY AS A 
PERFORMANCE THEORY 
The task of subpersonal cognitive psychology is to explain something that 
at first glance seems utterly mysterious and inexplicable. The brain, as 
intentional system theory and evolutionary biology show us, is a semantic 
engine; its task is to discover what its multifarious inputs mean, to 
discriminate them by their significance and "act accordingly. "8 That's what 
brains are for. But the brain, as physiology or plain common sense shows 
us, is just a syntactic engine; all it can do is discriminate its inputs by their 
structural, temporal, and physical features and let its entirely mechanical 
activities be governed by these "syntactic" features of its inputs. That's all 
brains can do. Now how does the brain manage to get semantics from 
syntax? How could any entity (how could a genius or an angel or God) get 
the semantics of a system from nothing but its syntax? It couldn't. The 
syntax of a system doesn't determine its semantics. By what alchemy, then, 
does the brain extract semantically reliable results from syntactically driven 
operations? It cannot be designed to do an impossible task, but it could be 
designed to approximate the impossible task, to mimic the behavior of the 
impossible object (the semantic engine) by capitalizing on close (close 
enough) fortuitous correspondences between structural regularities - of the 
environment and of its own internal states and operations - and semantic 
types. 
The basic idea is familiar. An animal needs to know when it has satisfied 
the goal of finding and ingesting food, but it settles for a friction­
in-the-throat-followed-by-stretched-stomach detector, a mechanical switch 
turned on by a relatively simple mechanical condition that normally 
co-occurs with the satisfaction of the animals "real" goal . It's not fancy and 
can easily be exploited to trick the animal into either eating when it 
shouldn't or leaving off eating when it shouldn't, but it does well enough by 

7. THREE KI N DS OF I NTENTIONAL PSYCHOLOGY 
1 37 
the animal in its normal environment. Or suppose I am monitoring 
telegraph transmissions and have been asked to intercept all death threats 
(but only death threats in English - to make it "easy"). I'd like to build a 
machine to save me the trouble of interpreting semantically every message 
sent, but how could this be done? No machine could be designed to do the 
j ob perfectly, for that would require defining the semantic category death 
threat in English as some tremendously complex feature of strings of 
alphabetic symbols, and there is utterly no reason to suppose this could be 
done in a principled way. (If somehow by brute-force inspection and 
subsequent enumeration we could list all and only the English death threats 
of, say, less than a thousand characters, we could easily enough build a 
filter to detect them, but we are looking for a principled, projectible, 
extendable method.) A really crude device could be made to discriminate all 
messages containing the symbol strings 
. . . I will kill you . . . 
or 
. . . you . . . die . . . unless . . . 
or 
. . .  (for some finite disjunction of likely patterns to be found in English 
death threats). 
This device would have some utility, and further refinements could screen 
the material that passed this first filter, and so on. An unpromising 
beginning for constructing a sentence understander, but if you want to get 
semantics out of syntax (whether the syntax of messages in a natural 
language or the syntax of afferent neuron impulses), variations on this basic 
strategy are your only hope. 9 You must put together a bag of tricks and 
hope nature will be kind enough to let your device get by. Of course some 
tricks are elegant and appeal to deep principles of organization, but in the 
end all one can hope to produce (all natural selection can have produced) 
are systems that seem to discriminate meanings by actually discriminating 
things (tokens of no doubt wildly disjunctive types) that co-vary reliably 
with meanings. 10 Evolution has designed our brains not only to do this but 
to evolve and follow strategies of self-improvement in this activity during 
their individual lifetimes (see Dennett 1 974b). 
It is the task of subpersonal cognitive psychology to propose and test 
models of such activity - of pattern recognition or stimulus generalization, 
concept learning, expectation, learning, goal-directed behavior, problem-

1 38 
DEN N ETI 
solving - that not only produce a simulacrum of genuine content-sensitivity, 
but that do this in ways demonstrably like the way people's brains do it, 
exhibiting the same powers and the same vulnerabilities to deception, 
overload, and confusion. It is here that we will find our good theoretical 
entities, our useful ii/ala, and while some of them may well resemble the 
familiar entities of folk psychology - beliefs, desires, judgments, deci­
sions - many will certainly not (see, e.g. , the subdoxastic states proposed 
by Stich 1 978b). The only similarity we can be sure of discovering in the 
il/ata of subpersonal cognitive psychology is the intentionality of their labels 
(see Brainstorms, pp. 23-38). They will be characterized as events with 
content, bearing information, signaling this and ordering that . 
In order to give the il/ata these labels, in order to maintain any intentional 
interpretation of their operation at all, the theorist must always keep 
glancing outside the system, to see what normally produces the configura­
tion he is describing, what effects the system's responses normally have on 
the environment, and what benefit normally accrues to the whole system 
from this activity. In other words the cognitive psychologist cannot ignore 
the fact that it is the realization of an intentional system he is studying on 
pain of abandoning semantic interpretation and hence psychology. On the 
other hand, progress in subpersonal cognitive psychology will blur the 
boundaries between it and intentional system theory, knitting them together 
much as chemistry and physics have been knit together. 
The alternative of ignoring the external world and its relations to the 
internal machinery (what Putnam has called psychology in the narrow 
sense, or methodological solipsism, and Gunderson has lampooned as black 
world glass box perspectivalism) is not really psychology at all, but just at 
best abstract neurophysiology - pure internal syntax with no hope of a 
semantic interpretation. Psychology "reduced" to neurophysiology in this 
fashion would not be psychology, for it would not be able to provide an 
explanation of the regularities it is psychology's particular job to explain: 
the reliability with which "intelligent" organisms can cope with their 
environments and thus prolong their lives. Psychology can, and should, 
Black Box Behaviorism 
Black World Glass Box Perspectivalism 
FIG. 7. 1 .  

7. T H R E E  KINDS OF INTENTI ONAL PSYCHOLOGY 
1 39 
work toward an account of the physiological foundations of psychological 
processes, not by eliminating psychological or intentional characterizations 
of those processes, but by exhibiting how the brain implements the 
intentionally characterized performance specifications of subpersonal the­
ories. 
Friedman, discussing the current perplexity in cognitive psychology, 
suggests that the problem 
is the direction of reduction. Contemporary psychology tries to explain 
individual cognitive activity independently from social cognitive activity, and 
then tries to give a micro reduction of social cognitive activity - that is, the use 
of a public language - in terms of a prior theory of individual cognitive 
activity. The opposing suggestion is that we first look for a theory of social 
activity, and then try to give a macro reduction of individual cognitive 
activity - the activity of applying concepts, making judgments, and so forth ­
in terms of our prior social theory. (198 1 ,  pp. 15-16) 
With the idea of macroreduction in psychology I largely agree, except that 
Friedman's identification of the macro level as explicitly social is only part 
of the story. The cognitive capacities of non-language-using animals (and 
Robinson Crusoes, if there are any) must also be accounted for, and not 
just in terms of an analogy with the practices of us language users. The 
macro level up to which we should relate microprocesses in the brain in 
order to understand them as psychological is more broadly the level of 
organism-environment interaction, development, and evolution. That level 
includes social interaction as a particularly important part (see Burge 1 979), 
but still a proper part. 
There is no way to capture the semantic properties of things (word 
tokens, diagrams, nerve impulses, brain states) by a microreduction. 
Semantic properties are not just relational but, you might say, superrela­
tional, for the relation a particular vehicle of content, or token, must bear 
in order to have content is not just a relation it bears to other similar things 
(e.g. ,  other tokens, or parts of tokens, or sets of tokens, or causes of 
tokens) but a relation between the token and the whole life - and counter­
factual life1 1  - of the organism it "serves" and that organism's requirements 
for survival and its evolutionary ancestry. 
THE PROSPECTS OF REDUCTION 
Of our three psychologies - folk psychology, intentional system theory, and 
sub-personal cognitive psychology - what then might reduce to what? 
Certainly the one-step microreduction of folk psychology to physiology 

1 40 
DEN N ETI 
alluded to in t he slogans o f  t he early ident ity t heorist s will never be found ­
and should never be missed , e\'en by sc aun..:h friends l) f materialism ;md 
s..:ient i fic unit y .  A prospect wort h expk)ring. t lwugh . is t hat folk psy..:hl'k'gy 
(more precisely , t he part of folk psycho logy ,,.lm h  ..:aring abl'ut ) redu..:es -
conceptually - t o intent ional system t heNy . W hat t his ,n,uld aml'Unt ll' ..:;m 
best be brought out by cont rast ing: t his proposed .,:,m..:ept ual redu..:til'n '' i t h  
more familiar alt ernat i,·es : "t ype-t ype ident ity t heory" a n d  "Turing ma..:hine 
funct ionalism . " According t o  t ype-t ype ident i t y  t hel'ry . for e\'ery ment al­
istic term or predicate ".\/ ", t here is some predil·;u e "P " expressif>lt' in rht' 
l'Ocabulary of rhe physical scit?nct.>s su..:h t hat a ..:reature is .\/ i f  and l'nly if 
i t  i s  P. I n  symbols: 
( 1 )  (x) (Mx =- Px) 
This is reductionism with a veng:ean..:e. t a king l'n t he bur den l) f  repla.:ing . i n  
principle. a l l  mentalistic predi..:ates with .:l1-ext ensi' e predi.:ates .:l'ml'l'Se,i 
t ru t h- funct ionally from the predicates l' f physi..:s . I t  is 1ww wiJely agreed l l' 
be hopelessly too st rong a demand . Belie,·ing t hat .:•H S  eat fis h i s .  int uiti' ely . 
a fzmctional st ate t hat might be " ariously implement ed physi..:al l y .  Sl' t here 
is no reason to suppose the commonality referred t o  l'n the left-h;mJ side l,f 
( 1 )  can be reliably picked out by any predi..:at e. hl'We\'er ..:l'mplex . l, f 
physics . What is needed t o  express the predi..:at e  l'n the right -hand side i s .  
it seems , a physi..:ally neut ral language for speaking l,f fun..:t il'ns an,i 
funct ional states . and t he ob\'iN1s candidat es are the hmgu;1ges used ll' 
describe automat a - for inst ance. Turing machine language . 
The Turing machine functionalist then proposes 
(2) (x) (.\Ix =- x realizes Sl'me Tur i ng ma..:hine k in ll,gi..:al s t ;lte .4 ) 
I n  other words . for two t hings bot h t o  belie\'e t hat .:•H S  eat fish t hey nee,i 
not be physically similar in any speci fiable way . but t hey must bl't h be in a 
"funct ional " condition spe..:i fiable in principle in t he ml'St general fun..:­
t ional language: t hey must share a Turing ma..:hine des..:ript il'n a..:,·Mding t l' 
which t hey are both in 
some part i ..:ular ll,gi..:al stat e .  This is 
st ill a 
reductionist doct rine. for it propl,ses to ident i fy ea..:h men t •ll t ype with a 
funct ional type picked out in t he language l) f auwmat a t heMy . But t his is 
st ill too st rong , for t here is no nw re reasl1n t o  suppl1se J a..:4ues . Sherk,..: k .  
Boris . and Tom "have the same program " i n  .my relaxed and abst ra..:t sense . 
considering t he differences in t heir nature and nurt ure ,  t han t hat t heir 
brains h a ve some crucially ident i..:al physi..:l'-dtemi..:al feat u re .  W e  must 
weaken t he requirement s for the right -hand side l) f l'ur formula st ill furt her . 
Consider 
(3) (x) (x believes that p = x .:an be predi..:t in:·ly at t ributed t h e  belief 
that p) 

7. TH REE K I N DS OF I NTENTIONAL PSYCHOLOGY 
1 41 
This appears to be blatantly circular and uninformative, with the language 
on the right simply mirroring the language on the left. But all we need to 
make an informative answer of this formula is a systematic way of making 
the attributions alluded to on the right-hand side. Consider the parallel case 
of Turing machines. What do two different realizations or embodiments of 
a Turing machine have in common when they are in the same logical state? 
Just this: there is a system of description such that according to it both are 
described as being realizations of some particular Turing machine, and 
according to this description, which is predictive of the operation of both 
entities, both are in the same state of that Turing machine's machine table. 
One doesn't reduce Turing machine talk to some more fundamental idiom; 
one legitimizes Turing machine talk by providing it with rules of attribution 
and exhibiting its predictive powers. If we can similarly legitimize "mental­
istic" talk, we will have no need of a reduction, and that is the point of the 
concept of an intentional system. Intentional systems are supposed to play 
a role in the legitimization of mentalistic predicates parallel to the role 
played by the abstract notion of a Turing machine in setting down rules for 
the interpretation of artifacts as computational automata. I fear my concept 
is woefully informal and unsystematic compared with Turing's, but then the 
domain it attempts to systematize - our everyday attributions in mentalistic 
or intentional language - is itself something of a mess, at least compared 
with the clearly defined field of recursive function theory, the domain of 
Turing machines. 
The analogy between the theoretical roles of Turing machines and 
intentional systems is more than superficial. Consider that warhorse in the 
philosophy of mind, Brentano's Thesis that intentionality is the mark of the 
mental: all mental phenomena exhibit intentionality and no physical 
phenomena exhibit intentionality. This has been traditionally taken to be an 
irreducibility thesis: the mental, in virtue of its intentionality, cannot be 
reduced to the physical. But given the concept of an intentional system, we 
can construe the first half of Brentano's Thesis - all mental phenomena are 
intentional - as a reductionist thesis of sorts, parallel to Church's Thesis in 
the foundations of mathematics. 
According to Church's Thesis, every "effective" procedure in mathe­
matics is recursive, that is, Turing-computable. Church's Thesis is not 
provable, since it hinges on the intuitive and informal notion of an effective 
procedure, but it is generally accepted, and it provides a very useful 
reduction of a fuzzy-but-useful mathematical notion to a crisply defined 
notion of apparently equal scope and greater power. Analogously, the claim 
that every mental phenomenon alluded to in folk psychology is intentional­
system-characterizable would, if true, provide a reduction of the mental as 
ordinarily understood - a  domain whose boundaries are at best fixed by 
mutual acknowledgment and shared intuition - to a clearly defined domain 

1 42 
DEN N ETI 
of entities whose principles of organization are familiar, relatively formal 
and systematic, and entirely general. 
1 2  
This reduction claim, like Church's Thesis, cannot be proven but could be 
made compelling by piecemeal progress on particular (and particularly 
difficult) cases - a  project I set myself elsewhere (in Brainstorms). The final 
reductive task would be to show not how the terms of intentional system 
theory are eliminable in favor of physiological terms via subpersonal 
cognitive psychology, but almost the reverse: to show how a system 
described in physiological terms could warrant an interpretation as a 
realized intentional system. 
FOOTNOTES 
1This paragraph corrects a misrepresentation of both Fodor's and Ryle's positions in my 
critical notice of Fodor's book in Mind (1 977) reprinted in Brainstorms, pp. 90- 1 08 .  
2 1  think i t  i s  just worth noting that philosophers' use o f  "believe" a s  the standard and general 
ordinary language term is a considerable distortion. We seldom talk about what people believe; 
we talk about what they think and what they know. 
3While in general true beliefs have to be more useful than false beliefs (and hence a system 
ought to have true beliefs), in special circumstances it may be better to have a few false beliefs . 
For instance it might be better for beast B to have some false beliefs about whom B can beat 
up and whom B can't . Ranking B's likely antagonists from ferocious to pushover, we certainly 
want B to believe it can't beat up all the ferocious ones and can beat up all the obvious 
pushovers, but it is better (because it "costs less" in discrimination tasks and protects against 
random perturbations such as bad days and lucky blows) for B to extend "! can't beat up x'' 
to cover even some beasts it can in fact beat up. Erring on the side of prudence is a 
well-recognized good strategy, and so Nature can be expected to have valued it on occasions 
when it came up. An alternative strategy in this instance would be to abide by the rule: avoid 
conflict with penumbra( cases . But one might have to "pay more" to implement that strategy 
than to implement the strategy designed to produce, and rely on, some false beliefs . 
4It tests its predictions in two ways: action predictions it tests directly by looking to see what 
the agent does; belief and desire predictions are tested indirectly by employing the predicted 
attributions in further predictions of eventual action. As usual , the Duhemian thesis holds : 
belief and desire attributions are underdetermined by the available data. 
5Michael Friedman's "Theoretical Explanation" ( 1 98 1 )  provides an excellent analysis of the 
role of instrumentalistic thinking within realistic science. Scheffler ( 1 963) provides a useful 
distinction between instrumenta/ism and fictiona/ism. In his terms I am characterizing folk 
psychology as instrumentalistic, not fictionalistic. 
6"0ur observations of concrete things confer a certain probability on the existence of 
i/ata-nothing more . . . .  Second, there are inferences to abstracta. These inferences are . . .  
equivalences, not probability inferences . Consequently, the existence of abstracta is reducible 
to the existence of concreta. There is, therefore, no problem of their objective existence; their 
status depends on a convention." (Reichenbach 1 938, pp. 211-12). 
7See Field 1 978, p. 55, n. 12 on "minor concessions" to such instrumentalistic treatments of 
belief. 
"More accurately if less picturesquely, the brain's task is to come to produce internal 
mediating responses that reliably vary in concert with variation in the actual environmental 
significance (the natural and nonnatural meanings, in Grice's ( 1 957) sense) of their distal causes 

7. THREE K I N DS OF I NTENTIONAL PSYCHOLOGY 
1 43 
and independently of meaning-irrelevant variations in their proximal causes, and moreover to 
respond to its own mediating responses in ways that systematically tend to improve the 
creature's prospects in its environment if the mediating responses are varying as they ought to 
vary . 
90ne might think that while in principle one cannot derive the semantics of a system from 
nothing but its syntax, in practice one might be able to cheat a little ar.d exploit syntactic 
features that don't imply a semantical interpretation but strongly suggest one. For instance, 
faced with the task of deciphering isolated documents in an entirely unknown and alien 
language, one might note that while the symbol that looks like a duck doesn't have to mean 
"duck," there is a good chance that it does, especially if the symbol that looks like a wolf seems 
to be eating the symbol that looks like a duck, and not vice versa. Call this hoping for 
hieroglyphics and note the form it has taken in psychological theories from Locke to the 
present: we will be able to tell which mental representations are which (which idea is the idea 
of dog and which of cat) because the former will look like a dog and the latter like a cat . This 
is all very well as a crutch for us observers on the outside, trying to assign content to the events 
in some brain, but it is of no use to the brain . . .  because brains don't know what dogs look 
like! Or better, this cannot be the brain's fundamental method of eking semantic classes out of 
raw syntax, for any brain (or brain part) that could be said - in an extended sense - to know 
what dogs look like would be a brain (or brain part) that had already solved its problem, that 
was already (a simulacrum oO a semantic engine. But this is still misleading, for brains in any 
rvent do not assign content to their own events in the way observers might: brains fix the 
content of their internal events in the act of reacting as they do. There are good reasons for 
positing mental images of one sort or another in cognitive theories (see "Two Approaches to 
Mental Images" in Brainstorms, pp. 1 74-89) but hoping for hieroglyphics isn't one of them , 
though I suspect it is covertly influential. 
101 take this point to be closely related to Davidson's reasons for claiming there can be no 
psycho-physical laws, but I am unsure that Davidson wants to draw the same conclusions from 
it that I do. See Davidson 1 970b. 
1 1 What I mean is this: counterfactuals enter because content is in part a matter of the normal 
or designed role of a vehicle whether or not it ever gets to play that role. Cf. Sober 1981 and 
Millikan 1 984. 
12Ned Block ( 1 978) presents arguments supposed to show how the various possible 
functionalist theories of mind all slide into the sins of "chauvinism" (improperly excluding 
Martians from the class of possible mind-havers) or "liberalism" (improperly including various 
contraptions, human puppets, and so forth among the mind-havers). My view embraces the 
broadest liberalism, gladly paying the price of a few recalcitrant intuitions for the generality 
gained. 

FOLK PSYCHOLOGY 
AND THE 
PHILOSOPHY OF MIND 
Edited by 
Scott M .  Christensen 
Dale R. Turner 
University of California, Riverside 
Im 
LA WREN CE ERLBAUM ASSOCIATES, PUBLISHERS 
1 993 
Hillsdale, New Jersey 
Hove and London 

Copyright © 1 993 by Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, Inc. 
All rights reserved. No part of this book may be reproduced in 
any form, by photostat, microfilm, retrieval system, or any other 
means, without the prior written permission of the publisher. 
Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, Inc., Publishers 
365 Broadway 
Hillsdale, New Jersey 07642 
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data 
Folk psychology and the philosophy of mind/ edited by Scott M .  
Christensen & Dale R. Turner. 
p. 
cm . 
Includes bibliographical references and index . 
ISBN 0-8058-093 1 -7 
I .  Philosophy of mind. 
2. Ethnopsychology. 
3 .  Mind and body. 
I .  Christensen, Scott M .  
I I .  Turner, Dale R .  
BD4 1 8 . 3 . F65 
1 993 
1 28'.2- dc20 
92' 1 9886 
CIP 
Books published by Lawrence Erlbaum Associates are printed on acid-free paper, and their 
bindings are chosen for strength and durability. 
Printed in the United States of America 
10 
9 
8 
7 
6 
5 
4 
3 
2 
I 

