 
WONDERING WHERE THE YELLOW WENT
Author(s): Daniel Dennett
Source: The Monist, Vol. 64, No. 1, Foundations for a Metaphysics of Pure Process
(JANUARY, 1981), pp. 102-108
Published by: Oxford University Press
Stable URL: http://www.jstor.org/stable/27902680
Accessed: 13-09-2016 09:00 UTC
 
JSTOR is a not-for-profit service that helps scholars, researchers, and students discover, use, and build upon a wide range of content in a trusted
digital archive. We use information technology and tools to increase productivity and facilitate new forms of scholarship. For more information about
JSTOR, please contact support@jstor.org.
 
Your use of the JSTOR archive indicates your acceptance of the Terms & Conditions of Use, available at
http://about.jstor.org/terms
Oxford University Press is collaborating with JSTOR to digitize, preserve and extend access to The
Monist
This content downloaded from 128.223.86.31 on Tue, 13 Sep 2016 09:00:03 UTC
All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms

 WONDERING WHERE THE YELLOW WENT
 The problem for Sellars here, as in many earlier papers, can be
 crudely but vividly summarized as follows: it seems that science has
 taught us that everything is some collection or other of atoms, and
 atoms are not colored. Hence nothing is colored; hence nothing is
 yellow. Shocking! Where did the yellow go? Sellars has for years
 been wondering where the yellow went, in a series of intricate,
 patient, metaphysically bold but argumentatively shrewd papers,
 and in his third Carus Lecture we can see the strands of doctrine
 woven into a single cable. Along the way Sellars explores a wide
 variety of imaginable (and sometimes, to me, unimaginable) ways
 of rejecting, revising, or adjusting the premises of the crudely ex
 pressed argument above. Might we deny that everything is some
 collection or other of atoms? Yes, in several different ways. Might
 we claim that a collection of colorless atoms could be colored? Yes,
 in several different ways. Sellars surveys the smorgasbord of views
 and eliminates all but one, which he advances tentatively, not sur
 prisingly, since it is metaphysically extravagant: an "ontology of
 absolute processes" among which are absolute sensory processes,
 such as E-flattings and reddings, which are not analyzable at all into
 the aggregate doings of particulate objects.
 Thus would Sellars unite what he calls the manifest image and
 the scientific image, and while I think there is no better way of set
 ting the questions than via the distinction between manifest and
 scientific image, I am not at all tempted by this particular answer.
 His articulated position is a monument to his skill as a metaphysics
 architect, but it is too much for me; the cure seems more drastic
 than the ailment. No doubt my tastes in ontology are prosaic, but it
 is not that I cannot imagine grounds for forsaking a particulate on
 tology in favor of a world of goings-on or ways-of-being, or such,
 but just that I cannot see the attempt to provide a sober and ade
 quate account of color perception as an enterprise that might land
This content downloaded from 128.223.86.31 on Tue, 13 Sep 2016 09:00:03 UTC
All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms

 WONDERING WHERE THE YELLOW WENT
 103
 us such a big fish.1 But perhaps this is just a confession of my failure
 of imagination; perhaps Sellars's pink ice cube, like Newton's
 mythic apple, should jolt us into a new vision.
 I doubt it. I think that everything that needs describing and ex
 plaining in the way of color perception (including the
 "phenomenology" of color perception) can be broken down in a
 principled way into various bits that can all be handled in entirely
 nonrevolutionary ways by the currently entrenched version of the
 scientific image. Without remainder. That makes me one of the
 over-sanguine hard-heads that Sellars typically accuses of un
 derestimating the problems. Since I agree with much of Sellars's
 case, where exactly do we part company?
 We agree that the ordinary furnishings of the world as found in
 the manifest image consist, in the scientific image, of variously
 shaped swarms of atoms and the like, and these atom-swarms have
 certain dispositional properties: powers to produce certain effects
 under normal conditions on the nervous systems of normal
 observer-shaped atom-swarms, to produce certain other effects un
 der normal conditions on Ektachrome 400 film (-shaped atom
 swarms, etc.), to produce yet other effects on color television
 cameras, and so forth. Such powers are unproblematically cap
 turable within the prerevolutionary resources of the scientific
 image, but Sellars insists that these properties are distinct from the
 properties he is concerned with: such properties as "occurrent
 pinkness." I hate to admit that after so much exposure to Sellars's
 ingenious explications I am still a bit baffled about just what occur
 rent color properties are. They are not mere powers or dispositions,
 so a pink ice cube residing in a closed (and hence dark) refrigerator
 is not occurrently pink. It is merely, in Sellars's terms, pink . That
 much is clear. Suppose someone opens the door and beholds the
 pink ice cube; its powers are unleashed: it has its various effects on
 the beholder's nervous system, and this makes it the case that
 various portions of that nervous system have various properties (of
 various sorts?dispositional, relational, intrinsic, . . .) but none of
 these properties of parts of the nervous system is occurrent pinkness
 either. Nevertheless, Sellars insists, a volume of occurrent pink
This content downloaded from 128.223.86.31 on Tue, 13 Sep 2016 09:00:03 UTC
All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms

 104
 DANIEL DENNETT
 comes to exist somewhere. Sellars's task, then, is to balance that
 pink ice cube on a knife edge?or rather, to balance its occurrent
 pinkness?so that when the scientific image has told the most com
 plete story it can tell with its current, prerevolutionary resources, it
 has left occurrent pinkness out. Occurrent pinkness is neither any of
 the various properties the scientific image can unproblematically at
 tribute to the cubical swarm of H20 molecules, nor any of the
 various properties the scientific image can unproblematically at
 tribute to the nervous-system-shaped swarm of proteins, H20
 molecules, sodium ions, etc. Nor can one deny its existence:
 Obviously there are volumes of pink. No inventory of what there is can
 meaningfully deny that fact. What is at stake is their status and function in the
 scheme of things. (Ill, 46)
 I guess I must grit my teeth and disagree with this proclama
 tion of the obvious. It is seldom obvious what is obvious, and this
 strikes me as a prime case of a dubiously obvious claim. "Obviously
 there are volumes of pink." Well, in one sense, of course. I can take
 that particular volume of pink ice and stick it back in the
 refrigerator; in this obvious sense, the volume of pink goes right on
 existing in the dark. Here "pink" does not mean "occurrent pink."
 When we restrict our attention to "occurrent pink" it is far from
 obvious to me (sullied as my mind is by theoretical partisanship)
 that there are volumes of pink. It is obvious to me that people often
 think there are, say there are, believe there are, even take
 themselves to perceive that there are volumes of pink (in the nonoc
 current sense), but these phenomena do not, even in Sellars's view
 (as I understand it), produce volumes of pink. Sellars has an in
 tricate taxonomy for those who hold various doctrines about occur
 rent pinkness, but he does not bother naming the variety I instan
 tiate. I doubt the very existence of occurrent pinkness as Sellars
 defines it.
 Sellars wishes to distinguish what we might call merely inten
 tional states from what we might call sensuous states. The state of
 believing that something or other is pink can occur without
 anything anywhere being occurrent pink. The state of "sensing a
This content downloaded from 128.223.86.31 on Tue, 13 Sep 2016 09:00:03 UTC
All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms

 WONDERING WHERE THE YELLOW WENT 105
 cube-of-pinkly," on the other hand, does involve the existence of oc
 current pink; it can occur without any belief, and even without any
 awareness of anything as pink. It is the latter sort of state that Sel
 lars is interested in, but my attempts to figure out when such states
 are supposed by him to occur have generated several important un
 answered questions. Consider the following candidates for occa
 sions on which there is occurrent pink:
 (1) I actively and consciously entertain the hypothesis that
 there is a pink ice cube in the refrigerator (and this is not a
 matter of just mentally mouthing the words, of course).
 (2) I see something as a pink ice cube.
 (3) I judge that I am seeing something as a pink ice cube.
 Now perhaps Sellars would claim that in (1) I will typically or
 even always accompany my hypothesis-entertaining with a bit of
 "imagery," and hence (?) bring some occurrent pink into being. Or
 am I wrong that imagining a pink ice cube is a case of sensing a
 cube-of-pinkly? (The point is potentially crucial when we consider
 the other cases.) Turning to (2), I gather that while Sellars insists, as
 noted above, that sensing a-cube-of-pinkly can occur without any
 seeing-as-pink or taking-as-pink, the converse doesn't hold: seeing
 something as pink, as in (2), does require an accompaniment of oc
 current pink. But then what of (3)? Can I not be in the state (3)
 describes without being in the state (2) describes? Sellars's line on
 the nonsensuous, merely conceptual character of belief (and judg
 ment?), together with his careful avoidance of incorrigibility claims,
 suggests that he would hold that (3) can be true (in the absence of
 occurrent pink) while (2) is false.
 The undeniable appeal of introducing sensing-pinkly and its
 kin is that it responds to our conviction that there is a manifest dif
 ference between merely believing-to-be-pink and seeing-as-pink.
 The latter is sensuous in a way the former is not. Somehow this fact
 must be acknowledged; Sellars's way is to say that something really
 is occurrently pink and is there in the latter case. But I think this
 misreads the intuitions that motivate the move. In case (1) above,
 do you not find competing intuitions? In the matter of sen
 suousness, is thinking about a pink ice cube importantly like seeing
This content downloaded from 128.223.86.31 on Tue, 13 Sep 2016 09:00:03 UTC
All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms

 106
 DANIEL DENNETT
 one or not? Does your intuition tell you how to distinguish (2) from
 (3)? If we grant that there is occurrent pink in (2), and deny that
 there must be in (3), then since I, as phenomenological subject, can
 not tell whether I am only in the state described by (3), I cannot tell
 from my own experience whether or not my experience contains any
 occurrent pink!
 This problem is not just a theoretician's artificial dilemma; it
 arises when one tries to divine what Sellars's position would be
 about various quite familiar cases. Suppose I dream of pink ice
 cubes. Will volumes of occurrent pink be involved? Or suppose I am
 hypnotized, and told that the next ice cube I see will be pink. A
 plain ice cube is presented and I swear to its pinkness. Now perhaps
 there are two empirically distinguishable hypotheses about such
 cases of hypnosis: (a) I have been induced to see the cube as pink, or
 (b) I have been induced to believe that I see it as pink. There is also
 the possibility, of course, that I have merely been induced to say
 that I see it as pink, and this, at least, is very plausibly dis
 tinguishable within some powerful psychological theory from (a)
 and (b), but what could be offered to persuade us to distinguish (a)
 from (b)? Not "introspective evidence," so far as I can see, but
 perhaps there could be good grounds to be found within some
 "third-person," nonintrospective psychological theory for drawing
 the distinction.2 That leaves open the possibility of making a case
 for a variety of sensing-pinkly (even with the drastic ontological
 implications Sellars would claim for it), but at the same time
 pushes the issue, as an empirical possibility, far from the home ter
 ritory of the obvious.
 To change colors, if not topics, consider the following true
 story, which at first might seem to favor Sellars's view. One
 predawn morning I sat at the helm of Jerry Fodor's sailboat in the
 open ocean, noting that although there was light enough to see, I
 could not see colors at all. Fodor emerged from the cabin wearing
 his bright yellow foul-weather jacket. I knew it was bright yellow,
 but could not tell, from looking at it, even staring carefully and in
 tently at it, whether I was seeing it as yellow or merely seeing it and
 believing it to be yellow. I could not tell whether it seemed to me to
This content downloaded from 128.223.86.31 on Tue, 13 Sep 2016 09:00:03 UTC
All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms

 WONDERING WHERE THE YELLOW WENT
 107
 be yellow or not! In Sellars's terms, presumably, I could not tell
 whether there was occurrent yellow there or not. Now one might
 say that this abnormal case helps make Sellars's point: it is
 manifestly different, introspectively or pHenomenologically dif
 ferent, from the normal case in which that luscious occurrent yellow
 floods my sensorium. This will not do, however, for Sellars grants
 that my sensorium can be yellowing along quite cheerfully in the
 absence of any seeing-as-yellow on my part, so (for all I know) my
 sensorium may have been bathed in its normal, visually produced
 occurrent yellow even as I judged that I could not tell whether or
 not I was seeing Fodor's jacket as yellow. Or perhaps an immediate
 ocular source is not required for the yellowing of my sensorium.
 Perhaps memory alone can drive it into its yellowing mode (as it
 does in imaginative recall?if I am right to suppose Sellars thinks
 this phenomenon requires occurrent colors). Then wondering
 whether I was seeing it as yellow or merely vividly recalling it as yel
 low would not in any case be wondering if occurrent yellow was pre
 sent.
 But what is it, then, that I was wondering about when I
 wondered whether I was seeing it as yellow or merely recalling it to
 be yellow? I would say that I was wondering about the etiology of
 my state of belief, or my taking of the moment. Was the part of it
 concerning the color of Fodor's jacket overdetermined by the com
 bination of a contribution from memory and a contribution from
 current visual processing, or was memory alone responsible? That
 was not something I could just tell but it was something I could
 have experimentally explored?if I had gone to the trouble of bring
 ing objects of unknown or unremembered color on deck for my
 perusal. As it happened, it was time to update our dead reckoning,
 and by the time that was done, the sun was shining, so we'll never
 know.3
 I do not see, then, that Sellars has a way of shoehorning his
 cases of sensing pinkly or yellowly into the gap between states of
 believing this or that and the states in the immediate etiology of
 those belief states. These prior states, if they are Sellars's sensing
 states, may have whatever properties empirical investigation might
This content downloaded from 128.223.86.31 on Tue, 13 Sep 2016 09:00:03 UTC
All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms

 108
 DANIEL DENNETT
 discover?including, I suppose, ultimate homogeneity (whatever
 that is)?but if so, this will be a fascinating and far from obvious
 discovery, not a deliverance of introspection. If those states are not
 Sellars's sensing states, I for one have lost sight of the quarry.
 Over the years Sellars has converted me to most of his views,
 especially his views on the epistemological status of claims people
 make about mental states?the claims of both everyday folk and
 more self-conscious theorists. So I have always been uneasy about
 my adamant deafness to this favorite theme in Sellars's work. As in
 the case of Fodor's jacket, I find myself wondering a wonder about
 overdetermination. It is clear that I have abundant ulterior
 theoretical motivation for disbelieving Sellars's plea on behalf of
 occurrent colors, but it seems to me that I am also seeing his plea as
 ill-founded. I cannot just tell what the etiology of my disbelief is,
 and so I am not sure whether my own theory has me bewitched, or
 whether Sellars merely has me bothered; that, however, is as far as I
 am prepared to go.4
 Daniel Dennett
 Center for Advanced Study in the Behavioral Sciences
 Stanford, California
 NOTES
 1. This claim is forcefully argued by William Lycan in "Sellars on Sensa and
 Second-guessing," presented at a colloquium on Sellars's philosophy of percep
 tion, May 10-11, 1979.
 2. For instance, suppose that although I pass a lie detector test when I say it is
 pink (so my saying so is probably a sincere expression of my belief), I fail some dis
 crimination test or tests people usually pass when they see things as pink. It would
 take a battery of such results, and a theory to account for them, to drive a wedge
 between seeing-as-pink and judging-one-is-seeing-as-pink.
 3. You may wish to replicate this experiment. It is not absolutely essential that
 it be performed on a sailboat in open ocean, but it helps. If you decide to replicate
 in this pure fashion, Fodor and I stand ready to assist you. Any sacrifice for the
 sake of science.
 4. This research was supported by an N. E. H. Fellowship, and by the N. S. F.
 (BNS 78-24671) and by the Alfred P. Sloan Foundation.
This content downloaded from 128.223.86.31 on Tue, 13 Sep 2016 09:00:03 UTC
All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms

