Foreword
Daniel C. Dennett
There are lots of books on consciousness being published these days, and I
end up skimming most of them and reading a few of them. Reading some-
body else’s take on the whole set of issues is often frustrating and depress-
ing: they just don’t get it. Other times it is tantalizing; they start on the right
foot, in other words, where I start! and they get lots of it, and clear up some
of the fog and even shine some light on part of the terra incognita, but
then wander off into some unlikely and unconvincing blind alleys. Rarely,
something much better happens: I encounter somebody who starts in quite
a different place, with a different agenda and different presuppositions, but
who eventually arrives in my own neighborhood having blazed some new
trails. Zoltan Torey is such a pathﬁnder. And surprisingly, the disagreements
I still have with some of his ways of putting things, and even with some of
his main verdicts, don’t disturb me at all. On the contrary, I ﬁnd it power-
fully reassuring that two such different perspectives can home in on so
much common ground. Like everybody else who works on the perplexing
problems of the mind and consciousness, I have always had a sense that
my own vision, while fundamentally correct, of course could be improved
upon, and Torey’s book contains quite a few suggestions worth further re-
ﬂection and research.
Torey ﬁrmly roots his theory of consciousness in evolution by natural se-
lection, as do I, but he comes at the issues with some strikingly different
emphases. He sees that human consciousness is profoundly unlike the con-
sciousness of all other species, and that language is the key to understand-
ing this difference—another point of deep agreement between us—but he
has a usefully different account of what kind of difference language makes
and how. Much of this I will happily adopt from now on. He and I agree on
the utter misguidedness of those who worry about the possibility of zom-
bies and “the Hard Problem” but he has some novel ways of showing what
is so bizarrely wrong about it. The greatest point of disagreement between

us is on the power of the computational perspective. By my lights, he has
been misled by a few other would be pathﬁnders—the usual suspects: Edel-
man, Penrose, Searle, Fodor—into a pinched and unrealistic caricature of ar-
tiﬁcial intelligence. If AI were what they say it is, I too would turn my back
on it. But unlike these, and other, anti-computational ideologues, Torey
surefootedly picks his way to a suitably astringent and non-miraculous, non-
romantic vision of how the brain works its “magic.” He is, I insist, computa-
tionalist malgré lui. As such, his ways of putting things often shed new light
on just what is going on in the “computational” brain, since he has to ﬁnd
alternative metaphors to stand in for the now somewhat overworked com-
parison with computers. Just as poets often ﬁnd that the constraints of
rhyme and meter force them to discover strikingly apt expressions of their
thoughts, it turns out that couching a computational theory of the mind in
resolutely noncomputational terms pays dividends.
There is much to repay readers in this book: to the uninitiated, it is a grace-
ful and wise introduction to many of the central problems and arguments;
to the veterans, it is a quite bountiful source of arrestingly different slants
on familiar topics. Does some of this originality stem from the fact that the
author has been blind for a half century, and has developed his skills of vi-
sual imagination to an uncanny degree? Perhaps this too has been a con-
straint turned into a blessing. Food for thought, well served.
xii
Foreword

The Crucible of Consciousness
An Integrated Theory of Mind and Brain
Zoltan Torey
with a foreword by Daniel C. Dennett
The MIT Press
Cambridge, Massachusetts
London, England

© Zoltan Torey 1999
First MIT Press edition, 2009
First published in 1999 by Oxford University Press, 253 Normanby Road, South Mel-
bourne, Australia.
All rights reserved. No part of this book may be reproduced in any form by any elec-
tronic or mechanical means (including photocopying, recording, or information
storage and retrieval) without permission in writing from the publisher.
MIT Press books may be purchased at special quantity discounts for business or sales
promotional use. For information, please email special_sales@mitpress.mit.edu or
write to Special Sales Department, The MIT Press, 55 Hayward Street, Cambridge,
MA 02142.
This book was set in Stone by Binghamton Valley Composition in Quark, and was
printed and bound in the United States of America.
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Torey, Zoltan.
The crucible of consciousness : an integrated theory of mind and brain / Zoltan
Torey.—1st MIT Pess ed.
p.
cm.
“A Bradford book.”
Originally published: Melbourne ; New York : Oxford University Press, 1999. With
new foreword.
Includes bibliographical references and index.
ISBN 978-0-262-51284-8 (pbk. : alk. paper)
1. Consciousness. I. Title.
BF311.T655
2009
153—dc22
2008041421
10
9
8
7
6
5
4
3
2
1

