Philosophy and Phenomenological Research 
Vol. LxV, No. 3, November 2002 
Commentary on Sober and Wilson, 
Unto Others: The Evolution and 
Psychology of Unselfish Behavior 
DANIEL C. DEh’NElT 
Tufts University 
Altruists, Chumps, and Inconstant Pluralists 
Anybody interested in evolutionary explanations of social phenomena (and 
every philosopher should be) will learn a lot from Unto Others. In addition to 
its cornucopia of fascinating empirical findings from biology and psychol- 
ogy, it is chock full of arresting perspectives, ingenious thought experi- 
ments, and clear expositions of difficult-indeed, 
treacherous+oncepts 
that 
should be in every philosopher’s kit. What philosophers will not learn, how- 
ever, is the status of group selection in current evolutionary theory, because 
while Sober and Wilson (hereafter S&W) strive intelligently to clarify and 
unify the issues, some of their efforts muddy the waters instead. This is 
mainly due to the lingering effects of ancient feuds and score-settling on both 
sides. So far as I can see, nobody has yet been able to come up with a judi- 
cious overview of the whole scene. Evolutionists love to pick a fight. Why 
propose a friendly amendment when you can claim to overthrow some major 
edifice of orthodoxy with your revolutionary idea? And what could be more 
satisfying than resurrecting a derided heresy? Stephen Jay Gould briefly tried 
to restore Goldschmidt’s “hopeful monster” saltationism as part of his cam- 
paign for punctuated equilibrium, which was itself not as revolutionary as he 
claimed (Dennett, 1995); hardly a year goes by without somebody declaring 
that something they have discovered is, actually, a genuine instance of 
Lamarckianism. There is usually a grain of truth, or more, in these dramatic 
claims. Prions really do constitute a major exception to Crick’s Central 
Dogma about the direction of information flow between DNA and proteins 
Have Sober and Wilson salvaged a sophisticated and sound perspective for 
group selection from the rhetorical overkill of the selfish-gene’s-eye gang, or 
have they merely reinvented (or just relabeled) Hamilton’s and Maynard 
Smith’s alternative to group selection models, models that can do justice to 
all the observed and even imagined phenomena of cooperation in the 
biosphere? One of the main lessons I have learned in thinking about the 
692 
DANIELC. DENNEIT 

issues raised by Unto Others over the last two years is that they are, at least 
for me, mind-twistingly elusive and slippery. The appeal of the competing 
metaphors is such that there is unwitting sleight of hand in every direction, 
as the perspectives shift back and forth. One stern admonition might then be: 
eschew the metaphors, stick to the math! The problem is that the math 
doesn’t distinguish between the perspectives Sober and Wilson champion and 
those they oppose. By their own account, the mathematical models are 
equivalent in what they can predict-and 
hence equivalent in what they can, 
in one important sense, explain. But that is not the end of it: “When one 
theory achieves an insight by virtue of its perspective, the same insight can 
usually be explained in retrospect by the other theories. As long as the rela- 
tionships among the theories are clearly understood, this kind of pluralism is 
a healthy part of science.” (p. 98). Good point. Patrick Suppes used to delight 
in challenging cognitive psychologists to point to any “cognitive” phenome- 
non that he couldn’t model, retrospectively, in strict behaviorist terms. The 
wise response was to deflect the challenge. His behaviorist models were para- 
sitic: they would never have been devised-the 
phenomena in question were 
all but invisible to the behaviorists-without 
the inspiration of the cognitive 
model they translated into behaviorese. And what Sober and Wilson say here 
echoes what one of their chief opponents, Richard Dawkins, had already 
claimed for his perspective: ‘The extended phenotype may not constitute a 
testable hypothesis in itself, but it so far changes the way we see animals and 
plants that it may cause us to think of testable hypotheses that we would 
otherwise never have dreamed of.” (The Extended Phenotype, 1982, p. 2) So 
what’s all the fuss about? If each side is just saying “Here’s a good way of 
thinking of things, a prolific generator of hypotheses to test!” they could 
both be right, with their different perspectives having rather different utilities 
in different circumstances, 
If Sober and Wilson had settled for the pluralistic r d n g  of their adver- 
tisement for the tactic of adopting “multilevel selection theory,” all might be 
well, but at times their pluralism evaporates, replaced by charges of error and 
confusion-charges which have been angrily reflected back by the other side. 
In the interests of de-escalation, let me comment on some recent gossip I 
have heard, to the effect that the late and deeply lamented William Hamilton 
had declared himself in a letter to Wilson to have “gone over” to the side of 
the group selectionists! That is an unfortunate twisting of a peaceful gesture. 
Not long after Unto Others came out, Hamilton, Alan Grafen, Mark Ridley 
and I met at Richard Dawkins’ house to discuss the issues, since I was 
persuaded, at the time, that S&W had indeed uncovered a deep oversight in the 
gene’s-eye view, and wanted to try to explain to them what I thought it was. 
The upshot of that long and sympathetic meeting was that I learned other- 
wise: the assembled theorists did indeed agree with many of S&W’s central 
BOOK SYMPOSIUM 693 

points, but claimed that these had all been quite explicitly anticipated, though 
expressed in different terms, by Hamilton thirty years ago. (See Hamilton’s 
Collected Papers, Vol. 1, 1996, especially chapters 5 and 6, and his recollec- 
tions of his “collusion” with George Price, pp 171-76, to get Price’s paper 
published in Nature.) According to Sober (personal correspondence) Hamil- 
ton’s subsequent letter to Wilson chided S&W for not including his work 
among the anticipations of multi-level selection theory. The two sides were 
much closer than I had appreciated-but 
also much closer than S&W portray 
them as being. Question: Do the HamiltonMaynard Smith models predict all 
the effects S&W use to illustrate their multilevel selection theory? Answer: 
Yes. More pointedly, haven’t S&W just shown that Maynard Smith’s hay- 
stack model has a rather wider potential application than he envisaged? So far 
as I can see (and I’ve learned that my own perception of these matters can be 
readily tricked), that is what is going on. But that’s enough, a valuable 
contribution. 
S&W define (evolutionary) altruism as “behaviors that decrease relative 
fitness within groups but increase the fitness of groups,” (p. 99) but this way 
of putting it conceals an important factor (acknowledged by them): “self-sacri- 
fice on behalf of the group can evolve by group selection, but it is never 
advantageous per se.” (p. 31). When, then, can it evolve? Only when, thanks 
to the particularities of the groups involved, those individuals whose relative 
fitness decrease within their groups nevertheless (thanks in part to their con- 
tributions and those of others in the group) enjoy a fitness increase relative to 
those in other groups not so blessed by the presence of altruists. 
S&W object to the perspective that highlights this fact: ‘The existence of 
more than one group and fitness differences between the groups have been 
folded into the definition of individual selection, defining group selection out 
of existence.” (p. 32) but their definition might be accused of the mirror 
image bias: “folding in” the reason for the increase in overall relative fitness 
of these altruists (being a member of a successful group) by calling the 
group’s success an instance of group “fitness”4efining group selection into 
existence. 
In one regard, what they propose is undeniably a valuable way of looking 
at some phenomena. It draws attention, as they say, to the role that mere 
group structure can play. Consider an artificial puzzle: we take 100 altruist 
clones, as like in their cooperative tendencies as can be, and sprinkle them 
around in different groups: some found thriving lineages, others go extinct. 
Why the difference? In the limiting case it could be that nothing but the dif- 
ference in the proportion of altruists in groups accounts for this marked 
difference in fitness between identical genotypes in environments that a~ 
identical aside from the group structure. In such a case you have to look at 
694 
DANIEL C. DFNNETI 

the patterns of interaction (S&W’s minimalist definition of a group) to see 
why the results come out as they do. 
But who is defining what into, or out of, existence? S&W use Simpson’s 
paradox to motivate their discussion of the importance of groups. The non- 
biological example they use is so telling that it is worth quoting in full, for 
philosophers unfamiliar with it: 
During the 197Os, the University of California at Berkeley was suspected of discriminating 
against women in its graduate admissions policies.. . . The percentage of women applicants who 
were admitted was less than the percentage of men, and the difference was large enough that 
it could not be attributed to chance. The University conducted a department-by-department 
inquiry and found in each department that women were admitted no less often than men. 
Evidently, women did worse than men overall, but not in any department.. . . . The paradoxical 
finding fell into place when it was noticed that women tended to apply to departments with low 
acceptance rates. To see how this can happen, imagine that 90 women and 10 men apply to a 
department with a 30 percent acceptance rate. This department does not discriminate and 
therefore accepts 27 women and 3 men. Another department, with a 60 percent acceptance 
rate, receives applications from 10 women and 90 men. This department doesn’t discriminate 
either and therefore accepts 6 women and 54 men. Consider both departments together, 100 
men and 100 women applied, but only 33 women were accepted, compared with 60 [sic-57, 
in fact] men. A bias exists in the two departments combined, despite the fact that it does not 
exist in any single department, because the departments contribute unequally to the total num- 
ber of applicants who are accepted. (pp. 24-6). 
In their discussion of the application of Simpson’s paradox to biological 
groups, they say “we need to emphasize that adding the progeny from the two 
groups is just statistical sleight of hand unless it can be justified biologi- 
cally. If the two groups are permanently isolated from each other, natural 
selection will eliminate the altruists within each group, as we have already 
shown.” (p. 25) In the Berkeley example of Simpson’s paradox, the adding of 
the “progeny” was not, in one sense, statistical sleight of hand, because it 
gave the right answer: women were “doing worse than men overall, but not 
in any department.” If we want to assign a number to play the role parallel to 
fitness in the biological case, which number should we use, the department- 
relative number or the university-relative number? In fact, we need to keep 
track of both, for there are different phenomena that need to be explained, a d  
it is only sleight of hand if you confuse your audience (or yourself) about 
which you are using.. 
As S&W insist, evolutionary altruism-the 
topic of part I of their 
book-must 
not be confused with psychological altruism-the 
topic of part 
11. But it is not clear to me that they themselves keep the unwarranted 
psychological implications from wafting into their discussions in part I. 
Consider their discussion of the fanciful example introduced by a cartoon 
showing a school of small fish taking on the shape of a very large fish and 
thereby driving off a large potential predator. 
BOOKSYMPOSIUM 695 

. . . it is not obvious that altruism is required for this process to occur. That would depend on 
how the costs and benefits of assuming the fish shape are distributed among members of the 
group. Perhaps some fish voluntarily [emphasis added] assume the most dangerous positions in 
the school, in which case altruism would be involved. However, it is equally possible that all 
positions are equally dangerous, or the fish have some way of randomizing their position, or 
some fish are forced [emphasis added] by others to assume the most dangerous positions. 
Regardless of the degree of altruism involved, we can appreciate that the school is well- 
adapted at the group level. [p. 311 
What are the words “voluntarily” and “forced” doing in this passage? 
Evolutionary altruism has nothing to do with psychological states or 
motives-it 
is, after all, as accessible to daisies and slime molds as it is to 
minnows. Is there any way of distinguishing, at this level, between an dm- 
is? and a chump?’ The connotations are opposite, but if we leave out motiva- 
tion and knowledge, the profile is apparently the same. Sober, in 
correspondence, clarifies their definition of evolutionary altruism thus: “any 
proximate mechanism (mindless or psychologically altruistic or psychologi- 
cally egoistic or psychologically chumpy, if these are in fact behaviorally 
equivalent) that leads organisms to donate fitness benefits at cost to self.” But 
even the word “donate” is loaded. Think about paying taxes: When would this 
count as altruistic and when as prudent (a selfish investment in security)? And 
when would it count as simply stupid (a bad investment in security)? As we 
observe the school of fish scrambling into its big-fish formation, what shall 
we look for to tell if those assuming the most dangerous positions have 
volunteered or been forced? 
The absence of “force” can only be a matter of there not having been any 
costly move (action, behavior, ...) by the other fish that has the effect of 
inducing or enforcing that dangerous choice. He who pays his taxes under 
threat of a severe beating has a short-range prudential reason for doing so. 
That is not volunteering. Then how about those who engage in the risky 
behavior of doing the threatening? Are they evolutionary altruists? Not if 
their neighborhood has a policy of punishing those who refrain from threaten- 
ing to punish tax-evaders. And so on. 
On re-reading this brief essay, I note that it is bristling with unanswered 
questions. Let me close by suggesting that readers should also imagine there 
to be tacit question marks in parentheses after the few assertions that I 
venture here. I am that far from thinking that I have these excellent issues 
figured out, and I expect my confusions will once again be diminished by 
S&W’s response, as it has in our many earlier exchanges, for which I am 
grateful. 
’ 
Thanks to Gabrielle Jackson for this point, and the vivid term. 
696 DANIELC. DENNEIT 

