DANIEL 
C. DENNETT 
THE ONUS RE EXPERIENCES 
A Reply to Emmett * 
(Received 6 February, 1978) 
More than a few people apparently suppose that I espouse and defend the 
bizarre 'cassette theory' of dreaming in 'Are Dreams Experiences? '1 Emmett 
speaks, for instance, of "Dennett's defense of the cassette theory". Since 
more than a few suppose this, it must be because of obscurity or misdirection 
in my paper, for I do not end up espousing the theory, and am quite explicit 
about it. I concoct the cassette theory as a foil, as an alternative to what I call 
the received view, precisely in order to raise and investigate the question of 
what in fact would settle the issue between two such drastic rivals. Emmett's 
attempt to refute the cassette theory and confirm the received view is thus 
grist for my mill, not a direct challenge to anything I claim. I myself offer 
reasons - both my own and those of others - for being skeptical about the 
cassette theory (pp. 169-70), and I think they are at least as persuasive as 
Emmett's. I do not claim that the persuasions I offer against the cassette 
theory are conclusive. Since the main point of the paper was to show that "it 
is an open and theoretical question whether dreams fall inside or outside the 
boundary of experience" (p. 170-71), it is not a question I am prepared to 
answer. To answer it, I claim, one must have a well-confirmed, empirical 
(psychological, physiological) theory of dreams - something no one yet has. 
Since my aim was to wrest the issue out of the hands of philosophers, by 
showing the systematic inconclusiveness or irrelevance of the sorts of con- 
siderations philosphers have traditionally raised, Emmett, by claiming to 
settle the issue in favor of the received view, does present a disagreement I 
want to rebut. She begins Section 1 by claiming without argument "The 
criterion for having had an experience must be subjective; whether or not 
someone has experienced something can only be determined on the basis of 
testimony". I offer several arguments and illustrative examples against that 
unargued claim: 
(1) the discussion of the ills besetting what I call the 'criteriological move', 
pp. 163-65; 
PhilosophicalStudies 35 (1979) 315-318. 0031-8116/79/0353-0315500.40 
Copyright 9 1979 by D. ReMel Publishing Co., Dordrecht, Holland, and Boston, U.S.A. 

316 
DANIEL C. DENNETT 
(2) the discussion of the possibility in principal of abnormal (e.g., surgical) 
insertion of bogus experience-memories (pp. 157-7); 
(3) the example of Jones' odd (hallucinatory?)memory of(hallucinating?) 
a ghost (p. 169). 
A conclusion of the paper is, after all, that the 'criterion' for having had an 
experience cannot be subjective. 
But let us see in any case what Emmett claims. The subjective testimony 
she believes to refute the cassette theory concerns 'lucid dreams', and she 
offers some bona fide, non-fictional transcriptions of such testimony. What, 
though, do they show? They show what the subjects, on waking, believe they 
experienced, but unless we let such beliefs be authoritative or incorrigible or 
constitutive, they are only very inconclusive data against the cassette theory. 
Why so inconclusive? Because, as I said, the cassette theory can handle all 
'lucid dreams' reports "via the literary conceit of a dream within a dream" 
(p. 161 .) This remark turns out to have been an overly compressed expression 
of my point, for Emmett is not alone in aiming at an unintended inter- 
pretation of it. What I had meant was just this. Since Descartes at least, it has 
been a commonplace that a dream can tell any story at all, can have any 
content at all, in particular can in principle mimic a bit of conscious life - 
any bit of conscious life - indistinguishably well. I see no reason to challenge 
that. It is proposed, then, that there are at least two sorts of dreams: lucid 
dreams (well described by Emmett) and - shall we say - ordinary dreams. 
The distinction drawn does not put any restriction on what may transpire 
within the story frame of an ordinary dream. Then if someone gives a waking 
report of the lucid dream variety, there will be two hypothesis consistent with 
the report; the subject had, as she believes she had, a lucid dream; or the 
subject had an ordinary dream in which she was aware she was dreaming, 
decided to fly in her dream, etc. She wasn't really aware she was dreaming, 
of course; she just dreamt she was aware she was dreaming. So subjective 
testimony, Emmett's criterion, cannot establish that lucid dreams are any- 
thing other than a variety of ordinary dreams, viz., dreams of having lucid 
dreams. But what if we can train people - ourselves even - to have lucid 
dreams? It is just as easy to suppose we could train people - ourselves even - 
to have ordinary dreams with certain contents, e.g., dreams about green 
things, or about selfless devotion to the State, or about having lucM dreams. 
If it was a standoff between the received view and the cassette theory before 
the topic of lucid dreams was raised, it appears to be still a standoff. 

THE ONUS RE EXPERIENCES 
317 
If one wants to push ahead with reasons why the cassette theory is never- 
theless rendered somewhat less plausible by the existence of lucid dreams - 
and this strikes me as eminently reasonable - one can do this only by ad- 
vancing and espousing the sorts of empirical theory-sketches in the light of 
which the cassette theory looks ad hoe and gratuitous. That is, in order to 
make anything of the manifestly ad hoc flavor of the cassette theory's hand- 
ling of lucid dreams, one must counter this bad theory with a good theory, 
and accede to the principle that the issue of whether or not dreams are ex- 
periences is not settled by subjective testimony at all, but rather, if at all, by 
the triumph of a good empirical theory over rival empirical theories. 
The nature of Emmett's argument is disguised by her claim to have found 
a tertium quM, "a framework for the claim that dreams are experiences that 
does not rely solely on either nerophysiological data or memory". So far as I 
can see, she supposes this new ground to be occupied by such remarks as "the 
distinction between an ordinary dream and a lucid dream rests in the degree 
of self-consciousness that the dreamer possesses". But this is not a third way; 
it is just equivocation. If we treat the degree of self-consciousness as some- 
thing to be settled by subsequent subjective testimony, we are still playing 
the criteriological game. If on the other hand we suppose that something else 
- 
our theory of self-consciousness will tell us what - settles the degree of 
self-consciousnes (even, possibly, in the face of contrary testimony) the claim 
is no different in kind from the sorts of objective considerations I have already 
raised for and against the cassette theory; it is also no more compelling. 
Finally, let me just deny Emmett's claim that I contend "that since we are 
never justified in claiming that our apparent memories of dreams are genuine, 
we cannot base the claim that dreams are experiences on the fact of apparent 
dream recall" (p. 445),I certainly don't contend that. Perhaps we are (often, 
almost always) justified in claiming that our apparent memories of dreams 
are genuine. If the received view turns out to be true, as I allow it may, 
no doubt we are often so justified. So the line of skeptical argument Emmett 
correctly brands as captious I would further denigrate as a red herring. 
Perhaps it was the title of my paper that misled more than anything else. 
What could be more reasonable than so suppose that a paper called 'Are 
Dreams Experiences?' would set out to answer that question? My aim, how- 
ever, was to treat the question itself as the specimen to be examined. 
Tufts University 

318 
DANIEL C. DENNETT 
NOTES 
* See Emmett, K.: 1978, 'Oneiric experiences', Phil. Stud. 34, pp. 445-450. 
i Philosophical Review LXXXV (1976), pp. 151-171. 

