
THE CHRISTMAS ESSAY
What do debutante balls, the Japanese 
tea ceremony, Ponzi schemes and doubting
clergy all have in common? 
The social cell
By Daniel Dennett

50 | NEW STATESMAN | 19 DECEMBER 2011 – 1 JANUARY 2012
THE CHRISTMAS ESSAY
A
single cell, such as a bacterium, 
is the simplest thing that can be
alive. In addition to the materials
from which it is constructed, it
needs three features: a way of cap-
turing energy (a metabolism), a
way of reproducing (genes or something like
genes) and a membrane that lets in what needs
to come in and keeps out the rest.
Converging lines of research from various
schools in biology agree on these three necessi-
ties, but there is substantial unresolved contro-
versy about the order in which they must have
emerged at the origin of life. If the history 
of evolutionary biology continues along the
paths it has followed so far, it is likely that the
solution to this problem will prove to be some
ingenious and indirect process of chance com-
binations and gradual refinements, in which
metabolism-like cycles and reproduction-like
processes joined forces with non-living mem-
branes that were already floating around, objets
trouvés that could be appropriated and ex-
ploited. Whatever their origins, the resulting
designs have now been refined and optimised
for more than three billion years and have
proven remarkably hardy. Not only are such
single cells the most abundant form of life on
the planet, but all living things, from trees to
fish to human beings, are constructed of them,
harnessed by the trillions into co-operating
multicellular teams.
Cells may be the simplest life forms on the
planet – even the simplest possible life forms –
but their inner workings, at the molecular level,
are breathtakingly complex, composed of thou-
sands of molecular machines, all of them inter-
acting to provide the cell with the energy it
needs to build offspring and maintain its mem-
brane. Echoes of the design wisdom embodied
in this very effective machinery can be found in
human culture, which is dazzlingly complex,
too, composed as it is of about seven billion 
interacting people, with their traditions, lan-
guages, institutions, occupations, values and
economies. Some cultural phenomena bear a
striking resemblance to the cells of cell biology,
actively preserving themselves in their social
environments, finding the nutrients they need
and fending off the causes of their dissolution.
Consider four unrelated species of social cell
that share some interesting features. What do
the Japanese tea ceremony, debutante parties,
Ponzi schemes and many Christian churches
have in common? They are all variations of an
insidiously effective social mechanism that:
1)thrives on human innocence, and
2)nobody had to design, and
3) is threatened with extinction by the rising
tide of accessibility to information.
Like bacteria, as we shall see, they have – and
need – metabolisms, methods of reproducing,
and membranes, yet there is no need to suppose
that these shared features arose from a common
ancestor, nor even that the features of one of
them inspired copying by the other. Wherever
there is a design that is highly successful in a
broad range of similar environments, it is apt 
to emerge again and again, independently – the
phenomenon known in biology as convergent
evolution. I call these designs “good tricks”. 
For instance, flight has evolved independently
at least four times, in insects, birds, pterosaurs
and mammals, and vision has evolved more of-
ten than that.
Seeing and flying are very good tricks, for ob-
vious reasons. It is also obvious that human cul-
ture has its own roster of good tricks: bows and
arrows, boats, writing and the wheel, to name 
a few. (It is not known if the wheel has been in-
vented many times or just once, with all later
wheels being copies of some original wheel, the
brainchild of the mythic inventor of the wheel –
and it doesn’t matter! Almost certainly wheels
would have appeared eventually one place or
another.) The typical if tacit assumption is that
these good tricks were independently rein-
vented by intelligent designers among our an-
cestors, and although this may sometimes have
been true – we will probably never know – it is
quite possible that they arose in the same way
the good tricks of biology did: by mindless
processes of differential reproduction in which
understanding of what was going on was at a
minimum, if not zero.
Let us consider the four cultural phenomena,
chosen for their relative simplicity and vivid-
ness from a much larger array of possibilities, to
see how this might have happened.
The Japanese tea ceremony is a set of traditions
that has accrued over at least a millennium, and
now consists of a considerable range of formal
ceremonies, varying with the season and with
the station of the participants, composed of
highly elaborate and scrupulously observed
rituals of greeting, preparation, serving, clean-
ing of the utensils, formulaic comments on the
quality of the tea and so forth, all conducted 
either in a tea-house built for that purpose or in
a specially furnished tearoom.
The neophyte participant in a tea ceremony
dutifully complies, silent and respectful, like 
a visitor at a religious service, though the cere-
mony is not specifically religious – unless you
define religion in such a way that ceremoniously
eating foie gras or caviar also counts as a sacra-
ment of sorts. Some people, after all, are said to
worship fine wine.
A quick glance at biology invites us to ask the
following question: why hasn’t the Japanese tea
ceremony become extinct? What has sustained
it over so many centuries? The system must in
some sense keep reproducing itself, ensuring 
a supply of new officiants to serve as hosts and
new participants to serve as guests, and main-
taining and replacing all the exquisite equip-
ment used. It requires a lot of energy to keep 
going. What is its metabolism and how does it
work? The Japanese tea ceremony exploits the
human desire for status and influence in order
to raise the money to capture the energy, and has
evolved an elaborate developmental programme
for enlisting and training new hosts who can
eventually reproduce their own schools (with
mutations) for training yet another generation
of hosts, and so on, all of this within the kind of
protective shell that can readily be constructed
and defended in a stratified society.
Young girls – and some boys as well – from 
financially comfortable families are readily in-
duced to enrol, at considerable expense, in 
“circles” that train them to perform the rituals. 
It is – or has been for a long time – a path to 
high status. The cultural virtues of obedience
and respect for one’s elders, together with a
standard helping of youthful naivety, tend to
ensure a ready supply of ideally compliant and
attentive initiates allowed inside the gates.
At first, as apprentices, they watch quietly,
memorising the rituals, inculcating in them-
selves the ideals, while their parents pay for the
operating expenses. Some of them graduate 
to higher stages, each tier of students educating
the lower tier, with the prospect held out of 
rising to the status of teacher, at which point
the energy flow – the money – turns around.
Teachers earn a living, but only a few climb that
high up the pyramid. And teachers have their
own pyramid to climb: associations of circles
that in effect compete for prestige with other
circles. Once you’re enrolled in the system,
there is a strong incentive not to criticise or
rebel: we’re all in this boat together – don’t 
rock it. It doesn’t matter that much whether 
the initiates continue to believe in the tea cere-
mony as an important part of life. They are all
committed to a trajectory with high costs of
leaving and some promise of future benefits.
Cultural phenomena bear
a striking resemblance 
to cell biology
Go forth and multiply: bacteria thrive by replication
CORBIS (PREVIOUS SPREAD). GETTY IMAGES (BACTERIA)

19 DECEMBER 2011 – 1 JANUARY 2012 | NEW STATESMAN | 51
THE CHRISTMAS ESSAY
No doubt many of the participants – including
the parents paying the bills – feel trapped, but
keep their feelings to themselves. Do you want
to be an insider or an outsider? The difficulty 
in answering that question creates the semi-
permeable membrane that preserves the ma-
chinery. As Japanese society becomes less
stratified, more homogenised, the contrast has
become less effective.
Notice that this account remains silent about
the value of the Japanese tea ceremony. It may,
like university education, be helping both soci-
ety and the individual in all manner of ways. 
It may be nurturing the arts, instilling virtues,
preserving knowledge and wisdom, stabilising
the mores of society – or it may have had, but
lost, these roles over time. It may survive today
as a sort of self-perpetuating parasitical growth
that reproduces itself because it can. It seems on
the face of it, however, to be a benign –mutual-
ist, not parasitic –element of society.
C
an the same be said for the debu-
tante ball or cotillion, which has
occupied much the same niche in
the US, especially in the South? If
you are rich enough, and arriviste,
you want your daughters to “come
out” to society, and expend considerable effort
and sums of money manoeuvring into position
to accomplish this initiation. If your family 
arrived generations ago, you may still feel the
pressure to preserve your position in society 
by participating in the prolonged and expen-
sive rituals, something you might think you
owed to your daughters, however ungratefully
they respond to the pressure.
A look at the website of the National League
of Junior Cotillions (nljc.com) shows much the
same structure as the Japanese tea ceremony:
“chapters” in place of “circles”, a hierarchy of
volunteers, assistants and (paid) instructors,
and – most interestingly – a “strong emphasis
on volunteerism, patriotism and involvement
in community activities”. Biologists know 
that you can infer much about the dangers in 
an organism’s environment by studying its 
defences, which have been crafted to protect 
it from the most salient challenges. The entire
debutante tradition is threatened by the spread-
ing opinion that it is a superannuated cultural
parasite, so it is sporting its good-works over-
coat, instead of a mink stole, to protect its high
status, on which its life depends.
It is important to remember that there is very
little inertia in culture; an art form or practice
(or language or institution) can become extinct
in a generation if its elements aren’t assidu-
ously reproduced and reproduced. Not so
many years ago, most city newspapers in the
US devoted an entire section to “Society” and
covered the ceremonies of debutantes with the
same respectful care still accorded weddings
and funerals. Today’s coverage tends to make
note of the diminishing numbers of debutantes
taking part, and often has the same snarky tone
of amusement and withheld approval that dis-
tinguishes Hollywood gossip – except that 
the people named are not celebrities. Farewell,
debutantes, except in Texas, where they will no
doubt hold out for another decade or two.
Ponzi schemes share the pyramidal entry
structure. They are obviously parasitic invad -
ers, benefiting neither the individuals entrapped
nor the society in general. Charles Ponzi (1882-
1949) did not invent the scheme (and neither
did Charles Dickens, who describes one in
Martin Chuzzlewit), but Ponzi may have added
a few wrinkles and hence, to some degree, may
deserve the authorial recognition.
How does a Ponzi scheme get started? It
doesn’t have to be born in villainy, though it 
always ends up there. An eager and sincere 
entrepreneur with what he takes to be a good
idea raises the initial capital in good faith and
then finds his project running into unantici-
pated snags. But there is an informational lag
that lets the investors keep coming in, and this
provides fresh energy – money – to expend in
protecting the whole project by providing a
dividend to the early investors. The rules forbid
this, but . . . can’t we bend them just a bit to get
through the storm and keep this wonderful
project afloat?
A gradual and unalarming entry on to a slip-
pery slope is often a good trick, found in nature
and in culture. It is relied on by the pitcher plant
and other insectivorous plants, which do not
have to comprehend the rationale of their de-
sign to benefit from it. Ponzi schemes, and even
their proprietors, can also take advantage of
this design feature without understanding it.
Those schemes that have it thrive; the others
do not. Ponzi schemes do, however, have to 
be composed, unlike plants, of parts – human
agents –which understand quite a lot. All these
social cells depend critically on language-using,
comprehending people. Language is the main
medium of interaction, but also of reproduc-
tion. Words play a foundational role rather 
like that of genes and, like genes, they are
highly effective transmitters of information
that similarly evolved without a helping hand
from any intelligent designers. (Words are the
pre-eminent vehicles of cultural transmission
and evolution.)
So language and comprehension are an es-
sential part of the workings of social cells, but
here is a surprising twist: it is very important 
in each case that the participants not under-
stand too much. It is not just that the invention
and refinement of these social cells do not 
depend on any intelligent designer; it is that 
the cells’ effective operation depends on the
relative cluelessness –or innocence –of the par-
ticipants. The membrane that restricts infor-
mation flow is just as important as the mem-
brane that restricts entry of outsiders, precisely
because inside the barrier there are participants
who are capable of understanding that infor-
mation, information that can quickly trans-
form them into outsiders. Bacteria don’t have
to worry about the disillusionment of their
motor proteins, willing slaves that do so much
of the heavy lifting. For social cells, this is a big
ecological challenge.
Money, not social prestige, is the bait that at-
tracts people to Ponzi schemes, but once you’re
caught, you encounter the same pressure not 
to blow the whistle, because it would destroy
the gains you have accumulated. And perhaps
the anticipated shame of becoming known as 
a dupe is more motivating than the prospect of
financial loss, or the dishonour of being consid-
ered a philistine or a social outcast, in the case 
of the Japanese tea ceremony or the debutante
cotillion. These are all strong inducements. The
extended success of Bernie Madoff shows that
it is still possible for a Ponzi scheme to thrive
for some time, in large measure because it ex-
ploits networks of trust –a fine feature of a soci-
ety – and politeness – a fine endowment of in-
dividuals – to circumvent the requirements of
due diligence that would otherwise expose the
fraud. It is no accident that it is typically good,
honest people (a bit greedy, maybe, but other-
wise trustworthy and trusting) who are lured
into Ponzi schemes.
N
ow what about religions? They,
too, thrive on the goodness of
people. For the past few years,
Linda LaScola, a clinical social
worker, qualitative researcher
and psychotherapist, and I have
been investigating the curious, sad phenome-
non of closeted non-believing clergy – well-
meaning, hard-working pastors who find they
do not believe the creed of their denomination,
but also find that they cannot just blow the
whistle and abandon the pulpit. We knew that
many churchgoers have lost whatever faith
they had but continue their membership for
social and psychological reasons, and surmised
that there might be clergy who were similarly
attached to their church. What is it like to be a
non-believing pastor? We found some exam-
ples who were willing to tell us, and are now
completing a second survey of volunteers.
We want to know, ultimately, how this hap-
pens, and how common it is. It is apparently
not rare – nobody knows what percentage of
clergy fall into this category, not surprisingly.
Our first study reported on five pastors in dif-
ferent Protestant denominations, who were in-
terviewed in depth and in strict confidence by
LaScola. Because it was published electronically
(on the website On Faith) and under the head-
line “Preachers who are not believers” (Evolu-
tionary Psychology, volume eight, issue one),
this first pilot study has received considerable
attention and brought us a host of new volun-
teers for our ongoing research.
There are many paths into this predicament,
we find, but a common thread runs through
most of them: a certain sort of innocence and 
a powerful desire, not for social prestige or
riches, but rather the desire to lead a good life,
t

19 DECEMBER 2011 – 1 JANUARY 2012 | NEW STATESMAN | 53
THE CHRISTMAS ESSAY
to help other people as much as possible. The
tragic trap is baited with goodness itself.
Here is how it often works: teenagers glow-
ing with enthusiasm decide to devote their
lives to a career of helping others and, looking
around in their rather sheltered communities,
they see no better, purer option than going into
the clergy. When they get to seminary they
find themselves being taught things that no-
body told them in Sunday school. The more
they learn of theology and the history of the
composition of the Bible, the less believable
they find their creed. Eventually they cease to
believe altogether. But, alas, they have already
made a substantial commitment in social capi-
tal – telling their families and communities
about their goals – so the pressure is strong to
find an accommodation, or at least to imagine
that if they hang in there they will find one.
Only a lucky few find either the energy or the
right moment to break free. Those who don’t
break free then learn the tricks of the trade, the
difference between what you can say from the
pulpit and what you can say in the sanctum of
the seminary, or in your heart. Some, of course,
are unfazed by this.
One can be initiated into a conspiracy with-
out a single word exchanged or without a secret
handshake; all it takes is the dawning realisation,
beginning in seminary, that you and the others
are privy to a secret, and that they know that
you know, and you know that they know that
you know. This is what is known to philoso-
phers and linguists as mutual knowledge, and 
it plays a potent role in many social circum-
stances. Without any explicit agreement, mu-
tual knowledge seals the deal; you have no right
to betray this bond by unilaterally divulging it,
or even discussing it. A social membrane is made
of such stuff, and it can make a prison for any-
body inside who wishes to get out.
Like reluctant debutantes or privately suspi-
cious Ponzi victims, they button their lip for an
abundance of good reasons. (Redundancy is al-
ways a good trick; it allows a collection of indi-
vidually porous defences to overlap into a nearly
impregnable shield.) Historically, pastors have
had slender economic resources, and if they live
in a parsonage they build up no equity in real
estate. Hanging on until the kids are out of col-
lege and one can collect one’s meagre pension is
an option that can look better than making an
honest dash for the door. But a tentative finding
of our study so far is that the economic incen-
tive to hang on is sometimes of less importance
than the social and psychological factors. As
one of our pastors says, “I’m thinking if I leave
the church – first of all, what’s that going to do
to my family? And I don’t know. Secondly is, 
I have zero friends outside the church. I’m kind
of a loner.” And what about telling his wife?
“It’s going to turn her life upside down.”
So pastors tend to stay put and search for ways
of protecting their conscience from the pangs
of hypocrisy. Redoubling one’s efforts to take
good care of one’s flock is probably a frequent
effect, and hence it could be one of the side 
benefits of this system, a bonus that could al-
most pay for itself by turning its shepherds 
into goodness slaves. Guilt is a potent enzyme
in many social arrangements, and has been es-
pecially promoted in religions.
Religions changed more in the past century
than they changed in the previous two millen-
nia, and probably will change more in the next
decade or two than in the past century. The
main environmental change, as many have
suggested, is the sudden increase in informa-
tional transparency. Religions were beautifully
designed over millennia to work in circum-
stances in which the people within them could
be assumed to be largely ignorant of much that
was outside the membrane.
Now that mobile phones and the internet have
altered the epistemic selective landscape in a
revolutionary way, every religious organisation
must scramble to evolve defences or become
extinct. Much has been made of the growing 
attention to religion in the world, and this has
often been interpreted as a revival, an era of ex-
panding religiosity, but all the evidence points
away from that interpretation. The fastest-
growing religious category worldwide is no re-
ligion at all, and the increasing noise we hear is
apparently due to the heightened expenditure
of energy by all the threatened varieties in their
desperate attempts to fend off extinction.
What will the various religions evolve into?
That is hard to say, because evolution is a pro -
cess that amplifies unpredictable accidents into
trends and then novel structures. But there are
patterns in how this plays out, and if we examine
the good tricks that religions have evolved over
the millennia, we may be able to see what new
applications are in the offing.
Are these biologically inspired reflections 
on religion offensive? They discuss topics that
many people would rather leave unexamined,
but, unlike most earlier criticisms of religion,
they do not point a finger of blame. It doesn’t
take conniving priests to invent these cultural
contraptions, any more than it took a devious
social engineer to create the Japanese tea cere-
mony, or debutante cotillions, no matter how
resentful and trapped some of the participants
in those traditions may feel. Just as there is no
Intelligent Designer to be the proper recipient
of our gratitude for the magnificent biosphere
we live in, there need be no intelligent design-
ers to be the proper targets of our anger when
we find ourselves victimised by social cells.
There are, to be sure, plenty of greedy and 
deceitful people, who often rise to power in any
of these organisations, but if we concentrate on
hunting the villains down, we misdirect our
energies. The structures can arise quite inno-
cently out of good intentions and gradually
evolve into social mechanisms that perpetuate
themselves quite independently of the inten-
tions and values of their constituent parts, the
agents who bustle about inside them executing
the tasks that keep the whole going.
We need to look dispassionately at possibili-
ties that can illuminate – and might eventually
eliminate – some serious sources of suffering 
in the world. Once we appreciate the necessity
of metabolism, reproduction and protective
membranes for social cells as much as for pro-
tein-based cells, we can see more clearly the ef-
fects that novel environmental factors are likely
to have on the prospects for these phenomena.
Will the Japanese tea ceremony morph into
something different in order to stay alive, or will
the recent destratifications of Japanese society
lead to the disintegration of the membrane that
has protected the ceremony for a millennium?
What will replace debutante balls, and will the
niche be taken over by a descendant species of
social cell, or by another phenomenon entirely?
Ponzi schemes are probably harder to sustain
now, and a few minor changes in the flow of in-
formation around such phenomena may make
them all but impossible – though who knows
what entity will invade that niche.
The parallels I have noted do not suggest any-
thing like a Law of Nature, nor is there any good
reason to believe that all social phenomena are
reducible to social cells. Societies are complex in
more ways than colonies of bacteria are. What
does shine through is a principle of good design.
Darwin showed us that the secret of life is the
differential reproduction of effective designs for
fending off dissolution. When we approach so-
cial phenomena with the same spirit of reverse
engineering, we find a bounty of insights that
can help us plan intelligently for the future. l
Daniel Dennett is a philosopher and cognitive
scientist and a professor at Tufts University
One can be initiated into 
a conspiracy without 
a word being exchanged
No question of faith: observant against the odds
REUTERS/ALESSANDRO BIANCHI
t

