 
Summary of Discussion
Author(s): Daniel Dennett, Parfit, Regan, Richard Rorty, Alasdair MacIntyre, Harry
Frankfurt, Annette Baier and  Jim Doyle
Source: Synthese, Vol. 53, No. 2, Matters of the Mind (Nov., 1982), pp. 251-256
Published by: Springer
Stable URL: http://www.jstor.org/stable/20115801
Accessed: 21-07-2016 00:07 UTC
 
Your use of the JSTOR archive indicates your acceptance of the Terms & Conditions of Use, available at
http://about.jstor.org/terms
 
JSTOR is a not-for-profit service that helps scholars, researchers, and students discover, use, and build upon a wide range of content in a trusted
digital archive. We use information technology and tools to increase productivity and facilitate new forms of scholarship. For more information about
JSTOR, please contact support@jstor.org.
Springer is collaborating with JSTOR to digitize, preserve and extend access to Synthese
This content downloaded from 144.173.6.94 on Thu, 21 Jul 2016 00:07:51 UTC
All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms

 SUMMARY OF DISCUSSION
 DANIEL DENNETT: I think there is something plausible in the
 claim that, if we abandon Classical Prudence, morality ought to take
 its place. But I suggest that how we can plausibly appeal to morality
 in these cases is by objecting to moral blackmail. The reason it's
 immoral for you not to care about your future self is that when you
 get yourself in that fix the rest of us will have the burden of caring for
 you more than we would otherwise. By not taking care of yourself,
 you put a burden on the rest of us, and that's wherein the immorality
 of this lies.
 PARFIT: You think that's where the whole of the immorality lies?
 DENNETT: I'm not sure, but I'd like to be shown why this isn't so.
 PARFIT: Take Robinsom Crusoe on his island. If he knowingly
 postpones some pain with the consequence that the pain will be much
 more painful, this seems to me open to criticism.
 DENNETT: But he doesn't seem to deserve moral criticism.
 PARFIT: I agree that the criticism isn't moral given the way we now
 think about morality. But in the case of several moral theories, though
 they allow that you can do what you like with your own life, when we
 look at the foundations of the theory - Nagel's The Possibility of
 Altruism would be an example - we find an appeal to a kind of
 impartiality which implies that your reason for bringing it about that
 there will be less pain suffered is the same in your own case as in the
 case of other people.
 REGAN: Let me add something to that. If we believe that the early
 self has no obligation to the later self, it is easy also to believe that
 the early self somehow has the power to consent to the harm done to
 the later self. If the early self has this power to consent, and
 somehow represents the whole self, then we may think that there's no
 real harm done, or at least none that was not consented to.
 PARFIT: Or we may think, "It serves him right. He's paying the
 penalty for his own folly."
 RICHARD RORTY: I wonder why you use the premise that if an
 action is criticizable it must be criticizable either on grounds of
 Synthese 53 (1982) 251-256. 0039-7857/82/0532-0251 $00.60
 Copyright ? 1982 by D. Reidel Publishing Co., Dordrecht, Holland, and Boston, U.S.A.
This content downloaded from 144.173.6.94 on Thu, 21 Jul 2016 00:07:51 UTC
All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms

 252
 SUMMARY OF DISCUSSION
 irrationality or on grounds of immorality. When people say to a young
 man who is squandering his substance, or risking death or mutilation,
 that he is being imprudent, you know what they mean. They mean
 that he's not thinking enough about his future, and this is standard
 criticism made of the young. But why should it be a criticism of this
 person as irrational or as immoral?
 PARFIT: If we think that imprudence is irrational, then it is clear
 that in calling someone imprudent we will be criticizing this person.
 But if we think that there is nothing irrational in imprudence, calling
 someone imprudent may be making no criticism. It may be a mere
 description, in the way that describing someone as "unchaste" would
 not be a criticism for those who believe there is nothing wrong with
 unchastity.
 RORTY: You suggest that, if it does not accuse someone either of
 irrationality or or immorality, calling someone imprudent would be a
 mere description. But I don't see why it has to be one of these three.
 Why can't calling someone imprudent make a criticism of another
 kind? If you use the word 'immoral' to cover all kinds of criticism
 except that of irrationality, it ceases to be a worthwhile question
 whether the criticism is moral.
 PARFIT: I agree. I shouldn't have suggested that if some act is
 neither irrational nor immoral it cannot be criticised. Of course there
 are other kinds of criticism. An act may be ugly, or impolite, and so
 on. But it seems to me that, if we cease to think imprudence
 irrational, but still think that people ought to be criticised for im
 prudence, the kind of criticism here is more like moral criticism than
 like criticisms of these other kinds. Robinson Crusoe knowingly
 brings it about that more pain will be suffered. He knowingly brings
 about what, impartially considered, is a worse outcome. It's often
 regarded as one of the ludicrous feature of classical consequentialism
 that it seems to imply that if you make some outcome worse by
 making it very bad for yourself, this is morally wrong. Consequen
 tialists need to add the proviso that, in this particular case, this is not
 immoral. I suggest that, if we cease to think such acts irrational, but
 still think them open to criticism, the simplest change is to remove
 this proviso. It's because Crusoe's act increases the sum of suffering,
 and makes the outcome worse, that the criticism of his act seemed to
 me most plausibly to be a moral criticism. This would involve a
 change in how we think of morality, but a simple and understandable
 change.
This content downloaded from 144.173.6.94 on Thu, 21 Jul 2016 00:07:51 UTC
All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms

 SUMMARY OF DISCUSSION
 253
 ALASDAIR MACINTYRE: You appeal to the morality of a classical
 consequentialist. But few of us accept that. You could appeal instead,
 more plausibly, to a kind of claim that most of us accept. You could
 say that, just as each person ought to be especially concerned about
 certain other people, such as his children, so he ought to be especially
 concerned about his own later self.
 PARFIT: Yes. Good. In most people's moral thinking there are some
 principles which are impartial. Most people give some weight to the
 principle of impartial benevolence. But most people give more weight
 to principles that are 'agent-relative': that concern the agent's special
 duties to those other people to whom he stands in certain special
 relations. I suggested that the part of morality which could do the
 work once done by Classical Prudence could be the principle of
 impartial benevolence. But you're quite right to suggest that it could
 be the other part of morality: the part concerned with these special
 duties. One's obligations to one's own future self needn't be com
 pared with one's obligations to any stranger. They can be more
 plausibly compared with one's obligations to one's parents or one's
 children. Or perhaps we can ride both horses at once. We could
 appeal to both these kinds of moral criticism.
 HARRY FRANKFURT: It's a mistake, I think, to talk about having
 special duties to oneself. I don't think I have any special duties to
 myself any more than I have special duties to people with whom I
 have other relationships. It's true that if I make somebody a promise,
 I have a special duty to do what I promised to do; but I would have this
 duty to anybody to whom I made a promise; and I would have the
 same kind of responsibility for my children as I would have for
 anyone who was in similar relationships of dependency and expec
 tations, and so forth. What's different about my relationships to my
 children is not that I have special duties to them, but that I love them,
 and that I want to have a certain kind of relationship with them which
 I consider to be valuable both to me and to them. What kind of
 relationship would I have with myself if I couldn't count upon myself
 to look after my future? This is the kind of question that is at stake,
 not a question about rationality, or morality. To take the suggested
 analogy of one's duties to one's children, though this calls attention to
 the right phenomenon, it uses the wrong category to describe it. It's
 not a moral question.
 PARFIT: You say that it's not morality that's at stake. Not only
 morality, yes. But if you cease to love your children, and therefore
This content downloaded from 144.173.6.94 on Thu, 21 Jul 2016 00:07:51 UTC
All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms

 254
 SUMMARY OF DISCUSSION
 ceased to give them care, most of us would think that you were failing
 to fulfill your moral obligations to your children. Or consider those
 parents who do love their children, but who bring their children up in
 ways that will be bad for their children when they have grown up.
 The objection here is not that they don't love their children, but that
 in their concern for their children they ought to think more about
 their children's futures.
 FRANKFURT: I agree, but this is not saying that they are acting
 immorally, or violating obligations.
 PARFIT: But we would say to such parents: "You oughtn't to treat
 your children like this. They may be happy now, but you're not
 preparing them for adulthood." I think we would here be claiming
 that these parents aren't bringing up their children in the way that
 they ought to, morally.
 FRANKFURT: It may be that, partly.
 ANNETTE BAIER: It seems to me interesting that Hume held what
 you call the Complex View, but he has a criticism of people who are
 concerned only with contiguous and not with remote stretches of
 their own lives. And his criticism isn't a moral one. He would here
 appeal to a calm but not necessarily moral passion, a "present
 concern for our past or future pains or pleasures."
 PARFIT: This is the common criticism that, if the imprudent person
 really knew and vividly imagined the consequences of his act, he
 wouldn't want to do it. This assumes that those who care less about
 their further futures suffer from what Pigou called "a defect in the
 telescopic faculty." The same suggestion is made in Plato's Pro
 tagoras, where it is claimed that, just as objects look smaller when
 they are further away in space, pains look smaller when they are
 further away in time. Imprudence is always the result of a kind of
 ignorance, or cognitive failure. I think that these claims are true in
 some cases. But they are false in many others. We could sometimes
 show that they are false like this. We tell someone that he will soon
 have to make a choice, and we tell him how the different alternatives
 would affect him for better or worse. We describe in detail what
 would happen to him, so that he can vividly imagine just how awful
 or how good these effects would be. Only after this do we tell this
 person when, in the different alternatives, the good and bad effects
 would come. When this person makes his choice, it may be quite clear
 that he cares less about bad effects if they will be further in his
This content downloaded from 144.173.6.94 on Thu, 21 Jul 2016 00:07:51 UTC
All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms

 SUMMARY OF DISCUSSION
 255
 future. But this will not be because he mistakenly believes that they
 will then be less bad, or because if they will be further in the future
 he will imagine them less vividly. This person did the imaginative
 work before he knew about the timing, so his choice cannot be the
 result of our imagination's tendency to underestimate the further
 future.
 BAIER: You suggest that the timing oughtn't to matter, but aren't
 there cases where it does - where, for instance, it would be better for
 certain sorts of pleasures to be enjoyed in youth, rather than post
 poned, certain other sorts of satisfactions to come later rather than
 earlier?
 PARFIT: Yes. It's a good reason for postponing pleasures that you will
 then have more time in which you can enjoy looking forward to them.
 I remember exactly when, at the age of eight, I changed over from
 eating the best bits first to eating them last.
 JIM DOYLE: I'd like to hear both of you say a bit more about the
 distinction Professor Regan mentioned, namely between oneself and
 others. I think this may be more flexible on your theory. I've heard
 confirmed smokers say that they're not harming themselves because
 they don't want to grow old.
 PARFIT: That's a rationalisation.
 DOYLE: Perhaps. But, if they were more sophisticated, they might
 say, "I don't care about my old age because then I will be a different
 person, and a person about whom I don't much care."
 PARFIT: I didn't mention the distinction between numerical and
 qualitative identity. Of course I might say, for example, that after my
 marriage I will be a different person. But I'm not here saying that it
 won't be me, just that I will change in many ways. I think that
 Regan's suggestion was much bolder: that I can claim that it won't be
 me in old age. I will have ceased to exist. The old man won't be me at
 all, but will be a different person. If I accepted this suggestion,
 the objection to imprudence would be easily and straightforwardly
 moral. I shouldn't harm other people. If it won't be me who is
 suffering in old age, I shouldn't harm the person who will be suffering.
 I don't take this line because the suggestion is just false. It will be me
 in my old age. Our criteria for personal identity clearly cover this case.
 REGAN: Since you wanted us both to say something about this, I
 will say that I am more inclined than Parfit to claim that it will be
 someone else. And I don't think this suggestion can be so easily
This content downloaded from 144.173.6.94 on Thu, 21 Jul 2016 00:07:51 UTC
All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms

 256
 SUMMARY OF DISCUSSION
 rejected. There is a normal, every-day, well-entrenched descriptive
 sense in which it is just false that it will not be you in old age. But the
 more we emphasize this normal sense, the more doubtful it becomes
 whether this is the sense that is relevant to moral questions. If any
 sense of personal identity is so relevant, and I have doubts about this,
 then it is not this normal sense, but some other sense. There are many
 problems in describing such a sense. But this proposed different sense
 cannot be rejected as supporting claims that are just false.
 PARFIT: Not if it is proposed as a different sense. I was tempted
 once myself to suggest that we start to talk about successive selves.
 But, as you say, this raises serious problems. If what we've got within
 one life holds over different times to different degrees, chopping up
 the life into that of successive selves will be very crude. It now seems
 to me better not to talk about successive selves, but to talk directly
 about the various relations which are involved in the continued
 existence of the same person.*
 NOTE ADDED BY PARFIT
 * In this discussion I did not answer Regan's first criticism. The defender of Classical
 Prudence may claim that what matters is psychological continuity, which in most lives
 does not hold to differing degrees. But to defend the Equal Concern Claim, which is
 near the heart of Classical Prudence, what must be argued is that it is wrong or
 irrational to think that connectedness matters. Of the two general relations, continuity
 and connectedness, I don't believe that we can plausibly claim that only one of the two
 is what matters. If the defender of Classical Prudence cannot plausibly criticise
 someone who believes that connectedness matters, my argument survives.
This content downloaded from 144.173.6.94 on Thu, 21 Jul 2016 00:07:51 UTC
All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms

