Vol.:(0123456789)
Biology & Philosophy            (2019) 34:2 
https://doi.org/10.1007/s10539-018-9650-2
1 3
BOOK REVIEW ESSAY
Review of Other Minds: the octopus, the sea and the deep 
origins of consciousness
Peter Godfrey-Smith, Farrar, Straus and Giroux, NY, 2016
Daniel Dennett1
Received: 2 January 2018 / Accepted: 20 October 2018 
© Springer Nature B.V. 2018
Some years ago there was a workshop on convergent evolution, starring two species: 
the octopus and us human beings. Mollusk and Man, as one used to say. What next, 
sunflowers and sidewinders? (They both keep track of the sun, after all.) But this 
is no joke; there are striking parallels between the minds of human beings and the 
minds of octopuses, and studying them carefully and open-mindedly is a great way 
of understanding what minds are or might be. Our most recent common ancestor 
with the octopus was a tiny worm that lived hundreds of millions of years ago. As 
Peter Godfrey-Smith says,
Cephalopods are an island of mental complexity in the sea of invertebrate ani-
mals. Because our most recent common ancestor was so simple and lies so 
far back, cephalopods are an independent experiment in the evolution of large 
brains and complex behavior. If we can make contact with cephalopods as sen-
tient beings, it is not because of a shared history, not because of kinship, but 
because evolution built minds twice over. This is probably the closest we will 
come to meeting an intelligent alien. (p. 9)1
This passage packs a philosophical wallop. Philosophers are fond of imagining 
“Martians” and “zombies” and other alien intelligences, but their imaginations are 
typically not up to the task. Whatever they hold constant (without realizing it) is 
 *	 Daniel Dennett 
	
Daniel.Dennett@tufts.edu
1	
Tufts University, Medford, USA
1  There is an even more alien form of life that has a nervous system, nowhere near as intelligent as an 
octopus, that is now recognized as profoundly different (at the level of neuromodulators and proteins and 
genes) from all other animals: the lowly ctenophores, a distant relative of jellyfish with which it is often 
confused. See https​://aeon.co/essay​s/what-the-cteno​phore​-says-about​-the-evolu​tion-of-intel​ligen​ce?utm_
sourc​e=Aeon+Newsl​etter​&utm_campa​ign=0b9c5​54b15​-EMAIL​_CAMPA​IGN_2017_11_27&utm_
mediu​m=email​&utm_term=0_411a8​2e59d​-0b9c5​54b15​-69421​497.

	
D. Dennett 
1 3
    2  
Page 2 of 6
likely to be ill-motivated, and the variations that do occur to them (x-ray vision, 
astronomically capacious factual memories, direct experience of cosmic rays,…) 
seldom manage to get at the truly interesting and important differences that we can 
discover if we actually do the science. Moreover, doing the science can enlarge and 
enhance our “direct” experience of other minds—if we make contact with them, as 
he says. This is not a trivial supplement of empirical fact. Our sense of “what it’s 
like” to be us is profoundly shaped by the contact we make with each other, and—
for better or for worse—our convictions about whether “it is like something” to be 
an octopus, are apt to be grounded by, perhaps overwhelmed by, actual interactions 
with octopuses. If it is true—as it seems to be, on Godfrey-Smith’s eloquent and 
detail-rich account—that you cannot help but arrive at the confident opinion that 
octopuses are conscious once you’ve engaged with them, this tells us at least this: 
before you even begin to study the interior complexities of these amazing creatures, 
your default assumption will be: they are, like us, conscious in some special way, not 
merely sensitive (like bacteria, like plants,…) and probably not merely sentient (like 
our shared ancestor worm, like ants,…) but—in some way still to be characterized—
conscious. Subjective experience is Godfrey-Smith’s preferred term for this elusive 
quarry, and he claims that the cephalopods are good model organisms to study, as 
biologist say, since they share so little with us: they are not apes, not primates, not 
mammals, not warm-blooded, not even vertebrates.
Another punch in the passage quoted above reminds us that a good way to study 
minds sets aside, to the extent possible, the Wittgensteinian “way of life” we share in 
our linguistic communities, the commonalities that are apt to confound our thinking 
with parochiality. We do not share a history, or a close kinship, with the octopus and 
yet it has a mind, as we can see if we just look. These philosophical messages inter-
act: they point to the almost irresistible intuition that can be pumped by what might 
be called mere behavioral tempo and rhythm: if cephalopods moved in the clunky 
way of most existing robots, then in spite of the manifest purposiveness of their 
motions, it would be quite comfortable to suppose that they were some kind of zom-
bies, marine robots with eight or ten appendages. (Cog, the humanoid robot devel-
oped by Rodney Brooks and his team at MIT some years ago, never approached 
consciousness, but it moved its arms and eyes and head with such humanoid vivac-
ity and even grace that naïve observers often blurted out loud their startled convic-
tion that it was conscious.)
Godfrey-Smith is well aware of the potency of such intuitions and the pitfalls 
confronting the imaginations of researchers, and he scrupulously describes and 
explains the discoveries he has made in his years of underwater research as an 
amateur (in the best sense) marine biologist. His conclusions are informed, first, 
by a careful review of the evolutionary origins of the cephalopods, and then by 
a survey of the amazing cognitive talents they have developed. As he reads the 
evolutionary record, “There’s a smooth transition from minimal kinds of sensitiv-
ity to the world to more elaborate kinds, and no reason to think in terms of sharp 
divides” (p. 77). Similar selection pressures in widely separated lineages have 
driven similar solutions to fundamental problems of staying alive, not always in 
the same order in each lineage, so we have a patchwork of different talents exhib-
ited in different phyla. Cephalopods are mollusks, like clams and oysters, and part 

1 3
Review of Other Minds: the octopus, the sea and the deep origins…
Page 3 of 6 
    2 
of the evolutionary message is clear: if you are going to be a mollusk without a 
shell, you had better be smart—but even this policy has exceptions, as Godfrey-
Smith reminded me: slugs are not celebrated for their cleverness, while the lowly 
Aplysia is prized by scientists for the simplicity of its nervous system.
Octopuses turn out to be quick studies: they are excellent learners, but have 
shockingly short lifespans—one or two years, in general, with four years as the 
outer limit. Why invest so heavily in learning if you’re not going to be able to use 
your acquired skills for long? Why have a short life span in the first place? These 
and other ‘why” questions have answers—to some extent worked out and con-
firmed—in adaptationist terms: there are good reasons to be designed this way 
or that way. In a lucid summary and extension of evolutionary reasoning by Peter 
Medawar, George Williams and William Hamilton, Godfrey-Smith shows how (1) 
late-acting deleterious mutations accumulate (as byproducts, not with their own 
purposes) to create senescence, and how (2) the rational policy of animals where 
the risks of predation in adulthood are high is to “go for broke” (p. 171) and make 
a large early investment in reproduction instead of distributing the reproductive 
project over many years or seasons.
The lifespan of different animals are set by their risks of death from exter-
nal causes, by how quickly they can reach reproductive age, and other fea-
tures of their lifestyle and environment…. Early cephalopods had protective 
external shells… Then the shells were abandoned… it gave cephalopods 
their outlandish, unbounded possibilities. (pp. 72–73)… They have the large 
nervous systems because of what those unbounded bodies make possible 
and the need to hunt while being hunted; their lives are short because their 
vulnerability tunes their lifespans. (p. 174)
This brief summary cannot do justice to the patience and ingenuity with which 
Godfrey-Smith considers and dismisses alternative reasons, and the way he accu-
mulates the empirical facts supporting his argument. The whole explanatory 
enterprise is biology as reverse engineering, and if you want to understand con-
sciousness (as contrasted with just staring gob-smacked at it and declaring it a 
mystery), you must ask and answer these fundamental questions, because con-
sciousness is clearly expensive, both in terms of the R&D that has gone into its 
emergence over millions of years of evolution, and metabolically. Big complex 
brains are energetically expensive, even though they have been optimized for 
energy efficiency for eons. That is part of what makes the decentralized, distrib-
uted computational architecture of the cephalopods so fascinating: it turns out 
that there is more than one way of designing a nervous system that can think 
ahead effectively.
Thinking ahead is the main task of nervous systems: preparing the organism to 
make timely responses to its multifarious needs and opportunities. Life is an over-
lapping series of arms races, and just as computers have relentlessly increased 
their fundamental speed of processing, nervous systems have found faster and 
cleverer ways of looking ahead, taking informed chances, cutting corners, prun-
ing out bottlenecks and other slowdowns, in addition to simply ramping up the 

	
D. Dennett 
1 3
    2  
Page 4 of 6
speed of signaling within the systems. In order to do what, exactly? What product 
or outcome is to be achieved by all this engineering? Here is where many theo-
rists of consciousness make a simple mistake: they stop one (giant) step too early. 
They devote great labor investigating the upward or inbound paths “to conscious-
ness” and when they think they have reached their target, they stop and declare 
victory. They don’t ask the Hard Question: ‘And then what happens?” (Dennett 
1991, p. 255) But it is answers to the Hard Question that are the only hope of 
demystifying consciousness. What does consciousness permit an organism to do, 
and how?
One still powerful philosophical tradition would say that this question is 
already a mistake, a “behaviorist” mistake of some sort:
Many years ago Thomas Nagel used the phrase what it’s like in an attempt 
to point us toward the mystery posed by subjective experience…. The term 
“like” is misleading here, as it suggests that the problem hinges on issues of 
comparison and similarity—this feeling is like that feeling. Similarity is not 
the issue. Rather, there is a feel to much of what goes on in human life….
That’s what has to be understood. But when we take an evolutionary and 
gradualist perspective, this takes us to strange places. How can the fact of 
life feeling like something slowly creep into being? How can an animal be 
halfway to having it feel like something to be that animal? (p. 78)
Is this just a rhetorical question? For some philosophers and psychologists, it is, 
but Godfrey-Smith doesn’t fall into that trap. He sets out to answer the question. 
There being a feel is commonly seen as sharply contrasting with being able to do 
something (behave somehow) in reaction to that feel; turning our attention to the 
reactions seems to be turning away from the subjective experience itself. But this 
is just wrong. What gives the subjective experience itself the content it has, what 
makes it the subjective experience it is, must be what it does to the subject—
typically what it does for the subject, but also, what disruptions if any it causes in 
the organism’s normal systems of self-maintenance. (Not just immediate effects 
either; the organism may salt away some effect of its current subjective experi-
ence for use in modulating some much later activity).
What you’ll do next is affected by what you’re now sensing; and also, what 
you’ll sense next is affected by what you now do…. We know that explicitly 
and can talk about it, but their intertwining also affects in more fundamental 
ways how things feel, in quite a raw sense of ‘feel.’ (p. 80)
Godfrey-Smith doesn’t use Gibson’s increasingly popular term, affordance, but he 
has a lot to say about how these tightly and automatically intertwined transitions 
between perception, motivation, expectation and preparation for action provide 
the contents, the flavors, the gists of subjective experience. (This is a close cousin 
of my way of putting the point (e.g., Dennett 2017) that the brain has developed 
a user-illusion that simplifies its task of generating anticipations and timely guid-
ance of actions. This feeds quite naturally and directly into the various global 
workspace and working memory theories of consciousness, and Godfrey-Smith 

1 3
Review of Other Minds: the octopus, the sea and the deep origins…
Page 5 of 6 
    2 
appreciates the strengths of these haltingly converging approaches, but he sees 
them, which he usefully dubs latecomer theories, as too anthropocentric (or just 
mammalcentric): they fail to find room for something beyond mere appropri-
ate sensitivity but short of self-reflection in, say, fish and invertebrates. “Do you 
think that those things (pain, shortness of breath, etc.) only feel like something 
because of sophisticated processing in mammals that has arisen late in evolution? 
I doubt it.” (p. 93) He has some tentative ideas about what he calls a transforma-
tion view of subjective experience: “In this picture, there are early and simple 
forms of subjective experience that are then transformed as evolution makes nerv-
ous systems more complicated.” (p 95) As complications are added (gradually, of 
course, in rudimentary and then less rudimentary forms), “new capacities—such 
as sophisticated kinds of memory—are added which have a subjective side.” (p. 
95). Can he really be suggesting that a pain that can be remembered (for instance) 
is more like a feeling than a pain (would it be a pain?) that had no sequelae at all? 
Yes, and it is just such useful increments that must be posited to get us out of the 
self-defeating pit of what might be called feeling-trance: the paralysis that pre-
vents one from asking oneself “and then what happens?” And once again, there 
are intermediate, smaller steps to be considered: it is one thing to be able to have, 
and reflect on, an episodic memory of a past pain and some of its circumstances, 
and another thing to have one’s dispositions and preferences regarding those 
circumstances adjusted aptly in ways likely to avoid “pain” (if it is pain) in the 
future. Yes, an animal can be “half way towards having it feel like something.” 
Later, with the elaboration of “a more definite sense of self” we reach “something 
closer to consciousness. I don’t see that as a single definite step.” (p. 97)
Many philosophers say that they cannot imagine any intermediates between the 
unconsciousness of, say, a brick, and their own sort of consciousness, and then they 
draw a “conclusion” from this noted inability: the light of consciousness is either on 
or off. Godfrey-Smith shows them, by example, that if they would just try harder, by 
actually considering some plausible details, they might succeed.
In chapter 6, “Our minds and others,” his evolutionary vantage point lets Godfrey-
Smith draw attention in a quite unified way to the various competing proposals amongst 
theories of consciousness recently put forward by philosophers, neuroscientists, com-
puter scientists and others. The adherents of these positions tend to see themselves as 
at war with all the rivals, but Godfrey-Smith’s framework allows him to find valuable 
contributions to his overall scheme without appearing to be merely a cherry-picker, an 
opportunistic Polyanna who can find a little bit of good in everyone. The various global 
workspace ideas (of Baars, Dehaene, Carruthers, Prinz, and me) fit in handsomely as 
long as we treat them as describing a broadcast system between otherwise non-com-
municating parts; the higher-order thought theory (of Rosenthal and others) is acceded 
a valuable role in the latecomer varieties of consciousness (I think it has other virtues, 
but that is a topic for another occasion); the integrated information idea (of Tononi, and 
now Koch) gets a constructive gloss, as does Hofstadter’s idea of strange loops (though 
without attribution to Hofstadter). He considers imaginatively the particularly explo-
sive role of adding language to the mix of capabilities, but carefully points out that at 
least crude versions of such expressive expansion may exist in other species, a possibil-
ity now being explored experimentally. And he adds some useful discussion of effer-
ence copy as a source for silent inner speech (though in an endnote he contrasts this 

	
D. Dennett 
1 3
    2  
Page 6 of 6
with my account, with which it is entirely consonant). In an academic monograph, this 
20-page roundup and evaluation of rival ideas would take hundreds of pages and even 
more references, but this book is intended for a wider readership, and its compactness 
serves to introduce the ideas vividly, which is the main point. (His decision to pack all 
the bibliographic citations—which are good—into endnotes unmarked in the text may 
give the mistaken impression that he is unaware of many of the sources for his ideas. 
This favoring of graceful, easy reading over Giving Proper Credit may annoy some pro-
fessionals, but their students will pick up the ideas with less toil, and any curiosities 
engendered are likely to be well rewarded with further reading found in the endnotes.)
One of the too-brief discussions in the book is his acknowledgment of Simona Gins-
burg and Eva Jablonka’s ideas (2007) about the gradual evolution of experience, but 
this gap can be filled to a considerable extent by Jablonka’s presentation (following 
Godfrey-Smith’s) and my commentary on both of them at the NYU conference on ani-
mal consciousness, November 17–18, 2017, on line at https​://wp.nyu.edu/consc​iousn​
ess/anima​l-consc​iousn​ess/.
There is much else that is fascinating and important in this small volume, not least 
the amazing details of cephalopod life, and the surprising recent discoveries about con-
vergent or parallel evolution in multiple branches of the Tree of Life. The details do 
matter. How can the octopus control its astonishingly swift and accurate changes of 
color when it is, apparently, colorblind? It turns out that its skin is itself light-sensitive. 
(What is it like to see with your skin? Wrong question, since it is only sorta seeing, and 
there need be no single central Subject that enjoys the show.) How do cuttlefish use 
their ability to create moving patterns of color on the “living video screen” (p. 160) on 
their sides? If they are signaling, who is interpreting the messages, and what is their 
function? These are still largely unanswered questions, but Godfrey-Smith whets the 
reader’s appetite for them, and points to the future work that will answer them.
Socrates famously described himself as a midwife helping others to give birth to 
wisdom, and Aristotle’s compendious knowledge of nature and boundless curiosity 
permitted him to assist at the birth of many important scientific ideas (a few of them 
stillborn). The great philosophers of the seventeenth and eighteenth century engaged 
energetically with the science of their day and contributed to the shape science assumed 
thereafter—often but not always positively. Today, we are witnessing something of a 
payback, with science providing—for philosophers who will attend—much needed 
conceptual breakthroughs, imagination-prostheses, and even methods of thinking that 
are dismantling ancient philosophical logjams, turning traditional “mysteries” into 
soluble problems. Peter Godfrey-Smith provides an excellent example of what can be 
accomplished by a scientifically educated philosophical imagination.
References
Dennett D (1991) Consciousness explained. Little, Brown, New York
Dennett D (2017) From bacteria to bach and back: the evolution of minds. W.W. Norton & Co., New 
York
Ginsburg S, Jablonka E (2007) The transition to experiencing: I. Limited learning and limited experienc-
ing. Biol Theory 2:218–230

