What Is It Like to Be a Robot?
Guilty Robots, Happy Dogs: The Question of Alien Minds by David McFarland
Review by: Daniel C. Dennett
BioScience, Vol. 59, No. 8 (September 2009), pp. 707-709
Published by: Oxford University Press on behalf of the American Institute of Biological Sciences
Stable URL: http://www.jstor.org/stable/10.1525/bio.2009.59.8.14 .
Accessed: 15/05/2014 12:28
Your use of the JSTOR archive indicates your acceptance of the Terms & Conditions of Use, available at .
http://www.jstor.org/page/info/about/policies/terms.jsp
 .
JSTOR is a not-for-profit service that helps scholars, researchers, and students discover, use, and build upon a wide range of
content in a trusted digital archive. We use information technology and tools to increase productivity and facilitate new forms
of scholarship. For more information about JSTOR, please contact support@jstor.org.
 .
Oxford University Press and American Institute of Biological Sciences are collaborating with JSTOR to
digitize, preserve and extend access to BioScience.
http://www.jstor.org 
This content downloaded from 193.105.154.35 on Thu, 15 May 2014 12:28:53 PM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

learn to appreciate some of the advances
and controversies in evolutionary de-
velopmental biology while reading Greg
Wray. Then again, there is no essay on
the role of phenotypic plasticity in evo-
lution, a topic that has acquired central
status during the past two decades; after
perusing Evolution a reader might be
excused for not appreciating the entire
field of evolutionary genomics, or for
being ignorant of ongoing discussions
on crucial new concepts like evolvabil-
ity. Even attempts to move beyond strict
biology with entries on evolution and
society, evolution and religion, and the
above-mentioned essay on antievolu-
tionism barely scratch the surface—why
is there no discussion of evolutionary
psychology, as controversial and some-
what dubious as the field is?
While some of these lacunae could
have been avoided during the planning
stages of the volume, I think the under-
lying problem is that encyclopedic efforts
are a thing of the past, certainly when it
comes to the paper variety of encyclo-
pedia. In this bold new era of ubiquitous
and increasingly cheap laptop comput-
ers, 24/7 Internet access, e-readers, smart
phones, and so on, I simply do not see
many people willing to lug around a
thousand pages of what is going to be a
necessarily incomplete and increasingly
unrepresentative reference source like
Evolution. Publishers, editors, and au-
thors would be much better off em-
bracing the anarchy and flexibility of
the Web to develop decentralized and
more focused projects, such as the
excellent Complete Works of Charles Dar-
win online (http://darwin-online.org.uk/).
Even encyclopedias are taking a de-
cidedly different form these days, and if
one does not like the proletarian
Wikipedia, excellent models of schol-
arly efforts are out there, such as the
Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy
(http://plato.stanford.edu/). These take
seriously the idea of organic, grassroots
growth arising from the efforts of a ded-
icated community, based on what the
community itself sees as worth writing
about, as opposed to the centralized
planning typical of the standard model.
Indeed, let me suggest to Ruse and
Travis, both of whom I know and highly
respect, that they go back to Harvard
Press and propose to use the current
version of their book as the seed for a
community-wide, online, open-ended
effort. Of course, it would also be nice if
it were open access, but that’s another
story.
MASSIMO PIGLIUCCI
Massimo Pigliucci (massimo 
@platofootnote.org) is a professor in the
Department of Philosophy at the City
University of New York, Lehman College.
References cited
Browne J, Ekman P, Kauffman S, May R, Pigliucci
M, and Raison C. 2009. Darwin’s Descendants.
New York Academy of Sciences. (7 August 2009;
www.nyas.org/Publications/Detail.aspx?cid=56e3
5057-c0ad-4b83-8c02-bc38082419dc)
Coyne JA. 2009. Why Evolution Is True. Viking.
Diderot D, d’Alembert JR. 1751–1777. Encyclopédie.
(7 August 2009; http://quod.lib.umich.edu/d/did/)
Müller GB. 2007. Evo-devo: Extending the evolu-
tionary synthesis. Nature Reviews Genetics 8:
943–949.
Norenzayan A, Shariff AF. 2008. The origin and
evolution of religious prosociality. Science 322:
58–62.
Pigliucci M. 2007. Do we need an extended evolu-
tionary synthesis? Evolution 61: 2743–2749.
WHAT IS IT LIKE TO BE A ROBOT?
Guilty Robots, Happy Dogs: The
Question of Alien Minds. David
McFarland. Oxford University Press,
2009. 256 pp., illus. $15.95 (ISBN
9780199219308 paper).
A
ny scientist who wants to investigate
minds—our minds, animal minds,
alien minds—will soon discover that
there is no way to proceed without ven-
turing into the playgrounds and battle-
fields of the philosophers. You can either
stumble into this investigation and
thrash about with a big scientific stick,
thwacking yourself about as often as
your opponents, or you can enter cau-
tiously, methodically, trying to figure
out the terrain using what you already
know to interpret what you find. For-
tunately, David McFarland has chosen
the second option in Guilty Robots,
Happy Dogs: The Question of Alien
Minds, and there is much food for
thought here for both scientists and
philosophers.
It is written in the spirit of Valentino
Braitenberg’s brilliant little book Vehicles
(1984), a series of thought experiments
that led readers from robotic vehicles
even simpler than bacteria to ever-more
sophisticated and versatile agents capa-
ble of tracking food, avoiding harm,
comparing situations, and remembering
things. McFarland starts his project a
little higher on the ladder of sophisti-
cation, with a robot designed to serve as
a night watchman of sorts, identifying
interlopers, calling for help when
needed, and, most important, preserv-
ing its energy supply for another day,
budgeting its activities to stay alive at all
costs. This basic robot is then enhanced
in various ways, in a design process
whose ultimate goal is a robot that can
be held accountable and to whom things
matter—a robot with subjectivity and
values.
How do nonhuman animals compare
with such robots? Animal minds (in-
cluding our own) are the real quarry
here, and McFarland uses the parallels
and differences between clearly imagined
robots and various well-studied animals
to illuminate the issues in a host of re-
search controversies currently raging in
psychology and ethology. This has been
his larger strategy for many years, and
this book gives us a summary of the
lessons he has gleaned from this inter-
disciplinary exploration.
One message driven home most
effectively, in my opinion, is that it is
entirely appropriate to consider natural
selection to be a (mindless, purpose-
less) designer, and to compare the de-
signs churned up by eons of natural
selection on a par with designs generated
top-down by would-be intelligent
designers—engineers and roboticists.
Sometimes the perspective is particu-
larly bracing, as when McFarland in-
sists on situating his imagined robots
in a market economy so he can note
www.biosciencemag.org
September 2009 / Vol. 59 No. 8 •  BioScience 707
Fall Focus on Books
doi:10.1525/bio.2009.59.8.14
This content downloaded from 193.105.154.35 on Thu, 15 May 2014 12:28:53 PM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

that nobody would buy such a robot—
it wouldn’t pay for itself. Animals, sim-
ilarly, are amazingly thrifty because they
have to be; they have superb layers of
self-protection and repertoires of self-
advancing behaviors, but not a smidgen
more than can pay for itself in the long
run. This often brings out the rationale
for animal (or robot) features that would
otherwise be lost in the shadows. It also
obliges McFarland to commit to a
“behaviorist” approach—not the ideo-
logical straitjacket of the Skinnerians
but the behaviorism expressed by Tur-
ing in 1937, when he noted about the
human computers of his day: “The be-
havior of the computer at any moment
is determined by the symbols which he
is observing, and his ‘state of mind’ at
that moment” (p. 241). Handsome is as
handsome does, a motto enshrined in
the rationale for the Turing test, and the
only way a science of mind can proceed.
But how much can one glean from
inner behavior (the machinery of the
mind, in effect) by observing the com-
petencies of outer behavior? Do ani-
mals, for instance, really have the beliefs
that their behavior seems to indicate
they do? Here McFarland avails himself
of a slightly unorthodox but useful in-
terpretation of philosophy’s terms of
art, realism and functionalism. Realism
would not impute a belief to the organ-
ism unless it was “in principle identifi-
able outside the role that it plays in the
system” (p. 69), whereas functionalism
(such as my intentional-stance view) is
more relaxed, willing to impute beliefs
that are only implicit in the design and
functioning of the larger system. For 
realists, a belief is an explicit represen-
tation, “not simply part of a procedure.
If a representation is to be explicit, then
there has to be a physically identifiable
bearer of the information (the token)
and, additionally, something, most likely
someone, who can be identified as the
user of the information” (p. 77).
Human beings have beliefs aplenty,
obviously, because they have lots of ex-
plicit knowledge that they can readily ex-
press. Do dogs or robots have explicit
beliefs? Do they need them? McFarland
shows how robots can exhibit behav-
iors similar to animals’ behaviors with-
out explicit representation, and he pro-
poses to define cognitive processes as
those that require “a certain kind of
mechanism—one that requires manip-
ulation of explicit representations”
(p. 87). This sets the bar high and departs
from standard usage, but perhaps it is
best to follow his lead. Note that with
this definition, it isn’t clear that our
hand-eye coordination or even our abil-
ity to find our way home counts as a
cognitive process (unless we use a map
or an explicit mental map).
McFarland also proposes a demand-
ing definition of subjective experience:
“The agent is the recipient of experi-
ence, and knows it” (p. 94). Using this
definition, the behavior of turning to a
more painless posture while asleep
would not count as demonstrating
subjective experience of pain, and it
follows that much animal behavior
(think of fish, for instance) is not clear
evidence that animals have subjective
experience, no matter how frantically
they squirm. McFarland does not infer
that animals don’t have subjective ex-
perience or explicit beliefs. He just points
out that given these well-motivated def-
initions, we cannot yet tell.
Indeed, that is the larger conclusion
that McFarland draws again and again—
the evidence is not yet in, not even about
Border, his dog. He looks sympatheti-
cally at important experiments and ob-
servations, of dogs “teaching” their pups,
of animals making sophisticated choices
(are they explicitly maximizing their ex-
pected pleasure?). In each case he finds
that a functionalist interpretation of the
behavior seems to suffice: “Certainly we
can say that the teacher behaves as if it
wants, hopes, or desires the pupil to be-
have in a certain way,” he says, but he also
goes on to note that the teacher could
have a “strong theory of mind” about the
pupil and be wrong (p. 105). The com-
parison with robots is always astringent
here, and McFarland puts our built-in
skepticism about robot minds to good
use in reining in our romanticism about
our furry friends.
McFarland proposes a contrast
between two views of what is going on
inside: the hedonic model and the
automaton model. According to the he-
donic, “the feelings of pleasure and dis-
pleasure that arise from various parts
of the body in situations of motivational
compromise are combined in some way,
and behavioral adjustments are made
so as to maximize pleasure and minimize
displeasure.” By contrast, in the au-
tomaton, “the behavioral and physio-
logical adjustments are automatic,
and...the system is attuned to produce
the best compromise among the com-
peting demands” (p. 123). He says, “The
fundamental difference between the two
views is that in the automaton view
the quantity maximized is implicit,
while in the hedonic view it is explicit”
(p. 123). But are these views as distinct
as they first appear? When he turns to
Michel Cabanac’s experiments with peo-
ple being paid to endure discomfort,
and paying for sandwiches of different
tastiness (by their own taste), he can
rely, for once, on what subjects say about
their decisions. As he goes on to note,
however, a subliminal process can take
the place of a “conscious motive,” ap-
parently, and thus “it is not clear that
Michel Cabanac is correct in assuming
that trade-offs involving money neces-
sarily involve a conscious mental com-
ponent” (p. 128).
As we near the summit, we consider
robot designers who want their robot to
be “accountable for its behavior.” For
this, it needs its own values, not just its
designers’ values. It can learn to adjust
its values, but this learning must de-
pend on some prior “immutable” values
it was born with, you might say. Here I
think McFarland misses a possibility: It
708 BioScience  •  September 2009 / Vol. 59 No. 8
www.biosciencemag.org
Fall Focus on Books
This content downloaded from 193.105.154.35 on Thu, 15 May 2014 12:28:53 PM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

might be unwise to design a robot that
could eventually undo even its initial
“immutable” values and take on a new
summum bonum, but this is not an en-
gineering impossibility (Suber 2001).
Perhaps the only way to make an ac-
countable robot that could deserve pun-
ishment for its misdeeds and rewards
for its heroics would be to give it the
dangerous capacity to renounce the val-
ues we installed in it at birth.
McFarland has done his homework
well; he offers a patient, sympathetic,
and largely accurate discussion of
philosophers’ best relevant work, plung-
ing into the darkest thickets of contro-
versy over supervenience, eliminativism,
symbol grounding, higher-order thought
theories, and the like. Some of his read-
ings will jar the authors he discusses,
who will think that they have been mis-
understood to hold positions that had
never occurred to them, but they will
never find him sniping in standard philo-
sophical fashion; if he misreads them, it
is because his effort to find a construc-
tive reading was too charitable by half.
Philosophers are not always trying to
do as much as scientists imagine.
DANIEL C. DENNETT
Daniel C. Dennett
(daniel.dennett@tufts.edu) is the
Austin B. Fletcher Professor of Philosopy
and codirector of the Center for Cognitive
Studies at Tufts University in Medford,
Massachusetts.
References cited
Braitenberg V. 1984. Vehicles: Experiments in Syn-
thetic Psychology. MIT Press.
Suber P. 2001. Saving Machines from Themselves:
The Ethics of Deep Self-Modification.(22 July
2009: www.earlham.edu/~peters/writing/selfmod.
htm)
Turing A. 1937. On computable numbers, with an
application to the Entscheidungsproblem. Pro-
ceedings of the London Mathematical Society
42: 230–265. Erratum in Proceedings of the
London Mathematical Society 43: 544–546
(1938). doi:10.1112/plms/s2-43.6.544
LIFE AT THE ENDS
OF THE EARTH
The Biology of Polar Regions. 2nd ed.
D. N. Thomas, G. E. Fogg, P. Convey,
C. H. Fritsen, J.-M. Gili, R. Gradinger,
J. Laybourn-Parry, K. Reid, and D. W.
H. Walton. Oxford University Press,
2008. 416 pp., illus. $60.00 (ISBN
9780199298136 paper).
A
s a scientist who has spent 25 years
conducting research in polar re-
gions, I was immediately drawn to The
Biology of Polar Regions for several rea-
sons: (a) The poles, particularly Antarc-
tica, represent one of the last frontiers of
exploration on our planet; (b) polar en-
vironments are highly sensitive barom-
eters of climate change and can affect the
entire Earth system as they respond to
changing climate; and (c) this work con-
tinues the vision and style of the late
G. E. Fogg, who was not only an eminent
scientist but also a visionary able to view
Earth in a completely holistic way. The
first version of the book, published in
1998, was written by Fogg alone; for this
second edition, it took eight authorita-
tive authors—with expertise spanning
topics such as marine biology, biologi-
cal oceanography, sea ice, soils, limnol-
ogy, climate change, and Antarctic
conservation and policy—to update
Fogg’s original version. Kudos to the
present authors for maintaining Fogg’s
original chapters 1 and 2 and the con-
cluding chapter largely unchanged,
paying tribute to his inquisitive pursuit
of the nature of science and masterful
synthesis of information across many
disciplines.
Fogg’s first two chapters describe the
basic physical and biological constraints
on life in polar regions. The subsequent
nine chapters are updated substantially
to reflect the many new discoveries made
over the past decade. I found the chap-
ters on sea ice, marine benthos, and hu-
man impacts (particularly the review of
polar politics) to be exceptional. Any
student of the polar sciences must read
these chapters. Difficult and often con-
troversial topics such as photophysiology
(chapter 2) and turbulence (chapter 3)
provide the reader with a nice review
of the processes before delving into their
roles in polar environments. Each chap-
ter typically ends with summary or con-
clusion sections, which could work well,
but, unfortunately, several of these sec-
tions are not well developed. For exam-
ple, the “wider perspectives” section of
chapter 4 (“Glacial Habitats in Polar
Regions”) hardly goes beyond the sur-
face on the role of polar environments
as analogs for life on other icy worlds.
Only two references in this section were
published after 2005, which does little
justice to what we have learned about
the icy systems of Mars, Europa, and
Enceledus over the past five years. I
think that many aspects of this chapter,
and the book in general, are directly rel-
evant to astrobiology and worthy of bet-
ter coverage.
I was also left wondering to what de-
gree the data presented in many of the
chapters have changed over the past five
years as the result of climate change.
This is particularly relevant to the de-
scriptions of species within Arctic ter-
restrial and marine systems, which are
clearly in a state of transition. For ex-
ample, are the depth profiles, species
lists, and food-chain depictions in chap-
ter 5 (“Inland Waters in Polar Regions”)
and chapter 6 (“Open Oceans in Polar
Regions”) representative of the present
situation? Current literature indicates
that these relationships have changed
or are in the process of changing rapidly.
Although the authors do devote chapter
10 to describing the influence of climate
change on many levels of polar ecosys-
tems, and even include a section on
www.biosciencemag.org
September 2009 / Vol. 59 No. 8 •  BioScience 709
Fall Focus on Books
This edition of The Biology of Polar Regions
packs a plethora of information. The authors’
detailed comparisons of Arctic and Antarctic
habitats generate a breadth of coverage that
few books on polar environments offer.
doi:10.1525/bio.2009.59.8.15
This content downloaded from 193.105.154.35 on Thu, 15 May 2014 12:28:53 PM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

