DANIEL C. DENNETT 
HOW TO STUDY 
HUMAN 
CONSCIOUSNESS 
EMPIRICALLY 
OR 
NOTHING 
COMES TO MIND 
Consciousness is making a comeback in psychology, but there is still 
residual skepticism, anxiety, and confusion about how to approach 
this perilous phenomenon scientifically. There are those, after all, 
such as Thomas Nagel, who have argued that approaching con- 
sciousness must inevitably involve leaving science behind - the 
objective world of science recedes as we close in on the subjective 
world of consciousness, on what it's like to be a conscious being. 
There may in the end be something to this suspicion, but I will try to 
show how little it could come to. It is perfectly possible to study 
consciousness, carefully conceived, empirically. 
I will support this claim by describing a method, and giving its 
rationale. Versions of the method are familiar in experimental psy- 
chology, though it is never, I think, practiced with attention to quite 
the set of principles and constraints I will describe. The method has 
close kin in the history of philosophy and psychology. There is little 
that is new in it; it looks a bit like Wundtian introspectionism, a bit 
like Husserlian - or better, Schutzian - phenomenology, and even like 
Quine's imagined exercises in "radical translation". 
A hallmark of the method is its cageyness, its metaphysical mini- 
malism; it begins by cautiously saying nothing at all about what 
consciousness might be, or even where it might be found. We all 
know, of course, one place consciousness might be found: in us, the 
more or less normal, intelligent adult human beings. And moreover 
we all are quite sure that the reason - or at least a major reason - why 
we are so sure we are conscious is because we have told each other, 
in one way or another. That is, we all think that one can learn 
something about the nature of what others are conscious of - what it 
is like to be them - from listening to what they tell us. For just these 
reasons, then, I will restrict the domain of the method to just such 
Synthese 53 (1982) 159-180. 0039-7857/82/0532-0159 $02.20 
Copyright © 1982 by D. Reidel Publishing Co., Dordrecht, Holland, and Boston, U.S.A. 

160 
DANIEL 
C. DENNETT 
apparently normal human beings, and more particularly to what they 
say, but the method itself requires no assumptions - for the moment 
at least - about whether any or all such organisms really are con- 
scious, and if so, of what. We start with a class of subjects picked out 
of the crowd by those rough and ready pretheoretical assumptions 
but decline to advance any premature theses about this class. For all 
we know, some of the members of this class may be masqueraders - 
zombies without a glimmer of consciousness in them. 
It is often the case in experimental psychology that groups of such 
subjects are placed, one at a time usually, in rather constrained 
experimental situations where they are asked to perform various 
intellectual tasks, solve problems and puzzles, make judgments, and 
so forth. One feature of such experimental situations is that they are - 
or can easily be made - objectively describable in many of their 
relevant details. For instance, we can adopt a resolutely third-per- 
sonal perspective, viewing the subjects [rom the outside only, as it 
were. We can restrict ourselves to such data-gathering as tape-record- 
ing, videotaping, the timing of button pushing, measurement of brain 
waves, galvanic skin response and so forth. If we are scrupulous 
about these matters, then whatever it is that we are studying, and 
however well or ill we are studying it we will be studying it empiric- 
ally. 
Let us focus first on the record of noises - vocal noises mainly - 
made by subjects (and experimenters) during some experiment or 
group of experiments. Now one could try to be a physicist or 
physiologist and devise a purely physical or physiological theory or 
model of the subjects that would explain and predict these noises, but 
if one fact is now abundantly clear from the last century of such 
endeavors, it won't work. It might work in principle - in principle one 
might also predict exactly where and when lightning will strike - but 
in fact there isn't a prayer. But happily there are other levels of 
analysis at which we might construct good, predictive theories. For 
instance, if we can turn our recording of the noise stream into a 
transcript, a text composed of words of the subject's language, there 
are all sorts of well-attested regularities, dependencies, and redun- 
dancies to exploit. This first step yields a radical reconception of the 
data, an abstraction from acoustic and physical properties to strings 
of words (though still adorned with precise temporal features, and 
perhaps other clearly physical features as well). The physics and 

STUDYING 
HUMAN 
CONSCIOUSNESS 
EMPIRICALLY 
161 
physiology of speech production and perception are still poorly 
understood in spite of vigorous and brilliant research, so disappoint- 
ingly little can be said at this point about the regular relations that 
must exist between the occurrence of words (or phonemes) and 
physical features of the acoustic signal, but there is nevertheless 
sufficient interpersonal agreement in the transcription process to 
ensure that a transcript is still a reliably objective refinement of the 
data. After all, any two typists with good hearing and a good vocabu- 
lary will independently produce transcripts that agree on all but a tiny 
percentage of the words. Many inaudible or garbled words can be 
extrapolated by appeal to obvious assumptions of grammar or the 
subject's manifest intentions, and such imponderable matters of 
judgment or interpretation that remain can be isolated, marked, and if 
need be discarded as data. 
So far, I take it the method described is cut-and-dried and un- 
controversial. It yields what I will call a text - a purified text, literary 
scholars might call it - and it is not quite given, since the process of 
transcription is also, as just noted, a process of (obvious) inter- 
pretation, which depends on assumptions about the language being 
spoken and on some of the subject's intentions. We can be sys- 
tematically cautious about the latter assumptions, restricting our- 
selves to what we might call assumptions of grammatical and lexical 
intentions. Thus we would boldly purify "from reft to light" to "from 
left to right", and insert a definite article at the obvious place in 
'%.. as soon as the car turns corner .... " but we would leave "I seem 
to hear an orange blur" in unadulterated inscrutability, pending our 
next step. 
Moving beyond the text is a step in which the caution begins to pay 
big dividends. On the one hand, we must now venture into the 
controversial and treacherous territory of hermeneutics, the inter- 
pretation of the text. On the other hand, we can really be quite 
confident that the text we find produced by our subjects consists of 
speech acts; not mere pronunciations or recitations but assertions, 
answers to questions, comments, self-corrections, requests for 
clarification. We are generally prepared to assume, that is, that the 
text is a product of a process that has an intentional interpretation: it 
consists of things the subjects wanted to say, of propositions they 
meant to assert, for various reasons. In fact of course, some reliance 
on such assumptions was playing a background role in our previous 

162 
DANIEL 
C. DENNETT 
step, purifying the text. (Why would anyone want to say "from reft to 
light"?) The reliance on an intentional interpretation of the subjects is 
in any event an ineliminable part of such experiments, both in the 
interpretation of the data, and in the prior process of experimental 
design. Whatever dangers we run by adopting the intentional stance, 
they are the price we must pay for gaining access to a host of highly 
reliable truisms we wish to exploit in the design of experiments. For 
instance, there are many reasons for wanting to say things, and it will 
be convenient to exclude some of these by experimental design. 
Sometimes people want to say things not because they believe them 
but because they think their audience wants to hear them. We take 
the obvious steps to diminish the likelihood that this desire is present 
or effective: we tell our subjects that what we want to hear is 
whatever they believe, and we take care not to let them know what it is 
we hope they believe. We do what we can, then, to put them in a 
situation where, given the desires we have inculcated in them, they 
will have no better option than to try to say what they in fact 
believe. 
Another application of the intentional stance towards our subjects 
is required if we are to avail ourselves of such useful event-types as 
button-pushing. Typically, pushing a button is a way of performing 
some conventionally fixed speech act, such as asserting that the two 
seen figures appear superimposed to me right now, or answering that 
yes, my hurried, snap judgment (since you have told me that speed is 
of the essence) is that the word that I have just heard was on the list I 
heard a little while ago. For many experimental purposes, then, we 
will want to unpack the meaning of these button pushings and 
incorporate them as elements of the text. Which speech act a parti- 
cular button pushing can be taken to execute depends critically on the 
intentional interpretation of the interactions between subject and 
experimenter that prepared the subject for the experiment. 1 Steps 
can be taken, and are routinely taken, to remove sources of ambiguity 
and uncertainty in the experimental situation, so that one intentional 
interpretation of the text (button-pushings and the like included) is 
overwhelmingly dictated - has no plausible rivals. 
The upshot of this rehearsal of the obvious is that we can and 
routinely do prepare subjects of whom it can be assumed with 
confidence 

STUDYING 
HUMAN 
CONSCIOUSNESS 
EMPIRICALLY 
163 
(1) 
(2) 
that their noises (and other conventional acts) are inter- 
pretable as text 
that their text is interpretable (defeasibly, and to a first 
approximation, as we shall see) as a sincere and reliable 
(error-corrected) account of their current beliefs 
or 
opinions) 
Obvious though these results may seem at first glance, do they not 
already contradict my earlier claim that the method would not make 
any assumptions about the consciousness of such subjects? One 
might hold them to do that, on the grounds that only a conscious 
being can be held to have beliefs, and that performing speech acts is 
something only a conscious creature can do, but equally one might 
refrain from assuming there was any such necessary relation between 
consciousness and intentional interpretation, even between con- 
sciousness and the correct interpretation of some behavior as the 
performance of speech acts. That is what I choose to do. Since the 
prospect of zombies behaviorally indistinguishable from conscious 
beings is often advanced as a skeptical challenge to functionalistic 
theories of the mind such as my own (and such as the theories that 
typically are seen to undergird such fields as cognitive psychology), I 
shall adopt the tactic of conceding the possibility, and then point out 
that nothing in the method as so far described will uncover such a 
zombie amidst the conscious subjects, and hence zombiehood 
presents no obstacles to the process of text purification and inter- 
pretation so far described. This observation thus challenges the 
presumption of a necessary connection between intentional inter- 
pretation and consciousness; if there is such a necessary relationship, 
then, since some of our subjects might, for all we know so far, be 
zombies, we had better not speak of assumptions about the subjects' 
beliefs and desires and speech acts, but only of their apparent beliefs, 
desires and speech acts. From now on, then, when I speak of beliefs, 
desires, speech acts, and other intentional states and actions, under- 
stand my terms to be surrounded with cautious scare-quotes. 
Happily for us, there is an analogy at hand to help us remember 
what we are and are not assuming at this point in our investigation. 
Consider the particular sub-branch of hermeneutics that deals with 
the interpretation of fiction. Some texts, such as novels and short 

164 
DANIEL 
C. DENNETT 
stories, are known - or assumed in any event - to be fictions, but this 
does not stand in the way of their interpretation, but rather frees the 
hermeneuticist from certain distractions (about such difficult topics as 
truth, reference, and sincerity). This permits the flat dismissal of 
certain sorts of questions, and at least a crisp isolation and post- 
ponement of other difficult questions. I want now to consider some 
fairly familiar facts about the projects and principles of this area of 
literary criticism. It may even be a case of the Humanities lending a 
Helping Hand to Science. 
Consider the semantics of fiction. 3 A novel tells a story, but not a 
true story, except per accidens. In spite of our knowledge or assump- 
tion that the story told is not true, we can, and do, speak of what is 
true in the story. "We can truly say that Sherlock Holmes lived in 
Baker Street and that he liked to show off his mental powers. We 
cannot truly say that he was a devoted family man, or that he worked 
in close cooperation with the police" (Lewis, p. 37). What is true in 
the story is much, much more than what is explicitly asserted in the 
text, of course. It is true that there are no jet planes in Holmes' 
London (though this is not asserted explicitly or even logically 
implied in the text) but also true that there are piano tuners (though - 
as I recall - none are mentioned, or, again, logically implied). In 
addition to what is true and false in the story, there is a large 
indeterminate area: while it is true that Holmes and Watson took the 
11:10 from Waterloo Station to Aldershot one summer's day, it is 
neither true nor false that that day was a Wednesday ('The Crooked 
Man'). Lewis (and others) have a panoply of clever technical pro- 
posals to make about how to handle the formal semantics of fiction 
without embarrassment, but these proposals will not concern me 
directly, for while I am fascinated by them, I am not worried by the 
problems they are designed to solve. That is, perhaps some people are 
deeply perplexed about the metaphysical status of fictional people 
and objects, but not I. In my cheerful optimism I don't suppose there 
is any deep philosophical problem about the way we should respond, 
ontologically, to the results of fiction; fiction is fiction; there is no 
Sherlock Holmes. There are delicious philosophical problems about 
how to say (strictly) all the things we unperplexedly want to say when 
we talk about fiction, but as I say, these will not be my concern. 
What I want to draw attention to is the fact that the interpretation 
of fiction, the fleshing out of the story, the exploration, if you will, of 

STUDYING 
HUMAN 
CONSCIOUSNESS 
EMPIRICALLY 
165 
"the world of Sherlock Holmes", is undeniably do-able, with certain 
uncontroversial results. First, the exercise is not pointless or idle; one 
can learn a great deal indirectly about a novel, about its text, about its 
point, about the author, about the real world, by learning about the 
world portrayed by the novel. Second, if we are cautious about 
identifying and excluding what are clearly judgments of taste or 
preference (e.g. "Watson is a boring prig") we can amass a great 
volume of unchallengeably objective fact about the world portrayed. 
All interpreters agree that Holmes was smarter than Watson; in 
crashing obviousness lies objectivity. 
Third - and this fact is a great relief to students - knowledge of the 
world portrayed by a novel can be independent of knowledge of the 
text of the novel. I could probably write a passing term paper on 
Madame Bovary, but I've never read the novel - even in English 
translation. I've seen the BBC television series, so I know the story, I 
know what happens in that world. Facts about the world of a fiction 
are (of course) purely semantic level facts about that fiction; they are 
independent of the syntactical facts about the text (if the fiction is a 
text). We can compare the film West Side Story with Romeo and 
Juliet; by describing similarities and difference in what happens in 
those worlds, we see similarities in the works of art that are not 
describable in the terms appropriate to the syntactical or textual (let 
alone physical) description of the concrete instantiations of the 
fictions. One can describe what is represented in Madame Bovary 
independently of how the representing is accomplished. 4 (Typically, 
of course, one doesn't try for this separation, and mixes commentary 
on the world portrayed with commentary on the author's means of 
accomplishing the portrayal, but the separation is possible.) One can 
even imagine knowing enough about a world portrayed to be able to 
identify the author of a fiction, in entire ignorance of the text or 
anything purporting to be a faithful translation. Learning indirectly 
what happens in a fiction we might be prepared to insist: only 
Wodehouse could have invented that preposterous misadventure. We 
think we can identify sorts of events and circumstances (and not 
merely sorts of descriptions of events and circumstances) as Kaf- 
kaesque, and we are prepared to declare characters to be pure 
Shakespeare. Many of these plausible convictions are no doubt mis- 
taken, but not all of them. I mention them just to illustrate how much 
one might be able to glean just from what is represented, in spite of 

166 
DANIEL 
C. DENNETT 
having scant knowledge of how the representing is accomplished. 
Now let us apply the analogy to the problem facing the experimen- 
ter who wants to interpret the texts produced by his subjects. Let us 
consider the advantages of adopting the tactic of interpreting these 
texts as fictions of a sort, not as literature of course, but as genera- 
tors of a theorist's fiction. Just as the literary critic or hermeneuticist 
of fiction lets the text constitute a (fictional) world, a world deter- 
mined by fiat by the text, exhaustively extrapolated as far as 
extrapolation will go and indeterminate beyond, so our experimenter, 
whom I shall now call the heterophenomenologist, lets the subject's 
text constitute what I shall call the subject's heterophenomenological 
world. We can thus postpone the knotty problems about what the 
relation might be between that world with its fictional denizens, and 
the real world. Note of course that the literary trick that inspires us 
here need not be restricted to works intended as fiction by their 
authors; we can describe a certain biographer's Queen Victoria, or the 
world of Henry Kissinger, with blithe disregard of the author's 
presumed intentions to be telling the truth, and referring noncoin- 
cidentally to real people, living or dead. 
One obvious advantage - but not by any means the main one - of 
playing the heterophenomenological game is that one can thereby 
remain officially neutral about the zombie problem. Consider a novel 
written in the autobiographical mode, the tale of a fictional narrator. 
Just as the literary interpreter may describe for us the character of 
the fictional narrator of such a novel (the fictional "referent" of all the 
'Ts" and "me's" in the text - Holden Caulfield, for instance, or 
Ishmael) without addressing the question of whether or not this 
narrator is really the author, partly the author, or based on the author 
or any other real person, so the heterophenomenologist can compose 
detailed descriptions of the heterophenomenological subject, the 
logically constituted referent (or fictional "referent") of all the 'Ts" 
and "me's" in the text produced by some (apparently) human subject, 
while postponing the question of whether there really is any ego or 
subject or soul in there, as it were, for those pronouns to refer to. The 
particular point of view of the subject is an objectively extrapolatable 
abstraction about which much can be said independently of whether 
or not that point of view is, as we might say, inhabited. If our subject 
is a zombie, the point of view we define and describe by the 
heterophenomenological method is vacant, not occupied - there's 

STUDYING 
HUMAN 
CONSCIOUSNESS 
EMPIRICALLY 
167 
nobody home, you might say - but curiously enough this dire pros- 
pect (well, isn't it a dire prospect?) has no apparent bearing on the 
utility for theory of the construct. It will be perspicuous, no doubt, to 
describe much of what goes on in and with the experimental subject 
(the thing we are investigating) from the subject's point of view (from 
the heterophenomenological subject's point of view), whether or not 
there really is - as there appears to be - something it is like to be the 
subject in question. 
I am pleased to discover this tactical ploy made available by the 
analogy between heterophenomenology and the exegesis of fiction, 
and I shall make more of it later, but I view it as a by-product of the 
theoretically more useful suggestions to be found in the analogy. 
Once we have settled upon whatever portion of a subject's hetero- 
phenomenological world interests us, we must face the tremendously 
difficult question of what the relation is or could be between the 
events, objects, denizens of that world, and the events, processes, 
objects, and states inside the subject's body (in the brain, we 
generally suppose). Here we find guidance once again in the world of 
literary theory, but this time in a particularly embattled part of that 
world. There are beleaguered factions in the literary world who want 
to ask, and answer, questions such as the following. Upon what real 
person in the author's acquaintance is this character modeled? Is this 
character really the author's mother in disguise? What real events in 
the author's childhood have been transmogrified in this fictional 
episode? What awful memory drove the author to create this episode? 
What is the author really trying to say, or do? Then one can enter the 
fray on whether asking the author would be of any use in settling 
such questions - supposing one ought to ask him or her in the first 
place. There are those who insist that the author's opinions, candidly 
expressed or not, on such matters are well-nigh useless, and those 
who find that dogma well-nigh incredible. There are those who think 
such issues as the psychoanalysis of the author, and even the un- 
adorned biography of the author, are utterly irrelevant to the only 
questions that are appropriately posed about the object of Art. These 
controversies, so superficially portrayed by me here, nevertheless 
provide insights into the novel problems of interpretation facing the 
experimental student of consciousness. 
Whether or not such questions of biographical source are irrelevant 
to Art, they surely compose a perfectly possible inquiry that often 

168 
DANIEL 
C. DENNETT 
yields results. Maybe one shouldn't read novels as thinly veiled 
autobiographies of their authors, but one often can, thereby dis- 
covering a great deal about the author's life - more, often, than the 
author ever dreamt he was revealing. Sometimes, in fact, it can be 
very plausibly argued that an author, wanting (perhaps unconsciously) 
to tell the world about some remarkable event or person in his life, 
has been forced (perhaps unwittingly) to express himself allegorically, 
in effect. The only expressive resouces available - for whatever 
reason - to this author did not permit a direct, factual, un- 
metaphorical, recounting of the events he wished to recount; the 
fiction he composed is the compromise or net effect; it may be 
drastically reinterpreted (if necessary, over the author's anguished 
protests) to reveal a true tale, about real people and real events. 
Since, one may sometimes argue, it is surely no coincidence that such 
and such a fictional character has these traits, we may reinterpret the 
text that portrays this character in such a way that its terms can then 
be seen to refer - in genuine, non-fictional reference - to the traits, 
and actions of a real person. Portraying (fictional) Molly as a slut 
may quite properly be seen as slandering real Polly, for all that talk 
about Molly 5 is really about Polly. The author's protestations to the 
contrary may convince us, rightly or wrongly, that the slander is not, 
in any event, a conscious or deliberate slander, but we have been 
persuaded at last by Freud and others that authors, like the rest of us, 
are often quite in the dark about the deeper wellsprings of their 
(artistic) intentions. They often don't know why they want to say 
what they want to say. If there can be unconscious slander, there 
must be unwitting reference to go along with it. 
When we turn back, once again, to the interpretation of the texts of 
subjects in experiments, we know (or assume) they are doing the best 
they can to tell the truth, but might it not be that when it comes to 
fixing the real reference (if any) of the terms subjects use when 
portraying their heterophenomenological worlds for us, we might on 
occasion be justified in similarly usurping the authority of the author 
and reinterpreting texts to yield (sometimes true, sometimes reliable) 
accounts of "deep" or in any event inaccessible events and processes 
occurring within the heads of the subjects? For instance, suppose our 
subject describes a manipulation of mental images he has just per- 
formed. That is to say, the subject yields a text, which, by scrupulous 
heterophenomenological extrapolation, we get to yield a portrayal of 

STUDYING 
HUMAN 
CONSCIOUSNESS 
EMPIRICALLY 
169 
a heterophenomenological world in which various (fictional) things 
called mental images cavort in various ways. We theorists on the 
outside can talk about these images, give them names, describe their 
careers, just as readily as the critic can recount the adventures of 
Alyosha and Ivan. 6 Having obtained a clear view of these hetero- 
phenomenological objects, we then ask: but what - if anything - is 
our subject really talking about? Is there something really going on in 
him which behaves in such ways as to render it no coincidence that 
these are the ways he describes his mental images? Can we reinter- 
pret his text to refer to those internal events? Perhaps the subject's 
limited expressive resources are such that this is the only way he can 
put the matter - even to himself. 7 
This suggestion might benefit from a concrete, if partly science- 
fictional, 8 example of what I mean. A few years ago, there was a robot 
at SRI in Palo Alto named Shakey. 9 Shakey was a sort of box on 
wheels with a television eye and instead of carrying his brain around 
with him, he was linked to it (a large stationary computer) by radio - a 
dubious arrangement in my experience. Shakey lived indoors in a few 
rooms in which the only other objects were a few boxes, pyramids, 
and wedges. One could communicate with Shakey via a computer 
terminal, in a severely restricted vocabulary of semi-English. "PUSH 
THE BOX OFF THE PLATFORM" would send Shakey out, finding 
the box, locating a ramp so he could push the ramp into position so he 
could roll up the ramp onto the platform, and push the box off. Now 
how did Shakey do this? How, in particular, did Shakey distinguish 
boxes from pyramids with the aid of his television eye? 
The answer, in outline, was readily apparent to observers, who 
could watch the process happen on a screen. The original, grainy, 
television image of, say, a box would appear on the screen; the image 
would then be purified and rectified and sharpened in various ways, 
and then, marvelously, the boundaries of the box would be outlined in 
white - and the entire image turned into a line drawing. Then Shakey 
would analyze the line drawing; each vertex was identifiable as either 
an L or a T or an X or an arrow or a Y. If a Y vertex was 
discovered, the object had to be a box, not a pyramid; from no 
vantage point would a pyramid project a Y vertex. Shakey had a 
"line semantics" program for wielding such general rules to determine 
the category of the object whose image was on the screen. Watching 
the screen, observers might be expected to suffer a sudden dizziness 

170 
DANIEL 
C. DENNETT 
when it eventually occurred to them that there was something strange 
going on: they were watching a process of image transformation on a 
screen, but Shakey wasn't looking at the screen. Moreover, Shakey 
wasn't looking at any other screen on which the same images were 
being transformed. There were no other screens in the hardware, and 
for that matter the screen they were watching could be turned off or 
unplugged without detriment to Shakey's processes of perceptual 
analysis! Was this screen some kind of fraud? For whom was the 
screen? Only for the observers. What then was its point, and what 
relation did the events they saw on the screen bear to the events 
going on inside Shakey? 
The screen was for the observers, but the idea of the screeia"was 
also for the designers of Shakey. How could you get a computer to 
take a television camera input and yield box-identification as output? 
The signal coming from the television camera is a stream of zeroes 
and ones, each representing a cell of light or dark on the "retina" of 
the camera. Suppose, to oversimplify, the retina was a grid of 10,000 
cells: 100 by 100. Then a sequence of 10,000 zeroes and ones would 
encode a single frame, a timed sampling of the light falling on the 
retina. Now computers are designed to be fed streams of zeroes and 
ones, but what could a computer possibly do to such a stream to 
"figure out" that there was a box in front of the camera? Here is 
where the idea of the screen is valuable. Suppose we spread the 
stream out on another grid - our screen, in fact - in a hundred rows of 
a hundred, reading from left to right just like sentences in a book (and 
unlike commercial TV which does a zigzag scan). Notice that we can 
now specify, purely in terms of erasing and printing ones and zeroes 
in the stream, operations that would "purify" the image. We can 
heighten contrast, removing the salt from the pepper and the pepper 
from the salt, with operations such as these: 
(a) 
Erase any 1 with 7 or 8 adjacent 0s and print 0; erase any 0 
with 7 or 8 adjacent ls and print 1 
(Two-dimensional adjacency can be defined in terms of the position 
in the long sequence: the digits adjacent, in this sense, to the digit in 
position 374 are the digits in positions 273,274 (just "above" 374) 275, 
373 (just to the "left" of 374) 375, 473, 474, 475.) 
Then we can locate, and outline in white, the vertical light-dark 
boundaries by scanning for sequences of ls followed by sequences of 

STUDYING 
HUMAN 
CONSCIOUSNESS 
EMPIRICALLY 
171 
0s, followed precisely 100 positions later by another sequence of ls 
followed by a sequence of 0s, and so forth. Once such a boundary has 
been located, it can be turned into a crisp vertical white line by 
judicious erasing and printing so that something like 001100 occurs 
exactly every hundred positions in the sequence. Slopes and horizon- 
tal boundaries can be similarly found and outlined. That gives us the 
line drawing, and now we need to define templating operations that 
will similarly locate and distinguish the different varieties of vertex. A 
harder bit of mathematical design, but you can see roughly how to 
proceed. 
This final process yields a "judgment" about the geometrical cate- 
gory of the object being scanned. That is how Shakey tells the boxes 
from the pyramids. Shakey's brain is a computer, and more precisely 
avon Neumann machine, an elaboration of Turing's classical idea of 
a Turing machine. It is a linear, sequential computer, doing one thing 
at a time. In this instance, we can quite directly envisage its opera- 
tions in classical Turing machine terms: the printing and erasing of 0s 
and ls in an input sequence, but however the hardware is configured, 
the spatial properties of its operations are irrelevant or nearly so. (I 
suspect some recherch~ topological properties might inevitably be 
shared by the working hardware and the changing shapes on the 
screen.) Even though there is no actual image locatable in 3-space in 
the hardware, the operations in the hardware are strictly homomor- 
phic to the events we observed on the screen - and those were 
genuinely imagistic: of a particular size, color, location and orien- 
tation. So in one strict, literal sense, Shakey does not detect boxes by 
a process of image transformation; the last real image in the process is 
the one that is focussed on the receptive field of the camera. In another 
strict but metaphorical sense, Shakey does detect boxes by a process of 
image transformation. That this second sense is in some regards 
metaphorical can be brought out by noting the variety of questions one 
would expect to be answerable about images that are not answerable 
about the "images" processed by Shakey's hardware. They have no 
color, no size, no orientation, no clear location. 
Suppose now we indulge in a little science fiction, and cross Shakey 
with another famous character in artificial intelligence circles: Terry 
Winograd's SHRDLU, '° who manipulates (imaginary) blocks and then 
answers questions about what it is doing and why. An interchange 
with our new version of Shakey, redesigned to include a more 

172 
DANIEL 
C. DENNETT 
sophisticated repertoire of verbal actions, might go like this: 
Why did you move the ramp? 
SO I COULD ROLL UP ON THE PLATFORM, _ 
And why did you want to do that? 
TO PUSH THE BOX OFF. 
And why did you want to do that? 
BECAUSE YOU TOLD ME TO. 
But suppose we ask Shakey: 
How do you tell the boxes from the pyramids? 
What should we design Shakey to want to say in reply? Here are 
three possibilities: 
(1) 
I scan each 10,000-digit-long sequence of 0s and ls from 
my camera, looking for certain patterns of sequences, such 
as ... blahblahblah (a very long answer, if we let Shakey 
go into the details). 
(2) 
I find the light-dark boundaries and draw white lines 
around them in my mind's eye; then I look at the vertices; 
if I find a Y-vertex, for instance, I know I have a box. 
(3) 
I don't know; some things just look boxy or cubical to me; 
it's a sort of intuition, or gestalt, or boxy raw feel or 
something. It just comes to me. 
Which is the right sort of thing for Shakey to say? I suggest that all 
three answers get at a version of the truth, and which Shakey would 
say depends on what access we design Shakey's expressive capacity 
to have to his perceptual processes. Perhaps there will be good 
reasons (of engineering, say) to deny deep (detailed, time-consuming) 
access to the intermediate perceptual analysis processes - the pro- 
cesses that ultimately govern Shakey's speech act productions, n But 
whatever communicative and self-descriptive capacities we endow 
Shakey with, there will be a limit to the depth and detail of his 
expressible "knowledge" of what is going on in him, what he is doing. 
If the best answer he can give is a type (3) answer, then he is in the 
same position with regard to the question of how he tells pyramids 
from boxes that we are in when asked how we tell the word "sun" 
from the word "shun"; we don't know how we do it; one sounds like 
"sun" and the other sounds like "shun" - that's the best we can do. If 
Shakey can respond as in (2), there will still be other questions he 
cannot answer, such as "And how do you draw white lines on your 

STUDYING 
HUMAN 
CONSCIOUSNESS 
EMPIRICALLY 
173 
mental images?" Suppose we design Shakey to (want to) give (2)-type 
answers to our questions about his perceptual processes. Shakey says 
he processes images. Unbeknownst to him, we unplug and throw 
away the screen. Are we then entitled to tell him that we know 
better? He isn't really processing images, though he thinks he is? If he 
were a realistic simulation of a person he might well retort that we 
were in no position to tell him what was going on in his own mind! He 
knew what he was doing! If he were more sophisticated, he might 
grant that what he was doing might only be allegorically describable 
as image processing - though he felt overwhelmingly inclined so to 
describe what was happening. Of course if we are diabolical, we can 
rig Shakey to have entirely spurious ways of talking about what he is 
doing - to want to say things about what is going on in him that have 
no truth-preserving interpretation at all; Shakey is just confabulating. 
And that, finally, is the major reason for going to the roundabout 
trouble of treating heterophenomenology as analogous to the inter- 
pretation of fiction. It is beginning to emerge, from a wide variety of 
experiments, that people are often just wrong about what they are 
doing and how they are doing it. 12 It is not that they lie in the 
experimental situation, but that they confabulate; they make up likely 
sounding tales without realizing they are doing it; they fill in the gaps, 
guess, speculate, mistake theorizing for observing. They are, then, 
unwitting creators of fiction, but of course to say they are unwitting is 
to grant that what they say is, or can be, an account of exactly how it 
seems to them. They tell what it is like to them to solve the problem, 
make the decision, and since they are sincere (apparently) we are 
prepared to grant that that is - must be - what it is like to them, but 
then what it is like to them turns out to be a poor guide to what is 
really going on in them. 
In a recent exchange in Psychological Review this issue is presen- 
ted as a disagreement over the reliability of verbal reports as data for 
cognitive psychological theory. In 'Telling More than We Know: 
Verbal Reports on Mental Processes', (Psychological Review, 1977), 
Nisbett and Wilson summarize a host of experiments and studies that 
apparently unmask human subjects as inveterate confabulators about 
their thinking. The shocking, almost paradoxical conclusion seems to 
be that we don't even know our own thinking! We have, in Gunder- 
son's nice phrase, underprivileged access to our own mentation. 13 In a 
recent rebutting paper, 'Verbal Reports as Data', Anders Ericsson and 

174 
DANIEL 
C. DENNETT 
Herbert Simon argue that although there are indeed many circum- 
stances under which subjects' verbal accounts of their own in- 
formation processing are highly dubious and unreliable, there is a 
model available (which is consistent, by the way, with the less 
detailed model I sketched in 'Towards a Cognitive Theory of Con- 
sciousness') TM that permits the theorist to distinguish between the 
circumstances in which verbal reports will be reliable and the cir- 
cumstances in which they won't. While there is much in these papers 
that repays a philosopher's attention, and deserves philosophical 
comment, I will restrict myself here to one point. Both Nisbett and 
Wilson and Ericsson and Simon are shy about talking about con- 
sciousness. As is typical in cognitive psychology, it is almost as if 
there were a tacit agreement that human subjects were in fact talking 
zombies whose talk was being treated as symptoms of internal 
processing to be assessed for reliability. 
Since those internal processes are what the cognitive psychologists 
are interested in studying, this makes perfect sense. 15 If we ask, "But 
what about consciousness?" they can candidly reply without embar- 
rassment that they are ignoring consciousness, but they needn't say 
that. The heterophenomenological method permits them instead to 
say: we construct portions of the subject's heterophenomenological 
world, and then our question is: when and why do the things that 
happen in that world tell us the truth about the things that happen in 
the subjects' brains? The heterophenomological world we construct 
from the subject's verbal reports is an objective, outsider's view of 
that subject's consciousness (if he or she is conscious, of course!). It 
is guaranteed to be accurate because we can put it to the subject for 
corroboration; we can close the loop and permit the subject to revise, 
adjust, disavow, confirm, embellish, edit the text, producing new 
chapters ad lib, tintil the heterophenomenological world portrayed 
asymptotes in convergence with the subject's autophenomenological 
world (if there is one). Of course if our subject is a zombie, then this 
feedback loop just leads to what would better be described as either 
stabilization, or endless elaboration, of the merely heterophenomeno- 
logical world of that zombie. 
It is time to take stock of this examination of heterophenomenology 
before turning to autophenomenology and its particular mysteries. 
First, I must rush to issue a caveat about my account of Shakey. I do 
not mean to suggest that Shakey is a realistic model of human 

STUDYING 
HUMAN 
CONSCIOUSNESS 
EMPIRICALLY 
175 
perception, belief or (with his SHRDLU attachments) speech 
production. The system as described is only the crudest of sketches 
of the sorts of complex relationships that would have to exist in any 
good psychological model of these capacities. And in particular, I 
don't want to be understood as suggesting that the way in which 
Shakey's actual computing processes can be viewed metaphorically 
as image-processing is just like the way the brain's actual processes 
might be metaphorically described as image-processing. Brains may 
be computers, and hence in a mathematically powerful but mechanis- 
tically superficial sense, equivalent to Turing machines, but they 
surely do not have the machine architecture of a von Neumann 
machine. The example of Shakey was merely meant to illustrate in 
one way a larger possibility opened up for theorists to compose 
theories that are imagistic at one level of description, but not all the 
way down. 
At the outset I spoke of the metaphysical minimalism of 
the heterophenomenological method. This is what I meant: the 
heterophenomenologist 
describes 
a 
world, 
the 
subject's 
heterophenomenological world, in which there are various objects, in 
which things happen, but if we ask "What are these objects, and what 
are they made of"? the answer is "Nothing"! What is Mr. Pickwick 
made of? Nothing. Mr. Pickwick is a fictional object, and so are the 
objects described, named, mentioned by the heterophenomenologist. 
The heterophenomenologist takes himself - at the outset - to be 
speaking about nothing, but as we know from the example of literary 
interpretation, this can be an activity that is neither unprincipled nor 
pointless. Sometimes one can express useful and illuminating facts by 
speaking about things that are fictional. 
There is another way in which heterophenomenology is metaphy- 
sically minimal, or better: scientifically minimal. While it purports to 
be a way of characterizing the relationship between language and 
consciousness - that particular sort of consciousness that our 
pretheoretical intuitions and traditions suppose to be intimately con- 
nected with the capacity for language - it does this while being almost 
entirely non-committal about the actual nature, structure, and real 
properties of whatever-it-is we take ourselves to be talking about 
when we tell others how it is with us, what it is like to be us. That is, 
while this view treats of a phenomenon that is dependent upon the 
text-producing capacity of some organisms, it does not presuppose 

176 
DANIEL 
C. DENNETT 
that this real phenomenon is somehow itself linguistic, made out of 
words or sentences in the head, for instance. The public text 
produced by subjects, the text recorded and transcribed, is, of course, 
made out of words, but the heterophenomenologist is neutral with 
regard to the relation between this public text and the private (just in 
the sense of internal) representing which, we might say, it partially 
co-represents. Partial co-representation is the relation that an English 
translation bears to the original French text of Madame Bovary, but it 
is also the relationship that either of these texts bears to the film or 
videotape of Madame Bovary. When two representings represent the 
same (fictional) world, they are co-representations. Probably no two 
different representings - especially in different media - can portray 
exactly the same world; hence I speak of partial co-representation. 
Now some think that when we speak, our words of natural lan- 
guage are a sort of translation of sentences in our language of 
thought, but another possibility is that the relation of those public 
words to our private thoughts is rather more like the relation between 
those recent novelizations and the original films they are parasitic 
upon. No doubt there are other, better possibilities. John Maynard 
Keynes was once asked whether he thought in words or pictures. His 
reply, which the heterophenomenologist applauds, was "I think in 
thoughts". 16 Finding out what they might be is the next task, 
which the heterophenomenologist can attack from a starting point of 
studied neutrality. So far, his characterization of what happens in 
(heterophenomenological) consciousness is purely at the semantic 
level; it is an account of what is represented and tells us nothing yet 
about the structure or substance of the representing. This is not to say 
that the heterophenomenologist must remain forever neutral on this 
score; the hope, in fact, is that if one can just get a clear, detailed and 
well-confirmed description of what is represented, this will force 
constraints on hypotheses about how the representing must be done. I 
think Roger Shepard's brilliant experiments on mental imagery are 
best viewed in this light. 17 In showing how surprisingly rich and 
imagistic the heterophenomenology of some subjects - good imagers 
- 
is, he drives up the requirements on the representing machinery. 
Modest hypotheses about that machinery that looked plausible before 
his experimental explorations of the heterophenomenology of good 
imagers are now seen to be inadequate. 
A strikingly counterintuitive way of characterizing this side of 

STUDYING 
HUMAN 
CONSCIOUSNESS 
EMPIRICALLY 
177 
heterophenomenology's minimalism is to note that it is a "black box" 
psychology par excellence - like behaviorism! It does not hypothesize 
inner mechanisms at all, but achieves its organizational and predictive 
power by an indirect characterization of input-output relations - 
relations between all the publicly accessible variables we record and 
manipulate in the experimental situation. It does not, however, 
pretend to be the whole story - as some earlier black box theories 
unwisely purported to be - but rather a valuable prolegomenon to the 
whole story, a data-organizing phase of the whole scientific enter- 
prise. 
Now, 
finally, what 
of autophenomenology? Does 
the 
hetero- 
phenomenological enterprise, whatever its utility to science, sim- 
ply leave the real problems of consciousness untouched? John 
Searle, in rebutting my commentary on his attack on "strong" artificial 
intelligence, TM explicitly warns you not to let me hoodwink you with 
this hetero approach. "Remember", he admonishes, "in these dis- 
cussions, always insist on the first person point of view. The first step 
in the operationalist sleight of hand occurs when we try to figure out 
how we would know what it would be like for others" (p. 451). I guess 
you should have walked out at the beginning of my talk, if Searle is 
right, or shouted me down, but it is too late for that. Now have I 
tricked you? Why would I want to do a thing like that? 
Let 
us 
see 
if 
heterophenomenology 
is 
unfair 
to 
auto- 
phenomenology. First of all, as we have already noted, when you 
are put in the heterophenomenologist's clutches, you get the last 
word. You get to edit, revise and disavow ad lib, and what you insist 
upon is granted constitutive authority to determine what happens in 
your heterophenomenological world. You're the novelist, and what 
you say goes. What more could you want? Surely you know your own 
mind? That is to say, there is a lot of your mind that you don't know, 
as we are now discovering, but that is - by definition really - the 
unconscious part. The part you do know is the part you can tell us 
about. So tell us. We'll trust you. We won't trust you to tell us the 
truth about the processes occurring in you, and if you think you are 
authoritative about.them, you should think again, for no one has that 
sort of God-like infallibility to report on what is actually happening. 
But we do trust you to tell us just how it seems to you; we constitute 
you as an authority on that) 9 Of course if there are any cleverly 

178 
DANIEL 
C. DENNETT 
designed zombies around, who aren't really conscious, but whose 
unconscious text-producing capacities are so marvelously sophisti- 
cated as to create the illusion of a conscious subject, we will be taken 
in, and concede consciousness, with all its rights and privileges, to 
some undeserving nonentities. 
But now, finally, aren't we all a little old to be believing in zombies? 
What is it that these supposed zombies lack that we lucky ones 
enjoy? A soul, perhaps; an ego, a self. A something-it-is-like-some- 
thing-to-be. A locus of meaning, understanding, and value. Taking the 
last point first, why wouldn't a zombie be a locus of value? Why 
wouldn't a zombie be a member in good standing of the class of 
things with interests, with desires to be satisfied, projects to complete, 
harms to be protected against? Even the lowly lobster, however 
zombie-like we may suppose him to be, is cunningly organized to take 
self-regarding steps to prolong its own existence. When distributing 
good and ill, then, may not the utilitarian (for instance) count the 
lobster as a suitable, if modest, receptacle for some portion? Why not 
the zombie, then? Let us not be racists or speciesists. Some of your 
best friends may be zombies. 
I have been playing along with this zombie idea - for tactical 
reasons that should now be obvious - but in fact I think (in case you 
have not already guessed) that the concept is just incoherent. The 
idea of a being that could pass all the heterophenomenological tests 
but still be a merely unconscious automaton strikes me as simply 
bizarre. I don't know how to argue against it, however, beyond 
presenting the case I have just presented for heterophenomenology. 
This leaves a symmetrical standoff, however, for those who think the 
secret light of consciousness is untouched by my reflections are 
equally unforthcoming in support of their creed. 
What little more I can offer might best be considered to be 
sympathetic - if unasked for - therapy. Part of your problem, you 
who remain unpersuaded, is this: when I announce that the objects of 
heterophenomenol0gy are mere theorist's fictions, you are tempted to 
pounce on this and say, "That's just what distinguishes the objects of 
autophenomenology from the objects of heterophenomenology. My 
autophenomeno!ogical objects are perfectly real - though I haven't a 
clue what to say they are made of. When I tell you, sincerely, that I 
am rotating a mental image, or imagining a purple cow, I am not just 
unconsciously producing a word-string to that effect, cunningly con- 

STUDYING HUMAN CONSCIOUSNESS 
EMPIRICALLY 
179 
trived to coincide with some faintly analogous physical happening in 
my brain; I am consciously and deliberately reporting the existence of 
something that is really there! It is no mere theorist's fiction to me! I 
see it with my own eyes.., well, no, I see it in my mind's eye". 
But reflect more cautiously on this speech. You are not just 
unconsciously producing a word-string, you say. Well, you are un- 
consciously producing a word-string; you haven't a clue to how you 
do that, or to what goes into its production. But, you insist, you know 
why you're doing it; you understand the word-string, and mean it. I 
agree, but merely point out that understanding and believing a sen- 
tence heard (or heard in one's mind's ear) is not a matter of using the 
sentence as a sort of mental movie-projector which, when under- 
standing is achieved, produces a mental object, or displays a mental 
scene. That is a tempting but hopelessly wrong idea. Once one 
banishes it, the apparently striking difference between the objects of 
heterophenomenology and the objects of autophenomenology fades. 
Raskolnikov's dark brown hair, like the purple flank of the cow you 
imagine, does not exist. Consciousness is not a process that makes 
things; it is a state of being informed - or misinformed - about what 
is actually happening. 
Tufts University 
NOTES 
Not all button-pushing consists in speech acts, of course. Some may be make-believe 
shooting, or make-believe steering-rocket firing, for instance. 
z In 'How to Change Your Mind' in Brainstorms: Philosophical Essays on Mind and 
Psychology (Montgomery, Ut. Bradford Books, 1978) I adopt a conventional use of 
"opinion" that permits me to draw a sharp distinction between beliefs proper and other 
more language-infected states (which I call opinions). While I shall not presuppose 
familiarity with, or acceptance of, that distinction here, I do mean what I say here to be 
about both beliefs and what I call opinions in Brainstorms. 
3 There have been several very interesting articles on this topic recently. I am drawing 
particularly on David Lewis's, 'Truth in Fiction' American Philosophical Quarterly 15 
(1978): 37-46. See also Kendall Walton, 'Pictures and Make Believe', Philosophical 
Review 82 (1973): 283-319; 'Fearing Fiction', Journal of Philosophy 75 (1978): 5-27; 
and Robert Howell, 'Fictional Objects: How They Are and How they Aren't,' in D. F. 
Gustafson and B. L. Tapscott, eds., Body, Mind and Method (Dordrecht, Holland: D. 
Reidel Publishing Co., 1979), pp. 241-94. 
4 I discuss this in more detail in 'Beyond Belief' in Andrew Woodfield, ed., Thought 
and Object, (Oxford University Press, 1981). 
SYN 82-05-52 p. 21 

180 
DANIEL C. DENNETT 
5 "Molly-about", in Nelson Goodman's sense of Pickwick-about. See his 'About', Mind 
71 (1961): 1-24. 
6 See my 'Two Approaches to Mental Images', in Brainstorms for an earlier version of 
these claims. 
7 On the reasons why an intelligent creature's expressive or representational powers 
must be limited, see Douglas Hofstadter, G6del, Escher, Bach, an Eternal Golden 
Braid, (New York: Basic Books, 1979). 
8 Because I shall both oversimplify and embellish the description in the interests of 
clarity and vividness. 
9 See, e.g., Bertram Raphael's account of Shakey (of which he was one of the creators) 
in The Thinking Computer: Mind Inside Matter, Freeman, 1976. Today Shakey, minus 
his computer brain, sits, like Jeremy Bentham, in Nils Nilssen's office at SRI, where I 
paid him a sentimental visit in 1980. 
10 Terry Winograd, Understanding Natural Language (New York: Academic Press, 
1972). SHRDLU is discussed in Ch. 7 of Brainstorms, and in 'Beyond Belief' (loc. cit.). 
H See K. Anders Ericsson and Herbert Simon, 'Verbal Reports as Data', Psych. 
Review, 87 (1980): 215-50. 
72 See, e.g., R. Nisbett and T. DeC. Wilson, 'Telling More than We Know: Verbal 
Reports on Mental Processes', Psych. Review, 84 (1977): 231-59, and M. Gazzaniga and 
J. Ledoux, The Integrated Mind (New York: Plenum, 1978). 
13 Keith Gunderson, 'Asymmetries and Mind-Body Perplexities', in David M. Rosen- 
thai, ed., Materialism and the Mind-Body Problem (Englewood Cliffs, N.J.: Prentice- 
Hall Inc., 1971) p. 117. Gunderson seems to understand something slightly different by 
his use of the phrase. 
~4 In Brainstorms, Ch. 9, reprinted from C. W. Savage, ed., Perception and Cognition:, 
Issues in the Foundations of Psychology (Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press, 
1978). 
15 I argue that the proper domain of cognitive psychology is such internal processes 
and not the beliefs and desires of folk psychology in 'Three Kinds of Intentional 
Psychology', in R. Healey, ed., Reduction, Time and Reality, (Cambridge University 
Press, 1981). 
16 Reported to me by Isaiah Berlin, in conversation. 
17 See Roger N. Shepard and Lynn A. Cooper, Mental Images and their Trans- 
formations (Bradford Books, forthcoming) for an overview and discussion of these 
results. 
is See his 'Author's Reply' to the critics of his 'Minds, Brains, and Programs', in 
Behavioral and Brain Sciences (September, 1980): 417-58. 
19 Not quite an incorrigible authority. While your word is and must be in general the 
best source of information on how it seems to you, it is possible for you to be wrong 
even about this. See Raymond Smullyan, 'An Epistemological Nightmare', and the 
Reflections following it, in Douglas R. Hofstadter and Daniel C. Dennett, eds., The 
Mind's I (New York: Basic Books, 1981). 

