Artifactual selves: a response to Lynne Rudder Baker
Daniel C. Dennett
# Springer Science+Business Media Dordrecht 2014
Abstract Baker’s critique of my view of the self as a fiction captures some of its points
well but misses the possibility of a theorist’s fiction, like the Equator or a center of
gravity, which is not an illusion, but rather an abstraction, like dollars, poems, and
software—made of no material but dependent on material vehicles. It is an artifact of
our everyday effort to make sense of our own (and others’) complex activities by
postulating a single central source of meaning, intention, and understanding. This is
revealed in an example of the heterophenomenological method in action.
Keywords Narrative . Self . Fiction . Author. Abstraction . Heterophenomenology
Lynne Rudder Baker’s essay begins well, with an accurate and lively account of
my view that human bodies—more particularly, human brains—“spin selves” by
generating a narrative starring the self as a fictional character. But it somewhat goes
off the track when she fails to appreciate that it is a theorist’s fiction, not some idle
fantasy; it must pay for itself by being supremely useful to the various human beings in
the neighborhood who are trying to make sense of, and live peacefully with, the human
body whose brain is largely responsible for the spinning. I confess to not having made
this sufficiently clear, thinking that it was a clear implication of the role I give to the
intentional stance in predicting and explaining the complex behavior people are capable
of. Baker says that on my view “the self is a totally fictional character that emerges
from the story produced by component modules in the brain. The self—or the subject
of experience—is an illusion.” Not an illusion, really, any more than a center of gravity
is a “totally fictional entity” or an illusion. If you think of a center of gravity as more
concrete, more like an atom or subatomic particle than it is, then you are creating an
illusion for yourself, I guess. Similarly, if your conception of the Equator leads you to
be surprised and disappointed when no bright or dark line appears in the ocean or on
land where the Equator lies, you have fallen for a self-generated illusion of sorts. I
suppose I am in fact saying that those who think a self is like an organ or brain module,
made of something—if not matter, then ectoplasm or some such stuff—are succumbing
Phenom Cogn Sci
DOI 10.1007/s11097-014-9359-x
D. C. Dennett (*)
Center for Cognitive Studies, Tufts University, Medford, MA 02155, USA
e-mail: Daniel.dennett@tufts.edu

to an avoidable illusion, but setting such overly concrete, overly “realistic” views aside,
I see nothing illusory about selves as centers of narrative gravity. They are largely well-
behaved abstractions, no more illusory than dollars or home runs or other socially
constructed things. Perhaps a better comparison would be to software. Is software real,
or an illusion? To my amazement, I’ve discovered a serious philosopher who claims to
doubt the very existence of software! He doesn’t think Bill Gates should go to prison
for perpetrating a gigantic fraud; he recognizes that Windows, and Acrobat, and Safari .
. . are worth buying, worth using, etc., but they aren’t made of anything material, and in
that sense they are not real. I chide him: neither, then, are Shakespeare’s sonnets or
calculus. A self that is a center of narrative gravity is an entity with quite demanding
identity conditions and can have quite a robust biography. (Is Windows 8 really
Windows?) Baker also says this:
The brain itself cannot produce any character—fictional or not—unless the brain
is interpreted as an author (from the intentional stance). With no constraints on
interpretation of the brain as author, the narrative could just as well be interpreted
as having a real protagonist as a fictional one. If so, how would any genuine
project of interpretation get off the ground?
I have trouble with this passage. I had not meant to suggest that the brain (in whole
or part) was an author when I said it generated a narrative. What else, you may wonder,
could generate a narrative? Well, how about a tipsy gang of people playing some party
game in which players throw dice, then draw cards with words on them, and then
somehow negotiate a consensus narrative according to the rules of the game. Who’s the
author of that narrative? No single author, obviously (unless the game has been rigged
by somebody). Could a brain do something like that without being an author? Yes!
There could be a pandemonium architecture of brain circuits all “trying” to get certain
words, certain phrases, into the story, winning a few and losing a few, the whole
political process being constrained by the needs of the human body, its current
circumstances, etc., etc. You may doubt that much of a narrative could be generated
by such an authorless (but information-sensitive) process, but then you have a problem
that is rather the opposite of the infinite regress of interpreters Baker tries to lay at my
door: what is an author—a genuine intelligent, intentional author (like Updike or
Nabokov)—made of? What kind of parts? There is no way you could adopt the
intentional stance to a full-fledged person-level author unless the body in question
was controlled by sub-personal processes that bore a striking resemblance to the party-
game players: semi-understanding, myopic, competitive agents more or less unwitting-
ly generating a narrative without intending to do so. It is Baker’s insistence that nothing
but an author can create a narrative that generates the regress. (I don’t understand the
second and third sentence in the quotation from Baker above—I may have woefully
misinterpreted her.)
Another passage from her essay:
A theorist may provide a narrative interpretation of the neural activity of the
subject. But what neural activity? This procedure of beginning with neural
activity (from the physical stance) is the opposite of Dennett’s
heterophenomenology. Suppose that a theorist had a detailed video of the neural
D.C. Dennett

events going on in a particular brain. How would the theorist (who does not even
know when the brain is producing a narrative) be able to identify the neural
activity to be interpreted as producing a narrative with a fictional self—not to
mention how a theorist would know what story was being produced?
Baker’s incredulity is out of place here. Suppose the theorist has just given the
subject (the human being under hereophenomenological investigation) a problem to
solve:
Imagine you glued five cubes in a vertical stack and glued it upright to the floor;
Then you took two cubes—same size as the others—and glued them to the side
of the top cube in the stake, facing to your right; then took a single cube and glued
it to the right side of the middle cube in the stack. What would you have made?
And now name an animal and a US President that begin with that letter.
The subject will not find these tasks difficult, and, if probed, will say how first she
formed the cube assembly image “in her mind’s eye,” recognized it as a capital “F” and
was then able to perform the second task by consulting her memory and coming up
with FOX and FORD (or FILLMORE). Nothing contentious or mysterious here—I’m
deliberately choosing a dead-simple example. The subject’s public, recordable narration
purports to describe mental activities very recently conducted, and it is not implausible
to suppose that the heterophenomenologist could use such public narratives to map out
(at least temporarily—brains are very plastic) cortical activities corresponding hand-
somely to the F-construction, recognition and memory retrieval. One might be able to
tell that the subject neglected to divulge that she first followed the directions incorrectly,
putting the top element of the F facing left, and also thought of fawn and FDR, which
she rejected. In such a case, the experimenter could use details of neural events to
uncover some of the private narrative of the subject. Now these are not the most
interesting elements of a person’s subjective biography, but we can already identify
such simple contentful elements in carefully circumscribed experimental situations.
We shouldn’t expect the subject’s own convictions about what it was like to respond
to these requests to be entirely or straightforwardly born out in neural details. It is very
likely that our private narratives are as self-servingly idealized as the redacted portions
of them we release to the public. Moreover, our public avowals—on which
heterophenomenology depends—will tend to be schematized and laden with metaphors
we can’t unpack from a privileged vantage point. We have no choice but to rely on
imperfectly fitting characterizations of our experiences because we are obliged to couch
everything in the lingua franca of public language. “It’s ineffable!” we say, and we
mean it, and we’re right. But the thresholds of ineffability are variable, and we can train
ourselves to a surprising degree to delve deeper into our experiences, analyzing and
fractionating our “holistic”, “intrinsic”, “atomic” qualia into their otherwise non-
introspectible components.
The main reason I talk of the self as the center of narrative gravity is that I view it as
an artifact of our (mainly unselfconscious and innocent) efforts to solve the myriad little
problems of interpersonal activity we encounter every day, from the moment of our
birth. What begins with as-good-as-random babbling and gesturing is swiftly pruned by
the selective environment of reactions, of parents and other things, movable and
Artifactual selves: a response to Lynne Rudder Baker

stationary. We learn eventually how to express our wants, to tell Mother where it hurts,
and, as we grow more worldly, to dissemble, deceive, and conceal. Our abilities to
control all these highly sensitive, nuanced, and demanding activities develop uncon-
sciously, competences without explicit comprehension, generating what Erving
Goffman aptly called The Presentation of Self in Everyday Life, (1959). The only
alternative on offer to this vision of an emergent, virtual self is an extremely dubious
dualism of real (really real, I guess you could say) selves in real bodies, an idea that is
about as antithetical to a scientific understanding of mind as élan vital was to a
scientific understanding of life.
References
Goffman, E. (1959). The presentation of self in everyday life. New York: Anchor Doubleday.
D.C. Dennett

