1. Introduction
1.1. The puzzle of visual experience
What is visual experience and where does it occur?
It is generally thought that somewhere in the brain an in-
ternal representation of the outside world must be set up
which, when it is activated, gives us the experience that we
all share of the rich, three-dimensional, colorful world. Cor-
tical maps – those cortical areas where visual information
seems to be retinotopically organized – might appear to be
good candidates for the locus of perception.
Cortical maps undoubtedly exist, and they contain infor-
mation about the visual world. But the presence of these
maps and the retinotopic nature of their organization can-
not in itself explain the metric quality of visual phenome-
nology. Nor can it explain why activation of cortical maps
should produce visual experience. Something extra would
appear to be needed in order to make excitation in cortical
maps provide, in addition, the subjective impression of see-
ing.
A number of proposals have come forth in recent years
to suggest how this might come about. For example, it has
been suggested, from work with blindsight patients, that
consciousness in vision may derive from a “commentary”
system situated somewhere in the fronto-limbic complex
(taken to include the prefrontal cortex, insula and claus-
trum; cf. Weiskrantz 1997, p. 226). Crick and Koch (1990),
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (2001) 24, 939–1031
Printed in the United States of America
© 2001 Cambridge University Press
0140-525X/01 $12.50
939
A sensorimotor account of vision and
visual consciousness
J. Kevin O’Regan
Laboratoire de Psychologie Expérimentale, Centre National de Recherche
Scientifique, Université René Descartes, 92774 Boulogne Billancourt, France
oregan@ext.jussieu.fr
http://nivea.psycho.univ-paris5.fr
Alva Noë
Department of Philosophy, University of California at Santa Cruz, 
Santa Cruz, CA 95064
anoe@cats.ucsc.edu
http://www2.ucsc.edu/people/anoe/
Abstract: Many current neurophysiological, psychophysical, and psychological approaches to vision rest on the idea that when we see,
the brain produces an internal representation of the world. The activation of this internal representation is assumed to give rise to the
experience of seeing. The problem with this kind of approach is that it leaves unexplained how the existence of such a detailed internal
representation might produce visual consciousness. An alternative proposal is made here. We propose that seeing is a way of acting. It
is a particular way of exploring the environment. Activity in internal representations does not generate the experience of seeing. The out-
side world serves as its own, external, representation. The experience of seeing occurs when the organism masters what we call the gov-
erning laws of sensorimotor contingency. The advantage of this approach is that it provides a natural and principled way of accounting
for visual consciousness, and for the differences in the perceived quality of sensory experience in the different sensory modalities. Sev-
eral lines of empirical evidence are brought forward in support of the theory, in particular: evidence from experiments in sensorimotor
adaptation, visual “filling in,” visual stability despite eye movements, change blindness, sensory substitution, and color perception.
Keywords: action; change blindness; consciousness; experience; perception; qualia; sensation; sensorimotor
Kevin O’Regan moved to Paris in 1975 after studying
theoretical physics in England, to work in experimental
psychology at the Centre National de Recherche Scien-
tifique. After his Ph.D. on eye movements in reading he
showed the existence of an optimal position for the eye
to fixate in words. His interest in the problem of the per-
ceived stability of the visual world led him to question
established notions of the nature of visual perception,
and to recently discover, with collaborators, the phe-
nomenon of “change blindness.” His current work in-
volves exploring the empirical consequences of the new
approach to vision.
Alva Noë is a philosopher at the University of Califor-
nia, Santa Cruz. He received a Ph.D. in philosophy from
Harvard University and a B. Phil. from Oxford Univer-
sity, and he has been a Research Associate of the Cen-
ter for Cognitive Studies at Tufts University. He has
published articles on topics in the philosophy of per-
ception, philosophy of mind, and other areas, including
a previous Behavioral and Brain Sciences target article
on perceptual completion. He is currently at work on a
book on the relation between perception and action,
and he is a co-editor of Vision and Mind: Selected Read-
ings in the Philosophy of Perception (MIT Press, forth-
coming).

Llinas and Ribary (1993), Singer (1993), and Singer and
Gray (1995) suggest that consciousness might be correlated
with particular states of the brain involving coherent oscil-
lations in the 40–70 Hz range, which would serve to bind
together the percepts pertaining to a particular conscious
moment.1 Penrose (1994) and Hameroff (1994) suggest
that the locus of consciousness might be a quantum process
in neurons’ microtubules. Edelman (1989) holds that re-
entrant signaling between cortical maps might give rise to
consciousness. A variety of other possibilities that might
constitute the “neural correlate of consciousness” has been
compiled by Chalmers (1996b).
A problem with proposals of this kind is that they do lit-
tle to elucidate the mystery of visual consciousness (as
pointed out by, for example, Chalmers 1996b). For even if
one particular mechanism – for example, coherent oscilla-
tions in a particular brain area – were proven to correlate
perfectly with behavioral measures of consciousness, the
problem of consciousness would simply be pushed back
into a deeper hiding place: the question would now be-
come, why and how should coherent oscillations ever gen-
erate consciousness? After all, coherent oscillations are ob-
served in many other branches of science, where they do
not generate consciousness. And even if consciousness is as-
sumed to arise from some new, previously unknown mech-
anism, such as quantum-gravity processes in tubules, the
puzzle still remains as to what exactly it is about tubules that
allows them to generate consciousness, when other physi-
cal mechanisms do not.
1.2. What are sensory modalities?
In addition to the problem of the origin of experience dis-
cussed in the preceding paragraphs, there is the problem of
differences in the felt quality of visual experience. Why is
the experience of red more like the experience of pink than
it is like that of black? And, more generally, why is seeing
red very different from hearing a sound or smelling a smell?
It is tempting to think that seeing red is like seeing pink
because the neural stimulation going on when we see some-
thing red is similar to that underlying our perception of pink:
almost the same ratios of long, medium and short wave-
length photoreceptors will be stimulated by red and pink.
But note that though this seems reasonable, it does not suf-
fice: there is no a priori reason why similar neural processes
should generate similar percepts.2 If neural activity is just
an arbitrary code, then an explanation is needed for the par-
ticular sensory experience that will be associated with each
element of the code. Why, for example, should more in-
tense neural activity provoke more intense experiences?
And what exactly is the mapping function: is it linear, loga-
rithmic, or a power function? And why is it one of these
rather than another? Even these questions leave open the
more fundamental question of how a neural code could
ever give rise to experience at all.
Not very much scientific investigation has addressed this
kind of question. Most scientists seem satisfied with some
variant of Müller’s (1838) classic concept of “specific nerve
energy.” Müller’s idea, in its modern form,3 amounts to the
claim that what determines the particularly visual aspect of
visual sensations is the fact that these sensations are trans-
mitted by specific nerve pathways (namely, those originat-
ing in the retina and not in the cochlea) that project to par-
ticular cerebral regions (essentially, cortical area V1). It is
certainly true that retinal influx comes together in relatively
circumscribed areas of the brain, and that this may provide
an architectural advantage in the neural implementation of
the calculations necessary to generate visual-type sensa-
tions. But what is it about these pathways that generates the
different sensations? Surely the choice of a particular sub-
set of neurons or particular cortical regions cannot, in itself,
explain why we attribute visual rather than auditory qua-
lities to this influx. We could suppose that the neurons 
involved are of a different kind, with, say, different neuro-
transmitters, but then why and how do different neuro-
transmitters give rise to different experiences? We could
say that the type of calculation done in the different corti-
cal areas is different, but then we must ask, how could cal-
culations ever give rise to experience? The hard work is left
undone. Much still needs to be explained.
1.3. An alternative approach: The sensorimotor
contingency theory
The present paper seeks to overcome the difficulties de-
scribed above by adopting a different approach to the prob-
lem of visual experience. Instead of assuming that vision
consists in the creation of an internal representation of the
outside world whose activation somehow generates visual
experience, we propose to treat vision as an exploratory ac-
tivity. We then examine what this activity actually consists
in. The central idea of our new approach is that vision is a
mode of exploration of the world that is mediated by knowl-
edge of what we call sensorimotor contingencies. We show
that problems about the nature of visual consciousness, the
qualitative character of visual experience, and the differ-
ence between vision and other sensory modalities, can now,
from the new standpoint, all be approached in a natural
way, without appealing to mysterious or arcane explanatory
devices.
2. The structure of vision
As stated above, we propose that vision is a mode of explo-
ration of the world that is mediated by knowledge, on the
part of the perceiver, of what we call sensorimotor contin-
gencies. We now explore this claim in detail.
2.1. Sensorimotor contingencies induced 
by the visual apparatus
Imagine a team of engineers operating a remote-controlled
underwater vessel exploring the remains of the Titanic, and
imagine a villainous aquatic monster that has interfered
with the control cable by mixing up the connections to and
from the underwater cameras, sonar equipment, robot arms,
actuators, and sensors. What appears on the many screens,
lights, and dials, no longer makes any sense, and the actua-
tors no longer have their usual functions. What can the en-
gineers do to save the situation? By observing the structure
of the changes on the control panel that occur when they
press various buttons and levers, the engineers should be
able to deduce which buttons control which kind of motion
of the vehicle, and which lights correspond to information
deriving from the sensors mounted outside the vessel,
which indicators correspond to sensors on the vessel’s ten-
tacles, and so on.
O’Regan & Noë: A sensorimotor account of vision and visual consciousness
940
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (2001) 24:5

There is an analogy to be drawn between this example
and the situation faced by the brain. From the point of view
of the brain, there is nothing that in itself differentiates ner-
vous influx coming from retinal, haptic, proprioceptive, ol-
factory, and other senses, and there is nothing to discrimi-
nate motor neurons that are connected to extraocular
muscles, skeletal muscles, or any other structures. Even if
the size, the shape, the firing patterns, or the places where
the neurons are localized in the cortex differ, this does not
in itself confer them with any particular visual, olfactory,
motor or other perceptual quality.
On the other hand, what does differentiate vision from,
say, audition or touch, is the structure of the rules govern-
ing the sensory changes produced by various motor actions,
that is, what we call the sensorimotor contingencies govern-
ing visual exploration. Because the sensorimotor contin-
gencies within different sensory domains (vision, audition,
smell, etc.) are subject to different (in)variance properties,
the structure of the rules that govern perception in these
different modalities will be different in each modality.
A first law distinguishing visual percepts from perception
in other modalities is the fact that when the eyes rotate, the
sensory stimulation on the retina shifts and distorts in a very
particular way, determined by the size of the eye move-
ment, the spherical shape of the retina, and the nature of
the ocular optics. In particular, as the eye moves, contours
shift and the curvature of lines changes. For example, as
shown in Figure 1, if you are looking at the midpoint of a
horizontal line, the line will trace out a great arc on the in-
side of your eyeball. If you now switch your fixation point
upwards, the curvature of the line will change; represented
on a flattened-out retina, the line would now be curved. In
general, straight lines on the retina distort dramatically 
as the eyes move, somewhat like an image in a distorting
mirror.
Similarly, because of the difference in sampling density
of the retinal photoreceptors in central and in peripheral vi-
sion, the distribution of information sensed by the retina
changes drastically, but in a lawful way, as the eye moves.
When the line is looked at directly, the cortical representa-
tion of the straight line is fat in the middle and tapers off to
the ends. But when the eye moves off the line, the corti-
cal representation peters out into a meager, banana-like
shape, and the information about color is radically under-
sampled, as shown in the bottom right hand panel of Fig-
ure 1. Another law that characterizes the sensorimotor con-
tingencies that are particular to visual percepts is the fact
that the flow pattern on the retina is an expanding flow
when the body moves forwards, and contracting when the
body moves backwards. Visual percepts also share the fact
that when the eyes close during blinks, the stimulation
changes drastically, becoming uniform (i.e., the retinal im-
age goes blank).
In contrast to all these typically visual sensorimotor con-
tingencies, auditory sensorimotor contingencies have a dif-
ferent structure They are not, for example, affected by eye
movements or blinks. They are affected in special ways by
head movements: rotations of the head generally change
the temporal asynchrony between left and right ears. Move-
ment of the head in the direction of the sound source
mainly affects the amplitude but not the frequency of the
sensory input.
We therefore suggest that a crucial fact about vision is
that visual exploration obeys certain laws of sensorimotor
contingency. These laws are determined by the fact that the
exploration is being done by the visual apparatus.
In summary: the sensorimotor contingencies discussed
in this section are related to the visual apparatus and to the
way three-dimensional objects present themselves to the
visual apparatus. These sensorimotor contingencies are dis-
tinctive of the visual sense modality, and differ from the
sensorimotor contingencies associated with other senses.
2.2. Sensorimotor contingencies determined 
by visual attributes
Real objects have properties such as size, shape, texture,
and color, and they can be positioned in the three-dimen-
sional world at different distances and angles with respect
to an observer. Visual exploration provides ways of sampling
O’Regan & Noë: A sensorimotor account of vision and visual consciousness
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (2001) 24:5
941
Figure 1.
Top: The eye fixates the middle of a straight line and
then moves to a point above the line. The retinal stimulation
moves from a great arc on the equator of the eye to a different,
smaller great arc. Bottom left: Flattened out retina showing great
arc corresponding to equator (straight line) and off-equator great
arc (curved line). Triangles symbolize color-sensitive cone pho-
toreceptors, discs represent rod photoreceptors. Size of photore-
ceptors increases with eccentricity from the center of the retina.
Bottom right: Cortical activation corresponding to stimulation by
the two lines, showing how activation corresponding to a directly
fixated straight line (large central oblong packet tapering off to-
wards its ends) distorts into a thinner, banana shaped region, sam-
pled mainly by rods, when the eye moves upwards. As explained
in Section 2.2, if the eye moves along the straight line instead of
upwards, there would be virtually no change at all in the cortical
representation. This would be true even if the cortical represen-
tation were completely scrambled. This is the idea underlying the
theory that shape in the world can be sensed by the laws obeyed
by sensorimotor contingencies.

these properties which differs from sampling via other
senses. What characterizes the visual mode of sampling ob-
ject properties are such facts as that the retinal image of an
object only provides a view of the front of an object, and
that when we move around it, parts appear and disappear
from view; and that we can only apprehend an object from
a definite distance, so that its retinal projection has a cer-
tain size that depends on distance. Other characteristics of
visual exploration of objects derive from the fact that color
and brightness of the light reflected from an object change
in lawful ways as the object or the light source or the ob-
server move around, or as the characteristics of the ambi-
ent light change.
On the other hand, tactile exploration of an object, even
though it may be sampling the same objective properties,
obeys different sensorimotor contingencies: you do not
touch an object from a “point of view” – your hand can of-
ten encompass it more or less completely for example, and
you don’t apprehend it from different distances; its tactile
aspect does not change with lighting conditions.
There is thus a subset of the sensorimotor contingencies
that are engendered by the constraints of visual-type ex-
ploration, and which corresponds to visual attributes of
sensed objects.
Note that unlike the sensorimotor contingencies that are
visual-modality related, the sensorimotor contingencies that
are visual-attribute related do, nonetheless, have strong
links to the tactile sense: this is because attributes of three
dimensional objects can also sometimes be apprehended
via the tactile exploratory mode, where they present them-
selves as tactile shape, texture, size, distance. As shown elo-
quently by Piaget’s work, the observer’s conception of space
in general will also have strong links to the laws of sensori-
motor contingency discussed in the present section. Simi-
lar ideas were developed by Poincaré who wrote:
To localize an object simply means to represent to oneself the
movements that would be necessary to reach it. It is not a ques-
tion of representing the movements themselves in space, but
solely of representing to oneself the muscular sensations which
accompany these movements and which do not presuppose the
existence of space. (Poincaré 1905, p. 47)
A good illustration of sensorimotor contingencies associ-
ated with one particular kind of visual attribute, namely, vi-
sual shape, can be obtained from the records of patients
whose vision has been restored after having been born blind
with congenital cataract (cf. reviews by Gregory 1973; Jean-
nerod 1975; Morgan 1977). One such patient, cited by
Helmholtz (1909/1925), is surprised that a coin, which is
round, should so drastically change its shape when it is ro-
tated (becoming elliptical in projection). The fact that ob-
jects also drastically change in extent as a function of distance
is poignantly illustrated by the case of a 13–14 year old boy
treated by Cheseldon (1728; cited by Morgan 1977, p. 20):
Being shewn his father’s picture in a locket at his mother’s
watch, and told what it was, he acknowledged a likeness, but
was vastly surpriz’d; asking, how it could be, that a large face
could be express’d in so little room, saying, it should have
seem’d as impossible to him, as to put a bushel of any thing into
a pint.
These examples make us realize how second nature it is
for people with normal vision to witness the perspective
changes that surfaces undergo when they are shifted or
tilted, or when we move with respect to them. The idea we
wish to suggest here is that the visual quality of shape is pre-
cisely the set of all potential distortions that the shape un-
dergoes when it is moved relative to us, or when we move
relative to it. Although this is an infinite set, the brain can
abstract from this set a series of laws, and it is this set of laws
which codes shape.4 
Another example of how sensorimotor contingencies can
be used as indicators of visual attributes is illustrated in an
aspect of Figure 1 we have not yet mentioned. We saw in
the introduction that movement of the eye away from a line
creates a very strong distortion in its cortical and retinal rep-
resentation. Under the classical view of what shape per-
ception requires, it would be necessary to postulate that in
order to see lines as straight despite eye movements, a
transformation mechanism would have to exist that com-
pensates for these distortions. This mechanism would take
the cortical representation illustrated in the bottom right of
the figure, and transform it so the two dissimilar packets of
stimulated neurons shown in the figure now look identical.5
There would additionally have to be another cortical locus
where this new, corrected representation was projected. The
view presented here does away with these unnecessary steps.
Consider the following fact: if the eye moves along the
straight line instead of perpendicular to it, the set of pho-
toreceptors on the retina which are stimulated does not
change, since each photoreceptor that was on the image of
the line before the eye moves is still on the image after the
eye moves. This is due to an essential property of lines –
they are self-similar under translation along their length
(we assume, for simplicity, that the line is infinite in length).
Since exactly the same photoreceptors are being stimulated
before and after eye movement along the line’s length, the
cortical representation of the straight line is therefore iden-
tical after such a movement: there is this time no distortion
at all. Another interesting fact is that the argument we have
just made is totally independent of the code used by the
brain to represent the straight line. Even if the optic nerve
had been scrambled arbitrarily, or if the retina were corru-
gated instead of spherical, thereby causing the image of the
line to be wiggly instead of straight, or if the eye’s optics
gave rise to horrendous distortions, movement of the eye
along the line would still not change the pattern of cortical
stimulation. We see that this particular law of sensorimotor
invariance is therefore an intrinsic property of straight lines,
and is independent of the code used to represent them.
Platt (1960) has extended such considerations to other geo-
metrical invariants, and Koenderink (1984a) has considered
the more general, but related problem of how spatiotem-
poral contingencies in the neural input can be used to de-
duce intrinsic geometrical properties independently of the
code by which they are represented.
In general, it will be the case that the structure of the laws
abstracted from the sensorimotor contingencies associated
with flat, concave, and convex surfaces, corners, and so on,
will be a neural-code-independent indication of their dif-
ferent natures. In relation to this, some psychophysical
work is being done; for example, to determine the respec-
tive importance, in determining shape, of cues derived
from changes caused by movement of the object versus
movement of the observer (e.g., Cornilleau-Peres & Drou-
lez 1994; Dijkstra et al. 1995; Rogers & Graham 1979;
Rogers & Rogers 1992). Nonetheless, though it is inherent
in the approaches of a number of researchers (cf. sect. 3.3),
the idea that the laws of sensorimotor contingency might
actually constitute the way the brain codes visual attributes
O’Regan & Noë: A sensorimotor account of vision and visual consciousness
942
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (2001) 24:5

has not so far been greatly developed in the literature.
However, this idea is essential in the present theory.
2.3. Sensation and perception
Psychologists interested in perception have traditionally
distinguished between sensation and perception. While it is
difficult to make this distinction precise, perhaps its central
point is to differentiate between the way the senses are af-
fected by stimuli (sensation) and the results of categoriza-
tion of objects and events in the environment (perception).
It is worthwhile to note that our distinction between two
different classes of sensorimotor contingency roughly cor-
responds to this distinction between sensation and percep-
tion. Sensorimotor contingencies of the first sort – those
that are determined by the character of the visual appara-
tus itself – are independent of any categorization or inter-
pretation of objects and can thus be considered to be a 
fundamental, underlying aspect of visual sensation. Senso-
rimotor contingencies of the second sort – those pertaining
to visual attributes – are the basis of visual perception.
In this way we can interpret the present theory as at-
tempting to do justice to one of the working doctrines of tra-
ditional visual theory.
2.4. Perceivers must have mastery of patterns 
of sensorimotor contingency
Consider a missile guidance system allowing a missile to
home in on an enemy airplane. As the missile zigzags
around to evade enemy fire, the image of the target airplane
shifts in the missile’s sights. If the missile turns left, then the
image of the target shifts to the right. If the missile slows
down, the size of the image of the airplane decreases in a
predictable way. The missile guidance system must ade-
quately interpret and adapt to such changes in order to
track the target airplane efficiently. In other words, the mis-
sile guidance system is “tuned to” the sensorimotor contin-
gencies that govern airplane tracking. It “knows all about”
or “has mastery over” the possible input/output relation-
ships that occur during airplane tracking.
Now consider what happens when the missile guidance
system is out of order. The visual information is being sam-
pled by its camera, it is getting into the system, being reg-
istered, but it is not being properly made use of. The mis-
sile guidance system no longer has mastery over airplane
tracking.
We suggest that vision requires the satisfaction of two ba-
sic conditions. First, the animal must be exploring the en-
vironment in a manner that is governed by the two main
kinds of sensorimotor contingencies (those fixed by the vi-
sual apparatus, and those fixed by the character of objects).
Second, the animal, or its brain, must be “tuned to” these
laws of sensorimotor contingencies. That is, the animal
must be actively exercising its mastery of these laws.
Note that the notion of being tuned, or having mastery,
only makes sense within the context of the behavior and
purpose of the system or individual in its habitual setting.
Consider again the missile guidance system. If exactly the
same system was being used for a different purpose, say, for
example, as an attraction in a fun fair, it might well be nec-
essary for the system to have a different behavior, with scary
lunges and strong acceleration and deceleration which
would be avoided in a real system. Thus, “mastery” of the
sensorimotor contingencies might now require a different
set of laws.6 In fact even the out-of-order missile guidance
system has a kind of ineffectual mastery of its sensorimotor
contingencies.
2.5. Important upshot: A sensory modality is a mode 
of exploration mediated by distinctive 
sensorimotor contingencies
The present view is able to provide an account of the nature
and difference among sensory modalities. In the introduc-
tion we stressed the deficiencies of Müller’s (1838) view as
well as of its modern adaptation,7 according to which it is
supposed that what determines the differences between
the senses is some inherent characteristic of the neural
pathways that are involved: this view requires postulating
some special extra property which differentiates the neural
substrate of these pathways, or some special additional
mechanism, whose nature then stands in need of further
(and for now at least unavailable) explanation. The present
approach obviates this difficulty by saying that what differ-
entiates the senses are the laws obeyed by the sensorimo-
tor contingencies associated with these senses.8 Hearing
and audition are both forms of exploratory activity, but each
is governed by different laws of sensorimotor contingency.
Just as it is not necessary to postulate an intrinsic “essence”
of horseriding to explain why it feels different from motor-
cycling, it is similarly unnecessary to postulate a Müller-
type specific nerve energy to account for the difference be-
tween vision and other senses.9
The sensory modalities, according to the present proposal,
are constituted by distinct patterns of sensorimotor contin-
gency. Visual perception can now be understood as the ac-
tivity of exploring the environment in ways mediated by
knowledge of the relevant sensorimotor contingencies.And to
be a visual perceiver is, thus, to be capable of exercising mas-
tery of vision-related rules of sensorimotor contingency.
We shall see that this approach, in which vision is con-
sidered to be a law-governed mode of encounter with the
environment, opens up new ways of thinking about phe-
nomena such as synesthesia, the facial vision of the blind,
and, in particular, tactile visual sensory substitution, where
apparently visual experience can be obtained through ar-
rays of vibrators on the skin.
2.6. Visual awareness: Integrating sensorimotor
contingencies with reasoning and action-guidance
Thus far we have considered two important aspects of vi-
sion: the distinctively visual qualities that are determined
by the character of the sensorimotor contingencies set up
by the visual apparatus; and the aspect which corresponds
to the encounter with visual attributes, that is, those fea-
tures which allow objects to be distinguished visually from
one another. These two aspects go some way towards char-
acterizing the qualitative nature of vision.
We now turn to a third important aspect of vision, namely,
visual awareness.
Suppose you are driving your car and at the same time
talking to a friend. As you talk, the vista in front of you is im-
pinging upon your eyes. The sky is blue, the car ahead of
you is red, there is oncoming traffic, and so on. Your brain
is tuned to the sensorimotor contingencies related to these
aspects of the visual scene. In addition, some of these sen-
O’Regan & Noë: A sensorimotor account of vision and visual consciousness
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (2001) 24:5
943

sorimotor contingencies are also being used to control your
driving behavior, since you are continuously adjusting your
steering and adapting your speed to the moment-to-mo-
ment changes in the road and the traffic. But, since you are
talking to your friend, you do not attend to most of these
things. You do not notice that the car ahead is red, you do
not think about the sky being blue; you just drive and talk
to your friend.
You lack, as we shall say, visual awareness of many of the
aspects of the visual scene. For those scene aspects, you are
no different from an automatic pilot controlling the flight
of an airplane. Your behavior is regulated by the appropri-
ate sensorimotor contingencies, but you remain visually un-
aware of the associated aspects of the scene.
But if you should turn your attention to the color of the
car ahead of you, and think about it, or discuss it with your
friend, or use the knowledge of the car’s color to influence
decisions you are making, then, we would say, you are aware
of it. For a creature (or a machine for that matter) to pos-
sess visual awareness, what is required is that, in addition to
exercising the mastery of the relevant sensorimotor contin-
gencies, it must make use of this exercise for the purposes
of thought and planning.10
When you not only visually track an environmental fea-
ture by exercising your knowledge of the relevant sensori-
motor contingencies, but in addition integrate this exercise
of mastery of sensorimotor contingencies with capacities
for thought and action-guidance, then you are visually
aware of the relevant feature. Then, we say, you see it.
Consider an important point about this view of what vi-
sual awareness is, namely that our possession of it is a mat-
ter of degree. In particular, in our view, all seeing involves
some degree of awareness, and some degree of unaware-
ness. For example, if you were to probe an unaware driver
waiting at the light, there would probably be some aspects
of the red light that were at least indirectly being integrated
into the driver’s current action-guidance, rational reflec-
tion and speech. Perhaps, though not noticing the light’s
redness, the fact that the light was red may make him real-
ize that he was going to be late. Or, though not noting that
the light was red, the driver could be noting that it was dif-
ficult to see because the sky was too bright. On the other
hand, even the driver who was aware of seeing the red light
may not have been aware of all its aspects, for example, that
the shape of the light was different from usual. A visual
stimulus has a very large (perhaps infinite) number of at-
tributes, and only a small number can at any moment be
influencing one’s action-guidance, rational reflection, and
speech behavior.
A further important fact about this account of visual
awareness is that it treats awareness as something nonmag-
ical. There is no need to suppose that awareness and seeing
are produced by the admixture of some mysterious addi-
tional element. To see is to explore one’s environment in a
way that is mediated by one’s mastery of sensorimotor con-
tingencies, and to be making use of this mastery in one’s
planning, reasoning, and speech behavior.
2.7. Visual consciousness and experience: 
Forms of awareness
It may be argued that there is still something missing in the
present account of vision, namely, an explanation of visual
consciousness, or of the phenomenal experience of vision.
Although there is a great deal of disagreement among phi-
losophers about these notions, there is broad consensus,
first, that seeing involves experience in the sense that there
is something it is like to see, and second, that it is somehow
mysterious how we can possibly explain this subjective
character of experience, or, as it is sometimes put, the “raw
feel” or the “qualia” of vision, in neural or other physical
terms. Is there any reason to believe the sensorimotor con-
tingency approach can succeed here where others have
failed?
We will return to some of these issues in section 6 of this
paper. For now, let us note that the present sensorimotor
contingency framework would seem to allow for the expla-
nation and clarification, and certainly, for the scientific
study of a good deal of what makes for the subjective char-
acter of experience. Thus, one important dimension of what
it is like to see is fixed by the fact that there is a lawful rela-
tion of dependence between visual stimulation and what we
do, and this lawful relation is determined by the character
of the visual apparatus. A second crucial feature that con-
tributes to what it is like to see is the fact that objects, when
explored visually, present themselves to us as provoking
sensorimotor contingencies of certain typically visual kinds,
corresponding to visual attributes such as color, shape, tex-
ture, size, hidden and visible parts. Together, these first two
aspects of seeing, namely, the visual-apparatus-related sen-
sorimotor contingencies and the visual-object-related sen-
sorimotor contingencies, are what make vision visual,
rather than, say, tactile or auditory. Once these two aspects
are in place, the third aspect of seeing, namely, visual
awareness, would seem to account for just about all the rest
of what goes into making up the character of seeing. For, vi-
sual awareness is precisely the availability of the kinds of
features and processes making up the first two aspects for
the purposes of control, thought, and action.
As said, the question of visual experience and conscious-
ness is extremely controversial, and we will defer further
discussion of our view until section 6.
3. Refinements of the view
Vision, we argue, requires knowledge of sensorimotor con-
tingencies. To avoid misunderstanding, it is necessary to
discuss this claim in greater detail.
3.1. Knowledge of sensorimotor contingencies is a
practical, not a propositional form of knowledge
Mastery of the structure of the rules is not something about
which we (in general) possess propositional knowledge. For
example, we are not able to describe all the changes that a
convex surface should suffer, or the distortions that should
occur, upon moving our eyes to all sorts of positions on the
surface, or when we move or rotate it. Nevertheless, our
brains have extracted such laws, and any deviation from the
laws will cause the percept of the surface’s shape to be mod-
ified. Thus, for example, our brains register the fact that the
laws associated with normal seeing are not being obeyed
when, for example, we put on a new pair of glasses with a
different prescription: for a while, distortions are seen
when the head moves (because eye movements provoke
displacements of unusual amplitudes); or when we look into
a fish tank (now moving the head produces unusual kinds
O’Regan & Noë: A sensorimotor account of vision and visual consciousness
944
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (2001) 24:5

of distortions), or dream or hallucinate (now blinking, for
instance, has no effect). Our impression in such cases is
that, then, something unusual is happening.
3.2. Mastery must be currently exercised
Another important condition that we need to impose for
sensorimotor contingencies to properly characterize vision,
is that the mastery of laws of sensorimotor contingency be
exercised now. The reason we need this condition is the fol-
lowing.
Over the course of life, a person will have encountered
myriad visual attributes and visual stimuli, and each of these
will have particular sets of sensorimotor contingencies as-
sociated with it. Each such set will have been recorded and
will be latent, potentially available for recall: the brain thus
has mastery of all these sensorimotor sets. But when a par-
ticular attribute is currently being seen, then the particular
sensorimotor contingencies associated with it are no longer
latent, but are actualized, or being currently made use of.
In the language of the missile guidance system: the system
may have stored programs that are applicable to the task of
following different kinds of planes with different speed and
turning characteristics. All these programs are latent, and
the system has mastery of them all. But it is only when the
system is following a particular type of plane, that it invokes
and follows the particular recipe for that plane.
Again: among all previously memorized action recipes
that allow you to make lawful changes in sensory stimula-
tion, only some are applicable at the present moment. The
sets that are applicable now are characteristic of the visual
attributes of the object you are looking at, and their being
currently exercised constitutes the fact of your visually per-
ceiving that object.
3.3. Historical note: Relation to other similar ideas
Consider the following analogy with haptic perception, sug-
gested by MacKay (1962; 1967; 1973). Suppose you are a
blind person holding a bottle with your hand. You have the
feeling of holding a bottle, you feel the bottle. But what sen-
sations do you really have? Without slight rubbing of the
skin, tactile information is considerably reduced, and even
temperature sensation will, through adaptation of the re-
ceptors, disappear after you have held the bottle for a while.
In fact therefore, you may well have very little sensory stim-
ulation coming from the bottle at the present instant. Yet,
you actually have the feeling of “having a bottle in your
hand” at this moment. This is because your brain is “tuned”
to certain potentialities: if you were to slide your hand very
slightly, a change would come about in the incoming sen-
sory signals which is typical of the change associated with
the smooth, sliding surface of glass. Furthermore, if you
were to move your hand upwards, the size of what you are
encompassing with your hand would diminish (because you
are moving onto the bottle’s neck), and if you were to move
downwards, your tactile receptors would respond to the
roughness coming from the transition from glass to the pa-
per label.
MacKay suggests that seeing a bottle is an analogous state
of affairs.11 You have the impression of seeing a bottle if
there is knowledge in your nervous system concerning a
certain web of contingencies. For example, you have knowl-
edge of the fact that if you move your eyes up towards the
neck of the bottle, the sensory stimulation will change in a
way typical of what happens when a narrower region of the
bottle comes into foveal vision; you have knowledge ex-
pressing the fact that if you move your eyes downwards, the
sensory stimulation will change in a way typical of what hap-
pens when the white label is fixated by central vision. Sim-
ilarly, motions of an object created by manual manipulation
can be part of what visually differentiates objects from one
another. Unlike a bottle, an object like a pitcher with a han-
dle can be rotated and the handle made to appear and dis-
appear behind the body of the pitcher. It is the possibility
of doing this which is indicative of the fact that this is a
pitcher and not a bottle. The visual nature of pitchers in-
volves the knowledge that there are things that can be done
to them which make a protrusion (the handle) appear and
disappear.
Ryle (1949/1990) has made similar points. He says of a
person contemplating a thimble:
Knowing how thimbles look, he is ready to anticipate, though
he need not actually anticipate, how it will look, if he ap-
proaches it, or moves away from it; and when, without having
executed any such anticipations, he does approach it, or move
away from it, it looks as he was prepared for it to look. When
the actual glimpses of it that he gets are got according to the
thimble recipe, they satisfy his acquired expectation-propensi-
ties; and this is his espying the thimble. (p. 218)
Other authors have, over the last decades, expressed sim-
ilar views. Hochberg (1968, p. 323), for example, in the con-
text of his notion of schematic maps, refers to: “the program
of possible samplings of an extended scene, and of contin-
gent expectancies of what will be seen as a result of those
samplings,” and Sperry (1952) has the notion of “implicit
preparation to respond.” These ideas are also related to
Neisser’s (1976) perceptual cycle, to Noton and Stark’s
(1971) “scanpath” theory, and were also put forward in
O’Regan (1992) in relation to the notion of the “world as an
outside memory.” Although, as noted by Wagemans and de
Weert (1992), Gibson’s notion of “affordance” (see Gibson
1982b; Kelso & Kay 1987; Turvey et al. 1981) is sometimes
considered “mystical,” it is undoubtedly strongly related to
our present approach (on this, see Noë 2002). The impor-
tance of action in perception has been stressed by Paillard
(1971; 1991) and Berthoz (1997). Similar notions have also
been found useful in “active vision” robotics (Ballard et al.
1997; Brooks 1987; 1991). Thomas (1999), in an excellent
review, has advocated an “active perception” approach to
perception and visual imagery, which corresponds very
closely to our second, object-related type of sensorimotor
contingency.
Another related viewpoint is to be found in the work of
Maturana and Varela (1987/1992). Maturana and Varela
also emphasize the importance of sensorimotor coupling
for understanding the structure of the animal’s cognitive
and perceptual capacities, as well as for understanding the
organization of the nervous system. Varela et al. (1991) pre-
sent an “enactive conception” of experience according to
which experience is not something that occurs inside the
animal, but is something the animal enacts as it explores the
environment in which it is situated (see also Noë et al. 2000;
Pessoa et al. 1998; Thompson 1995; Thompson et al. 1992).
A related approach has been put forward by Järvilehto
(1998a; 1998b; 1999; 2000), who, in a series of articles with
an approach very similar to ours,12 stresses that perception
is activity of the whole organism-environment system.
O’Regan & Noë: A sensorimotor account of vision and visual consciousness
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (2001) 24:5
945

All these views of what it is to see – particularly MacKay’s
and Ryle’s, – are based on the same notion of sensorimotor
contingency that is so central to the view we are proposing
in the present article. MacKay’s work, especially, was the
main source of inspiration of our theory. However, it should
be emphasized that our view contains several novel ele-
ments not to be found in the works of these authors.
The first point we have stressed is that there is an im-
portant distinction to be made between the two classes of
sensorimotor contingencies, those which are particular to
the visual apparatus, and those which are particular to the
way objects occupy three-dimensional space and present
themselves to the eye. Most of the researchers cited in the
previous paragraphs have been concerned mainly with the
sensorimotor contingencies associated with visual object at-
tributes. An exception may be the case of Gibson, who con-
sidered the more apparatus-related sensorimotor contin-
gencies in different terms. In any case, it seems to us that it
is mainly, though not exclusively, through these latter con-
tingencies that we can give a principled account of the qual-
itative differences in the experienced phenomenology of the
different sensory modalities, thereby providing a more
principled alternative to Müller’s notion of “specific nerve
energy.”
A second innovative point in our approach will become
more evident in section 6. We shall see that by taking the
stance that the experience of vision is actually constituted
by a mode of exploring the environment, we escape having
to postulate magical mechanisms to instill experience into
the brain.13
4. The world as an outside memory
4.1. The world as an outside memory
Under the present theory, visual experience does not arise
because an internal representation of the world is activated
in some brain area. On the contrary, visual experience is a
mode of activity involving practical knowledge about cur-
rently possible behaviors and associated sensory conse-
quences. Visual experience rests on know-how, the posses-
sion of skills.
Indeed, there is no “re”-presentation of the world inside
the brain: the only pictorial or 3D version required is the
real outside version. What is required, however, are meth-
ods for probing the outside world – and visual perception
constitutes one mode via which it can be probed. The ex-
perience of seeing occurs when the outside world is being
probed according to the visual mode, that is, when the
knowledge being accumulated is of the three kinds de-
scribed above, that are typical of the visual modality.
Thus, as argued in O’Regan (1992), it could be said that
the outside world acts as an external memory that can be
probed at will by the sensory apparatus.
To further clarify this, it is useful to make the relation
with normal memory. You know many things about where
you live. But as you sit in your office, you may not be think-
ing about them. If you should start doing so, you can con-
jure up in your mind all manner of things. Each thing can
be thought about in detail, but meanwhile, the other things,
though latent, are not being thought about. As you think
about your kitchen, your bedroom is not in your mind,
though you can cause it to come to mind by merely think-
ing about it. Remembering is casting one’s awareness onto
parts of latent memories.
Similarly, seeing is casting one’s awareness onto aspects
of the outside world made available by the visual apparatus.
As you look at a visual scene, you can interrogate yourself
about different aspects of the scene. As soon as you do so,
each thing you ask yourself about springs into awareness,
and is perceived – not because it enters into a cortical rep-
resentation, but because knowledge is now available about
how sensations will change when you move your eyes, or
move the object. However, before you actually wonder
about some aspect of the scene, although the information
is “out there,” and although you know you can obtain it by
making the appropriate eye movement or attention shift, it
is not currently available. It is not currently available for be-
ing visually “chewed upon” or “manipulated,” and cannot at
this moment be used to control judgments and utterances:
the third, “awareness” aspect of seeing is missing. Thus,
even though the image of the object is impinging upon your
retina, and even if its aspects are being analyzed by the fea-
ture-extracting modules of your visual system, under the
current theory of seeing we must say that the object is not
actually being seen.
As will be described in section 5, this way of thinking
about vision brings with it a number of consequences about
some classic problems related to the apparent stability of
the visual world despite eye movements, and to the prob-
lem of “filling-in” or compensating for “imperfections” of
the visual apparatus such as the blind spot. It also provided
the impetus for the change-blindness experiments de-
scribed in section 5.10.
4.2. The impression of seeing everything
A rather counter-intuitive aspect of the world-as-outside-
memory idea, and the associated notion that there is no pic-
ture-like internal representation of the outside world, is
that, in a certain sense, only what is currently being pro-
cessed is being “seen.” How then, – if at any moment only
a small fragment of the world is actually being seen, – could
we ever have that strong subjective impression that we con-
tinually have of seeing “everything”?
As pointed out by Noë et al. (2000) and Noë (2001), this
paradox is actually only apparent, and rests on a misun-
derstanding of what seeing really is. It is true that normal
perceivers take themselves to be aware of a detailed envi-
ronment. But what this means is that they perceive the en-
vironment surrounding them as detailed. It does not mean
that they think that inside their brains there is a detailed
copy of the environment. It is only those perceivers – and
there are many scientists among them – who make the mis-
take of thinking that “seeing” consists of making such a
copy, who are led to think there is a problem.
Another way of understanding why our visual phenome-
nology is of seeing everything in front of us, derives from
the fact that since the slightest flick of the eye or attention
allows any part of a visual scene to be processed at will, we
have the feeling of immediate availability about the whole
scene. In other words, despite the fact that we are only cur-
rently processing a small number of details of the scene, un-
der the present definition of seeing, we really are seeing the
whole scene.
Suppose you should ask yourself, “Am I currently con-
O’Regan & Noë: A sensorimotor account of vision and visual consciousness
946
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (2001) 24:5

sciously seeing everything there is to see in the scene?”
How could you check that you were seeing everything? You
would check by casting your attention on each element of
the scene, and verify that you have the impression of con-
sciously seeing it. But obviously as soon as you do cast your
attention on something, you see it. Conclusion, you will al-
ways have the impression of consciously seeing everything,
since everything you check on, you see. There is an inter-
esting and unfortunate consequence of this: If for some rea-
son you should not be able to mentally attend to some as-
pect of the scene, you will not be able to consciously see it.
Some empirical examples of this are given in sections 5.10–
5.12.
One could make the amusing analogy, referred to by
Thomas (1999), of the refrigerator light. It seems to be al-
ways on. You open the refrigerator: it’s on. You close the re-
frigerator, and then open it again to check, the light’s still
on. It seems like it’s on all the time! Similarly, the visual field
seems to be continually present, because the slightest flick
of the eye, or of attention, renders it visible. Brooks (1991)
has said that the world should be considered as its own best
model, and Minsky (1988) has suggested the notion of “im-
manence illusion” in a similar vein.
4.3. Vividness through transients
In addition to the “slightest flick of attention” argument
there is another, very important, factor which explains the
particular vividness of the feeling we have of a rich external
visual presence. The visual system is particularly sensitive
to visual transients (Breitmeyer & Ganz 1976; Stelmach et
al. 1984; Tolhurst 1975). When a visual transient occurs, an
automatic, “alerting” or “attention-grabbing” mechanism
appears to direct processing to the location14 where the
transient occurred (Theeuwes 1991; Yantis 1998). This
means that should anything happen in the environment, we
will generally consciously see it, since processing will be di-
rected to it. This gives us the impression of “having tabs” on
everything that might change, and so, of consciously seeing
everything. Were there not the attention-grabbing mecha-
nism, our visual impression would be more similar to the
impression we have when we stand with our backs to a
precipice: we keenly feel it is there, we know that we can
turn and see more of the precipice, but the feeling of pres-
ence is much less vivid than when we are actually looking
into the precipice. The knowledge of having tabs on any
change that might occur in the visual field – the fact that
we know any change will attract our attention, – is another
thing that makes the “outside memory” providing vision dif-
ferent from other forms of memory. For, any change in the
visual field is immediately visible to you; whereas if, say, a
Latin noun drops out of your memory overnight, no whis-
tle will blow to let you know!
4.4. Dreaming and mental imagery
It is often claimed that dreaming, or other types of mental
imagery, provide a counterexample to our denial that the
brain must represent what is seen. Since dreams and men-
tal images are apparently pictorial in nature, this seems to
show that we are, after all, capable of creating an internal
iconic image. Penfield’s classic observations (e.g., Penfield
& Jasper 1954) of visual memories being created by stimu-
lation of visual cortex might also be thought to indicate that
there are internal pictorial representations.
It is easy to be misled by these arguments, which for
some reason are peculiarly compelling. But it is important
to appreciate that they are misleading. Whether dreams,
hallucination, or normal vision are at stake, these argu-
ments are another instance of the error of thinking that
when we see things as picture-like (be it when we look at
reality or when we have a dream), this must be because
there is some kind of internal picture. But this is as mis-
guided as the supposition that to see red, there must be red
neurons in the brain. The supposed fact that things appear
pictorial to us in no way requires there to be pictures in the
head. Therefore, the fact that we dream, hallucinate, and
imagine does not provide evidence in favor of the view that
the brain contains pictures of the detailed environment.15
A corollary of this confusion about dreams and mental
imagery is the idea, expressed by a number of authors (e.g.,
Farah 1989; Kosslyn 1994; Zeki 1993) that feedback from
higher brain areas into the retinotopic cortical map of area
V1 would be a good way of creating mental imagery. This
argument is somewhat misleading. It could be taken to be
based on the implicit assumption that mental imagery oc-
curs because of activation in V1: the topographic, metric
layout of V1 would make it a good candidate for the corti-
cal areas that possess what Zeki (1993) has called an “expe-
riential” quality – that is, the capacity to generate experi-
ence. But again, the metric quality of V1 cannot in any way
be the cause for the metric quality of our experience. It is
as though, in order to generate letters on one’s screen, the
computer had to have little letters floating around in its
electronics somewhere.
There may also be a second confusion at work in the ar-
gument from dreaming that we are considering. We have
already noted that it does not follow from the fact that
dreams are pictorial that, when we dream, there are pic-
tures in the head. But do we really have reason to believe
that dreams are pictorial? People certainly do say that they
are. But does this give us reason to believe it is so? Just as
we have observed that the idea that seeing is pictorial re-
flects a kind of naïve phenomenology of vision, it may very
well be that the claim that dreaming is pictorial is similarly
ill-founded phenomenologically. Certainly it is not the case
that when we dream, it is as if we were looking at pictures.
A hallmark of dream-like experiences is the unstable and
seemingly random character of dreamt detail. For example,
the writing on the card is different every time you look at it
in the dream.16 This suggests that without the world to
serve as its own external model, the visual system lacks the
resources to hold an experienced world steady.
4.5. Seeing without eye movements
Under the theory presented here, seeing involves testing
the changes that occur through eye, body, and attention
movements. Seeing without such movements is, under the
theory, a subspecies of seeing: an exception. This would ap-
pear to be a rather dissident claim, given that psychologists
studying visual perception have devoted a significant part
of their energy precisely to the use of tachistoscopic stimu-
lus presentation techniques, where stimuli are displayed for
times shorter than the saccadic latency period of about 150
msec required for an eye movement to occur. Indeed, the
O’Regan & Noë: A sensorimotor account of vision and visual consciousness
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (2001) 24:5
947

studies show that observers are perfectly able to see under
these conditions. For example, Potter (1976), in now clas-
sic experiments, showed that observers could pick out a tar-
get picture in a series of pictures presented at rates as fast
as one picture every 125 msec. Thorpe et al. (1996) refined
Potter’s technique and showed by using event-related EEG
potentials, that 150 msec after a stimulus is presented, that
is, without any eye movement occurring, there is already in-
formation available in the cortex allowing the presence of
an animal in a picture to be ascertained.
But because highly familiar stimuli (like words or ani-
mals) are used in these experiments, observers may be mak-
ing use of a few distinctive features available in the images
in order to accomplish the task. As argued by Neisser
(1976), it probably cannot be said that observers are “see-
ing” the pictures in the normal sense of the word. As an il-
lustration, consider an experiment we performed in which
observers were asked to learn to distinguish three previ-
ously unknown symbols resembling Chinese characters
(Nazir & O’Regan 1990). These were presented under the
control of a computer linked to an eye movement measur-
ing device. In the experiment, conditions were arranged so
that observers could contemplate each Chinese symbol
with their eyes fixated at the middle of the symbol, but as
soon as the eyes moved, the symbol would disappear. Ob-
servers found this procedure extremely disrupting and irri-
tating, and, contrary to what happens when the eye is free
to move, hundreds of trials were necessary before they were
able to distinguish the symbols. Furthermore, once the task
was learnt, observers often failed when asked to recognize
the learnt patterns at a new retinal location, only as little as
half a degree away from the learnt position. Schlingen-
siepen et al. (1986) also found that without eye movements,
observers had difficulty distinguishing patterns composed
of arrays of random black and white squares; and Atkinson
et al. (1976) showed by using an after-image technique that
it is impossible to count more than four dots that are fixed
with respect to the retina: a rather surprising fact. In a task
of counting assemblies of debris-like pixel clumps, Kowler
and Steinman (1977) found that observers had difficulties
when eye movements were not permitted.17 Because the
stimuli used in these experiments were well above the acu-
ity limit, the results are not explicable by acuity drop-off in
peripheral vision. Even though a portion of the results may
be due to lateral interaction effects (e.g., Toet & Levi 1992),
it seems clear that observers are not at ease when doing a
recognition task where eye movements are prohibited. It is
like tactually trying to recognize an object lain on your hand
without manipulating it.
A further suggestion of the need for visual exploration
concerns the phenomenon of fading that occurs when the
retinal image is immobilized artificially by use of an optical
stabilization device. Under these circumstances a variety of
perceptual phenomena occur, ranging from loss of contrast,
to fragmentation, to the visual field becoming gray or
“blacker than black” (Ditchburn 1973; Gerrits 1967). A por-
tion of these phenomena can undoubtedly be accounted for
in terms of the temporal response of the first stages of the
visual system. Kelly (1982), for example, has suggested that
detectors sensitive to oriented lines such as those discov-
ered by Hubel and Wiesel actually are silent unless the ori-
ented line stimulation is temporally modulated. Laming
(1986; 1988) has stressed that neural transmission of exter-
nal stimulation is always differentially coupled, so that, for
example, the response of the retina to static stimulation is
weak, and temporal modulation is necessary for optimal re-
sponse (see also Arend 1973; Gerrits 1978; Kelly 1981;
Krauskopf 1963).
From the point of view of the present theory, these phe-
nomena are compatible with the idea that sensing of the vi-
sual world is a dynamic probing process. It could be that
even the presence of a static external stimulus is not regis-
tered by a static sensory input, but by the dynamic pattern
of the inputs that would potentially be produced by changes
in the sensor position.
4.6. Why we don’t see behind ourselves, but we do see
partially occluded objects
Consider objects behind you, or in a box on your desk.
Though you know that turning around or opening the box
will cause certain changes in your sensory stimulation, some
of which are indeed visual in nature, you do not have the
feeling of seeing things behind you or in the box. The rea-
son is that while the objects are behind you or in the box,
the knowledge you have does not include certain essential
visual aspects, namely, the knowledge that, say, blinking or
moving your eyes will modify the sensations in a way typi-
cal of things that you see.
On the other hand, closer to normal seeing, consider an
object which is partially occluded by another object. As you
move your head, previously occluded parts appear, and pre-
viously unoccluded parts may disappear behind the oc-
cluder. This ability to make parts of the occluded object ap-
pear and disappear is similar to the ability to make objects
appear and disappear by blinking, or to make their retinal
projections change by moving the eye towards and away
from them. This kind of ability is typical of what it is to see,
so, even though the object is partially occluded, you never-
theless have the impression of seeing it, or at least “almost”
seeing it. Furthermore, if you suddenly close your eyes and
ask yourself exactly how much of the object was actually vis-
ible just before you closed your eyes, you will not generally
know, and indeed, as suggested by results of Intraub and
Richardson (1989), you will generally think you saw more
than you did (see Fig. 2). This demonstrates that seeing is
not directly related to having a retinal image, but to being
able to manipulate the retinal image.
5. Empirical data
5.1. Introduction
In this section we will lay out a number of empirical results
which are related to the theory of visual experience we have
sketched. Before beginning however, it should be stressed
that the empirical data to be presented is not intended as a
test of the theory in the everyday sense in which theories
are tested in science. We are providing a general framework
for the study of vision, and it is not possible to subject a gen-
eral framework to direct verification. Our new framework
provides scientists with new problems and it makes some
old problems appear as non-problems (like the problem of
visual stability despite eye movements, and the problem of
filling in the blind spot – see below). The framework high-
lights links between previously unrelated research streams,
and creates new lines of research (like the work on change
blindness, which was initiated by the idea of “the world as
O’Regan & Noë: A sensorimotor account of vision and visual consciousness
948
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (2001) 24:5

an outside memory”). Of course, in each case, local, alter-
nate, theories are possible within each of these domains,
but the advantage of the present approach is that it brings
together all the results so they can be seen from a single
viewpoint.
In understanding the epistemological role of the present
theory, an analogy can be made with the situation facing
nineteenth-century physicists, who were trying to invent
mechanisms by which gravitational or electrical forces
could act instantaneously at a distance. To solve this prob-
lem, Faraday developed the idea of a field of force which
was, according to Einstein, the single most important ad-
vance in physics since Newton (cf. Balibar 1992). But, in
fact, the idea of a field of force is not a theory at all, it is just
a new way of defining what is meant by force. It is a way of
abandoning the problem being posed, rather than solving
it. Einstein’s abandoning the ether hypothesis is another ex-
ample of how advances can be made by simply reformulat-
ing the questions one allows oneself to pose.
In the experiments to be described below, the first group
relates to the notion that there is no picture-like internal
representation of the outside world and that the world
serves as an outside memory. These studies concern the
problem of the apparent stability of the visual world despite
eye movements, the filling-in of the blind spot and other
(supposed) visual defects, and “change blindness”: the fact
that large changes in a visual scene sometimes go unno-
ticed. The second group of studies is more related to the
idea that visual experience only occurs when there is the po-
tential for action. These studies concern sensorimotor adap-
tation, sensory substitution, and synesthesia-related effects.
5.2. The extraretinal signal
At least since Helmholtz toward the end of the last century,
a classic problem in vision has been to understand why the
perturbations caused by eye movements (shift and smear
on the retina) do not interfere with our perception of a sta-
ble visual world (cf. reviews of Bridgeman 1995; Grüsser
1986; MacKay 1973; Matin 1972; 1986; Shebilske 1977). A
large portion of the experimental literature on the subject
has assumed the existence of an internal representation,
like a panoramic internal screen, into which successive
snapshots of the visual world are inserted so as to create a
fused global patchwork of the whole visual environment.
The appropriate location to insert each successive snapshot
is assumed to be determined by an “extraretinal signal,” that
is, a signal reflecting the direction the eyes are pointed at
every moment. In total darkness some sort of extraretinal
information is certainly available, as can easily be ascer-
tained by noting that the after-image of a strong light source
seems to move when the eyes move (Mack & Bachant
1969). Much debate has occurred concerning the question
of whether the extraretinal signal is of efferent or afferent
origin, and a convincing estimation of the role of the two
components has been made by Bridgeman and Stark
(1991). Irrespective of its origin however, the data concur
to show that if the extraretinal signal exists, it is very inac-
curate. Measurements from different sources (cf., e.g.,
compilations in Matin 1972; 1986) show that the signal
must incorrectly be signaling that the eye starts to move as
much as 200 msec before it actually does. The signal also
incorrectly estimates the time and position where the eye
lands, becoming accurate only about 1 second after the eye
has reached its final position.18 In any case, as admitted by
Matin (1986), it is clear that the extraretinal information is
too inaccurate, and also too sluggish, given the frequency of
eye movements, to be used under normal viewing condi-
tions to accurately place successive snapshots into a global
fused internal image.
These results are not surprising when considered from
the point of view of the theory of vision presented here.
From this viewpoint, there is no need to postulate a mech-
anism that re-positions the retinal image after eye saccades
so that the world appears stationary, because what is meant
by “stationary,” is precisely one particular kind of sensory
change that occurs when the eye moves across an object.
Having the feeling of seeing a stationary object consists in
the knowledge that if you were to move your eye slightly
leftwards, the object would shift one way on your retina, but
if you were to move your eye rightwards, the object would
shift the other way. The knowledge of all such potential
movements and their results constitute the perception of
stationarity. If on actually moving the eyes there were no
corresponding retinal motion, the percept would not be of
stationarity. From this point of view, there is no need to con-
struct a stationary internal “image” of an object in order to
see it as stationary. If there is such a thing as an internal sig-
nal in the brain that signals the eye’s instantaneous position,
then its purpose could not be to construct such an internal
image (for there would be no one to look at it).
The question nevertheless arises of how the brain is able
to accurately judge whether an object is stationary, or to
control visuomanual coordination. If there is no way for
retinal and extraretinal information to be combined to yield
the true spatial coordinates of an object, how can the mo-
tion of an object ever be accurately ascertained, or how can
an object be located with respect to the body and grasped?
A possible answer may be that, whereas there is no extra-
retinal signal, there is nevertheless extraretinal information
O’Regan & Noë: A sensorimotor account of vision and visual consciousness
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (2001) 24:5
949
Figure 2.
Subjects tend to remember having seen a greater ex-
panse of a scene than was shown in a photograph. For example,
when drawing the close-up view in Panel A from memory, one
subject’s drawing (Panel C) contained extended boundaries. An-
other subject, shown a more wide-angle view of the same scene
(Panel B), also drew the scene with extended boundaries (Panel
D). (Note: To evaluate the drawings in the figure, it is important
to study the boundaries of each drawing and its associated stimu-
lus.) (Figure and caption from Intraub, http://www.psych.udel.edu/
~intraub)

about the eye’s location or velocity in the orbit. This infor-
mation could be present in distributed form, and con-
founded with information about retinal stimulation. Such a
distributed representation that mixes sensory and motor in-
formation (both of a static kind – position – and of a dy-
namic kind – velocity, acceleration) could provide the knowl-
edge about sensorimotor contingencies required in the
present theory. It could be used to perform accurate local-
ization, but would not require the existence of a metric-pre-
serving representation of the eye’s position, or a picture-like
internal image of objects on the retina or in space. Perhaps
the multisensory neurons observed in parietal cortex, whose
responses may be modulated by imminent eye movements,
are compatible with this idea (Colby et al. 1996; Duhamel
1992; see also Zipser & Anderson 1988). Also of interest
with respect to these ideas is a model of visual localization
despite eye movements that has been constructed by
Pouget and Sejnowski (1997). The model uses basis func-
tions to code nonlinear mixtures of retinal and eye position.
Linear combinations of these basis functions can provide
pure retinal position, pure eye position, or head-centered
coordinates of a target, despite the fact that no coherent in-
ternal map of the visual field has been constructed.
5.3. Trans-saccadic fusion
Over recent decades a new research topic has arisen with
regard to the question of visual stability, in which research-
ers, instead of measuring the extraretinal signal itself, are
questioning the notion that underlies it, namely, the notion
of an internal screen in which successive snapshots are ac-
cumulated. The experimental methodology of this work
consists in displaying stimuli which temporally straddle the
eye saccade, and attempting to see if observers see a fused
image – this would be predicted if an internal screen exists.
Excellent reviews of this work (Irwin 1991; 1992) conclude
that trans-saccadic fusion of this kind does not exist, or at
least is restricted to a very small zone, namely, the zone cor-
responding to the target which the saccade is aiming for.
Another kind of experiment consists in making large changes
in high quality, full color pictures of natural scenes in such
a way that the changes occur during an eye saccade (Mc-
Conkie & Currie 1996). Even though the changes can oc-
cupy a considerable fraction of the field of view (e.g., cars
appear or disappear in street scenes, swimming suits worn
by foreground bathers change color, etc.), they are often not
noticed – also contradicting the idea of a pictorial-type in-
ternal representation of the visual world. Again the conclu-
sion appears to be that if there is an internal screen, it is not
this internal screen which is providing us with the sensation
of a stable, panoramic, visual world (Irwin & Andrews 1996;
Irwin & Gordon 1998).
This conclusion is consistent with the theory presented
here, where the problem of visual stability is a non-prob-
lem. Seeing does not require compensating for the effects
produced by eye shifts in order to ensure accurate accu-
mulation of partial views into a composite patchwork pro-
jected on some internal screen. There is no need to re-
create another world inside the head in order for it to be
seen. Instead, as suggested in section 4, the outside world
acts as an “external memory” store, where information is
available for probing by means of eye movements and shifts
of attention O’Regan (1992).19
5.4. Saccadic suppression
Another issue which has preoccupied scientists concerns
the question of why we are not aware of the smear caused
by saccades. An enormous literature on the topic has been
reviewed by Matin (1974; cf. also Li & Matin 1997): it ap-
pears that both at that time and still today (e.g., Burr et al.
1994; Li & Matin 1990; Ridder & Tomlinson 1997; Uchi-
kawa & Sato 1995) many researchers believe that it is nec-
essary to postulate some kind of suppression mechanism
that inhibits transmission of sensory information to aware-
ness during saccades, so that the rather drastic saccadic
smear is not seen.
The empirical evidence showing diminished sensitivity
to flashes during saccades cannot be denied, and the origin
of this effect has been estimated by Li and Matin (1997) to
be 20% due to the retinal smearing and masking caused by
the image displacement (there may also be mechanical ef-
fects, as suggested by Richards 1969), and 80% due to cen-
tral inhibitory mechanisms (some portion of this may be
due to spatial uncertainty caused by the new eye position,
cf. Greenhouse & Cohn 1991).
The important point, however, is that whatever inhibitory
effects are occurring during saccades, these certainly do not
constitute a suppression mechanism designed to prevent
perception of the saccadic smear. If they did, then why
would we not perceive a dimming of the world during sac-
cades? Would we have to postulate a further un-dimming
mechanism to compensate for the dimming? The notion of
saccadic suppression probably constitutes another instance
of the homunculus error, and is no less naive than postulat-
ing the need for a mechanism to right the upside-down reti-
nal image so that the world appears right-side up. As ex-
plained in the theory presented above, there is no need to
postulate mechanisms that compensate for the smear that
is created by eye saccades, because this smear is part of
what it is to see. If the retinal receptors did not signal a
global smear during saccades, then the brain would have to
assume that the observer was not seeing, and that he or she
was perhaps hallucinating or dreaming.
5.5. Filling in the blind spot and perceptual completion
Another classic problem in vision which has recently been
revived and generated heated debate (e.g., Ramachandran
1992; Ramachandran & Gregory 1991; Ramachandran
1995 vs. Durgin et al. 1995) is the problem of why we do
not generally notice the 5–7 degree blind spot centered at
about 17 degrees eccentricity in the temporal visual field of
each eye, corresponding to the blind location on the retina
where the optic nerve pierces through the eyeball.
Related problems involve understanding the apparent
filling in of brightness or color that occurs in phenomena
such as the Craik-O’Brian-Cornsweet effect and neon color
spreading; the apparent generation of illusory contours as
in the Kanisza triangle; and other phenomena of modal or
amodal completion (cf. reviews of Kingdom & Moulden
1992; Pessoa et al. 1998).
Taking the case of the blind spot, from the point of view
of the present theory, and in agreement with analyses of a
number of theoreticians (Kingdom & Moulden 1992; Pes-
soa et al. 1998; Todorovicˇ 1987), there is no need for there
to be any filling in mechanism (O’Regan 1992). On the con-
O’Regan & Noë: A sensorimotor account of vision and visual consciousness
950
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (2001) 24:5

trary, the blind spot can be used in order to see: if retinal
sensation were not to change dramatically when an object
falls into the blind spot, then the brain would have to con-
clude that the object was not being seen, but was being hal-
lucinated. Suppose you explore your face with your hand:
you can put your hand in such a way that your nose falls be-
tween two fingers. This does not give you the haptic im-
pression of having no more nose. On the contrary, being
able to put the nose between two fingers gives information
about the size and nature of a nose. It is part of haptically
perceiving the nose.
Monitoring the way the sensory stimulation from the
retina changes when the eye moves to displace an object in
the vicinity of the blind spot, is, for the brain, another way
of gaining information about the object.
One can argue, however, that even though there may be
no need for filling in processes, such filling in processes may
nevertheless actually exist. In support of this, Pessoa et al.
(1998), though critical of some neurophysiological and be-
havioral studies purporting to be evidence for filling in, con-
cluded that several studies do point to the existence of pre-
cisely the kind of mechanisms which would be required for
a filling in process. For example, Paradiso and Nakayama
(1991), by using a masking paradigm, were able to measure
the temporal dynamics of the phenomenal filling in of the
inside of a bright disk. De Weerd et al. (1995) found cells
in extrastriate cortex whose responses correlate well with
the time it takes for the holes in textures presented in pe-
ripheral vision to perceptually fill in.
Just as was the case for the problem of the extraretinal
signal or of saccadic suppression, the theory being advo-
cated here does not deny the existence of neural mecha-
nisms that underlie the perceptual phenomena that each of
us observe. There can be no doubt that something is going
on in the brain which is in relation to the fact that observers
have no experience of a blind spot, and which makes
Kanisza triangles have illusory contours. The question is: Is
whatever is going on, actually serving to create an internal
copy of the outside world, which has the metric properties
of a picture, and which has to be completed in order for ob-
servers to have the phenomenology of a perfect scene? In
the example of Paradiso and Nakayama’s data, for example,
there can be no denying that there must be retinal or cor-
tical processes that involve some kind of dynamic spreading
activation and inhibition, and that these processes underlie
the percept that observers have in their paradigm – and
possibly also when a disk is presented under normal condi-
tions. But even though these processes act like filling in pro-
cesses, this does not mean that they are actually used by the
brain to fill in an internal metric picture of the world. They
may just be providing information to the brain about the na-
ture of the stimulation, but without this information being
used to create a picture-like representation of the world.
In other words, our objection is not to the mechanisms
themselves, whose existence we would not deny, but to the
characterization of these mechanisms as involving “filling
in.” Consider this caricature: Spatio-temporal integration in
the low-level visual system is a mechanism which explains
much phenomenology (e.g., why fast flickering lights ap-
pear continuous, and very closely spaced dots look like
lines). But surely no one would want to claim that the pur-
pose of spatiotemporal integration is to “fill in” the tempo-
ral gaps in what would otherwise look like a stroboscopic
world, or to make dotted lines look continuous. Spatiotem-
poral integration is a mechanism used in our visual systems
to sample the environment, but its purpose is not to com-
pensate for gaps in what would otherwise be a granular,
pixel-like internal picture.
5.6. Other retinal non-homogeneities 
and the perception of color
A striking characteristic of the human visual system is its
non-homogeneity. Spatial resolution is not constant across
the retina, but falls off steadily: even the central foveal area
is not a region of constant acuity, since at its edge (i.e., at an
eccentricity of about 1 degree), position acuity has already
dropped to half its value at the fovea’s center (Levi et al.
1985; Yap et al. 1989). This drastic fall-off continues out into
peripheral vision, only slowing down at around 15 degrees
of eccentricity.
In addition to this non-homogeneity in spatial sampling,
the retina also suffers from a non-homogeneity in the way
it processes color: whereas in the macular region, the pres-
ence of three photoreceptor cone classes permits color dis-
crimination, in the peripheral retina the cones become very
sparse (Anderson et al. 1991; Coletta & Williams 1987;
Marcos et al. 1996). The lack of the ability to accurately lo-
cate colors can easily be demonstrated by attempting to re-
port the order of the colors of four or five previously unseen
colored pencils when these are brought in from peripheral
vision to a position just a few degrees to the side of one’s fix-
ation point.
A further, surprising non-homogeneity derives from the
macular pigment, a yellowish jelly covering the macula, that
absorbs up to 50% of the light in the short wavelength range
(Bone et al. 1992), thereby profoundly altering color sensi-
tivity in central vision.
Despite these non-homogeneities, the perception of spa-
tial detail and color does not subjectively appear non-
uniform to us: most people are completely unaware of how
poor their acuity and their color perception are in periph-
eral vision. Analogously to the filling-in mechanism that is
sometimes assumed to fill in the blind spot, one might be
tempted to postulate some kind of compensation mechanism
that would account for the perceived uniformity of the visual
field. However, from the point of view of the present theory
of visual experience, such compensation is unnecessary. This
will be illustrated in relation to color perception below.
5.7. “Red” is knowing the structure of the changes 
that “red” causes
Under the present view of what seeing is, the visual experi-
ence of a red color patch depends on the structure of the
changes in sensory input that occur when you move your
eyes around relative to the patch, or when you move the
patch around relative to yourself. For example, suppose you
are looking directly at the red patch. Because of absorption
by the macular pigment, the stimulation received by the
color-sensitive retinal cones will have less energy in the
short wavelengths when you look directly at the red patch,
and more when you look away from the patch. Further-
more, since there is a difference in the distribution and the
density of the different color-sensitive cones in central ver-
sus peripheral vision, with cone density dropping off con-
O’Regan & Noë: A sensorimotor account of vision and visual consciousness
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (2001) 24:5
951

siderably in the periphery, there will be a characteristic
change in the relative stimulation coming from rods and
cones that arises when your eyes move off the red patch.
What determines the perceived color of the patch is the set
of such changes that occur as you move your eyes over it.20
A relevant example arises from the perception of color in
dichromats. When carefully tested in controlled conditions
of illumination, dichromats exhibit deficiencies in their
ability to distinguish colors, generally along the red-green
dimension, which can be accounted for by assuming that
they lack a particular type of cone, generally either the long
or medium wavelength type. Curiously however, in real-life
situations, dichromats are often quite good at making red-
green distinctions. As suggested by Jameson and Hurvich
(1978; cf. also Lillo et al. 1998) this is undoubtedly because
they can make use of additional cues deriving from what
they know about objects and what they can sense concern-
ing ambient lighting. Thus, for example, when a surface is
moved so that it reflects more yellowish sunlight and less
bluish light from the sky, the particular way the spectrum of
the reflected light changes, disambiguates the surface’s
color, and allows that color to be ascertained correctly even
when the observer is a dichromat.
Though it is not surprising to find observers using all sorts
of available cues to help them in their color discriminations,
this kind of finding can be taken to support a much more
far-reaching, fundamental hypothesis, put forward by
Broackes (1992). This is that the color of a surface is not so
much related to the spectrum of the reflected light, but
rather, to the way the surface potentially changes the light
when the surface is moved with respect to the observer or
the light sources.
It must be stressed that more is being said here than was
said by Jameson and Hurvich (1978), who merely noted
that information is available that allows dichromats to make
judgments similar to trichromats. Broackes’ idea is that the
colors of surfaces are exactly the laws governing the way the
surface changes the reflected light.21 At least as far as re-
flectivity of surfaces are concerned, the same laws apply to
dichromats and trichromats, so that to a certain extent they
have the same kinds of color perception: the difference is
that dichromats have fewer clues to go by in many situa-
tions. Thus Broackes, who has color vision deficiencies22
himself, claims that he has different experiences for red and
green as do normals. His only problem is that sometimes,
when lighting conditions are special, he can see certain dark
red things as dark green, just as sometimes, in shadow, peo-
ple with normal vision are convinced a garment is dark blue
when in fact it is black, or vice versa. Of course, there will
be a component of the sensorimotor contingencies, namely,
those determined by the observer’s own visual apparatus,
which, to the extent that dichromats lack one of the three
color channels, are different in the case of dichromats as
compared to trichromats, so colors cannot be completely
identical for them.
Broackes’ theory of color is strongly related to the theory
of visual perception that we have presented here. The dif-
ference between Broackes’ views and ours is that Broackes
is attempting to characterize the nature of color in terms of
laws of sensorimotor contingency, whereas we have taken
the bolder step of actually identifying color experience with
the exercise of these laws, or, more precisely, with activity
carried out in accord with the laws and based on knowledge
of the laws.
5.8. Eye-position contingent perception
A surprising prediction from this idea, that the sensation of
red comes from the structure of changes that is caused by
red, is the following armchair experiment. Using a device
to measure eye movements connected to a computer, it
should be possible to arrange stimulation on a display
screen so that whenever an observer looks directly at a
patch of color it appears red, but whenever the observer’s
eye looks away from the patch, its color changes to green.
The rather counterintuitive prediction from this is that af-
ter training in this situation, the observer should come to
have the impression that green patches in peripheral vision
and red patches in central vision are the same color.
Whereas exactly this kind of experiment has not yet been
done, a variety of related manipulations were performed by
McCollough (1965b) and by Kohler (1951).23 For example,
Kohler had observers wear spectacles in which one half of
the visual field was tinted with blue, and the other half
tinted with yellow. This is similar to the proposed armchair
experiment in the sense that perceived color will be differ-
ent depending on which way the observer moves the eyes.
Results of the experiment seem to show that after adapta-
tion, observers apparently came to see colors “normally.”
Similar phenomena were observed with half-prisms, in
which the top and bottom portion of the visual field were
shifted by several degrees with respect to each other. Ob-
servers ultimately adapted, so that manual localization of
objects in the upper and lower visual fields was accurate.
Of particular interest in these studies would have been to
know whether observers perceived the world as continuous
despite the discontinuity imposed by the colored glasses or
prisms. However, it is difficult to rigorously evaluate the re-
ports, as they were only described informally by Kohler.
Since then, though a large literature has developed over the
last decades concerning many forms of perceptual adapta-
tion, not very much work seems to have been done to in-
vestigate the effects of modifications like those imposed by
the two-color glasses or the half-prisms, which produce
strong discontinuities in the visual field.
Nevertheless, partial insight into such situations may be
obtained by considering people who wear spectacles with
bifocal lenses24: here a discontinuity exists in the visual field
between the upper and lower part of the glasses. Depend-
ing on where an observer directs the eyes, the size and fo-
cus of objects will be different, because of the different
power of the two parts of the lens. The question then is,
does the world appear discontinuous to viewers of bifocals?
The answer is that the world does not appear discontinu-
ous, any more than the world appears “dirty” to someone
who has not wiped his spectacle lenses clean. This is not to
say that the observer cannot become aware of the disconti-
nuity or the dirt on the lenses by attending to the appropri-
ate aspect of the stimulation, just as it is possible to become
aware of the blind spot in each eye by positioning a stimu-
lus appropriately. But under normal circumstances the
wearer of bifocals takes no notice of the discontinuity. Fur-
thermore, even though image magnification as seen through
the different parts of the lens are different, thereby modi-
fying perception of distance, manual reaching for objects
seen through the different parts of the lenses adapts and be-
comes accurate, as does the vestibulo-ocular reflex. Gau-
thier and Robinson (1975) and Gauthier (1976) have, for
example, shown that wearers of normal spectacles with
O’Regan & Noë: A sensorimotor account of vision and visual consciousness
952
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (2001) 24:5

strong corrections, as well as scuba divers, come to possess
a bistable state of adaptation, whereby their distance per-
ception and reaching can instantaneously switch from one
to the other state, as they take their spectacles on and off,
or look through their underwater goggles (see also Welch et
al. 1993 for a similar effect with prisms). In fact, an observer
can be tricked into inappropriately switching adaptation
state by surreptitiously removing the lenses from his or her
eyeglasses, so that he or she incorrectly expects magnifica-
tion to change when the eyeglasses are put on (Gauthier,
personal communication).
5.9. Inversion of the visual world
Relevant to the theory of visual experience being proposed
here, are the classic experiments performed by Stratton
(1897), Kohler (1951), and some less often cited replications
by Taylor (1962), Dolezal (1982), and Kottenhoff (1961), in
which an observer wears an optical apparatus which inverts
the retinal image so that the world appears upside-down
and/or left-right inverted (cf. reviews by e.g., Harris 1965;
1980). Although at first totally incapacitated, observers
adapt after a few days and are able to move around. Ulti-
mately (after about two weeks of wearing the apparatus)
they come to feel that their new visual world is “normal”
again.25
What is interesting about these experiments is that dur-
ing the course of adaptation, perception of the world is sub-
ject to a sort of fragmentation, and to a dependence on con-
text and task. For example, Kohler (1951) reports that visual
context allows something that is seen upside-down to be
righted (e.g., a candle flips when it is lit because flames
must go up, a cup flips when coffee is poured into it, be-
cause coffee must pour downwards). Ambiguities and in-
consistencies abound: Dolezal reports sometimes being un-
able to prevent both his hands from moving when he tries
to move only one. Kohler reports cases where two adjacent
heads, one upright, the other inverted, were both perceived
as upright. Kohler’s observer Grill, after 18 days of wearing
reversing spectacles, stands on the sidewalk and correctly
sees vehicles driving on the “right,” and hears the noise of
the car motor coming from the correct direction. On the
other hand, Grill nevertheless reports that the license plate
numbers appear to be in mirror writing. Other observations
are that a “3” is seen as in mirror writing, even though its
open and closed sides are correctly localized as being on the
left and right, respectively. The bicycle bell seems on the
unusual side, even though the observer can turn the handle
bars in the correct direction. Taylor (1962) has performed
a study similar to Kohler’s, except that instead of wearing
the inverting spectacles continuously, his subject wore
them only for a limited period each day. Under these con-
ditions the subject rapidly obtains a bistable form of adap-
tation, adapted to both wearing and not wearing the spec-
tacles. A point stressed by Taylor, in support of his
behaviorist theory,26 is that adaptation is specific to the par-
ticular body parts (arms, legs, torso) or activities (standing
on both feet, on one foot, on the toes, riding a bicycle) that
the subject has had training with, and that there is little “in-
terpenetration” from one such sensorimotor system to an-
other.
A theory of vision in which there is a picture-like internal
representation of the outside world would not easily ac-
count for the fragmentation of visual perception described
in these experiments: for example, it would be hard to ex-
plain the case of the license plate, where one aspect of a
scene appears oriented accurately, and yet another aspect,
sharing the same retinal location, appears inverted. On the
other hand, the present theory, in which vision is knowledge
of sensorimotor transformations, and the ability to act,
readily provides an explanation: reading alphabetic charac-
ters involves a subspecies of behavior connected with read-
ing, judging laterality involves another, independent, sub-
species of behavior, namely, reaching. An observer adapting
to an inverted world will in the course of adaptation only be
able to progressively probe subsets of the sensorimotor con-
tingencies that characterize his or her new visual world; and
so inconsistencies and contradictions may easily arise be-
tween “islands” of visuo-motor behavior.27
Particularly interesting are cases of double vision when
only one eye is open, that is, not explicable by diplopia. For
example, Kohler’s observer Grill saw two points of light
when only one was presented slightly to the right of the me-
dian line (the second point was seen weaker, on the left,
symmetrical to the original point). Similar observations of
symmetrical “phantoms” were noticed by Stratton (1897),
and can be compared to cases of monocular diplopia re-
ported in strabismus (Ramachandran et al. 1994a; 1994b;
Rozenblom & Kornyushina 1991). Taylor (1962) says of his
subject wearing left-right inverting spectacles:
Another of the training procedures he adopted was to walk
round and round a chair or table, constantly touching it with his
body, and frequently changing direction so as to bring both
sides into action. It was during an exercise of this kind, on the
eighth day of the experiment, that he had his first experience of
perceiving an object in its true position. But it was a very
strange experience, in that he perceived the chair as being both
on the side where it was in contact with his body and on the op-
posite side. And by this he meant not just that he knew that the
chair he saw on his left was actually on his right. He had that
knowledge from the beginning of the experiment. The experi-
ence was more like the simultaneous perception of an object
and its mirror image, although in this case the chair on the right
was rather ghost-like. (pp. 201–202)
Presumably what happens in these experiments is that,
because the spatial location or orientation of an object with
respect to the body can be attributed either with respect to
the pre- or the post-adapted frame of reference, during the
course of adaptation it can sometimes be seen as being in
both. Furthermore, orientation and localization of objects
in the field of view can be defined with respect to multiple
referents, and within different tasks, and each task may
have adapted independently, thereby giving rise to inco-
herent visual impressions.
The impression we have of seeing a coherent world thus
arises through the knitting together of a number of separate
sensory and sensory-motor components, making use of vi-
sual, vestibular, tactile, and proprioceptive information; and
in which different behaviors (e.g., reading, grasping, bicy-
cle riding) constitute components that adapt indepen-
dently, but each contribute to the experience of seeing.
Conclusions of this kind have also been reached in a wealth
of research on sensorimotor control, where it is shown that
a gesture such as reaching for an object is composed of a
number of sub-components (e.g., ballistic extension of the
arm, fine control of the final approach and finger grasping,
etc.), each of which may obey independent spatial and tem-
poral constraints, and each of which may be controlled by
O’Regan & Noë: A sensorimotor account of vision and visual consciousness
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (2001) 24:5
953

different cerebral subsystems, which adapt separately to
perturbations like changes in muscle proprioception, or in
vestibular and visual information (for reviews of these re-
sults, see Jeannerod 1997; Rossetti et al. 1993).28
5.10. Change blindness experiments
The idea that the world constitutes an outside memory, and
that we only see what we are currently attending to, was the
impetus for a number of surprising experiments performed
recently on “change blindness”29 (O’Regan et al. 1999;
2000; Rensink et al. 1997; 2000). In these experiments, ob-
servers are shown displays of natural scenes, and asked to
detect cyclically repeated changes, such as a large object
shifting, changing color, or appearing and disappearing.
Under normal circumstances a change of this type would
create a transient signal in the visual system that would be
detected by low-level visual mechanisms. This transient
would exogenously attract attention to the location of the
change, and the change would therefore be immediately
seen.
However, in the change blindness experiments, condi-
tions were arranged such that the transient that would nor-
mally occur was prevented from playing its attention-grab-
bing role. This could be done in several ways. One method
consisted in superimposing a very brief global flicker over
the whole visual field at the moment of the change. This
global flicker served to swamp the local transient caused by
the change, preventing attention from being attracted to it.
A similar purpose could be achieved by making the change
coincide with an eye saccade, an eye blink, or a film cut in
a film sequence (for reviews, see Simons & Levin 1997).30
In all these cases a brief global disturbance swamped the lo-
cal transient and prevented it attracting attention to the lo-
cation of the change. Another method used to prevent the
local transient from operating in the normal fashion was to
create a small number of additional, extraneous transients
distributed over the picture, somewhat like mudsplashes on
a car windscreen (cf. O’Regan et al. 1999). These local tran-
sients acted as decoys and made it likely that attention
would be attracted to an incorrect location instead of going
to the true change location.
The results of the experiments showed that in many
cases observers have great difficulty seeing changes, even
though the changes are very large, and occur in full view –
they are perfectly visible to someone who knows what they
are. Such results are surprising if one espouses the view
that we should “see” everything that we are looking at: It is
very troubling to be shown a picture where a change is oc-
curring repetitively and in full view, without being able to
see the change. The experience is quite contradictory with
one’s subjective impression of richness, of “seeing every-
thing” in the visual field. However, the results are com-
pletely coherent with the view of seeing which is being de-
fended here.
Another aspect of these experiments which relates to the
present theory is a result observed in an experiment in
which observers’ eye movements were measured as they
performed the task (O’Regan et al. 2000). It was found that
in many cases, observers could be looking directly at the
change at the moment the change occurred, and still not
see it. Again, under the usual view that one should see what
one is looking at, this is surprising. But under the view that
what one sees is an aspect of the scene one is currently “vi-
sually manipulating,” it is quite reasonable to observe that
only a subset of scene elements that share a particular scene
location should at a given moment be perceived.
A striking result of a similar nature had been observed by
Haines (1991) and Fisher et al. (1980), who had profes-
sional pilots land an aircraft in a flight simulator under con-
ditions of poor visibility, and using a head-up display (or
“HUD”) – that is, a display which superimposed flight guid-
ance and control information on the windshield. On various
occasions during the pilot’s landing approach, they were
presented with unexpected “critical” information in the
form of a large jet airplane located directly ahead of them
on the runway. Although the jet airplane was perfectly vis-
ible despite the head-up display (see Fig. 3), presumably
because of the extreme improbability of such an occur-
rence, and because the pilots were concentrating on the
head-up display or the landing maneuver, two of the eight
experienced commercial pilots simply did not see the ob-
stacle on the two occasions they were confronted with it,
and simply landed their own aircraft through the obstacle.
On later being confronted with a video of what had hap-
pened, they were incredulous.31
Other results showing that people can be looking directly
at something without seeing it, had previously been ob-
tained by Neisser and Becklen (1975), who used a situation
which was a visual analogue of the “cocktail party” situation,
where party-goers are able to attend to one of many super-
imposed voices. In their visual analogue, Neisser and Beck-
len visually superimposed two independent film sequences,
and demonstrated that observers were able to single out
and follow one of the sequences, while being oblivious of
the other. Simons and Chabris (1999) have recently repli-
cated and extended these effects.
Finally, Mack and Rock (1998) and Mack et al. (1992)
have done a number of experiments using their paradigm
of “inattentional blindness.” In this, subjects will be en-
gaged in an attention-intensive task such as determining
which arm of a cross is longer. After a number of trials, an
unexpected, perfectly visible, additional stimulus will ap-
pear near the cross. The authors observe that on many oc-
casions this extraneous stimulus is simply not noticed.32
O’Regan & Noë: A sensorimotor account of vision and visual consciousness
954
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (2001) 24:5
Figure 3.
Simulator pilot’s forward visual scene at an altitude of
72 feet and 131 knots with runway obstruction clearly visible.
From Haines (1991). (Photo courtesy of NASA.)

5.11. Inattentional amnesia
Related to the idea that the world serves as an outside mem-
ory, are the intriguing experiments of Wolfe (1997; 1999),
and Wolfe et al. (1999) which they interpret in terms of
what they call “inattentional amnesia.”
Wolfe et al. (1999) use a standard visual search paradigm
in which a subject must search for a target symbol among a
number of distractor symbols. The authors estimate the ef-
ficiency of the search in milliseconds per item searched.
However, instead of using a new display of distractors on
each trial as is usually done, the authors use exactly the same
visual display over a number of repetitions, but each time
change the target that the subject is looking for. Since sub-
jects are looking at the same display, which remains contin-
uously visible on the screen for anything from 5 to 350 rep-
etitions, depending on the experiment, one might have
expected that an internal representation of the display
would have time to build up, allowing search rate to im-
prove over repetitions. However, this is not what is found:
Over a number of experiments using different kinds of
stimuli, Wolfe et al. (1999) find no evidence of improve-
ment in search rate. It seems that no internal representa-
tion of the display is being built up over repetitions. In fact,
search rate is as bad after many repeated searches as in the
normal visual search conditions when the display changes
at every trial: in other words, it is as though the subjects
think they are searching through a brand new display at
each trial, even though it is exactly the same display as be-
fore. Furthermore, an experiment done where the display
is memorized and not visually presented at all, actually
shows faster search speeds than when the display is present.
The results of these experiments are surprising under the
view that what we see consists of an internal, more or less
picture-like, representation of the visual world. However,
they are exactly what would be expected under the present
view, according to which “seeing” consists, not of having a
“picture” in the mind, but of having seeking-out-routines
that allow information to be obtained from the environ-
ment. Thus, observers generally do not bother to recreate
within their minds a “re”-presentation of the outside world,
because the outside world itself can serve as a memory for
immediate probing. Indeed, the last result showing faster
performance in the pure memory search shows that the
very presence of a visual stimulus may actually obligatorily
cause observers to make use of the world in the “outside
memory” mode, even though it is less efficient than using
“normal” memory.
This way of interpreting the results is also in broad agree-
ment with Wolfe’s point of view (Wolfe 1997; 1999) – Wolfe
also refers to the notion of “outside memory.” However,
Wolfe lays additional emphasis on the role of attention in
his experiments: Following the approach of Kahneman et
al. (1992) adopted by many researchers in the attention lit-
erature, Wolfe believes that before attention is brought to
bear on a particular region of the visual field, the elemen-
tary features (such as line segments, color patches, texture
elements) analyzed automatically by low-level modules in
the visual system constitute a sort of “primeval soup” or
undifferentiated visual “stuff.” Only once attention is ap-
plied to a particular spatial location, can the features be
bound together so that an object (or recognizable visual en-
tity) is perceived at that location. Wolfe’s interesting propo-
sition is that now, when visual attention subsequently moves
on to another location, the previously bound-together vi-
sual entities disaggregate again and fall back into the
“primeval soup”: the previously perceived entity is no
longer seen. This idea prompts Wolfe to use the term “inat-
tentional amnesia,” to emphasize the fact that after atten-
tion has moved on, nothing is left to see.
The status of the notion of attention in this explanation,
and its relation to the theory presented here, is not entirely
clear. One possibility would be to assume that what Wolfe
means by “attention” is nothing other than visual aware-
ness. In that case, the result of the experiment could be
summarized by saying “once your awareness has moved off
a part of the scene, you are no longer aware of it,” which is
tautological. Presumably, therefore, what Wolfe means by
attention is something independent of awareness: there
would be forms of attention without awareness and forms
of awareness without attention. It is clear that further thought
is needed to clarify these questions.
Independently of the framework within which one places
oneself, it remains an interesting question to ask: What does
the primeval soup “look like”? In other words, what does
the visual field look like when the observer is not attending
to anything in particular in it? Our preference would be to
take the strict sense of attention in which attention 5
awareness, and to say that without attending to something
(i.e., without being aware of anything), by definition the
visual field cannot look like anything at all. Only when the
observer attends to something will he or she be aware of
seeing it. Note that what the observer attends to can be
something as basic as overall brightness or color, or some-
thing like the variability in these (“colorfulness”?, “tex-
turedness”?), or some attribute like “verticality” or “blobi-
ness.” If such features constitute the “primeval soup,” then,
like normal targets in the search task, the primeval soup
would also only be “seen” if it was being attended to.
5.12. Informal examples
While the examples given in the preceding sections are
striking experimental demonstrations of the fact that you do
not always see where you look, several more informal dem-
onstrations also speak to the issue.
Proofreading is notoriously difficult: when you look at
words, you are processing words, not the letters that com-
pose them. If there is an extra, incorrect letter in a word,
it will have been processed by your low-level vision mod-
ules, but it will not have been “seen.” Thus, for example,
you will probably not have noticed that the “a”s in the last
sentences were of a different shape than elsewhere.33
Nonetheless on several occasions you were undoubtedly
looking directly at them. It may take you a while to realize
that the sign below (Fig. 4) does not say: The illusion of
O’Regan & Noë: A sensorimotor account of vision and visual consciousness
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (2001) 24:5
955
Figure 4.
Ceci n’est pas: The illusion of “seeing.”

“seeing.”34 You may be furious to find confirmation of years
of the scientific study of reading showing that in this sen-
tence there are in fact more “f”s than you think (count
them!).35
The phenomena of figure-ground competition (see Fig.
5) and of ambiguous figures are also striking examples of
how you do not see everything that you could see: when
looking at such stimuli, you only see one of the possible con-
figurations, even though more than one may be simultane-
ously available at the same location in your visual field.
It sometimes occurs that as you walk in the street you
look directly at someone without seeing them. Only when
the person gesticulates or manifests their irritation at not
being recognized, do you become aware of who they are.
While driving; it sometimes happens that you realize that
you have been looking for a while at the brake lights of the
car ahead of you without pressing on the brake.
5.13. Remote tactile sensing
An immediate consequence of the notion that experience
derives not from sensation itself, but from the rules that
govern action-related changes in sensory input, is the idea
that visual experience should be obtainable via channels
other than vision, provided that the brain extracts the same
invariants from the structure of the sensori-motor contin-
gencies.
A number of devices have been devised to allow people
with deficits in one sensory modality to use another modal-
ity to gain information. In the domain of vision, two main
classes of such sensory substitution devices have been con-
structed: echolocation devices and tactile visual substitu-
tion devices.
Echolocation devices provide auditory signals which de-
pend on the direction, distance, size, and surface texture of
nearby objects, but they provide no detailed shape infor-
mation. Nevertheless, such devices have been extensively
studied as prostheses for the blind, both in neonates (Bower
1977; Sampaio 1989; Sampaio & Dufier 1988) and in adults
(Ifukube et al. 1991). It is clear that while such devices ob-
viously cannot provide visual experience, they nevertheless
provide users with the clear impression of things being “out
in front of them.”
Particularly interesting is the work being done by Lenay
(1997), using an extreme simplification of the echolocation
device, in which a blind or blindfolded person has a single
photoelectric sensor attached to his or her forefinger, and
can scan a simple environment (e.g., consisting of several
isolated light sources) by pointing. Every time the photo-
sensor points directly at a light source, the subject hears a
beep or feels a vibration. Depending on whether the finger
is moved laterally, or in an arc, the subject establishes dif-
ferent types of sensorimotor contingencies: lateral move-
ment allows information about direction to be obtained,
movement in an arc centered on the object gives informa-
tion about depth. Note several interesting facts. First, users
of such a device rapidly say that they do not notice vibra-
tions on their skin or hear sounds, rather they “sense” the
presence of objects outside of them. Note also that at a
given moment during exploration of the environment, sub-
jects may be receiving no beep or vibration whatsoever, and
yet “feel” the presence of an object before them. In other
words, the experience of perception derives from the po-
tential to obtain changes in sensation, not from the sensa-
tions themselves. Note also that the exact nature or body lo-
cation of the stimulation (beep or vibration) has no bearing
on perception of the stimulus – the vibration can be applied
on the finger or anywhere else on the body. This again
shows that what is important is the sensorimotor invariance
structure of the changes in sensation, not the sensation it-
self.
Lenay’s very simple setup provides a concrete example of
what is meant by the laws of sensorimotor contingency.
Suppose that the photosensor were mounted on the fore-
arm of an articulated arm, with the arm making an angle a
with the torso, and the forearm making an angle b with the
arm, as shown in the Figure 6. Then we can define the sen-
sorimotor manifold as the two-dimensional space a: [0, p/
2] and b: ]3p/2-a, 2p[. Consider the situation where we are
obtaining information about depth by making movement in
an arc. If a luminous source at distance L is being “fixated,”
the angles a and b will lie on orbits in the sensorimotor sen-
sorimotor manifold defined by the relation shown in the
lower part of the figure. In reality of course the angles a and
b will be nonlinear functions of high-dimensional neural
population vectors corresponding to arm and forearm mus-
cle parameters. But the laws of contingency will be the
same.
On further reflection it is apparent that the simple device
studied by Lenay is an electronic variant of the blind per-
son’s cane. Blind persons using a cane do not sense the cane,
but the outside environment that they are exploring by
means of the cane. It has been said that the tactile sensa-
tions provided by the cane are somehow “relocated” or
“projected” onto the environment. The cane itself is for-
gotten or ignored. But this way of describing experience
with the cane, though in a way correct, is misleading, as 
it suggests that sensations themselves originally possessed a
location which had to be relocated. The present theory
shows that in themselves, sensations are situated nowhere.
The location of a sensation (and, for that matter, any per-
ceived aspect including its moment of occurrence) is an ab-
straction constructed in order to account for the invariance
structure of the available sensorimotor contingencies.
Note that similar experiences to those of the blind per-
son with the cane are experienced every day even by sighted
persons: Car drivers “feel” the wheels on the road, and ex-
tend the sense of their bodies to include the whole car, 
allowing them to negotiate into parking spaces with only
centimeters to spare. A particularly poignant example of
having one’s perceived body extend outside of the bound-
ary formed by the skin was given to the first author by a
friend who is a talented viola player. Spending most of the
O’Regan & Noë: A sensorimotor account of vision and visual consciousness
956
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (2001) 24:5
Figure 5.
Figure-ground competition.

day with the viola under his chin, on one occasion he went
into the kitchen to drink some hot tea, and some drops fell
on the viola. He said he was surprised not to have felt the
hot drops on the instrument: it felt anesthetized. Another
everyday example of remote tactile sensing occurs when
you write on a piece of paper with a pen: you feel the paper
at the end of the pen: it is rough, it is smooth, it is soft. You
locate the contact at the end of the pen, not on your fingers
where the force is actually felt (this example is given by
James 1890/1950).
One might consider these examples as surprising at first
sight. But then we ask: should it not also be considered sur-
prising that fingertip sensations are felt on the fingertips,
since after all, it is presumably in the brain where the sen-
sations are registered? Why would one not tend to think
that one should be able to walk through a door no wider
than one’s brain, since body sensations presumable arrive in
the brain? Indeed, given that visual sensation impregnates
the retina, why does one not feel the outside world as situ-
ated on one’s retina, instead of outside one? These obvi-
ously ridiculous extensions of the “relocation” idea dis-
cussed above make one realize that, actually, the perceived
location of a sensation cannot be logically determined by
where the nerves come from or where they go to. Perceived
location is, like other aspects of sensation, an abstraction
that the brain has deduced from the structure of the senso-
rimotor contingencies that govern the sensation.36
Some very interesting experiments of Tastevin (1937) are
related to these points. Tastevin had shown that the sensed
identity or position of a limb can be transferred to another
limb or to a plaster model of the limb. Thus, for example,
when an experimenter feigns to touch a subject’s forefinger
with one prong of a compass, but actually touches the mid-
dle finger with the other prong, the subject feels the touch
on the forefinger. Sensation has thus been relocated from
the middle finger to the forefinger. Whole body parts can
be relocalized by this means. A recent experiment along
very similar lines was described by Botvinick and Cohen
(1998; and also extended by Ramachandran & Blakeslee
1998). These authors used a life-size rubber model of a left
arm placed before a subject whose real left arm was hidden
by a screen. Using two small brushes, the experimenters
synchronously stroked corresponding positions of the rub-
ber and real arm. After ten minutes, subjects came to feel
that the rubber arm was their own.
All these phenomena show how labile the perceived lo-
cation of a stimulation can be, and how it depends on cor-
relation with information from other modalities (in this case
vision). Even neural representations of body parts are
known to be labile, as has been shown by Iriki et al. (1996)
whose macaque monkeys’ bimodal visual somatosensory re-
ceptive fields moved from their hands to the ends of a rake
they used as a tool. However, a facile interpretation of such
phenomena in terms of “neural plasticity” of cortical maps
would be misleading, since such an interpretation would
implicitly assume that perceived location of a stimulus is di-
rectly related to activity in cortical maps – an idea we re-
ject.
5.14. Tactile visual sensory substitution
Tactile visual substitution systems (TVSS) use an array of vi-
bratory or electrical cutaneous stimulators to represent the
luminance distribution captured by a TV camera on some
skin area, such as the back, the abdomen, the forehead or
the fingertip. For technical reasons and because of the re-
strictions on tactile acuity, TVSS devices have up to now
suffered from very poor spatial resolution, generally having
stimulator arrays of not more than 20 3 20 stimulators at
the very best. They have also been bulky, expensive, and too
sensitive to light level variations, for them to be of practical
use by the blind (Bach-y-Rita 1983; Easton 1992). Notwith-
standing these problems, however, as concerns the question
of visual experience, a number of highly interesting points
have been made about the experiences of individuals who
have used these devices (Apkarian 1983; Guarniero 1977;
1974).
O’Regan & Noë: A sensorimotor account of vision and visual consciousness
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (2001) 24:5
957
Figure 6.
Figure from Lenay et al. (1997) showing the sensori-
motor contingency for a simple photocell mounted on an arm and
a forearm, in the case where the photocell is continuously fixating
a luminous source at distance L. A: The arm (with the forearm)
has a length of 1. The distance from the target, L (0S), can then
be obtained by a trigonometrical relation, according to the follow-
ing formula: (1) L 5 sin a 2 cos a tan (a 1 b), where a: [0, p/2]
and b: [3p/2 2 a, 2p]. B: Curve representing angle b in relation
to angle a (both expressed in radians) for the following values of
L 5 0,1, . . . 7. a varies from 0 to p/2. According to (1) one can
determine b for any given L and a: b 5 2p 2 a 1 Atan( (sin a 2
L)/cos a).

A first point concerns the importance of the observer’s
being able to manipulate the TV camera himself or herself
(Bach-y-Rita 1972; 1984; Sampaio 1995).
In the earliest trials with the TVSS device, blind subjects
generally unsuccessfully attempted to identify objects that
were placed in front of the camera, which was fixed. It was
only when the observer was allowed to actively manipulate
the camera that identification became possible and ob-
servers came to “see” objects as being externally localized
(White et al. 1970). This important point constitutes an em-
pirical verification of the mainstay of the present theory of
visual experience, namely, that seeing constitutes the abil-
ity to actively modify sensory impressions in certain law-
obeying ways.
Once observers have had practice with the TVSS, several
further aspects of the experience provided by the system
suggest that it is similar to the experience of vision. First,
though initially observers locate stimulation on the body
part which is stimulated, with practice, the observers locate
objects in space, and not on the skin – although they are still
able to feel the local tactile sensation (e.g., if it is painful or
if it itches). Indeed, after using one skin location (e.g., the
back), an observer has no problem transferring to a differ-
ent skin location (e.g., the forehead).
An interesting example shows that the localization of ob-
jects outside the body is not just a cognitive strategy but
truly resembles visual experience. In an anecdote reported
by Bach-y-Rita, the zoom control of the camera being used
by a well-trained subject was moved, causing a sudden mag-
nification or “looming” of the tactile image. Bach-y-Rita
states (1972, p. 98): “the startled subject raised his arms and
threw his head backward to avoid the ‘approaching’ object.
It is noteworthy that, although the stimulus array was, at
the time, on the subject’s back, he moved backward and
raised his arms in front to avoid the object, which was sub-
jectively located in the three-dimensional space before
him.”37 Another interesting observation caused puzzle-
ment in the early investigations with the TVSS. For practi-
cal reasons the battery of 400 vibrators mounted on the ob-
server’s back consisted of two ramps of 200 vibrators, one
on each side of the observer’s backbone. A large gap was
therefore present in the tactile representation of the visual
field. “Curiously” however, no gap was apparent in ob-
servers’ perceived visual field. This tactile analog of what
might incorrectly be called “filling-in” of the retinal blind
spot is, of course, unsurprising in the light of the present
theory, where no filling-in mechanism need be postulated
(cf. sect. 5.5).
Do blind people actually see with the TVSS? The ques-
tion has been raised by Bach-y-Rita who prefers to put the
word “see” in quotes. One justification for this, he claims,
is the fact that people who have learnt to see with the de-
vice are disappointed when shown pictures of their loved
ones, or erotic pictures: they have no emotional reaction.
Bach-y-Rita interprets this as a failure of the device to pro-
vide true visual experience. An alternative, however, is to
admit that the device does provide true visual experience,
but that emotional and sexual reactions are strongly linked
to the sensations that are experienced during the period
when emotional attachment occurs and sexual interest de-
velops. If, during the course of development, these experi-
ences are initially non-visual, then they will remain non-
visual.38
Morgan (1977) also discusses this and concludes, that ei-
ther people really do see with the TVSS, or there can be no
scientific psychology. Clearly from the point of view of the
present theory, seeing is not a matter of “all or nothing.”
There are many aspects to seeing, and the TVSS provides
some but not all of them. The invariants related to position
and size changes of the tactile image are similar to those in
normal vision. Color and stereo vision however are absent,
and resolution is extremely poor. But, just as color blind,
stereo blind, one-eyed or low-sighted people can be said to
“see,” people using the TVSS should also be said to see. The
fact that stimulation is provided through the skin should be
irrelevant, providing the stimulation obeys the required
sensorimotor laws. Of course, seeing with the skin probably
involves laws that are not exactly the same as seeing with
the eyes, just as seeing colors in the dark is not quite the
same as in the light. The experience associated with the
TVSS will thus also be somewhat different from normal vi-
sual experience.
5.15. The “facial vision” of the blind
A further interesting example of sensory substitution comes
from what is called the “facial vision,” or “obstacle sense,”
or “pressure sense” of blind people. In locating objects, par-
ticularly when these are large and in the 30–80 cm range,
blind people often have the impression of a slight touch on
O’Regan & Noë: A sensorimotor account of vision and visual consciousness
958
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (2001) 24:5
Figure 7.
A blind subject with a “Tactile Visual Substitution sys-
tem” (TVSS). A TV camera (mounted on spectacle frames) sends
signals through electronic circuitry (displayed in right hand) to an
array of small vibrators (left hand) which is strapped against the
subject’s skin. The pattern of tactile sitmulation corresponds roughly
to a greatly enlarged visual image. (Photograph courtesy of P. Bach-
y-Rita). From Morgan (1977).

their forehead, cheeks, and sometimes chest, as though
they were being touched by a fine veil or cobweb (James
1890/1950; Kohler 1967).
For instance, consider the following quote given by James
(1890/1950) from the blind author of a treatise on blindness
of the time:
Whether within a house or in the open air, whether walking or
standing still, I can tell, although quite blind, when I am oppo-
site an object, and can perceive whether it be tall or short, slen-
der or bulky. I can also detect whether it be a solitary object or
a continuous fence; whether it be a close fence or composed of
open rails, and often whether it be a wooden fence, a brick or
stone wall, or a quick-set hedge. . . . The currents of air can
have nothing to do with this power, as the state of the wind does
not directly affect it; the sense of hearing has nothing to do with
it, as when snow lies thickly on the ground objects are more dis-
tinct, although the footfall cannot be heard. I seem to perceive
objects through the skin of my face, and to have the impressions
immediately transmitted to the brain. (Vol. 2, p. 204).
At least since Diderot’s “Letter on the blind,” facial vision
had often been considered to truly be a kind of tactile, or
even possibly an extrasensory, form of perception (cf. his-
torical review by Hayes 1935, cited by Rice 1966). James
(1890/1950, Vol 2, pp. 140, 204) compares this sense to
what he believes is a tactile, pressure-related “tympanic
sense,” that is, the ability we all have of sensing with closed
eyes whether an object brought before our face is large or
small, or more or less solid. Despite such claims, however,
by stopping up the ears of blind people with putty, James
demonstrated to his satisfaction that audition was involved
in the facial sense. This was then definitively established by
Dallenbach et al. (1944), and facial vision is now known to
be essentially caused by intensity, direction, and frequency
shifts of reflected sounds (see review by Arias 1996). Kohler
(1967) actually went so far as to anesthetize the faces of
blind people, who nevertheless continued to have these
sensations.
As noted by Worchel et al. (1950; cited by Strelow &
Brabyn 1982), the question arises why this form of object
perception is experienced as having a tactile feeling rather
than an auditory quality. A possibility along behaviorist lines
has been suggested by Taylor (1962), who supposes that col-
lisions with obstacles will often involve the face – the hands
may often rise and protect the face. This may create, by as-
sociation, feelings on the face in the case of impeding colli-
sions. Further correlations (apparently not mentioned by
Taylor) might be the fact that objects that are close to the
face tend to provoke slight disturbances of the air as well as
changes in heat radiation that could be detected by recep-
tors on the face. Although Taylor’s associationist hypothesis
may have some truth in it, from the point of view of the pres-
ent theory another possibility arises: the prediction would
be that the sensorimotor contingencies created by the par-
ticular, very subtle information received through the audi-
tory modality would, in this particular case, have an invari-
ance structure that resembles the contingencies caused by
tactile stimuli, like those created by a veil upon the face.
Indeed, it appears conceivable that the object sense, re-
quiring more subtle auditory distinctions, would be much
more critically dependent on distance than normal hearing.
In particular, moving a few centimeters forward or back-
wards, might create a radical change analogous to moving a
few centimeters forward or backwards and bringing the
head into and out of contact with a veil. Similarly, it may be
that when the head is facing the object that is being sensed,
slight sideways shifts of the head might create systematic
changes similar to the systematic rubbing that occurs when
one is touching a piece of cloth with the head. Note, how-
ever, that it would be exaggerated to take too literally the
comparison that blind people make with veils and cobwebs:
Kohler has verified that when touched with actual veils the
same blind people say that the sensations are actually quite
different. Perhaps the inability to specify precisely the na-
ture of the experience produced prompted the author cited
by James to say that the impressions were “immediately
transmitted to the brain.”
The facial sense of the blind may be related to the phe-
nomenon of synesthesia (Cytowic & Wood 1982; Baron-
Cohen & Harrison 1996),39 where a stimulus in one sensory
modality evokes sensations in another, the most frequently
occurring case being colored hearing (Marks 1978). Ven-
triloquism is another type of example where information
from one sensory modality modifies that in another: in “vi-
sual capture” or the “ventriloquism effect,” the perceived
location of a sound source is influenced by its seen position,
and, to a lesser extent, vice versa (Hatwell 1986; Radeau &
Bertelson 1974; Warren et al. 1981). A related phenome-
non is the McGurk effect (McGurk & MacDonald 1976) in
which the identity of a heard phoneme is altered by simul-
taneously observing a visual display of a different phoneme
being pronounced. Radeau (1997; cf. also Marks 1978) has
reviewed a number of inter-sensory interactions such as
these, both in humans and animals, and concludes that such
effects are compatible with the notion that the different
qualities of the senses are not present ab initio, as Piaget
might have claimed, but rather (following Gibson 1966;
Bower 1979) are the result of a progressive differentiation
process that occurs in the developing organism through the
influence of environmental experience.
The view taken within the context of the present theory
regarding all such intermodal interactions would be related
to the above. More precisely, however, it would say that the
experience associated with a modality exists only within the
context of the acting organism, and within the context of
the other senses available to the organism. Although vision,
audition, touch, and so on, will have their own specificities
due to the particularities of the sensors and sensorimotor
contingencies involved – with these specificities defining
the particular experience associated with each sense, – in-
teractions between the senses are to be expected when
there are systematic correlations and common sensorimo-
tor contingencies.40 Perceptual adaptation effects like the
McCollough effect (Harris 1980; Humphrey et al. 1994;
McCollough 1965a; 1965b) and the related disappearance
of color fringes on adaptation to displacing prisms (Held
1980; Kohler 1951) may be manifestations of similar nature,
except that they are intramodal rather than intermodal.
6. Visual consciousness
6.1. Introduction
The sensorimotor contingency theory of vision we have de-
veloped here provides a new vantage point from which to
approach the vexing theoretical question of the nature of vi-
sual consciousness. Vision, we have argued, is a mode of
skillful encounter with the environment, requiring knowl-
edge of sensorimotor contingencies and also the ability to
O’Regan & Noë: A sensorimotor account of vision and visual consciousness
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (2001) 24:5
959

make use of that knowledge for the purpose of guiding ac-
tion, thought, and (in humans) language use. What, in this
view, is visual consciousness?
6.2. Two kinds of visual consciousness
We propose to distinguish between two kinds of visual con-
sciousness: (1) transitive visual consciousness or conscious-
ness of; and (2) visual consciousness in general.
(1) To be transitively conscious is to be conscious of a fea-
ture of a scene (Malcolm 1984). To be conscious of a fea-
ture of a scene in this sense is simply to be visually aware of
it, as laid out in section 2.6.
Thus, to say that you are transitively conscious of (for ex-
ample) the shape of a parked car in front of you is to say that
you are, first, currently exercising mastery of the laws of
sensorimotor contingency that pertain to information about
the shape of the car; and, second, that you are attending to
this exercise, in the sense that you are integrating it into
your current planning, reasoning, and speech behavior.
Notice that when you are visually conscious of the shape
of the car, you may fail to attend to its color, or to the fact
that the object in front of you is a car. As you shift your at-
tention from one aspect of the car to another, features of
the car enter consciousness. What happens when you thus
shift your attention is that you draw into play different bits
of implicit knowledge of the relevant sensorimotor contin-
gencies.
To this, it might be objected that when you look at the
car, you have the impression that all its details are available
in consciousness all at once. In looking at the car, you are
conscious of, or aware of, its shape, color, nature, and so on,
all in a glance. But this objection is easily countered. First,
the empirical data on change blindness (see sect. 5.10
above) and inattentional blindness (see Noë & O’Regan
2000) demonstrate that you do not have all the details of
what is seen in consciousness at once. The actual case is that
all the detail is there in the scene in front of you and is thus
accessible by the slightest effort. Second, and of great im-
portance, is that your feeling of the presence of all the de-
tail consists precisely in your knowledge that you can access
all this information by movements and inquiries.
(2) Visual consciousness in general, on the other hand, is
a higher-order capacity. To be visually conscious in general
is to be poised to become aware of a present feature (that
is, to become transitively conscious of it). In this sense of vi-
sual consciousness, we can contrast being visually conscious
with being asleep or with being blind. Consciousness in this
most general sense consists in one’s possession of the abil-
ity to become conscious of aspects of a scene (that is, in one’s
ability to see, to explore aspects of the environment in a
fashion mediated by the relevant sensorimotor contingen-
cies).
6.3. The problem of qualia
As noted above in section 2.7, it may be argued that there
is still something missing in the present account of vision,
namely, an explanation of the qualitative character of visual
experience. Can the sensorimotor contingency theory in
addition provide an explanation of what philosophers have
called “the raw feel” or “qualia” of seeing?
“Quale” is a technical term in philosophy. Like most such
terms, to become clear about its precise meaning is to en-
ter into the throes of philosophical controversy. Qualia are
frequently characterized as the “phenomenal,” or “qual-
itative,” or “intrinsic” properties of experience, and they
are typically contrasted with “intentional,” or “representa-
tional,” or “functional” features. Qualia are said to be that
thanks to which there is something that it is like to have an
experience (something that is, in addition, independent of
representational or functional features). One of the central
philosophical debates surrounding qualia concerns the
question whether qualia can be studied by means of tradi-
tional biological and cognitive science. It has been sug-
gested on this point that there is an unbridgeable “explana-
tory gap,” that it is not possible to explain the subjective, felt
aspects of experience in behavioral, physical, or functional
terms.
In our view, the qualia debate rests on what Ryle (1949/
1990) called a category mistake. Qualia are meant to be
properties of experiential states or events. But experiences,
we have argued, are not states. They are ways of acting.
They are things we do. There is no introspectibly available
property determining the character of one’s experiential
states, for there are no such states. Hence, there are, in this
sense at least, no (visual) qualia. Qualia are an illusion, and
the explanatory gap is no real gap at all.
It is important to stress that in saying this we are not
denying that experience has a qualitative character. We
have already said a good deal about the qualitative charac-
ter of experience and how it is constituted by the character
of the sensorimotor contingencies at play when we per-
ceive. (We have more to say about this below; see also the
discussion of the individuation of sensory modalities in sect.
2.5). Our claim, rather, is that it is confused to think of the
qualitative character of experience in terms of the occur-
rence of something (whether in the mind or brain). Experi-
ence is something we do and its qualitative features are as-
pects of this activity.41
6.4. What gives rise to the illusion of qualia?
Many philosophers, vision scientists, and lay people will say
that seeing always involves the occurrence of raw feels or
qualia. If this view is mistaken, as we believe, then how can
we explain its apparent plausibility to so many? In order to
make our case convincing, we must address this question.
In our view, there are two main sources of the illusion.
The first pertains to the unity and complexity of experience.
We tend to overlook the complexity and heterogeneity of
experience, and this makes it seem as if in experience there
are unified sensation-like occurrences. The second source
of illusion has to do with the felt presence of perceptible
qualities. Because, when we see, we have continuous access
to features of a scene, it is as if we continuously represent
those features in consciousness. We elaborate these two
mistaken lines of reasoning in turn.
6.4.1. The unity of experience. Scientists and philosophers
frequently get the phenomenology of experience wrong;
they misdescribe what perceptual experience is like. Con-
sider, as an example, the experience of driving a Porsche
and its distinctive qualitative character. What does this feel-
ing consist of? What is it like? Notice that, in one sense,
there is no feeling of Porsche-driving. That is, the charac-
ter of Porsche-driving does not consist in the occurrence of
a special sort of momentary flutter or bodily sensation.
O’Regan & Noë: A sensorimotor account of vision and visual consciousness
960
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (2001) 24:5

What defines the character of driving a Porsche, rather, is
something more complex. There are characteristic ways in
which the vehicle accelerates in response to pressure on the
gas pedal. There are definite features of the way the car
handles turns, how smoothly one can change gears, and so
on. What it is like to drive a Porsche is constituted by all
these sensorimotor contingencies and by one’s skillful mas-
tery of them, – one’s confident knowledge of how the car
will respond to manipulations of its instruments.42
In one sense, then, there is no Porsche-driving quale. Af-
ter all, what it is like to drive a Porsche depends on these
various activities. In another sense, however, one can speak
of the qualitative character of driving a Porsche, but this
must be understood not in terms of the occurrence of a sen-
sation-like quale in the mind, but rather, in terms of one’s
comfortable exercise of one’s knowledge of the sensorimo-
tor contingencies governing the behavior of the car.
We propose that the same account can be extended to
such prototypical visual qualia as “the raw feel of a shade of
red.” Suppose you stand before a red wall. It fills up your
field of view. What is it like for you to see this red wall? Try
to describe the experience. How do you fulfill this instruc-
tion? One thing you might do is direct your attention to one
aspect or another of the wall’s redness. For example, you
might focus on its hue, or its brightness. In this way you be-
come transitively conscious of (that is to say, aware of ) this
or that aspect of the wall’s color. How do you accomplish
this? In what does your focusing on the red hue of the wall
consist? It consists in the (implicit) knowledge associated
with seeing redness: the knowledge that if you were to move
your eyes, there would be changes in the incoming infor-
mation that are typical of sampling with the eye; typical of
the nonhomogeneous way the retina samples color; knowl-
edge that if you were to move your eyes around, there might
be changes in the incoming information typical of what hap-
pens when illumination is uneven, and so on. Importantly,
there is not one thing in which the focussing of your atten-
tion on the hue (say) consists. Eye movements, shifts of at-
tention, the application of understanding – seeing the red
hue of the wall consists in all of this. There is no simple, un-
analyzable core of the experience. There are just the differ-
ent things we do when we see the redness of the wall.
In one sense, then, we can say that there is no red-quale
(just as there is, in a sense, no Porsche-driving quale). An
experience of a red surface is not a sensation-like occur-
rence. Seeing something red is a variegated activity, and to
describe its character adequately, one must describe the
many different things we do when we see something red.
6.4.2. The felt presence of qualities. Let us now turn to the
second source of the illusion of qualia. Consider once again
the phenomenon of change blindness. Many people say
that they have the impression that when they see, the en-
tire visual field is present to consciousness in all its nearly
infinite detail. However, the change blindness results sug-
gest that we do not have such detailed, picture-like aware-
ness. What explains the conviction that we do? As we have
discussed above, and as argued by O’Regan (1992; cf. also
O’Regan et al. 1999), the explanation is that we have access
to all the detail by means of the mere flick of an eye or turn
of the head, and so it is as if we had everything in view all
the time. The feeling of the presence of detail stems from
our implicit knowledge of the ways in which movements of
the eye and head gives rise to new detail and new informa-
tion. Importantly, one can explain this feeling without sup-
posing that all the detail is represented in consciousness.
In exactly this way, when we see something red we feel
that the redness has a certain definite, sensation-like pres-
ence and immediacy. The explanation for this is that we
have access to the redness by the most minute of eye move-
ments or attentional shifts. The redness is there, in the en-
vironment. The slightest eye, head, or attention movement
reveals further information about its character. Because we
have continuous access to the redness in the environment,
it may seem as if we are mentally in contact with it contin-
uously. This leads us to say, mistakenly, that there is a feel-
ing of redness (say) in our heads all along.
6.5. Is the illusion of qualia really so widespread?
Is the illusion of qualia really as widespread as it would
seem? Perhaps not. If you ask what a person sees, he or she
will not bring up visual experiences and their intrinsic fea-
tures. In everyday life, discussions of what we see are for
the most part confined to discussions of things themselves
(of the things we see). Even when we are viewing a piece of
art, when we may deliberately try to reflect on the way the
work affects us visually, nonphilosophers will rarely confuse
the question what it is like to look at the piece (what it re-
minds one of, how it makes one feel, whether one finds it
pleasant, or not) with that favorite question of philosophers,
namely, what is it like to have an experience as of seeing a
painting (that is, what are the intrinsic, qualitative features
of the visual experience)?
Another way to put this point is to say that qualia-based
accounts of the phenomenology of experience actually mis-
describe the phenomenological character of experience
(what experience is like). Qualia-talk, one might say, is the-
ory driven and the illusion of qualia is a theoretical illusion.
Crucially, normal perceivers do not, by virtue of being nor-
mal perceivers, buy into the relevant theory.
6.6. The ineffability of the qualitative character 
of experience
We have proposed that experience is a temporally extended
activity of exploration mediated by the perceiver’s knowl-
edge of sensorimotor contingencies. The differences in the
qualitative character of perceptual experiences correspond
to differences in the character of the relevant sensorimotor
contingencies. Just as the difference between driving a
Porsche and driving a tank consists in the different things
you do in driving it – that is, in the different skill-based un-
derstanding of how to drive the vehicle, – so the difference
between seeing a red flower and smelling a red flower con-
sists in the different patterns of sensorimotor contingency
governing one’s perceptual encounter in each situation. To
experience a red object, or the feel of driving a Porsche, is
to know, for example, that if you change the illumination in
such and such ways (or press down on the accelerator in
such and such ways), it will produce such and such changes
in the stimulation.
It follows, according to this view, that to reflect on the
character of one’s experience is to reflect on the character
of one’s law-governed exploration of the environment, on
what one does in seeing. Some of the sensorimotor contin-
gencies governing vision are easily accessible to awareness.
If you reflect on the character of your visual experience of
O’Regan & Noë: A sensorimotor account of vision and visual consciousness
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (2001) 24:5
961

a colorful flower, for example, it is easy to comprehend the
manner in which the appearance of the flower is a function
of viewing angle and illumination. If you look at a plate and
turn it, you can become aware of the way its profile be-
comes elliptical. If you put on inverting lenses, it is imme-
diately apparent that eye and head movements produce
surprising patterns, thus enabling us to direct our attention
to the disruption of familiar patterns of sensorimotor con-
tingency. But though we have access to these aspects of the
sensorimotor contingencies, there are other components of
the sensorimotor contingencies which do not lend them-
selves easily to propositional description, and which are not
so easily brought into consciousness: the exact laws that the
flower’s color obeys when you change the illumination, the
exact rule determining the modification of the plate’s pro-
file, the precise disruption caused by distorting lenses. Other
examples even less accessible to consciousness are: the par-
ticular way the macular pigment and the non-homogeneity
of retinal sampling affect sensory input when the eye moves;
the optic flow that occurs when the head rotates, and so on.
We believe that these considerations enable us to get
clear about a feature of experience that has often provoked
puzzlement on the part of scientists and philosophers,
namely, its apparent ineffability. It is very difficult to de-
scribe everything we do when we see, just as it is difficult to
describe everything we do when we are engaged in other
skillful activities such as athletic endeavors, playing an in-
strument, or speaking a language. A major portion of our
mastery of sensorimotor contingencies takes the form of
practical know-how. When we attempt to inquire into the
more subtle features of what goes on when we perceive, we
immediately come up against the fact that it is very difficult
to describe any but the most high-level, gross sensorimotor
contingencies.
There is nothing mysterious about this inability. In gen-
eral, the ability to know how to do something does not carry
with it the ability to reflect on what it is one does when ex-
ercising the ability in question. The difficulty in describing
the character of experience is not evidence of the special
character of experience in the world order. But it does bring
forcibly to mind the fact that experiences are “exercisings”
of complicated capacities, not ongoing occurrences in the
mind or brain.
6.7. On the possibility of phenomenology
We hope it is clear that it is no part of our argument to deny
the possibility of, or the importance of, phenomenological
reflection on experience.43 Indeed, we believe that our view
provides an account of the subject matter of phenomenol-
ogy that is superior to that put forward by qualia-oriented
positions.
First, our theory is supported by careful reflection on
what it is like to have perceptual experience. It is commonly
asserted by both philosophers and scientists, that it seems
to normal perceivers as if perception involves detailed in-
ternal representations of the environment in the head. As
noted in section 4.2, we believe this misdescribes the char-
acter of seeing. First of all, in seeing we commit ourselves
to no beliefs about what is going on in our heads. Seeing is
directed to the world, not the brain. Second, when we see,
we take the perceived detail to be out there in the world,
not in our head. Indeed, we take ourselves to be embedded
in the environment and to have access to detail through ac-
tive exploration. In our view, it is just bad phenomenology
to assert that we take ourselves to have a 3D-model or pic-
ture in the head when we see. In short, we believe that,
once it has broken free of clichés about pictures in the head,
phenomenological reflection on the character of experi-
ence does support the kind of approach developed here.
Second, traditional qualia-based approaches to experi-
ence threaten to make experience itself something myste-
rious and inaccessible. However, the subject matter of phe-
nomenological reflection is not an ephemeral, ineffable,
sensation-like momentary occurrence in the mind, but,
rather, the real-world, temporally extended activity of ex-
ploring the environment and the structure of sensorimotor
contingencies. There is a qualitative or phenomenological
difference between seeing and hearing and touching, as
stated. These are different activities, corresponding to dif-
ferent modes of exploration of the structure of sensory-
motor contingencies. To see a bottle, for example, is to ex-
plore visual-motor contingencies, such as transformations
in the appearance of the bottle as one moves in relation to
it. To touch it, on the other hand, is to explore the structure
of tactile-motor contingencies. The bottle impedes, guides,
and informs tactile exploration of the bottle. To reflect,
then, on what it is like to see the bottle, or to touch it, is to
reflect on just these sorts of facts about the active engage-
ment the perceiver undertakes with the environment (see
Noë 2001). In this way, we believe that the kind of approach
we lay out in this paper helps place phenomenology as an
undertaking on solid ground (see Noë 2002, for a develop-
ment of this idea).
6.8. Overcoming the explanatory gap (or, Why there 
is no gap)
As noted above, the problem of the explanatory gap is that
of explaining qualia in physical or biological terms. We be-
lieve that our view bridges this gap. More accurately, it
demonstrates that the gap itself is an artifact of a certain –
we believe mistaken – conception of experience. There is
not really any gap at all.
Our claim, simply put, is this: there is no explanatory gap
because there is nothing answering to the theorist’s notion
of qualia. That is, we reject the conception of experience
that is presupposed by the problem of the explanatory gap.
(Note that we can make this claim even though we do not
deny, as we have been at pains to explain above, that there
are experiences and that experience has qualitative charac-
ter.)
To appreciate the structure of our claim, consider once
again, very briefly, the Porsche-driving example. We have
argued that the feeling of driving a Porsche derives from the
different things we do when we drive a Porsche, and from
our confident mastery of the relevant sensorimotor contin-
gencies. We can now appreciate that there is no need to ex-
plain the physical or causal basis of the occurrence of the
unitary Porsche-driving quality, for there is no such quality.
What does need to be explained is the physical (neural) ba-
sis of the various component skills that are drawn into play
when one drives a Porsche (for it is these that constitute the
feeling). And so, likewise, there is no need to seek a neural
basis for the occurrence of visual qualia such as that of red,
for, in the relevant sense, there are no such qualia.
To this it will be objected that it is no more easy to see
how possession and mastery of sensorimotor skills is to
O’Regan & Noë: A sensorimotor account of vision and visual consciousness
962
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (2001) 24:5

bridge the explanatory gap, than it is to see how different
patterns of neural activity can accomplish the same feat.
But this very question betrays a failure to understand our
proposal. For our claim is not that knowledge and exercise
of sensorimotor contingencies can solve the same feat. Our
claim is that there is no feat to be accomplished and, there-
fore, no possible way in which neural activity can accom-
plish it. Let’s return again to simple examples. You hold a
bottle in your hand. You feel the whole bottle. But you only
make contact with isolated parts of its surface with isolated
parts of the surface of your hands. But don’t you feel the
whole bottle as present? That is, phenomenologically speak-
ing, the feeling of presence of the bottle is not a conjecture
or an inference. The feeling you have is the knowledge that
movements of the hand open up and reveal new aspects of
bottle surface. It feels to you as if there’s stuff there to be
touched by movement of the hands. That’s what the feeling
of the presence of the bottle consists in. But the basis of the
feeling, then, is not something occurring now. The basis
rather is one’s knowledge now as to what one can do.
6.9. Summary
Let us summarize the main claims of this section.
(1) There are two kinds of visual consciousness. There is
transitive visual consciousness (or consciousness of), which
consists in one’s awareness of an aspect of a scene. There is
visual consciousness in general, which consists in one’s gen-
eral capacity to become aware of different features of the
scene. Transitive consciousness, as a form of awareness, can
be explained just as we explain visual awareness in section
2.6 above. To be aware of a feature is to exercise one’s prac-
tical knowledge of the relevant sensorimotor contingencies.
Visual consciousness in general is just the higher-order ca-
pacity to exercise such mastery.
(2) The difference between different perceptual experi-
ences, and between different perceptual experiences in dif-
ferent sensory modalities, can be explained in terms of the
different things we do in having the experience and in terms
of the different rules of sensorimotor contingency that are
invoked in each case. The supposition that there are further
qualitative aspects of experience that cannot be explained
along such lines is an illusion, engendered by: (a) our ten-
dency to fail to attend to the heterogeneity and complexity
of experience; (b) our tendency to treat continuous access
to environmental detail as the continuous representation of
that detail. Moreover, we claim that the illusion of qualia is
actually not as widespread as philosophers often suggest,
and that the conception of experience we develop in this pa-
per – experience as a mode of skillful activity – is actually
truer to the actual character of felt experience than qualia
based views.
(3) There is no explanatory gap. We do not claim that it
is possible to explain the physical basis of conscious experi-
ence by appeal to sensorimotor contingencies. How, one
might ask, can sensorimotor contingencies explain phe-
nomenal consciousness any better than other proposals that
have been made? Rather, we argue, as should by now be
clear, that the conception of phenomenal consciousness it-
self must be (and can be) rejected, and so there is no longer
any puzzle about how to explain that. As we make clear in
the points above, other aspects of consciousness can indeed
be explained according to our view.
We have not attempted to present solutions to such
philosophical chestnuts as the problem of undetectable
spectrum inversion, or the problem of zombies. Instead, we
have turned our attention to the presentation of a frame-
work within which to investigate the nature of vision and vi-
sual consciousness. We have drawn attention to the wealth
of empirical data that support our theory. In addition, we
have tried to provide some statement of what we take to be
the implications of this view for progress on the topic of vi-
sual consciousness. We have adopted the strategy of trying
to demonstrate the fruitfulness of our approach instead of
that of refuting the philosophical opposition. This sort of in-
direct approach is necessary when what divides camps is not
so much disputes over what the facts are, but rather, fairly
messy questions about how to make sense of the interde-
pendence of a whole network of related ideas: seeing, vi-
sion, visual experience, visual consciousness, qualia, raw
feel, awareness, and attention. We have made a number of
proposals about how to think about this raft of intercon-
nected phenomena which will, we hope, allow for empiri-
cal progress.
7. Philosophical niceties
7.1. Awareness versus consciousness
Chalmers (1996a) distinguishes between awareness and con-
sciousness. Awareness, according to Chalmers, is a state in
which some information (that of which we are aware) is
available for control of behavior and for guiding verbal re-
port. Consciousness, or experience, on the other hand, is an
intrinsically qualitative state whose links to behavior are in-
essential. Chalmers’ distinction is very similar to Block’s
(1995b) distinction between access-consciousness and phe-
nomenal-consciousness. A state is access-conscious, accord-
ing to Block, if it is poised to be used to govern rational
thought, guide behavior, or give rise to verbal report. A state
is phenomenally conscious, however, if it is an experience.
Block and Chalmers agree that awareness (or A-conscious-
ness) is a functional notion, definable in terms of behavior
and dispositions to behave, and they agree that conscious-
ness (or P-consciousness, or experience) are non-functional
notions (that is, functional duplicates can differ in their P-
consciousness). (Block and Chalmers differ in important de-
tails that do not concern us here.)
We are skeptics about phenomenal consciousness under-
stood the way Block and Chalmers understand it. As we
stated above, what explains the illusion that seeing consists
in the occurrence of an internal qualitative state is the fact
that, at any moment, one can direct one’s attention to one’s
activity of looking and so encounter such qualities as the
redness of a wall, or the distinctive shape of a seen object.
Moreover, we are able to track not only objects of aware-
ness, but our tracking activity itself and thus become aware
(in the functional sense) of the percepts induced by the pat-
terns of sensorimotor contingency governing our seeing.
The experience of red, for example, arises when we know
(though this is not propositional, but rather, practical knowl-
edge) that, for example, if we move our eyes over a red re-
gion, there will occur changes typical of what happens when
our non-homogeneously sampling retinas move over things
whose color is red. It is, then, our continuous access to the
redness that provides the key to understanding why it (mis-
takenly) seems to us as if we are continuously undergoing
experience as of something red.
O’Regan & Noë: A sensorimotor account of vision and visual consciousness
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (2001) 24:5
963

Our account of seeing and visual awareness thus cuts
across the distinction between awareness and conscious-
ness (as Chalmers puts it), or between A- and P-conscious-
ness (in Block’s terms). Visual experience is a matter of ac-
cess, but access to the world, and to one’s activity of tracking
and interacting with the surrounding scene, not to one’s in-
ternal information-bearing states. The felt or qualitative
character of seeing is to be explained in terms of this active
conception.
7.2. Blindsight
Block (1995b) puts the concepts of A- and P-consciousness
to work in his discussion of blindsight. Patients with blind-
sight have suffered lesions in the visual cortex as a conse-
quence of which they appear to be blind in a region of the
visual field (Pöppel et al. 1973; Weiskrantz 1986). Subjects
report that they see nothing when a stimulus is presented
to their scotoma. When asked to guess (from a number of
choices) what is present in their blind field, subjects are cor-
rect at a rate well above chance. There would seem to be a
sense, then, in which these individuals see without seeing.
One possibility is that these patients see, but are uncon-
scious of seeing. This in turn suggests that the function of
consciousness is to enable us to make use of the informa-
tion we acquire. Block (1995b) attacks this reasoning be-
cause it fails to distinguish between A- and P-conscious-
ness. P-consciousness is surely lacking, but A-consciousness
is absent too, at least for the most part. One is not entitled,
then, to draw general conclusions about consciousness
from the phenomenon of blindsight.
Block contrasts blindsight with a nonactual but, he thinks,
conceptually possible phenomenon of superblindsight. In
superblindsight, as Block describes it, subjects have appar-
ently normal access to information acquired in their blind
fields, but they lack experience of the information. He in-
vites us to imagine that these individuals have been trained
to trust their “guesses” about what is present in their blind
fields. This information, therefore, is available to guide ac-
tion and speech. Indeed, we are asked to imagine that, as far
as speech and behavior go, people with superblindsight
seem normal. There is one noteworthy exception, of course.
If you ask them whether they visually experience what is
present in their blind field, the way they experience what is
present to their non-blind field, they reply that they experi-
ence nothing. They are as good as blind as far as feeling goes.
Block’s main contention then is two-fold: (1) that su-
perblindsight is visual A-consciousness in the absence of P-
consciousness; and (2) that superblindsight is conceptually
possible. We doubt both points. As for (1), it seems that we
have grounds for doubting that the patient really has a blind
field. After all, the patient appears to see just fine. As Den-
nett (1995) notes, Block’s account appears to trade, illegit-
imately, on the fact that in actual blindsight the kinds of in-
formation involved are remarkably sparse (on this point, see
also Noë 1997). The subject is correct, for example, about
the orientation of a line grating. But if we imagine infor-
mational content to be greatly enriched, as would seem re-
quired in the case of superblindsight, then the claim, on the
part of the subject, that he lacks P-consciousness, becomes
highly implausible. It is difficult to make sense of the claim
that a person might offer an accurate description of a paint-
ing, say, describing all the colors and the geometry of the
composition in a natural manner, all the while having no ex-
perience of the painting. One loses all grip on what it could
mean to say that the subject has no experience. And this in-
dicates the nature of our misgivings about (2). If you are
perceptually alert to the presence of environmental detail
in a manner that allows you to describe what is present, and
if you are sensitive to the appropriate visual laws of senso-
rimotor contingency (for example, if the detail is no longer
accessible when you close your eyes or the lights go out, if
the image shifts in the normal way when you move your
eyes, if your attention is immediately drawn to any change
in the image, etc.), – then surely it would be very peculiar
to say that you are not experiencing/seeing the painting
(Noë 1997).
Nor do we find Block’s (1995b) examples of cases of P-
consciousness without A-consciousness convincing. He
gives the example of having a conversation while a power
drill makes a racket outside the window. One is engrossed
in the conversation and one does not notice the drill. All of
a sudden one notices it. Block proposes that in a case such
as this, insofar as one did hear the drill before noticing it,
one was P-conscious of the drill while at the same time A-
unconscious of it. When one noticed the drill, one becomes
A-conscious of what one had previously heard and been P-
conscious of all the time.
But did one hear the drill before one noticed it? The view
developed in our paper here requires a negative answer to
this question. One does not hear the sound of the drill be-
cause one does not make use of one’s auditory tracking. This
is of course compatible with its being the case that we are
sensitive to the sound before we hear it (before we become
conscious of it). The auditory system will analyze and store
(perhaps only in a short-term memory buffer) information
pertaining to the drill. But we do not use that information,
nor are we, before we notice the drill, poised to use that in-
formation or able to use that information to guide our be-
havior, thought, movement, or perceptual exploration.
One might challenge Block’s view in another way as well.
Consider a slightly different but familiar example. A bell is
chiming. All of a sudden you notice not only that there is a
bell chiming, but that there were six chimes in all. Surely
this shows that you heard the chimes even before you no-
ticed it? Indeed, what this would show, as Chalmers has ar-
gued, is that there is a sense in which one was in fact poised
to make use of the unnoticed sounds one was hearing even
as one failed to notice them. That is, according to this line
of reasoning, one was A-conscious of the unexperienced
sounds (contrary to what Block would say).
One virtue of this account is that it perhaps fits somewhat
better with ordinary usage of words like “hear” and “see.”
That is, it seems quite natural to say that you heard the clock
chime without noticing it. But there are substantive empir-
ical reasons to reject this account nonetheless. The fact that
a stimulus is present and is actively impinging on the senses,
does not entail that you perceive it. This is the central up-
shot of the change blindness studies (discussed in sect.
5.10) and also recent work on so-called “inattentional
blindness” (discussed in sect. 5.11). The fact that a stimu-
lus is present means that it is available to be probed by the
active animal. Only while the active probe is occurring do
you get conscious perception (seeing or hearing, say).
The conflict between our view and that of common sense
is actually more apparent than real. As we noted earlier in
our discussion of awareness, awareness is a matter of de-
gree. Part of what makes it seem so reasonable to say that
O’Regan & Noë: A sensorimotor account of vision and visual consciousness
964
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (2001) 24:5

you heard the noise without noticing it, or that you (a
driver) saw a car without noticing it, is that we may call to
mind cases where you are in fact noticing a sound or an ob-
ject a little bit. For example, you are trying to have a con-
versation and there’s that irritating noise in the background
which threatens to interrupt you but to which you are pay-
ing very little attention. Nevertheless, having said all this, we
are quite prepared to bite the bullet and insist that in the
complete absence of current access, there is no perception.
Note that to say that there is no perception is not to say
that there may not be significant unconscious influence on
behavior or action.44
7.3. Our relationship to Dennett
The view developed in this paper is very similar in impor-
tant respects to the position developed over the last few
decades by the philosopher D. C. Dennett (Dennett 1978;
1987; 1991; Dennett & Kinsbourne 1992). But, as the dis-
cussion of the previous section suggests, there are impor-
tant differences as well.
Many philosophers and scientists assume that conscious-
ness is an intrinsic property of neural states. The idea is
that, among the multitude of content-bearing states in the
brain, some subset of states have an additional property of
being phenomenally conscious. (This is in contrast to states
which, in the terminology of Block, are access-conscious.
This access consciousness is not thought to be an intrinsic
property of the state but one that depends on the relation
between that state and others in the broader system.) The
problem of consciousness, in this general picture, is to un-
derstand what processes or mechanisms or events in the
brain make certain contents phenomenally conscious.
Where, and how, does consciousness happen in the brain?
We reject not only specific attempts to answer this ques-
tion (oscillations, synchrony, microtubules, etc.), but the as-
sumptions implicit in the question itself. That is, like Den-
nett, we reject Cartesian materialism (Dennett 1991;
Dennett & Kinsbourne 1992). Phenomenal consciousness
is not a property of states in what Dennett calls the sub-
personal system (i.e., the brain – whether thought of in
neural, or in more abstract, cognitive or computational
terms) (Dennett 1978; 1969; 1987). There need be no one-
to-one correlation between states of consciousness and
events in the brain.
But this brings us to the main point of our disagreement
with Dennett. Although we reject accounts of phenomenal
consciousness as a property of subpersonal states, we do not
deny (as we have sought to make clear in the previous sec-
tions, especially sect. 6.7), that there are experiences and
that there are facts about what experiences are like. But
these, however, are facts not about a person’s qualia or raw
feels. They pertain, rather, to the person’s (or animal’s) ac-
tive engagement with the world he or it inhabits.45 They are
facts at the personal (as opposed to subpersonal) level. We
return to this point below.
One of the cornerstone’s of Dennett’s approach to the
problem of consciousness, is his conception of heterophe-
nomenology (Dennett 1991). In many respects, we are very
sympathetic to this approach. The best way to understand
what Dennett means by heterophenomenology is to con-
trast this view with could be called introspectionism. Intro-
spectionism is the view that the conscious subject has im-
mediate epistemic access to his or her conscious states.
Perhaps not too many writers would endorse introspec-
tionism when put forward in this blunt manner, but it is
clear that something like this idea drives a good deal of dis-
cussion in contemporary consciousness studies. Theorists
believe that we know, on the basis of reflection on our own
case, what our own conscious states are like. Dennett re-
jects introspectionism. Dennett has a lot to say about why
introspectionism is untenable, and we are sympathetic to
his position. For our purposes it is enough to point out that,
according to Dennett, as scientists we cannot assume that
subjects are right in their first-personal avowals of con-
scious experience. Such reports are just further bits of evi-
dence about the nature of mental life and they have no priv-
ileged status with respect to other forms of evidence (e.g.,
psychophysical, neural, psychological, etc.). According to
heterophenomenology, then, first-person reports of experi-
ence have no special status attached to them. There is no
deep and unfathomable asymmetry between what can be
known in the first person, and what can be known in the
third person.
Although we endorse Dennett’s rejection of naïve intro-
spectionism, our endorsement of the claim that first-person
approaches to consciousness are not privileged with respect
to third-person approaches is guarded. To appreciate why,
consider an example: Dennett (1991) criticizes what he
takes to be the widespread assumption, on the part of per-
ceivers, that the visual field is in sharp detail and uniform fo-
cus from the center out to the periphery. Simple tests (e.g.,
the colored pencil test mentioned earlier in sect. 5.6), and
well-known facts about the non-homogeneity of the retina,
suffice to show that this account of the quality of the visual
field is misguided. But is it really true that normal perceivers
think of their visual fields this way? Do normal perceivers
really make this error? We think not. As noted earlier in con-
nection with change blindness (and see Noë 2001; Noë et al.
2000; and Pessoa et al. 1998), normal perceivers do not have
ideological commitments concerning the resolution of the
visual field. Rather, they take the world to be solid, dense,
detailed, and present, and they take themselves to be em-
bedded in and thus to have access to the world.
The point of this example is that Dennett seems to mis-
characterize how things seem to perceivers, that is, he mis-
characterizes their first-person judgments as to the quality
of experience. He does this precisely because he is insuffi-
ciently attentive to the actual phenomenology of experi-
ence. What this shows is that there are substantive empiri-
cal questions about the first-person quality of experience.
To investigate such questions, presumably, one must avail
oneself of the first-person perspective. From this it does not
follow, to be sure, that first-person methods are privileged
with respect to third-person methods, but it does follow
that it ought to be possible to develop modes of first-person
investigation of experience that do not suffer from the flaws
of qualia-based (introspectionist) approaches.46
The crucial point is that nothing in Dennett’s criticisms
of naïve introspectionism entails that all first-person ap-
proaches to consciousness must take the form of naïve in-
trospectionism, and so nothing in the arguments speaks
against the possibility of, or importance of, first person ap-
proaches. In the concept of perceptual experience we have
endorsed, first-person reflection on the character of expe-
rience would not consist in introspection at all, but rather
in attentiveness to the complexity of the activity of percep-
tual exploration. Ironically, as we have seen, Dennett’s re-
O’Regan & Noë: A sensorimotor account of vision and visual consciousness
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (2001) 24:5
965

jection of the importance of the first-person perspective has
led him, at crucial junctures, to misdescribe the character
of perceptual experience.
8. Visual neuroscience
8.1. The brain and vision
Much work on visual neuroscience rests on the idea that for
every perceptual state there is a neural correlate sufficient
to produce it. In addition, it is widely supposed that the
function of this neural substrate is to produce sensory ex-
perience by generating a “representation” corresponding to
the content of the experience. A very different conception
of the role of the brain in vision emerges from the stand-
point of the sensorimotor contingency theory.
According to this theory, seeing is a skillful activity
whereby one explores the world, drawing on one’s mastery
of the relevant laws of sensorimotor contingency. Seeing, in
this sense, is somewhat like dancing with a partner. Dancing
is a complicated activity. There is no one thing in which
dancing consists and there is no single state of being in the
dancing state. Dancing consists in the integration of a range
of connected skills: sensitive listening, coordinated move-
ment (or sometimes the absence of movement); and, im-
portantly, partner dancing requires the presence of a part-
ner to whose actions and reactions one is appropriately
attuned. There is no doubt that neural activity in the brain
is necessary to enable one’s skillful performance of the
dance. But this neural activity is not sufficient to produce the
dancing. This is so because the accompanying, appropriate
actions and reactions of the partner are also needed. These
provoke weight changes, disequilibria, rebounds, and so on,
which cannot occur without the partner being present, and
which are part and parcel of the dancing activity.
In the same way, we argue, seeing also necessarily in-
volves particular forms of action and reaction on the part of
the visual apparatus and the environment. The brain en-
ables us to see by subserving the different capacities that
get drawn on in the activity of visual exploration. But the
brain’s activation does not in itself constitute the seeing. In
partner dancing, specifying the bodily configuration or
brain state of the dancer is not sufficient to specify the
dance (because we need additionally to know how the part-
ner is currently interacting). Likewise, in seeing, specifying
the brain state is not sufficient to determine the sensory ex-
perience, because we need to know how the visual appara-
tus and the environment are currently interacting. There
can therefore be no one-to-one correspondence between
visual experience and neural activations. Seeing is not con-
stituted by activation of neural representations. Exactly the
same neural state can underlie different experiences, just as
the same body position can be part of different dances.
How then are we to understand the role played by the
brain in vision? Our proposal, which we develop below, is
that the brain supports vision by enabling mastery and ex-
ercise of knowledge of sensorimotor contingencies.
8.2. The search for neural representations and the
neural correlate of consciousness
Perhaps the most widely cited work which might be thought
to constitute evidence for the existence of cortical repre-
sentations of sensory stimuli could be taken to be the ob-
servations of Penfield, who solicited sensory responses
from unanesthetized patients undergoing brain stimulation
(e.g., Penfield & Jasper 1954). More recent work in visual
science and consciousness studies has been devoted to the
quest for what has been called “neural correlates of con-
sciousness” (Crick & Koch 1990; 1995; 1998; – for an illu-
minating review, cf. Chalmers 1996a, Ch. 6). As an illustra-
tion of such work, we can use the impressive studies of
Logothetis and colleagues (Leopold & Logothetis 1996;
Logothetis 1998; Logothetis et al. 1996) analyzing neural
substrates of binocular rivalry in laboratory monkeys. In
binocular rivalry, each eye is presented with a different
stimulus (e.g., a horizontal bar, a face). Under these condi-
tions the observer experiences not both stimuli, or some
amalgam of the two, but rather a sequence of alternating
percepts corresponding to one or other of the two stimuli.
When one stimulus is dominant, the other is not perceived.
The perceptual reversals occur irregularly and at intervals
of a few seconds. Logothetis and collaborators show that in
tested visual areas (e.g., V1/V2, V4, MT, IT, STS), some
neurons are unaffected by perceptual reversals. The activ-
ity of these neurons is driven by the stimulus patterns en-
tering the eyes, which remain unchanged. The activity of
other neurons, however, depends directly on the internally
generated shifts in the percept. The percentage of such per-
cept-driven cells is substantially higher in IT and STS –
where 90% of tested neurons correlate to percepts, – than
in other visual areas. (In V1/V2, for example, a much
smaller percentage of neurons were percept-driven.) These
data suggest (it is claimed) that neural activity in IT and STS
forms the neural correlate of the experience.
Other kinds of neural representations or neural corre-
lates of conscious perceptual experience arise in the context
of perceptual completion phenomena. A classical example
is the work of von der Heydt and his colleagues, who found
neurons in V2 that fire for illusory contours in a very simi-
lar way that they fire for real contours (Peterhans & von der
Heydt 1989; von der Heydt & Peterhans 1989; von der
Heydt et al. 1984). A number of other examples involving
perceptual completion have been reviewed by Pessoa et al.
(1998).
Work like that described above has been received with
enthusiasm: researchers believe that the discovery of neural
representations that correlate with perceptual experience
brings us closer to understanding what gives rise to the per-
ceptual experience. The underlying assumption is that if a
set of neurons is found in the brain which correlates
strongly with aware perceptual states, then, because these
neurons are probably linked to the mechanisms that are
generating awareness, we are likely to be able to explain
perceptual awareness by appeal to this neural activity.
But this reasoning is unsound. Indeed, consider what
would happen if we were to actually find a set of neurons
that correlated perfectly with visual awareness. For the sake
of illustration, suppose we were to discover that in the
pineal gland of macaque monkeys there was a tiny projec-
tion room in which what is seen by the monkey was pro-
jected onto an internal screen whose activity correlated per-
fectly with the monkey’s visual awareness. On reflection it
is clear that such a discovery (which would surely be the
Holy Grail of a neural correlate of consciousness seeker!)
would not bring us any closer to understanding how mon-
keys see. For we would still lack an explanation of how the
image in the pineal gland generates seeing; that is, how it
O’Regan & Noë: A sensorimotor account of vision and visual consciousness
966
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (2001) 24:5

enables or controls or modulates the forms of activity in
which seeing consists. We would certainly be entitled, on
the basis of the strong correlation between features of what
is seen and features of what is projected onto the pineal pro-
jection screen, to assume that this neural activity played
some role in vision. But nothing more could be said about
such a discovery.
Why do some researchers believe that to understand the
nature of consciousness or vision it is necessary to track
down the neural representations that correlate with con-
scious experience? One possible explanation is that these
researchers are (perhaps unwittingly) committed to the
idea that the discovery of perfect correlation would give us
reason to believe that we had discovered the neural activity
sufficient to produce the experience (as suggested by
Chalmers 1996a). Teller and Pugh (1983) call such a neural
substrate of experience the bridge locus. In addition,
thinkers may unwittingly subscribe to what Pessoa et al.
(1998) have called analytic isomorphism. This is the view
that for every experience there will be a neural substrate
whose activity is sufficient to produce that experience (a
bridge locus), and that there will be an isomorphism
(though not necessarily spatial or topographic) between
features of the experience and features of the bridge locus.
It is the existence of such an isomorphism that works to jus-
tify the claim that the discovery of such a neural substrate
would explain the occurrence of the percept.
We believe that one must reject the metaphysical dogma
of analytic isomorphism. As argued by Pessoa et al., no
neural state will be sufficient to produce experience. Just as
mechanical activity in the engine of a car is not sufficient to
guarantee driving activity (suppose the car is in a swamp, or
suspended by a magnet), so neural activity alone is not suf-
ficient to produce vision.
Note also that if this view is correct, then it is a mistake
to expect to find neurons which are perfectly correlated
with visual consciousness. Ultimately, visual consciousness
is not a single thing, but rather a collection of task and
environment-contingent capacities, each of which can be
appropriately deployed when necessary. Furthermore, we
expect that if neurophysiologists do find neurons that cor-
relate strongly with awareness, then most likely this will
only be for one or another set of conditions or tasks.
8.3. There is no need for “binding”
Neuroanatomists believe that the visual system is com-
posed of numerous, more or less independent subsystems
(or modules), which extract a variety of different attributes
such as color, contrast, depth, orientation, and texture from
the visual stimulus (e.g., De Yoe & van Essen 1988; Living-
stone & Hubel 1988; Zeki 1993). The fact that these mod-
ules operate independently and are often localized in dif-
ferent cerebral regions, raises the question of how the
separate streams of information ultimately come together
to give us the unified perception of reality that we subjec-
tively experience. One suggestion for solving this so-called
“binding problem” was the idea of the “grandmother cell”
in which single cells, or at least highly localized cerebral re-
gions, combine information pertaining to specific percepts:
for example, face-sensitive cells (Rolls 1992); place sensi-
tive cells (O’Keefe et al. 1998); view sensitive cells (Rolls &
O’Mara 1995). A more recent idea which does not require
bringing signals into a single brain location has also received
support from neurophysiological evidence (cf. Abeles &
Prut 1996; Brecht et al. 1998; Castelo-Branco et al. 1998;
Gray & Singer 1989; Llinas & Ribary 1993). According to
this view, separate cortical areas which are concurrently an-
alyzing the different aspects of a stimulus might oscillate in
synchrony, and it might be this synchrony which provides
the perceptual experience of unity.
There are two motivations in the reasoning which un-
derlies these types of investigations: one concerns tempo-
ral unity, and the other concerns “conceptual” unity.
Certainly it is true that when we recognize an object, we
have the impression that all its attributes are seen simulta-
neously at one “perceptual moment.” This leads scientists
to think that the objects’ attributes must be bound together
synchronously in the internal representation in order to
provide the singleness of the perceptual moment. But this
is a fallacy. Thinking that physical synchrony is necessary for
having a synchronous experience is the same kind of fallacy
as thinking that because things look like 3D models or pic-
ture postcards to us, there must be a topologically equiva-
lent map in the brain. Underlying this fallacy is the implicit
assumption that the synchrony or coherence of perception
requires presenting information in a synchronous or coher-
ent way to an internal homunculus. In fact, just as the per-
ception of the 3D world does not require 3D maps in the
brain, subjective simultaneity does not require simultane-
ity of brain events.47 This point has been made by Dennett
and Kinsbourne (1992; see also O’Regan 1992; Pessoa et al.
1998). What explains the temporal unity of experience is
the fact that experience is a thing we are doing, and we are
doing it now.
Coming now to the issue of “conceptual” coherence, a
similar argument can be made: the fact that object attri-
butes seem perceptually to be part of a single object does
not require them to be “represented” in any unified kind of
way, for example, at a single location in the brain, or by a
single process. They may be so represented, but there is no
logical necessity for this. Furthermore, if they are repre-
sented in a spatially or temporally localized way, the fact
that they are so represented cannot in itself be what ex-
plains the spatial, temporal or “conceptual” phenomenology
of perceptual coherence.48 What explains the conceptual
unity of experience is the fact that experience is a thing we
are doing, and we are doing it with respect to a conceptu-
ally unified external object.
We noted above that were we to discover pictures in the
brain that correlated with the experience of seeing, we
would still not have moved much closer towards an expla-
nation of seeing. But once we recognize this, then we fur-
ther realize that there is no reason to suppose that to explain
seeing we should seek for detailed internal pictures. There
is no longer any rationale for supposing that there is a place
in the brain where different streams of information are
brought together and “unified” (whether conceptually or
temporally). With the appreciation of this point we can
dismiss the problem of binding as, in essence, a pseudo-
problem.
8.4. A new way of thinking about the role of the brain 
in vision: A program for future research
We have already taken steps toward a positive characteri-
zation of the role of the brain in vision by claiming (as we
have in sect. 8.1 above) that studies of the neural bases of
O’Regan & Noë: A sensorimotor account of vision and visual consciousness
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (2001) 24:5
967

vision must be framed by a consideration of the whole ani-
mal’s broader behavioral and cognitive capacities. In this
section we try to extend these remarks.
Consider the missile guidance system we discussed in
section 2.4. Suppose that at the present moment the target
airplane happens to have gone out of the field of view of the
missile. No information, let us suppose, is coming into the
missile’s sights right now. Nevertheless, the missile guid-
ance system has a certain potential: it “knows” that by mak-
ing the appropriate change in its trajectory, it should be able
to bring the missile back into view. Thus, even though at this
particular moment the airplane is not visible and no visual
information is coming in, it is still correct to say that the mis-
sile is currently tracking its target.
Exactly the same point, we argue, can be made about see-
ing and the sensorimotor contingencies governing seeing.
When you make an eye saccade, the sensory stimulation
provided by an object will change drastically due to very
strong retinal smearing. At that very moment you do not re-
ceive sensory input from the object. But there is no more
reason to think that this interruption in stimulation leads to
an interruption in seeing, than there is to think that the mis-
sile is no longer tracking the plane when the plane happens
to go out of the missile’s sights.49 The missile continues to
track the plane, and the perceiver continues to see, because
each is master of the relevant sensorimotor contingencies
and each is exercising those capacities in an appropriate
manner. Seeing an object consists precisely in the knowl-
edge of the relevant sensorimotor contingencies – that is, in
being able to exercise one’s mastery of the fact that if, among
other things, you make an eye movement, the stimulus will
change in the particular way typical of what happens when
you move your eyes. If the stimulation due to the object did
not change in that way, then you would not be seeing the ob-
ject – you might, for example, be hallucinating it.
These considerations call attention to the fact that inter-
ruptions and discontinuities in stimulation (owing to sac-
cades, blinks, eye movements, chromatic aberrations, and
other supposed defects of the visual apparatus) are in fact
part of what seeing is. It is one’s exercise of the mastery of
just such regularities in sensorimotor contingencies in
which seeing consists. What is striking for present purposes
is that just as moments of stillness and inactivity may be es-
sential to the performance of a dance, so moments of neural
inactivity may be precisely what characterizes the exercise
of sight. This is a fact that can only come into focus through
a conception of vision as a mode of activity such as that de-
veloped by the sensorimotor contingency theory.
Considerations such as these show further, that although
neural activity is necessary for vision, there need be no one-
to-one mapping between seeing and occurrent neural
states and processes. Vision requires all manner of neural
events, but crucially, in our view, the experience of seeing
itself cannot be equated with the simultaneous occurrence
of any particular neural activity. This follows from the fact
that, at any given moment, the brain may be inactive.
What then is the function of the brain in vision? Very gen-
erally speaking, it is to enable the knowledge and exercise
of sensorimotor contingencies. Seeing, we argue, is consti-
tuted by the brain’s present attunement to the changes that
would occur as a consequence of an action on the part of
the perceiver. Visual experience is just the exercise of the
mastery of relevant sensorimotor contingencies. An exam-
ple may help to make the point clearer. Your visual appre-
hension of the roundness of a plate consists in part in your
knowledge that changes in your relation to the plate (move-
ments relative to the plate) will induce changes in the plate’s
profile. That it looks round to you now, despite its elliptical
profile, is constituted by your application, now, of skillful
mastery of the appropriate rule of sensorimotor contin-
gency. Other rules of sensorimotor contingency may be, as
it were, more low level. As you move your eye across a
straight line (as discussed in sect. 2.2), there is a character-
istic pattern of transformation of the retinal stimulation.
The brain is attuned to this pattern. One important func-
tion of the brain may thus consist in the testing of the ap-
propriateness of the application of certain patterns of sen-
sorimotor contingency.
An important advantage of this view is that it allows us to
escape from the problem of having to explain how brain ac-
tivity could give rise to experience. We escape from this
problem because we propose that experience does not de-
rive from brain activity. Experience is just the activity in
which the exploring of the environment consists. The ex-
perience lies in the doing.
8.5. Toward a sensorimotor approach 
to visual neuroscience
A good deal of recent neuroscientific research shows that
to understand the role the brain plays in supporting per-
ceptual and motor capacities, it is necessary to keep clearly
in view the broader context of the animal’s skillful task-
oriented activity. Specific neural states cannot be perfectly
correlated with specific perceptual states. You cannot un-
derstand the contribution of neural activity if you restrict
yourself to a brain’s-eye view. This fits with our model of vi-
sion and visual consciousness. Seeing is not a simple occur-
rence; it is a rich, exploratory activity within a certain envi-
ronment and with certain sensory apparatus, drawing on a
number of heterogeneous capacities. Neural activity does
not in itself produce experience. Neural activity contributes
to experience only as enabling mastery and exercise of the
laws of sensorimotor contingency.
An exhaustive survey of this neuroscientific research
goes beyond the scope of the present discussion. Here we
briefly indicate some examples.
8.5.1. Neural Plasticity and sensory substitution. A cur-
rently very active domain of investigation in neurophysiol-
ogy concerns findings which show that cortical representa-
tions of visual or somatosensory information can change as
a function of stimulation, use, or lesion. For example Pas-
cual-Leone et al. (1993) show that the sensorimotor repre-
sentation of the reading finger in the cortex of proficient
Braille readers becomes greatly developed at the expense
of the representations of other fingers (see also Sterr et al.
1998). Sadato et al. (1998) have suggested that in proficient
Braille readers, tactile processing is “rerouted” to occipital
visual cortex (see also Cohen et al. 1999). The cortical rep-
resentation of owl monkeys’ fingertips become enlarged
when the monkeys engage in haptic exploration training
(Jenkins et al. 1990a). Iriki et al. (1996) found that recep-
tive fields of bimodal (somatosensory and visual) neurons in
the caudal postcentral gyrus of macaque monkeys were al-
tered during tool use “to include the entire length of the
rake or to cover the expanded accessible space.” Other ex-
amples include reorganization of cortical representations as
O’Regan & Noë: A sensorimotor account of vision and visual consciousness
968
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (2001) 24:5

O’Regan & Noë: A sensorimotor account of vision and visual consciousness
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (2001) 24:5
969
a result of intracortical microstimulation, cortical lesions,
digit amputation or fusion (cf.; Jenkins et al. 1990b; Mer-
zenich et al. 1984; 1987; Wall et al. 1986), as well as the re-
sult of von Melchner et al. (2000) showing that auditory cor-
tex of ferrets can be “rewired” to process visual information.
8.5.2. Attention and action. Rizzolatti and his colleagues
have developed a “premotor theory of spatial attention” ac-
cording to which, first, “conscious space perception results
from the activity of several cortical and subcortical areas,
each with its own neural space representation” (Rizzolatti
et al. 1994, p. 232), and second, these “neural maps” di-
rectly function in the guidance of movement and action.
There are not two systems, one for spatial attention and one
for action. “The system that controls action is the same that
controls what we call spatial attention” (p. 256). These
claims dovetail with psychophysical, psychological, and
neuroscientific evidence demonstrating linkages between
perception and motor action. For example, Kustov and
Robinson (1996) studied “superior colliculus in monkeys as
they shifted their attention during different tasks, and
found that each attentional shift is associated with eye-
movement preparation” (p.74). Another line of evidence
linking spatial attention and motor activity comes from
studies of neglect in animals and humans with damage to
cortical motor areas (Kinsbourne 1987; 1995; Rizzolatti et
al. 1983). Neglect appears to be best understood as a diffi-
culty in shifting attention to the affected part of the visual
field. The fact that neglect should arise from damage to cor-
tical areas serving motor activity further demonstrates the
link between attention and motor activity.
8.5.3. Two visual systems: The what and the how. In the
last few years, a very influential view of the structure of the
visual brain has surfaced, according to which there are two
streams of visual processing, a dorsal stream and a ventral
stream. Opinions differ on the exact functions of the two
systems, but Ungerleider and Mishkin (1992) distinguish
between a dorsal “where” system devoted to localizing ob-
jects, and a ventral “what” system devoted to identifying
them. A somewhat different classification has been pro-
posed by Goodale and Milner (1992; cf. also Milner &
Goodale 1995), who emphasize that the dorsal system is
concerned with coordinating actions directed towards ob-
jects, whereas in the ventral system recognition and classi-
fication operations are performed which allow persons to
memorize and reason about objects. Jeannerod (1997) re-
fers to the dorsal stream as “pragmatic,” in that it provides
the ability to make the necessary transformations between
visual input and motor output to locate an object with re-
spect to the body, and to grasp and manipulate it, and calls
the ventral stream the “semantic” system. Evidence for this
latter interpretation of the two streams hypothesis comes
from studies of the effects of lesions in humans (Milner &
Goodale 1995). As Milner and Goodale point out, damage
to the dorsal stream is associated with impairments of vi-
suo-motor control such as optic ataxia (Harvey 1995) in the
absence of impairments of the subject’s ability to make ver-
bal reports about the shape, features, and location of what
is seen. Conversely, damage to the ventral stream produces
visual agnosias (Benson & Greenberg 1969; Milner et al.
1991) without impairing visuo-motor functioning.
From the standpoint of the sensorimotor contingency
view we propose here, the possibility of this kind of double
dissociation is not surprising. In our view, seeing is an ac-
tivity depending on a broad range of capacities, for exam-
ple, capacities for bodily movement and guidance, on the
one hand, and capacities for speech and rational thought,
on the other. To the extent that these capacities are inde-
pendent, it is not surprising that they can come apart in the
manner described. It is not surprising, therefore, that the
dorsal system can operate in relative isolation from the ven-
tral system.
These points lead us to doubt, on certain interpretations
at least, Milner and Goodale’s claim that what the visual ag-
nosia patient DF (who retains normal visuo-motor skill)
lacks is visual awareness of what she sees. Milner and
Goodale suggest that, like DF, normals carry out visually
guided actions using information that is not present in
awareness; and they say that only information in the ventral
stream enters awareness. According to the view developed
here (the sensorimotor contingency view), people are
aware of what they see to the extent that they have control
over that information for the purposes of guiding action and
thought. Awareness is always, we have argued, a matter of
degree. Even the distracted driver is somewhat aware of
what he sees, to the extent that, if we were to ask him, he
would tell us what he is looking at. The case of DF is thus
a case of what would seem to be partial awareness. She is
unable to describe what she sees, but she is otherwise able
to use it for the purpose of guiding action.
This may seem like a purely verbal dispute, but there is
an important point at stake here. What makes the informa-
tion conscious or aware, in our view, cannot consist just in
the activity or lack of activity in a certain brain region (e.g.,
the ventral stream). Consciousness or awareness is not a
property that informational states of the brain can just come
to have in that way. Rather, visual awareness is a fact at the
level of the integrated behavior of the whole organism. The
work of Milner and Goodale suggests that damage to the ven-
tral stream disrupts non-visuo-motor aspects of seeing. This
is an important finding. But it would be a mistake to infer
from this that the ventral stream is therefore the place
where visual awareness happens.
Apart from the above provisos, the “two visual systems”
view fits well with the position we develop in this paper.
First, as expected from the sensorimotor contingency based
approach, at the neural level there is a tight connection be-
tween seeing and moving. Second, the two-systems ap-
proach provides evidence supporting a claim we have made
at different stages in this paper, namely, that seeing does not
depend on the existence of unified representations of what
is seen. In the two-systems approach, for example, there is
not one single representation of space in the brain.
In this connection, it is worth mentioning here that the
“two visual systems” approach is also relevant to the scheme
for classifying sensorimotor contingencies introduced in
section 2.
Processing in the two streams will in general have to be
done in different coordinate systems. In order to allow
reaching for an object and manipulating it, the “where” sys-
tem will have to make use of the position of the object rel-
ative to the observer’s body. On the other hand, in the
“what” system, recognition and classification of an object
will require knowledge about the intrinsic shape of the ob-
ject within an object-centered coordinate system, irrespec-
tive of the observer’s position with respect to it.
This distinction between an observer-centered and an

object-centered coordinate system is relevant to our classi-
fication of sensorimotor contingencies. In section 2 we em-
phasized that there are a subset of contingencies which are
due to the particular spherical structure of the eyes, to the
way they move, and due to the fact that sampling is being
done by means of a two-dimensional perspective projection
taken at a certain distance from the object, through optics
and via a retinal mosaic that have very particular properties.
These visual-apparatus-dependent rules are also constrained
by the fact that the objects and the eyes are embedded in
three-dimensional space (rather than, say, two-dimensional
space): laws of variation like the inverse square law for the
amount of light reaching the eye, the linear relation be-
tween distance and projected size, will be common to all ob-
jects which are sampled through the visual apparatus.
If we were to construct a neural network connected to an
eye-like input device and to a muscle-like eye-mover, and
have it learn the rules of dependency between its input and
output, then the first rules which the neural network would
adduce would be apparatus-based rules like the ones we
have just described: these rules apply in all reasonably rich
environments, irrespective of the objects contained in
them. Furthermore, we see that the coordinate system use-
ful to the neural network would be the observer-based co-
ordinate system, since what has to be learnt by the network
is those (in)variance laws of the space of sensorimotor con-
tingencies which are occasioned by the observer’s own
movements. This learning would also provide the system
with the notion of “self,” since it will allow it to distinguish
between parts of its environment which it can systemati-
cally control, and parts which it cannot. The notion of “ob-
ject” would also be something that would emerge from such
learning: an object is something which can be removed and
put back into the visual scene. These facts about what might
be called object-combinatorics are independent of the iden-
tity of the objects themselves, and are related simply to their
intrinsic “objectness” and their embeddedness in three di-
mensional space. It is possible that the dorsal “where” sys-
tem could have evolved to serve this function.
The second subset of sensorimotor contingencies we re-
ferred to in our classification was the subset which we de-
scribed as “object-related.” These contingencies are those
that allow objects to be distinguished from one another, and
to be recognized independently of their position and ori-
entation. Clearly, a neural network which was trying to ad-
duce laws of (in)variance from sensorimotor contingencies
of this kind would have an advantage in coding information
in object-centered, rather than observer centered coordi-
nates. This is known to be the case for the ventral “what”
system, which could have evolved for this purpose.
Note that our classification into apparatus-related and
object-related sensorimotor contingencies is a somewhat
artificial division. Many of the laws underlying sensorimo-
tor contingencies could be said to be related both to the vi-
sual apparatus and to the nature of objects. For example,
the fact that objects are embedded in three dimensional
space has the consequence that they can show only one face
to the eye, and that as they are turned or as the observer
turns around them, different parts appear and disappear.
These facts are both a consequence of the fact that the eye
is operating from a distance and so capturing only a single
point of view – an aspect of the apparatus, – and a conse-
quence of the fact that objects have different sides – an as-
pect of the objects.
8.5.4. Downward causation. There is considerable evi-
dence that when neural correlates of consciousness have
been found, they are sensitive to mood, attentional set, and
task. Varela and Thompson (e.g., Thompson & Varela 2001)
have referred to the modulation of individual neurons by
patterns of activity of populations of neurons and also by the
attitude or set of the whole animal as “downward causa-
tion.” So, for example, as stressed by Varela (1984) and Va-
rela et al. (1991, p. 93; see also Pessoa et al. 1998, p. 736;
Thompson 1995, p. 217; and Thompson & Varela 2001), re-
sponses in visual cells depend on behavioral factors, such as
body tilt (Horn & Hill 1969), posture (Abeles & Prut 1996),
and auditory stimulation (Fishman & Michael 1973; Morell
1972). Other studies show that attention and the relevance
of a stimulus for the performance of a behavioral task can
considerably modulate the responses of visual neurons
(Chelazze et al. 1983; Haenny et al. 1988; Moran & Desi-
mone 1985; Treue & Maunsell 1996). Leopold and Logo-
thetis (1999) themselves write of binocular rivalry:
We propose that the perceptual changes are the accidental
manifestation of a general mechanism that mediates a number
of apparently different behaviors, including exploratory eye
movements and shifts of attention. We also propose that while
the different perceptions of ambiguous stimuli ultimately de-
pend on activity in the ‘sensory’ visual areas, this activity is con-
tinually steered and modified by central brain structures in-
volved in planning and generating behavioral actions. (Leopold
& Logothetis 1999, p. 254)
Leopold and Logothetis suggest that to understand per-
ceptual reversals of the kind encountered when we view an
ambiguous figure, or when we undergo binocular rivalry, it
is necessary to consider not only neural activity in the visual
cortex, but the animal’s capacities for thought and action.
8.5.5. Upshot. Work in these and other areas provides evi-
dence in favor of ways of understanding the role of the brain
in vision and consciousness that are different from the ideas
in the neural correlate of consciousness and binding prob-
lem research programs. Like work in the fields of dynamic
systems theory (e.g., Kelso & Kay 1987) and embodied cog-
nition both in robots and in animals or humans (Aloimo-
nos 1992; Bajcsy 1988; Ballard 1991; Brooks 1991; Clancey
1997; Cotterill 1995; 1997), this research suggests the im-
portance of accounts of the brain as an element in a system,
and not, as it were, as the seat of vision and consciousness
all by itself.
9. Conclusion
In this paper we have put forward a new framework for
thinking about the nature of vision and visual conscious-
ness. The solution to the puzzle of understanding how con-
sciousness arises in the brain is to realize that consciousness
does not in fact arise in the brain! Visual consciousness is
not a special kind of brain state, or a special quality of in-
formational states of the brain. It is something we do.50
From this point of view, understanding vision amounts to
understanding the various facets of the things people do
when they see. We suggest that the basic thing people do
when they see is that they exercise mastery of the sensori-
motor contingencies governing visual exploration. Thus, vi-
sual sensation and visual perception are different aspects of
a person’s skillful exploratory activity (that is, exploratory
activity guided by practical knowledge of the effect move-
O’Regan & Noë: A sensorimotor account of vision and visual consciousness
970
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (2001) 24:5

ment will have on nervous influx). Visual awareness depends,
further, on the person’s integration of these patterns of skill-
ful exercise into ongoing planning, reasoning, decision-
making, and linguistic activities. As we have argued, these
ingredients are sufficient to explain the otherwise elusive
character of visual consciousness.
In addition, our proposal has the advantage of providing
an account of what differentiates the sensory modalities.
The problem is solved naturally, without appealing to the
existence of sensory-modality-specific essences or mecha-
nisms. Just as horse riding is different from motorcycling,
so is seeing different from hearing. These differences can
be explained without appeal to the essences of horseback
riding and motorcycle riding, and without appeal to the spe-
cific nerve energies or pathways devoted to seeing and
hearing. The difference between seeing and hearing is to
be explained in terms of the different things that we do
when we see and hear.
These are matters of philosophical significance, and we
have sought, in developing our position, to make clear that
in denying the need for qualia, we are not denying the ex-
istence of perceptual experience, or the possibility of phe-
nomenological reflection on experience. Rather, we have
proposed a new way of thinking about what goes on when
we experience – which, as we have argued throughout, cap-
tures what we believe, as experiencers, about our experien-
tial lives, but does so in a manner that does not give rise to
the mystery of the explanatory gap.
These are matters of empirical significance. The sensori-
motor approach to vision we have laid out here has provided
the impetus for a series of surprising experiments on what
has come to be known as change blindness. The robustness
of these results in turn serves to vindicate the framework
itself. In addition, we have tried to demonstrate that the
sensorimotor view presented here allows for a unified ap-
proach to a variety of otherwise unconnected perceptual
phenomena related to, for example, perceptual completion,
inattentional blindness, perceptual stability despite observer
eye-movement, prosthetic perception, color vision, invert-
ing lens adaptation, the surgical restoration of sight in the
congenitally blind, blindsight, the double dissociation of
optic ataxia, and visual agnosia. We think it is striking evi-
dence of the power of the position we develop here that it
is able to account for such a broad range of perceptual phe-
nomena.
Finally, if we are correct in our analysis, there is need for
reassessment, on the part of neuroscientists, of the notion
of neural correlate of consciousness. A way of thinking
about the neural bases of perception and action is needed
that does not rest on the false assumption that the brain is
the seat of consciousness. We also believe that philosophers
should consider the way in which empirical results in this
area suggest the formulation of a new metaphysics of mind
and body.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The authors deeply thank the following people for their help with
different aspects of this work: Paul Bach-y-Rita, Hasna Ben Salah,
Ned Block, Benédicte de Boysson Bardies, Justin Broackes,
Philippe Capet, Jim Clark, Frédérique Devignemont, Don Du-
lany, Pedro Fonseca, Juan Gonzalez, Andrei Gorea, Stevan Har-
nad, Cathy Harris, Keith Humphrey, Timo Järvilehto, Pierre Ja-
cob, Marcel Kinsbourne, Christof Koch, Stephen Kosslyn, Donald
Laming, Ariane Lévy-Schoen, Michael O’Regan, Elias O’Regan,
Malcolm MacIver, Erik Myin, Ernst Niebur, Luiz Pessoa, Bill
Phillips, Ronan Reilly, Juan Segui, Paulo Sousa, Nigel Thomas,
Jean-Pierre Rospars, Evan Thompson, Srimant Tripathy, Marc
Wittman, Andreas Wohlschläger, Jeremy Wolfe, and Tiziana Zalla.
Alva Noë gratefully acknowledges the support of faculty research
funds granted by the University of California, Santa Cruz.
NOTES
1. Cf. also Abeles & Prut (1996); Milner (1974); von der Mals-
burg (1983); Kahn et al. (1997); Rodriguez et al. (1999).
2. To suppose otherwise is to assume a particular account of
psychoneural correspondence. But surely, how neural processes
underwrite perceptual experiences is precisely what requires ex-
planation. We can frame the problem in terms of Teller’s notion of
linking propositions (Teller 1983; 1984; Teller & Pugh 1983).
Linking propositions specify the mappings between the forms of
neural responses and the qualities of percepts.
3. See Gorea (1991) for a discussion of the relation of modern
psychophysics to Müller’s concept.
4. Koenderink (1984b) gave an example of how the shape of a
tomato changes as you look at it from different angles. He called
this the “aspect graph” or “visual potential” of the tomato. The
concept of aspect graph has since then been extensively investi-
gated in artificial vision.
5. This classical reasoning is an instance of what Pessoa et al.
(1998) call “analytic isomorphism,” that is, the view that at the
neural substrate of an experience there must be an isomorophism
between percept and substrate. Analytic isomorphism comes up
again in our discussion of the neural basis of vision in section 8.
6. Koenderink (1984a) has a very perspicacious discussion of
what it is to perceive, rather than simply to record information,
where he makes this point.
7. Heil (1983), agreeing with Gibson and rejecting Müller’s
idea of physiological “channels” associated with different senses,
also attempts a taxonomy of the different senses but does not sug-
gest the idea that it could be the laws obeyed by the sensorimotor
contingencies that are the essential fact that differentiates them.
8. Note that it could be claimed that Müller’s idea of specific
nerve quality could be salvaged by supposing that what differ-
entiates the senses is different calculations that are done in the dif-
ferent pathways. This was suggested by Wittmann, Pöppel, and
Schill, reviewers of the original version of this manuscript. In a way
this is what is being proposed by the present approach, although
we emphasize that the calculation itself is not enough. What is
needed is for the structure of the input/output relationships to
obey different laws.
9. Note that we have been careful not to say that vision or
horseriding provide different experiences: the experience is the
fact of engaging in the activities. The activities, we claim, are not
providing an experience – though people often use the word pro-
vide in this way, we claim this is a figure of speech, and not indi-
cation of a true experience-generating mechanism. It is precisely
this kind of misunderstanding which gives rise to the problem of
the explanatory gap. Cf. section 6.3.
10. The possibility of machine awareness raises issues that go
beyond the scope of the present discussion. We note here that be-
cause we admit that awareness comes in degrees, we are willing to
say that to the extent that machines can plan and have rational be-
havior, precisely to that same extent are they also aware. But
clearly, given the limitations of current machines’ planning and ra-
tional behavior, and given the lesser diversity of their environ-
mental interactions, the degree of awareness will be accordingly
limited. If a chess-playing machine were able to purposefully lose
a game so as to avoid upsetting a child, or if a medical diagnosis
system were able to lie to a cancer patient about his condition, we
would be more willing to accord higher degrees of awareness to it.
11. Merleau-Ponty (1968) has also compared vision to palpa-
tion.
12. We unfortunately became aware of Järvilehto’s work too
late to be able to give it full consideration.
13. Järvilehto (1999) has also made this point.
O’Regan & Noë: A sensorimotor account of vision and visual consciousness
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (2001) 24:5
971

14. It is often assumed that transients must necessarily direct
attention to a location. But presumably location is only one fea-
ture of visual stimuli, and in the brain, location may have a similar
status to other features, like color, orientation, contrast, etc. Could
it be that attention can be directed to aspects of a stimulus defined
by such other features? For example, is it possible to direct atten-
tion to all the red items in a scene, or to scene region constituted
by a 3D surface? Cf. Pylyshyn (1988) on this issue.
15. An excellent discussion of these topics can be found in
Thomas (1999), who makes a convincing argument in favor of an
“active perception” approach very similar to ours.
16. As observed by Stephen LaBerge (personal communica-
tion).
17. They observed no eye movement advantage but less than
50% correct performance in counting a grating pattern of identi-
cal vertical bars: it may be that the observers were using a strategy
of estimating the number of bars by evaluating the number on the
basis of the overall width of the pattern.
18. A portion of the existing data purportedly measuring the
extraretinal signal under conditions of normal viewing can, to
some degree, probably be explained by assuming that they are due
to purely retinal effects (smear, retinal persistence, differences in
spatio-temporal effects in central and peripheral vision; cf. O’Re-
gan 1984).
19. It could be argued that people actually do have a detailed,
picture-like internal representation of the outside world, but that
it is destroyed at each saccade or on interruption by flicker and
other transients. Alternately, as suggested by reviewers Wittmann,
Schill, and Pöppel of our manuscript, it may be that we deceive
ourselves as to the amount of detail we think we see in the repre-
sentation. Such arguments are hard to square with data showing
interaction of the change blindness effects with central/marginal
interest manipulations, and with the data from the “mudsplash”
experiments, among others. (cf. O’Regan et al. 1996; Rensink et
al. 1997; 2000). Similar alternatives have also been discussed by
Simons (2000b).
20. This view of the phenomenology of color perception is re-
lated to the idea of D’Zmura and Lennie (1986), who suggest that
nonhomogeneity in retinal cone distributions could indeed be
made use of by the visual system to determine surface reflec-
tances. But in general, most current views of color perception as-
sume that perceived color derives from applying some kind of
color constancy calculation to the output of the long, medium, and
short wavelength cone channels. The idea that perceived color is
not the output of a constancy calculation, but rather is constituted
by the applicability of laws of variation under eye movements,
lighting conditions, and surface movements, appears not to have
been seriously investigated up to now.
21. Broackes additionally notes: “And if it is puzzling how a dy-
namic property can make itself manifest in a static perception
(‘how can a disposition to present a variety of appearances be vis-
ible in a single appearance?’), then we already have, in familiar dis-
cussions of aspect-shift, the theoretical apparatus for a solution. It
is because there is ‘the echo of a thought in sight’.” Broackes
quotes Strawson (1974, pp. 52–53) who says: “To see [a newly pre-
sented object] as a dog, silent and stationary, is to see it as a pos-
sible mover and barker, even though you give yourself no actual
images of it as moving and barking.”
22. Broackes says that contrary to what he said in Broackes
(1992), he is either protanomolous or protanope. (Broackes, per-
sonal communication.)
23. Cole (1991) has also invoked these studies in a functional-
ist defense against the inverted spectrum problem.
24. Curiously, many people wearing normal glasses seem to
voluntarily peer over the rims of their glasses when they look at
you, as though this procured some kind of advantage in seeing.
25. Dolezal stresses that the use of the terms upside down and
right side up is confusing, and guards against saying that the world
comes again to appear right side up. He says that in his experiment
the final state of adaptation could be distinguished from the state
before the experiment. Part of the reason for this could be that the
duration of the adaptation was perforce limited, and because use
of inverting goggles necessarily involves other constraints like the
limited field of view and the weight of the apparatus. Howard and
Templeton (1966) also stress the need to be wary of the terms up-
side down and right side up (see also Linden et al. 1999; Smith &
Smith 1962).
26. Chapter 8 in Taylor’s book contains a detailed, behaviorist
theory of the effects of inversion of the visual world, referring to
specific results of Stratton, Ewert, and Kohler. The outcome ap-
pears to be that the observed adaptation effects are to be expected,
and that the nativist theory is “shattered” (p. 168).The chapter in-
cludes a mathematical appendix by Seymour Papert, who was the
subject in Taylor’s left-right inversion experiment.
27. The situation may be similar to what happens when you
move to a new town, and attempt to orient yourself. It takes some
time before local and global landmarks merge into a coherent rep-
resentation of the town. Until that happens (and it may never do),
you may make gross mistakes. For example, you may be perfectly
able to orient yourself locally, but be unable to correctly indicate
the direction of a well-known global landmark.
28. Bedford (1995) has a theory of perceptual learning which
is related to the theory presented here.
29. Movies of the demonstrations can be found on the first
author’s web page at http://nivea.psycho.univ-paris5.fr. See also
http://www.wjh.harvard.edu/~viscog/change/demolinks.shtml.
30. Movie demonstrations of some film-cut and other effects
can be found on Simons’ page at http://coglab.wjh.harvard.edu.
31. The following quote from Haines (1991) is an example: “Pi-
lot F was a high-flight-time Captain who demonstrated excep-
tionally good performance both with and without HUD. The run-
way obstruction run was his seventh data run. He indicated his
‘Decision (140 ft) . . to land (110 ft)’, and proceeded to do so. The
experimenter terminated the run at an altitude of 50 ft. The pilot
was surprised. Captain: ‘Didn’t get to flare on this one.’ First Of-
ficer: ‘No you didn’t . . . I was just looking up as it (the picture) dis-
appeared, and I thought I saw something on the runway. Did you
see anything?’ Captain: ‘No, I did not.’ The experimenters sug-
gested that an equipment failure was probably to blame. Both of
these pilots saw the obstruction during the second exposure with-
out HUD (13 runs and 21 runs later, respectively) and executed
missed approaches. Later, when he was shown the videotape of
this run, Pilot D said, ‘If I didn’t see it (the tape), I wouldn’t be-
lieve it. I honestly didn’t see anything on that runway’.”
32. In Noë & O’Regan (2000) we discuss some philosophical
aspects of the inattentional blindness work.
33. This demonstration may not work if the file is being viewed
on the web or has been printed with the option of substitution of
typography enabled. The point is that there are two ways of form-
ing an “a”; one similar to the hand-written a (a circle with a line
next to it), and one similar to a typewriter a. If hand-written-like
a’s are mixed into a text, provided they have the same height and
density as normal a’s, this will generally not be noticed.
34. The word “of” is repeated. Repetitions of the word “the”
can also be easily missed.
35. There are nine f’s. Many people fail to count the f’s in the
three occurrences of the word “of.”
36. In fact sensation itself is an abstraction, as already noted by
James (1890/1950, vol. 2, p. 3).
37. Humphrey and Humphrey (1985) quote a blind man (D.
Lepofsky, 1980) who has used a binaural sonic sensor mounted on
eyeglasses for 5–10 hours a week for three years: “I am at the point
that I react very naturally to its signals. I no longer have to think
about what each signal could mean, rather, I react instinctively. I
go around someone on the sidewalk without even realizing I’ve
done it: that’s how much a part of you it becomes.”
38. Lenay et al. (1999) have discussed other reasons why TVSS
systems have met with less enthusiasm on the part of blind peo-
ple than might have been expected. He says: “Ce que cherche
l’aveugle qui accepte de se plier à l’apprentissage du dispositif de
O’Regan & Noë: A sensorimotor account of vision and visual consciousness
972
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (2001) 24:5

couplage, c’est d’avantage la connaissance de ce dont les voyants
lui parlent tant : les merveilles du monde visible. Ce qu’il espère,
c’est la jouissance de cette dimension d’existence qui lui est in-
connue. Or, ce n’est pas ce que donne ces dispositifs. Il y a de fait,
de nombreuses différences entre le couplage artificiel et notre
couplage visuel: il n’y a pas de couleur, peu de points, une caméra
dont les mouvements sont difficiles et limités, ce qui donne une
grande lenteur à la reconnaissance de la situation. Ce couplage
sensori-moteur ressemble bien par certains aspects à celui de
notre vision, mais l’expérience qu’il permet est toute différente,
comme peuvent d’ailleurs bien le comprendre les voyants qui se
prêtent à son apprentissage. Le dispositif de Bach-y-Rita ne
réalise pas une substitution sensorielle, mais une addition, l’ou-
verture d’un nouvel espace de couplage de l’homme avec le
monde.”
39. Howells (1944) cited by Taylor (1962, p. 246) is an inter-
esting example where association of a low and high pitched tone
with red and green respectively, over 5,000 trials, gave rise to a
perception of white being tinged with red and green when white
was associated with the tones.
40. Bedford (1995) has a theory bringing together the McCol-
lough effect and adaptation to prism displacement which is simi-
lar in concept to the present theory.
41. Of course, this is not to deny that vision may, under certain
circumstances, involve feelings or sensations of a non-visual na-
ture. So, for example, if you are trying to track the movement of
an object without moving your head, you may feel a certain dis-
tinctive eye strain. If you witness an explosion, you may feel daz-
zled in a way which causes definite sensations in the eyes. If vision
is, as we have argued, a mode of activity, then there may be all sorts
of features that the activity consists of which in this way contribute
to its “felt character.” But crucially these are not intrinsic or defin-
ing properties of the experiencing, that is, they are not what
philosophers think of as qualia. They are rather more or less acci-
dental accompaniments of the activity of seeing on a particular oc-
casion. Note, similar points can be made for the other sensory
modalities. Bach-y-Rita (1996) has noted that perceptual experi-
ence may have a qualitative aspect in yet another sense. For those
capable of vision, certain experiences may have a definite affective
quality. This affective quality was reported to be absent in the
quasi-visual experiences of patients using TVSS. So, for example,
such patients lacked the familiar “feel” of emotion and familiarity
when looking at a picture of a loved one, or the erotic charge that
may be delivered by certain images in normal perceivers. Bach-y-
Rita reports these differences as differences in qualia. This usage
differs from that in the philosophical literature. In any event, we
do not deny that experiences may be associated in this way with
affect. In fact, the sensorimotor contingency view offers a basis
from which to explain what may be going on here. One might
speculate that what prevents tactile visual experiences from ac-
quiring a full affective charge is the fact that tactile vision is not
perfectly mastered, that is to say, it is not fully integrated into a
sensorimotor skill set. A direct consequence of this strangeness is
the fact that one’s intimate dealings with one’s loved ones have not
been mediated by the exercise of the relevant sensorimotor skills.
42. Of course, when you drive a Porsche for the first time, you
may at first lack confident knowledge of how the car will respond
to your actions. Insofar as you are an experienced driver of cars,
you will exercise confident mastery of how to drive. In so far as you
are new to Porsches, you may be tentative and exploratory. You try
to learn how the car performs. The distinctive feel of driving a
Porsche for the first time thus can be understood to differ from
the experience of the connoisseur.
43. One of the hallmarks of the tradition known as Phenome-
nology, associated with the work of Husserl and Merleau-Ponty,
is a clear and rigorous conception of the methodology of first-
person investigations of experience. Of great importance for ap-
preciating this tradition, Husserl and Merleau-Ponty make con-
tributions toward the development of a first-person study of
consciousness which does not rely on the problematic conception
of qualia criticized above. We are broadly sympathetic to work in
this tradition. For recent contributions, see Varela and Shear
(1999) and Petitot et al. (1999). Other traditions may also provide
methods and concepts for first-person investigations of experi-
ence, for example, the mindfulness-awareness tradition in Tibetan
Buddism. See Varela et al. (1991). Our use of the term “phenom-
enology” above, however, is not meant to refer specifically to these
traditions but, rather, to the general problem to the solution of
which these traditions make a contribution. Our central aim above
is to make clear that we do not believe that there is any incom-
patibility between the sensorimotor contingency theory and a
more full-blooded phenomenological project.
44. This has been shown for example by Chun and Nakayama
(2000) in the context of experiments on change blindness (cf. also
Chun & Jiang 1998).
45. An interesting question arises about the relation between
what we think of as the animal’s active engagement with the world
and what, in the Phenomological Tradition, is known as the lived-
body. This is a subject for further inquiry.
46. Research in the Phenomenological Movement associated
with Husserl and Merleau-Ponty is concerned precisely with the
development of just such first-person methods. It is ironic that Den-
nett criticizes Phenomenology from the heterophenomenological
perspective (see, e.g., Dennett 1991, p. 44), since, as noticed by
Thompson et al. (1999) and also Marbach (1994), Dennett’s mis-
descriptions of experience often turn on misunderstandings that
have been clearly understood as such within the Phenomenologi-
cal Tradition.
47. In a criticism of Crick and Koch’s arguments, Cogan (1995)
also suggests that the notion of “perceptual moment” may not
be useful. Dennett (1991) notes a similar point in his “multiple
drafts” theory of consciousness.
48. A similar argument was made in section 5.5 with regard to
the “filling in” of the blind spot: there may actually be what look
like filling in processes in the brain, but these cannot be what pro-
vide us with the impression of the blind spot being filled in.
49. Of course, it is possible by attending to blinks (or eye move-
ments), to become aware of the change in sensory input that they
cause. But normally people do not attend to blinks or eye move-
ments, and do not notice them. Certainly they do not attribute the
sensory interruptions they cause, to changes in external objects.
50. Varela et al. (1991) and Thompson et al. (1992) also make
this point. In their terminology, consciousness is something we
enact.
Open Peer Commentary
Commentary submitted by the qualified professional readership of this
journal will be considered for publication in a later issue as Continuing
Commentary on this article. Integrative overviews and syntheses are es-
pecially encouraged.
Editorial commentary
Let us simplify the problem of “consciousness” or “visual con-
sciousness”: Seeing is feeling. The difference between an optical
transducer/effector that merely interacts with optical input, and a
conscious system that sees, is that there is something it feels like
for that conscious system to see, and that system feels that feeling.
All talk about “internal representations” and internal or external
difference registration or detection, and so on, is beside the point.
The point is that what is seen is felt, not merely registered, pro-
Commentary/O’Regan & Noë: A sensorimotor account of vision and visual consciousness
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (2001) 24:5
973

cessed, and acted upon. To explain consciousness in terms of sen-
sorimotor action, one has to explain why and how any of that pro-
cessing is felt; otherwise one is merely giving an optokinetic ex-
planation of I/O (Input/Ouput) capacities (and of whether those
capacities are actually or optimally generated by sensorimotor
contingency processors, analog representations, symbolic repre-
sentations, or other forms of internal structure/process), not of the
fact that they are felt. Nor will it do to say “qualia are illusions.”
Qualia are feelings. Am I under the illusion that I am seeing (i.e.,
feeling) something right now? What is the truth then? That I am
not feeling, but merely acting? No, I’m afraid Descartes had it
right. Certain things are not open to doubt. They either need to
be explained, or passed over in silence, in favor of the unfelt cor-
related functions that we can explain (Harnad 1995; 2000; 2001).
Visual conscious perception could be
grounded in a nonconscious 
sensorimotor domain
Ulrich Ansorge, Ingrid Scharlau, Manfred Heumann, 
and Werner Klotz
Department of Psychology, Bielefeld University, Bielefeld, 33501, Germany.
{ulrich.ansorge, ingrid.scharlau, manfred.heumann, werner.klotz}
@uni-bielefeld. de
http://www.psychologie.uni-bielefeld.de/public/
{uansorge/, scharlau/, mheumann/}
Abstract: Visual conscious perception could be grounded in a noncon-
scious sensorimotor domain. Although invisible, information can be pro-
cessed up to the level of response activation. Moreover, these noncon-
scious processes are modified by actual intentions. This notion bridges a
gap in the theoretical framework of O’Regan & Noë.
According to O’Regan & Noë (O&N), conscious perception de-
pends on actually applied sensorimotor contingencies, and the au-
thors provide a wealth of data that convincingly support this no-
tion. Although the argument is not entirely new (e.g., Gurwitsch
1964; Straus 1963), it deserves repetition, because it is important,
and seems to have been unacknowledged or forgotten by many.
However, O&N do not detail which processes give rise to specific
conscious content. Several alternatives are conceivable: Inade-
quate phenomenal content could be replaced by adequate con-
tent, less precise by more precise, or nonconscious data could give
way to phenomenal content. Data from our laboratory suggest that
the latter possibility may be a valid option.
Ruling out residual conscious perception. In reply to the re-
peated methodological critique of studies of nonconscious visual
information processing (Dulany 1997; Eriksen 1960; Holender
1986; Reingold & Merikle 1988), Klotz and Neumann (1999) con-
vincingly demonstrated that visual information, backward-masked
and definitely not consciously perceived, was nonetheless pro-
cessed. In that study, invisible primes led to an increase of reac-
tion time (RT) to a visible target if they indicated alternative re-
sponses compared to the targets, and to faster responses if they
indicated the same responses as the targets. Most noteworthy,
Klotz and Neumann found no evidence for a residual conscious
perception of the invisible primes; although forced-choice judg-
ments, and confidence ratings to signal the presence of the primes
were employed, judgments were made under a variety of differ-
ent instructions (e.g., speeded vs. non-speeded), and transformed
to the most sensitive index of residual perception (d’; Green &
Swets 1966), and although feedback, training, and high monetary
rewards for correct performance were provided.
Direct parameter specification. Some historical theories of non-
conscious processing may have been far-fetched or difficult to test,
but several recent conceptions are not characterized by these
shortcomings (Bridgeman 1992; Milner & Goodale 1995; Neu-
mann 1989; 1990). For example, according to Neumann’s (1989;
1990) concept of direct parameter specification, visual informa-
tion can be used to specify the final open parameter of an overt
response without a conscious percept of the critical information,
provided that action planning has been completed. Two predic-
tions derived from this theory were successfully tested: a response
activation by invisible information, and the dependence of the
processing of the nonconsciously registered information on actual
intentions of the agent. Both results also support the assumed role
of sensorimotor processes for conscious perception as outlined
above.
First, the activation of responses by invisible information was
demonstrated by showing that invisible primes interfered more
strongly with responses to visible targets if the primes indicated an
alternative response than if they indicated no response (Ansorge
& Neumann 2001; Ansorge et al. 1998; Jaskowski et al. 2002; Klotz
& Neumann 1999; Klotz & Wolff 1995; Leuthold & Kopp 1998;
Neumann & Klotz 1994). Moreover, response activation by invis-
ible primes was also evident in the lateralized readiness potential
(LRP) of the EEG, which reflects activity in motor areas of the
human cortex (Dehaene et al. 1998; Eimer & Schlaghecken 1998;
Leuthold & Kopp 1998; Neumann et al. 1998). Second, the pro-
cessing of the invisible primes apparently depended on actual in-
tentions of the agents. Participants had to know which specific in-
formation was mapped to which alternative response at least 250
msec prior to the invisible primes (Neumann & Klotz 1994, Ex-
periment 4). Otherwise, the primes’ impact was compromised,
presumably because time was too short to transform the mapping
rule into a corresponding intention. Likewise, if primes did not
contain information appropriate to specify one of the required re-
sponses, they did not interfere at all (Ansorge & Neumann 2001,
Experiment 3).
In sum, processing of nonconsciously registered information
can indeed be sensorimotor (i.e., up to the level of response acti-
vation) and is determined by aspects of the actual situation (i.e.,
by the currently active intentions), supporting our notion that in-
formation might be applied in the course of mastering sensori-
motor contingencies prior to the conscious perception of the same
information. Besides, it seems that rather diverse visual features
can be processed in the nonconscious sensorimotor domain. Evi-
dence for response activation by invisible shape (Klotz & Wolff
1995), position (Neumann & Klotz 1994), color (Schmidt 2000),
and even semantic information (Dehaene et al. 1998) has been ob-
tained.
The functional value of processing nonconsciously registered
visual information. Our proposal provides an answer to the ques-
tion of what the functional value of processing nonconsciously reg-
istered visual information might be.
Of course, virtually everybody would agree that it takes time
to consciously perceive, so that visual information remains non-
conscious at least during an initial phase of information process-
ing. A very important aspect of our proposal is that even motor
processes involving the most peripheral effectors might be part
of this initial phase. It is the organism that processes information
into conscious content, not one of its (central) organs – its brain,
or whatever subunit of it. Like data employed in processes of an
organism’s brain, those used in sensorimotor coordination could
therefore in principle remain nonconscious; for example, if the
processing sequence is interrupted prior to conscious percep-
tion. But, what is more, this notion suggests how specific infor-
mation that is not consciously perceived might nonetheless rou-
tinely contribute to phenomenal aspects in a more unspecific
way. For example, the felt veridicality of the content of conscious
perception could be grounded in verifying visual information in
a consciousness-independent domain of sensorimotor coordina-
tion.
In conclusion, in addition to its evident power in explaining as-
pects of phenomenal content, O&N’s theory provides a useful
framework for integrating conscious and nonconscious func-
tions.
Commentary/O’Regan & Noë: A sensorimotor account of vision and visual consciousness
974
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (2001) 24:5

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
Supported by Grants Ne 366/6-1 and 366/4-3 from the Deutsche For-
schungsgemeinschaft (DFG) to Odmar Neumann.
The role of the brain in perception
Paul Bach-y-Ritaa, b, c and Steven J. Hassea
aDepartments of Rehabilitation Medicine and bBiomedical Engineering,
University of Wisconsin-Madison, Madison, WI 53706 USA; cFacultad de
Medicina, Universidad Autónoma del Estado de Morelos, Cuernavaca,
Mexico. pbachyri@facstaff.wisc.edu
shaase@facstaff.wisc.edu
Abstract: The recent interest of cognitive- and neuro-scientists in the
topic of consciousness (and the dissatisfaction with the present state of
knowledge) has revealed deep conceptual differences with Humanists,
who have dealt with issues of consciousness for centuries. O’Regan & Noë
have attempted (unsuccessfully) to bridge those differences.
Commenting on the chasm between scientific and philosophic
analyses of human consciousness, Gardner (2001) stated, “For
centuries humanists have cherished consciousness as their do-
main. . . For most of the last century, behavioral scientists es-
chewed that territory. But in recent years, cognitive scientists and
neuroscientists have begun at least an assault on the fortress.” In
a review of a dialogue between a neuroscientist (Changeux) and a
philosopher (Ricoeur), Gardner (2001) discussed their deep con-
ceptual differences. He noted: “At one point, Ricoeur states ‘I see
with my eyes.’ Changeux retorts, ‘I would say that I need my eyes
in order to see. . . one really ought to speak of his brain.’ Ricoeur
counters. . . ‘I see with my eyes, because my eyes belong to my
bodily experience, whereas my brain does not.’” This would ap-
pear to be consistent with O’Regan & Noë’s (O&N’s) view; how-
ever, it is challenging for neuroscientists to comment on a target
paper that appears to see little role for the brain in vision, per-
ception or consciousness, with statements such as “The solution to
the puzzle of understanding how consciousness arises in the brain
is to realize that consciousness does not in fact arise in the brain!”
(target article, Conclusion).
There is reason for dissatisfaction with the present state of
knowledge about brain mechanisms related to vision and con-
sciousness, and many of us share it. Cartesian dualism and its “the-
ater in the brain” (therefore also the notion of “pictures-in-the-
head”), as well as the “grandmother cell,” are outmoded. There
are a number of approaches that explore possible mechanisms of
information management, perception, and consciousness that
provide insights, but perhaps not definitive explanations. But that
is not sufficient to support the approach of O&N, who appear to
consider that because other explanations are inadequate, theirs is
proven. In fact, if one were to agree with their view that conscious
visual experience results from “exercising mastery of the sensori-
motor contingencies,” and that “Visual awareness depends, further,
on the person’s integration of these patterns of skillful exercise into
ongoing planning, reasoning, decision-making, and linguistic ac-
tivities” (Conclusion), then one would also have to acknowledge
that these processes are dependent on high-level brain events.
While it may one day be determined that a complete neural ac-
count of vision will still be unable to explain the subjective, per-
sonal quality of visual experiences (Dodwell 2000), a number of
recent approaches seem to be heading in the right direction. For
example, Harth (1993) favors a physicalist approach, by which he
means “the working assumption that the broad field of Physics
must ultimately account for most things we observe, including our
own minds. This differs fundamentally from orthodox materialism
because it leaves the door open to the unknown laws and relations
of a yet to be explored territory.” He explores the feedback loops
within the central sensory paths, including perceptual levels
higher than the visual cortex. Similarly, in arguing against strictly
feed-forward theories of visual information processing (which
“picture theory” seems to be based upon), Di Lollo et al. (2000)
note that: “On this hypothesis, activity proceeds from primary cor-
tex to other visual areas where input signals are convolved with
stored information. The coded signals are then returned to lower
centers for further processing.” They, as well as Harth, emphasize
the importance of reentrant signals in visual processing. A recent
approach offered by Bachman (2001) can integrate the approach
advocated by cognitive and ecological theorists in a way that is per-
haps most consistent with O&N in that, “evolutionary regularities
begin to control the active representational process” in addition to
the importance of the organism-environment interaction in ex-
plaining perception. Bachman also details evidence of how per-
cepts evolve very quickly over time, and carry with them traces of
phylogenetically older representational content in their initial
“stages.” The very first sensory representations and responses
were quite local to the membrane-environment interface, “but
with further evolutionary development. . . representations evolve
which, if activated and used, gradually take over the function of
the site where sensitivity and perceptibility actually rest.”
The authors are not alone in rejecting the notion that there are
internal pictorial representations. Even in his earlier work, Koss-
lyn (1980) described mental image representations as “quasi-
pictorial entities” as opposed to actual “pictures-in-the head.”
What does seem clear is that people can generate internal spatial-
like representations and make functional use of them (e.g., navi-
gating based on cognitive maps, recognizing meaningful patterns
in stimulation based on learning, and even in developing scientific
theory (Shepard 1978). Shepard (1978) has also argued that men-
tal images are not “pictures-in-the-head.” but rather are repre-
sentations which to some degree match the relationships among
real objects (i.e., second-order isomorphism). Our tactile vision
substitution studies (Bach-y-Rita et al. 1969; Bach-y-Rita et al., in
press) have emphasized that motor-sensory interaction is impor-
tant for image acquisition and spatial localization. However, how
those images are produced and stored, and how mental images in
memory are accessed, remains unknown. Thus, the viewpoints of
O&N are welcome in the quest for an understanding regarding
the most complex processes that relate to perception and con-
sciousness – provided the brain is not thrown out with the bath
water!
Visual awareness relies on exogenous
orienting of attention: Evidence from
unilateral neglect
Paolo Bartolomeoa and Sylvie Chokronb
aINSERM Unit 324, Centre Paul Broca, F-75014 Paris, France; bLPE-CNRS
UMR 5105, UPMF, BP 47 38000 Grenoble, France. paolo@broca.inserm.fr
http://paolo.broca.inserm.fr/
chokron@upmf-grenoble.fr
http://www.upmf-grenoble.fr/upmf/RECHERCHE/lpe/index.html
Abstract: Unilateral neglect stems from a relatively selective impairment
of exogenous, or stimulus-related, orienting of attention. This neuropsy-
chological evidence parallels “change blindness” experiments, in which
normal individuals lack awareness of salient details in the visual scene as a
consequence of their attention being exogenously attracted by a compet-
ing event, suggesting that visual consciousness requires the integrity of ex-
ogenous orienting of attention.
O’Regan & Noë (O&N) propose a new account of vision ac-
cording to which seeing is a way of acting. In this approach, vision
is a mode of exploration of the world that is mediated by knowl-
edge of what the authors call sensorimotor contingencies. Thus,
when we look at an object, the visual quality of its shape is the set
of all potential distortions that this shape undergoes when it moves
relative to us or when we move relative to it. Although this is an
Commentary/O’Regan & Noë: A sensorimotor account of vision and visual consciousness
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (2001) 24:5
975

infinite set, the brain can abstract a series of laws from it and it is
this set of laws which codes shape. The idea that the world con-
stitutes an outside memory and that we only see what we are cur-
rently attending to, is consistent with the results of “change blind-
ness” experiments reviewed by O&N in the target article. These
experiments demonstrate that in many cases normal observers
have great difficulty seeing changes, even though the changes are
very large and occur in full view. This phenomenon, observed in
normal healthy subjects, is a reminder of neglect symptoms often
observed after a unilateral posterior brain damage. Patients suf-
fering from left neglect after right brain damage fail to respond,
attend to and explore left-sided stimuli.
We agree overall with the authors concerning the importance
of sensorimotor contingencies of vision and find that many argu-
ments in the target article are fascinating. Although the authors
invoke some evidence from neuropsychological disorders of vision
(unilateral neglect, visual agnosia) to support their hypothesis
(sect. 8.5), we feel that the question of how their theory can ac-
count for these disorders should be further developed. For uni-
lateral neglect, one could imagine an impairment of the sensori-
motor contingencies concerning the left hemispace. This loss
would explain the impossibility to process left-sided objects. How-
ever, it is now well known that there is no clear-cut division be-
tween a left neglected hemispace and a right unimpaired hemi-
space ; rather, neglect patients show a gradient of performance
continuously ranging from left to right. Along those lines, left ne-
glect could result from either a disruption of leftward shifts of spa-
tial attention, or a facilitation for rightward attentional shifts, or
both. In this framework, the sensorimotor account of vision could
perhaps benefit from a more explicit reference to a directional
component.1 The positive effects of some rehabilitation tech-
niques are consistent with the hypothesis of an impairment of the
patients’ knowledge of the sensorimotor contingencies associated
with leftward orienting. Neglect patients can benefit from ma-
neuvers combining sensory and motor demands, such as scanning
the environment from left to right, moving actively the left limb
while exploring the extrapersonal space, or actively adapting to op-
tical prisms that displace rightwards the visual scene. These tech-
niques might be understood as temporarily restoring patients’
knowledge of sensorimotor contingencies associated with leftward
orienting.
Considering the dichotomy between “exogenous” or stimulus-
related and “endogenous” or strategy-driven orienting of atten-
tion, a large amount of evidence suggests that left neglect patients
suffer from a relatively selective impairment of exogenous orient-
ing with a relative sparing of endogenous processes. Interestingly,
change blindness experiments also seem to imply exogenous ori-
enting; a visual transient attracts attention at a specific location
and entails a lack of awareness for concurrent events.
Regarding the need to postulate the existence of mental visual
representations, it has been proposed that neglect could result
from a lateralized amputation or a distortion of the mental repre-
sentation of external space.
However, O&N deny that visual experience arises because an
internal representation of the world is activated in some brain
area. Visual experience would rather be a mode of activity involv-
ing practical knowledge about currently possible behaviors and
associated consequences. Indeed, neglect patients do not neces-
sarily show any representational disorder. To illustrate this point,
we present the case of a 66-year-old male patient suffering from
a left hemiparesis and left neglect signs two months after an is-
chemic lesion in the territory of the right anterior choroidal
artery. We asked this patient to draw a butterfly from memory
(Fig. 1), first with (upper panel), and then without (lower panel)
visual guidance (while blindfolded), whereupon left neglect dis-
appeared.
This observation confirms that left neglect may occur without
any lateralized disorder of mental representation. In accordance
with the hypothesis of an impaired exogenous orienting of atten-
tion in neglect, and similarly to the change blindness experiments,
we propose that when drawing with visual guidance the patient’s
attention was attracted by the right-sided half just drawn, thus
provoking the omission of left details. More generally, this con-
firms that a bias in exogenous orienting may entail a dramatic lack
of awareness for visual events when a competing stimulus attracts
the subject’s attention.
For this reason, attentional orienting could be viewed as one of
“the mechanisms of consciousness” (Posner 1994), thereby re-
solving the risk of tautology which, according to O’Regan & Noë,
may affect attentional accounts of visual awareness.
NOTE
1. As a matter of fact, there is growing evidence that directional trends
such as reading habits influence visual perception in normal individuals.
Normal subjects demonstrate opposite biases as a function of their read-
ing habits (from left to right or right to left like Hebrew or Arabic readers)
in a variety of visuo-spatial task such as line bisection, line extension or aes-
thetic judgment.
Commentary/O’Regan & Noë: A sensorimotor account of vision and visual consciousness
976
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (2001) 24:5
Figure 1 (Bartolomeo & Chokron).

Three experiments to test the sensorimotor
theory of vision
Susan J. Blackmore
Department of Psychology, University of the West of England, St Matthias
College, Bristol BS16 2JP, United Kingdom. sjb_ac@hotmail.com
http://www.uwe.ac.uk/fas/staff/sb/index.htm
Abstract: The sensorimotor theory of vision is the best attempt yet to ex-
plain visual consciousness without implying a Cartesian theatre. I suggest
three experiments which might test the theory.
If we were thinking clearly about consciousness we should surely
have crossed James’s (1890) “fathomless abyss” by now, but we
have not. I agree with Dennett (1991) that the root cause of our
confusion is the seductive lure of the Cartesian theatre (CT) (that
mythical place where consciousness happens; that imaginary con-
tainer of the “contents of consciousness.” Most existing theories –
though their proponents deny it – entail some form of Cartesian
theatre. Global workspace models do so, as do most current at-
tempts to find the neural correlates of consciousness. Put at its
simplest (and perhaps most extreme) we can say this. Ask the
question “what is in my consciousness now?” (Or “what is in x’s
consciousness at time t?”). If you believe there is an answer then
you are imagining a Cartesian theatre.
O’Regan & Noë (O&N) provide the best attempt yet to escape
from the clutches of the CT. Their theory is exactly the kind of
bold departure that is needed. But is their theory right? And do
they go far enough?
O&N suggest that “it is not possible to subject a general frame-
work to direct verification.” However, I think some of their cen-
tral claims can be tested and I offer here three suggestions for do-
ing so. These are not easy tests to perform but I hope they may
reveal how different are the predictions of this theory compared
with other, more traditional, theories of vision and visual aware-
ness.
1. Scrambled vision. Traditional experiments using inverting
goggles show that people gradually learn to see the world “the
right way up,” but during the learning phase they suffer two com-
peting views, as described by O&N. We might imagine that in
some way they gradually learn to invert their mental picture of the
world. In the proposed experiment people would wear goggles
that completely scrambled the visual input (this scrambling might
also include blind spots, bars, or other gaps without affecting the
argument). If O&N are correct, the new sensorimotor contingen-
cies should be no more difficult to learn than with a simple inver-
sion, but this time the subjects would effectively begin their learn-
ing blind. Their visual input would appear as noise and they would
see nothing meaningful at all. As they learn the new contingencies
by visual manipulation they would gradually come to see again.
This new seeing would, if the theory is correct, be experienced as
just like ordinary seeing. I would love to know what it is like to
learn to see and would happily volunteer for such an experiment.
2. Manual vision. The feelings associated with facial vision in
the blind might, in the spirit of O&N’s theory, occur because the
sensorimotor contingencies of the face and ears are linked. That
is, moving the ears necessitates moving the face. In this experi-
ment auditory feedback is provided while subjects try to detect
virtual objects in front of them by manually controlling the posi-
tion of virtual ears. They could then move their faces indepen-
dently of moving their “ears.” In this case the theory predicts that
they would feel things not on their faces but on their hands.
3. Blinded vision. Phenomena such as habituation and sta-
bilised retinal images usually prompt only the conclusion that the
visual system needs changing input to function. O&N, in contrast,
propose that active manipulation of sensorimotor contingencies is
required. This difference could be tested by yoking pairs of sub-
jects together in the following way. ‘A’ subjects are able to move
their eyes normally and explore a visual scene. ‘B’ subjects are
given exactly the same changing visual input but their own eye
movements are ineffective and uncorrelated with the input they
receive. O&N’s theory makes the strong prediction that ‘A’ sub-
jects will see normally, but ‘B’ subjects – while receiving identical
visual input – will be blind.
These tests, especially the last, might help find out whether
O&N’s bold theory really holds or not. If it does they will have
made a huge step towards eliminating the CT since in their the-
ory seeing is a way of acting, not a way of building up unified rep-
resentations of the world – or pictures in the CT. And incidentally
(though they do not mention this), it may also explain the currently
mysterious profusion of descending fibers in the visual system.
Nevertheless, their attempt is not, I suggest, completely con-
sistent. For example, they claim (in sect. 2.6) that visual awareness
requires not only mastery of the relevant sensorimotor contin-
gencies but integration of this with thought and action guidance.
There are possible counter-examples in both directions. First, fast
actions that are controlled by the ventral stream are not normally
reported as conscious (Milner & Goodale 1995) yet they should
surely count as “action-guidance.” This step is particularly odd
since they helpfully point out problems with Milner and Goodale’s
analysis in section 8.5.3. Second, experience in meditation sug-
gests that it is possible to stop all thought, planning, and overt ac-
tion (if not sensorimotor manipulation) without losing vision.
Finally, a few subtle hints of the CT remain – showing just how
hard it is to escape altogether. Such phrases as “features of the car
enter consciousness” or “are available in consciousness” (sect. 6.2)
imply a CT, as do the claims that some sensorimotor contingen-
cies are “accessible to awareness,” or are “brought into conscious-
ness” (sect. 6.6). And there seems to be some confusion in the way
they compare their views with Dennett’s. While claiming that
“qualia are an illusion” (sect. 6.3) and “the conception of phe-
nomenal consciousness itself must be. . . rejected” (sect. 6.9), they
nonetheless take Dennett to task for being “insufficiently atten-
tive to the actual phenomenology of experience” (sect. 7.3). Yet,
as Dennett famously says: “the actual phenomenology? There is
no such thing” (Dennett 1991, p. 365).
Building a theory that does justice to the reality of conscious-
ness without invoking a CT is extremely hard. I think O&N, in
spite of these small problems, have come closer than anyone else.
Their theory is bold, testable, and a rare step in the right direc-
tion.
Behaviorism revisited
Ned Block
Departments of Philosophy and Psychology, New York University, New York,
NY 10003. ned.block@nyu.edu
www.nyu.edu/gsas/dept/philo/faculty/block/
Abstract: Behaviorism is a dead doctrine that was abandoned for good
reason. A major strand of O’Regan & Noë’s view turns out to be a type of
behaviorism, though of a non-standard sort. However, their view suc-
cumbs to some of the usual criticisms of behaviorism.
O’Regan & Noë (O&N) declare that the qualitative character of
experience is constituted by the nature of the sensorimotor con-
tingencies at play when we perceive. Sensorimotor contingencies
are a highly restricted set of input-output relations. The restric-
tion excludes contingencies that don’t essentially involve percep-
tual systems. Of course, if the “sensory” in “sensorimotor” were to
be understood mentalistically, the thesis would not be of much in-
terest, so I assume that these contingencies are to be understood
non-mentalistically. Contrary to their view, experience is a matter
of what mediates between input and output, not input-output re-
lations all by themselves. However, instead of mounting a head-on
collision with their theory, I think it will be more useful to con-
sider a consequence of their view that admits of obvious coun-
terexamples. The consequence consists of two claims: (1) any two
Commentary/O’Regan & Noë: A sensorimotor account of vision and visual consciousness
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (2001) 24:5
977

systems that share that highly restricted set of input-output rela-
tions are therefore experientially the same; and (2) conversely, any
two systems that share experience must share these sensorimotor
contingencies. Once stated thus, the view is so clearly wrong that
my ascription of it to the authors might be challenged. Yet, it is at
least a consequence of a major strand within O&N’s theory. Per-
haps this will be an opportunity for them to disassociate them-
selves from it. I will limit myself to claim (1).
There are some unfortunate people whose visual apparatus has
been severely damaged to the point where they can distinguish
only a few shades of light and dark. You can simulate this “legally
blind” state at home, though imperfectly, by cutting a ping-pong
ball in half and placing one half over each eye. In addition, many
people are paralyzed to the point where they can control only a
very limited set of behaviors, for example, eye-blinks. For some-
one who has both problems, visual sensorimotor contingencies are
drastically reduced. In fact, it would seem that they are so reduced
that they could be written down and programmed into an ordinary
laptop computer of the sort we find in many briefcases. If this
were done, O&N’s thesis would commit them to the claim that the
laptop has experiences like those of the legally blind paralytic I
mentioned. (This form of argument derives from my reply to Den-
nett in Block 1995a, p. 273, and has been subsequently used by
Siewart 1998.)
What would those experiences of the laptop have to be like? If
you put the ping-pong balls on your eyes you can get some insight
into the matter. My judgement is that such experiences are no less
vivid than ordinary experience, although of course greatly reduced
in informational content. Perhaps O&N will say that the paralysis
dims the experience to the point where it is not so implausible that
the laptop has such an experience. However, people who are tem-
porarily completely paralyzed often report normal experience
during the paralyzed period. In any case, can there be any doubt
that such people do have some experience, even visual experience,
and that the laptop has no experience at all? I would say the same
for people who are born with severe limits to their visual appara-
tus but report visual experience with low informational content.
There is every reason to think that these people have some visual
experience and that the corresponding laptop has none.
Behaviorism in one form is the view that two systems are men-
tally the same just in case they are the same in input-output capacities
and dispositions. There are standard refutations of behaviorism.
(See, e.g., Block 1995c, pp. 377–384; or Braddon-Mitchell &
Jackson 1996, pp. 29–40 and 111–121.) But what really killed be-
haviorism was the rise of the computer model of cognition. If cog-
nitive states are computational states of certain sorts, behaviorism
runs into the problem that quite different computational states of
the relevant sort can be input-output equivalent. For example,
consider two input-output equivalent computers that solve arith-
metic problems framed in decimal notation. One computer does
the computation in decimal whereas the other translates into bi-
nary, does the computation in binary, and then translates back into
decimal. Delays are added to get the two computations to have the
same temporal properties. Behaviorism doesn’t fit with the com-
putational picture of cognition; that’s why it died.
O&N’s view, in my interpretation, is a form of behaviorism. It
isn’t the general behaviorism that I just described because it is
about sensory experience, not about cognition or mentality in gen-
eral. And so it might be thought to escape the problem just men-
tioned. Since it is not about cognition, O&N don’t have to worry
about two different cognitive states being input-output equivalent
or two identical cognitive states implemented in systems with dif-
ferent input-output relations. But their view is doomed by a sim-
ilar problem nonetheless: the same input-output relations can be
mediated either by genuine experience or by simple computations
that involve no experience. Genuine experience need not have a
complex computational role, and that less complex experience
surely can be simulated in input-output terms by a system that has
no experience. It should be equally obvious that the same experi-
ence could play different input-output roles in different systems.
Experience, attention, and mental
representation
Justin Broackes
Department of Philosophy, Brown University, Providence, RI 02912.
Justin_Broackes@brown.edu
Abstract: O’Regan & Noë make plausible that perception involves mas-
tery of sensory-motor dependencies. Their rejection of qualia, however, is
less persuasive; as is their view that we see only what we are attending to.
At times they seem to oppose “internal representation” in general; I argue
that they should in fact only be rejecting crude conceptions of brain pic-
turing.
This fascinating article makes very plausible the idea that percep-
tion involves mastery of sensory-motor dependencies. (I prefer
“dependencies” to the authors’ term “contingencies,” which has
perhaps unfortunate connotations of non-necessity. The real issue,
of course, is how sensation varies with relative position of per-
ceiver and perceived.) The authors also want to go further, how-
ever, and use the conception of sensory-motor dependency to at-
tack the idea that perception involves an internal representation
of the world. On that I have some doubts.
1. Experiences as ways of acting. O’Regan & Noë (O&N)
have a direct argument that the very idea of qualia involves what
Ryle (e.g., in Ch. 1 of 1949/1990) called a category mistake.
Qualia are meant to be properties of experiential states or events. But
experiences. . . are not states. They are ways of acting. They are things
we do. There is no introspectibly available property determining the
character of one’s experiential states, for there are no such states.
Hence, there are, in this sense at least, no (visual) qualia. (Target arti-
cle, sect. 6.3)
There is much here that goes to the heart of the authors’ views.
But I suspect the argument is too quick – and not quite as gram-
matically careful as Ryle himself would have wanted. There is
much to be said against the idea that experiences are solely pas-
sive. (Think of 20 years’ experience as the head of a secondary
school, or the experience of swimming 10 miles in the rain.) But I
doubt whether experiences are simply “things we do.” As a first
approximation, I’d suggest: the central cases of experience are nei-
ther active or passive alone. Rather, experience is what we have
when we push against the world and the world pushes back. (Plato,
interestingly, has a physical theory of vision which makes it liter-
ally a case of pressure and counter-pressure; see Timaeus, 45c.)
The experience of swimming in the rain is something we get while
performing that act. The swimming is something we do, the ex-
perience is not.
If that is true, then we can’t immediately conclude that experi-
ences are never states. It may sometimes be the case that when I
act in a certain way, the world puts me into a certain state (e.g., a
state of embarrassment, or of irritation). And if standing for min-
utes in front of a color field painting of Ellsworth Kelly’s puts me
into a particular perceptual state and keeps me in it, then the au-
thors can hardly dismiss the qualia-lovers simply for talking of
properties distinctive of that perceptual state. Other arguments
may do the job – there may be much wrong with the particular
qualities the qualia-lovers invoke; but the present argument seems
too quick.
2. Attention and the field of view. It seems attractive to say that
vision typically involves the experience of a whole range of things
in front of the perceiver, only some of which at any one time are
the object of attention. One possible development of that view
would claim that vision involves the formation of an internal im-
age, and the thinker’s attention passes from certain things repre-
sented in parts of that image to other things represented in other
parts of it. In their concern to reject the latter idea, O&N seem in
danger of rejecting the first idea – which is really, I think, too im-
portant to be thrown away.
As you explore the scene in front of you, “each thing you ask
yourself about springs into awareness” (target article, sect. 4.1, my
Commentary/O’Regan & Noë: A sensorimotor account of vision and visual consciousness
978
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (2001) 24:5

emphasis). Before you ask about a particular feature (or direct
your attention it), the information about it is “out there” and ob-
tainable “by making the appropriate eye movement or attention
shift,” but, the authors insist, the information is at the earlier time
“not currently available.” An image of the detail in question may
be “impinging on the retina,” but still the item is “not actually be-
ing seen.” O&N are right to remind us that when I turn my eye to
the paper on the left of my desk, I start receiving information that
I didn’t have before: it is not true that I previously had an image
of the words on that paper, and have simply come now to attend
to that image. But they evidently want to go further, and deny that
I was even aware of the paper before I was actually attending to
it. We are under “the impression of seeing everything,” but “only
a small fragment of the world is actually being seen” (sect. 4.2).
And the source of the mistake is that we confuse being able to see
x with actually seeing x (sect. 4.6). When we have “continuous ac-
cess to environmental detail,” we all too readily suppose we have
“continuous representation of that detail” (sect. 6.8).
In O&N’s view, we never see anything that we’re not currently
attending to. Since presumably we only attend to a few things at a
time, it is as though we see through a narrow tube of attentional
consciousness, never perceiving more than is currently in the at-
tentional field. And if my attention is newly drawn to something,
it can only be to something I am not already seeing. This is ex-
tremely implausible: surely while looking at and thinking of the
books in front of me, I can also be aware of the paper off to the
left. If someone moves the paper, I can easily be aware of this
(even while keeping my eyes on the books. I am not merely capa-
ble of getting information about the paper, I am already doing so
– though of course in less detail than about the things I’m looking
at directly. The authors claim that before I actually attend to the
object, information is “out there” but “cannot at this moment be
used to control judgments and utterances” (sect. 4.1, para. 5); but
that does not seems true of this kind of case. I can surely comment
on gross features like the approximate size and orientation of the
paper, and perhaps its color. If the authors insist that one simply
cannot make a judgment about something without at that moment
“attending to” it (just by virtue of thinking of it), then that again
seems incorrect. Suppose that at time t1 I look at my books, and
am rather indistinctly aware of the paper off to the left; then I close
my eyes and make a judgment at time t2 about the color of the pa-
per I saw shortly before. Indeed at t2 I will be “attending” to the
paper, but that hardly implies that at t1 I was doing so already.
Thus, in my opinion, O&N are too quick to dismiss the idea of
simultaneous visual representation of things, only some of which
are attended to. It is true that we should not mistake mere avail-
ability of information for its actual supply; but we must also avoid
the converse mistake. In fact what we need is to allow that, just as
information from the things we see may vary greatly in degree of
detail, so also visual experience will vary greatly in degree of de-
tail (whether or not that experience is ultimately to be described
in terms of pictorial representation.
3. Representation and interpretation. O&N offer several ex-
amples to confirm their idea that we often look at something with-
out seeing it. The intention, I think, is to discredit representa-
tionalist views that would be forced to say that an item was “seen”
simply because it was within the field of view. But I suspect the
authors are too quick here. If a person counts the wrong number
of f’s in a sentence (like the example given in sect. 5.12), this may
be because they have failed to see all of the f’s; but it may also be
that they saw them, but somehow treated some as “not counting”
(i.e., perhaps, as not important enough to be counted). Writing the
sentence out accurately could be a sign that the letters had been
seen, yet might still be followed by failure in the counting task. In
general, anyone who believes in representations (whether “in the
mind” or “in the brain”) will surely give a role not only to visual
representation but also to (various forms of) something like infer-
ence and conceptual interpretation. And the latter seems too
quickly forgotten by the authors. Take the case of change blind-
ness (sect. 5.10). Under particular circumstances, a person may be
unaware of a change, even quite a large one, in the scene before
her. But is this definitely a case where the person does not “see”
something in the visual field?
We need to distinguish between seeing the change and seeing
the objects in view before and after the change. It may be that the
person first sees the car and later sees the wall (now visible be-
hind); but she doesn’t realize what change has occurred. We are
in no position to conclude that there are no mental representa-
tions here; the problem may simply indicate weaknesses in the op-
erations or inferences the perceiver is trying to apply to (or with)
such representations. This needn’t be terribly surprising: a person
may minutely examine two variant drawings on the back of a ce-
real packet for discrepancies, and still miss them, though there is
no doubt that he has seen the car in the one picture, and the wall
in the other. Searching for words in a 4 by 4 matrix of letters, I may
find NOSE and miss STEP, though there’s no doubt I have seen
all the letters, and indeed the whole matrix. The problems may lie
less with perception than with further mental operations.
4. Brain representations. The authors give, I think, very good
reasons to be suspicious of the idea that there are brain represen-
tations that straightforwardly mimic the features found in our own
perceptual experience. Their strongest argument is a functional
one: there are, for example (sect. 8.5), two sets of perceptual abil-
ities (supported by dorsal and ventral pathways – and each can ap-
parently be disrupted while the other is left intact. Both are essen-
tial to vision, so we shouldn’t expect vision to involve just a single
unified representation. A similar lesson can be derived from the
case (in sect. 5.9) where a person with inverting spectacles adapts
in some respects but not in others: the world, for example, seems
the “right way up” in general but license plates still look reversed.
Here again, it seems there is more modularity and disunity than
one would expect if dealing with a single brain representation.
O&N are arguing that functional disunity implies neural dis-
unity. But if that argument is valid, then there is a case also for a
converse argument, that functional similarity may derive from
neural similarity. Where, for example, we find Kanisza triangles
with illusory contours leading to the same kinds of behavior (un-
der certain circumstances) as other triangles with real contours
(cf. sect. 5.5), then the similarity in behavior (under those cir-
cumstances) could be very genuinely (if partially) explained if we
found a place in the brain where something similar was going on
in the two cases.
Perhaps the lesson is not that there are no such things as brain
representations but that the representations are more distributed,
fragmented, and multi-level than we thought, and they involve a
variety of kinds of representation that show up in surprisingly
complex ways in our capacities to get around in the world. Some-
times O&N seem to be dismissing only the crude conceptions of
brain representations with “the metric properties of a picture”
(sect. 5.5); at other times they seem to be dismissing “internal rep-
resentation” in general (e.g., sect. 4.1). I suspect that the fascinat-
ing discussions of the present paper fail to give justification for the
latter claim; I wonder if the authors might after all be satisfied with
merely the former.
Sensorimotor chauvinism?
Andy Clark and Josefa Toribio
Cognitive and Computing Sciences, University of Sussex, Brighton, United
Kingdom. andycl@cogs.susx.ac.uk
pepat@cogs.susx.ac.uk
Abstract: While applauding the bulk of the account on offer, we question
one apparent implication, namely, that every difference in sensorimotor
contingencies corresponds to a difference in conscious visual experience.
O’Regan & Noë (O&N)present a wonderfully detailed and com-
prehensive defense of a position whose broad outline we ab-
solutely and unreservedly endorse. They are right, it seems to us,
Commentary/O’Regan & Noë: A sensorimotor account of vision and visual consciousness
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (2001) 24:5
979

to stress the intimacy of conscious content and embodied action,
and to counter the idea of a Grand Illusion with the image of an
agent genuinely in touch, via active exploration, with the rich and
varied visual scene. This is an enormously impressive achieve-
ment, and we hope that the comments that follow will be taken in
a spirit of constructive questioning. Overall, we have two main
reservations.
The first, which we are sure others will pursue in more detail,
concerns the claim to have dissolved or side-stepped the “hard
problem” of visual qualia. Even if the contents of our conscious vi-
sual experiences reflect ways of acting in the world, the hard prob-
lem surely remains. A good ping-pong playing robot, which uses
visual input, learns about its own sensorimotor contingencies, and
puts this knowledge to use in the service of simple goals (e.g., to
win, but not by too many points) would meet all the constraints
laid out. Yet it seems implausible to depict such a robot (and they
do exist – see, e.g., Andersson 1988) as enjoying even some kind
of modest visual experience. Surely someone could accept all that
O&N offer, but treat it simply as an account of how certain visual
experiences get their contents, rather than as a dissolution of the
so-called hard problem of visual qualia.
But more important, to our mind, is a reservation concerning
the account even as a story about the determination of experien-
tial content. The worry is that by pitching the relevant sensorimo-
tor contingencies (SMCs) at quite a low level (they concern, after
all, such things as the precise way the retinal image shifts and dis-
torts as we move our eyes, etc.), the authors invite a kind of sen-
sorimotor chauvinism. By this we mean that they invite the con-
clusion that every small difference in the low-level details of
sensing and acting will make a difference to the conscious visual
experience. Thus, for instance, imagine a being whose eyes sac-
cade fractionally faster than our own. Some of the “apparatus-
related” SMCs will then vary. But will the conscious experience it-
self vary? (It may come more quickly (but that is not the point. The
question is: will it seem any different to the perceiver?)
We are not sure how such a question is to be resolved one way
or the other. But there seems no a priori reason to believe that
every difference in SMCs will make a difference to the experi-
enced content, even if the SMCs (some of them, at some level) are
indeed active in determining the content (compare, e.g., work on
discriminable vs. non-discriminable differences in color).
Moreover, though we cannot defend this view in detail here (see
Clark, forthcoming), there is some evidence to suggest that con-
scious visual experience is rather deeply tied up with the uptake
of information in a form geared not to fine-tuned sensorimotor
control but to memory, thought, reason, and planning (think of a
somewhat weakened version of the dual visual systems hypothesis
defended by Milner & Goodale 1995, and indeed mentioned by
O&N). To whatever extent this is the case, it may be that the need
to put the SMCs to use in the service of planning, reason and in-
tentional action (a need properly stressed by the authors) serves
as a kind of filter on the type and level of the SMCs especially
relevant to conscious visual experience. Thus, we suspect that the
important links between action and conscious visual content are
mediated (for more on this, see Prinz 2000) by systems geared to-
wards memory, planning, and reason.
The challenge, then, is for the authors to either refute the
charge of sensorimotor chauvinism, or to show convincingly that
every difference in SMC (both apparatus-related and object-
related) yields a difference in visual experience.
Whither visual representations? 
Whither qualia?
Jonathan Cohen
Department of Philosophy, University of California San Diego, La Jolla, CA
92093-0119. joncohen@aardvark.ucsd.edu
http://aardvark.ucsd.edu/~joncohen/
Abstract: This commentary makes two rejoinders to O’Regan & Noë. It
clarifies the status of visual representations in their account, and argues
that their explanation of the (according to them, illusory) appeal of qualia
is unsatisfying.
Whither visual representations? O’Regan & Noë (O&N) ar-
gue against conceiving of vision in terms of pictorial internal rep-
resentations. They urge that “there is no ‘re’-presentation of the
world inside the brain: the only pictorial or 3D version required is
the real outside version” (target article, sect. 4.1). While their ar-
guments against the existence of pictorial representations in the
brain are persuasive, they are unsuccessful in showing that there
are no internal visual representations.1
There are a number of traditional, if quotidian, reasons for posit-
ing internal, visual representations, and O&N say nothing that
would undermine these. For example, you can remember the
color of the coffee cup you used yesterday morning, even though
it is now hidden in a cabinet (because the cup is hidden, your abil-
ity can’t be explained by the “outside memory” of O&N’s section
4). Although the details might vary, the standard explanation of
this ability seems to require appeal to a persisting mental state that
is (i) selectively sensitive to the coffee cup and its properties (e.g.,
its color), (ii) causally efficacious with respect to later processing,
and (iii) generated in part by past visual interaction with the cup.
Such a state is traditionally counted a representation because of
feature (1) – it represents the coffee cup. It is traditionally counted
as internal/mental because of feature (2) – it can be recalled and
manipulated by later mental processes, and can survive radical al-
teration or even destruction of its object (the cup). And it is tradi-
tionally counted visual because of feature (3) – it is generated and
maintained by the visual system.2
There are many other standard motivations for visual repre-
sentations, most of which take the form of phenomena for which
explanations are possible if there are visual representations, but
not possible otherwise. To take a few examples almost at random,
it is hard to explain perceptual priming, perceptual learning, or the
dependence of recall time for visually presented items on their
number, without supposing that the visual system forms repre-
sentations of the world, and that these representations are oper-
ated on by mental processes with certain properties (e.g., effects
on recall, chronometric properties). Significantly, there is no rea-
son to suppose that the visual representations required by these
explanations must be pictorial, that they are retinal projections, or
that they otherwise exemplify geometric properties. On the con-
trary, accepting the standard explanations commits one only to the
existence of internal, causally efficacious states that represent the
world and are generated by the visual system.
I see no reason why O&N should deny the existence or signifi-
cance of such states; consequently, I see no reason for them to
deny the existence or significance of internal visual representa-
tions.
Whither qualia? Although O&N’s position on the nature of
qualia amounts to a familiar brand of eliminativism, they supple-
ment this position with a novel proposal about the source of the
widespread belief in qualia (sect. 6.4).3 O&N propose that sub-
jects’ belief in qualia has two main sources. First, subjects “over-
look the complexity and heterogeneity of experience and this
makes it seem as if in experience there are unified sensation-like
occurrences.” Second, the continuous availability of features of
the visual scene to our attention gives subjects the false impres-
sion that they “continuously represent those features in con-
sciousness.”
Commentary/O’Regan & Noë: A sensorimotor account of vision and visual consciousness
980
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (2001) 24:5

Unfortunately, I don’t see how these points explain subjects’ be-
lief in qualia. Grant that subjects make the errors O&N attribute
to them; if these errors explain the illusion of qualia, then remov-
ing them should make that illusion disappear. Suppose, then, that
subjects came to appreciate the complexity underlying visual ex-
perience (they learn about inhomogeneities in retinal photore-
ceptor densities, eye movements, color constancy mechanisms,
and so on. I don’t see how knowing about the complex structure
of events that causally sustain our visual experiences would im-
pugn subjects’ belief that experiences have a certain qualitative
character: belief in qualia seems to derive from subjects’ phe-
nomenological impressions about their own experiences, not from
naïve speculation about the simplicity of visual mechanisms. Now
consider the other purported source of the illusion – subjects’ er-
roneous impression that they continuously and consciously repre-
sent visual features that are in fact unrepresented. Again, grant
that subjects hold this erroneous belief. Why should this make
them susceptible to a belief in qualia? Once again, correcting this
erroneous belief seems not to affect a subject’s belief in qualia:
even a subject convinced she did not maintain continuous con-
scious representations of features in the visual scene might hold
that her experience of looking at the scene has a qualitative char-
acter.4
Because a subject could believe in qualia without holding either
of the two other beliefs O&N mention, it is hard to see these be-
liefs as the sources of the widespread appeal of qualia. If qualia are
an illusion, this illusion must have its source elsewhere.
NOTES
1. I am unsure whether O’Regan & Noë mean to show this, or whether
they intend to show only that, if there are such representations, they can-
not be pictorial. Unfortunately, many of the formulations in the text are
ambiguous on this point.
2. It is not counted visual because it can be seen, or because it exem-
plifies geometric or color properties.
3. O’Regan & Noë also argue that belief in qualia is not widespread be-
cause naive subjects don’t understand the question “what is it like to look
at the piece?” as a request for elucidation of the qualitative aspects of their
experiences (sect. 6.5). I find this response unconvincing: surely the sup-
position that subjects have phenomenal access to qualia is compatible with
their understanding the above question as not soliciting commentary about
qualia. Putting this aside, it seems strange that O’Regan & Noë argue in
section 6.5 that the illusion is not widespread among ordinary subjects when
they attempt to explain its source in ordinary subjects in section 6.4: if the
illusion is not widespread, there should be nothing to explain.
4. So it seems to me. Presumably these issues are empirically testable.
Trans-saccadic representation makes your
Porsche go places
Peter De Graef, Karl Verfaillie, Filip Germeys, Veerle
Gysen, and Caroline Van Eccelpoel
Laboratory of Experimental Psychology, University of Leuven, Leuven, 
B-3000, Belgium. {Filip.Germeys, Veerle.Gysen, Caroline.Van
Eccelpoel}@psy.kuleuven.ac.be
http://www.psy.kuleuven.ac.be/labexppsy/top/{peterweb, karlweb,
filipweb, veerleweb, carolineweb
Abstract: To eliminate the leap of faith required to explain how visual con-
sciousness arises from visual representation, O’Regan & Noë focus on the
sensorimotor interaction with the outside world and ban internal repre-
sentations from their account of vision. We argue that evidence for trans-
saccadic representations necessitates a central position for an internal, on-
line stimulus rendition in any adequate theory of vision.
What is visual experience and where does it occur? In the ho-
munculus who is sitting in a mental projection room, watching an
internal representation of the outside world? Few modern day vi-
sion scientists will defend this caricature of visual perception.
However, O’Regan & Noë (O&N) convincingly argue that the
unattractive notion of an internal, interpretative agent is difficult
to escape as long as one assumes that visual experience arises from
the activation of internal representations or their neural sub-
strates. By equating visual experience to the act of exploring the
visual world, the sensorimotor account eliminates the gap be-
tween visual representation and consciousness. However, by equat-
ing vision to the exploration of our surroundings in search of con-
firmation of sensorimotor hypotheses, we feel that a new enigma
is created. As we argue below, the visual system does maintain a
representation of the visual environment. The question then be-
comes why this representation exists if the outside world is always
there to be explored?
Although O&N state (sect. 4.1) that there is no “re”-presenta-
tion of the world inside the brain, we assume this claim only per-
tains to one particular type of representation. O&N do not seem
to question the existence of feature representations (laws of sen-
sorimotor contingency, sect. 2.2), spatial representations (sect.
8.5), and a lexicon of stored object and scene representations
(webs of contingencies, sect. 3.3). The one representation which
O&N do target is a detailed and continuously updated rendition
of the visual environment, which mediates further exploration, in-
terpretation, and action in that environment. Empirical support
for the absence of such a representation is derived from the ab-
sence of trans-saccadic fusion (sect. 5.3) and from the existence of
change blindness (sect. 5.10) and inattentional amnesia (sect.
5.10). We claim that this evidence is not compelling.
First, while the notion of trans-saccadic fusion has been disproved
(Irwin 1991) the existence of trans-saccadic integration has not.
Numerous studies have demonstrated that visual object properties
such as orientation (Henderson & Siefert 1999; Verfaillie & De
Graef 2000), position (Deubel et al. 1996; Hayhoe et al. 1992), shape
(Pollatsek et al. 1984), internal part structure (Carlson-Radvansky
1999), and motion path (Gysen et al. 2002) are encoded on fixa-
tion n and affect post-saccadic object processing on fixation n 1 1.
Apparently, the visual system maintains an internal, trans-saccadic
representation which codes visual attributes (albeit not on a pixel-
by-pixel basis) and impacts subsequent perception. We agree with
O&N that this representation is not the source of visual con-
sciousness. It often is not even accessible to consciousness (Deu-
bel et al. 1998), yet it is there and it mediates vision.
Second, change-blindness studies appear to provide striking ev-
idence against on-line internal representations, but their rele-
vance for understanding representation as it develops across con-
secutive fixation-saccade cycles may be limited. First, change
blindness disappears entirely when one is warned in advance
about the location and type of change that will occur. In contrast,
the failure to note certain intrasaccadic changes is resistant to such
advance warning, indicating that very different mechanisms are at
work. Next, the low detection of changes in change-blindness
studies appears to be largely attributable to iconic masking and a
failure to deploy attention to insulate iconic contents from mask-
ing (Becker et al. 2000). Recent studies using temporary postsac-
cadic blanking of the visual stimulus have revealed a transsaccadic
representation that is very different from iconic memory: Its time
course is locked to the saccade dynamics and it does not rely on
selective attention to safeguard information from postsaccadic
masking (De Graef & Verfaillie 2001a; Deubel et al. 1998; Gysen
& Verfaillie 2001).
Related to this last point, O&N agree with Wolfe et al.’s (2000)
proposal of inattentional amnesia, which holds that we have no on-
line representation of those components of the visual world which
we are no longer attending to. Contrary to this view, Germeys et
al. (2001) demonstrated location-specific trans-saccadic memory
for contextual or bystander objects that are present before, dur-
ing, and after the saccade to another object. Although it is clear
that, prior to the saccade to the target object, these bystander ob-
jects were abandoned by attention (if they ever were attended to
in the first place), Germeys et al. (in press) found that the by-
standers were easier to identify than a new object at the same lo-
cation. Importantly, this trans-saccadic preview benefit only oc-
Commentary/O’Regan & Noë: A sensorimotor account of vision and visual consciousness
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (2001) 24:5
981

curred when the bystander retained its location throughout the
fixation-saccade-fixation cycle. This rules out an explanation in
terms of priming at the level of stored object representations in a
long-term object lexicon and firmly places the effect at the level
of an on-line representation of the current visual stimulus.
In view of the above, we want to claim that studies of trans-
saccadic perception have revealed the presence of an internal ren-
dition of visual aspects of the currently viewed scene. Research on
the contents of this representation is still expanding (De Graef &
Verfaillie 2001b) but its very existence raises an important ques-
tion for O&N’s sensorimotor account of vision: What is the func-
tional role of this representation in our sensorimotor interaction
with the outside world? Perhaps the answer lies in the fact that,
by definition, sensorimotor interaction is limited to whatever
scene aspect is the topic of transitive visual consciousness (sect.
6.2). Every other scene aspect might as well not be there. Hence,
to efficiently apply the right subset of sensorimotor procedures to
the outside world to recognize an object (e.g., benefit from a
transsaccadic preview), or locate a new visual attribute or explore
a new location (i.e., steer attention shifts), some representation is
required of where which procedures are most likely to be suc-
cessful and where we should no longer look.
In conclusion, to not only explain visual consciousness but to
also work as an account of vision, the sensorimotor framework
should incorporate a more detailed treatment of the on-line visual
representations that characterize the transsaccadic cycle. In the
absence of this, we could be very happily driving our sensorimo-
tor Porsche in circles or fill it with the wrong type of fuel, neither
of which would get us very far.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This work was supported by Concerted Research Effort Convention GOA
98/01 of the Research Fund K.U. Leuven, the Belgian Programme on In-
teruniversity Poles of Attraction Contract P4/19, and the Fund for Scien-
tific Research of Flanders.
Surprise, surprise
Daniel C. Dennett
Center for Cognitive Studies, Tufts University, Medford, MA 02155.
ddennett@tufts.edu
ase.tufts.edu/cogstud/
Abstract: The authors show that some long-standing confusions and prob-
lems can be avoided by thinking of perception in terms of sensorimotor
contingencies, a close kin to my heterophenomenological approach (Den-
nett 1991). However, their claim that subjects do not have any commit-
ments about the resolution of their visual fields is belied by the surprise
routinely expressed by subjects when this is demonstrated to them.
Many tributaries lead into the view of “sensorimotor contingen-
cies” that O’Regan & Noë (O&N) urge on us, as they are at pains
to acknowledge. I particularly applaud their citation of Donald M.
MacKay (1962; 1967; 1973) and Gilbert Ryle (1949/1990), two
thinkers who were ahead of their time, but did manage to inspire
some of the other contributors, myself very much included. It is
somewhat surprising that this sensible view, which in its outlines
is over half a century old, has not long since been acknowledged
to be the mainstream position. But as O&N show, there are pow-
erful misleaders that have prevented it from being more widely
accepted. What is especially valuable in O&N’s discussion is that
they don’t just refute the objections: they diagnose their allure in
detail, which is the key (one hopes) to preventing another gener-
ation of theorists from falling into these traps.
The value added in their detailed presentation of what it means
to recast perceptual processes into terms of sensorimotor contin-
gencies, and in their acute discussions of the problems that beset
“qualia” objections, “explanatory gap” objections, and the so-called
“hard problem,” takes us well beyond my own views, which are, as
they say, “very similar.” Do they also correct an error of mine? I
don’t think so. They claim (in sect. 7.3) that their method differs
from my heterophenomenology in offering a better account of
subjects’ beliefs about their own experience.
But is it really true that normal perceivers think of their visual fields this
way [as in sharp detail and uniform focus from the center out to the pe-
riphery]? Do normal perceivers really make this error? We think not.
. . . normal perceivers do not have ideological commitments concern-
ing the resolution of the visual field. Rather, they take the world to be
sold, dense, detailed and present and they take themselves to be em-
bedded in and thus to have access to the world.
Then why do normal perceivers express such surprise when
their attention is drawn to facts about the low resolution (and loss
of color vision, etc.) of their visual peripheries? Surprise is a won-
derful, dependent variable, and should be used more often in ex-
periments; it is easy to measure and is a telling betrayal of the sub-
ject’s having expected something else. These expectations are,
indeed, an overshooting of the proper expectations of a normally
embedded perceiver-agent; people shouldn’t have these expecta-
tions, but they do. People are shocked, incredulous, dismayed;
they often laugh and shriek when I demonstrate the effects to
them for the first time. These behavioral responses are themselves
data in good standing, and in need of an explanation. They are also,
of course, highly reliable signs of their “ideological commitments”
– the very commitments that elsewhere in their article the authors
correctly cite as culprits that help explain resistance to their view.
They themselves point out several times that the various effects
their view predicts are surprising. Surprise is only possible when
it upsets belief. I think O&N need not try so hard to differ with
me. If they don’t like the awkward term, “heterophenomenology,”
they needn’t use it, but we are on the same team, and they are do-
ing, well, what I think we should do when we study consciousness
empirically.
Misperceptions dependent 
on oculomotor activity
Burkhart Fischer
Brain Research Unit, Albert-Ludwigs-University, Freiburg, D-79104, Germany.
bfischer@uni-freiburg.de
http://www.brain.uni-freiburg.de/fischer/
Abstract: Two visual phenomena are described in which oculomotor ac-
tivity (saccades) changes our conscious perception: (1) some geometrical
visual illusions disappear when saccades are suppressed, and (2) misper-
ceptions occur in an antisaccade task with attentional precues. The first
phenomenon shows that what we consciously perceive depends on how we
look. The second phenomena indicates that a saccade itself may remain
unconscious together with the accompanying changes of the retinal image.
The theory of sensorimotor contingency proposed by O’Regan &
Noë (O&N) poses some specific questions in relation to experi-
mental observations. I will discuss here cases of visual illusions in
which our conscious perception definitely does not correspond to
the physical reality. The critical point is that there are illusions
which depend on the way we look at the material that is misper-
ceived: our conscious perception may be right or wrong depend-
ing on whether or not the only available sensorimotor actions (sac-
cades and/or attention shifts) are used.
Misperceptions can occur in terms of what we perceive or in
terms of where we see a stimulus. Correspondingly, two percep-
tual phenomena are considered: (1) Some geometrical visual illu-
sions disappear when we look at them the unnatural way (by fixa-
tion), instead of the natural way (by saccades). Here, the motor
part of vision (the eye movements) create the illusion: what we see
consciously depends on how we look (Fischer et al. 2001a). (2)
Under certain visual conditions with precued attention, unwanted
Commentary/O’Regan & Noë: A sensorimotor account of vision and visual consciousness
982
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (2001) 24:5

reflexive saccades (errors) occur in an antisaccade task (Weber et
al. 1998). About half of these saccades and their retinal conse-
quences escape the subjects’ consciousness: they are neither re-
ported verbally nor indicated by key press (Mokler & Fischer 1999).
1. The simple geometrical arrangement of lines in Figure 1
show the famous Zöllner illusion: the long lines do not appear as
parallel though they are so in reality. The reader may now try to
fixate the point in the middle and attend to the lines in the pe-
riphery. After some seconds of stationary fixation one clearly sees
the lines becoming parallel. No question, both ways of looking –
with and without saccades – represent conscious vision. Yet, they
lead to different results. Interestingly, it is the saccade mode
which leads to the illusion, while the fixation mode results in the
correct perception. Scanning through the known geometrical il-
lusions, quite a number of them were found to disappear with sta-
tionary fixation (Fischer et al. 2001b). In fact, one may argue that
these illusions are not illusions at all, because the visual system as
such provides the correct percept. (By the way, it is not clear why
these disillusions have escaped the awareness of scientists for
more than a hundred years.)
In any case, the exact kind of sensorimotor activity in the actual
visual process – saccades or fixation – determines the conscious
perceptual result. One could also argue that only inactivity – no
oculomotor activity (5 fixation) – leads to the correct result. It
would be very interesting to see how this observation of geomet-
rical illusions fading with fixation can be incorporated in the the-
ory of sensorimotor contingency. Clearly, a simple neural repre-
sentation cannot explain the observation unless one introduces an
extra mechanism for the geometrical distortion resulting from sac-
cades.
2. The instruction to make saccades from an initial fixation
point in the direction opposite of a suddenly presented stimulus
is called the antisaccade task (Hallett 1978). One can manipulate
the condition so as to make it rather difficult for the subject to fol-
low the instruction: if the initial fixation point is extinguished be-
fore a stimulus is presented to the right or left (gap condition), the
strength of fixation is diminished and the reflexes become rela-
tively stronger. In this situation subjects generate prosaccades to
the stimulus in about 10–15% of the trials (Fischer & Weber
1992). These saccades are unwanted and happen against the sub-
jects’ conscious decision.
If the subjects were given a visual precue which indicated the
direction and position to which they have to make the next sac-
cade (an antisaccade), the rate of errors increased unexpectedly
by a factor of 2 or 3 (Fischer & Weber 1996); even though, ac-
cording to the classical view, attention should have been captured
by the cue and should have facilitated the wanted antisaccade, the
opposite happened. In addition, if the subjects were asked to in-
dicate by a key press at the end of each trial whether they believed
that they made an error on that trial, 50% of the error saccades es-
caped the subjects’ conscious perception: they denied that they
made the error saccade and the corresponding corrective saccade
of double size. When the eye movement traces were analysed sep-
arately for trials with recognized and unrecognized errors, it turns
out that reaction times of the error saccades were the same but
the correction times were shorter for unrecognized than for rec-
ognized errors (Mokler & Fischer 1999).
Moreover, subjects did not realize that they had been looking at
the stimulus for 50 to 200 msec with their fovea. Here we have a
twofold misperception: the saccades remained unconscious and
the position of the stimulus was misperceived. In those trials the
subjects reported a perception of what they wanted to do, not what
they really did. They also perceived consciously what would have
happened to the stimulus if they had made the correct intended
eye movement.
In a few other trials the subjects reported an error but did not
make one (false alarm). In these trials the subjects may have
shifted their attention to the stimulus and experienced these shifts
as saccades. In agreement with the notion that a covered shift of
visual attention is a time consuming process the reaction time of
these misperceived correct antisaccades were considerably longer
than those of correctly perceived correct antisaccades (Mokler &
Fischer 1999).
It should be noted that both visual phenomena considered here
are independent of any theoretical concept such as, for example,
the assumption of neural representations. They are just observa-
tions which one way or another should have a place in a valid the-
ory of conscious vision.
Mirror neurons: A sensorimotor
representation system
Vittorio Gallese and Christian Keysers
Istituto di Fisiologia Umana, Università di Parma, I-43100 Parma, Italy.
vittorio.gallese@unipr.it
keysers@nemo.unipr.it
Abstract: Positing the importance of sensorimotor contingencies for per-
ception is by no means denying the presence and importance of repre-
sentations. Using the evidence of mirror neurons we will show the intrin-
sic relationship between action control and representation within the logic
of forward models.
The paper by O’Regan & Noë (O&N) addresses the issue of vi-
sual perception from a stimulating perspective, by emphasizing
the crucial role played by action in perception. Historically, per-
ception and action have been studied all too separately. A recent
instantiation of the intrinsic relationship between action and per-
ception is provided by the discovery of mirror neurons: mirror
neurons, although found in motor areas, are endowed with visual
properties matching the execution of an action with its perception
(Gallese 2001; Gallese et al. 1996; Rizzolatti et al. 1996; Umiltà et
al. 2001).
Although the perspective offered by O&N is stimulating, we are
afraid that the conclusions they draw on mental representations
are overstretched. One of their central claims is that there is no
need for an inner representation of the outside world. To make
their point the authors refer, amongst others, to the work by Lenay
(1997) on photoelectric sensing in blind people. In Lenay’s exper-
iment, “at a given moment during exploration of the environment,
subjects may be receiving no beep or vibration whatever, and yet
‘feel’ the presence of an object before them. In other words, the
experience of perception derives from the potential to obtain
Commentary/O’Regan & Noë: A sensorimotor account of vision and visual consciousness
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (2001) 24:5
983
Figure 1 (Fischer).
The Zöllner illusion: the long lines do not
appear as parallel. Fixate the point in the middle and observe the
lines becoming parallel.

changes in sensation.” The subjects, having no supernatural way
of sensing the presence of the object, must therefore derive their
feeling of its presence from some form of knowledge about the ob-
ject’s location. This knowledge, in turn, must derive from past ex-
perience. O&N would probably argue that this knowledge reflects
mastery of the laws of sensorimotor contingency. But in our eyes,
what this implies is that the perception of an object must derive
from a representation of it in the brain, albeit not an iconic one.
Indeed, representations in the brain are not thought by visual
neuroscientists to be point-by-point picture-like representations.
Representations of objects in the temporal cortex, for instance,
have been shown to correlate with perception (Keysers et al.
2001), and yet they clearly represent the world in a very abstract,
feature-based way, where entire faces are represented by the fir-
ing of single neurons, and not by the firing of a set of neurones
arranged in the shape of a face. Hence, in our eyes the merit of fo-
cusing on the relevance of sensorimotor contingencies for per-
ception – in contrast to what O&N suggest – is not to falsify the
importance of representations for perception but to help us un-
derstand the nature of these representations. In particular, it
points towards the fact that representations may take the form of
forward models of motor consequences (see Kawato 1999;
Wolpert 1997; Wolpert et al. 1995). Mirror neurons may be ex-
amples of forward models as representations (Gallese 2001): they
respond, for instance, to the sight of a hand action and to the in-
tention to execute it. Hence, they may constitute a system that can
predict the sight of the agent’s hand action when planning to move
its hand – and thereby their activation also constitutes a “visual”
representation of a hand action. This representation can be used
not only to control your own actions, but also to perceive those
performed by others. Visual representations and motor represen-
tations may thus be two sides of the same coin (Gallese 2000). By
this account, representations are not an end but a means: the pay-
off of the necessity to anticipate, and therefore re-present, the
consequences of a planned action in order to control it better.
How else could we know that our intended action is going wrong
if we didn’t have an inner representation of what it should look
like? Ironically, in a way mirror neurons instantiate both the very
expertise of sensorimotor contingencies so central to O&N’s the-
ory, and the representation of the world, the importance of which
O&N argue against.
These representations are not the result of a solipsistic monadic
organism, but rather the result of the active and dynamic interplay
of the organism with its environment and the control require-
ments of this interplay.
In conclusion, we think that stressing the importance of sensory
motor contingencies in perception is not antagonistic to the no-
tion of an inner representation of the world, but rather a way to
help us understand how such representation may be achieved and
why it exists.
Real action in a virtual world
Melvyn A. Goodale
Department of Psychology, University of Western Ontario, London, Ontario
N6A 5C2, Canada. mgoodale@uwo.ca
http://www.sscl.uwo.ca/psychology/faculty/goodale/
Abstract: O’Regan & Noë run into some difficulty in trying to reconcile
their “seeing as acting” proposal with the perception and action account of
the functions of the two streams of visual projections in the primate cere-
bral cortex. I suggest that part of the problem is their reluctance to ac-
knowledge that the mechanisms in the ventral stream may play a more crit-
ical role in visual awareness and qualia than mechanisms in the dorsal
stream.
Who couldn’t be enthusiastic about O’Regan & Noë’s (O&N’s)
proposal? They have managed to push the idea of “seeing as act-
ing” much further than many of us might have thought possible.
All those thorny problems – representation, consciousness, qualia
– vanish from sight as soon as one realizes that vision is more about
doing than seeing and that our percepts are more virtual than real.
The central concept of O&N’s proposal is that seeing is a spe-
cific way of exploring the environment. There is no need to posit
a detailed internal representation of the outside world; vision
arises because of the perceiver’s knowledge of the sensorimotor
contingencies that are jointly determined by the visual apparatus
and the visual attributes of objects. The idea that perception is a
grand illusion and that the external world represents itself is an at-
tractive one – but there are still some issues with respect to expe-
riential perception and the visual control of action that are only
partially addressed in O&N’s otherwise compelling thesis.
O&N’s treatment of the ventral-dorsal story is particularly un-
convincing. They begin by arguing that the double dissociation in
deficits following lesions of the dorsal and ventral streams poses
no problem for their “seeing as acting” idea. But then they go on
to say something rather curious. “Seeing” they say “is an activity
depending on a range of capacities, for example, capacities for
bodily movement and guidance, on the one hand, and capacities
for speech and rational thought on the other.” Thus, they argue, it
is not surprising that these capacities “can come apart” and that
the dorsal stream “can operate in relative isolation from the ven-
tral stream.”
But what does this mean? Are they harking back to the point
that they raised earlier in the article, that visual awareness de-
pends on both mastery of sensorimotor contingencies and the use
of this mastery in one’s planning, reasoning, and speech? Do they
want to associate the sensorimotor part of this equation with the
dorsal stream and the reasoning part with the ventral stream? But
if so, then it would be difficult to reconcile this idea with the pat-
tern of deficits seen in patients with ventral or dorsal stream dam-
age. If visual awareness depends on both sensorimotor contin-
gencies and the ability to use the mastery of these contingencies
for rational thought then patients should lose visual awareness
with lesions of either the dorsal or the ventral stream. But we know
that this is simply not the case. Patients with ventral-stream dam-
age are much more likely to lose visual awareness of particular vi-
sual attributes than are patients with dorsal-stream damage. Pa-
tients with dorsal-stream damage, who may have lost a good deal
of visuomotor control, are still quite aware of the shape, size, ori-
entation, and location of objects that they see (for review, see
Goodale & Milner 1992; Milner & Goodale 1995). In other words,
there is something about visual processing in the ventral stream
that is more intimately associated with seeing than is processing in
the dorsal stream.
But alternatively, perhaps O&N mean to say that the activity of
seeing – visual awareness – supports both the guidance of action
and the guidance of thought. Thus, according to O&N, the visual-
agnosia patient DF, who suffered ventral-stream damage, has par-
tial visual awareness of form. As they put it, DF “is unable to de-
scribe what she sees, but she is otherwise able to use it for the
purpose of guiding action.” But this distinction does not capture
the profound nature of DF’s problem. It is not that she cannot talk
about what she sees; she cannot perform the simplest of visual dis-
criminations of form. She cannot, for example, distinguish hori-
zontal from vertical lines or tell if two simple geometrical shapes
are the same or different. But at the same time, she has excellent
visual imagery for form and is also able to draw familiar objects
and shapes from memory (much like a blind person might do).
Moreover, she can readily identify an object using haptic explo-
ration. What she appears to lack is any conscious appreciation of
the visual form of objects. Yet when she reaches out to grasp ob-
jects that vary in size, shape, and orientation, her grasp is oriented
correctly and the posture of her moving hand reflects the geome-
try of the object well before she makes contact with it. In short,
she shows nearly perfect visuomotor control in the absence of any
evidence that she actually “sees” the form of the object she is
grasping.
Commentary/O’Regan & Noë: A sensorimotor account of vision and visual consciousness
984
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (2001) 24:5

To construe DF’s profound deficit in visual perception (and her
spared visuomotor abilities) as “partial awareness” or as an “[in-
ability] to describe what she sees” is to distort what is normally
meant by awareness or even visual qualia. DF does not have any
visual experience of form. But the fact that DF has an absence of
visual awareness can perhaps be used to bolster O&N’s thesis. Af-
ter all, according to them visual awareness is a joint product of the
mastery of sensorimotor contingencies and the use of this mastery
in one’s thought and planning. The ventral stream is certainly well
positioned to carry out the latter. It has intimate connections with
regions in the temporal lobe and prefrontal cortex that mediate
long-term memory and higher executive functions – just the sort
of connections one might expect to see in a system that plays a crit-
ical role in the production of a virtual percept imbued with mean-
ing and causality.
(I might add parenthetically that O&N’s attempt towards the
end of their paper to map the apparatus-related sensorimotor con-
tingencies onto the dorsal stream and the object-related sensori-
motor contingencies onto the ventral stream just doesn’t fly. Mas-
tery of object-related contingencies plays an essential role in
skilled visuomotor actions, such as grasping, which are mediated
by dorsal-stream structures and which typically survive damage to
the ventral stream and sometimes even damage to primary visual
cortex. Moreover, there is neurophysiological and imaging evi-
dence that areas in the dorsal stream code object properties, such
as size, orientation, and three-dimensional structure, and that
these same areas play a role in the visual control of object-directed
grasping [for review, see Goodale & Humphrey 1998].)
I would like to end by saying that I found this to be a thought-
ful and provocative account of vision and visual consciousness. I
suspect, however, that like most boldly stated ideas in science, it
will attract a lot of flak. But if it does only that it will be doing the
field a considerable service.
Visual perception is not visual awareness
Valerie Gray Hardcastle
Science and Technology Studies Program, Department of Philosophy,
Virginia Tech, Blacksburg, VA 24061-0227. valerie@vt.edu
http://mind.phil.vt.edu
Abstract: O’Regan & Noë mistakenly identify visual processing with vi-
sual experience. I outline some reasons why this is a mistake, taking my
data and arguments mainly from the literature on subliminal processing.
O’Regan & Noë (O&N) present us with an exciting and original
view of visual perception. Moreover, their view has the ring of
truth about it. This is all good and I applaud the authors. But in
this commentary I wish to focus on their attempt to connect their
views of visual perception with conscious experience. Here things
are more dubious. In particular, O&N fall into the same trap that
many others before them have fallen into – they equate a new view
of some aspect of cognition or perception with a new view of con-
sciousness. It must be an easy and comfortable intellectual slide,
since so many intelligent people make it. But there is much about
perception that isn’t conscious and there is much about con-
sciousness that isn’t perception. Knowing more about how our vi-
sual system operates can, of course, tell us important things about
how consciousness must operate as well, but it is a real stretch to
claim that the two processes are identical.
O&N claim that in achieving visual awareness, we use our mas-
tery of the relevant sensorimotor contingencies for the purposes
of thought and planning. As a result, experience does not derive
from brain activity per se, but it consists in the “doing” itself. Both
claims are false.
There is a huge and often contradictory literature out there re-
garding unconscious visual perception. Unfortunately, most of the
research has been directed to determining whether subliminal
perception exists at all, and not to what exactly we can process out-
side of awareness and how much such processing affects decision-
making or behavior. But it is not premature to draw some conclu-
sions. First, we know that unconscious visual perception exists. We
have known this since the late 1880’s; just a few curmudgeons have
refused to accept the obvious. Second, we are coming to appreci-
ate how much we can in fact process outside of awareness. Not
only can we recognize abstract properties such as “open” or
“closed” in novel shapes (Hardcastle 1996), but we also can un-
cover complex arbitrary patterns (Lewicki et al. 1987; 1992;
Stadler 1989). More importantly, what we perceive unconsciously
affects how we decide – it affects how we process sensorimotor
contingencies and then it affects how we move through space.
For example, Hanna and Antonio Damasio concern themselves
with the differences in rule-following between normal subjects
and frontal lobe patients (Bechara et al. 1997). What is interesting
about their research, though, is the task itself, for what counts as
advantageous motor behavior in a board game is highly relative
and depends heavily on how the players interpret their visual in-
puts. Subjects are given four decks of cards and are instructed to
pick a card from any deck. They are “rewarded” or “punished” (us-
ing Monopoly money) according to which deck the card came
from and the face value of the card. Subjects, however, are not told
what the reward strategy is. They are simply allowed to chose as
they see fit. What we learn from experiments like this is that we
move advantageously before we are aware of our strategy for mo-
tor choice, before we are aware of the relevant sensory patterns.
Notice that to understand what counts as a correct choice in the
Damasios’ experiment requires some serious interpretation of the
face value of the cards vis-à-vis the instructions given concerning
the fake money. If we respond unconsciously to the rules of the
game, then our unconscious must be processing possibilities for
intelligent behavior on the basis of semantically interpreted visual
information.
From this quick example, we can see that while visual process-
ing might consist of mastering relevant sensorimotor contingen-
cies, such mastery can occur both inside and outside of awareness.
Hence, consciousness must be something over and above visual
processing simpliciter. It might be that we need consciousness in
order to process visual information robustly, but that is a different
claim and one O&N don’t make. Let us suppose that O&N are
correct and that visual processing turns on appreciating how we
can move through space. Since we are conscious of a subset of
what we process visually, understanding how our brains and our
bodies define sensorimotor contingencies is relevant to under-
standing awareness, even if the two processes aren’t identical. It is
in this sense, perhaps, that O&N mean that conscious experience
consists in the doing itself. Without the possibility for movement,
we wouldn’t have vision and without vision, we wouldn’t have vi-
sual consciousness. So far, so good. But none of these considera-
tions allows us to disconnect experience – or vision – from brain
activity.
If we are materialists (which I am assuming here), then con-
scious experience has to be identical to some material event in the
world. It might be true that much of what we experience is illu-
sory – we see the world as a broadly continuous movie, when our
perceptions are actually more like tiny, discrete snapshots. Nev-
ertheless, the illusion has to have some substrate. These are all ob-
vious points, but they require that, insofar as we believe that the
brain processes sensory information (regardless of whether such
information is intimately tied to our motor system), then our vi-
sual processing, and hence our visual awareness, have to derive
from brain activity. It might not be the activity that we normally
assume, nor might it be located where we think it is, nor might it
be theoretically fruitful to consider such activity apart from the
rest of our body. But on pain of dualism, the experience has to de-
rive from what the brain is doing, albeit an active brain embedded
in a challenging environment.
Commentary/O’Regan & Noë: A sensorimotor account of vision and visual consciousness
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (2001) 24:5
985

In the Mind’s Eye: Perceptual coupling 
and sensorimotor contingencies
Julian Hochberg
Columbia University, New York, NY 10023. hochberg@columbia.edu
Abstract: The theoretical proposal that perceptual experience be thought
of as expectancies about sensorimotor contingencies, rather than as ex-
pressions of mental representations, is endorsed; examples that effectively
enforce that view are discussed; and one example (of perceptual coupling)
that seems to demand a mental representation, with all of the diagnostic
value such a tool would have, is raised for consideration.
This paper by O’Regan & Noë (O&N) marks a new and power-
ful approach to perception, to cognitive neurophysiology, and to
the perceptual technology so pervasive in our lives. Although the
approach has close predecessors, this is the most economical yet
comprehensive and far-reaching version I know.
The paper’s essential points are these: Vision is an exploratory
behavior, not the activation of internal representations of the
things and layout of the world, and what we perceive results from
our acquisition of the principles of sensorimotor contingency. As
the authors note, this position’s power lies in the exceptional range
of behavior for which it accounts. (I would add: and it helps that
it is essentially correct.) I think it can do more than that: It offers
a potentially much more inclusive and complete approach that, as
Thomas (1999) notes in his PA (Perceptual Activity) view of im-
agery, has relatively recent close relatives in Hebb (1947; 1968),
Hochberg (1968), Neisser (1967), Sperry (1952), and others, but
for various reasons has not really taken off until now. O&N now
offer a more systematic and unencumbered framework than we
have previously had. Indeed, if we fill in a few points not addressed
in the paper, the position becomes even more impressive and
enormously promising, although the notion of sensorimotor con-
tingencies becomes somewhat more abstract than it first sounds.
The fact that only the small amount that can be encoded in
working memory survives for approximately 200 msec after a
glance is taken (Sperling1960) stresses the importance of ex-
trafoveal vision as a (low-frequency-sensitive) storage of what was
seen and of what is potentially available to another glance (see
Hochberg 1997; 1998; O’Regan 1992). Phenomena like that in
Figure 1 tell us that local information as basic as the object’s 3D
form may not only go unencoded between glances, but when out
of central vision may be both ineffectual and uninformative of
what would be seen if fixated. Knowledge of such limitations will
help us to dissect what naively seems a seamless perceptual expe-
rience. That apparent seamlessness is probably due, among other
things, to the normal prevalence of intraobject consistency (what
you learn from one part of an object will usually serve for the
whole); and a reluctance to do unnecessary checking. The varia-
tions on the modified Penrose figures in Figure 1C, D, when they
are thought about (Hochberg 1968), make all of these points; the
argument that they are uninformative because ecologically im-
probable, is hard to apply in a world in which at least so much of
our time must be spent with computer-generated displays.
Such figures, and the study of how successive views are stored
and grasped in motion pictures, led me to argue that (as O&N
note) our perceptions are “the program of possible samplings of
an extended scene, and of contingent expectancies of what will be
seen as a result of those samplings” (Hochberg 1968, p. 323).
But that means we need to study the nature and motivation –
that is, attention – of such contingent expectancies, and their lim-
itations. Such attention is neither a glue, a spotlight, nor a filter:
It does not require a filter to obscure the unattended channel in a
shadowing experiment (i.e., an experiment in which the listener
who is duplicating one speaker’s monologue cannot report what
another speaker has said), only a failure to be ready with a set of
expectations with which to encode the words spoken before they
fade from the immediate moment (Hochberg 1970). Liberman
(1957) had argued that listening requires analysis-by-synthesis:
the testing of attended speech against internally intended speech,
so listening to speech also meets the sensorimotor-expectancy
description. From this standpoint, skilled reading also calls on the
production of constrained expectancies, which makes proof-read-
ing very difficult, and makes inattention to omissions and errors so
common. Inattentional blindness to the things and events in the
world is not a new problem: Similar attentional dependence has
been demonstrated in perceiving the contents of superimposed
motion pictures (Neisser & Becklen1975) and in the kind of se-
quential partial views (“aperture viewing”) on which so much of
our virtual visual world of moving pictures depends (Hochberg
1968; Hochberg & Brooks 1997).
Attention, at least in this most engaged and powerful sense, is
not separable from the constraints on sensorimotor expectations,
and this point is challenged when the objects of our perceptual in-
quiry are not simply derivable from the natural ecology of the
physical world. In responses to the natural world, inter-response
constraints, like size and distance, reflectance and form, and so on,
may be attributable to the world rather than the observer. Such
constraints were called perceptual coupling (Hochberg 1974) spe-
cifically to avoid any implication that one percept necessarily
causes the other, and to avoid attributing Helmholtzian inference
to the nature of perceptual expectations. They can be demon-
strated and studied with still and moving pictures as well as with
real depth, even though there are no sensorimotor depth-based
contingencies present either in the pictures or in the visual system.
If the sequence of silhouettes in Figure 2C is preceded by the pat-
tern in Figure 2A, 3D motion is perceived with Arrow I showing
the leading edge; if Figure 2B precedes the sequence in 2C, Ar-
row II is what is seen as the leading edge in motion – so long as A
and B are clearly perceived as 3D forms (Hochberg 2001).
That may imply an “internal mental representation” of the first
figure. However, the perception of 3D form is itself a sensorimo-
tor contingency, though that contingency here would not be
depth-based even if it played out. One set of contingencies may
surely preset another. But there is more to be formalized and set
in theoretical order for sensorimotor contingencies than meets the
eye.
Commentary/O’Regan & Noë: A sensorimotor account of vision and visual consciousness
986
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (2001) 24:5
Figure 1 (Hochberg).
Variations on Penrose figures (A, B: Pos-
sible; C, D: Impossible); only C looks grossly inconsistent as a 3D
object (Hochberg 1968).
Figure 2 (Hochberg).
Pre-exposure to the 3D picture at A or B
determines the apparent motion in depth of the sequence of flat
silhouettes at C (Hochberg 2001).

Doing it my way: Sensation, 
perception – and feeling red
Nicholas Humphrey
Centre for Philosophy of Natural and Social Science, London School of
Economics, London WC2A 2AE, United Kingdom.
n.humphrey@lse.ac.uk
www.humphrey.org.uk
Abstract: The theory presented here is a near neighbour of Humphrey’s
theory of sensations as actions. O’Regan & Noë have opened up remark-
able new possibilities. But they have missed a trick by not making more of
the distinction between sensation and perception; and some of their par-
ticular proposals for how we use our eyes to represent visual properties are
not only implausible but would, if true, isolate vision from other sensory
modalities and do little to explain the phenomenology of conscious expe-
rience in general.
O’Regan & Noë’s (O&N’s) theory of visual consciousness has
several parallels with the theory I proposed ten years ago (Hum-
phrey 1992; 2000). In my book, A History of the Mind, I argued,
from first principles, that sensations (of all kinds, not only visual)
derive their characteristic phenomenology from the fact that they
are – in evolutionary origin – a kind of bodily action, involving
reaching back to the stimulus at the body surface with an evalua-
tive response. “Conscious feeling. . . is a remarkable kind of in-
tentional doing. Feelings enter consciousness not as events that
happen to us but as activities that we ourselves engender and par-
ticipate in” (Humphrey 1992, p. 217). In particular, I suggested
that the modality-specific quality of sensations is determined by
what I called the “adverbial style” of the responses associated with
different sense organs. Drawing on a musical analogy, I suggested
that each type of sense organ has, as it were, to be played like a
musical instrument in its own way: “fingered, blown, bowed,
plucked, etc. . . . so that the tactile modality might correspond to
the woodwind style, the visual modality to the strings style, and so
on” (p. 165).
I went on to argue then, just as O&N do now, that such an
“action-theory” of sensations is uniquely able to account for what
it’s really like to experience red light at the eyes, taste salt on the
tongue, and so on; and, indeed, that it can dispel many if not all of
the mysteries surrounding qualia. I thought it was a good theory
at the time; and I think O&N’s version of it is a good theory now.
However, the way O&N have developed the idea of “seeing as ac-
tion” goes far beyond what I did. Their thesis is brilliant and
provocative – in several ways more radical than mine, but not, I
think, entirely an improvement. I’ll restrict my comments to two
aspects of their presentation.
Sensation and perception. In making my own case I began
with the insight, stemming from Thomas Reid, about the essen-
tial difference between sensation and perception (Reid 1785/
1969). “The external senses,” Reid insisted, “have a double prov-
ince – to make us feel, and to make us perceive” (p. 265). Sensa-
tion is the way the subject represents “what’s happening to me” at
the level of bodily stimulation, perception is the way he represents
“what’s happening out there” as a description of the outside world.
“Things so different in their nature,” Reid had said, “ought to be
distinguished” (p. 249).
Now, O&N do at least pay lip-service to this distinction, ac-
knowledging that: “Sensation consists in those sensorimotor con-
tingencies that are modality-specific, determined by the laws of
contingency provided by the particular apparatus used in a par-
ticular modality, and by the particular way the apparatus samples
the world. Perception consists in knowing those laws that are re-
lated to the object” (O’Regan, personal email). But, as O’Regan
goes on, “we don’t want the distinction to be hard and fast.” And,
indeed, they fail to see that they are – or should be – talking about
two independent types of experience. Consequently, O&N end up
making just the kind of category mistakes that so many other the-
orists have done – as Reid warned they would, – when they have
assumed that seeing (or hearing or touching. . . ) is all of a piece.
This is particularly obvious when it comes to their attempts to
explain those “exceptions that prove the rule,” such as skin vision,
perceptual rearrangement, change blindness, and blindsight. In
all these cases people’s reported experiences have, as I’ve shown,
a simple explanation if we assume that sensation and perception
can – and here indeed are – going their own ways. But O&N, not
having a model that allows for this kind of disassociation, are in-
stead driven to engage in complex and unconvincing special plead-
ing about what people’s experience actually amounts to in these
strange conditions.
Sensorimotor – what? I myself proposed an “action theory”
only for sensation. I confess it did not occur to me that perception
might be action-based as well (although back in 1970 I had sug-
gested that the residual visual capacity of a monkey without visual
cortex might in fact be mediated by – and secondary to – her
“looking-behaviour,” Humphrey 1970). But I am ready to agree
that what works on one level may indeed work on another, and that
actions are probably crucial to most if not all aspects of how we
use our sense organs. So I now find many of O&N’s specific sug-
gestions very persuasive.
Yet their central example, of how we perceive (or is it sense?)
redness, I find unconvincing. We experience something as red,
they say, by virtue of exploring (or anticipating exploring) how the
responses of our anisotropic retinae change when we move our
eyes in relation to the image. I can see how this might work for a
small localised patch of red light with clear contours. But how
about the case where the visual field is coloured red all over? In
this case, when we move our eyes, nothing changes. And yet, of
course, we are still able to see it as red – suggesting that here we
must in fact be relying on the steady retinal signal per se, inde-
pendently of any action on our part.
I also have a worry of a more general kind. Even if this sort of
account can be made to work for colour, it’s hard to see it being
made to work for equivalent dimensions in other sensory modali-
ties that do not have such actively-explorable anisotropic fields.
When we taste salt on our tongues, or smell musk in our noses, or
feel pain in our stomach, how can these experiences plausibly be
thought to depend on sensorimotor contingencies? There is sim-
ply nothing we do by way of exploration with our tongues (or our
noses or our stomachs. . . ) that could provide requisite informa-
tion. But, if exploratory action cannot provide the answer in these
non-visual cases – and so, as theorists, we must invoke some other
active process – why not invoke a similar process (whatever it is)
for seeing red too?
What other kind of active process could underlie sensation in
general? My own view is that the key lies not so much with senso-
rimotor contingencies as with sensorimotor proclivities, and that
the kind of action involved is not exploration of the stimulus but
rather affective engagement with it. In short, if I may simplify it so,
while O&N would argue that when we sense a stimulus this is the
way it feels to us because this is how we plan to feel it, I would ar-
gue that this is the way it feels to us because this is how we feel to-
wards it.
Still, these are local disagreements between myself and O&N.
In the longer run, I’d rather emphasise how much I admire the
spirit of their paper. It has been well said that pour se disputer, il
faut être en accord. (That’s to say, the best arguments are between
those who share their premises).
Commentary/O’Regan & Noë: A sensorimotor account of vision and visual consciousness
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (2001) 24:5
987

How do we account for the absence 
of “change deafness”?
Frédéric Isel
Max Planck Institute of Cognitive Neuroscience, Leipzig, Postfach 500 355,
D-04103 Leipzig, Germany. isel@cns.mpg.de
http://www.cns.mpg.de
Abstract: O’Regan & Noë (O&N) argue that there is no need of internal,
more or less picture-like, representation of the visual world in the brain.
They propose a new approach in which vision is a mode of exploration of
the world that is mediated by knowledge of sensorimotor contingencies.
Data obtained in “change blindness” experiments support this assumption.
This commentary focuses on O’Regan & Noë’s (O&N’s) proposal
that we do not necessarily “see” everything that we are looking at,
but rather, we only see what we are currently attending to. Change
blindness experiments demonstrate that, under arranged experi-
mental conditions (for example, when superimposing a very brief
global flicker over the whole visual field at the moment of the
change) observers who were asked to detect cyclically repeated
large changes in a natural visual scene (for instance, the shift of a
large object, the change of color, or the appearance and disap-
pearance of an object) have difficulties in noticing these changes.
This outcome suggests that either observers are not aware of all
the elements in the visual scene (e.g., they neglect some elements)
or the high expectations of an element could lead to its restoration
even though it was previously removed from the scene (e.g., a hal-
lucinated element). However, as mentioned by O&N, under nor-
mal circumstances a change of this type would create a transient
signal that would be detected by low-level visual mechanisms.
Therefore, it is important to point out that change blindness only
occurs in some experimental situations.
Another example of change blindness is illustrated by the diffi-
culty in detecting unexpected information. Haines (1991) and
Fisher et al. (1980) who tested eight professional pilots during the
landing of aircraft in a flight simulator, showed that two of the
eight pilots were unable to detect an unexpected jet airplane that
was located directly ahead of them on the runway. Taken together,
evidence of change blindness is fairly discouraging with respect to
current theories that assume the storage of a picture-like repre-
sentation of the world in some area of the brain. If such visual rep-
resentations do exist, one should expect the processing system to
be able to detect the presence of a “large” mismatch between the
stored representation of a scene and its “truncated” input signal
when it is re-presented. Given the size of this mismatch, the out-
put of the processing system should be either a correct detection
of the missing element, or an unsuccessful identification of the
scene. On the contrary, change blindness strengthens the view
proposed by O&N that observers lack visual awareness of many
of the aspects of a visual scene, and that the world serves as an out-
side memory. However, one can ask whether change blindness is
modality-independent and can also be found in other sensory do-
mains?
I will now argue that behavioral and electroencephalographical
data obtained in the auditory domain clearly indicate the ability of
the cognitive system to detect missing elements in words (deletion
of a phoneme) as well as in sentences (deletion of a word). I will
try to demonstrate that change blindness, which I call “change
deafness” in the auditory domain, is not systematically found.
Although Warren (1970, Experiment 1) showed that the re-
placement of a phoneme in a recorded sentence by a cough re-
sulted in the illusory perception of the missing sound, other data
invalidate the phenomenon of change deafness. Warren (1970,
Experiment 3) failed to replicate a phonemic restoration when a
speech sound was deleted and not replaced with an extraneous
sound. In this latter condition, participants were able to perfectly
detect the gap in its proper location and illusory perception of the
missing sound did not occur. This outcome does not support the
idea that any missing element of an “auditory scene” can be either
restored or overlooked, even when this element is highly ex-
pected. Rather, it suggests that the processing system is sensitive
enough to detect 120 msec of gaps in a word. In language com-
prehension also, there is evidence against change deafness. Re-
cent event-related brain potentials (ERPs) data on syntactic pro-
cessing do not agree with the view that missing words in a sentence
are simply restored or neglected. Friederici et al. (1993) in Ger-
man, and Isel et al. (1999) in French, showed that the suppression
of the noun in prepositional phrases (e.g., the noun house in the
sentence the child who is in the house is sleeping), is a phrase
structure violation that elicits an early left anterior negativity
(ELAN) assumed to reflect the on-line assignment of a syntactic
structure to the incoming information on the basis of the word cat-
egory. The short latency of the ELAN (around 100 to 300 msec af-
ter the acoustic onset of the item following the missing noun) in-
dicates that the syntactic processor is able to rapidly detect the
absence of elements presenting the appropriate word category
with respect to the grammatical constraints of the sentence. The
ELAN is usually followed by a late centroparietal positivity (P600)
assumed to reflect a reanalysis process once the syntactic violation
has been detected. Moreover, in both studies, behavioral data
showed that participants were able to perform the task of gram-
matical judgment without any error indicating that they were
aware of the change in the syntactic structure. The ELAN/P600
pattern observed in correlation with syntactic word category vio-
lations demonstrate that the electrical activity of the brain is sig-
nificantly modified in some area when expected elements of a sen-
tence are deleted.
In conclusion, in the auditory domain, evidence at word as well
as sentence levels suggests that change deafness is not systemati-
cally found. Regarding detection of changes, it seems that the cog-
nitive system does not behave similarly in the visual and in the au-
ditory modalities. Whereas large changes in visual scenes can be
neglected by observers, a small gap in spoken words or the dele-
tion of a word in a sentence are clearly noticed by listeners. On the
basis of the data we presented for auditory processing of changes,
the assumption that words and syntactic properties are repre-
sented in the brain is not unplausible. In contrast, the data of
change blindness presented by O&N are intriguing because they
considerably weaken the concept of stored picture-like represen-
tations in the brain usually proposed in current neurophysiologi-
cal, psychophysical, and psychological approaches. Hence, the
sensorimotor account presented in the target article opens new
perspectives.
The role of eye movements in perception
Nam-Gyoon Kim
Department of Psychology, William Paterson University, Wayne, NJ 07470.
kimn@wpunj.edu
Abstract: For Gibson, sensory stimulation is neither the cause nor a com-
ponent of perception, but merely incidental. Perception is based on the
pickup of information, which occurs when purposeful observers actively
seek information. I present a case in which only with the active sampling
of the ambient optical flow field can observers extract the requisite infor-
mation for the control of locomotion.
As a Gibsonian ecological psychologist, I was extremely pleased
with O’Regan & Noë’s (O&N’s) target article in which they de-
nounced mental representation as “mysterious or arcane explana-
tory devices” for explaining visual experience (see sect. 13). I am
very sympathetic to their attempt to provide a natural account for
this elusive problem. Indeed, this was exactly the problem that led
Gibson to develop his ecological approach to perception. Gibson’s
solution, however, was remarkably different from O&N’s.
Gibson came to understand perception as an exploratory activ-
ity. He rejected the idea that inputs of any sort could be relevant
to perception. Sensation may occur when stimulation is imposed,
Commentary/O’Regan & Noë: A sensorimotor account of vision and visual consciousness
988
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (2001) 24:5

but not perception. Perception occurs only when purposeful ob-
servers actively seek stimulation. Thus, Gibson’s psychology is not
just a theory of ecological information specific to environmental
properties but includes the active role played by the observer in
search of goal-relevant information.
In this commentary, I present a case of exploratory activity that
renders a seemingly intractable problem tractable. I focus on op-
tical flow, a particular change in optical structure that results from
an observer’s locomotion and constitutes the primary basis for vi-
sually guided locomotion (e.g., Warren 1995). For example, when
an observer moves straight ahead, the focus of expansion in the re-
sultant optical flow corresponds to the direction of locomotion
(Fig. 1a). To move directly toward an object, one need only keep
this singularity coincident with the object.
However, when an observer looks around, sampling different
portions of the ambient optical flow, the image pattern on the
retina (retinal flow) changes. For example, as a forward moving
observer tracks an object, the eyes rotate and the point of fixation
becomes the singularity instead of the focus of expansion (Fig. 1b).
Thus, even though information about heading direction is avail-
able in optical flow, there is no guarantee that the observer can ex-
tract it when needed (Regan & Beverly 1982).
If the observer proceeds along a curved path, even the well-
defined radially expanding pattern generated by an observer walk-
ing straight ahead disappears. Worse yet, the observer may not al-
ways look in the direction of locomotion, further complicating the
flow pattern. Consequently, an informational basis for perceiving
heading is needed that is not specific to a particular locomotion
path.
Computer simulations can help. Graphic simulations depicting
an observer moving along a circular path are quite different when
the eyes are fixated on an object lying outside the circular path
(Fig. 2a) or on the path (Fig. 2b). When the fixated object lies on
the path, all image trajectories are linearized.
In circular locomotion, observers’ paths are specified by the op-
tic flow line passing directly beneath them (Lee & Lishman 1977).
This line is easily identified by the trajectory of all the vertically
aligned image vectors (Fig. 2c). Because rectilinear locomotion is
a special case of circular locomotion, any method of identifying
heading on a circular path can be applied to a rectilinear path.
Hence, we can formulate a simple rule to identify one’s (linear or
circular) heading: Move the eyes until the image trajectories are
rendered linear; then you are looking in the direction you are
headed towards and the trajectory defined by the vertical image
vectors is your path of locomotion. In short, by actively rotating
the eye, the observer can recover the ambient optical flow field
from image motion.
If the visual system has to differentiate various types of eye
movements, the task may be insurmountable (cf. Warren 1995).
However, if each movement is recognized as an outcome of a
unique intention, the unique pattern in retinal flow can be ex-
ploited. We may fixate and pursue an object during locomotion to
learn more about it; but in so doing, we risk reducing our direc-
tional awareness from absolute to nominal (Kim et al. 1996). Be-
cause we have frontal eyes, our field of view is restricted to a small
portion of the optical flow. To avoid collisions with objects outside
our field of view, we must continuously scan our surroundings,
which may necessitate using unreliable extra-retinal signals to de-
termine heading (Royden et al. 1994). Therefore, with each type
Commentary/O’Regan & Noë: A sensorimotor account of vision and visual consciousness
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (2001) 24:5
989
Figure 1 (Kim).
Retinal flow corresponding to translation along
a linear path (a) with the focus of expansion and (b) under pursuit
fixation.
Figure 2 (Kim).
Retinal flow corresponding to translation along
a circular path with pursuit fixation on an object lying (a) outside
or (b) on the path. (c) In a linearized retinal flow field, the path
constructed from the vertical vectors identifies the observer’s path
of locomotion. See Kim & Turvey (1999) for further details. The
geometries of the observer’s path, tangential heading, and gaze di-
rection are shown by solid, long dotted, and short dotted arrows,
respectively.

of eye movement, we may both gain and lose something (e.g., di-
rectional awareness). However, when directional awareness is re-
quired, we can compensate by executing a simple rule, that is,
scanning until retinal flow becomes linear. The fact that drivers
concentrate their fixations in the direction they head (Shinar
1978) corroborates this hypothesis.
The preceding discussion offers possible solutions to age-old
questions. First, how can a series of discrete samples of the world
be converted to a stable and continuous visual world (e.g., Irwin
1991)? If the coincidence of gaze and heading directions during
locomotion collapses retinotopic and environmental frames of ref-
erence, there is no need for conversion processes and various
stages of frames of reference. Paradoxically, in fixed-eye vision,
retinal pattern changes with shifts in eye position; but ambulatory
vision simplifies the problem, resulting in a stable and continuous
visual world (see also Ballard 1992). Extending the preceding
point, imagine that you are a passenger in a car. By actively rotat-
ing your eyes to induce a linearized retinal flow, you can pick up
the same information as the driver, that is, the driver’s intended
heading direction – despite the fact that your “sensations” are
completely different than the driver’s. Here we have a clue as to
how to understand the sharing of awareness between different ob-
servers. As Gibson (1982a) noted, “your perception and mine can
be identical even though your sensation and mine can never be
identical at the same time. The same invariants are available to us
both” (pp. 411–12).
Why rotate our eyes if rotation induces ambiguity? Based on the
arguments presented here, active rotation of the eyes is essential
for extracting the self-movement information contained in optical
flow. Strategically positioning the eyes renders a nonlinear flow
linear. “Problems that are ill-posed and nonlinear for a passive ob-
server become well-posed and linear for an active observer” (Aloi-
monos et al. 1988, p. 333).
Consciousness as action: The eliminativist
sirens are calling
Martin Kurthen
Department of Epileptology, University of Bonn, D-53105 Bonn, Germany.
martin.kurthen@ukb.uni-bonn.de
http://www.epileptologie-bonn.de
Abstract: The sensorimotor theory of vision successfully blends in with
the currently developing action-oriented account of cognition. As a theory
of phenomenal consciousness, however, it suffers from the same short-
comings as the theories O’Regan & Noë (O&N) criticize. This is mainly
due to the failure to avoid the explanatory gap by rejecting one notion of
qualia while retaining the concept of experience with qualitative features
in general.
Two problems of consciousness. Let’s take O’Regan & Noë’s
(O&N’s) theory of vision as a part of a more general sensorimotor
theory of cognition (STC). In their approach to consciousness,
O&N address two problems. The first one is that, according to a
widespread intuition, an account of the neural correlate of con-
sciousness does not really make the “hard problem” of explaining
phenomenal consciousness any easier. The second one is that any
theory of consciousness will have to explain the “differences in the
felt quality” (target article, sect. 1.2) within one modality and
across sensory modalities. The latter problem is elegantly solved
by O&N’s notion of modality-specific sensorimotor contingencies,
but this solution presupposes some prior solution (or dissolution,
or rejection) of the first problem. At best, the proposal concern-
ing the second problem can be embedded in a more comprehen-
sive conceptual framework of embodied cognition that – com-
bined with a certain preference in coping with the qualia problem
(eliminativist, agnostic, pragmatic, deconstructionist. . . ), – could
as a whole suggest a rejection of the first problem. But O&N are
not willing to adopt any of these combined approaches. The sen-
sorimotor contingency framework alone, as part of a neurobiolog-
ical or ethological theory of vision, however, will not “allow for the
explanation. . . of a good deal of what makes the subjective char-
acter of experience” (sect. 2.7), because it presupposes that an or-
ganism’s contingency-governed action somehow generates or con-
stitutes phenomenal consciousness in the first place (see below).
The nature of experiences. In an (unwillingly?) eliminativistic
tone, O&N maintain that “qualia are an illusion” (sect. 6.3). To re-
ject the notion of qualia means to reject the notion of phenome-
nally conscious tokens or features in favor of whatever the alter-
native theory invokes (in O&N’s case, in favor of “activity”). But in
common usage, “phenomenally conscious features” are “experi-
ential features.” Hence, it remains unclear how O&N could both
dismiss qualia as an illusion and keep with qualitative features of
experience, as they are explicitly willing to do. I assume that O&N
do not understand “experience” non-phenomenally, for this would
render their approach eliminativistic from the start.
O&N address this problem in their critique of the view that
qualia are states or occurrences of something. They hold that
qualia in the sense of states/occurrences are “an illusion,” but they
keep with the “qualitative character” of experiences (as ways of
acting). But what could it mean that experiences “are” ways of act-
ing? Either there are phenomenal features of experiences, or
there aren’t. If there are, then the gap opens between these fea-
tures and the ways of acting they are meant to be identified with.
If there aren’t, we have landed at the eliminativist or deconstruc-
tionist shore once again. There is no third path to follow, unless
you argue that the whole notion of phenomenal consciousness (not
only that of phenomenal consciousness as occurrences/states!) is
somehow ill-designed and has to be “quined” (Dennett 1991). But
O&N explicitly reject this move, which anyway has a manifestly
eliminativistic flavor, too.
To clarify the origins of the “qualia illusion,” O&N present a
phenomenological analysis of experience (sect. 6.4) in which they
show that, contrary to the assumptions of some qualia freaks, the
factual phenomenological aspects of experience do not support
the notion of qualia as (sensation-like) occurrences, internal rep-
resentations, or “unitary” qualities in general. In their examples,
O&N nicely illustrate that their action-oriented theory fits well
with the actual phenomenology of experience. And again, in O&N’s
own view this merely invalidates the construction of qualia as
states or occurrences, not the notion of qualitative features of ex-
perience as such. But they don’t seem to see that for the qualia
freak, this does not help to close the gap: in their own words, it
may be made plausible that the phenomenal features of experi-
ence are “constituted by” (sect. 6.3) or “depend on” (sect. 6.4) the
“sensorimotor contingencies at play.” This move opens the gap
just like any other “constitution hypothesis” would: why is it that
sensorimotor contingencies at play generate – or constitute – phe-
nomenal features at all, instead of being just that: sensorimotor
contingencies in an organism-environment system? Why is it that
skillful mastery of contingencies is experience, instead of being
just that: skillful mastery? (By the way, this is exactly what O&N’s
action-oriented phenomenological analysis of experience [sect.
6.4] suggests: that there is nothing “over and above” skillful mas-
tery of sensorimotor contingencies.)
Action alone will not close the gap. In passages like these, it
becomes obvious that O&N literally identify consciousness qua
experience with law-governed action (see sect. 5.7) without any in-
dependent argument for this identification. In this respect, they
don’t do better than the representationists (or neural-correlate-of-
consciousness-theorists) they criticize. By merely postulating an
identity of action and visual consciousness, they will not escape the
explanatory gap problem, since “ways of acting” are by no means
closer to experiential features than “internal representations” are.
O&N clearly anticipate this objection (sect. 6.8), and they reject it
in the overtly eliminativistic manner they had applied before when
they had stated that “qualia are an illusion” (sect. 6.3). And again,
they want to keep with “experience” (and hence qualia, in some
sense or other!) while dismissing qualia as states/occurrences. But
Commentary/O’Regan & Noë: A sensorimotor account of vision and visual consciousness
990
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (2001) 24:5

the gap argument is not dissolved or avoided by just rejecting one
“conception of experience” (sect. 6.8): the gap remains whenever
the existence of “experience” with “qualitative character” is con-
ceded in the context of a neurobiological approach to conscious-
ness. In O&N’s example, it remains unclear in which sense the
feeling of holding a bottle could be the “knowledge that move-
ments of the hand open up and reveal new aspects of bottle sur-
face” (sect. 6.8). “Knowledge” cannot be construed as a conscious
mode of cognizing here, for that would render the explanation cir-
cular; what is meant is something like “skilled exercise.” But then
the question O&N pose in the introduction (ridiculing neural-cor-
relate-of-consciousness-theories of consciousness) is still left
unanswered in their own approach: why should skilled exercise
generate phenomenal consciousness at all? The only way out is the
straightforwardly eliminativistic one that declares the whole no-
tion of there being something to explain as illusory (or the radi-
cally deconstructionist one which holds that consciousness itself
can be subject to social deconstruction; see Kurthen et al. 1998).
And there is no reason why the STC should not be used to pro-
mote strategies like these.
A sensorimotor theory of cognition, not of consciousness.
O&N may well be right in arguing that the STC overrides the tra-
ditional representationist paradigm in cognition theory. There are
quite a number of good philosophical and scientific reasons for
this (see Hendriks-Jansen 1996, Lakoff & Johnson 1999, and
Pfeifer & Scheier 1999 for current reviews), some of which O&N
do not need to employ directly for their own approach. As for vi-
sion, one aspect of the superiority of the STC is its elegant account
of the modality-specific aspects of vision in terms of sensorimotor
contingencies. But this gives no clue whatsoever to the desired dis-
solution of the explanatory gap: to dismiss qualia in favor of ways
of acting will not suffice to avoid the gap as long as the existence
of experiences with qualitative character is affirmed.
Does sensorimotor contingency theory
account for perceptual-motor dissociations?
Francesco Lacquaniti and Myrka Zago
Human Physiology Section, Scientific Institute Santa Lucia and University of
Rome “Tor Vergata,” 00179 Rome, Italy. lacquaniti@caspur.it
m.zago@hsantalucia.it
Abstract: We review studies that indicate a dissociation between the per-
ceptual estimate and the resulting cognitive representation of given prop-
erties of a seen object, on the one hand, and the motor action exerted on
the same object. We propose that there exist multiple levels of organiza-
tion of sensorimotor loops and that internal models may be made accessi-
ble to one level of organization while remaining inaccessible to another
level.
In the on-going debate between supporters of sensorimotor af-
fordances and supporters of internalization of world physics (see
BBS Special Issue on THE WORK OF ROGER SHEPARD), it
is apparent that neither factor alone can account for the whole
repertoire of human behavior in sensorimotor coordination. Dis-
sociations between perception and action seem especially difficult
to reconcile with unifying explanations. Some interesting exam-
ples of such dissociations are provided by the study of interaction
with moving objects. There are two aspects of interest here: visual
perception and cognitive judgment of object motion, on the one
hand, and motor interception on the other hand.
Consider the case of projectile motion, such as a baseball hit by
a batter. Object trajectory is nearly parabolic with horizontal ve-
locity which decreases steadily by a small amount due to air resis-
tance, and vertical velocity which decelerates from the release
value to zero at the apex of the trajectory and then accelerates
downwards under the action of gravity. Despite the fact that
throwing and catching balls is a generally practiced skill, cognitive
and perceptual understanding of this simple ballistic motion is
surprisingly poor. Hecht and Bertamini (2000) used a number of
different approaches to study the explicit and implicit assessment
of projectile acceleration by an observer. Many subjects mistak-
enly believed that the ball would continue to accelerate after it left
the thrower’s hand and showed a remarkable tolerance for highly
anomalous trajectory profiles in computer graphics animation.
A related issue is whether or not visual perception of the ab-
solute size and distance of a moving object could be disam-
biguated by taking into account the expected effects of gravity
(Saxberg 1987; Watson et al 1992). Once again, however, Hecht et
al. (1996) showed that observers do not behave as if they made use
of some knowledge about gravity. Projectile motion of balls of dif-
ferent diameters and at different distances from the observer was
simulated on a computer. Performance was compared with two
categories of events, accelerating balls and constant-velocity balls.
It was found that observers are as bad at scaling absolute size and/
or distance of accelerating balls as they are with constant-velocity
balls. In sum, these and similar studies seem to suggest that the
naive physics used by the brain in the assessment of ballistic mo-
tion does not account for Newton’s laws.
The opposite conclusion can be reached if one considers tests
of motor performance instead of perceptual tests. Subjects can
catch or throw with great spatial and temporal accuracy (Alderson
et al. 1974; Peper et al. 1994; Sharp & Whiting 1974). Moreover,
it has been shown that the acceleration of a falling ball is predicted
quite accurately to prepare motor responses (Lacquaniti 1996;
Lacquaniti & Maioli 1989a; 1989b; Lacquaniti et al. 1993a; Tre-
silian 1993; 1999). It has further been hypothesized that the spe-
cific acceleration of gravity can be foreseen based on an internal
model (Lacquaniti 1996; Lacquaniti & Maioli 1989a). Gravity is a
terrestrial invariant that is monitored by several sensory systems
and the consequences of its effects on objects can be learned
through experience. This hypothesis has been tested in a series of
studies involving catches of free-falling balls of identical external
appearance but different mass, dropped from heights between 0.2
and 1.6 m (Lacquaniti et al. 1992; 1993a; 1993b; Lacquaniti &
Maioli 1989a; 1989b). The electrical activity (EMG) of arm mus-
cles was recorded. The time to onset of anticipatory activity rela-
tive to impact and the time course of the activity do not change with
the height of fall, nor do they depend on the ball mass. Thus, the
responses are precisely timed on impact time. A similar time-lock-
ing on impact is observed for the modulation of muscle reflex re-
sponses and for the changes in overall hand impedance. Remark-
ably, motor preparation of reflex responses and limb impedance is
correctly timed on impact even when blindfolded subjects are
alerted of ball release by an auditory cue (Lacquaniti & Maioli
1989b). Not only is the response timing tuned to gravity, but also
the magnitude of the anticipatory responses is tuned to the ex-
pected momentum of the incoming ball (Lacquaniti & Maioli
1989a; Lang & Bastian 1999). Thus, even though Newton’s laws
may not be internalized for constructing a visual representation of
the object’s motion, they seem to be internalized for manual in-
terception of the object.
A striking dissociation between cognitive/perceptual assess-
ments and motor interaction with a moving object has recently
been shown in micro-gravity studies (McIntyre et al. 2001). As-
tronauts caught a ball projected from the ceiling at different, ran-
domised speeds. Despite the prolonged exposure to 0g, the infor-
mation given by vestibular organs, pressure cues on the skin and
visual cues from objects floating within the cabin – all clearly at-
testing the micro-gravity conditions in orbit, – the astronauts did
not believe their eyes that told them the ball was travelling at con-
stant velocity. Instead, to catch the ball they gave credence to an
a priori model of the physical world in which a downward moving
object will always accelerate. In fact, their motor activity always
started too early at 0g, with time shifts in accord with a 1g hy-
pothesis.
According to the sensorimotor contingency theory put forth by
O’Regan & Noë (O&N), seeing and perceiving are a way of act-
Commentary/O’Regan & Noë: A sensorimotor account of vision and visual consciousness
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (2001) 24:5
991

ing on the environment. It is not obvious how the theory can ex-
plain perceptual-motor dissociations. Moreover, O&N reject the
idea that there exist internal representations of the outside world.
A general purpose, unifying theory may assume just one level of
organization of sensorimotor loops, whereas it is more likely that
there exist multiple levels. Perceptual and cognitive events may be
constructed using building blocks different from those used for
motor reactions. What is available at one level may not be avail-
able at another level. Thus, the data we reviewed above do indi-
cate that physical laws are internalised in the brain, and that these
internal models may be made accessible to one level of organiza-
tion while they remain inaccessible to another level.
On the distinction between “sensorimotor”
and “motorsensory” contingencies
Donald Laming
Department of Experimental Psychology, University of Cambridge,
Cambridge CB2 3EB, United Kingdom. drjl@cus.cam.ac.uk
Abstract: An experimenter studies “sensorimotor contingencies”; the
stimulus is primary and the subject’s response consequential. But the sub-
ject, looking at the world from his or her distinctive viewpoint, is occupied
with “motorsensory contingencies”; the response is now primary and the
sensory consequential. These two categories are gathered together under
the one term in the target article. This commentary disambiguates the con-
fusion.
The term “sensorimotor contingencies” is serving a double duty.
Suppose I conduct an experiment – I impose a large, cyclically re-
peated, change on a natural scene, masking the temporal transient
(though not the change), and ask my subject to say what is being
changed. That studies a sensorimotor contingency. Now suppose
my subject is running an eye over the scene I propose to use. As
his (or her) eye moves, so the projection of a straight line on the
retina is distorted. That is, properly speaking, a motorsensory con-
tingency. The distinction is essential. When I analyse my data I
regress my subject’s reports onto the various ways in which I have
attempted to mask the change. But if my subject were to analyse
the effects of eye movements in any formal sense, that analysis
would be a regression of the sensory change onto the (motor)
movement that produced it. In the first case the independent vari-
able is a stimulus (my choice of mask), in the second it is a response
(the subject’s choice of eye movement). These two sets of contin-
gencies are entirely disjoint, and it follows that my experiment can
tell me nothing about my subject’s internal visual experience.
Motorsensory contingencies induced by the visual apparatus
can be inferred from the optics of the eye and are much the same
for everyone. Likewise, geometrical considerations lead to an un-
derstanding of many contingencies determined by visual attri-
butes. Moreover, by serving as a subject in his own experiment, an
experimenter can check his intuition in such matters. But that
does not give access to another person’s visual experience. The fact
that I am aware of the change I have imposed on my natural scene
tells me nothing about whether my subject is also aware!
The point to be grasped is that subject and experimenter expe-
rience the experiment from two contrary viewpoints. What is, to
the experimenter, a dependent response, predictable (to some ex-
tent) from the stimulus, is, to the subject, an independent variable,
a choice at his disposal. Consciousness is the quality of experience
from the subjective viewpoint and is forever beyond the ambit of
strictly experimental study.
An analogy will help here. If I look out from the window of my
breakfast room, I can see three other houses, separated from me
by a road and a green sward. If a car comes to turn round in the
road (it is a cul-de-sac), my neighbour and I can readily agree that
the car is red. That arena outside our houses is a part of the pub-
lic domain within which objective experiments can be conducted.
But my neighbour and I cannot see into each others houses be-
cause the light reflected from the windows is much too bright. I
can telephone my neighbour, but I can then only describe the in-
terior furnishing of my breakfast room by comparison with things
that my neighbour will have seen elsewhere. The scope of exper-
imental procedure can be extended to internal experience only by
projecting that experience into the public domain. This is accom-
plished by my selecting elements within that domain that would
generate, if I were actually viewing them, my current visual expe-
rience. But there is a limit to the accuracy with which I can express
my state of mind. If I describe my curtains as scarlet, or carmine,
or cerise, or plum, or. . .  – my neighbour might think of a differ-
ent external colour referent to the one that I have in mind, and
“seeing red” will then mean slightly different things to the two of
us. Of course, I can invite my neighbour into my house to see for
himself; but I cannot give him direct access to my visual experi-
ence. Visual experience is private to each one of us, and that is why
visual awareness presents a problem.
Many visual scientists think they can crack that problem with
neurophysiological observation. Visual experience is a function of
the brain; a sufficient complexity of observation and understand-
ing (but much greater complexity than anyone has at present) will
enable a direct access to my visual experience. There are four
problems with this view.
1. An experimenter cannot know what I am aware of unless I
tell him. So neuroscientific understanding will be limited to the
relationship between neural process and verbal (or some other
mode of) report. That will be satisfactory if my report is both ac-
curate and complete; but is it?
2. The processes inside my brain divide functionally into two
categories. There is the state of mind that I am reporting and there
is the function of observing that state of mind and reporting on it,
a function on which I am ultimately unable to report. It happens
that my house is built to a plan that is different from any of the
three others I can see across the way, but I cannot observe that dif-
ference from my breakfast room window because I cannot see the
exterior of my house. The observer cannot see himself as others
see him.
3. In addition, there are many lower level functions – the ini-
tial processing of visual input is one – that are not accessible to
consciousness and cannot be reported on. So the neuroscientist
has a much greater variety of observations of my brain processes
than can be matched to my reports, and experiment is needed to
sort those observations that do match something from those that
do not.
4. But we now return to the problem with which I began. The
neuroscientist can study detailed contingencies between sensory
input and neural response, but that is no more than a detailed kind
of sensorimotor contigency. My reports, on the other hand, relate
to what I can do, to what I choose to do, and concern motorsen-
sory contingencies. The two categories do not correspond. The
question: which aspect of my verbal reports relate to which aspects
of neurophysiological observation, can never be more than a mat-
ter of conjecture, even though some of those conjectures may
seem very plausible.
Commentary/O’Regan & Noë: A sensorimotor account of vision and visual consciousness
992
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (2001) 24:5

Attention sheds no light on the origin 
of phenomenal experience
Victor A. F. Lammea and Rogier Landmanb
aThe Netherlands Ophthalmic Research Institute, AMC, University of
Amsterdam, 1105 BA Amsterdam, The Netherlands; bDepartment of Visual
System Analysis, AMC, University of Amsterdam, 1100 AA Amsterdam,
The Netherlands. v.lamme@amc.uva.nl
r.landman@ioi.knaw.nl
http://www.ioi.knaw.nl
http://www.ioi.knaw.nl
Abstract: In O’Regan & Noë’s (O&N’s) account for the phenomenal ex-
perience of seeing, awareness is equated to what is within the current fo-
cus of attention. They find no place for a distinction between phenomenal
and access awareness. In doing so, they essentially present a dualistic so-
lution to the mind-brain problem, and ignore that we do have phenome-
nal experience of what is outside the focus of attention.
What causes the phenomenal experience of a visual stimulus? The
traditional view is that at successive stages of visual processing, in-
formation that is embedded in the input is made explicit by neu-
rons, either individually, by selective firing when this information
is present, or as a group, with a particular “neural code” such as
synchrony. Neurons make explicit a lot of attributes of the visual
input, ranging from elementary features to high level inferences
such as illusory contours, filling-in, scene segmentation, colour
constancy, and so on. Damage to such neurons results in a loss of
the experience of these attributes, while artificial stimulation leads
to the occurrence of an experience. Explicit representation is con-
sidered necessary for phenomenal experience, but not sufficient.
Some additional property, either of the neural activity, or of the ar-
eas in which it occurs, is assumed to be necessary. This is the
“quest for the neural correlate of consciousness (NCC)” (Crick &
Koch 1998; Lamme et al. 2000).
O’Regan & Noë (O&N) propose a different basis for phe-
nomenal experience. They argue that correlations between neural
activity and the reported percepts should not be taken to indicate
that neurons are building an internal representation of the world.
Rather, they are involved in the mastery of certain sensorimotor
contingencies related to dealing with the visual input. In this view,
explicit representations are not necessary. This is a potentially use-
ful interpretation of the neural data (although very difficult to val-
idate), but does it solve the mind-brain problem?
Much of the brain is devoted to sensorimotor transformations
that fully bypass phenomenal experience (Stoerig 1996). Mastery
of sensorimotor contingencies also includes making inferences, an
important aspect of perception. Neural activity related to percep-
tual aspects (i.e., those which have to be inferred from the input)
can be recorded when animals are anesthetized (Gray et al. 1989),
do not pay attention to stimuli (Assad & Maunsell 1995), or report
not to see stimuli (Super et al. 2001). This implies that the senso-
rimotor contingencies mastered by these neurons at that time are
not sufficient for awareness, while at other times they are. The
question remains open: What causes some masteries of sensori-
motor contingencies to give rise to awareness, while others do not?
It seems we are in for another quest for the NCC.
The key, according to O&N is that some masteries are made
available for control, thought, and action, while others are not.
What would this mean at the neural level? Visual input resulting
in the firing of motor neurons (“action”) is obviously insufficient
(cf. blindsight, automatic behavior, etc.). So the solution lies in
finding the neural basis of “thought” and “control,” and then fig-
uring out how the interaction between visual and control mecha-
nisms is represented at the neural level. Much of this work has
already been done in the study of the neural basis of attention
(Desimone & Duncan 1995). However, O&N refute such expla-
nations as they would constitute an “analytic isomorphism.” But
what other than a specific set of neural events renders a mastery
into a current mastery?
We believe, therefore, that equating phenomenal experience to
the current mastery of sensorimotor contingencies does not ex-
plain phenomenal experience at the neural level, and essentially
constitutes a dualistic view of the mind-brain problem. However,
this is only the first of our problems. We also think that the authors
are looking for awareness in all the wrong places.
Top-down attention seems central to the notion of current ver-
sus other masteries. It is argued that “casting one’s awareness onto
what is made available by the visual apparatus” (sect. 4.1) is what
makes a mastery a “current mastery.” On the basis of change blind-
ness and inattentional blindness phenomena it is even concluded
that without top-down attention there is no awareness. But what
do these phenomena really show?
In a change blindness experiment, a visual scene is presented,
followed by a modified version of that scene (while local transients
are masked in one way or another). Much of the contents of the
first scene seem lost, as we do not notice a potentially salient dif-
ference between the two unless we focus attention on the chang-
ing item. But does that imply that there was only poor phenome-
nal experience of the first scene? Recent experiments show that
memory of the original stimulus is quite extensive until the mod-
ified version of the stimulus comes on. When attention is guided
by a cue after the offset of the original picture and before onset of
the modified version, change blindness is largely eliminated (Becker
et al. 2000). Change blindness occurs because the representation
of the original stimulus is overwritten as soon as a new stimulus
comes on. What is then left of the original scene is what has been
transferred to working memory, a process requiring attention.
When we rely on a report about the subjects’ phenomenal ex-
perience we are essentially looking at their memory of it. We thus
have to face the difference between working memory and so
called iconic or sensory memory, a short lived form of memory,
that is richer, yet less stable, than working memory (Cowan 1988;
Sperling 1960). There is no scientific reason to exclude either of
the two from a theory about awareness. By the same token, there
is no reason to eliminate the very related distinction between phe-
nomenal and access awareness (or P-consciousness and A-con-
sciousness; Block 1996).
We conclude that equating phenomenal experience to the cur-
rent mastery of sensorimotor contingencies puts no challenge to
more traditional views on the NCC. We conjecture that visual ex-
perience is caused by the recurrent interaction of neurally explicit
visual information, which can be reported as soon as this informa-
tion is linked to the executive systems of the brain (Lamme 2000).
The sensorimotor theory is an interesting and inspiring view.
However, it leaves us with the questions of why some masteries of
sensorimotor contingencies give rise to awareness while others re-
main unconscious, and which are the neural events that cause the
masteries to give rise to awareness. Also, because phenomenal
awareness is eliminated at the expense of access awareness, it is
more a theory about attention and working memory, than about
the origin of phenomenal experience.
Does functionalism really deal with the
phenomenal side of experience?
Riccardo Manzotti and Giulio Sandini
LIRA-Lab, DIST, University of Genova, 16145 Genova, Italy.
manzotti@lira.dist.unige.it
sandini@dist. unige.it
http://manzotti.lira.dist.unige.it
http://www.lira.dist.unige.it
Abstract: Sensory motor contingencies belong to a functionalistic frame-
work. Functionalism does not explain why and how objective functional
relations produce phenomenal experience. O’Regan & Noë (O&N) as well
as other functionalists do not propose a new ontology that could support
the first person subjective phenomenal side of experience.
In reading O’Regan & Noë’s (O&N’s) paper two major concerns
are mandatory. First, it is difficult to see in what respect the au-
Commentary/O’Regan & Noë: A sensorimotor account of vision and visual consciousness
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (2001) 24:5
993

thors’ standpoint is different from functionalism. Second, it is
difficult to define objectively what sensory motor contingency
(SMC) is without recourse to some kind of external interpretation.
The authors reject the representational framework advocated
by several other authors (Kosslyn et al. 1995; O’Brien & Opie
1999), according to which conscious perception derives from the
instantiation of structures somehow similar to external objects. We
agree with O&N that this approach has several serious problems,
among which are: (i) apart from geometrical spatial relations, how
can the other qualities of experience (colour, smell, sound) be re-
produced? (ii) there is no compelling evidence of the existence of
such structures; (iii) if such structures were found there is no a pri-
ori or scientific theory showing why their presence in the brain
should result in some subjective qualitative experience.
The authors correctly address all these three issues. To over-
come these difficulties they propose “a different approach” whose
“central idea is that vision is a mode of exploration of the world that
is mediated by knowledge of” what they call “sensorimotor con-
tingencies” (target article, sect. 1.3). In itself this is not a strong
claim since it has already been made several times, most notably
by functionalism. In fact, the authors claim that “seeing is a way of
acting”: a statement that could be accepted from a functionalist (if
not behaviourist) standpoint. Nevertheless, it is not clear what is
the novelty of SMCs with respect to other forms of functionalism.
If we have understood the authors’ standpoint, a SMC is a set of
compelling correspondences between action and perceived ob-
jects. Yet the authors do not provide a general proof of the fact that
every visual conscious phenomenal object can be reduced to
SMCs. Even if these SMCs could be located, the authors do not
explain why these SMCs, which – by their own admission – are
just “rules governing the sensory changes produced by various mo-
tor actions” (sect. 2.1), should correspond to phenomenal experi-
ences. The authors should have realized that something is missing
when they wrote that “the visual qualities are determined by the
character of the SMCs set up by the visual apparatus” (sect. 2.3).
A series of questions arises: i) if visual qualities are determined by
SMCs, then what are visual qualities? are they something differ-
ent from SMCs? ii) what is the character of a SMC? Is it something
different from a SMC in itself? iii) what are the laws connecting vi-
sual qualities and SMCs? iv) it seems perfectly conceivable that
SMCs exist without any visual qualities or phenomenal experi-
ences at all, then why should SMCs explain subjective experience?
Although the empirical data collected by O&N can be very
helpful in building a functionalistic theory of vision and in giving a
more complete explanation of the way information is processed by
the brain, it does not help in explaining why such information pro-
cessing should be correlated to a conscious experience. The au-
thors do admit the existence of such a gap between SMC and con-
sciousness and they promise to provide more details in section 6.
In section 6, the authors are adamant in stating their function-
alist credo that phenomenal experience does not exist as a real
phenomenon. According to them, the “qualia debate rests on what
Ryle . . . called a category mistake” (sect. 6.3). They write that their
position does not deny that “experience has a qualitative charac-
ter,” yet it seems to deny the existence of experience in itself. “It
is confused to think of the qualitative character of experience in
terms of the occurrence of something. . . . Experience is something
we do and its qualitative features are aspects of this activity” (sect.
6.3). Unfortunately, there are no qualitative aspects available.
Since what we do, from a strict objective standpoint, is just a se-
ries of physical events there is no quality at all. We do not accept
this functionalist credo and hold a different standpoint. The idea
that subjective facts are real has gained wider and wider accep-
tance (Chalmers 1996a; Edelman 1987; Edelman & Tononi 2000;
Manzotti & Tagliasco 2001; Stubenberg 1998). Leopold Stuben-
berg makes a straightforward statement about this concept in what
he calls the principle of phenomenological adequacy.
I will reject everything that does not square with what I take to be the
phenomenological data. . . . “So much the worse for phenomenology”
is not a viable option for one who adheres to the principle of phenom-
enological adequacy. Phenomenology is what the theory of conscious-
ness is supposed to illuminate. If a theory requires us to disregard the
deliverances of phenomenology then it is not the theory I seek .
The authors’ claim that the explanatory gap can be filled “because
it does not really exist” is not acceptable outside a functionalistic
framework.
In conclusion, our main criticism is directed towards three is-
sues. First, it is not clear what the difference is between the SMC
approach and functionalism. Second, we do not see why the exis-
tence of SMCs should entail any phenomenal experience. Third,
we do not see what is the ontological status of such SMCs (are they
intrinsic properties of matter? do they entail consciousness even
when they occur in an artificial machine? are they sufficient to let
consciousness emerge?). Yet, the authors’ approach is valuable in
that it marks the possibility of locating consciousness outside the
brain. The repeated failure in the search for a neural correlate of
consciousness can thus be used as a suggestion for a different ap-
proach that includes the relations with the external environment.
Although O&N’s approach does not directly address the problem
of consciousness, it can be the basis for a more radical attempt to
locate the phenomenal properties of experience in a broader
framework than that of internalism. But functionalism cannot be
enough.
Sensorimotor contingencies do not replace
internal representations, and mastery is not
necessary for perception
Ernst Niebur
Zanvyl Krieger Mind/Brain Institute and Department of Neuroscience, Johns
Hopkins University, Baltimore, MD 21218. niebur@jhu.edu
http://www.cnslab.mb.jhu.edu
Abstract: Sensorimotor contingencies are certainly of great importance
for perception but they are no substitute for the internal representation of
perceived information. I argue that internal, non-iconic representations of
perceptions must, and do, exist and that sensorimotor contingencies are
an integral part of them. Further, I argue that mastery of the sensory ap-
paratus or environment is not a prerequisite for perception and that per-
ception is possible in the absence of any control over the perceptual pro-
cess.
Sensorimotor contingencies are important for internal repre-
sentations, not for “movie screens.” O’Regan & Noë (O&N)
spend a large part of the target article elucidating how the per-
ceiver makes use of “sensorimotor contingencies.” This is a laud-
able and important endeavor. Even students of neuroscience some-
times may wonder why we don’t perceive, for example, saccadic
smear.1 The detailed treatment in the target article makes it clear
that (a), sensorimotor contingencies are an essential part of what
it means to see, and (b), they are not “mysterious” in any way.
The second dragon they are trying to slay is the idea of an in-
ternal “movie screen” and, implicitly of course, the homunculus
who watches it. Although the need is less clear in this case – I sus-
pect few serious thinkers still entertain the notion of a camera ob-
scura inside the brain which the external world is projected into –
all their arguments are correct. For instance, they demonstrate
convincingly (perhaps most so through O’Regan’s beautiful work
on change blindness) that the outside world serves as its own rep-
resentation for many of the perceived details, and that they are not
reproduced in the internal representation. The brain does not in-
ternalize a detailed, iconic representation of a visual scene since it
is readily available at the (minimal) cost of opening the eyes; it
would be very inefficient to build up a costly detailed representa-
tion that can be had nearly for free.
However, in fighting the idea of an internal movie screen, the
authors go way too far and deny the existence of any internal rep-
Commentary/O’Regan & Noë: A sensorimotor account of vision and visual consciousness
994
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (2001) 24:5

resentation. This is in contradiction to the results of essentially all
electrophysiological studies of sensory perception. In a classic ex-
ample, nearly 40 years ago Hubel and Wiesel (1962) showed that
visual presentation of an oriented line leads to characteristic firing
patterns in primary visual cortex, with cells varying their firing
rates as a function of the stimulus orientation relative to their pre-
ferred orientation. Clearly, this pattern of cellular responses is part
of the internal representation of the oriented bar. More complex
stimuli are represented in ways that are poorly understood. The
iconic form available at the photoreceptor level is not suitable for
at least some of the important tasks the brain has to perform dur-
ing perception. It needs transformed representations that are bet-
ter suited than the raw iconic input (available to the brain in ad-
dition by accessing the outside world) for establishing meaningful
relationships between ecologically important stimuli, for efficient
access to memory (storage and retrieval), and so on. These trans-
formed representations incorporate sensorimotory contingencies
like the visual “artefacts” of iconic representations, for example,
the “saccadic smear.” Whatever the details of the internal repre-
sentation are, and whatever are the underlying reasons why this
particular representation is implemented in the brain, there can
be no doubt that there is a representation of sensory input.
“Mastery” is not perception. The authors claim that awareness
is intimately related, or even identical, to the instantaneous “mas-
tery” of sensorimotor constraints. There are many counter ex-
amples to this claim. For instance, let us consider a hypothetical
situation in tactile perception. Assume that you are holding a
three-dimensional lump of matter, like a mass of modelling clay,
that is somehow moved by internal actuators in a complex, un-
predictable way, without you having any possibility of influencing
or predicting its motion and the forces it exerts on your hands (i.e.,
there is no “mastery”). According to the claims of the target arti-
cle, the lump should not be perceived since the perceiver does not
interact with it in “lawful” ways. This seems absurd; the lump will
surely be perceived, and probably quite vividly so.
This idea is not entirely hypothetical. A two-dimensional ver-
sion, consisting of a few hundred probes that touch the skin, that
can be moved independently and, therefore, can emulate any sur-
face within a wide parameter range, has actually been built and is
used to provide dynamic tactile stimuli to both humans and mon-
keys (Vega-Bermudez & Johnson 1999). When set to “random”
mode, the stimulation patterns are completely unpredictable but,
of course, they are perceived.
Analogous examples can be constructed in all modalities. In vi-
sion, imagine random flashes of light being projected directly onto
parts of the retina; they will certainly be perceived even though
the activation they generate in the optic nerve does not follow
“lawful” rules. A simple example from the auditory system is lis-
tening to music through headphones: Many of the sensorimotor
contingencies are removed (turning of the head will change nei-
ther amplitude nor frequency nor synchrony between ears) but
the symphony is still perceived.
One might argue that part of the sensorimotor contingencies is
the interaction between different sensors (e.g., lateral inhibition
between neighboring retinal ganglion cells) and the resulting pat-
terns they project onto the cortex. Such interactions are presum-
ably intact even when random patterns are presented to the sen-
sory periphery. This argument is easy to refute. We have no control
at all, let alone mastery, about cortical phosphenes, yet they are
clearly perceived. Another example: From experiments pioneered
by Penfield it has been known for a long time that direct electri-
cal stimulation of the cortex gives rise to (sometimes vivid) per-
ceptions, yet it is hard to imagine a perceiver with less mastery
over his or her perceptual environment than a patient with an
opened skull receiving electrical stimulation directly to his or her
cortex.
NOTE
1. Another example: The second edition of Kandel and Schwartz (1985),
the standard textbook for teaching neuroscience well into the 1990s, ex-
plained that we perceive the world in the correct orientation because the
“upside-down” projection of the retinal image is “compensated for” by
“higher levels of the brain” (p. 358).
ACKNOWLEDGEMENT
Work supported by the National Science Foundation.
A sensory-attentional account 
of speech perception
Howard C. Nusbaum,a Jeremy I. Skipperb
and Steven L. Smallb
aDepartment of Psychology, The University of Chicago, Chicago, IL 60637;
bDepartments of Psychology and Neurology and the Brain Research Imaging
Center, The University of Chicago, Chicago, IL 60637.
h-nusbaum@uchicago.edu
skipper@uchicago.edu
s-small@uchicago.edu
http://home.uchicago.edu/~slsmall
http://www.ccp.uchicago.edu/faculty/Howard_Nusbaum/
Abstract: Although sensorimotor contingencies may explain visual
perception, it is difficult to extend this concept to speech perception.
However, the basic concept of perception as active hypothesis testing
using attention does extend well to speech perception. We propose that
the concept of sensorimotor contingencies can be broadened to sensory-
attentional contingencies, thereby accounting for speech perception as
well as vision.
We see the world by knowing what to expect when we move our
visual system through the environment. This is the heart of O’Re-
gan & Noë’s (O&N’s) account of vision. Furthermore, they argue
that sensorimotor contingencies underlie all perception, not just
vision. In this commentary, we examine the limitations upon the
extension of sensorimotor contingencies to speech perception and
suggest that a broader, more general concept – sensory-attentional
contingencies – may explain perception in different sensory mo-
dalities.
Although O&N allude to hearing, they do not really explain au-
ditory form perception. But, sensorimotor contingencies are un-
likely to mediate auditory form perception – motor movements
only subserve hearing for source localization and play no role in
understanding speech. Since speech patterns “move” in frequency
space over time, we don’t need to wiggle our ears or move our
head to avoid “static displays” or stabilized images that disappear
(as by O&N for vision).
This eliminates a prime motivation for sensory-motor contin-
gencies, leaving two possible conclusions. Either speech percep-
tion operates according to traditional representation-matching
theories, or we need a more abstract version of sensorimotor con-
tingencies. This abstraction should maintain the principles of sen-
sorimotor contingencies without tying the theory to motor move-
ments.
O&N view perception as active, knowledge-based, and hypoth-
esis-driven. Knowledge of sensorimotor contingencies drives visual
experience through the deployment of attention in the visual world.
But is it the motor behavior or the exploratory sensory contingen-
cies that are the core concept? In vision, active hypothesis testing
may be carried out in the motor system by moving sensory surfaces
in relation to the physical surfaces of the environment. However,
speech perception can be viewed as active hypothesis-testing (see
Nusbaum & Schwab 1986) without involving the motor system.
Speech perception cannot be explained by positing simple pattern
representations of linguistic categories to be matched to utterances
(Nusbaum & Henly 1992) because there is no stable set of proper-
ties that can be assigned to those putative categories (see Nusbaum
& Magnuson 1997). We have proposed instead that listeners con-
struct hypotheses about the linguistic categories that would account
for a particular stretch of utterance given the context of the situa-
tion and expectations of the listener (Nusbaum & Schwab 1986).
These hypotheses are tested by shifting attention to the relevant in-
formation to constrain interpretation. For example, when there is
Commentary/O’Regan & Noë: A sensorimotor account of vision and visual consciousness
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (2001) 24:5
995

a change in talker, there is a momentary increase in cognitive load
and a shift in attention to acoustic properties such as talker pitch
and higher formant frequencies (Nusbaum & Morin 1992).
O&N describe sensorimotor contingencies as specific to char-
acteristics of the visual apparatus and the visual attributes of ob-
jects and scenes. In speech perception, sensory-attentional con-
tingencies depend on the characteristics of the auditory apparatus
and linguistic experience of the listener. However, sensory-atten-
tional contingencies also depend on phonetics and phonology for
determining constraints on the “form” of speech objects and the
acoustic characteristics of the talker and environment for instan-
tiating that form in a pattern.
Since talkers and speaking characteristics restructure the acous-
tic patterns of linguistic forms (Liberman et al. 1967), sensory-
attentional contingencies cannot be stored as fixed knowledge but
must be adaptive and dynamic. Adult listeners learn new acoustic-
phonetic patterns for hard-to-understand synthetic speech rapidly
and effectively – eight hours of learning improves word identifi-
cation by about 40 percentage points (Schwab et al. 1985) gener-
alized to novel utterances (Greenspan et al. 1988; Schwab et al.
1985) lasting as long as six months without subsequent training
(Schwab et al. 1985). Training shifts the way listeners attend to
acoustic cues (Francis et al. 2000) reflecting the induced sensory-
attentional contingencies. Similarly, when someone new starts
talking, listeners know how to shift attention to acoustic proper-
ties to accommodate talker differences (Nusbaum & Morin 1992).
Adaptive processing of speech is marked by attentional move-
ments rather than by motor movements.
We might think that the “motor” in sensorimotor contingencies
refers to articulation. But listeners do not subvocalize to under-
stand speech, and neural activity in Broca’s area occurs when lis-
teners are called upon to hold items in verbal working memory
(subvocal rehearsal) tasks (see Jonides & Smith 1997), or when
they must make explicit metalinguistic judgments (e.g., Burton et
al. 2000; Zatorre et al. 1992). Without a directed linguistic task,
speech generally activates the posterior superior temporal cortex
(Binder et al. 2000; Burton et al. 2000; Rep et al. 1996), even
though motor theory suggests that Broca’s area should mediate
speech perception (e.g., Liberman & Mattingly 1985).
Recently we found one condition during speech perception that
activates Broca’s area. When listeners see a talker’s facial move-
ments along with hearing during speech production, Broca’s area
is active, but not when presented with the sound alone or the vi-
sual information alone. This is consistent with the idea that an ob-
servation/execution matching system (Rizzolatti & Arbib 1998)
takes visual information about production in during comprehen-
sion to support a sensory-attentional contingency. Knowledge
about speech production in Broca’s area is active only when there
is direct sensory (visual) evidence about motor movements from
the talker.
Thus, listeners may recruit relevant sensory-attentional contin-
gencies during perception. These data also suggest a method-
ological concern. There is a tendency to treat speech comprehen-
sion from a reductionist perspective. Research often examines
phoneme and word perception in isolation from the natural con-
text. If sensory-attentional contingencies are important we must
study perception in contexts that provide for the use of these con-
tingencies. Speech perception should be studied in richer, natu-
ralistic settings such as face-to-face communication, since this is
the environment that shaped the evolution of communication and
is the context of daily use.
Finally, the change from sensory-motor to sensory-attentional
contingencies has an implication for understanding vision. The
motor behavior underlying sensorimotor contingencies is a phys-
ical manifestation of attentional exploration. Perhaps it is the at-
tentional shift, not the motor activity, that is the basis for these
contingencies. Observers can shift attention within the visual field
even without eye movements (e.g., Posner et al. 1980). Attention
shifts may provide the same kinds of contingencies that are pos-
tulated to govern motor-based visual exploration. Perhaps, per-
ception in all sensory modalities is better explained by appealing
to knowledge of sensory-attentional contingencies.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors wish to acknowledge the National Institute of Deafness and
other Communication Disorders (NIH-NIDCD) for their support under
grant number R01 DC-3378.
The explanatory gap is still there
Klaus Oberauer
University of Potsdam, Allgemeine Psychologie I, 
14415 Potsdam, Germany. ko@rz.uni-potsdam.de
http://www.psych.uni-potsdam.de/people/oberauer/index-d.html
Abstract: I argue that O’Regan & Noë’s (O&N’s) theory is in a no better
position than any other theory to solve the “hard problem” of conscious-
ness. Getting rid of the explanatory gap by exchanging sensorimotor con-
tingencies for neural representations is an illusion.
Sometimes a good idea must be advanced by advertising it with
bold claims. Sometimes this seduces authors into pushing a the-
ory beyond the limits of what it can accomplish. I think that O’Re-
gan’s & Noë’s (O&N’s) account offers many intriguing ideas
about how the visual system works, but it does not help to solve
the philosophical problems surrounding conscious experience.
The so-called “hard problem” of consciousness (Chalmers 1996a)
is how to explain the fact that “there is something that it is like to
have an experience” (target article, sect. 6.3). Targeting compet-
ing views, O&N express this problem very clearly as the “fun-
damental question of how a neural code could ever give rise to
experience at all” (sect. 1.2). Does this rhetorical question lose
any of its force when we replace “neural code” with “currently
exercised sensorimotor contingencies”? O&N argue that their
approach turns the hard problem of consciousness into a non-
problem. I think their argument is flawed.
O&N’s first step is to recast the problem into the question: What
are qualia?, which they go on to characterize as “properties of ex-
periential states or events” (sect. 6.3). Experiences, they argue, are
not states but “ways of acting, . . . things we do.” These are not
states, but they certainly are events. So it seems completely rea-
sonable to characterize qualia as features of the events going on
during perceptual activity. It is true that qualia are often linked to
representational states; this is because representational states play
a key role in most theories of cognition. This does not imply that
when one drops the concept of a static representation, the con-
cept of qualia becomes meaningless. “Qualia” is a descriptive term
that captures the fact that we experience something while we per-
ceive, and that this experience has a certain quality that could be
different for different people even if we perceived (in an infor-
mation-processing sense) the same thing. For example, one could
imagine that the same representation – or the same executed sen-
sorimotor contingency – that is associated with the experience of
red in one person gives rise to the experience of green in another
person, and vice versa (cf. Palmer 1999a).
The second step is to analyze the qualitative character of an ex-
perience, even one as simple as the perception of a red wall, as
something complex, consisting of the knowledge of “changes in
the incoming information” contingent on the perceiver’s activity.
But what about the information that changes – is it experienced?
Is the change (or that which is changed) something we experi-
ence? If yes, the question is just shifted down from the complex
experience of “red” to the experience of the incoming informa-
tion. If no, the fundamental question arises how registering not-
experienced changes of incoming information in a brain generates
experience. That is, why is it like something when my brain regis-
ters changes on my retina, and why is the experience one of red?
The same pattern of changes in the information influx could as
Commentary/O’Regan & Noë: A sensorimotor account of vision and visual consciousness
996
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (2001) 24:5

well “feel” green. Borrowing from O&N’s introduction (sect. 1.2):
What is the mapping function from a complex structure of senso-
rimotor contingencies onto the experience of one color or an-
other?
It seems to be important to O&N that “there is no simple, un-
analyzable core of the experience” (sect. 6.4). If this is so, it only
follows that there are no simple, unanalyzable qualia; qualia are
complex entities. It does not follow that qualia don’t exist (even if
there are philosophers who characterize qualia as simple). We are
still left with the problem of explaining how elements that have no
experiential quality can give rise to an experience when put to-
gether.
O&N seem to suggest that all there is to the quality of an ex-
perience is the structure of the sensorimotor contingencies –
experiences differ because they are based on the execution of
different sensorimotor contingencies. These contingencies, the
knowledge about them, and their execution are part of the func-
tional properties of our brains. The “explanatory gap” arises be-
cause all these information-processing activities could work as
well without us experiencing anything at all. If sensorimotor con-
tingencies are to explain conscious experience, the existence of
conscious experience should follow with logical necessity from the
existence of the appropriate sensorimotor contingencies (together
with the necessary boundary conditions, for example, a world in
which they can be executed, cf. Chalmers 1996a). To illustrate: We
could build the appropriate sensorimotor contingencies into a ro-
bot (e.g., one that can drive a Porsche, among other things), and
this should allow us to deduce that the machine has a rich inner
life (e.g., is able to feel what it is like to drive a Porsche). I’d rather
stay agnostic on this, even for a very graceful robot.
It seems that O&N would be more confident. In their discus-
sion of blindsight (sect. 7.2) they define experience in terms of be-
ing able to describe and react appropriately to what one sees. This
is a common materialist reply to the hard problem: The denial of
phenomenal experience as an explanandum – everything that
needs explaining is behaviour (Dennett 1991). In this case it all
comes down to the empirical question, which theory is better
suited to explain the observed behavior. Then, however, there is
no room for the “fundamental question” raised in the introduc-
tion: How does anything going on in our brains and their causal
interactions with the world give rise to experience? With regard to
this question, the approach of O&N does not achieve more than
any other theory of vision: It simply evades it.
Sins of omission and commission
Gerard O’Brien and Jon Opie
Department of Philosophy, University of Adelaide, Adelaide, South Australia
5005. gerard.obrien@adelaide.edu.au
jon.opie@adelaide.edu.au
http://www.arts.adelaide.edu.au/Philosophy/gobrien.htm
http://www.arts.adelaide.edu.au/Philosophy/jopie.htm
Abstract: O’Regan & Noë (O&N) fail to address adequately the two most
historically important reasons for seeking to explain visual experience in
terms of internal representations. They are silent about the apparently in-
ferential nature of perception, and mistaken about the significance of the
phenomenology accompanying dreams, hallucinations, and mental im-
agery.
Despite the plethora of theories that have surfaced over the years,
there are really only two ways of explaining visual experience. The
first accords with the commonsense intuition that when we open
our eyes and look around, we have direct access to the world. In
this view, visual experience supervenes on the interaction between
our visual apparatus and the visually detectable properties of the
environment. The second approach rejects commonsense, and
holds that our perceptual access to the world is always indirect.
What we see is not the actual world; what we see (or, better, what
we see with) are mental representations constructed by our
brains. According to this “constructivist” conception, visual expe-
rience supervenes on the brain alone.
Although the history of vision science has seen many oscillations
between these two poles, constructivism currently dominates the
discipline. O’Regan & Noë’s (O&N’s) sensorimotor account of
vision, on the other hand, favours commonsense over mainstream
thinking. The great drawback with constructivist theories of vi-
sion, they observe, is that such theories are burdened with the
problem of explaining how neural representations give rise to vi-
sual experiences – a problem that has stubbornly resisted all at-
tempts at resolution. By contrast, their sensorimotor account, pre-
cisely because it rejects the idea that the brain constructs visual
experiences, steps right over this explanatory gap. Visual experi-
ences occur when our visual apparatus, replete with the structure
of its sensorimotor contingencies, actively engages with the world.
Such experiences are not states in the head, they are “ways of act-
ing” (sect. 6.3).
O&N are right about the extra explanatory burden that is car-
ried by constructivist theories of perception. And they are no
doubt right to be dissatisfied with current attempts to explain the
qualitative character of visual experience in representational
terms. Nonetheless, before abandoning constructivism it would
be wise to consider why, for nearly thirty years now, vision scien-
tists have almost universally adopted this counter-intuitive ap-
proach. The reasons are numerous, but two deserve special men-
tion because of their historical significance.
First, our perceptual responses are underdetermined by the in-
formation our visual apparatus garners from its interaction with
the world. The conclusion many theorists find inescapable is that,
appearances to the contrary notwithstanding, visual perception
must be an inferential process – one that constructs representa-
tions of the environment by combining stimulus data with infor-
mation internal to the perceiver. (This form of argument is too fa-
miliar to require detailed rehearsal here. For a classic rendering
see Fodor and Pylyshyn 1981, and for a more recent statement see
Palmer 1999b, p. 55. Palmer notes that the structure of the envi-
ronment cannot be unambiguously determined by stimulus data,
even if we factor in the dynamics of organism-environment cou-
pling, because “time is also a dimension of the environment.”)
Second, there are several kinds of visual experience which oc-
cur when organism and environment are not actively coupled. The
standard examples are the visual experiences that accompany
dreams, hallucinations, and mental imagery. Such experiences
provide compelling evidence that neural activity is sometimes suf-
ficient for visual awareness. Furthermore, many theorists think it
reasonable to surmise that dreams and hallucinations indicate
something important about the nature of visual experience more
generally, namely, that even “veridical” experiences are con-
structed by the brain, and thus implicate internal representations.
O&N are silent about the first of these reasons for preferring
constructivism, a serious omission given the fundamental role this
form of argument has played in shaping cognitive science. They
do, however, address dreams and mental imagery, albeit briefly
(sect. 4.4). According to O&N, the worry is that “since dreams and
mental images are apparently pictorial in nature, this seems to
show that we are, after all, capable of creating an internal iconic
image.” But this, they think, is as misguided “as the supposition
that to see red, there must be red neurons in the brain,” and con-
clude that “the supposed fact that things appear pictorial to us in
no way requires there to be pictures in the head.”
O&N’s response here is lame, because they misconstrue the
problem that dreams, hallucinations, and mental imagery pose for
their account. These mental phenomena are problematic not be-
cause they seem to depend on internal icons; they are problem-
atic because they can occur in the absence of any interaction be-
tween the visual apparatus and the world. The precise form of
visual representations – whether, for example, they are more like
pictures or linguistic tokens – is indeed a much debated issue (see
Block 1981). But this is a debate within the constructivist camp,
Commentary/O’Regan & Noë: A sensorimotor account of vision and visual consciousness
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (2001) 24:5
997

not between advocates of constructivism and their critics. What
O&N must demonstrate is that they can account for the phenom-
enology associated with dreams, hallucinations, and mental im-
agery without postulating internal representations of any kind. At
the very least they must explain how visual experiences can arise
in situations where the very activity that is supposed to account for
experience is missing.
To sum up: O&N are guilty of two sins, one of omission and one
of commission. They are silent about the apparently inferential na-
ture of perception, and mistaken about the problem that dreams,
hallucinations, and mental imagery create for their sensorimotor
account of vision. Since O&N fail to address adequately the two
most important arguments for constructivism, it is reasonable to
conclude that the challenge for visual science remains that of ex-
plaining how neural representations give rise to visual experi-
ences.
Perceptual theories that emphasize action 
are necessary but not sufficient
John R. Pani
Department of Psychological and Brain Sciences, University of Louisville,
Louisville, KY 40292. jrpani@louisville.edu
http://www.louisville.edu/~jrpani01
Abstract: Theories that make action central to perception are plausible,
though largely untried, for space perception. However, explaining object
recognition, and high-level perception generally, will require reference to
representations of the world in some form. Nonetheless, action is central
to cognition, and explaining high-level perception will be aided by inte-
grating an understanding of action with other aspects of perception.
Theoretical advances in psychology nearly always follow new em-
pirical demonstrations. If the sensorimotor theory of perception
proves to be an advance, it will be because it provides a success-
ful account of the phenomena of change blindness. On this point,
it seems to me that where the theory concerns space perception,
it has much to recommend it. Change blindness, however, appears
relevant also to object and scene recognition (e.g., Archambault et
al. 1999; Hollingworth & Henderson 2000; Pani 2000), and here
the sensorimotor theory seems to be on uncertain ground. None-
theless, it is important to develop theories in which the possibili-
ties for action are embedded in our understanding and use of con-
cepts.
Low-level perception. O’Regan & Noë (O&N) suggest that
perception consists largely of mastering sensorimotor contingen-
cies through a variety of different forms of action. This conception
reinforces a number of important statements about perception.
One of these is J. J. Gibson’s (e.g., 1979/1986) argument that per-
ception does not include static percepts, such as a percept of the
shape of an object. Instead, perception involves tuning the sen-
sory systems to sets of relations and transformations that occur
continuously, often due to observer action or locomotion. The in-
dividual becomes attuned to the information that specifies an ob-
ject of constant shape, and static percepts of shape are unneces-
sary. In extending this view to higher perceptual and cognitive
functions, Neisser (e.g., 1976) argued that the anticipation of per-
ceptual information within systems of action was the essential in-
gredient for bridging perception and cognition.
The authors add two elements to this account. First, the world
serves as an outside memory for action. Second, our perception of
the world is not a reflection of the content of mental representa-
tions, but rather, is due to the structure of the world itself and our
ability to act intelligently with respect to it. That is, perceptual
knowledge exists only in sensorimotor action.
To account for change blindness, the authors discount the no-
tion that untutored intuitions about the richness of momentary
perceptions are a sound basis for theory. They suggest that each
moment of perception includes relatively sparse information, and
that it is through the combined efforts of well-adapted actions that
the richness of perception is constituted. Successful action is suc-
cessful perception, and no representation of the world is neces-
sary.
For perception of geometric properties of the world, this seems
a reasonable approach, but significant theoretical challenges re-
main. People not only perceive and act in a complex world, they
understand that they do, as evidenced by their concepts, language,
and behavior. For example, we understand that innumerable sac-
cades and shifts of attention extended across time and space all
sample information from one scene. How do we know this (see
Neisser 1976)? The more severe we are in saying that there is no
information outside of the focus of attention, and the more severe
we are in rejecting the contribution of mental representations
(e.g., in working memory), the more challenging these issues be-
come. It will be nontrivial to work out the details of such an ac-
count, and it may be necessary to allow more information into
momentary perceptions and working memory. To revive a debate
that took place with regard to auditory attention (e.g., Norman
1969), change blindness may be due in part to limitations on mem-
ory (see Hollingworth 2001; Pani 2000; Simons 2000b).
High-level perception. It was a truism insisted upon by the be-
haviorists years ago that knowledge is expressed in behavior. No
sensible cognitive theory ultimately isolates its components from
the necessity to generate actions, and theories about action are not
necessarily theories without representations.
At the same time, no theory of human perception (as a whole)
can avoid the fact that perception includes object recognition, and
that recognition involves categorization. Categories are pivot-
points that determine choices between potentially large sets of di-
verse actions, and they affect action at every level from eye move-
ments on upward (see Lichtenstein & Brewer 1980). The broad
shift of behavior that comes from realizing, for example, that a
store is closed or that an animal is stuffed demonstrates that the
individual knows what these facts mean. And the stored informa-
tion about what something means can be considered to be a rep-
resentation, whether or not the function of that information is to
generate behavior. Even if a theory of object recognition is de-
voted to explaining human action, claiming that the theory has no
representations may be little more than an aesthetic decision re-
garding labels.
Categories, thinking, and concepts. Having expressed some
skepticism about the stronger claims of the sensorimotor theory, I
would like also to express some enthusiasm about the enterprise.
As theories of concepts based on the possibilities of action are de-
veloped, new sets of explanations become possible. Some cogni-
tive phenomena will be associated particularly closely with this
type of explanation. For example, people’s typical indifference to
how well mental images depict information probably is due to the
fact that the images are part of a larger effort for which pictorial
fidelity of any single image is unnecessary to the outcome (see
Pani 1996). Similarly, the time-honored problem of the con-
sciousness of meanings (as opposed to sensations and images)
probably will have to be explained as an instance of a complex state
of preparation within sets of possible actions (Brown 1958;
Humphrey 1951; Pani 1996). For example, try a bit of introspec-
tion. Answer the question: Can a man marry his widow’s sister? As
you came to your answer, what was the nature of the conscious
event? I suspect that describing the experience as a changed set
of anticipations with respect to possible actions related to the man
in question (e.g., whether to introduce yourself) is much more
promising than a description that refers to images or internal
speech.
Commentary/O’Regan & Noë: A sensorimotor account of vision and visual consciousness
998
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (2001) 24:5

Seeing, acting, and knowing
Zenon W. Pylyshyn
Center for Cognitive Science, Rutgers University, New Brunswick, NJ 08854-
8020. zenon@ruccs.rutgers.edu
http://ruccs.rutgers.edu/faculty/pylyshyn.html
Abstract: The target article proposes that visual experience arises when
sensorimotor contingencies are exploited in perception. This novel analy-
sis of visual experience fares no better than the other proposals that the ar-
ticle rightly dismisses, and for the same reasons. Extracting invariants may
be needed for recognition, but it is neither necessary nor sufficient for hav-
ing a visual experience. While the idea that vision involves the active ex-
traction of sensorimotor invariants has merit, it does not replace the need
for perceptual representations. Vision is not just for the immediate con-
trolling of action; it is also for finding out about the world, from which in-
ferences may be drawn and beliefs changed.
This target article by O’Regan & Noë (O&N) presents a radically
different analysis of the nature of perceptual experience. In view
of the intransigence of the problem, a radical proposal is the only
kind worth considering. The article builds upon two currently
popular ideas about vision: the idea that visual perception is active
and the idea that our intuitions mislead us about what is in our
head when we see. The thesis shares with J. J. Gibson the belief
that seeing consists in actively extracting invariants from the
world, though in the present proposal these invariants are defined
over the manifold of sensory-motor contingencies. While the arti-
cle presents a welcome admonition against certain common mis-
conceptions about vision, it has some drawbacks of its own as an
account of the nature of visual experience.
Any claim of the form “visual experience consists of X” imme-
diately raises a family of familiar problems, regardless of whether
X is “having a mental picture” or “extracting the invariant sensory-
motor contingencies.” Ironically, the kind of problem such claims
raise is explained with particular clarity in section 1 of the target
article: All such claims fail to specify why X leads to that experi-
ence, or indeed why it should lead to any experience. Nothing in
the current proposal takes it out of this explanatory dead end. Sen-
sorimotor contingencies can no more explain the qualitative dif-
ferences between modalities, than can the much simpler hypoth-
esis that different modalities arise from the activation of different
sense organs, or different efferent fibers, or different parts of the
cortex. These may all distinguish among modalities, yet none – in-
cluding the present proposal – addresses the question of why they
are associated with different experiences; why they feel different.
If the experience of seeing arises from the extraction of the same
sorts of sensorimotor invariants that must be extracted in object
recognition, then one might expect that people who achieve a high
level of proficiency in object recognition might have similar visual
experiences. Yet blind people can reach very high levels of profi-
ciency in object recognition, without any accompanying visual ex-
perience. There is no reason to believe that the experience of see-
ing can arise from anything other than direct stimulation of the
visual system. In contrast, one can get genuine visual experiences
without extracting sensorimotor invariants, providing that the in-
puts actually stimulate the visual nervous system. Such results are
consistent with Müller’s doctrine of specific nerve energies (see,
e.g., Müller 1896), but are not consistent with the view that expe-
rience “is constituted by the character of the sensorimotor contin-
gencies at play when we perceive” (target article, sect. 6.3).
The discussion of visual awareness can be factored from the
main body of the target article, which is about what vision does, or
to put it in David Marr’s terms, what function it computes. Here,
the authors make an interesting argument for including the activ-
ity of the motor system as part of vision. Yet one thing that can be
said in favor of the old fashioned approach to vision is that it has
achieved some remarkable results in the past 30 years. In the tra-
dition often associated with David Marr and others, these invari-
ants take a form called “natural constraints,” which are typically
subject to rigorous mathematical analyses. This approach takes
into account possible alternative viewpoints, which is why “nonac-
cidental properties” play a major role. Yet it does not include any
analysis of concurrent activities of the motor system. When simi-
lar success has been achieved in characterizing recognition in
terms of sensorimotor contingencies, the authors would be justi-
fied in claiming a breakthrough in the analysis of vision.
O&N devote considerable space to criticizing the appeal to
“mental pictures” in vision, and I could not agree more with them.
But then they play down the idea that vision involves anything that
might be called a representation, choosing, instead to emphasize
“the world as external memory.” While this is an important idea
which I have also championed (Pylyshyn 2001), it does not obviate
the need for some form of visual representation. Neither does rec-
ognizing the importance of vision for guiding action. Milner and
Goodale (1995) have proposed that vision has evolved largely for
controlling actions rather than creating internal representations.
This idea led Milner and Goodale to investigate many properties
of the visual system that heretofore had been neglected; such as
that visual information may be available for motor control but not
available for conscious access, suggesting that there may be more
than one “visual system.” While O&N embrace the vision-for-ac-
tion principle, they somewhat surprisingly (and unnecessarily) re-
tain the idea that vision results in a unitary conscious experience.
While it is true that we often use our visual system to determine
our actions, we also use it to find out what is in the world simply
because we want to know. As George Miller once put it, we are ba-
sically informavores: we seek to know even if we have no possibil-
ity of acting towards what we see – as we do when we watch tele-
vision or visit an art gallery or read a book. Most things we see are
things we cannot act upon directly, such as the words in the target
article. Of course what we find out through vision may lead to new
beliefs and so may eventually affect what we do, but this is not the
sort of behavior people have in mind when they speak of visually
guided action (writing a commentary on an article is not an exam-
ple of a visually guided action!). Much of what we see guides our
action only indirectly by changing what we believe and perhaps
what we want.
The target article also emphasizes the role of visual exploration.
Yet the fact that we can clearly see things we have not visually ex-
plored, or have only explored in a passive way, as in the Zollner-
Parks “eye of the needle” and other successive-presentation phe-
nomena, tells us that sensorimotor contingencies are not necessary
for vision, even though they may often play a role. The usual way
to deal with this dilemma, which the authors have not taken, is to
appeal to ecological validity . Such lines of evidence as are re-
viewed in the target article do suggest that vision and action may
be more closely linked than many believed; but they are far from
showing that our visual system is designed around sensorimotor
contingencies and knows nothing of the world it sees.
Neural correlates of consciousness 
are not pictorial representations
Geraint Reesa and Chris Frithb
aInstitute of Cognitive Neuroscience, University College London, London
WC1N 3AR, United Kingdom; bWellcome Department of Cognitive
Neurology, University College London, London WC1N 3BG, United Kingdom.
g.rees@fil.ion.ucl.ac.uk
http://www.fil.ion.ucl.ac.uk/~grees
c.frith@fil.ion.ucl.ac.uk
http://www.fil.ion.ucl.ac.uk/principals.html
Abstract: O’Regan & Noë (O&N) are pessimistic about the prospects for
discovering the neural correlates of consciousness. They argue that there
can be no one-to-one correspondence between awareness and patterns of
neural activity in the brain, so a project attempting to identify the neural
correlates of consciousness is doomed to failure. We believe that this de-
gree of pessimism may be overstated; recent empirical data show some
convergence in describing consistent patterns of neural activity associated
with visual consciousness.
Commentary/O’Regan & Noë: A sensorimotor account of vision and visual consciousness
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (2001) 24:5
999

A consistent finding in humans and monkeys is that damage to
functionally specialized regions of the visual cortex leads to defi-
cient awareness of the visual attribute represented in that area,
without impairment of awareness for other attributes. For exam-
ple, damage to the human homologue of V5/MT (middle tempo-
ral area) leads to akinetopsia (Zihl et al. 1983). Alteration of activ-
ity in that area through microstimulation (Salzman et al. 1990) or
transcranial magnetic stimulation (Beckers & Homberg 1992;
though see Pascual-Leone & Walsh 2001) leads to altered per-
ception of that attribute. Even when sensory input and motor out-
put are held constant, changes in perceptual awareness (Tong et
al. 1998) or hallucinations (ffytche et al. 1998; Silbersweig et al.
1995) are associated with enhanced activity in areas of visual cor-
tex with functional specializations that correspond to the percept
experienced. These remarkably consistent results from a wide va-
riety of experimental techniques suggest that activity in function-
ally specialized areas of visual cortex is correlated with, and nec-
essary for, visual awareness.
We do not claim that this neural correlate of consciousness is
constitutive of, or even sufficient for, visual awareness; merely that
it represents a consistent (and probably necessary) correlate of
consciousness. Recent neuroimaging experiments suggest that vi-
sual cortex activity can be detected for unseen stimuli in parietal
extinction (Rees et al. 2000; Vuilleumier et al. 2001), during
change blindness (Beck et al. 2001) or following pattern masking
(Dehaene et al. 2001). When stimuli reach awareness, not only is
enhanced activity observed in the ventral visual pathway, but also
in areas of frontal and parietal cortex (Kleinschmidt et al. 1998;
Lumer 2000). For the parietal cortex in particular, a remarkably
consistent locus of activation correlated with awareness is seen in
the superior parietal lobule (Rees 2001). Parietal and prefrontal
cortices are often associated with attention and motor control, so
the consistent involvement of areas associated with action in con-
scious awareness is supportive of the general notion of a close re-
lationship between (conscious) perception and action. However,
activity in these areas is correlated with awareness even when sen-
sory stimulation and motor behavior is held constant (Frith et al.
1999).
A consistent association of parietal and prefrontal activity with
visual awareness supports the notion that motor control systems
may play an important role in visual awareness, as O’Regan &
Noë (O&N) suggest. However, it also implies that involvement of
these systems can be independent of overt behavior (and conse-
quent changes in the environment). Thus, an important qualifica-
tion for their theoretical claims is that “mastery of sensorimotor
contingencies” may reflect covert rather than overt behavior. The
challenge for O&N is therefore to specify how this covert “mas-
tery of sensorimotor contingency” differs from other cognitive
processes such as attention or working memory. Indeed, the no-
tion that motor activity is not necessary for awareness is consistent
with clinical observations. Damage to motor cortex leading to
paralysis causes little or no change in conscious experience, either
acutely or in the long term. Indeed, an individual almost com-
pletely paralysed (apart from the ability to blink) authored a best-
selling volume of short stories, displaying apparently normal con-
sciousness (Bauby 1997). This failure to identify changes in
conscious experience following changes in the ability of individu-
als to master sensorimotor contingencies must place important
constraints on O&N’s theoretical approach.
The notion of the neural correlates of visual consciousness as
reflected in activity in a distributed network of cortical areas is
rather different to O&N’s characterization of such research as
searching for a pictorial representation of the outside world inside
the brain. No such representation is either assumed or implied by
the research we review here. However, the consistent activation
of specific areas poses a challenge to O&N’s predictions that no
one-to-one correspondence between attributes represented in
consciousness and brain activity is possible. We are sympathetic to
the notion that consideration of action may have an important role
to play in explaining how activity in the brain is associated with
consciousness (Neisser 1967). However, empirical data does not
support the wider implications of O&N’s claim that the study of
the neural correlates of consciousness is doomed to inconsistency
and failure.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The Wellcome Trust funded this work.
Dreaming and the place of consciousness 
in nature
Antti Revonsuo
Department of Philosophy, Center for Cognitive Neuroscience, University of
Turku, FIN-20014 Turku, Finland. revonsuo@utu.fi
Abstract: The research program defended by O’Regan & Noë (O&N)
cannot give any plausible explanation for the fact that during REM-sleep
the brain regularly generates subjective experiences (dreams) where visual
phenomenology is especially prominent. This internal experience is almost
invariably organized in the form of “being-in-the-world.” Dreaming pre-
sents a serious unaccountable anomaly for the sensorimotor research pro-
gram and reveals that some of its fundamental assumptions about the na-
ture of consciousness are questionable.
O’Regan & Noë (O&N) propose a new research program on vi-
sion and consciousness that combines the behavioristic tradition
of Ryle and Dennett with modern views of “embodied” cognition.
Among the core assumptions of this program are the following: Vi-
sion (and subjective visual consciousness) is a phenomenon real-
ized at the level of organism-environment interaction; it is not to
be found at any lower (subpersonal) levels of organization. Nei-
ther the brain in isolation from its environment nor any particular
part or process or activity within the brain is sufficient for visual
consciousness. This account is in accordance with phenomenol-
ogy, for seeing is directed to the world and in seeing we are aware
of being embedded in the centre of a visual environment, not of
pictorial representations located within our heads; nor are qualia
or binding required, for there is nothing phenomenally qualitative
or unified in the brain.
The competing view is described as implying that visual con-
sciousness is a unified pictorial representation within the head
which, when activated, produces qualitative experiences. This re-
search program tries to discover the direct neural correlates of
consciousness in the brain. However, even if found, they would
not explain how consciousness is produced. Furthermore, this
view may imply the postulation of a homunculus who looks at the
internal representations.
In my view, both of these research programs have got something
right, but neither of them is entirely acceptable. O&N are cor-
rect in that our phenomenology is indeed experience of 
“being-in-the-world” rather than “pictures-in-the-head.” But what
they do not realize is that the brain might be entirely sufficient for
producing experiences in the form of “being-in-the-world”! Incon-
testable evidence from dream research (e.g., Foulkes 1985;
Strauch & Meier 1996) shows that by far the most prominent form
of dream experience is “being-in-the-world”: the dreamer finds
herself embodied in a body-image embedded in the center of an
organized, temporally progressing perceptual world consisting of
the full range of sensory experiences in all modalities, visual expe-
riences being the most prominent. Thus, the form of dream expe-
rience is identical to that of waking experience. Dreams are never
experienced as “pictures-in-the-head.”
But now we should ask: If dreaming is an instantiation of sub-
jective experience (consciousness), where is this phenomenon (or
where are the conditions sufficient for bringing it about) located
in the physical world (Revonsuo 1998)? During REM sleep, or-
ganism-environment interaction is virtually impossible because of
the “sensory input blockade” that keeps sensory stimulation from
Commentary/O’Regan & Noë: A sensorimotor account of vision and visual consciousness
1000
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (2001) 24:5

modulating the content of consciousness and the “motor output
blockade” that produces nearly complete muscle atonia. At the
same time, the brain is internally activated virtually to the same
extent as during wakefulness (Hobson 1988; Jouvet 1999). Now,
by any logic I am aware of, it necessarily follows from this evidence
that the immediate causal conditions sufficient for bringing about
the full range of subjective conscious experiences must reside in-
side the brain. Realistic experiences of “being-in-the-world” re-
quire nothing more than a brain that is physiologically in REM
sleep.
These empirical facts are sufficient to disconfirm the claim by
O&N that (visual) conscious experience in principle could not re-
side at the subpersonal levels of organization. O&N briefly discuss
dreams, but they provide no description of the facts revealed by
dream research about the phenomenological content of dream ex-
perience, nor any mention of the neurophysiological mechanisms
directly responsible for bringing dreams about. That is not sur-
prising, for most of those facts would be difficult to incorporate
into their account of consciousness. For example, adventitiously
blind people who nevermore can engage in any visual exploration
of their environment nevertheless every once in a while enjoy fully
visual dreams (i.e., experiences of being embedded in a visual en-
vironment). Such dreams are of special significance for them, be-
cause dreaming is the only occasion that remains for them to en-
joy the visual qualitative experience of colors or the actual sight of
the face of a loved one (Rainville 1994).
If O&N’s account cannot incorporate dreams in any plausible
manner, what kind of avenues are then left for somebody who
takes them seriously? The only alternative is not, as O&N seem to
fear, the resort to the view that there are pictures in the head and
homunculi looking at them. Instead, the starting point ought to be
that, both during dreaming and during wakefulness, conscious-
ness manifests itself in the form of “being-in-the-world” – experi-
ences which are brought about in the brain. Consciousness can be
thought of as a real biological phenomenon in the brain, and like
other such phenomena, it resides at a specific level in the hierar-
chical system of ontological levels of biological organization. A rea-
sonable empirical working hypothesis is that consciousness, or the
“phenomenal” level, is one of the higher levels of neural or elec-
trophysiological organization that still remain to be discovered in
the brain (Revonsuo 2000).
I agree that finding the neural correlates of consciousness will
not suffice, for correlation is not an explanatory relationship. Bio-
logical explanation instead seeks for the lower-level constitutive
mechanisms. Thus, the lower levels of organization that figure in
the explanation of consciousness not only correlate with con-
sciousness but constitute it, and the features of the lower level
must bear intelligible explanatory relationships to features at the
higher phenomenal level (isomorphism may be one such rela-
tionship, but certainly not the only one; Revonsuo 2001). O&N
seem to claim precognitive knowledge about the future course of
neuroscience, since they are absolutely convinced that no ex-
planatory relationships between consciousness and any phenom-
enon in the brain will ever be found. But that is just an argument
from ignorance. Self-replication of biological organisms was an
awesome mystery until it was solved by showing how the lower-
level constitutive biological mechanisms can explain it. Similarly,
if consciousness is a real biological phenomenon in the brain, we
simply have to apply the strategies of biological explanation to this
phenomenon in order to get a clearer picture of what its explana-
tion might imply.
In conclusion, I submit that O&N have not bridged the ex-
planatory gap. They have merely decided to pretend (along with
Dennett) that, from the third-person’s point of view, there is noth-
ing out there on the other side of the gap, so no attempts to bridge
it are necessary. Neither this nor any other commentary is likely
to change their philosophical views in any detectable way, but any-
body who has not yet made up his mind about which research pro-
gram on consciousness is to be favoured should perhaps think
twice whether or not O&N’s philosophical approach is true to the
empirical facts about the place of subjective consciousness in na-
ture.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The author is supported by the Academy of Finland (project no. 45704).
The sensorimotor contingency 
of multisensory localization correlates 
with the conscious percept of spatial unity
Gwendolyn E. Roberson,a Mark T. Wallace,b
and James A. Schirilloa
aDepartment of Psychology, Wake Forest University, Winston-Salem, NC
27109; bDepartment of Neurobiology & Anatomy, Wake Forest University
School of Medicine, Winston-Salem, NC 27151. robege0@wfu.edu
mwallace@wfubmc.edu
schirija@wfu.edu
Abstract: Two cross-modal experiments provide partial support for O’Re-
gan & Noë’s (O&N’s) claim that sensorimotor contingencies mediate per-
ception. Differences in locating a target sound accompanied by a spatially
disparate neutral light correlate with whether the two stimuli were per-
ceived as spatially unified. This correlation suggests that internal repre-
sentations are necessary for conscious perception, which may also medi-
ate sensorimotor contingencies.
O’Regan & Noë (O&N) call upon the scientific community “to
develop modes of first-person investigation of experience that do
not suffer from the flaws of qualia based (introspectionist) ap-
proaches” (sect. 7.3, para. 7). Our work on cross-modal process-
ing has employed such methods, obtaining results both in keeping
with and at odds with the authors’ basic tenets.
Our experiments have examined a form of the ventriloquism il-
lusion, in which the location of a target sound can be made to ap-
pear as originating from the location of a spatially disparate neu-
tral visual signal. Using this approach we have found evidence of
what we believe to be correlates of both sensorimotor contingen-
cies and conscious perception that demonstrates a striking inter-
relationship between these measures.
In our paradigm we presented a 50 msec neutral visual stimu-
lus (i.e., an LED) 200–800 msec after the onset of a 50 msec au-
ditory target (i.e., broadband noise burst). The target sound was
presented at a range of locations from 0º to 30º from the midline,
while the LED was presented at a range of spatial disparities (i.e.,
0º to 15º) from this target. Subjects used a laser pointer to indicate
the perceived location of the target sound, and a foot pedal to re-
port whether the light-sound pairings appeared spatially “unified”
(i.e., originating from the same location).
Localization performance, a measure we posit to reveal sensori-
motor contingency, was found to be strongly correlated with
whether subjects perceived the two stimuli as spatially unified, a
report we posit to reflect conscious perception. Thus, independent
of spatial disparity, when perceptual unity was reported, localiza-
tion bias approximated 100%. That is, subjects pointed at the light,
a result analogous to visual capture (Fig. 1). Conversely, when sub-
jects reported perceptual non-unity, bias was near 0% for large dis-
parities. Interestingly, when spatial non-unity was reported at
smaller disparities, bias was actually negative, in that the target
sound was localized in the direction away from the light. That is,
subjects localized the sound further away from the light with small
disparities when the stimuli were perceived as spatially distinct.
We take this relationship between the reporting of spatial unity
and localization performance to be supportive of O&N’s assertion
that “perception can now be understood as the activity of explor-
ing the environment in ways mediated by knowledge of the rele-
vant sensorimotor contingencies” (sect. 2.5, emphasis in original).
In essence, we have demonstrated that the pattern of localization
bias a light has upon a target sound results from their dynamic sen-
sorimotor contingencies, which coincide with whether the signals
Commentary/O’Regan & Noë: A sensorimotor account of vision and visual consciousness
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (2001) 24:5
1001

are consciously represented as unified. Most striking is the find-
ing that when the stimuli are spatially united in the external world
(i.e., zero spatial disparity), they can still be reported as either uni-
fied or not, and this report is strongly correlated with localization
performance. Furthermore, we agree, and feel that our data lends
credence to O&N’s claim that their theory allows for the ventrilo-
quism effect by letting each modality “have their own specificities
due to the particularities of the sensors and sensorimotor contin-
gencies involved,” yet granting “interactions between the senses
are to be expected when there are systematic correlations and
common sensorimotor contingencies” (sect. 5.15, last para.).
However, we also believe our results cannot be explained ex-
clusively on the basis of this form of external representation. The
strong influence of the neutral visual stimulus presented shortly
after the auditory target suggests the workings of an internal rep-
resentation which weights the contributions from the different
sensory channels and compares these with a conceptual repre-
sentation of space.
Furthermore, although we agree with the authors that localiza-
tion (bias) may constitute the orientation activity typically consid-
ered a function of an observer-centered dorsal stream, and that
judging unity may be a function of the object-centered ventral
stream (sect. 8.5), we disagree with their claim that there is no
need to join streams of information to produce “binding,” whether
conceptually or temporally (sect. 8.3). Our finding of a strong link-
age between localization bias and judgments of unity suggests an
interrelationship between these two streams. In fact, growing ev-
idence from anatomical, physiological, and functional imaging
studies suggests much more connectivity between these streams
than traditionally believed; a connectivity that could serve as the
substrate for such binding processes.
Finally, O&N claim that “seeing is constituted by the brain’s
present attunement to the changes that would occur as a conse-
quence of an action on the part of the perceiver.” This suggests
that localization occurs prior to unity judgments, and that, in fact,
these motor actions drive our perceptual judgments. However, the
results of our study, and our belief in an internal spatial represen-
tation, leave open the possibility of the converse. That is, the con-
scious perception of spatial unity (or non-unity) may ultimately
dictate the type of sensorimotor contingencies employed to local-
ize objects in space.
The existence of internal visual memory
representations
Jennifer D. Ryana and Neal J. Cohenb
aRotman Research Institute, Baycrest Centre for Geriatric Care, Toronto,
Ontario M4C 5S7 Canada; bBeckman Institute, University of Illinois at
Urbana-Champaign, Urbana, IL 61801.
jryan@rotman-baycrest.on.ca
ncohen@s.psych.uiuc.edu
Abstract: Although O’Regan & Noë (O&N) claim that the world may
serve as the viewers’ external visual memory, findings from the field of
memory research have demonstrated the existence of internal visual rep-
resentations. These representations are stored in the viewer’s brain, con-
tain information regarding visual objects and their relations, guide subse-
quent exploration of the visual world and promote change detection.
In arguing that the existence of mental representations cannot
explain the experience of seeing or produce visual consciousness,
O’Regan & Noë (O&N) dispense altogether with internal rep-
resentations of the visual world. In their view, the visual world
serves as its own external memory for the observer. Vision (or see-
ing) is a skill, and the information that must be represented by
the brain to accomplish it constitutes knowledge (or “mastery”)
of the sensorimotor contingencies that govern skillful visual ex-
ploration.
Whether certain kinds of mental representations are necessary
and sufficient to mediate the consciously aware and experiential
aspects of vision is an issue that we leave to other discussants. This
commentary focuses instead on evidence from the field of mem-
ory research, including our own work, that emphasizes the exis-
tence of internal visual representations and that documents the
use of such representations by the viewer in exploration of the vi-
sual world. We argue that vision and visual exploration necessar-
ily entail an interaction between information currently present in
the external world and stored memory representations derived
from previous samplings of the visual world, even without the
viewer’s conscious awareness.
Upon walking into one of the rooms in a building that we know
well on campus, we can easily and quickly perceive the colors of
the many objects in view, identify the objects and people in the
room, determine whether it is an office or classroom or confer-
ence room, and note whether the event in that room is a seminar
or thesis defense or office party. The ability to rapidly parse such
situations has long been attributed to internal representations of
experience, in the form of schemas or general knowledge struc-
tures, as shown in work dating back at least as far as Bartlett
(1932). That such representations also shape the nature of visual
exploration, as measured by eye movements, has been shown in
work by Loftus and Mackworth (1978) and Parker (1978), who
found increased viewing of the region in scenes in which the usual
semantic relations were violated.
O&N cite as evidence against internal visual representations
the results of Wolfe et al. (2000) on inattentional amnesia. In that
work, subjects were presented with the same display repeatedly
across trials, but were to search for a different target item on each
trial. There was no speed-up in search, under these conditions, de-
spite the many repetitions of the display. By contrast, there is an
emerging literature that supports the idea that search does have
memory (Peterson et al. 2001) and an enormous literature demon-
strating that recent exposure to individual visual objects can mod-
ulate the speed and efficacy of subsequent processing of those
items. Performance in reading words and in identifying visually
presented objects is enhanced when the items are repeated. That
these repetition priming, or perceptual priming, effects are due to
visual representations is suggested by evidence that priming
shows considerable modality- and form-specificity; the effects are
largest when the perceptual features are maintained across view-
ings (Roediger 1990; Tulving & Schacter 1990). Moreover, such
priming effects are tied to representations in the brain. Functional
neuroimaging data indicate that perceptual priming for visual ma-
Commentary/O’Regan & Noë: A sensorimotor account of vision and visual consciousness
1002
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (2001) 24:5
Figure 1 (Roberson et al.).
Localization bias plotted as a func-
tion of the spatial disparity between the visual and auditory signals
when subjects judged the signals to be spatially unified (unity) or
not unified (non-unity). Error bars represents SEM.

terials is associated specifically with changes in cortical visual pro-
cessing regions (Schacter & Buckner 1998). Prior exposure also
shapes the nature of subsequent visual exploration of those mate-
rials when presented again, as measured by eye movements. Our
own work has shown that the pattern of viewing of faces (Althoff
& Cohen 1999) and of scenes (Ryan et al. 2000) is altered upon
repeated presentations. These effects can occur in the absence of
conscious or explicit memory for the (previously presented) primed
items.
Our work has shown that visual representations include infor-
mation about relations among the constituent elements of scenes,
and are used by viewers to guide further visual exploration (Ryan
et al. 2000). Subjects saw a series of scenes and then subsequently
saw either repeated versions or manipulated versions of the scenes
involving some difference in the relations among scene elements.
Increased viewing was directed to the changed region in manipu-
lated scenes, most notably when subjects were unaware of any
scene manipulation. Accordingly, relational information was main-
tained in visual representations and was used by observers to
guide subsequent eye movement behavior, even in the absence of
conscious awareness of the change.
Chun and Jiang’s (1998) findings of contextual cuing, in which
subjects were faster in finding a target in a repeated display of dis-
tracters compared to a new display, as long as the position of the
target within the display remained constant, lead to similar con-
clusions. Viewers were apparently able to form representations
containing information about the target object and its relations to
the distracters in the display. Viewers were then able to use this
relational information to guide further search behavior even in the
absence of conscious awareness of the information.
Another empirical evidence cited by O&N as proof against in-
ternal representations of the visual world is the phenomenon of
change blindness, in which viewers are surprisingly poor at re-
porting changes made to scenes on-line. However, our most re-
cent work demonstrates eye movement evidence of change de-
tection (Ryan & Cohen, submitted), emphasizing the presence of
visual memory representations that are maintained on-line and
used to guide subsequent viewing behavior. After viewing an ini-
tial scene, subjects saw it again immediately, either repeated in its
original form or in a manipulated version. Subjects directed in-
creased viewing to the very region of change in manipulated
scenes, even within the first gaze to the region. Additionally, the
overall pattern of viewing of manipulated scenes was altered com-
pared to viewing of repeated scenes, even when subjects were un-
aware that a change had occurred. Similar findings have also been
reported by Hollingworth et al. (in press).
Taken together, these findings indicate that internal memory
representations of the visual world play a critical role in vision and
visual exploration. Visual representations containing information
about viewed objects and the relations among them are main-
tained in viewers’ brains and used to compare with the currently
presented visual display in order to guide exploratory eye move-
ment behavior.
Reexamining visual cognition in human
infants: On the necessity of representation
Matthew Schlesinger
Department of Psychology, Southern Illinois University, Carbondale, IL
62901. matthews@siu.edu
http://www.siu.edu/~matthew
Abstract: The sensorimotor account of vision proposed by O’Regan &
Noë (O&N) challenges the classical view of visual cognition as a process
of mentally representing the world. Many infant cognition researchers
would probably disagree. I describe the surprising ability of young infants
to represent and reason about the physical world, and ask how this capac-
ity can be explained in non-representational terms. As a first step toward
answering this question, I suggest that recent models of embodied cogni-
tion may help illustrate a way of escaping the representational trap.
O’Regan & Noë (O&N) present a compelling account of visual
cognition that trades in the popular myth of vision as recovery and
reconstruction of the 3D world, for a leaner, meaner alternative.
I enthusiastically endorse their thesis that much of “seeing the
world” can be better understood as a process of recognizing how
actions in the world (e.g., eye and head movements) systematically
transform sensory data over time. The theory of sensorimotor con-
tingency reaches well beyond the domain of perception and visual
consciousness, raising many important questions for other areas of
research. In particular, as a developmental psychologist I would
like to focus my commentary on the implications of O&N’s pro-
posal for infant cognition research.
Infants mentally represent the world. Across a wide range of
knowledge domains (e.g., number, objects, causality, classes), there
is now unequivocal, or at least overwhelming support for the con-
clusion that young infants mentally represent the world (Bail-
largeon 1999; Meltzoff & Moore 1998; Spelke 1998; Wynn 1992;
however, see also Bogartz et al. 2000; Haith 1998; Rivera et al.
1999). For example, young infants react with surprise (i.e., in-
creased attention) when they see two dolls placed behind a screen
and then only one doll revealed when the screen is removed
(Wynn 1992). Infants are similarly surprised when they see a
drawbridge appear to rotate through a space that was occupied a
moment before by a solid box (but not if the box is shown to be
made of sponge).
It is typically assumed in these studies that infants mentally re-
construct salient features of the physical environment, forming in-
ternal copies or models of the external world that not only persist
over time, but also guide infants’ perceptual information-gathering.
Complimenting the representational account of infants’ visual
cognition are a number of recent computational models that illus-
trate how such representations might arise during early develop-
ment (Mareschal et al. 1999; Munakata et al. 1997; Simon 1998).
Infants operate on their mental representations of the world.
It may not only be the case that infants mentally represent the
world, but that they also seem to use these representations as de-
tailed physical models when data from the real world are tem-
porarily unavailable (e.g., when an object is occluded). For exam-
ple, infants react with surprise at the sight of a car that reappears
after its path is obstructed by a large, occluded box (Baillargeon
1986). Such findings are used to conclude that infants use mental
models to actively reason about the physical world, by forecasting
or predicting the outcomes of occluded events.
The representational account of infant visual cognition creates
a difficult challenge for O&N’s theory. Much of what they marshal
as evidence for their proposal are data and thought experiments
from the here-and-now, like exploring a bottle that is in one’s
hands. How might we explain an infant’s putative ability to hold in
mind both the existence and location of an occluded object, or
more impressively, to recognize when that object should obstruct
the movement of another occluded object, within the formal
framework of sensorimotor contingencies? It is unclear how the
idea of the “world as an external representation” could account for
such impressive mental skills.
A first step toward escaping the representational trap. Can the
sensorimotor account of visual cognition explain the apparent rep-
resentational prowess of young infants? This is a difficult question,
but one that I hope O&N can somehow answer. However, paral-
leling their approach are a number of researchers (e.g., Ballard et
al. 1997; Nolfi & Parisi 1999; Scheier & Pfeifer 1995; Schlesinger
& Parisi 2001) who (1) advocate the notion of embodied knowl-
edge, and (2) have investigated a variety of practical tasks that
would seem to require mental or symbolic representations, but that
can in fact be solved by assuming that knowledge is body-based,
situated, and encoded implicitly through temporally-extended ac-
tions.
Commentary/O’Regan & Noë: A sensorimotor account of vision and visual consciousness
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (2001) 24:5
1003

As an example of this approach, I have developed an oculomo-
tor control model that simulates the eye movements of an infant
as it tracks moving objects (Schlesinger & Barto 1999; Schlesinger
& Parisi 2001). Using a reinforcement-learning algorithm, the
eye-movement model quickly learns to anticipate the reappear-
ance of an occluded object. Perhaps more impressively, like the
young infants in Baillargeon’s (1986) study, the model also tracks
the target appropriately when its path is blocked by a hidden ob-
stacle. Note that these prospective behaviors are achieved with
only a simple associative learning mechanism, and without as-
suming or building in the capacity for memory or prediction.
Obviously, this eye-movement model is just one small step to-
ward trying to explain infants’ visual cognition in non-representa-
tional terms. Nevertheless, the model suggests that we can know
about and act in the world, indeed, even anticipate future states
of the world, without having to explicitly reference a mental model
or symbolic representation. In this sense, of course, an important
point of agreement between my model and O&N’s more general
theoretical account is that visual cognition is activity. It is unclear
to me, however, how far such a theory can go toward explaining
not only the (apparent) capacity for infants to represent the world
in symbolic form, but also their capacity for using those putative
representations to act, judge, or reason about the world in a pro-
spective manner.
Summary. I have highlighted here the representational account
of infant cognition. My challenge to O&N is to continue to expand
and elaborate their theory in at least two directions. First, I hope
that they can flesh out the sensorimotor account of vision in
enough detail to provide a compelling alternative to the idea that
knowledge acquisition is simply a process of copying external re-
ality. Second, and more generally, I encourage both authors to
raise their sights, and to begin thinking beyond the question of
learning and, instead, toward the lifelong process of perceptual
and cognitive development.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This commentary was supported by a grant from the National Institute of
Child Health and Human Development (1R03 HD40780-02). I thank
Michael Young for his helpful comments during its preparation.
Change blindness, Gibson, and the
sensorimotor theory of vision
Brian J. Scholla and Daniel J. Simonsb
aDepartment of Psychology, Yale University, New Haven, CT 06520-8205;
bDepartment of Psychology, Harvard University, Cambridge, MA 02138.
Brian.Scholl@yale.edu
dsimons@wjh.harvard.edu
http://pantheon.yale.edu/~bs265
http://www.wjh.harvard.edu/~viscog/lab/
Abstract: We suggest that the sensorimotor “theory” of vision is really an
unstructured collection of separate ideas, and that much of the evidence
cited in its favor at best supports only a subset of these ideas. As an exam-
ple, we note that work on change blindness does not “vindicate” (or even
speak to) much of the sensorimotor framework. Moreover, the ideas them-
selves are not always internally consistent. Finally, the proposed frame-
work draws on ideas initially espoused by James Gibson, but does little to
differentiate itself from those earlier views. For even part of this frame-
work to become testable, it must specify which sources of evidence can
support or contradict each of the component hypotheses.
On its surface, the “sensorimotor account of vision” by O’Regan
& Noë (O&N) has an impressive scope: among many other things,
it allegedly explains the nature of visual consciousness; how sen-
sory modalities differ; how sensation differs from perception; how
we perceive a stable world despite eye movements; why visual
binding is unnecessary; and why hundreds of years of philosophi-
cal analysis of the problem of qualia can be dismissed as mis-
guided.
How can so many phenomena fall under the explanatory scope
of this single theory? One reason, we suggest, is that it is not so
much a coherent theory as an unstructured collection of three in-
teresting ideas: (1) vision is active and exploratory rather than pas-
sive; (2) knowledge of sensorimotor contingencies plays a central
role in conscious vision; and (3) the visual system uses the world
as an “outside memory.” Although most researchers would accept
the first idea, the latter two are more controversial. More impor-
tantly, these ideas are essentially unrelated: each can be selectively
denied while maintaining the others.
The scope of these hypotheses and the many types of evidence
alleged to support them creates a substantial problem: given that
the theory is not a single, structured claim, it is unclear which of
the ideas are supported by which types of evidence. The sensori-
motor theory is treated by O&N as a coherent whole, and evi-
dence consistent with some of the ideas is inappropriately taken
to substantiate the theory in its entirety.
The role (or lack thereof) of change blindness in the sensori-
motor theory. Here we focus on just one instance of this error, in-
volving change blindness – the phenomenon wherein surprisingly
large changes go unnoticed, even when observers are actively try-
ing to find them (see Simons 2000a). The authors view change
blindness as central to their theory: “the sensorimotor approach to
vision . . . has provided the impetus for a series of surprising ex-
periments on what has come to be known as change blindness.
The robustness of these results in turn serves to vindicate the
framework itself” (sect. 9). We suggest that both of these claims
are mistaken, and that change blindness does not directly support
the sensorimotor theory.
O&N suggest that change blindness was discovered as a direct
consequence of the sensorimotor theory, or more precisely, the
“world as an outside memory” claim. Although this idea did pro-
vide some of the theoretical motivation for recent work on such
phenomena, the initial work on change blindness was not moti-
vated by this issue at all. Most early work on change blindness de-
rived from the study of visual integration and focused on the de-
tection of changes during reading. For example, McConkie and
Zola (1979) showed that observers often failed to notice when
every letter on a screen changed case during a saccade. Other
work on the failure to notice changes, both theoretical and em-
pirical, similarly predated the current theory (e.g., Dennett 1991;
Hochberg 1986; Phillips 1974; Stroud 1955).
The notion of using the world as an outside memory (e.g.,
Brooks 1991; O’Regan 1992; Stroud 1955) might explain why sev-
eral forms of change blindness occur: we intuitively expect to de-
tect such changes, perhaps on account of implicit beliefs about the
capacity and fidelity of internal representations, or perhaps be-
cause of implicit expectations about the range of unusual or dis-
tinctive events that will draw our attention (e.g., Levin et al. 2000;
Scholl et al., submitted). In any case, accurate change detection,
when it does occur (in situations which do not induce change
blindness) may be driven largely by motion transients which draw
attention back to the world itself (e.g., Simons et al. 2000). Though
the externalized memory hypothesis might predict change blind-
ness, however, it is not clear that the sensorimotor hypothesis
would. Sensorimotor contingencies require an internal memory
from one instant to the next, because detecting contingencies de-
pends on the ability to note how an environment changes in re-
sponse to actions such as a “flick of the eyes.” However, if the ob-
server relied solely on the external world to provide their memory,
then nothing would ever be seen to change across such flicks of
the eyes (due to saccade-contingent change blindness). How,
then, would observers learn what was stable and what was variable
over time and across eye and head movements?
Thus, change blindness – including the flicker and mudsplash
paradigms developed by Rensink, O’Regan, and colleagues – pro-
vides no direct support for O&N’s sensorimotor contingency idea.
In fact, it does not even directly support the externalized memory
idea. Change blindness is consistent with the idea that we lack in-
ternalized, detailed representations: in the absence of such inter-
Commentary/O’Regan & Noë: A sensorimotor account of vision and visual consciousness
1004
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (2001) 24:5

nal representations, change blindness would occur. However, the
existence of change blindness does not logically require the ab-
sence of a representation (see Simons 2000b). Representations
are needed to detect change, but they could also be present in the
face of change blindness. For example, observers might represent
both the original and changed scene, but simply fail to compare
them directly (Levin et al., in press; Scott-Brown et al. 2000; Si-
mons 2000b; Simons et al., in press). The presence of change
blindness allows no conclusive inferences about the presence or
absence of internal representations. All it tells us is that if we have
such representations, we do not spontaneously gain conscious ac-
cess to the differences between them.
Even if we grant the idea of an externalized memory, however,
we can simultaneously deny every other aspect of the theory – in-
cluding the idea that knowledge of sensorimotor contingencies
plays a substantive role in conscious vision. Change blindness pro-
vides little support for the externalized memory idea and provides
even less for the framework as a whole. It is thus misleading to
characterize change blindness as vindication for the overall frame-
work. At best, one small (and dissociable) part of the theory is con-
sistent with change blindness.
Are sensorimotor contingencies truly sensory? Do we really
lack representations? The problems induced by the lack of inte-
gration among the central ideas in O&N’s framework are ampli-
fied by the fact that the individual ideas are not always internally
consistent on their own. Take, for example, the central idea that
perception derives from knowledge of sensorimotor contingen-
cies. This claim depends on a consistent relationship between ob-
jects in the world and changes in retinal stimulation. Essentially,
these retinal changes must reveal invariant properties of the ob-
jects. However, in describing this proposal, O&N seem to want the
theory to include not just flicks of the eyes, but also flicks of at-
tention. But in what respect is a shift of attention sensory? If it
does not change the retinal stimulation, how can it be the basis of
a sensorimotor contingency?
Similarly, it is not clear that this model truly lacks internal rep-
resentations and memory. The repeated appeal to “knowledge” of
sensorimotor contingencies seems little different from an internal
memory or representation of an object. The only difference from
a traditional object representation is that the “knowledge” in this
case is of dynamic rather than static information. It was for this
reason that other attempts to eradicate memory from the process
of perception argued that the invariant information underlying
perception was present externally, in the environment (e.g., Gib-
son et al. 1969).
Gibson redux? The notion that manipulation of sensorimotor
contingencies underlies perception and awareness is old, dating at
least to behaviorist views. To quote an example from that era: “The
awakening of a retained sensory impression when its response is
made is memory in the common sense of the word. Thought, then,
appears as a means of ‘trying’ different actions and anticipating
their results through a process of automatic recall” (Ross 1933). Al-
though O&N acknowledge the prior related work of several other
authors, they pay surprisingly little attention to the one researcher
who most (in)famously proposed these ideas: James Gibson. Both
the content of the sensorimotor theory as well as the style of its ex-
position are highly reminiscent of Gibson’s work on direct percep-
tion. Yet, O&N rarely mention these similarities, even when Gib-
son addressed the same issues extensively. For example, both
Gibson and O&N argue that perception is exploratory, that it de-
pends on detecting the constant information amidst change (in-
variants), that learning improves the detection of correlations, that
temporarily occluded objects are “seen” (Gibson et al. 1969), and
that vision does not rely on an internal representation of the world
(see Gibson 1966; 1979/1986 for further details). Furthermore,
both essentially define away classic problems in perception and
cognition such as the binding problem (O&N), or perceiving depth
(e.g., Gibson 1966, p. 298). Despite the overwhelming similarity
between the approaches and their implications, O&N entirely ne-
glect discussion of how their views differ from Gibson’s, or of the
ways in which their approach might better handle the many well-
known critiques of direct perception (e.g., Fodor & Pylyshyn 1981;
Ullman 1980). Given the similarities, it is not clear that O&N fare
any better in the face of such critiques.
One fundamental difference between Gibson and O&N is the
nature of the stimulus for perception. Gibson emphasized that the
information for perception was available in the visual world rather
than in the retinal stimulation. Observers generally do not become
aware of the retinal sensations produced by objects – they are just
aware of the objects. Although O&N appeal to similar notions,
their argument relies more on invariants of the retinal stimulation
as the basis for perception. This issue is perhaps most apparent in
the discussions of seeing “red” and of “filling in.” In these sections,
the authors focus on how the brain might perceive changes to the
retinal stimulation that result from moving the eyes, noting that
the blind spot might provide additional information due to the
changes in stimulation it imposes.
This approach has its pitfalls. For example, the theory is diffi-
cult to test empirically because it is affected by the nature of the
sensory apparatus to a greater degree than Gibson’s views. One ad-
vantage of Gibson’s approach is that evidence for the presence and
use of environmental invariants in perception could be taken as
support for the theory. For Gibson, invariant information is pres-
ent in the environment regardless of whether or not the perceiver
is capable of “picking up” that information (Gibson 1966). For
O&N, the information available for perception depends critically
on the nature and structure of the sensory apparatus (at least in
some cases – for other forms of sensorimotor contingency, they
seem to appeal to a more Gibsonian view). The particular senso-
rimotor invariants that define red for one observer might then not
be identical to those that define red for another observer. Al-
though their approach to defining “redness” is clever and original,
it is also untestable because no laws of sensorimotor contingency
can be specified; their invariants are tied to the sensory apparatus
and will not generalize from one observer to another. Not sur-
prisingly, then, their paper lacks details about the nature of the
contingencies that could underlie the perception of “red.”
Concluding thoughts. The sensorimotor theory of vision is no-
table largely for its impressive breadth: it attempts to marshal a
wide variety of evidence in support of its several ideas, and thereby
attempts to explain (or define away) several longstanding puzzles
about the nature of visual experience. Although individually these
ideas are each intriguing, O&N do little to explain how they are
interrelated and how the framework as a whole is structured. Con-
sequently, evidence that is relevant to only one of aspect of the
theory is often adduced as support for the whole. We have high-
lighted one example of this: whereas O&N claim that their theory
is vindicated by their discovery of change blindness, we have ar-
gued that change blindness is entirely unrelated to claims about
sensorimotor contingencies. Moreover, it provides little support
for the more relevant claims about external memory. The lack of
internal consistency, both of the framework as a whole and of its
component ideas, leads to a view that is intriguing, but difficult to
test empirically. Of course, some of these same objections have
been applied to the quite similar views presented in Gibson’s the-
ory of direct perception (e.g., Ullman 1980).
In sum, the sensorimotor framework would be greatly clarified
by considering in detail (1) which parts of the theory receive di-
rect support from which types of empirical evidence, (2) which
parts of the theory must stand or fall together, and (3) which parts
of the theory are substantive departures from earlier Gibsonian ar-
guments.1
NOTE
1. Following these suggestions might in some ways work in O&N’s fa-
vor by highlighting, for those who are not favorably disposed to the theory,
which ideas needn’t “go down with the ship.” For example, we were in-
trigued by the idea of using sensorimotor contingencies to explain the dif-
ference between the various sensory modalities, but as it stands it is not
apparent from the text that you can accept this idea while denying most of
the other major claims.
Commentary/O’Regan & Noë: A sensorimotor account of vision and visual consciousness
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (2001) 24:5
1005

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
BJS was supported by NIMH grant No. R03-MH63808-01. DJS was sup-
ported by NSF grant No. BCS-9905578 and by an Alfred P. Sloan Research
Fellowship.
The absence of representations causes
inconsistencies in visual perception
Jeroen B. J. Smeets and Eli Brenner
Vakgroep Fysiologie, Erasmus Universiteit Rotterdam, NL-3000 DR
Rotterdam, The Netherlands. smeets@fys.fgg.eur.nl
brenner@fys.fgg.eur.nl
www.eur.nl/fgg/fys/people/smeets.htm
Abstract: In their target article, O’Regan & Noë (O&N) give convincing
arguments for there being no elaborate internal representation of the out-
side world. We show two more categories of empirical results that can eas-
ily be understood within the view that the world serves as an outside mem-
ory that is probed only when specific information is needed.
In line with the arguments in the target article, we consider vision
to be tightly coupled to motor control. In order to catch a ball, one
needs information about its size, weight, position, speed, and di-
rection of motion. These attributes are important for different as-
pects of the action, so that they can be determined and processed
independently within what has become known as separate visuo-
motor-channels (e.g., Jeannerod 1999).
Although determining visual attributes independently might be
useful for controlling actions, this does not mean that the out-
comes are independent, because the laws of physics and geome-
try relate many of these attributes. For instance, if an object moves
at a certain speed, its position will change at a corresponding rate.
An internal representation of the outside world would combine all
available information to yield the most likely (and thus consistent)
representation. This would of course reflect the physical and geo-
metrical relationships within the outside world. The consequence
of independent processing is that the relevant sources of infor-
mation are combined separately for each attribute. Physically re-
lated attributes might thus be determined on the basis of differ-
ent sources, within physiologically independent pathways. If all
attributes are determined veridically, this independence remains
unnoticed. It becomes evident when the processing of one at-
tribute is erroneous, as is the case in visual illusions (Smeets &
Brenner 2001). Two examples clarify this.
For intercepting a moving object one needs information about
its speed to regulate the timing of one’s action, and information
about its (egocentric) position to direct one’s action. Due to the
noisiness of extraretinal information on eye orientation, the most
accurate estimate of object speed will generally be one based on
relative retinal information (Smeets & Brenner 1994). For deter-
mining an object’s egocentric position, the use of extraretinal in-
formation cannot be avoided. And indeed, moving a visual back-
ground influences the perceived speed, without influencing the
perceived position (Duncker illusion). In our view, each such at-
tribute is processed independently to control a certain aspect of
our actions. The Duncker illusion therefore affects the timing of
ones action, without influencing its direction (Smeets & Brenner
1995).
A similar reasoning holds for grasping an object to pick it up. To
move the digits to the object’s surface, information about positions
on that surface is needed (Smeets & Brenner 1999). To subse-
quently apply adequate forces to lift the object, a visual correlate
of the object’s weight is needed: that is, its size (Gordon et al.
1991). As with the previous example, these geometrically related
aspects (positions and size) might very well be determined on the
basis of different sources of information. The positions will again
be determined using extraretinal information, whereas the ob-
ject’s size might be determined purely on the basis of retinal in-
formation. This explains why illusions of size affect the lifting force
in grasping, but not the grip aperture (Brenner & Smeets 1996).
Independent processing of physically related attributes is not
only evident in the visual control of action, but also in conscious
perception. For instance, if one looks for a while at a waterfall, and
subsequently fixates a tree at eye-level near that waterfall, the tree
appears to move upward. The apparent position of the tree re-
mains approximately at eye-level. Other examples of inconsisten-
cies can be found in visual illusions, such as the Müller-Lyer illu-
sion. This illusion influences the perceived size of the figure
without affecting the perceived positions of the end-positions
(Gillam & Chambers 1985). In analogy to the claim that we pro-
cess only one fragment of the world at a time (sect. 4.2), this ap-
parent inconsistency suggests that conscious perception involves
processing only one attribute of that fragment at a time.
If one accepts that not all attributes are processed at a time, one
can understand the flash-lag effect (e.g., Nijhawan 1994). This ef-
fect manifests itself when a subject is fixating a screen on which a
target is moving continuously while another target flashes. If the
subject is asked to indicate the position of the moving target at the
time of the flash, he will misjudge this position in the direction of
the target’s motion. This has been interpreted as the result of mo-
tion extrapolation. However, this cannot be so because if the tar-
get unexpectedly reverses direction near the moment of the flash,
the misjudgements are never beyond the actual trajectory of the
moving target. It is more likely to be caused by different process-
ing times for flashed and continuously presented stimuli (Whitney
& Murakami 1998).
However, there is no reason to assume that flashes are pro-
cessed more slowly than continuously visible stimuli. What then is
the cause of this apparent difference in processing time? If not all
attributes are processed continuously, the position of the moving
target will have to be probed at some instant. This presumably
takes time, and can start only after the flash has been detected.
The moving target’s position (or other attributes such as its colour
and shape) will be probed too late. If this explanation is correct,
the flash-lag effect should disappear if we change the experiment
in a way that allows the position of the moving target to be probed
at the time of the flash. A simple way to do so is to provide an ad-
ditional cue for the time (or equivalently, the position of the mov-
ing target) at which the flash will occur. Indeed, the flash-lag ef-
fect is reduced markedly when this is done (Brenner & Smeets
2000).
Re-presenting the case for representation
Benjamin W. Tatler
School of Biological Sciences, University of Sussex, Brighton, BN1 9QG
United Kingdom. b.w.tatler@sussex.ac.uk
http://www.biols.susx.ac.uk/resgroups/scn/vision
Abstract: O’Regan & Noë (O&N) present the most radical departure yet
from traditional approaches to visual perception. However, internal rep-
resentation cannot yet be abandoned. I will discuss: (1) recent evidence
for very short-term pictorial representation of each fixation; (2) the possi-
bility of abstract representation, largely unconsidered by the authors; and
(3) that sensorimotor contingency theory requires internal visual retention
and comparison.
O’Regan & Noë (O&N) extend the implications of recent change
detection studies by arguing that not only is it unnecessary for the
visual system to construct a point-by-point pictorial representa-
tion of the world across multiple fixations, but that no such infor-
mation need be internalised on even the shortest of time scales.
However, the reader should be cautious before abandoning all no-
tion of representation and should first consider some of the im-
plications of this model and other possible accounts.
Whilst it would be hard to argue that we build up a point-by-
Commentary/O’Regan & Noë: A sensorimotor account of vision and visual consciousness
1006
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (2001) 24:5

point pictorial representation over multiple fixations, there is evi-
dence to suggest that a much shorter-term version might well ex-
ist. Contemporary accounts of visual perception often include a
very short-term pictorial component (e.g., Rensink 2000). O&N
would argue that these models represent a reluctance to depart
from old ways of thinking about vision, but there is considerable
evidence in recent literature to support the notion of a pictorial
representation that survives only in the order of a fixation dura-
tion. Recently I studied what subjects can report about their fixa-
tions during the real life activity of making a cup of tea (Tatler
2001). Whilst making tea they were interrupted by the lights be-
ing turned off and asked to report details of what they were fixat-
ing. Subjects were able to report accurately the content of their
fovea for the fixation interrupted by the lights going out, but were
unable to report the content of previous fixations. This result sug-
gests that detailed pictorial information is available to subjects
within the current fixation but does not survive multiple fixations.
The data further suggest that the locus of the subject’s report is
not the retina but a low-level buffer in which a veridical copy of
the retinal image survives until it is overwritten soon after the start
of the next fixation. In a recent change detection experiment
Becker et al. (2000) support the notion of an iconic store that is
overwritten by each new fixation. De Graef and Verfaillie (2001a)
use post-saccadic masking to argue that pictorial representations
of the retinal image are routinely established, but overwritten in
the first 50 msec of each fixation. These empirical studies cannot
be explained easily if we disregard all notion of internal pictorial
representation, as O&N would like us to do. It should be noted,
however, that O&N’s model need not exclude the possibility of a
very short-term pictorial representation and that many of their ar-
guments could be equally compelling if they were to embrace the
existence of such a representation.
In presenting their case for the “World as an Outside Memory”
(WOM), O&N argue that no vestige of the visual environment
need ever be internalised. It is certainly the case that when we re-
quire detailed inspection of a particular part of the world we sim-
ply direct our high-resolution foveas to that location. This obser-
vation lends support to the WOM model, but also raises some
concerns particularly when we consider that it is not unusual for
very large gaze shifts of up to 140º to be made in the real world
(Grealy et al. 1999; Land et al. 1999). These large gaze shifts can
locate items and positions with considerable accuracy, an achieve-
ment that is surely beyond the limits of our peripheral vision. In
these situations it is hard to explain saccade targeting if we take
the authors’ stance in supposing that no aspect of the visual envi-
ronment is ever internally registered. Although I agree that there
is no need for a detailed pictorial representation of the whole
scene, it seems that some more abstract record of the environment
may well be required for our operation in the real world. This
echoes the feelings and findings of many current researchers (e.g.,
Rensink 2000; Simons 1996) and O’Regan has, in the past, pro-
posed the retention of more abstract details of the visual environ-
ment (O’Regan & Lévy-Schoen 1983). The present account could
easily encompass the existence of an internal abstract representa-
tion of the world if we do not take such a hard-line view on the
WOM model of perception. It is surprising that the authors do not
give due consideration to the possibility or implications of abstract
representations in their construction of the current model.
O&N’s sensorimotor contingency (SMC) theory is a provoca-
tive and innovative attempt to account for many aspects of visual
perception in the complete absence of internal representation.
The theory proposes that perception is based upon the knowledge
of changes to retinal stimulation as a result of world- or ego-
motion (actual or potential), and so is an extension of the Gibson-
ian view of perception. Let me highlight one key issue raised by
the SMC account. The authors consistently argue against internal
registration and retention of the retinal image and yet the SMC
theory critically relies upon comparisons of the retinal stimulation
across viewpoint changes. If there is no visual retention or inter-
nal registration, how can we ever make these comparisons or build
up knowledge of the structure of changes that occur for given eye
movements on objects? Hence, how can we establish the laws of
sensorimotor contingencies that are so vital to O&N’s theory? This
point warrants further exploration by the authors if they wish to
retain their strong position of supposing that visual details are
never internalised.
O&N’s account of visual perception in the complete absence of
internal representation is provocative and well-presented, and
representative of the changes in our approach to visual perception
that are necessary in the light of the recent descriptions of change
blindness. Certainly we should all entertain these possibilities in
our considerations of visual perception, but we must be cautious
not to adopt a position that is equally as extreme as the old ideas
of a complete internal picture. There is ample evidence and pos-
sibility within the current framework for very short-term pictorial
representations and persistent abstract representations of our vi-
sual environment.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
I thank Professor Mike Land for his helpful discussions and suggestions.
Still room for representations
Robert Van Gulick
Department of Philosophy, Syracuse University, Syracuse, NY 13244.
rnvangul@syr.edu
Abstract: One can support O’Regan & Noë’s (O&N’s) commitment to the
active nature of vision and the importance of sensorimotor contingencies
without joining them in rejecting any significant role for neurally realized
visual representations in the process.
O’Regan & Noë (O&N) offer an importantly different perspec-
tive on vision and visual awareness, which aims to challenge not
only the standard answers in the field but many of its questions as
well. Their own view comprises both positive and negative claims.
To the positive, they ably demonstrate the importance of sensori-
motor contingencies in visual perception. Negatively, they deny
that visual perception involves the construction of a neural repre-
sentation of the environment. However, the latter does not follow
from the former, at least not without the addition of controversial
assumptions about visual representations, for example, that they
would have to be complete and unified. Thus, one might accept
the major role the authors accord to sensorimotor contingencies
but still believe that vision and visual experience involve some
form of neural representation. Indeed, reflection on the sensori-
motor model might lead one to just such a belief.
The disagreement turns in part on what one takes the repre-
sentational model to entail, and O&N seem at times to pack a lot
of heavy and dubious baggage into it. For example, they regard the
results from inattentional and change blindness studies as weigh-
ing against the representational model. Some, no doubt, hold a
naive view of visual representations as complete detailed depic-
tions of the entire scene, but the representational model itself car-
ries no such commitment. One can agree that at any given instant
the perceiver gets detailed information about only a small portion
of the surround, but still invoke neurally based representations to
explain how all the relevant information is realized, at whatever
degree of resolution. Nor do visual representations require a
viewer, a homunculus in the inner theater, as O&N imply. Ac-
cording to many representational theories, the perceiver does not
observe or “view” the representations. She sees external objects,
but her ability to do so is underlain by neural features that func-
tion as representations of the scene.
Thus, we need to be clear about what something must do to
“function as a representation” in the relevant context. Are repre-
sentations in that sense compatible, incompatible, or perhaps
even entailed or strongly implied by the sensorimotor model of
Commentary/O’Regan & Noë: A sensorimotor account of vision and visual consciousness
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (2001) 24:5
1007

vision? O&N view the perceiver as dynamically coupled to her en-
vironment; indeed they argue that such coupling is what vision
consists of. It does not merely accompany or result from vision; it
is vision. Anyone who takes a teleo-pragmatic view of mind (as I
do), will find the active practical aspect of their model attractive.
But one might still stop short of accepting the constitution claim:
“That’s all vision is”; or of drawing general negative conclusions
about the lack of any role for representations in the process.
Consider the familiar guided missile example they use. The mis-
sile’s pursuit is guided by the sensorimotor coupling between it
and its target. Its success depends on its being accurately tuned to
the contingencies that govern that coupling. According to O&N
the successful operation of such a visually coupled process of
agent/environment interaction involves nothing that functions as
a representation of the target or the scene. Whatever information
that missile acquires about its target is realized solely in the struc-
ture of their coupled engagement; vision, as they say, is a form of
action. But consider real cruise missiles that evade radar detection
by flying low and hugging the terrain. They are responsively cou-
pled to their immediate environment, but their “look-down” sys-
tem is used to navigate and identify its location and course by
matching current imaged landforms against stored “maps” of the
terrain. In such cases, there seems good reason to think that both
the stored terrain maps, and the processing outputs that are
matched against them, function as representations.
O&N must take care not to repeat the error of behaviorists.
Having recognized that perceptual systems are a means to the goal
of adaptively modifying behavior, behaviorists drew the false con-
clusion that learning is just the learning of behaviors. But, as many
famous experiments showed, rats acquire a detailed knowledge of
the spatial layout of their environment in the absence of any sig-
nificant present behaviors dependent on such spatial facts. What
the rat gains is not behaviors but information that might be of rel-
evance to a wide range of future behaviors.
Somewhat analogously, O&N seem to go too far when they pro-
pose to identify vision with the successful coupling that takes place
during a visually mediated engagement. There is indeed continu-
ous sensorimotor feedback which shapes the response in a way
that harmonizes with the environment. But vision seems also to
involve the acquisition and storage of information for future use
by means of the sorts of representations they are eager to deny.
Consider O&N’s examples of “ash can art” in Figure 2. They use
those examples to show how poorly subjects remember and dis-
tort the scene in their memory-based drawings, and thus, perhaps,
also how incomplete and schematic the subjects’ perception of the
scene can be. One can grant all that, but still note that the copies
are more accurate than inaccurate, despite having been produced
in the absence of visual access to the originals. The natural expla-
nation is that by viewing the originals, the subjects were able to lay
down a representation – incomplete and uneven in detail though
it might be – that could be retrieved through imagistic memory in
a form accurate enough to guide the intentional action of drawing
a copy.
Moreover, that same information could have been applied to a
wide range of behaviors other than copying, which illustrates a
general feature of representational processes. As organisms move
away from sensorimotor links that subserve particular behaviors,
they develop structures that carry information in a form accessi-
ble to an open-ended range of applications. Rather than acquiring
a set of interactive contingencies of the sort needed to guide a spe-
cific behavior, they store information in a format that can be ap-
plied in a diversity of ways, should the situations arise. I don’t want
to beg the question against O&N, but I am hard pressed to see
why taking the sensorimotor aspect of vision seriously should lead
one to reject such plausible representationalist models.
In search of the ultimate evidence: 
The fastest visual reaction adapts 
to environment, not retinal locations
Boris M. Velichkovsky and Sebastian Pannasch
Psychology Department, Dresden University of Technology, D-01062
Dresden Germany. velich@applied-cognition.org
www.applied-cognition.org
pannasch@applied-cognition.org
www.applied-cognition.org
Abstract: The sensorimotor account of perception is akin to Gibsonian di-
rect realism. Both emphasize external properties of the world, challenging
views based on the analysis of internal visual processing. To compare the
role of distal and retinotopic parameters, distractor effect – an optomotor
reaction of midbrain origin – is considered. Even in this case, permanence
in the environment, not on the retina, explains the dynamics of habitua-
tion.
The target article presents a refreshing synthesis of hitherto sep-
arate research, but it also creates a déjà vu impression. Every forty
years, somewhere in the world, there is a rebellion against passive,
mirror-like theories of cognition. For instance, a sensorimotor
treatment of perception was the established approach in Russian
“psychology of activity” (see Velichkovsky et al. 1973). In the ‘60s,
labs around Leont’ev and Luria tried to implement ideas of an ac-
tivity-based approach to perception and even to find eye move-
ments (presumably in the tremor range) which could explain color
perception, however without much success at that time.
In this commentary, we describe new data relevant to the
world-as-its-own-model hypothesis. If there is a neurophysiologi-
cal transition from proximal to distal representations somewhere
in the brain, what does it mean for perception? O’Regan & Noë
(O&N) deny the relevance of such a transition, basically in line
with the Gibsonian argument. This argument may not always be
conclusive in their case. All phenomena considered by O&N in-
volve cortical processing that can include not just one but several
transitions from retinotopic to spatial coordinates; hence, it is
rather tempting to relate them to phenomenal perception.
Of interest, therefore, is the much simpler phenomenon of the
distractor effect. This (also known as the “remote distractor ef-
fect”) refers to an inhibition of a saccade or – what is the same in
a free visual exploration – to a prolongation of the current fixation
after a sudden visual event (Levy-Shoen 1969; Walker et al. 1997).
With its reaction time of only 100 msec, the distractor effect is the
fastest optomotor reaction in humans. This effect is also evoked
by acoustic signals, so it could be related to orienting reaction
(Pannasch et al. 2001).
As a symptom of orienting reaction the effect should habituate,
that is, become habitual – but there was no sign of a habituation
in our experiments. One possible reason could be that we used a
gaze-contingent paradigm presenting distractors in the same area
of the retina. In a new experiment, we compared distractors’ effi-
ciency over time when they appeared either in the same retinal lo-
cation (variable localization in the world) or in the same place of
the picture (variable retinal location). Full-screen copies of nine-
teenth century paintings were presented to the subjects on a 17-
inch computer monitor with instructions to study them for a
recognition test. After the initial phase of 20 sec, distractors (cir-
cular patterns of 4 degrees diameter) appeared within approxi-
mately every seventh fixation. Distractors were presented for 75
msec either in the lower right part of the picture, 12 degrees from
the center, or in the respective location of visual field. In addition,
they were presented 50 or 150 msec after the start of fixation. Af-
ter 12 distractors, the first picture was replaced by the next pic-
ture, and so on. Conditions were partially counterbalanced across
6 subjects and 4 pictures.
Figure 1 shows the main results. No effect is observed either in
space or in retinal coordinates for 50 msec delay. For 150 msec
and permanent localization in the picture, there is a clear distrac-
tor effect as well as two habituation effects – between pictures
Commentary/O’Regan & Noë: A sensorimotor account of vision and visual consciousness
1008
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (2001) 24:5

[F(3,6) 5 6.29, p , .001] and between the first 6 and last 6 dis-
tractors within the first three pictures [F(1,6) 5 5.82, p , .024].
In the case of the same retinal location, there is a significant dis-
tractor effect [F(1,6) 5 11.48, p , .001], however it does not
change over time.
According to a recent analysis, the distractor effect seems to be
mediated by midbrain optomotor circuits (Reingold & Stampe
2000). They are retinotopically organized and too fast for an in-
volvement of higher-level representations. Our results demon-
strate that in this case the permanence in space, that is, in the out-
side world not on the retina, causes the decline in the saccadic
inhibition. The decline can be explained by a genuine habituation
or by a form of adaptation mediated by sensorimotor activity: dis-
tractors with an invariant position in the world are more easily ex-
plored and lose their novelty more quickly. It is interesting that
adaptation effects are observed only at longer delays. This testifies
to the fact that the environmental dependency is not due to an im-
material symbolic act. Rather, every re-fixation initiates the pro-
cess of spatial localization anew, and the process obviously needs
some time to be completed (Bridgeman et al. 1994). The gener-
ality of this process is remarkable, as is its potency across the vast
range of the brain’s evolutionary mechanisms.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We wish to thank Markus Joos for programming and Jens Helmert for his
help in collecting data. Evgeni Sokolov and Pieter Unema made valuable
comments on the commentary.
Perceptions as hypotheses 
of the outside world
Veijo Virsua and Simo Vannib
aDepartment of Psychology, University of Helsinki, FIN-00014 Helsinki,
Finland; bCentre de Recherche Cerveau et Cognition, CNRS, Universite Paul
Sabatier UMR 5549 133, 31062 Toulouse cedex, France.
veijo.virsu@helsinki.fi
vanni@cerco.ups-tlse.fr
Abstract: Perceptual phenomena reviewed by O’Regan & Noë (O&N)
cannot be explained by bottom-up activity alone, but conventional inter-
pretations suffice if perceptions are seen as activations of memory models
of the outside world and its events. Motor involvement is necessary only
during the phylogenetic and ontogenetic development of perceptual mech-
anisms.
O’Regan & Noë (O&N) argue that signal activity of the brain
alone, without considering the outside world and exploratory ac-
tions, is not sufficient to explain visual perception. For example, it
can be shown that the visual perception of objects and features
correlates with the activity of the lateral occipital cortex (Vanni et
al. 1996), parieto-occipital alpha and mu rhythms (Vanni et al.
1997; Vanni et al. 1999), or the sustained activity in the V5 com-
plex (Uusitalo et al. 1997). According to the notion of O&N, re-
sults like these are not causally related to perception. What, then,
motivates experiments on neural correlates of perception? What
should be added in order to explain perception?
O&N answer the second question but they do not provide a
suitable answer to the first one, perhaps because their framework
does not allow it. The framework presented by O&N is suspect,
however, because it cannot deal with perceptions such as pain, mi-
graine fortification illusions, or phantom limbs and related per-
ceptual peculiarities, which do not have any sensorimotor in-
volvement. For the auditory and somatosensory percepts this is
even more evident. We can understand speech, or experience mu-
sic, without moving our ears or body.
O&N submit afferent neural representation as a competitor of
their framework. It is easy to show neural representation as un-
tenable with the perceptual phenomena they review. A much
harder adversary is the approach going back to Helmholtz, who
assumed that perceptions are based on unconscious and involun-
tary inferences concerning the properties of objects to be per-
ceived (see Southall 1962). Gregory (1972; 1980) developed this
notion by assuming that perceptions are hypotheses tested by
thinking: the source of hypotheses is ideation and memory mod-
els. This framework can probably explain all the data presented by
O&N without being at any variance with the conventional inter-
pretations. For example, a visual activation occurs in the putative
parieto-occipital sulcus after an eye blink (Hari et al. 1994) or sac-
cadic eye movement (Jousmäki et al. 1996). These activations may
represent signals that are necessary for preventing the disturbance
of hypothesis testing caused by irrelevant movements. The hy-
pothesis testing is based on relevant information present in all sen-
sory systems, context, memory, intended and executed actions,
and so forth.
What are these hypotheses? Psychologically speaking they are
models of the outside world and its events as they are supposed to
be. They are not abstract concepts or “images in the head.” Phys-
ically, they are extremely complex activation patterns in neural
networks. They result from anatomical connection weights, affer-
ent stimuli, and recurrent activities that reflect attentional selec-
tion, memory, and thinking. The selective activation of only a sub-
set of neurons, which depends on the task at hand, minimizes the
computational load and energy consumption of the brain. This no-
tion assumes no special role for sensorimotor events and contin-
gencies, movement, or action, although they can modify percep-
tual mechanisms as the prism experiments reviewed by O&N
show.
O&N’s article does not indicate how sensorimotor contingen-
cies affect the limits and variations of vision, or how visual mech-
anisms originate. Although sensorimotor contingencies might
Commentary/O’Regan & Noë: A sensorimotor account of vision and visual consciousness
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (2001) 24:5
1009
Figure 1 (Velichkovsky & Pannasch).
Fixation duration for the
first vs. last distractors and the baseline: Top left: distractors ap-
pear 50 msec after begin of fixation in the same picture location;
Top right: 50 msec delay, same retinal position; Bottom left: 150
msec delay, same picture location; Bottom right: 150 msec delay,
same retinal position.

have played a decisive role in the development of the computa-
tional hardware of the brain, they are not a prerequisite for vision
any longer when the mechanisms are actually used. The connec-
tion strengths between neurons are largely built up during onto-
genesis, but the evolution of the mechanisms should not be for-
gotten.
Virsu and Hari (1996) have given a quantitative example of how
a locomotion-based magnification factor from the retina to corti-
cal areas can evolve. They derived a realistic approximation of the
magnification factor assuming only that the same amount of cor-
tical visual apparatus was used by our walking ancestors for ana-
lyzing the visual world at different eccentricities. As this mecha-
nism exists now, it automatically and extremely rapidly performs
the hardware computation of several invariances of spatial vision.
It also determines the variations and limits of vision for a large
number of spatial, spatiotemporal, chromatic, and attentional vari-
ables across the whole visual field (see Carrasco & Frieder 1997).
Thus the mechanism yields preprocessed data for hypothesis test-
ing.
Movement-dependent evolution and ontogenesis (see Held &
Hein 1963) may explain even quantitatively how the computa-
tional hardware mechanisms of perception have developed, but
this does not mean that there is anything “motor” in the hardware
any longer, not even when the mechanisms can guide reflex move-
ments. Vision at the present, conscious or not, is possible without
motor acts or their preparation, and movements can be ballistic
without feedback from sensory data. Motor acts cannot exist with-
out memory involvement, but perception can exist without motor
acts, solely on the basis of memory and hypothesis testing. Neural
correlates of visual perception emerge from the brain mechanisms
that are utilized in perception, independently of their possible ori-
gin in motor acts. In sum, the study of neural correlates produces
essential information about the mechanisms of perception, inde-
pendently of sensorimotor contingencies.
A non-epistemic, non-pictorial, internal,
material visual field
Edmond Wright
Faculty of Philosophy, University of Cambridge, Cambridge CB3 9DA, United
Kingdom. elw33@hermes.cam.ac.uk
Abstract: The authors O’Regan & Noë (O&N) have ignored the case for
the visual field as being non-epistemic evidence internal to the brain,
having no pictorial similarity to the external input, and being material in
ontological status. They are also not aware of the case for the evolution-
ary advantage of learning as the perceptual refashioning of such non-
epistemic sensory evidence via motivated feedback in sensorimotor ac-
tivity.
On the one hand, the authors O’Regan & Noë (O&N) somewhat
ingenuously, admit that they did not set out to refute “the philo-
sophical opposition” (sect. 6.9, para. 4). On the other hand, with
an argument F. H. Bradley used (see Price 1961, p. 127), they
choose to attack repeatedly a philosophical claim about internal
representational projection which can be dated as far back as the
nineteenth century: typically, that of Bradley’s target, Thomas
Case (Case 1888, p. 25). But there have been many obvious and
detailed rejections both of Case’s view, and of Bradley’s objection
to it, by supporters of another type of internal field (Alroy 1991;
Lowe 1981; 1996; Maund 1975; 1993; 1995, pp. 25–49; Sellars
1922; Wright 1975; 1990, pp. 82–84; 1994, pp. 483–86; 1996,
pp. 23–28).
Take the authors’ claim that all supporters of an internal pre-
sentation are committed to there being “red neurons” in the brain.
This is rhetorically parallel to Bradley’s complaint that Case was
committed to the claim that “when I smell a smell I am aware of
the stinking state of my own nervous system” (see Price 1961,
p. 127). Roy Wood Sellars was the first to present the theory that
the relation between sensory inputs and their presentation in the
brain is not a copy but that of a “differential correlation” (Sellars
1932, p. 86), and that therefore, for the visual system, there is no
pictorial resemblance between the input and the cortical presen-
tation. “Sensuous contents are not like what controls their rise”
(Sellars 1919, p. 414; his emphasis). This “structural isomorphism”
implies that a colour experience will bear some relation (e.g., to
intensities, wavelengths, etc.), not necessarily in direct ratio, to its
causes, both near and distal, which will not be “coloured” at all.
This also disposes of the ancient Homunculus Objection (first
used by Hermann Lotze 1884, pp. 492–93, relied on by the au-
thors, sect. 5.4, para. 3) since the internal sensing is obviously not
done with eyes, which have evolved to pick up the uncoloured
light-rays. Obviously, then, there cannot be, within this theory, any
“pictures in the brain” for pictures are actually uncoloured. Sens-
ing, of whatever kind, is a direct neural experience. Incidentally,
the authors appear to be confident that external space is stereo-
scopically three-dimensional; but stereoscopic space is also a sen-
sory feature (it can be turned inside out: Nakajima & Shimojo
1981), and, furthermore, there is no guarantee from physics that
real space is three-dimensional (Stewart 1986). So the internal re-
sponse-field is involuntary, non-mental, hence material, evidence,
and does not carry information about “the characters of objects”
(sect. 2.4, para. 3). It is like a footprint – material evidence, but
not literal information, open to guesses about its causes.
There is much empirical support for the basic non-epistemic
state of sensory fields (see my extended discussion, Wright 1996,
pp. 24–28). Josiah Royce gave an example of the non-epistemic in
1885 (Royce 1958, pp. 309–10; see also Arthur W. Collins 1967,
p. 455, for the first use of the term). Another counter-example is
my After-Image Argument (Wright 1983, pp. 57–62), which no
one has yet tried to refute: it is an example of an experience which
does not “look like anything” (target article, sect. 5.11, para. 6), yet
which is still plainly sensed, in colour, and after a while does come
to look like something. One might mention here that it is empiri-
cally false to state that when one closes one’s eyes, one sees “a
blank” (sect. 2.1, para. 5): I have just tested this, having seen the
background colour of light through my eyelids, after-images of
what I last looked at, and, being a good visile, mental imagery,
which I may or may not find objectifiable. It is also weak to sug-
gest that a belief in qualia is not widespread (sect. 6.9.2); I have
found many non-philosophers who find it the reverse of counter-
intuitive.
What is fundamentally odd about O&N’s approach is that they
praise Jean Piaget’s view of the importance of the sensorimotor
feedback in vision (sect. 2.2, para. 4), but he is a constructivist, for
whom “to know is to assimilate reality into systems of transfor-
mations” (Piaget 1970, p. 15), in which actions are “added, re-
ordered, sequenced, related” (p. 17; my emphasis). Construc-
tivism sees “entities” as the organism’s ongoing, adjustable
selections for action from the real evidence that is sensory experi-
ence, not as already given units in the external real as the authors
here “magically” view them. It sees the real continuum as existing,
both as sensory evidence and as its external causes, but objects and
persons – “objective reality” – only as viable selections from that
evidence (as to why we are often unhappy with that thought, see
Wright 1992, pp. 47–50). The incessant intersubjective updating
of concepts that goes on under the regime of motivation, even that
of persons themselves, proves simultaneously the existence of the
evidence, both as internal field and external cause, as against the
tentativeness of objectivity, and this without sliding into solipsism
(a fortiori because the self, as any “entity,” is corrigible from out-
side itself). We only achieve what Stevan Harnad calls “conver-
gence on approximations” (Harnad 1987, p. 537). Those selections
have the viable character of a hypothesis without being con-
sciously so (Gregory 1993, pp. 256–60). To use O&N’s own words
against themselves, we only “take ourselves to be embedded in the
environment” (sect. 6.7, para. 2, my emphasis), for they mean the
objective environment, the “reality” that we “take to be” certain,
Commentary/O’Regan & Noë: A sensorimotor account of vision and visual consciousness
1010
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (2001) 24:5

not the material real, disturbingly contingent, in which we are em-
bedded. The nature of the internal field as sketched above has
therefore the evolutionary advantage of being open to constant
updating from the non-epistemic evidence, even in the singularity
of the “entity.” As the sixth-century Indian philosopher Dignaga
sensibly said, “Even ‘this’ can be a case of mistaken identity” (Ma-
tilal 1986, p. 332). There is not space to bring out the scope and
fertility of this theory (see Wright 1990, pp. 85–87; 1999; 2000;
2001), but the authors might yet see that there is some justifica-
tion for Gregory Harding’s claim, that a place for qualia must be
found in “a richer conception of the physical” (Harding 1991,
p. 302).
Authors’ Response
Acting out our sensory experience
J. Kevin O’Regana and Alva Noëb
aLaboratoire de Psychologie Expérimentale, Centre National de Recherche
Scientifique, Université René Descartes, 92774 Boulogne Billancourt,
France; bDepartment of Philosophy, University of California, Santa Cruz,
Santa Cruz, CA 95064. oregan@ext.jussieu.fr
http://nivea.psycho.univ-paris5.fr
anoe@cats.ucsc.edu
http://www2.ucsc.edu/people/anoe/
Abstract: The most important clarification we bring in our reply
to commentators concerns the problem of the “explanatory gap”:
that is, the gulf that separates physical processes in the brain from
the experienced quality of sensations. By adding two concepts
(bodiliness and grabbiness) that were not stressed in the target ar-
ticle, we strengthen our claim and clarify why we think we have
solved the explanatory gap problem, – not by dismissing qualia,
but, on the contrary, by explaining why sensations have a “feel”
and why “feels” feel the way they do. We additionally clarify our
views on: internal representations (we claim internal representa-
tions cannot explain why sensation has a feel), on behaviorism (we
are not behaviorists), on perception and action (we believe there
can be perception without action), and on the brain (we believe
the brain does do something important in perception).
The aim of our target article was to explain perception and
perceptual consciousness. Specifically, we sought to lay out
a way of thinking about visual experience (indeed, about
perceptual experience more broadly) that can address the
explanatory gap for consciousness, that is, the problem of
understanding how physical mechanisms can give rise to
consciousness (to experience, sensation, feelings).
We are grateful to the commentators (including those
whose commentaries were not accepted for publication in
this issue). Their criticism forces us to clarify our position.
R1. Finding and closing the explanatory gap
Broackes, Block, Clark & Toribio, Cohen, Kurthen,
Manzotti & Sandini, Lamme & Landman, Laming,
Oberauer, Pylyshyn, Revonsuo, and the Editor doubt
that the sensorimotor approach provides for a novel solu-
tion to the problem of the explanatory gap. We address this
issue in this section by formulating more explicitly the rea-
soning implicit in the target paper.
The explanatory gap for perceptual consciousness has
several aspects. Following Hurley and Noë (forthcoming),
we can distinguish three different questions that need pos-
ing (cf. Chalmers 1996, pp. 234–35).
1. The intra-modal comparative aspect: Why does it look
like this (spherical, say), rather than like that (say, cubical)?
2. The inter-modal comparative aspect: What makes one
experience visual whereas another is tactile?
3. The basic question: Why is there experience at all?
It is clear that the sensorimotor approach makes a contri-
bution to (1) and (2). As for (1), the intra-modal aspect, con-
sider that the differences between a spherical and a cubical
object of sight correspond in part to differences in laws of
sensorimotor contingency. For example, there are systematic
changes in the character of the profile of a cubical object as
you move around it. These patterns of changes are totally un-
like the changes in sensory stimulation that occur as you walk
around a sphere. The visual quality of looking cubical is con-
stituted (at least in part) by your knowledge of how your vi-
sual stimulation will change as you move around it.
Intra-modal differences pertain to differences in the
objects of sight. Inter-modal differences pertain, rather, to
the differences in what you do when you encounter objects
through different sensory modalities. Moving your eyes to
the left or right will produce a change in sensory stimula-
tion related to an object if that object is being visually per-
ceived but not if it is being tactually perceived, or if it is be-
ing listened to. Likewise, stopping and unstopping your
ears affects your relation to things you are hearing, but not
your relation to things you are seeing. In general, in agree-
ment with a suggestion made previously by Pacherie (1999),
we argue that the sensory modalities differ from one an-
other in that they are governed by different laws of senso-
rimotor dependency.
But what of the basic question (3)? Can the sensorimo-
tor approach explain why activity drawing on knowledge of
sensorimotor contingencies gives rise to experience at all?
Several commentators challenge us on this score. Clark &
Toribio, for example, write that “Even if the contents of
our conscious visual experiences reflect ways of acting in
the world, the hard problem surely remains.” Oberauer as-
serts that we are victims of the illusion of thinking that sen-
sorimotor contingencies can do something that neural rep-
resentations cannot, namely explain the emergence of
consciousness. The Editor writes: “The point is that what
is seen is felt, not merely registered, processed, and acted
upon. To explain consciousness in terms of sensorimotor ac-
tion, one has to explain why and how any of that processing
is felt. . . .”
To make some headway, let us consider a fourth question
about the explanatory gap, this one intermediate between
questions (2) and (3).
29. The perceptual aspect: What is the basis of the dif-
ference between perceptual and nonperceptual awareness
of a thing? The contrast here is between conscious states
with sensory qualities and those without sensory qualities.
To deal with (29), compare your visual experience of a book
on the table in front of you with your nonperceptual aware-
ness of a book on your desk in the next room. Two features
sharply distinguish these two modes of awareness.
Bodiliness. Moving your body makes a difference to the
mode of your awareness of the book in front of you on the
table but not to the mode of your awareness of the book in
the next room. In particular, it is not just any body move-
ments that make a difference, but those that depend on the
Response/O’Regan & Noë: A sensorimotor account of vision and visual consciousness
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (2001) 24:5
1011

distinctively visual sensorimotor contingencies. For exam-
ple, blinking, eye movements, body or head movements
modulate your relation to the book in front of you but make
no difference at all to the book in the next room. Further-
more, if you reach out to move the book, or wave your hand
to obstruct it, or to cast it in shadow, there will be a change
in way the book affects your sensory systems. Such move-
ments make no similar difference to the way you are af-
fected by the book in the next room.
Grabbiness. The visual system is put together in such a
way that sudden changes in the visual field provoke an au-
tomatic orienting reflex. For example, if a mouse moves the
book suddenly, or if the lighting on the book changes
abruptly, this will grab your attention, and cause your eyes
to flick to the book. Thus, movements or changes in the
book immediately affect your sensory stimulation (just as
movements of the body do): you are (so to speak) “con-
nected” to the book. On the other hand, there is no such
sensitivity to movements of the book in the next room.
Bodiliness and Grabbiness affect your relation to the
book in front of you, but not your relation to the book in the
next room. This is what the difference between perceptual
awareness and nonperceptual awareness (or thought)
comes down to. We suggest that it is precisely the way in
which sensory stimulation is affected by movements of the
body (bodiliness) and movements of (or changes in) the ob-
ject (grabbiness), which give sensory experience its pecu-
liar, sensory, character. In other words, bodiliness and grab-
biness explain not only the difference between seeing
something and merely thinking about it (thus answering 29),
but they also explain why seeing something has the sort of
qualitative characteristics that it does. And crucially, bodi-
liness and grabbiness are concepts defined strictly in func-
tional terms, thereby providing a functional basis for the
difference between sensory and non-sensory experience.
With these considerations in place, we can now go fur-
ther and try to make clear how, with bodiliness and grabbi-
ness, the sensorimotor approach provides the key to closing
the explanatory gap. Nagel (1974) says that there is “some-
thing it is like” to have a sensory experience. Let us be more
precise and try to characterize exactly what it is like, taking
visual experience as an example.
First, visual experience is visual, rather than, say, tactual
or olfactory. Second, it is forcibly present to your con-
sciousness. Third, it is ongoing, that is, the experience seems
to be happening to you in a continuous way: its subjective
character lasts while the experience continues. Fourth, the
experience strikes us as ineffable, that is, though you ex-
perience it as possessing various qualities, the exact quali-
tative character escapes description in words.
We believe the sensorimotor approach allows us to ex-
plain each of these aspects of the quality of the experience.
To the extent, then, that the experience itself is constituted
by the presence of just these qualities, then the sensorimo-
tor account can explain why the experience occurs at all
(and so it can answer [3]).
First, as we have stated already, the visualness is ex-
plained by the character of the sensorimotor contingencies
produced by exploration mediated by the visual apparatus
and by the character of the sensory changes produced by
objects as they move in space.
Second, the sense of forcible presence is explained by
(1) grabbiness and (2) bodiliness. (1) the book forces itself
on us as present because any movement of the book causes
us to direct our attention (our processing resources) to it.
(2) The slightest movement of the relevant parts of our bod-
ies modifies the sensory stimulation in relation to the book.
Metaphorically, it is as if we are in contact with the book.
Third, we can explain ongoingness in a similar way in
terms of bodiliness and grabbiness. The sense of an ongo-
ing qualitative state consists, (a) in our understanding that
movements of the body can currently give rise to the rele-
vant pattern of sensory stimulation (bodiliness), and (b) in
our understanding that the slightest change in what we are
looking at will grab our attention and in that way force itself
on us. In this way we explain why it seems to us as if there
is something ongoing in us without actually supposing that
there is anything ongoing, and in particular, without sup-
posing that there is a corresponding ongoing physical
mechanism or process. Just as our awareness of detail pre-
sent in the world is explained by the fact that we have ac-
cess to that detail, and that we know that we do – this is the
significance of the idea of the world as external memory
(O’Regan 1992) – so our awareness of the experience as on-
going is explained by the fact that we encounter a sensory
event whenever we look.
Fourth, the sensorimotor approach can also explain the
ineffability of experience. The nature of our contact with
objects of perception is determined by the very compli-
cated laws linking commands given along thousands of mo-
tor nerves with the associated input received along thou-
sands of sensory input fibres. Obviously these laws, though
they are registered and distinguished by the brain, are not
themselves what is available for use in our decisions, judge-
ments, and rational behavior. We cannot describe the laws
– all we can do is put them to use. Just as we can ride a bi-
cycle, drive a car, and tie our shoelaces without being able
to describe in detail everything these skills involve, our
sense of the ineffability of experience is explained by the
fact that we lack access to the very complicated laws gov-
erning sensorimotor contingencies involved in sensory ex-
ploration.
R2. Robots and chauvinism
We argue that the peculiar sensory quality of perceptual ex-
perience derives from the fact that the associated sensori-
motor contingencies have bodiliness and grabbiness. How-
ever, to be perceptually aware of an object is not only to
interact with it in ways drawing on knowledge of sensori-
motor contingencies, it is to make use of one’s skillful in-
teraction for guiding behavior and other forms of thought
and action (such as speech). This amounts to the require-
ment that, to actually visually experience an item, to see it,
one must have a kind of higher-order control of one’s track-
ing activity. This kind of control corresponds to the partic-
ular use we made of the term “awareness,” or what Malcolm
(1984) and Rosenthal (1997) have called “transitive con-
sciousness”1: but note, crucially, that – like sensorimotor
contingences themselves, – this control is a functionally de-
scribable capacity.
We could build a robot with knowledge of sensorimotor
contingencies on the one hand, and with the further ability
to make use of information about its exercise of this knowl-
edge in its planning and acting, on the other hand. If indeed
such a robot were to be embodied and situated in such a
way that its perceptual encounters were characterized by
Response/O’Regan & Noë: A sensorimotor account of vision and visual consciousness
1012
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (2001) 24:5

bodiliness and grabbiness, then it would be correct to say –
and the robot would agree! – that there is “something it is
like” for it to perceive.
In this way we meet Clark & Toribio’s worry about ping-
pong playing robots head on. They write:
A good ping-pong playing robot, which uses visual input, learns
about its own sensorimotor contingencies, and puts this knowl-
edge to use in the service of simple goals (e.g., to win, but not
by too many points), would meet all the constraints laid out. Yet
it seems implausible to depict such a robot (and they do exist –
see e.g., Andersson 1988) as enjoying even some kind of mod-
est visual experience. Surely someone could accept all that
O&N offer, but treat it simply as an account of how certain vi-
sual experiences get their contents, rather than as a dissolution
of the so-called hard problem of visual qualia.
We agree that, at least as described, it is implausible that
Clark & Toribio’s ping-pong playing robot would be per-
ceptually conscious. But this is exactly what the sensori-
motor approach would predict of such a robot. As it is
described, it is simply far too simple to be a plausible can-
didate for perceptual consciousness of the kind usually at-
tributed to animals or humans. This simplicity has several
dimensions. For one thing, the robot lacks too much of the
background capacities (intentions, thoughts, concepts, lan-
guage) for the attribution of experiences to it to make much
sense. For another, its sensorimotor mastery is reasonably
supposed to be pretty simple in comparison with the ex-
ceedingly complicated effects of movement on the sensory
systems of animals. Nevertheless, we would claim that once
we imagine a robot that not only masters sensorimotor con-
tingencies, but makes use of that mastery to engage with
the world in a thoughtful and adaptable way, it becomes
necessary to say that it has (at least primitive) visual expe-
riences.
Block raises a similar objection to Clark & Toribio’s.
He points out that the sensorimotor contingencies govern-
ing the visual experience of a person who was both para-
lyzed and almost completely blind would be simple enough
that they could be programmed into a laptop computer. But
it is plainly false, Block reasons, that the laptop would have
the visual experiences enjoyed by the nearly blind paralytic.
This is meant to be a reductio of the sensorimotor view. The
argument fails, however, because it is not a consequence of
our view that the laptop would have visual experiences like
that of the nearly blind paralytic. The simplest way to show
this is to consider that there is no reason to think that pro-
graming sensorimotor contingencies into the laptop would
give the computer knowledge of sensorimotor contingencies
in the relevant sense. By “knowledge” we mean practical
mastery, that is, familiarity with the ways sensory stimula-
tion varies as a function of bodily movement. It is difficult
to see how a machine without a body could have this kind
of know-how. Another relevant consideration is that, con-
trary to the laptop, a legally blind paralytic would be able to
perceive in other sensory modalities. For example, when
the incandescent object comes closer, you would feel its
heat. Your limited visual stimulus would be correlated with
nonvisual sensory stimuli. But there are other reasons to
conclude that Block’s laptop would not have perceptual
consciousness. Importantly, the laptop lacks not only capac-
ities for bodily movement, but also capacities for thought
and perceptual attention. Suppose that Block’s laptop were
now endowed with understanding and with a body that
functioned (to some degree) like ours. Of such a robot, it is
surely conceivable (indeed probable) that it would be per-
ceptually conscious.
These considerations are related to a second criticism ad-
vanced by Clark & Toribio, namely that of “sensorimotor
chauvinism,” namely, the view that only creatures with bod-
ies exactly like ours can have experiences qualitatively like
our experiences. They suggest, in response, that “there
seems no a priori reason to believe that every difference in
SMCs will make a difference to the experienced content,
even if the SMCs (some of them, at some level) are indeed
active in determining the content.” As Clark & Toribio
suggest, the key issue here is level. For instance, we argue
that it is reasonable to think of Bach-y-Rita’s TVSS as a kind
of vision (quasi-vision, tactile-vision) because there is a level
at which the laws of sensorimotor contingency governing vi-
sion operate in the domain of TVSS. Of course, TVSS pro-
ceeds without use of the eyes or the visual pathways – thus
TVSS is a way of seeing only if we think of it at a sufficiently
coarse grain. Our view thus allows for the judgment that
creatures with radically different kinds of physical make up
can enjoy an experience which is, to an important degree,
the same in content and quality. But it also allows for the
possibility (indeed, the necessity) that where there are
physical differences, there are also qualitative differences.
To this extent, our proposal deviates from classical func-
tionalism. That is, we are rejecting a certain way of think-
ing about the multiple-realizability of functional systems. In
particular, we hold, as Clark & Toribio are right to point out,
that differences in our bodies (and thus in sensorimotor
contingencies) will make a difference to our experiential
states. One way to put our point is as follows: only a crea-
ture with a body like ours could have input/output relations
like ours. We agree with the functionalists, though, that it is
the input/output relations that matter. Moreover, we agree
that it is not intrinsic qualities of the neural material which
instantiate brain processes that matter for consciousness.
What matters is the patterns of sensorimotor contingency.
R3. Are there qualia? What are experiences?
It was not our aim to deny that there is experience, nor to
deny that experience has a qualitative character. Our aim,
rather, has been to explain experience and to explain its
qualitative character. We believe that once you have an-
swered the various questions we answer in the target arti-
cle – what makes a conscious state perceptual as opposed
to nonperceptual? what makes an experience a visual expe-
rience as opposed to a tactile experience? what makes a vi-
sual experience an experience as of a cube rather than as of
a sphere? what makes an experience have the qualities that
are specific to sensation, namely, forcible presence, ongo-
ingness, and ineffableness – there just isn’t any qualitative
residue left over which still needs explanation. If we use the
term “qualia” to refer precisely to this sort of qualitative
residue, we claim in the target article that there are, in this
restricted sense of the word, no qualia. Let us add a few
words of explanation here.
Consider the would-be quale that you enjoy when you
see something red, for example. Strawson (1989) writes:
Most . . . will agree that the notion of the qualitative character
of colour-experience can reasonably be taken for granted. And
for present purposes, a sufficient reply to those who disagree is
simple, as follows. Consider your present visual experience.
Response/O’Regan & Noë: A sensorimotor account of vision and visual consciousness
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (2001) 24:5
1013

Look at the bookshelf. (Get out some of the brightest books.)
There you have it.
We are inclined to respond to this argument in two ways.
First, we are inclined to point at the fact that our visual ex-
perience appears to us as being sensation-like (rather than
thought-like, say) in that this experience consists precisely
in being red (and not some other color, nor a sound or
smell), and in that the experience imposes itself on us in a
forcible and ongoing way. These are precisely the features
of the experience that the sensorimotor view explains. The
experience is as of red rather than as of green thanks to the
subtly different patterns of sensorimotor contingency gov-
erning our encounter with the red surface (as compared to
a green one). The presence and ongoingness of our experi-
ence consist in our continuous access and in our ever-ready
responsiveness to the redness (i.e., to knowledge of senso-
rimotor contingencies with their associated bodiliness and
grabbiness).
There is a second way we are inclined to respond to
Strawson’s argument. It is not at all clear what we are com-
manded to do. “Look at the bookshelf . . . . There you have
it.” When you look at the books, what do you encounter?
The books. Do you encounter all of them all at once? No.
But you have access to them all at once and wherever you
do look you find a book. So you take them to be there in
front of you and to be aware of them (in the sense that you
are connected to them by laws of sensorimotor contingency
that you understand). But all of this isn’t something that just
happens, as it were, in a flash. It is something you do. You
move your eyes here, there, back and forth, now here, now
there. You think about what you see. You notice this, are dis-
tracted by that. The experience you have looking at the
books is not something that occurs in you or to you, it is
something you do. And when you catalog what you do in
acting out this experience, you don’t need to count any ad-
ditional residue over and above the eye movements and the
books and their qualities (such as the red quale).
This idea is challenged by Broackes on something like
Rylean, ordinary-language grounds. “The experience of
swimming in the rain,” he writes, “is something we get while
performing that act. The swimming is something we do, the
experience is not.” Broackes’ point seems to be that al-
though having an experience often involves doing things
such as exploring with your eyes, your fingers, sniffing your
nose, and so on, the things that you do don’t constitute ex-
periences, rather they provide experience.
We agree that this is certainly what people say and be-
lieve. However, we suggest that people are wrong: in fact,
your belief that you are in a special kind of “seeing redness”
state (when looking at an apple, say) derives from the fact
that you are connected to the redness in a special, very in-
timate way, by virtue of bodily, grabby sensorimotor con-
tingencies. Any movement of your eyes produces a change
in stimulation you are receiving from the apple. Any move-
ment of the apple (or change, e.g., in its illumination) will
grab your attention. It is as if we are in a state which is sat-
urated by the feeling of redness, when in fact we are only
poised and attuned and ready and expectant and capable.
It was taking this stance that allowed us to bridge the ex-
planatory gap and to make a number of empirical predic-
tions. This idea is at the core of our approach. Admittedly,
it is counter-intuitive.
Broackes is certainly right that we move too fast against
qualia when we say that qualia are meant to be properties of
experiential states and there are no such states. Our dis-
missal of qualia was meant to apply only to the restricted no-
tion of qualia conceived as the residue which cannot be ac-
counted for from a functional approach. In particular, we
can certainly agree with Broackes that standing for a few
minutes in front of an Ellsworth Kelly painting can put you
into a kind of perceptual “state” and keep you there. We
deny, though, that there is any sense in which this supposed
state is unitary. To be in such a “state” consists of several
things. Your atttitude to the painting is organized by your
thoughtfulness, your attentiveness, by the manner in which
you look at the picture and reflect on it. We believe that even
when we stop to appreciate the redness in the painting, say,
we are not “receiving” an atom-like quale. Instead, we are at
that moment integrating into our rational behavior, our cur-
rent mastery of the sensorimotor contingencies of red.
Blackmore criticizes our account of qualia from a differ-
ent perspective, namely, the standpoint of Dennettian skep-
ticism about consciousness. She cites Dennett (1991) with
approval: “the actual phenomenology? There is no such
thing.” And she presses against us the thought that in ad-
mitting that there are facts of the matter about perceptual
phenomenology, we are sliding back into the Cartesian
Theater. Dennett’s heterophenomenological perspective
is a rich, provocative, and important one. Its strength con-
sists in its ability to take on board all the offerings of first-
person reflection while dissociating those offerings from
claims to privilege or metaphysical insight. It may be – in-
deed, it is likely – that our phenomenological analysis can
be accommodated by heterophenomenology.
R4. Are we behaviorists?
Block, Harnad (the Editor), Kurthen, Cohen venture
the criticism that ours is just a new version of (a tired old)
behaviorism. This criticism might seem plausible insofar as
we deny that there are qualia (in the restricted sense of an
inexplicable qualitative residue: see sects. 6.3, 6.4 of the tar-
get article and R3 above) and we assert that we can explain
perception in terms of patterns of interdependence be-
tween stimulation and action (which certainly has a behav-
iorist stimulus-response ring to it). But there are important
differences between our view and any version of philo-
sophical behaviorism with which we are acquainted. First,
as stressed in R3 above, we do not deny that there are ex-
periences or that experience has a qualitative character.
Second, our theory takes as primitive the idea that per-
ceivers have knowledge of sensorimotor contingencies. The
basis of the qualitative character of experience, in our view,
is the perceiver’s knowledge of the interdependence be-
tween stimulus and bodily movement. Third, according to
the sensorimotor approach, it is not the case that mental
states (experiential states) are logical constructions of actual
and possible behavior states.
Said in another way, our explanation of sensory conscious-
ness is not simply based on sensorimotor contingencies.
Sensory consciousness arises, we say, when the person is
currently making use of the fact that certain sensorimotor
contingencies are being obeyed. For this to be the case, the
brain must be doing more than just S-R. First, it must have
abstracted from the sensorimotor contingencies categories
Response/O’Regan & Noë: A sensorimotor account of vision and visual consciousness
1014
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (2001) 24:5

that allow them to be classified into different sensory mo-
dalities and, within these, into different categories like red,
blue, green. This is a form of concept formation, and is not
just learning of behaviors, contrary to what Van Gulick sug-
gests. Second, it must be making use of the fact that these
sensorimotor contingencies are currently being obeyed.
This is concept manipulation as might be done in an expert
system or AI device. All this is therefore not behaviorism.
Block also criticizes us for being behaviorist. He writes:
“O’Regan & Noë declare that the qualitative character of
experience is constituted by the nature of the sensorimotor
contingencies at play when we perceive.” He characterizes
sensorimotor contingencies as a “highly restricted set of in-
put-output relations.” The problem for us, he states, is that
our view would appear to have two “clearly wrong” conse-
quences: (1) that any two systems that share the highly re-
stricted set of input-output relations are experientially the
same; and (2) that any two systems that share experience
must share the highly restricted set of input-output restric-
tions. Contrary to what Block thinks we claim, Block ex-
plains, “experience is a matter of what mediates between
input and output, not input-output relations all by them-
selves.”
However, Block has represented us incorrectly. Sensori-
motor contingencies are laws describing input-output rela-
tions. But it is not sensorimotor contingencies, as such, that
“constitute” the qualitative character of perceptual experi-
ence. It is the perceiver’s exercise of mastery of laws of sen-
sorimotor contingency that provides the basis for the char-
acter of experience. Our relation to our environment when
we perceive is bodily and grabby and it is this fact, together
with the fact that we implicitly understand the nature of this
relation, that explains the qualitative nature of experience.
In light of this clarification of our position, consider, first,
that this is hardly behaviorist reductionism. As said above,
our view depends on the attribution of knowledge to the
perceiver. Second, this means that we can accept Block’s
observation that experience mediates inputs and outputs
and is not simply constituted by those relations. We dis-
agree with Block, on the other hand, on the character of
that mediation. For Block, the inputs cause experiences in
us which in turn cause behavior (output). For us, in con-
trast, skillful activity (consisting of behavior and sensory
stimulation) is the experience. We do not reduce the expe-
rience to the input-output relations themselves.
What of the two consequences of our view that Block
gives? We reject (1). It is not the case that any two systems
that share the same input-output relations will be experi-
entially the same, unless, of course, they also agree in their
skillful mastery of laws of sensorimotor contingency. They
might not do so. Consider, for example, someone who is
adapted to reversing goggles and someone who has just put
them on. These two individuals will agree in their input-
output relations but they will not agree in experience. Con-
sequence (2), on the other hand, seems right: Same knowl-
edge of sensorimotor contingencies, then same experience.
It is worthwhile, though, to repeat a point made above in
connection with Clark & Toribio. For two systems to have
the same knowledge of sensorimotor contingencies all the
way down, they will have to have bodies that are identical
all the way down (at least in relevant respects). For only
bodies that are alike in low-level detail can be functionally
alike in the relevant ways.
R5. Dreaming, hearing, paralysis: Perceptual
experience without action
Is action necessary for experience? Surely dreaming, med-
itation, tachistoscopic vision, hearing, pain, perception dur-
ing paralysis, hallucinations such as phantom limbs, tinni-
tus, phosphenes, Penfield’s experiments – all these are
cases where people have perceptions without action being
involved, and, as pointed out by Blackmore, Humphrey,
Niebur, Nusbaum et al., O’Brien & Opie, Pylyshyn,
and Virsu & Vanni, they might pose problems for our ap-
proach. Further, Fischer gives an intriguing example
where perception of the Zöllner illusion is more veridical
without eye movements than with them, which would ap-
pear to contradict our theory. To respond to these objec-
tions, it is necessary to try to disentangle different strands
of criticism. This is our aim in this section.
It is not our claim that action is necessary for experienc-
ing. Our claim, rather, is that knowledge of the ways move-
ments effect sensory stimulation is necessary for experi-
ence. It is not movement as such, but the consequences of
potential movement that play a role in our view. For this
reason there is nothing in our view that rules out contem-
plative seeing, or that would lead us to think that a para-
lyzed person would be unable to see (providing that the
person had at some time previously had some kind of con-
trol over her visual input).
This is enough to make it clear how we can hear even
when we hold our eyes and bodies absolutely still. As Virsu
& Vanni note, through the course of its development, an
organism will have integrated and abstracted laws of senso-
rimotor contingency particular to each sensory modality. At
a later stage, when it is presented with a sensory input
which is unambiguously linked to one or other such senso-
rimotor contingencies, it will implicitly “assume” that if it
moved in the appropriate way, the changes in sensory input
would be those that are normally associated with that type
of stimulation. Thus, since normally input coming through
the auditory nerve will change in certain ways when the
head or body moves, when later, without moving, the or-
ganism is stimulated through the auditory nerve, the stim-
ulation will be perceived as belonging to the auditory
modality. This then provides an explanation of audition
without head movements. Similar arguments can be made
for brief visual stimulations, phosphenes, and stimulation of
visual cortex à la Penfield, as well as for phantom limbs.
Niebur gives the example of a “three-dimensional lump
of matter, like a mass of modelling clay, that is somehow
moved by internal actuators in a complex, unpredictable
way, without you having any possibility of influencing or
predicting its motion and the forces it exerts on your hands
(i.e., there is no ‘mastery’).” Niebur continues, “According
to the claims of the target article, the lump should not be
perceived since the perceiver does not interact with it in
‘lawful’ ways. This seems absurd; the lump will surely be
perceived, and probably quite vividly so.” First of all, we
would not expect the subject to fail to perceive the lump
just because its movements relative to the hands are actu-
ated from within. Many laws of tactile-motor contingency
would be in effect. For example, if you withdrew your hands
you would no long receive stimulation. There is therefore
no reason for doubting one would feel the lump. But let us
ask: Would one also be able to feel its shape, to feel it as hav-
Response/O’Regan & Noë: A sensorimotor account of vision and visual consciousness
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (2001) 24:5
1015

ing such and such a shape? It might be very difficult to ex-
tract the relevant knowledge of the operative sensorimotor
contingencies without actively exploring with your hands.
Pylyshyn writes
while it is true that we often use our visual system to determine
our actions, we also use it to find out what is in the world sim-
ply because we want to know . . . as we do when we watch TV
or visit an art gallery or read a book . . . . Much of what we see
guides our action only indirectly by changing what we believe
and perhaps what we want.
There is nothing in this that we disagree with. Pylyshyn,
like Goodale, seems to make the mistake of confusing the
claim that seeing depends on capacities for action with the
claim that all seeing is for action. Ours is not a theory about
what vision is for, it is a theory about what vision is: it is a
mode of interaction with the world drawing on knowledge
of sensorimotor contingencies.
O’Brien & Opie and Revonsuo raise the question of
dreams. Revonsuo believes that the phenomenon of dream-
ing shows that “the immediate causal conditions sufficient
for bringing about the full range of subjective conscious ex-
periences must reside inside the brain.” This is so because
when we dream we do not (cannot) move our bodies in in-
teraction with the world. O’Brien & Opie make the same
point, adding that “many theorists think it reasonable to
surmise that dreams and hallucinations indicate something
important about the nature of visual experience more gen-
erally, namely, that even ‘veridical’ experiences are con-
structed by the brain, and thus implicate internal represen-
tations.”
There seem to be two issues here. First, whether our
view can account for dreams and visual images. Second,
whether neural activity is sufficient for such occurrences.
We will discuss the second of these at greater length below
in connection with our analysis of the role of brain in con-
sciousness more generally. Here it suffices to point out that
our view does not predict that it should be impossible to
have visual experiences in the absence of movements. It
would predict only that it would be impossible to have vi-
sual expriences in the absence of knowledge of sensorimo-
tor contingencies. There is every reason to believe that
dreamers possess knowledge of laws of sensorimotor con-
tingency. It is also not part of our view to deny that the brain
is not (in some sense at least) the seat of our knowledge of
sensorimotor contingencies. We are, then, happy to accept
the consequence that neural activity during dreaming is
sufficient to produce the resulting experiences.
Although we are not expert in the psychology of dream-
ing, we are skeptical of Revonsuo’s claim that “the form of
dream experience is identical to that of waking experience.”
In the article we noted that it seems to be a hallmark of
dream-experiences that they are unstable with respect to
detail. So, for example, as reported by the dream research
of Stephen LaBerge (personal communication), in a dream
the writing on a sign will be different every time you look at
it. Without the world to act as a repository of information,
details in the dream are in flux. In light of this we would pre-
dict (although we cannot now establish this) that there will
be important systematic differences between the content of
dreams and waking experiences, and that these differences
will correspond to the fact that dreamers cannot look
around and check how things are, they can only dream that
they can do this.
In connection with this family of issues we would like to
discuss briefly the suggestion of Nusbaum et al. that we
should broaden our account to include not just motor be-
havior, but attentionally controlled exploration. In a sim-
ilar vein, Virsu & Vanni suggest the concept of sensori-
attentional contingencies. Hochberg (with examples of
aperture viewing and interpretation of ambiguous 3D mo-
tions) similarly suggests that we should broaden our notion
of sensorimotor contingencies to include not just coupling
between action and sensory input, but also between differ-
ent kinds of sensory input, as these are constrained by the
nature of the physical world.
The cornerstone of the argument in our paper was the
idea that we can close the explanatory gap by developing
the consequences of the active, skill-based character of per-
ceptual exploration. Experience arises not thanks to the ex-
istence of an internal representation, but thanks to the mas-
tery and exercise of perceptual exploration. This may seem
counterintuitive at first, but it enables us, we think, to ex-
plain experience without finding a special kind of physical
mechanism to generate it. To the extent that the basis of our
approach is that experiences are things we do, not things
that happen in us, nothing prevents us from adopting Nus-
baum et al.’s and Virsu & Vanni’s suggestion of using sen-
sori-attentional contingencies instead of sensorimotor con-
tingencies, since both are modes of action. Indeed, we
would agree with Nusbaum et al. and Virsu & Vanni that in-
sofar as pattern recognition and classification are con-
cerned, the notions of sensori-attentional contingencies, or
equivalently, hypothesis testing or matching of sensory in-
put with internal knowledge, are certainly very plausible.
Indeed we are convinced that such processes are precisely
those that are involved in everyday pattern recognition, and
for that reason, as noted by Scholl & Simons, at certain
places in our paper we included flicks of attention as well
as flicks of the eye among possible sensorimotor contin-
gencies, even if there is no motor component.
A crucial feature of our theory, however, is the involve-
ment of the body in experience. The peculiar, sensory, qual-
ity of our perceptual experience consists (in part) in the fact
that movements of the body produce changes in our sen-
sory stimulation. The content of perception is certainly in
part the result of inferential processes, as O’Brien & Opie
stress; but the quality of experience, is determined by sen-
sorimotor contingencies and the bodiliness and grabbiness
that goes with them.
R6. Does perceptual consciousness require
representations in the head?
Our claims about representations provoked vehement crit-
icism from many commentators.
Broackes argues that representations exist, but that they
are fragmented, distributed, and multi-level. Pani argues
that internal representations must be used in object recog-
nition, and Cohen gives examples showing that the visual
system extracts and categorizes information about the en-
vironment, and says this shows there are visual representa-
tions. Tatler and De Graef et al. give examples of infor-
mation that is stored across eye saccades, showing the
existence of an almost iconic internal representation. Ryan
& Cohen and Hardcastle show how information acquired
without awareness can influence later behavior, and say this
shows there are internal representations. Ansorge et al.
Response/O’Regan & Noë: A sensorimotor account of vision and visual consciousness
1016
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (2001) 24:5

remind us of an important body of data showing uncon-
scious influences of visual information on motor responses.
Gallese & Keysers cite mirror neurons as examples of in-
ternal representations that can be used not only to control
actions but to perceive those performed by others. Niebur
argues that internal neural responses such as oriented bar
detectors are transformed versions of sensory input that
constitute internal representations.
We are firmly convinced – and the data cited by the com-
mentators provide proof – that the visual system stores in-
formation; and that this information – whether acquired
consciously or unconsciously, whether iconic or abstract,
whether local or distributed – influences the perceiver’s be-
havior and mental states either directly or indirectly. If this
is what is meant when it is insisted that perceiving depends
on representations, then we do not deny that there are rep-
resentations.
There is of course another sense in which our view relies
on the existence of representations. Knowledge of the laws
of sensorimotor contingency themselves must surely be
represented. We readily grant this.
However, we reject two other distinct but related claims
about the role of representations in perception and per-
ceptual consciousness. The first of these concerns what
Marr (1982) called “the computational problem” of vision,
for example, what vision does, or what function the brain
computes when it gives rise to vision. Marr’s answer, roughly,
is that vision is a process whereby the brain transforms one
kind of representation into another, specifically, the retinal
image into a representation of the three-dimensional scene.
In the target article, we give two different kinds of reasons
for rejecting Marr’s representational account. First, we
doubt that we enjoy perceptual experiences with the kind
of content Marr’s visual function is supposed to produce. As
change blindness, inattentional blindness, and other exper-
iments cited in the target article show, we do not have ex-
periences that represent the environment in that way. Sec-
ond, we doubt that we need representations of such detail
in order to explain the sort of conscious experiences we do
actually enjoy.
We can have a flawless, unified, continuous experience
of the environment without having flawless, unified, con-
tinuous internal representations. The reason is that seeing
is not contemplating an internal representation, but doing
something of a visual nature with the information available
to the brain. Schlesinger’s interesting example of a repre-
sentation-less reinforcement learning neural network that
tracks objects as though it had representations of them, is a
concrete instantiation of our idea. A consequence of the
idea is also that there is no need to postulate filling-in mech-
anisms to fill in the blind spot, saccade-suppression mech-
anisms, and extra-retinal signals to compensate for eye
movements, synchrony of neural firing to provide for bind-
ing, and so on. Indeed, when neurophysiologists find neu-
rons that look like they are fulfilling such functions, we
claim they cannot in fact be doing so. Consider a neuron
that responds to a virtual contour. How can the firing of a
particular neuron, by itself (that is, isolated from the rest of
the brain), make me have the impression of a contour? It
cannot. But connecting that neuron to other neurons would
not appear to help either, because, after all, neural firing,
no matter how complex or recurrent or synchronized, is just
neural firing, not sensation. A related point concerns the
mirror neurons referred to by Gallese & Keysers. Mirror
neurons undoubtedly play a role in the processes involved
when macaque monkeys recognize gestures. But the role
they play cannot be the role of providing the sensation of
seeing a gesture! Because, if the firing of mirror neurons
provided the sensation of recognizing gestures, one would
have to postulate some magical sensation-imbuing power to
such neurons (or, to the networks that those neurons are
connected to). So what do mirror neurons do? They pre-
sumably provide information to the brain circuits which
control the multifarious things that macaque monkeys can
potentially do when they act in response to gestures.
The second claim about representations that we reject
concerns perceptual consciousness: that seeing could be a
matter of having certain kinds of representations in the
head. The existence of representations of the environment
are neither sufficient nor necessary for seeing. That they are
not sufficient is shown by consideration of the fact that,
though people have very nice representations of the envi-
ronment in the form of the images on their retinas, having
the retinal image does not make people see. Seeing lies in the
making use of the representation, not in the having of the
representation. Because of this, the actual format of the rep-
resentation (whether it’s metric-preserving or distorted,
iconic or abstract) is less important than whether, and how,
that representation can be put to use in the sensorimotor
activity of the organism. The brain may abstract informa-
tion in the environment into a form that can be used in an
open-ended range of applications, as Van Gulick says. But
just having those abstract multi-purpose representations
does not account for the what-it-is-like of seeing.
Of course, as Tatler and De Graef et al. point out, it is
important to investigate the exact nature of information
that is stored in the brain, and this can be done in the man-
ner their very interesting experiments suggest. But finding
iconic information in the low level, or middle-level, visual
system does not explain why the world looks iconic to us.
An example of where our approach to the question of in-
ternal representations finds support is in the domain of mo-
tor control, as pointed out by Smeets & Brenner. If one
takes the view that seeing a moving ball is making an in-
ternal representation of it, one is easily led to the miscon-
ception that this representation should resemble what a
physicist would construct, that is, a representation where
distance, position, speed, and time are linked by coherent
physical laws. It then becomes problematic to understand
how, as in the Duncker and waterfall illusions and in the
flash lag effect, perceived position and perceived speed
seem not to be coherently linked, or why size illusions af-
fect lifting force but not grip aperture (cf. Smeets & Bren-
ner). On the other hand, such findings are easier to com-
prehend under our view, according to which perception
involves assimilating possibly independently acquired sen-
sorimotor contingencies which have no necessary internal
consistency. Velichkovsky & Pannasch also provide an
example of an oculomotor distractor effect which may sup-
port our view. Lacquaniti & Zago provide further sup-
porting data for the idea that different, more or less indepen-
dent sensorimotor loops are used in perception: judgments
of size and distance of moving objects constitute one type
of visual perception, but another kind of visual perception,
ruled by different sensorimotor loops, is involved in catch-
ing objects. Curiously, Lacquaniti & Zago take this to be
contrary to our theory, when in fact it is exactly what we pre-
dict. Another example is provided by Roberson et al., who
Response/O’Regan & Noë: A sensorimotor account of vision and visual consciousness
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (2001) 24:5
1017

show that relative localization of auditory and visual stimuli
depends on an observer’s conceiving them as bound. This
would be difficult to comprehend on a physicist-type view
of the representation of the world. Still, in contradiction to
our view, Roberson et al. mention neural connectivity be-
tween dorsal and ventral streams as possible substrates for
binding: this may be the case, but then again, as we suggest,
binding need not be instantiated in the brain at all.
Let us also address an interesting apparent paradox
pointed out by Tatler and by Scholl & Simons. These
commentators argue that the notion of sensorimotor con-
tingency actually requires internal representations: after all,
say these commentators, in order to register a change in
sensory input when a body motion is made, an internal trace
(representation!) of the initial and final state must be pre-
served in order to allow comparison. But the paradox is only
apparent. We agree that the visual system stores informa-
tion from moment to moment, and to some extent from sac-
cade to saccade, and this is what is used to evaluate changes.
But these changes are generally not available to awareness,
and this stored information is not what is seen! Seeing, as
we keep stressing, is not having an internal representation.
Finally, we would like to clarify one misunderstanding.
Pace Wright, we do not claim that “all supporters of an in-
ternal presentation are committed to there being ‘red neu-
rons’ in the brain.” It isn’t clear to us why Wright takes this
to be our view. What we do believe is that certain arguments
about the neural basis of experience seem to rely on mis-
takes just like the mistake of supposing that to see red there
must be red neurons. As we explain in the target article, the
very idea that there is a binding problem would seem to rest
on just the assumption that, sensuous contents must indeed
be like what controls their rise (to change slightly the phrase
of Sellars’s that Wright cites).
R7. The brain in consciousness
The role of the brain in perceptual consciousness is another
topic on which we have drawn much criticism. Many com-
mentators misunderstand us as denying that the brain is
causally necessary for perceptual consciousness. Lamme &
Landman ask whether anything other than neural events
could explain consciousness and they propose that reen-
trant processes can do the job. Bach-y-Rita & Hasse com-
plain that we seem to be throwing the brain out with the
bath water, and suggest the importance of reentrant brain
mechanisms as contributing to perceptual consciousness.
Revonsuo says that consciousness is a real biological phe-
nomenon in the brain, and notes that dreaming is proof that
only the brain, with no input from outside, is necessary for
perceptual awareness. Rees & Frith suggest that the su-
perior parietal lobule is a brain locus that correlates consis-
tently with awareness.
It seems probable that only a dualist could claim the
brain plays no role in consciousness, and we are not dual-
ists. Our claim, rather, is that many neuroscientists seem to
be looking in the wrong direction for an account of the
brain-basis of consciousness. We do not think that we will
ever discover the Neural Correlates of Consciousness
(NCC) – the neural system whose activity makes con-
sciousness happen, or which is the event of consciousness
itself. Our reason for this is straightforward: a visual expe-
rience is not an occurrence in the mind, that is produced by
neural activity. Seeing is, in ways we explain, something we
do, drawing on a range of sensorimotor (and also concep-
tual skills). Indeed, as we argue in the target article, we
think this is what seeing actually seems like. Careful con-
sideration reveals that when you see you do not encounter
an inner something that is, so to speak, ongoing, buzzing,
continuous. Your perceptual encounter is a state in which
you have access and in which you know you have access.
This knowledge makes it seem almost as though you are in
contact with that to which you have access. But if there is
no ongoing, buzzing, continuous state, then there is no on-
going, buzzing, continuous neural process that we need ap-
peal to. (See Noë & Thompson, in press, and Chalmers
2000 for a critical discussion of the NCC research pro-
gram.)
We can illustrate the point by way of a comparison. Con-
sider what one might call the BCL: the biological correlate
of life in humans. Clearly, a “contrastive analysis” of the
kind Baars (1993) defends would show that the heart beat
is an extremely reliable indicator of life. Thus, the heart
beat is a BCL to the same extent as activity in the superior
parietal lobule is a NCC. Having isolated this important
correlate of life, the next step would then be to ask how it
might contribute to generating life. But this would be an er-
ror. We should not think that the heart beat generates (or
contributes to the generation) of life. What we mean by life
is a complicated range of abilities (e.g., the ability to repro-
duce, respire, grow, eat, move, etc.). The beating heart is
causally necessary for organisms like us to live. Neither the
beating heart, nor any other physiological system or pro-
cess, or even the sum of all them, generate life. Being “alive”
is just what we say of systems that are made up in this way
and that can do these sorts of things.
Our claim about consciousness is that consciousness
stands to the brain as life stands to the heart. It reflects a
simplistic account of what life is, or what consciousness is,
to think that the brain produces consciousness or that the
heart (or any other physiological processes) produce life.
What then is the correct way to approach neuroscience,
in the context of our theory? We suggest that instead of
seeking for the NCC, we should seek for the neural mech-
anisms that underlie each of the many capacities that un-
derlie consciousness. We should not expect them to come
together at any unifying locus in the brain. The conse-
quences of this view have not been widely explored as yet.
Indeed, Bartolomeo & Chokron note that much work
could be done in exploring the neuropsychological evi-
dence in favour of this view (and they discuss an interesting
aspect of unilateral neglect related to the concept of grab-
biness). Another interesting line of work in this respect is
the research showing separate functions of dorsal and ven-
tral systems in visual perception. Goodale notes that we
may have got the exact relations between our theory and
these two systems wrong, but certainly the fact that there
should be separate systems underlying the different facets
of visual consciousness is in favor of our approach. With re-
spect to Goodale’s criticism of the distinction between ap-
paratus and object-related contingencies, our point was
perhaps not clear in the target article: our idea is that a sta-
tistical device that analyzed input-output relations would
first extract invariants that are related to the way the ob-
server’s body changes sensory input. Grasping an object,
and properties of objects that influence that grasp, are part
of this first level of statistics. All these are essentially coded
Response/O’Regan & Noë: A sensorimotor account of vision and visual consciousness
1018
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (2001) 24:5

in ego-centric coordinates. At the second level are proper-
ties of objects that are invariant with respect to the ob-
server’s body, for example: size, color, shape, as considered
independently of the observer’s position, in other words, in
object-centered coordinates. What this means, as found in
Goodale’s example, is that someone lacking this stage would
be able to grasp, but would not be able to describe the
shape of an object. It’s worth mentioning that Goodale’s
view stumbles on the problem of the explanatory gap. Just
what is it, one might ask, about neural activity in the ventral
sream that gives rise to visual experience?
R8. Coherent theory or untestable 
mish-mash of old ideas?
Scholl & Simons believe that our approach is just a bric a
brac of old ideas, combined to yield an untestable mess.
As concerns our relation to earlier researchers, Scholl
& Simons, as well as Kim (who also provides evidence in
favor of our theory), note the debt we owe to Gibson. Sim-
ilarity to Gibson in some respects is also noticed by Pyly-
shyn (who notes an important dissimilarity as well), Ve-
lichkovsky & Pannasch, and is suggested by O’Brien &
Opie (in their citation of Fodor and Pylyshyn’s well-known
criticism of the ecological approach: Fodor & Pylyshyn
1981 ). Velichkovsky & Pannasch say our work reminds
them of the Russian School of the 1960s. No commenta-
tors mentioned Heidegger, Husserl, Merleau-Ponty, or Poin-
caré, who are other giants upon whose shoulders we stand,
although one unpublished commentator also mentioned
Bergson.
Our relation to Gibson. Gibson challenged traditional ideas
about the information available to the perceiver in visual
perception. He argued that the information needed for vi-
sion is available in the optic flow and in invariants of the
flow under body motions. He rejected the idea that the only
information available for vision is that which is available at
the retina. We fully endorse Gibson’s viewpoint. The focus
of our investigation is totally different, however. Our target
is the explanation of perceptual consciousness – why is
there perceptual experience? why are some experiences
distinctively visual whereas others are distinctively tactile?
Our proposal is that we should think of sensory experiences
as active – as things we do rather than as things that hap-
pen in us. In adopting this view we invoke the role of action
and the importance of extracting invariants, and so we are
indebted to Gibson. But we harness these ideas for quite
different explanatory and theoretical purposes.
In other words, whereas Gibson stresses the use of sen-
sorimotor invariants as sources of information, we are stress-
ing the idea that sensorimotor invariants are part of what
constitute sensations and perceptual content. We show that
Gibson’s idea can go farther than Gibson pushed it.
Scholl & Simons suggest that one of our differences
with Gibson might be that we place more emphasis on
those particular sensorimotor laws that are related to the
observer’s peculiar, idiosyncratic sensory apparatus. This is
both right and wrong. We think the particular idiosyncratic
laws peculiar to each human individual are one part of a
heirarchy of sensorimotor contingencies. This lowest level
defines the ineffable what-it-is-likeness of red, say, for me,
different from you. But at a higher level of abstraction,
there are laws like the laws of how light from surfaces is af-
fected when you tilt them, which are common to most peo-
ple and define the invariant qualities of red. Perhaps this is
more similar to Gibson’s affordances, and less dependent
on individuals’ apparatus.
As concerns the coherence of the theory, Scholl & Si-
mons are right to point out that what we call sensorimotor
theory is not composed of one single idea. We obviously
were not clear enough in our target article on how the dif-
ferent ideas fit together and on where lies their common
motivation. Let us first address the relation between “the
world as an outside memory” idea and the notion of senso-
rimotor contingency.
The sensorimotor approach and the idea of the world as
outside memory. Knowledge of sensorimotor contingen-
cies explains the qualitative character of perceptual experi-
ence. We encounter red, as opposed to green, or as opposed
to no color, because of the ways our sensory stimulation de-
pends on our movements and also on movements of the col-
ored surface. We experience red because we take our sen-
sory stimulation to be governed by the relevant laws. The
idea is extended to perception (as opposed to merely “sen-
sation”) as follows: seeing a bottle is knowing how moving
the bottle affects sensory input. Only part of the bottle is at
any moment being explored. It serves as an outside entity
which is immediately available for exploration, like a mem-
ory is immediately available for recovery. Hence the notion
of “world as an outside memory.” The idea explains the feel-
ing of richness we get even though at any moment we’re
only in sensory contact with a small part of the stimulus.
This is the theoretical link between the two concepts of
knowledge of laws of sensorimotor contingency and world
as an outside memory. They form a unified structure in our
theory.
The relation to change blindness. Scholl & Simons ac-
cept that change blindness was motivated by the “world as
outside memory” idea, but mention that other, earlier ex-
periments preceded the recent change blindness literature,
and that these had a different motivation. In fact, the work
of McConkie on saccade contingent changes was contem-
poraneous with a number of similar studies which the first
author (O’Regan) was conducting involving changes during
saccades. These studies were concerned with the question
of trans-saccadic fusion and the extra-retinal signal, that is,
the question of how successive views of the environment
are brought together to give a coherent representation
(O’Regan 1984; O’Regan & Levy-Schoen 1983). It was the
results of these experiments, which led the first author to
the notion of world as outside memory. In arriving at this
idea the first author was most helped by MacKay. On the
other hand, Brooks (1991) and, particularly Stroud (1955),
though cited by Scholl & Simons, actually mention the con-
cept only very much in passing. Minsky (1988) does indeed
make a similar point, as we noted in the target article.
With respect to auditory perception let us note paren-
thetically here, in relation to Isel’s commentary, that failure
to find change deafness is not contrary to our theory –
change blindness is also not ubiquitous: it only occurs with
coincident visual transients, and mainly in cases where
changes concern marginal interest items.
Scholl & Simons question whether change blindess ac-
tually provides support for the idea of the world as an out-
Response/O’Regan & Noë: A sensorimotor account of vision and visual consciousness
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (2001) 24:5
1019

side memory. Scholl & Simons correctly point out that
other possibilities are consistent with the phenomenon,
that is, that change blindness does not logically entail the
world-as-an-outside-memory view. Lamme & Landman
actually suggest one such alternative. This is of course no
argument against our explanatory proposal, however. In
general, phenomena will admit of many possible explana-
tions. The advantage of one explanation over another lies in
the way it fits with other theoretical constructs of a theory.
We offer an account of perceptual consciousness in terms
of knowledge of sensorimotor contingencies and the idea of
the world as outside memory that explains a broad range of
phenomena such as change blindness, inattentional blind-
ness, sensory substitution, experiments with inverting gog-
gles, the nature of sensory modalities, and so on (as discussed
in the target article). Scholl & Simons criticize the theory
because they say these phenomena are more or less inde-
pendent of one another. It’s true that they could be inde-
pendent, but in fact they are united here by one underlying
idea, namely, that when taken together with the notion of
“feel” as a thing people do, they allow the explanatory gap
to be bridged.
Scholl & Simons also question whether the theory is
testable. Change blindness was one prediction made from
the idea of the world as an outside memory (O’Regan 1992).
As said above, although change blindness is compatible with
other frameworks, it is striking that no other framework pre-
dicted change blindness. Change blindness only became an
active paradigm after the first change blindness experi-
ments with the flicker and mudsplash techniques were per-
formed. The McConkie work (e.g., McConkie & Zola 1979)
that Scholl & Simons referred to was done using eye sac-
cades, because McConkie’s prediction concerned the prob-
lem of trans-saccadic fusion, and not the more general prob-
lem of what the sensation of seeing is. The work by Phillips
(1974) was motivated by the problem of understanding
iconic memory, and was ignored until it was resuscitated
by the change blindness literature. We therefore consider
change blindness, even though it can be explained in other
ways, as an instance of how the theory made interesting pre-
dictions. Indeed, one other researcher did predict change
blindness, and it was the philosopher Dennett (1991), with
an idea very similar to ours, namely, that there is no time or
place in the brain where consciousness “happens.”
The “armchair” experiment with colour we mentioned in
section 5.8 of the target article is another counterintuitive
prediction which we are currently testing, and which has
met with some success (O’Regan et al. 2001). Different
kinds of sensory substitution and the possibility of creating
new, previously unfelt sensations, is another avenue we are
exploring.
Blackmore, who is certainly the commentator who best
understood the spirit of our approach, proposes three ad-
ditional, fascinating experiments which would also be ways
of confirming the theory because they are so counter-
intuitive. What she calls “scrambled vision” is something
we have actually already attempted (in collaboration with
C. Tyler), but, regrettably, at present without success. Evi-
dence that it might nevertheless work comes from the well-
known fact that people who develop scotomas very quickly
come to no longer “see” them. On the other hand, people
with age-related macular degeneration suffer another kind
of scrambled vision, to the extent that the buckling of their
retinas has the effect of making straight lines look wiggly.
Our prediction would be that practise should iron out the
wiggles, provided they don’t change over time.
What Blackmore calls “manual vision” is a very intrigu-
ing proposal and bears on the question of where people lo-
cate a sensation. There are modalities, like vision, where
qualities are located in the outside object. There are modal-
ities like touch, where they are located in the limb where
contact occurs. There are modalities in-between, like smell
and hearing, where there is a sense in which the quality is
located in the object outside, and a sense in which people
say they experience the stimulation at the locus of the de-
tector, or even at other locations. An example is when you
hear a sound inside your head when you listen to music
through stereo headphones. As Blackmore rightly says, ac-
cording to our theory the locus of sensation will depend on
the nature of the sensorimotor contingencies, and by
changing these laws, it should be possible to change the lo-
cus of perception. We are indeed embarking on experi-
ments very similar to those proposed by Blackmore to test
this. A suggestion that they will work comes from the rub-
ber arm experiment of Botvinick & Cohen (1998) cited in
our target article, and the related work of Ramachandran &
Blakeslee (1998) on phantom limbs, as well as Bach-y-Rita
(1983) (cf. also Sampaio et al.’s 2001 work on sensory sub-
stitution).
What Blackmore calls “blinded vision” was, of course,
tested to some extent by Held and Hein (1963) in their
famous work on kittens in the kitten carousel. Each kitten
received the same visual stimulation, but only one kitten re-
ceived the stimulation as a result of self-produced move-
ment. As predicted by our approach, only the active kitten
subsequently displayed normal visually guided behavior. In
humans, similar suggestions as to the importance of action
for acquiring sensory proficiency derive from the finding
that severe strabismus seems related to amblyopia. How-
ever, Blackmore’s point seems to be that she thinks that this
kind of finding should be observable not just during devel-
opment, but also at a shorter time scale in the mature sen-
sory system. In a certain sense we agree that our approach
suggests that since perception is constituted by mastery of
sensorimotor contingencies, the brain must be continually
updating and analysing the input-output statistics and mak-
ing use of them to categorize outside events. This suggests
that adaptation to re-arrangement of sensorimotor contin-
gencies could be much faster than what one would expect
under a more traditional view, according to which such
adaptation is a matter of brain “plasticity,” occurring fairly
slowly in response to environmental or body changes, as
during maturation, for example. The question of course is,
how much faster? Such experiments need to be done, but
lacking willing subjects at present, we have not been able to
embark upon them. Meanwhile, we note that the relative
speed with which sensory substitution seems to be acquired
suggests that adaptation is indeed faster than might be ex-
pected from a traditional theory.
R9. Conclusion
The most important claim in the target article was that the
sensorimotor approach allows us to address the problem of
the explanatory gap: that is, the problem of explaining per-
ception, consciousness, and qualia in terms of physical and
functional properties of perceptual systems. While the tar-
Response/O’Regan & Noë: A sensorimotor account of vision and visual consciousness
1020
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (2001) 24:5

get article left many of our commentators unconvinced, we
think that in our response we have provided a more con-
vincing argument. Our case has been strengthened by in-
troducing two concepts which, though incipient in the tar-
get article, were not properly exploited there. These are the
concepts of bodiliness and grabbiness. Bodiliness and grab-
biness are physically measurable characteristics of percep-
tual systems which, when combined with the notion of sen-
sorimotor contingency, explain why sensation has a “feel,”
and what that feel is like in comparison to other mental
states which have little or no feel. We suggest that in this
way we have cast the first steps of what might be called an
“analytical phenomenology” (or perhaps a “heterophenom-
enology”?); that is, a scientific account of the experienced
qualitative nature of sensations within a given sensory
modality, as well as the principles that distinguish sensa-
tions across different modalities.
Many commentators misunderstood our claims about in-
ternal representations and the role of the brain in con-
sciousness. We hope to have shown in our reply that we are
not so extravagant as to claim that the brain contains no in-
formation, or that it serves no purpose in cognition. On the
other hand, we hope to have shown how making a shift in
the way we think about representations and the role of the
brain leads to new ways of understanding the nature of phe-
nomenal consciousness. The shift we advocate consists in
suggesting that experience does not involve having an in-
ternal representation, but instead involves making use of
certain capacities to interact with the environment. Though
counter-intuitive at first sight, this approach, in addition to
dealing satisfactorily with phenomenology, sheds a new
light on previously unconnected phenomena in experimen-
tal psychology, and makes empirically testable predictions.
NOTE
1. Malcolm appears to have been the first person to use this
term in print, but Rosenthal used the term first in papers written
and presented but not published in the 1970s. Rosenthal’s usage
is the main source of the idea in contemporary discussions.
References
Letters “a” and “r” appearing before authors’ initials refer to target article
and response, respectively.
Abeles, M. & Prut, Y. (1996) Spatio-temporal firing patterns in the frontal cortex of
behaving monkeys. Journal of Physiology (Paris) 90(3–4):249–50.
[aJKO]
Alderson, G. J. K., Sully, D. J. & Sully, H. G. (1974) An operational analysis of a
one-handed catching task using high speed photography. Journal of Motor
Behavior 6:217–26.
[FL]
Aloimonos, J., Weiss, I. & Bandyopadhyay, A. (1988) Active vision. International
Journal of Computer Vision 2:333–56.
[N-GK]
Aloimonos, Y. E. (1992) Purposive, qualitative, active vision. Computer Vision,
Graphics and Image Processing: Image Understanding 56(1). [Special issue,
ed. Y. E. Aloimonos.].
[aJKO]
Alroy, D. (1991) Inner light. Synthese 104(1):147–60.
[EW]
Althoff, R. R. & Cohen, N. J. (1999) Eye-movement-based memory effect: A
reprocessing effect in face perception. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Learning, Memory, and Cognition 25(4):997–1010.
[JDR]
Anderson, S. J., Mullen, K. T. & Hess, R. F. (1991) Human peripheral spatial
resolution for achromatic and chromatic stimuli: Limits imposed by optical
and retinal factors. Journal of Physiology (London) 442:47–64.
[aJKO]
Andersson, R. L. (1988) Robot ping-pong player. MIT Press.
[AC]
Ansorge, U., Klotz, W. & Neumann, O. (1998) Manual and verbal responses to
completely masked (unreportable) stimuli: Exploring some conditions for the
metacontrast dissociation. Perception 27:1177–89.
[UA]
Ansorge, U. & Neumann, O. (2001) Intentions determine the effect of
nonconsciously registered visual information: Evidence for direct parameter
specification in the metacontrast dissociation. In: Proceedings of the AISB
2001 Symposium on Nonconscious Intelligence: From natural to artificial. The
Society for the Study of Artificial Intelligence and the Simulation of
Behaviour.
[UA]
Apkarian, P. A. (1983) Visual training after long term deprivation: A case report.
International Journal of Neuroscience 19(1–4):65–83.
[aJKO]
Archambault, A., O’Donnell, C. & Schyns, P. G. (1999) Blind to object changes:
When learning the same object at different levels of categorization modifies
its perception. Psychological Science 10:249–55.
[JRP]
Arend, L. E., Jr. (1973) Spatial differential and integral operations in human vision:
Implications of stabilized retinal image fading. Psychological Review
80(5):374–95.
[aJKO]
Arias, C. (1996) L’écholocation humaine chez les handicapés visuels. L’Année
Psychologique 96:703–21.
[aJKO]
Assad, J. A. & Maunsell, J. H. R. (1995) Neuronal correlates of inferred motion in
primate posterior parietal cortex. Nature 373:518–21.
[VAFL]
Atkinson, J., Campbell, F. W. & Francis, M. R. (1976) The magic number 4 1/2 0:
A new look at visual numerosity judgements. Perception 5(3):327–34.
[aJKO]
Bachman, T. (2000) Microgenetic approach to the conscious mind. John Benjamins.
[PByR]
Bach-y-Rita, P. (1972) Brain mechanisms in sensory substitution. Academic Press.
[aJKO]
(1983) Tactile vision substitution: Past and future. International Journal of
Neuroscience 19(1–4):29–36.
[aJKO]
(1984) The relationship between motor processes and cognition in tactile vision
substitution. In: Cognition and motor processes, ed. A. F. Sanders & W. Prinz.
Springer.
[aJKO]
(1996) Substitution sensorielle et qualia. In: Perception et Intermodalité, ed. J.
Proust. Presses Universitaires de France.
[aJKO]
Bach-y-Rita, P., Collins, C. C., Saunders, S. A., White, B. & Scadden, L. (1969)
Vision substitution by tactile image projection. Nature 221:963–64.
[PByR]
Bach-y-Rita, P., Tyler, M. E. & Kaczmarek, K. A. (in press) Seeing with the brain.
International Journal of Human-Computer Interaction.
[PByR]
Baillargeon, R. (1986) Representing the existence and the location of hidden
objects: Object permanence in 6- and 8-month-old infants. Cognition 23:21–
41.
[MS]
(1999) Young infants’ expectations about hidden objects: A reply to three
challenges. Developmental Science 2:115–32.
[MS]
Bajcsy, R. (1988) Active perception. Proceedings of the IEEE 76:996–1005.
[aJKO]
Balibar, F. (1992) Einstein 1905. De L’éther aux quanta. Presses Universitaires de
France.
[aJKO]
Ballard, D. H. (1991) Animate vision. Artificial Intelligence 48:57–86.
[aJKO]
(1996) On the function of visual representation. In: Perception, ed. K. Akins.
Oxford University Press.
[N-GK]
Ballard, D. H., Hayhoe, M. M., Pook, P. K. & Rao, R. P. N. (1997) Deictic codes
for the embodiment of cognition. Behavioral and Brain Sciences 20(4):723–
67.
[aJKO, MS]
Baron-Cohen, S. & Harrison, J. (1996) Synesthesia: Classic and contemporary
readings. Blackwell.
[aJKO]
Bartlett, F. C. (1932) Remembering: A study in experimental and social psychology.
Cambridge University Press.
[JDR]
Bartolomeo, P. & Chokron, S. (1999) Left unilateral neglect or right hyper-
attention? Neurology 53:2023–27.
[PB]
Bartolomeo, P., Chokron, S. & Siéroff, E. (1999) Facilitation instead of inhibition
for repeated right-sided events in left neglect. NeuroReport 10(16):3353–57.
[PB]
Bartolomeo, P., D’Erme, P. & Gainotti, G. (1994) The relationship between
visuospatial and representational neglect. Neurology 44:1710–14.
[PB]
Bartolomeo, P., Siéroff, E., Decaix, C. & Chokron, S. (2001) Modulating the
attentional bias in unilateral neglect: The effects of the strategic set.
Experimental Brain Research 137(3/4):424–31.
[PB]
Bauby, J.-D. (1997) The diving bell and the butterfly, trans. J. Leggatt. Fourth
Estate.
[GR]
Bechara, A., Damasio, H., Tranel, K. & Damasio, A. R. (1997) Deciding
advantageously before knowing the advantageous strategy. Science 275:1293–
95.
[VGH]
Beck, D., Rees, G., Frith, C. D. & Lavie, N. (2001) Neural correlates of change
detection and change blindness. Nature Neuroscience 4(6):645–50.
[GR]
Becker, M. W., Pashler, H. & Anstis, S. M. (2000) The role of iconic memory in
change-detection tasks. Perception 29(3):273–86.
[PDG, VAFL, BWT]
Beckers, G. & Homberg, V. (1992) Cerebral visual motion blindness: Transitory
akinetopsia induced by transcranial magnetic stimulation of human area V5.
Proceedings of the Royal Society of London B: Biological Sciences
249(1325):173–78.
[GR]
References/O’Regan & Noë: A sensorimotor account of vision and visual consciousness
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (2001) 24:5
1021

Bedford, F. L. (1995) Constraints on perceptual learning: Objects and dimensions.
Cognition 54(3):253–97.
[aJKO]
Benson, D. F. & Greenberg, J. P. (1969) Visual form agnosia: A specific deficit in
visual discrimination. Archives of Neurology 20:82–89.
[aJKO]
Berthoz, A. (1997) Le sens du mouvement. Odile Jacob.
[aJKO]
Binder, J. R., Frost, J. A., Hammeke, T. A., Bellgowan, P. S. F., Springer, J. A.,
Kaufman, J. N. & Possing, E. T. (2000) Human temporal lobe activation by
speech and nonspeech sounds. Cerebral Cortex 10:512–28.
[HCN]
Bisiach, E. & Luzzatti, C. (1978) Unilateral neglect of representational space.
Cortex 14:129–33.
[PB]
Bisiach, E., Pizzamiglio, L., Nico, D. & Antonucci, G. (1996) Beyond unilateral
neglect. Brain 119:851–57.
[PB]
Block, N. (1981) Imagery. MIT Press.
[GO]
(1995a) How many concepts of consciousness? Behavioral and Brain Sciences
18(2):272–84.
[NB]
(1995b) On a confusion about a function of consciousness. Behavioral and Brain
Sciences 18(2):227–47.
[aJKO]
(1995c) The mind as the software of the brain. In: An invitation to cognitive
science, ed. D. Osherson, L. Gleitman, S. Kosslyn, E. Smith & S. Sternberg.
MIT Press.
[NB]
(1996) How can we find the neural correlate of consciousness? Trends in
Neurosciences 19:456–59.
[VAFL]
Bogartz, R. S., Shinksey, J. L. & Schilling, T. H. (2000) Object permanence in five-
and-a-half-month-old infants? Infancy 1:403–28.
[MS]
Bone, R. A., Landrum, J. T. & Cains, A. (1992) Optical density spectra of the
macular pigment in vivo and in vitro. Vision Research 32(1):105–10.
[aJKO]
Botvinick, M. & Cohen, J. (1998) Rubber hands “feel” touch that eyes see
[letter]. Nature 391(6669):756.
[aJKO]
Bower, T. G. R. (1977) Blind babies see with their ears. New Scientist 73:255–57.
[aJKO]
(1979) Human development. Freeman.
[aJKO]
Braddon-Mitchell, D. & Jackson, F. (1996) Philosophy of mind and cognition.
Blackwell.
[NB]
Brecht, M., Singer, W. & Engel, A. K. (1998) Correlation analysis of corticotectal
interactions in the cat visual system. Journal of Neurophysiology 79(5):2394–
407.
[aJKO]
Breitmeyer, B. G. & Ganz, L. (1976) Implications of sustained and transient
channels for theories of visual pattern masking, saccadic suppression, and
information processing. Psychological Review 83(1):1–36.
[aJKO]
Brenner, E. & Smeets, J. B. J. (1996) Size illusion influences how we lift but not
how we grasp an object. Experimental Brain Research 111:473–76.
[JBJS]
(2000) Motion extrapolation is not responsible for the flash-lag effect. Vision
Research 40:1645–48.
[JBJS]
Bridgeman, B. (1992) Conscious vs. unconscious processes. The case of vision.
Theory and Psychology 2:73–88.
[UA]
(1995) Extraretinal signals in visual orientation. In: Handbook of perception and
action, vol. 1: Perception, ed. W. Prinz & B. Bridgeman. Academic Press.
[aJKO]
Bridgeman, B. & Stark, L. (1991) Ocular proprioception and efference copy in
registering visual direction. Vision Research 31(11):1903–13.
[aJKO]
Bridgeman, B., Van der Heijden, A. & Velichkovsky, B. M. (1994) A theory of
spatial stability across saccadic eye movements. Behavioral and Brain Sciences
17(2):247–92.
[BMV]
Broackes, J. (1992) The autonomy of colour. In: Reduction, explanation, and
realism, ed. K. Lennon & D. Charles. Oxford University Press.
[aJKO]
Brooks, R. (1987) Autonomous mobile robots. In: AI in the 1980s and beyond, ed.
W. E. L. Grimson & R. S. Patil. MIT Press.
[aJKO]
(1991) Intelligence without representation. Artificial Intelligence 47:139–59.
[arJKO, BJS]
Brown, R. (1958) Words and things. Macmillan.
[JRP]
Burr, D. C., Morrone, M. C. & Ross, J. (1994) Selective suppression of the
magnocellular visual pathway during saccadic eye movements. Nature
371:511–13.
[aJKO]
Burton, M. W., Small, S. L. & Blumstein, S. E. (2000) The role of segmentation in
phonological processing: An fMRI investigation. Journal of Cognitive
Neuroscience 12:679–90.
[HCN]
Carlson-Radvansky, L. A. (1999) Memory for relational information across eye
movements. Perception and Psychophysics 61:919–34.
[PDG]
Carrasco, M. & Frieder, K. S. (1997) Cortical magnification neutralizes the
eccentricity effect in visual search. Vision Research 37:63–82.
[VV]
Case, T. (1888) Physical realism, being an analytical philosophy from the physical
objects of science to the physical data of sense. Longmans Green.
[EW]
Castelo-Branco, M., Neuenschwander, S. & Singer, W. (1998) Synchronization of
visual responses between the cortex, lateral geniculate nucleus, and retina in
the anesthetized cat. Journal of Neuroscience 18(16):6395–410.
[aJKO]
Chalmers, D. J. (1996a) The conscious mind: In search of a fundamental theory.
Oxford University Press.
[RM, KO, aJKO]
(1996b) On the search for the neural correlate of consciousness. Paper presented
at the Tucson II Conference: Towards a Science of Consciousness, Tucson,
Arizona, 1996.
[aJKO]
Chelazze, L., Miller, E. K., Duncan, J. & Desimone, R. (1983) A neural basis for
visual search in inferior temporal cortex. Nature 363:345–47.
[aJKO]
Chokron, S., Bartolomeo, P., Perenin, M. T., Helft, G. & Imbert, M. (1998)
Scanning direction and line bisection: A study of normal subjects and
unilateral neglect patients with opposite reading habits. Cognitive Brain
Research 7(2):173–78.
[PB]
Chokron, S., Bernard, J. M. & Imbert, M. (1997) Length representation in normal
and neglect subjects with opposite reading habits studied through a line
extension task. Cortex 33:47–64.
[PB]
Chokron, S. & De Agostini, M. (2000) Reading habits influence aesthetic
preference. Cognitive Brain Research 10(1–2):45–49.
[PB]
Chokron, S. & Imbert, M. (1993) Influence of reading habits on line bisection.
Cognitive Brain Research 1:219–22.
[PB]
Chun, M. M. & Jiang, Y. (1998) Contextual cueing: Implicit learning and memory
of visual context guides spatial attention. Cognitive Psychology 36(1):28–71.
[aJKO, JDR]
Chun, M. M. & Nakayama, K. (2000) On the functional role of implicit visual
memory for the adaptive deployment of attention across scenes. Visual
Cognition 7(1/2/3):65–82.
[aJKO]
Clancey, W. J. (1997) Situation cognition: On human knowledge and computer
representations. Cambridge University Press.
[aJKO]
Clark, A. (forthcoming) Visual experience and motor action: Are the bonds too
tight? Philosophical Review.
[AC]
Cogan, A. I. (1995) Vision comes to mind. Perception 24(7):811–26.
[aJKO]
Cohen, L. G., Weeks, R. A., Sadato, N., Celnik, P., Ishii, K. & Hallett, M. (1999)
Period of susceptibility for cross-modal plasticity in the blind. Annals of
Neurology 45(4):451–60.
[aJKO]
Colby, C. L., Duhamel, J. R. & Goldberg, M. E. (1996) Visual, presaccadic, and
cognitive activation of single neurons in monkey lateral intraparietal area.
Journal of Neurophysiology 76(5):2841–52.
[aJKO]
Cole, D. (1991) Functionalism and inverted spectra. In: Epistemology and
cognition: Studies in cognitive systems, vol. 6, ed. J. H. Fetzer. Kluwer
Academic.
[aJKO]
Coletta, N. J. & Williams, D. R. (1987) Psychophysical estimate of extrafoveal cone
spacing. Journal of the Optical Society of America [A] 4(8):1503–13.
[aJKO]
Collins, A. W. (1967) The epistemological status of the concept of perception.
Philosophical Review 76:436–59.
[EW]
Cornilleau-Peres, V. & Droulez, J. (1994) The visual perception of three-
dimensional shape from self-motion and object-motion. Vision Research
34(18):2331–36.
[aJKO]
Cotterill, R. M. J. (1995) On the unity of conscious experience. Journal of
Consciousness Studies 2:290–312.
[aJKO]
(1997) On the mechanism of consciousness. Journal of Consciousness Studies
4:231–47.
[aJKO]
Cowan, N. (1988) Evolving conceptions of memory storage, selective attention,
and their mutual constraints within the human information processing system.
Psychological Bulletin 104:163–91.
[VAFL]
Crick, F. & Koch, C. (1990) Toward a neurobiological theory of consciousness.
Seminars in the Neurosciences 2:263–75.
[aJKO]
(1995) Are we aware of neural activity in primary visual cortex? Nature 375:121–
23.
[aJKO]
(1998) Consciousness and neuroscience. Cerebral Cortex 8:97–107.
[VAFL,
aJKO]
Cytowic, R. E. & Wood, F. B. (1982) Synesthesia. I. A review of major theories and
their brain basis. Brain and Cognition 1(1):23–35.
[aJKO]
D’Zmura, M. & Lennie, P. (1986) Mechanisms of color constancy. Journal of the
Optical Society of America 3(10):1662–72.
[aJKO]
Dallenbach, K. M., Supa, M. & Cotzin, M. (1944) “Facial vision” the perception of
obstacles by the blind. American Journal of Psychology 57:133–83.
[aJKO]
De Graef, P. & Verfaillie, K. (2001a) Transsaccadic memory and on-line scene
representations. Paper presented at the 11th European Conference on Eye
Movements, Turku, Finland, August 2001.
[PDG, BWT]
De Graef, P. & Verfaillie, K., eds. (2001b) Special Issue on Transaccadic Object
Perception. Psychologica Belgica 41(1/2).
[PDG]
Dehaene, S., Naccache, L., Cohen, L., Bihan, D. L., Mangin, J. F., Poline, J. B. &
Riviere, D. (2001) Cerebral mechanisms of word masking and unconscious
repetition priming. Nature Neuroscience 4(7):752–58.
[GR]
Dehaene, S., Naccache, L., Le Clec’H, G., Koechlin, E., Mueller, M., Dehaene-
Lambertz, G., van de Moortele, P. & Le Bihan, D. (1998) Imaging
unconscious semantic priming. Nature 395:597–600.
[UA]
Dennett, D. C. (1969) Content and consciousness.Routledge & Kegan Paul.
[aJKO]
(1978) Brainstorms. MIT Press.
[aJKO]
(1987) The intentional stance. MIT Press.
[aJKO]
(1991) Consciousness explained. Little, Brown.
[SJB, DCD, MK, KO, arJKO,
BJS]
References/O’Regan & Noë: A sensorimotor account of vision and visual consciousness
1022
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (2001) 24:5

(1995) The path not taken. Behavioral and Brain Sciences 18(2):252–53.
[aJKO]
Dennett, D. C. & Kinsbourne, M. (1992) Time and the observer: The where and
when of consciousness in the brain. Behavioral and Brain Sciences 15:183–
247.
[aJKO]
Desimone, R. & Duncan, J. (1995) Neural mechanisms of selective visual
attention. Annual Review of Neuroscience 18:193–220.
[VAFL]
Deubel, H., Bridgeman, B. & Schneider, W. X. (1998) Immediate post-saccadic
information mediates space constancy. Vision Research 38:3147–59.
[PDG]
Deubel, H., Schneider, W. X. & Bridgeman, B. (1996) Postsaccadic target blanking
prevents saccadic suppression of image displacement. Vision Research
36:985–96.
[PDG]
De Weerd, P., Gattass, R., Desimone, R. & Ungerleider, L. G. (1995) Responses of
cells in monkey visual cortex during perceptual filling-in of an artificial
scotoma. Nature 377(6551):731–34.
[aJKO]
De Yoe, E. A. & van Essen, D. C. (1988) Concurrent processing streams in
monkey visual cortex. Trends in Neuroscience 11:219–26.
[aJKO]
Dijkstra, T. M., Cornilleau-Peres, V., Gielen, C. C. & Droulez, J. (1995) Perception
of three-dimensional shape from ego- and object-motion: Comparison
between small- and large-field stimuli. Vision Research 35(4):453–62.
[aJKO]
Di Lollo, V. Enns, J. T. & Rensnik, R. A. (2000) Competition for consciousness
among visual events: The psychophysics of reentrant processes. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: General 129:481–507.
[PByR]
Ditchburn, R. W. (1973) Eye-movements and visual perception. Clarendon Press.
[aJKO]
Dodwell, P. C. (2000) Brave new mind: A thoughtful inquiry into the nature and
meaning of mental life. Oxford University Press.
[PByR]
Dolezal, H. (1982) Living in a world transformed. Academic Press.
[aJKO]
Duhamel, J. R., Colby, C. L. & Goldberg, M. E. (1992) The updating of the
representation of visual space in parietal cortex by intended eye movements.
Science 255(5040):90–92.
[aJKO]
Dulany, D. E. (1997) Consciousness in the explicit (deliberative) and implicit
(evocative). In: Scientific approaches to consciousness, ed. J. D. Cohen & J. W.
Schooler. Erlbaum.
[UA]
Durgin, F. H., Tripathy, S. P. & Levi, D. M. (1995) On the filling in of the visual
blind spot: Some rules of thumb. Perception 24(7):827–40.
[aJKO]
Easton, R. D. (1992) Inherent problems of attempts to apply sonar and vibrotactile
sensory aid technology to the perceptual needs of the blind. Optometry and
Vision Science 69(1):3–14.
[aJKO]
Edelman, G. M. (1987) Neural Darwinism: The theory of neuronal group selection.
Basic Books.
[RM]
(1989) The remembered present. Basic Books.
[aJKO]
Edelman, G. M. & Tononi, G. (2000) A universe of consciousness: How matter
becomes imagination. Allen Lane.
[RM]
Eimer, M. & Schlaghecken, F. (1998) Effects of masked stimuli on motor
activation: Behavioral and electrophysiological evidence. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Human Perception and Performance 24:1737–47.
[UA]
Eriksen, C. W. (1960) Discrimination and learning without awareness: A
methodological survey and evaluation. Psychological Review 67:279–300.
[UA]
Farah, M. J. (1989) The neural basis of mental imagery. Trends in Neurosciences
12(10):395–99.
[aJKO]
ffytche, D. H., Howard, R. J., Brammer, M. J., David, A., Woodruff, P. & Williams,
S. (1998) The anatomy of conscious vision: An fMRI study of visual
hallucinations. Nature Neuroscience 1(8):738–42.
[GR]
Fischer, B., daPos, O. & Stürzel, F. (2001a) The Z-illusion: A new geometrical
illusion disappearing by fixation. (submitted).
[BF]
(2001b) Disillusions. (submitted).
[BF]
Fischer, B. & Weber, H. (1992) Characteristics of “anti” saccades in man.
Experimental Brain Research 89:415–24.
[BF]
(1996) Effects of precues on error rate and reaction times of antisaccades in
human subjects. Experimental Brain Research 109:507–12.
[BF]
Fisher, E., Haines, R. F. & Price, T. A. (1980) Head-up transition behavior of pilots
with and without head-up display in simulated low-visibility approaches.
(Technical Paper). NASA.
[FI, aJKO]
Fishman, M. C. & Michael, C. R. (1973) Integration of auditory information in
cat’s visual cortex. Vision Research 13:1415.
[aJKO]
Fodor, J. & Pylyshyn, Z. (1981) How direct is visual perception? Some reflections
on Gibson’s “Ecological Approach.” Cognition 9:139–96.
[GO, rJKO, ZWP,
BJS]
Foulkes, D. (1985) Dreaming: A cognitive-psychological analysis. Erlbaum.
[AR]
Francis, A. L., Baldwin, K. & Nusbaum, H. C. (2000) Learning to listen: The
effects of training on attention to acoustic cues. Perception and Psychophysics
62:1668–80.
[HCN]
Frederici, A. D., Pfeifer, E. & Hahne, A. (1993) Event-related brain potentials
during natural speech processing: Effects of semantic morphological and
syntactic violations. Cognitive Brain Research 1:183–92.
[FI]
Frith, C. D., Perry, R. & Lumer, E. (1999) The neural correlates of conscious
experience: An experimental framework. Trends in Cognitive Sciences 3:105–
14.
[GR]
Gainotti, G., D’Erme, P. & Bartolomeo, P. (1991) Early orientation of attention
toward the half space ipsilateral to the lesion in patients with unilateral brain
damage. Journal of Neurology, Neurosurgery and Psychiatry 54:1082–89.
[PB]
Gallese, V. (2000) The inner sense of action: Agency and motor representations.
Journal of Consciousness Studies 7:23–40.
[VG]
(2001) The “Shared Manifold” hypothesis: From mirror neurons to empathy.
Journal of Consciousness Studies 8:33–50.
[VG]
Gallese, V., Fadiga, L., Fogassi, L. & Rizzolatti, G. (1996) Action recognition in the
premotor cortex. Brain 119:593–609.
[VG]
Gardner, H. (2001) The philosophy-science continuum. The Chronicle of Higher
Education (Section 2:The Chronicle Review) 47:B7-B10.
[PByR]
Gauthier, G. M. (1976) Alterations of the human vestibulo-ocular reflex in a
simulated dive at 62 ATA. Undersea Biomedical Research 3(2):103–12.
[aJKO]
Gauthier, G. M. & Robinson, D. A. (1975) Adaptation of the human vestibulo-
ocular reflex to magnifying lenses. Brain Research 92(2):331–35.
[aJKO]
Germeys, F., De Graef, P. & Verfaillie, K. (in press) Transaccadic perception of
saccade target and flanker objects. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Human Perception and Performance.
[PDG]
Gerrits, H. J. M. (1967) Observations with stabilized retinal images and their
neural correlates. A theory on the perception of constant brightness. Doctoral
dissertation, Catholic University of Neijmegen, Neijmegen, The Netherlands.
(1978) Differences in peripheral and foveal effects observed in stabilized vision.
Experimental Brain Research 32(2):225–44.
[aJKO]
Gibson, J. J. (1966) The senses considered as perceptual systems. Houghton Mifflin.
[aJKO, BJS]
(1979/1986) The ecological approach to visual perception. Erlbaum.
[JRP,
BJS]
(1982a) Note on perceiving in a populated environment. In: Reasons for realism:
Selected essays of James J. Gibson, ed. E. Reed & R. Jones. Erlbaum.
[N-
GK]
(1982b) Notes on affordances. In: Reasons for realism: Selected essays of James
J. Gibson, ed. E. Reed & R. Jones. Erlbaum.
[aJKO]
Gibson, J. J., Kaplan, G. A., Reynolds, H. N., Jr. & Wheeler, K. (1969) The change
from visible to invisible: A study of optical transitions. Perception and
Psychophysics 5:113–16.
[BJS]
Gillam, B. & Chambers, D. (1985) Size and position are incongruous:
Measurements on the Müller-Lyer figure. Perception and Psychophysics
37:549–56.
[JBJS]
Goodale, M. A. & Humphrey, G. K. (1998) The objects of action and perception.
Cognition 67:179–205.
[MAG]
Goodale, M. A. & Milner, A. D. (1992) Separate visual pathways for perception
and action. Trends in Neurosciences 15(1):20–25.
[MAG, aJKO]
Gordon, A. M., Forssberg, H., Johansson, R. S. & Westling, G. (1991) Visual size
cues in the programming of manipulative forces during precision grip.
Experimental Brain Research 83:477–82.
[JBJS]
Gorea, A. (1991) Thoughts on the specific nerve energy. In: Representation of
vision. Trends and tacit assumptions in vision research, ed. A. Gorea.
Cambridge University Press.
[aJKO]
Gray, C. M., Konig, P., Engel, A. K. & Singer, W. (1989) Oscillatory responses in
cat visual-cortex exhibit inter-columnar synchronization which reflects global
stimulus properties. Nature 338:334–37.
[VAFL]
Gray, C. M. & Singer, W. (1989) Stimulus-specific neuronal oscillations in
orientation columns of cat visual cortex. Proceedings of the National Academy
of Sciences USA 86(5):1698–702.
[aJKO]
Grealy, M. A., Craig, C. M. & Lee, D. N. (1999) Evidence for on-line visual
guidance during saccadic gaze shifts. Proceedings of the Royal Society of
London, Series B: Biological Sciences 266:1799–804.
[BWT]
Green, D. M. & Swets, J. A. (1966) Signal detection theory and psychophysics.
Wiley.
[UA]
Greenhouse, D. S. & Cohn, T. E. (1991) Saccadic suppression and stimulus
uncertainty. Journal of the Optical Society of America [A] 8(3):587–95.
[aJKO]
Greenspan, S. L., Nusbaum, H. C. & Pisoni, D. B. (1988) Perceptual learning of
synthetic speech produced by rule. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Learning, Memory, and Cognition 14:421–33.
[HCN]
Gregory, R. L. (1972) Seeing as thinking: An active theory of perception. Times
Literary Supplement June 23, 1972:707–708.
[VV]
(1973) Eye and brain. The psychology of seeing. McGraw Hill.
[aJKO]
(1980) Perceptions as hypothesis. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society
of London 290:181–97.
[VV]
(1993) Hypothesis and illusion: Explorations in perception and science. In: New
representationalisms: Essays in the philosophy of perception. Avebury.
[EW]
Grimes, J. (1996) On the failure to detect changes in scenes across saccades. In:
References/O’Regan & Noë: A sensorimotor account of vision and visual consciousness
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (2001) 24:5
1023

Perception, ed. K. Akins. Vancouver Studies in Cognitive Science, vol. 2.
Oxford University Press.
[BJS]
Grüsser, O. J. (1986) Interaction of efferent and afferent signals in visual
perception. A history of ideas and experimental paradigms. Acta Psychologica
(Amsterdam) 63(1–3):3–21.
[aJKO]
Guarniero, G. (1974) Experience of tactile vision. Perception 3(1):101–104.
[aJKO]
(1977) Tactile vision: A personal view. Visual Impairment and Blindness 125–30.
[aJKO]
Gurwitsch, A. (1964) The field of consciousness. Duquesne University Press.
[UA]
Gysen, V., De Graef, P. & Verfaillie, K. (2002) Detection of intrasaccadic
displacements and depth rotations of moving objects. Vision Research
42:379–91.
[PDG]
Gysen, V. & Verfaillie, K. (2001) Transaccadic perception of translating objects.
Paper presented at the First Annual Meeting of the Vision Sciences Society,
Sarasota, Florida, May 2001.
[PDG]
Haenny, P. E., Maunsell, J. H. R. & Schiller, P. H. (1988) State dependent activity
in monkey visual cortex. Experimental Brain Research 69:245–59.
[aJKO]
Haines, R. F. (1991) A breakdown in simultaneous information processing. In:
Presbyopia research. From molecular biology to visual adaptation, ed. G.
Obrecht & L. W. Stark. Plenum Press.
[FI, aJKO]
Haith, M. M. (1988) Who put the cog in infant cognition? Is rich interpretation too
costly? Infant Behavior and Development 21:167–79.
[MS]
Hallett, P. (1978) Primary and secondary saccades to goals defined by instructions.
Vision Research 18:1279–96.
[BF]
Hardcastle, V. G. (1996) Discovering the moment of consciousness II: An ERP
analysis of priming using novel visual stimuli. Philosophical Psychology 9:169–
98.
[VGH]
Harding, G. (1991) Color and the mind-body problem. Review of Metaphysics
45:289–307.
[EW]
Hari, R., Salmelin, R., Tissari, S. O., Kajola, M. & Virsu, V. (1994) Visual stability
during eyeblinks. Nature (London) 367:121–22.
[VV]
Harnad, S. (1987) Category induction and representation. In: Categorical
perception: The groundwork of cognition, ed. S. Harnad. Cambridge
University Press.
[EW]
Harnad, S. (1995) Why and how we are not zombies. Journal of Consciousness
Studies 1:64–67. http://www.cogsci.soton.ac.uk/~harnad/Papers/Harnad/
harnad95.zombies.html
[SH]
(2000) Correlation vs. causality: How/Why the mind/body problem is hard.
Journal of Consciousness Studies 7(4):54–61. http://www.cogsci.soton.ac.uk/
~harnad/Papers/Harnad/harnad00.mind.humphrey.html
[SH]
(2001) No easy way out. The Sciences 41(2):36–42.
http://www.cogsci.soton.ac.uk/~harnad/Tp/thesciences.htm
[SH]
Harris, C. S. (1965) Perceptual adaptation to inverted, reversed, and displaced
vision. Psychological Review 72(6):419–44.
[aJKO]
(1980) Insight or out of sight?: Two examples of perceptual plasticity in the
human adult. In: Visual coding and adaptability, ed. C. S. Harris. Erlbaum.
[aJKO]
Harth, E. (1993) The creative loop: How the brain makes a mind. Addison-Welsey.
[PByR]
Harvey, M. (1995) Translation of “Psychic paralysis of gaze, optic ataxia, and spatial
disorder of attention” by Rudolph Balint. Cognitive Neuropsychology 12:261–
82.
[aJKO]
Hatwell, Y. (1986) Toucher l’espace: La main et la perception tactile de l’espace.
Presses Universitaires de Lille.
[aJKO]
Hayes, S. P. (1935) Facial vision or the sense of obstacles. Perkins.
[aJKO]
Hayhoe, M. M., Lachter, J. & Moeller, P. (1992) Spatial memory and integration
across saccadic eye movements. In: Eye movements and visual cognition:
Scene perception and reading, ed. K. Rayner. Springer Verlag.
[PDG]
Hebb, D. O. (1947) The organization of behavior: A neuropsychological approach.
Wiley.
[JH]
(1968) Concerning imagery. Psychological Review 75:466–77.
[JH]
Hecht, H. & Bertamini, M. (2000) Understanding projectile acceleration. Journal
of Experimental Psychology: Human Perception and Performance 26:730–46.
[FL]
Hecht, H., Kaiser, M. K. & Banks, M. S. (1996) Gravitational acceleration as a cue
for absolute size and distance? Perception and Psychophysics 58:1066–75.
[FL]
Heil, (1983) Perception and cognition. University of California Press.
[aJKO]
Held, R. (1980) The rediscovery of adaptability in the visual system: Effects of
extrinsic and intrinsic chromatic dispersion. In: Visual coding and
adaptability, ed. C. S. Harris. Erlbaum.
[aJKO]
Held, R. & Hein, A. (1963) Movement-produced stimulation in the development
of visually guided behavior. Journal of Comparative and Physiological
Psychology 56:872–76.
[VV]
Helmholtz, H. von (1909/1925) Physiological optics, vol. 3, trans. J. P. C. Southall.
Optical Society of America.
[aJKO]
Hemeroff, S. R. (1994) Quantum coherence in microtubules: A neural basis
for emergent consciousness? Journal of Consciousness Studies 1:91–118.
[aJKO]
Henderson, J. M. & Siefert, A. (1999) The influence of enantiomorphic
transformation on transaccadic object integration. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Human Perception and Performance 25:243–55.
[PDG]
Hendriks-Jansen, H. (1996) Catching ourselves in the act. MIT Press.
[MK]
Hobson, J. A. (1988) The dreaming brain. Basic Books.
[AR]
Hochberg, J. (1968) In the mind’s eye. In: Contemporary theory and research in
visual perception, ed. R. N. Haber. Holt, Rinehart & Winston.
[JH, aJKO,
ZWP]
(1970) Attention, organization and consciousness. In: Attention: Contemporary
theory and analysis, ed. D. I. Mostofsky. Appleton-Century-Crofts.
[JH,
aJKO]
(1974) Higher-order stimuli and interresponse coupling in the perception of the
visual world. In: Perception: Essays in honor of James J. Gibson, ed. R. B.
MacLeod & H. L. Pick. Cornell University Press.
[JH]
(1986) Representation of motion and space in video and cinematic displays.
In: Handbook of perception and human performance. Vol. 1: Sensory
processes and perception, ed. K. R. Boff, L. Kaufman & J. P. Thomas.
Wiley.
[BJS]
(1997) The affordances of perceptual inquiry: Pictures are learned from the
world, and what that fact might mean about perception quite generally. In:
Perceptual learning, ed. R. Goldstone, D. Medin & P. G. Schyns. Academic
Press.
[JH]
(1998) Gestalt theory and its legacy: Organization in eye and brain, in attention
and mental representation. In: Cognition and perception at century’s end, ed.
J. Hochberg. Academic Press.
[JH]
(2001) Coupling: Phenomena, problems and opportunities. Paper presented at
the Society of Experimental Psychologists Conference, Princeton University,
March 30, 2001.
[JH]
Hochberg, J. & Brooks, V. (1997) The perception of motion pictures. In: Handbook
of perception and cognition: Cognitive ecology, ed. M. Friedman & E.
Carterette. Academic Press.
[JH]
Hoffman, D. D. (1998) Visual intelligence: How we create what we see. W. W.
Norton.
[ZWP]
Holender, D. (1986) Semantic activation without conscious identification in
dichotic listening, parafoveal vision, and visual masking: A survey and
reappraisal. Behavioral and Brain Sciences 9:1–23.
[UA]
Hollingworth, A. (2001) The relationship between change detection and visual
memory: Evidence from target postcuing. Poster presented at the Annual
Meeting of the Psychonomic Society, Orlando, Florida.
[JRP]
Hollingworth, A. & Henderson, J. M. (2000) Semantic informativeness mediates
the detection of changes in natural scenes. In: Visual cognition: Change
blindness and visual memory, ed. D. J. Simons. [Special issue of Visual
Cognition]. Psychology Press.
[JRP]
Hollingworth, A., Williams, C. C. & Henderson, J. M. (in press) To see and
remember: Visually specific information is retained in memory from
previously attended objects in natural scenes. Psychonomic Bulletin and
Review.
[JDR]
Horn, G. & Hill, R. M. (1969)Modifications of the receptive field of cells in the
visual cortex occurring spontaneously and associated with bodily tilt. Nature
221:185–87.
[aJKO]
Howard, I. P. & Templeton, W. B. (1966) Human spatial orientation. Wiley.
[aJKO]
Howells, T. H. (1944) The experimental development of color-tone synesthesia.
Journal of Experimental Psychology 34:87–103.
[aJKO]
Hubel, D. H. & Wiesel, T. N. (1962) Receptive fields, binocular interaction and
functional architecture in the cat’s visual cortex. Journal of Physiology
160:106–54.
[EN]
Hukube, T., Sasaki, T. & Peng, C. (1991) A blind mobility aid modeled after
echolocation of bats. IEEE Transactions on Biomedical Engineering
38(5):461–65.
[aJKO]
Humphrey, G. K. (1951) Thinking: An introduction to its experimental psychology.
Methuen.
[JRP]
Humphrey, G. K., Gumsey, R. & Bryden, P. J. (1994) An examination of colour-
contingent pattern aftereffects. Spatial Vision 8(1):77–94.
[aJKO]
Humphrey, G. K. & Humphrey, D. E. (1985) The use of binaural sensory aids by
blind infants and children: Theoretical and applied issues. In: Applied
developmental psychology, vol. 2, ed. F. Morrison, C. Lord & D. Keating.
Academic Press.
[aJKO]
Humphrey, N. (1970) What the frog’s eye tells the monkey’s brain. Brain, Behavior,
Evolution 3:324–37.
[NH]
(1992) A history of the mind. Chatto & Windus.
[NH]
(2000) How to solve the mind-body problem. Journal of Consciousness Studies
7:5–20.
[NH]
Intraub, H. & Richardson, M. (1989) Wide-angle memories of close-up scenes.
References/O’Regan & Noë: A sensorimotor account of vision and visual consciousness
1024
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (2001) 24:5

Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition
15(2):179–87.
[aJKO]
Iriki, A., Tanaka, M. & Iwamura, Y. (1996) Coding of modified body schema during
tool use by macaque postcentral neurones. NeuroReport 7(14):2325–30.
[aJKO]
Irwin, D. E. (1991) Information integration across saccadic eye movements.
Cognitive Psychology 23:420–56.
[PDG, N-GK, aJKO]
(1992) Perceiving an integrated visual world. In: Attention and performance XIV:
Synergies in experimental psychology, artificial intelligence, and cognitive
neuroscience, ed. D. E. Meyer & S. Kornblum. MIT Press.
[aJKO]
Irwin, D. E. & Andrews, R. V. (1996) Integration and accumulation of information
across saccadic eye movements. In: Attention and performance XIV:
Information integration in perception and communication, ed. T. Inui & J. L.
McClelland. MIT Press.
[aJKO]
Irwin, D. E. & Gordon, R. D. (1998) Eye movements, attention, and transaccadic
memory. Visual Cognition 5(1–2):127–55.
[aJKO]
Isel, F., Hahne, A. & Friederici, A. D. (1999) Syntactic and semantic processes in
French spoken sentences: ERP evidence. Annual Report of the Max Planck
Institut of Cognitive Neuroscience, pp. 19–20.
[FI]
James, W. (1890/1950) The principles of psychology. Dover/Macmillan.
[SJB,
aJKO]
Jameson, D. & Hurvich, L. M. (1978) Dichromatic color language: “Reds” and
“greens” don’t look alike but their colors do. Sensory Processes 2:146–55.
[aJKO]
Järvilehto, T. (1998a) The theory of the organism-environment system: I.
Description of the theory. Integrative Physiological and Behavioral Science
33:317–30.
[aJKO]
(1998b) The theory of the organism-environment system: II. Significance of
nervous activity in the organism-environment system. Integrative
Physiological and Behavioral Science 33:331–38.
[aJKO]
(1999) The theory of the organism-environment system: III. Role of efferent in-
fluences on receptors in the formation of knowledge. Integrative Physiological
and Behavioral Science 34:90–100.
[aJKO]
(2000) The theory of the organism-environment system: IV. The problem of
mental activity and consciousness. Integrative Physiological and Behavioral
Science 35:35–57.
[aJKO]
Jaskowski, P., van der Lubbe, R., Schlotterbeck, E. & Verleger, R. (2002) Traces
left on visual selective attention by not consciously identified stimuli.
Psychological Science 13:48–54.
[UA]
Jeannerod, M. (1975) Déficit visuel persistant chez les aveugles-nés opérés.
Données cliniques et expérimentales. Année Psychologique 1:169–95.
[aJKO]
(1997) The cognitive neuroscience of action. Blackwell.
[aJKO]
(1999) Visuomotor channels: Their integration in goal-directed prehension.
Human Movement Science 18:210–18.
[JBJS]
Jenkins, W. M., Merzenich, M. M., Ochs, M. T., Allard, T. & Guic-Robles, E.
(1990a) Functional reorganization of primary somatosensory cortex in adult
owl monkeys after behaviorally controlled tactile stimulation. Journal of
Neurophysiology 63(1):82–104.
[aJKO]
Jenkins, W. M., Merzenich, M. M. & Recanzone, G. (1990b) Neocortical
representational dynamics in adult primates: Implications for
neuropsychology. Neuropsychologia 28(6):573–84.
[aJKO]
Jonides, J. & Smith, E. E. (1997) The architecture of working memory. In:
Cognitive neuroscience. Studies in cognition, ed. M. D. Rugg. MIT Press.
[HCN]
Jousmäki, V., Hämäläinen, M. & Hari, R. (1996) Magnetic source imaging during a
visually guided task. NeuroReport 7:2961–64.
[VV]
Jouvet, M. (1999) The paradox of sleep, the story of dreaming. MIT Press.
[AR]
Kahn, D., Pace-Schott, E. F. & Hobson, J. A. (1997) Consciousness in waking and
dreaming: The roles of neuronal oscillation and neuromodulation in
determining similarities and differences. Neuroscience 78(1):13–38.
[aJKO]
Kahneman, D., Treisman, A. & Gibbs, B. J. (1992) The reviewing of object files:
Object-specific integration of information. Cognitive Psychology 24(2):175–
219.
[aJKO]
Kandel, E. R. & Schwartz, J. H. (1985) Principles of neural science, 2nd edition.
Elsevier.
[EN]
Kawato, M. (1999) Internal models for motor control and trajectory planning.
NeuroReport 9:718–27.
[VG]
Kelly, D. H. (1981) Disappearance of stabilized chromatic gratings. Science
214(4526):1257–58.
[aJKO]
(1982) Motion and vision. IV. Isotropic and anisotropic spatial responses. Journal
of the Optical Society of America 72(4):432–39.
[aJKO]
Kelso, J. A. S. & Kay, B. A. (1987) Information and control: A macroscopic analysis
of perception-action coupling. In: Perspectives on perception and action, ed.
H. Heuer & A. F. Sanders. Erlbaum.
[aJKO]
Keysers, C., Xiao, D., Foldiak, P. & Perrett, D. I. (2001) The speed of sight.
Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience 13:90–101.
[VG]
Kim, N.-G., Growney, R. & Turvey, M. T. (1996) Optical flow not retinal flow is the
basis of wayfinding by foot. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human
Perception and Performance 22:1279–88.
[N-GK]
Kim, N.-G. & Turvey, M. T. (1999) Eye movements and a rule for perceiving
direction of heading. Ecological Psychology 11:233–48.
[N-GK]
Kingdom, F. & Moulden, B. (1992) A multi-channel approach to brightness coding.
Vision Research 32(8):1565–82.
[aJKO]
Kinsbourne, M. (1970) A model for the mechanism of unilateral neglect of space.
Transactions of the American Neurological Association 95:143–46.
[PB]
(1987) Mechanisms of unilateral neglect. In: Neurophysiological and
neuropsychological aspects of spatial neglect, ed. M. Jeannerod. North
Holland.
[aJKO]
(1993) Orientational bias model of unilateral neglect: Evidence from attentional
gradients within hemispace. In: Unilateral neglect: Clinical and experimental
studies, ed. I. H. Robertson & J. C. Marshall. Erlbaum.
[PB]
(1995) Awareness of one’s own body: An attentional theory of its nature,
development and brain basis. In: The body and the self, ed. J. L. Bermudez, A.
Marcel & N. Eilan. MIT Press.
[aJKO]
Kleinschmidt, A., Buchel, C., Zeki, S. & Frackowiak, R. S. J. (1998) Human brain
activity during spontaneously reversing perception of ambiguous figures.
Proceedings of the Royal Society of London B 265:2427–33.
[GR]
Klotz, W. & Neumann, O. (1999) Motor activation without conscious
discrimination in metacontrast masking. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Human Perception and Performance 25:976–92.
[UA]
Klotz, W. & Wolff, P. (1995) The effect of a masked stimulus on the response to the
masking stimulus. Psychological Research/Psychologische Forschung 58:92–
101.
[UA]
Koenderink, J. J. (1984a) The concept of local sign. In: Limits in perception, ed. A.
J. van Doorn, W. A. van de Grind & J. J. Koenderink. VNU Science Press.
[aJKO]
(1984b) The internal representation of solid shape and visual exploration. In:
Sensory experience, adaptation, and perception. Festschrift for Ivo Kohler, ed.
L. Spillmann & B. R. Wooten. Erlbaum.
[aJKO]
Kohler, I. (1951) Über Aufbau und Wandlungen der Wahmehmungswelt.
Österreichische Akademie der Wissenschaften. Sitzungsberichte,
philosophisch-historische Klasse 227:1–118.
[aJKO]
(1967) Facial vision rehabilitated. In: Les systèmes sonars animaux, vol. 1, ed.
R.-G. Busnel. Laboratoire de Physiologie Acoustique.
[aJKO]
Kosslyn, S. M. (1980) Image and mind. Harvard University Press.
[PByR]
(1994) Image and brain. The resolution of the imagery debate. MIT Press.
[aJKO]
Kosslyn, S. M., Thompson, W. L., Kim, I. J. & Alpert, N. M. (1995) Topographical
representations of mental images in primary visual cortex. Nature
378(30):496–98.
[RM]
Kottenhoff, H. (1961) Was ist richtiges Sehen mit Unkehrbrillen und in welchem
Sinne stellt sich das Sehen um? A. Hain.
[aJKO]
Kowler, E. & Steinman, R. M. (1977) The role of small saccades in counting.
Vision Research 17(1):141–46.
[aJKO]
Krauskopf, J. (1963) Effect of retinal image stabilization of the appearance of
heterochromatic targets. Journal of the Optical Society of America 53:741–44.
[aJKO]
Kurthen, M., Grunwald, T. & Elger, C. E. (1998) Will there be a neuroscientific
theory of consciousness? Trends in Cognitive Sciences 2:229–34.
[MK]
Kustov, A. A. & Robinson, D. L. (1996) Shared neural control of attentional shifts
and eye movements. Nature 384:74–77.
[aJKO]
Lacquaniti, F. (1996) Neural control of limb mechanics for visuomanual
coordination. In: Hand and brain: The neurophysiology and psychology of
hand function, ed. A. M. Wing, P. Haggard & J. R. Flanagan. Academic Press.
[FL]
Lacquaniti, F., Borghese, N. A. & Carrozzo, M. (1992) Internal models of limb
geometry in the control of hand compliance. Journal of Neuroscience
12:1750–62.
[FL]
Lacquaniti, F., Carrozzo, M. & Borghese, N. A. (1993a) The role of vision in tuning
anticipatory motor responses of the limbs. In: Multisensory control of
movement, ed. A. Berthoz. Oxford University Press.
[FL]
(1993b) Time-varying mechanical behavior of multijointed arm in man. Journal
of Neuroscience 69:1443–64.
[FL]
Lacquaniti, F. & Maioli, C. (1989a) The role of preparation in tuning anticipatory
and reflex responses during catching. Journal of Neuroscience 9:134–48.
[FL]
(1989b) Adaptation to suppression of visual information during catching. Journal
of Neuroscience 9:149–59.
[FL]
Làdavas, E., Carletti, M. & Gori, G. (1994) Automatic and voluntary orienting of
attention in patients with visual neglect: Horizontal and vertical dimensions.
Neuropsychologia 32:1195–208.
[PB]
Lakoff, G. & Johnson, M. (1999) Philosophy in the flesh. Basic Books.
[MK]
Laming, D. (1986) Sensory analysis. Academic Press.
[aJKO]
(1988) A re-examination of sensory analysis. Behavioral and Brain Sciences
11:316–39.
[aJKO]
References/O’Regan & Noë: A sensorimotor account of vision and visual consciousness
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (2001) 24:5
1025

Lamme, V. A. F. (2000) Neural mechanisms of visual awareness; a linking
proposition. Brain and Mind 1:385–406.
[VAFL]
Lamme, V. A. F., Super, H., Landman, R., Roelfsema, P. R. & Spekreijse, H. (2000)
The role of primary visual cortex (V1) in visual awareness. Vision Research
40:1507–21.
[VAFL]
Land, M., Mennie, N. & Rusted, J. (1999) The roles of vision and eye movements
in the control of activities of daily living. Perception 28:1311–28.
[BWT]
Lang, C. E. & Bastian, A. J. (1999) Cerebellar subjects show impaired adaptation
of anticipatory EMG during catching. Journal of Neurophysiology 82:2108–
19.
[FL]
Lee, D. N. & Lishman, J. R. (1977) Visual control of locomotion. Scandinavian
Journal of Psychology 18:224–30.
[N-GK]
Lenay, C. (1997) Le mouvement des boucles sensori-motrices aux représentations
cognitives et langagières. Paper presented at the Sixième Ecole d’Eté de
l’Association pour la Recherche Cognitive.
[VG, aJKO]
Lenay, C., Canu, S. & Villon, P. (1997) Technology and perception: The
contribution of sensory substitution systems. Paper presented at the Second
International Conference on Cognitive Technology, Aizu, Japan.
[aJKO]
Lenay, C., Gapenne, O., Hanneton, S. & Marque, C. (1999) La suppléance
sensorielle: Limites et perspectives. In: Toucher pour connaître. Psychologie
cognitive de la perception tactile manuelle, ed. Y. Hatwell, A. Streri & E.
Gentaz. Presses Universitaire de France.
[aJKO]
Leopold, D. A. & Logothetis, N. K. (1996) Activity changes in early visual cortex
reflect monkeys’ percepts during binocular rivalry. Nature 379(6565):549–53.
[aJKO]
(1999) Multistable phenomena: Changing views in perception. Trends in
Cognitive Studies 3(7):254–65.
[aJKO]
Leuthold, H. & Kopp, B. (1998) Mechanisms of priming by masked stimuli:
Inferences from event-related brain potentials. Psychological Science 9:263–
69.
[UA]
Levi, D. M., Klein, S. A. & Aitsebaomo, A. P. (1985) Vernier acuity, crowding and
cortical magnification. Vision Research 25(7):963–77.
[aJKO]
Levin, D. T., Momen, N., Drivdahl, S. B. & Simons, D. J. (2000) Change blindness
blindness: The metacognitive error of overestimating change-detection ability.
Visual Cognition 7:397–412.
[BJS]
Levin, D. T., Simons, D. J., Angelone, B. L. & Chabris, C. F. (in press) Memory for
centrally attended changing objects in an incidental real-world change
detection paradigm. British Journal of Psychology.
[BJS]
Lévy-Schoen, A. (1969) Détermination et latence de la résponse oculomotrice à
deux stimulus. L’Annee Psychologique 69:373–92.
[BMV]
Lewicki, P., Czyzewska, M. & Hoffman, H. (1987) Unconscious acquisition of
complex procedural knowledge. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Learning, Memory, and Cognition 13:523–30.
[VGH]
Lewicki, P., Hill, T. & Czyzewska, M. (1992) Nonconscious acquisition of
information. American Psychologist 47:796–801.
[VGH]
Li, W. & Matin, L. (1990) Saccadic suppression of displacement: Influence of
postsaccadic exposure duration and of saccadic stimulus elimination. Vision
Research 30(6):945–55.
[aJKO]
(1997) Saccadic suppression of displacement: Separate influences of saccadic
size and of target retinal eccentricity. Vision Research 37(13):1779–97.
[aJKO]
Liberman, A. M. (1957) Some results of research on speech perception. Journal of
the Acoustical Society of America 29:117–23.
[JH]
Liberman, A. M., Cooper, F. S., Shankweiler, D. P. & Studdert-Kennedy, M. (1967)
Perception of the speech code. Psychological Review 74:431–61.
[HCN]
Liberman, A. M. & Mattingly, I. G. (1985) The motor theory of speech perception
revised. Cognition 21:1–36.
[HCN]
Lichtenstein, E. H. & Brewer, W. F. (1980) Memory for goal-directed events.
Cognitive Psychology 12:412–45.
[JRP]
Lillo, J., Davies, J. R., Collado, J., Ponte, C. & Vitini, J. (1998) Colour memory
dichromats is more accurate than the standard model predicts. Perception
27:175.
[aJKO]
Linden, D. E. J., Kallenbach, U., Heinecke, A., Singer, W. & Goebel, R. (1999)
The myth of upright vision. A psychophysical and functional imaging study of
adaptation to inverting spectacles. Perception 28:469–81.
[aJKO]
Livingstone, M. & Hubel, D. (1988) Segregation of form, color, movement and
depth: Anatomy, physiology and perception. Nature 240:740–49.
[aJKO]
Llinas, R. & Ribary, U. (1993) Coherent 40-Hz oscillation characterizes dream
state in humans. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences USA
90(5):2078–81.
[aJKO]
Loftus, G. R. & Mackworth, N. H. (1978) Cognitive determinants of fixation
location during picture viewing. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Cognition, Perception, and Performance 4(4):565–72.
[JDR]
Logothetis, N. K. (1998) Single units and conscious vision. Philosophical
Transactions of the Royal Society of London B: Biological Sciences
353(1377):1801–18.
[aJKO]
Logothetis, N. K., Leopold, D. A. & Sheinberg, D. L. (1996) What is rivalling
during binocular rivalry? [see comments]. Nature 380(6575):621–24.
[aJKO]
Lotze, H. (1885) Metaphysics. Clarendon Press.
[EW]
Lowe, E. J. (1981) Indirect perception and sense-data. Philosophical Quarterly
31:330–42.
[EW]
(1996) Subjects of experience. Cambridge University Press.
[EW]
Lumer, E. (2000) Binocular rivalry and human visual awareness. In: Neural
correlates of consciousness: Conceptual and empirical questions, ed. T.
Metzinger. MIT Press.
[GR]
Mack, A. & Bachant, J. (1969) Perceived movement of the afterimage during eye
movements. Perception and Psychophysics 6:379–84.
[aJKO]
Mack, A. & Rock, I. (1998) Inattentional blindness. MIT Press.
[aJKO]
Mack, A., Tang, B. Tuma, R., Kahn, S. & Rock, I. (1992) Perceptual organization
and attention. Cognitive Psychology 24(4):475–501.
[aJKO]
MacKay, D. M. (1962) Theoretical models of space perception. In: Aspects of the
theory of artificial intelligence, ed. C. A. Muses. Plenum Press.
[DCD,
aJKO]
(1967) Ways of looking at perception. In: Models for the perception of speech
and visual form, ed. W. Wathen-Dunn. MIT Press.
[DCD, aJKO]
(1973) Visual stability and voluntary eye movements. In: Handbook of sensory
physiology, vol. VII/3A, ed. R. Jung. Springer.
[DCD, aJKO]
Malcolm, N. (1984) Consciousness and causality. In: Consciousness and causality,
ed. D. M. Armstrong & N. Malcolm. Blackwell.
[aJKO]
Manzotti, R. & Tagliasco, V. (2001) Coscienza e realtà. Il Mulino.
[RM]
Marbach, E. (1994) Troubles with heterophenomenology. In: Philosophy and the
cognitive sciences, ed. R. Casati, B. Smith & G. White. Hölder-Pickler-
Tempsky.
[aJKO]
Marcos, S., Navarro, R. & Artal, P. (1996) Coherent imaging of the cone mosaic in
the living human eye. Journal of the Optical Society of America 13(5):897–
905.
[aJKO]
Mareschal, D., Plunkett, K. & Harris, P. (1999) A computational and
neuropsychological account of object-oriented behaviours in infancy.
Developmental Science 2:306–17.
[MS]
Marks, L. E. (1978) The unity of the senses. Interrelations among the modalities.
Academic Press.
[aJKO]
Marr, D. (1982) Vision: A computational investigation into the human
representation and processing of visual information. W. H. Freeman.
[rJKO,
ZWP]
Marshall, J. C. & Halligan, P. W. (1989) Does the midsagittal plane play any
privileged role in “left” neglect? Cognitive Neuropsychology 6(4):403–22.
[PB]
Matilal, B. K. (1986) Perception: An essay on classical Indian theories of
knowledge. Clarendon Press.
[EW]
Matin, E. (1974) Saccadic suppression: A review and an analysis. Psychological
Bulletin 81(12):899–917.
[aJKO]
Matin, L. (1972) Eye movements and perceived visual direction. In: Handbook of
sensory physiology. Vol. VII/4: Visual psychophysics, ed. D. Jameson & L. M.
Hurvich. Springer-Verlag.
[aJKO] 
(1986) Visual localization and eye movements. In: Handbook of perception and
human performance, vol. 1, ed. K. R. Boff, L. Kaufman & J. P. Thomas. Wiley.
[aJKO]
Maturana, H. R. & Varela, F. J. (1989/1992) The tree of knowledge: The biological
roots of human understanding. Revised Edition. Shambala.
[aJKO]
Maund, J. B. (1975) The representative theory of perception. Canadian Journal of
Philosophy 5(1):41–55.
[EW]
(1993) Representation, pictures and resemblance. In: New representationalisms:
Essays in the philosophy of perception, ed. E. Wright. Avebury.
[EW]
(1995) Colours: Their nature and representation. Cambridge University Press.
[EW]
McCollough, C. (1965a) Color adaptation of edge-detectors in the human visual
system. Science 149:1115–16.
[aJKO]
(1965b) The conditioning of color perception. American Journal of Psychology
78:362–68.
[aJKO]
McConkie, G. W. & Currie, C. B. (1996) Visual stability across saccades while
viewing complex pictures. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human
Perception and Performance 22(3):563–81.
[aJKO]
McConkie, G. W. & Zola, D. (1979) Is visual information integrated across
successive fixations in reading? Perception and Psychophysics 25(3):221–24.
[rJKO, BJS]
McGurk, H. & MacDonald, J. (1976) Hearing lips and seeing voices. Nature
264(5588):746–48.
[aJKO]
McIntyre, J., Zago, M., Berthoz, A. & Lacquaniti, F. (2001) Does the brain model
Newton’s laws. Nature Neuroscience 4:693–94.
[FL]
Meltzoff, A. N. & Moore, M. K. (1998) Object representation, identity, and the
paradox of early permanence: Steps toward a new framework. Infant Behavior
and Development 21:201–35.
[MS]
Merleau-Ponty, M. (1968) Résumés de cours au Collège de France. Gallimard.
[aJKO]
Merzenich, M. M., Nelson, R. J., Kaas, J. H., Stryker, M. P., Jenkins, W. M., Zook,
J. M., Cynader, M. S. & Schoppmann, A. (1987) Variability in hand surface
References/O’Regan & Noë: A sensorimotor account of vision and visual consciousness
1026
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (2001) 24:5

representations in areas 3b and 1 in adult owl and squirrel monkeys. Journal
of Comparative Neurology 258(2):281–96.
[aJKO] 
Merzenich, M. M., Nelson, R. J., Stryker, M. P., Cynader, M. S., Schoppmann, A.
& Zook, J. M. (1984) Somatosensory cortical map changes following digit
amputation in adult monkeys. Journal of Comparative Neurology 224(4):591–
605.
[aJKO]
Miller, G. A. (1984) Informavores. In: The study of information: Interdisciplinary
messages, ed. F. Machlup & U. Mansfield. Wiley.
[ZWP]
Milner, A. D. & Goodale, M. A. (1995) The visual brain in action. Oxford
University Press.
[UA, SJB, AC, MAG, aJKO, ZWP]
Milner, A. D., Perrett, D. I., Johnston, R. S., Benson, P. J., Jordan, T. R., Heeley,
D. W., Bettucci, D., Mortara, F., Mutani, R., Terazzi, E. & Davidson, D. L. W.
(1991) Perception and action in “visual form agnosia.” Brain 114:405–28.
[aJKO] 
Milner, P. M. (1974) A model for visual shape recognition. Psychological Review
81:521–35.
[aJKO]
Minsky, M. (1988) The society of mind. Simon & Schuster.
[arJKO]
Mokler, A. & Fischer, B. (1999) The recognition and correction of involuntary
saccades in an antisaccade task. Experimental Brain Research 125:511–16.
[BF]
Moran, J. & Desimone, R. (1985) Selective attention gates visual processing in
extrastriate cortex. Science 229:782–84.
[aJKO]
Morell, F. (1972) Visual system’s view of acoustic space. Nature 238:44–46.
[aJKO]
Morgan, M. J. (1977) Molyneux’s question. Vision, touch and the philosophy of
perception. Cambridge University Press.
[aJKO]
Müller, G. E. (1896) Zur Psychophysik der Gesichtsempfindungen. (Concerning
the psychophysics of visual sensations). Zeitschrift für Psychologie 10:1–82.
[ZWP]
Müller, H. J. & Rabbitt, P. M. (1989) Reflexive and voluntary orienting of visual
attention: Time course of activation and resistance to interruption. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Human Perception and Performance 15(2):315–30.
[PB]
Müller, J. (1838) Handbuch der Physiologie des Menschen. Hölscher.
[aJKO]
Munakata, Y., McClelland, J. L., Johnson, M. H. & Siegler, R. S. (1997) Rethinking
infant knowledge: Toward an adaptive process account of successes and failures
in object permanence tasks. Psychological Review 104:686–713.
[MS]
Nakajima, N. & Shimojo, S. (1981) Adaptation to the reversal of binocular depth
cues: Effects of wearing left-right reversing spectacles on stereoscopic depth-
perception. Perception 10:391–402.
[EW]
Nazir, T. A. & O’Regan, J. K. (1990) Some results on translation invariance in the
human visual system. Spatial Vision 5(2):81–100.
[aJKO]
Neisser, U. (1967) Cognitive psychology. Appleton-Century-Crofts.
[JH, GR]
(1976) Cognition and reality: Principles and implications of cognitive
psychology. W. H. Freeman.
[aJKO, JRP]
Neisser, U. & Becklen, R. (1975) Selective looking: Attending to visually-specified
events. Cognitive Psychology 7:480–94.
[JH, aJKO]
Neumann, O. (1989) Kognitive Vermittlung und direkte Parameterspezifikation.
Zum Problem mentaler Repräsentation in der Wahrnehmung. [Cognitive
mediation and direct parameter specification. On the problem of mental
representation in perception.] Sprache und Kognition 8:32–49.
[UA]
(1990) Direct parameter specification and the concept of perception.
Psychological Research/Psychologische Forschung 52:207–15.
[UA]
Neumann, O., Ansorge, U. & Klotz, W. (1998) Funktionsdifferenzierung im
visuellen Kortex: Grundlage für motorische Aktivierung durch nicht bewußt
wahrgenommene Reize? [Functional differentiation in the visual cortex: Basis
for motor activation by not consciously perceived stimuli?] Psychologische
Rundschau 49:185–96.
[UA]
Neumann, O. & Klotz, W. (1994) Motor responses to nonreportable, masked
stimuli: Where is the limit of direct parameter specification? In: Attention and
performance XV: Conscious and nonconscious information processing, ed. C.
Umiltà & M. Moscovitch. MIT Press.
[UA]
Nijhawan, R. (1994) Motion extrapolation in catching. Nature 370:256–57.
[JBJS]
Noë, A. (1997) Perception and content. Behavioral and Brain Sciences 21(1):154–
55.
[aJKO]
(2001) Experience and the active mind. Synthese 29:41–60.
[aJKO]
(2002) On what we see. Pacific Philosophical Quarterly 83(1):57–80.
[aJKO]
Noë, A. & O’Regan, J. K. (2000) Perception, attention, and the grand illusion. PSYCHE
6(15). http://psyche.cs.monash.edu.au/v6/psche-6-15-noe.html
[aJKO]
Noë, A. Pessoa, L. & Thompson, E. (2000) Beyond the grand illusion: What change
blindness really teaches us about vision. Visual Cognition 7:93–106.
[aJKO]
Noë, A. & Thompson, E. (in press) Neural correlates of consciousness and the
matching-content doctrine. Journal of Consciousness Studies.
[rJKO]
Nolfi, S. & Parisi, D. (1999) Exploiting the power of sensory-motor coordination.
In: Advances in artificial life: Proceedings of the Fifth European Conference
on Artificial Life, ed. D. Floreano, J.-D. Nicoud & F. Mondada. Springer-
Verlag.
[MS]
Norman, D. A. (1969) Memory and attention. Wiley.
[JRP]
Norman, R. A., Maynard, E. M., Rousche, P. J. & Warren, D. J. (1999) A neural
interface for a cortical vision prosthesis. Vision Research 39(15):2577–87.
[ZWP]
Noton, D. & Stark, L. (1971) Eye movements and visual perception. Scientific
American 224(6):35–43.
[aJKO]
Nusbaum, H. C., Alperin, N., Towle, V. L., Francis, A. L., Barshes, N., Yarger, R.,
Small, S. & Solodkin, A. (1999) Cortical localization of linguistic expectations.
Paper presented at the Psychonomics Society, Los Angeles.
[HCN]
Nusbaum, H. C. & Henly, A. S. (1992) Listening to speech through an adaptive
window of analysis. In: The processing of speech: From the auditory periphery
to word recognition, ed. B. Schouten. Mouton-De Gruyter.
[HCN]
Nusbaum, H. C. & Magnuson, J. S. (1997) Talker normalization: Phonetic
constancy as a cognitive process. In: Talker variability in speech processing,
ed. K. A. Johnson & J. W. Mullennix. Academic Press.
[HCN]
Nusbaum, H. C. & Morin, T. M. (1992) Paying attention to differences among
talkers. In: Speech perception, production and linguistic structure, ed. Y.
Tohkura, E. Vatikiotis-Bateson & Y. Sagisaka. OHM Publishing.
[HCN]
Nusbaum, H. C. & Schwab, E. C. (1986) The role of attention and active
processing in speech perception. In: Pattern recognition by humans and
machines: Vol. 1, Speech perception, ed. E. C. Schwab & H. C. Nusbaum.
Academic Press.
[HCN]
O’Brien, G. & Opie, J. (1999) A connectionist theory of phenomenal experience.
Behavioral and Brain Sciences 21:127–96.
[RM]
O’Keefe, J., Burgess, N., Donnett, J. G., Jeffery, K. J. & Maguire, E. A. (1998)
Place cells, navigational accuracy, and the human hippocampus. Philosophical
Transactions of the Royal Society of London (B): Biological Sciences
353(1373):1333–40.
[aJKO]
O’Regan, J. K. (1984) Retinal versus extraretinal influences in flash localization
during saccadic eye movements in the presence of a visible background.
Perception and Psychophysics 36(1):1–14.
[aJKO]
(1992) Solving the “real” mysteries of visual perception: The world as an outside
memory. Canadian Journal of Psychology 46(3):461–88.
[PB, JH, aJKO,
BJS]
O’Regan, J. K., Deubel, H., Clark, J. J. & Rensink, R. A. (2000) Picture changes
during blinks: Looking without seeing and seeing without looking. Visual
Cognition 7:191–212.
[aJKO]
O’Regan, J. K. & Lévy-Schoen, A. (1983) Integrating visual information from
successive fixations: Does trans-saccadic fusion exist? Vision Research
23(8):765–68.
[JS]
O’Regan, J. K., Rensink, J. A. & Clark, J. J. (1996) “Mud splashes” render picture
changes invisible. Investigative Ophthalmology and Visual Science 37:S213.
[aJKO]
(1999) Change-blindness as a result of “mudsplashes.” Nature 398:34.
[aJKO]
Paillard, J. (1971) Les déterminants moteurs de l’organisation spatiale. Cahiers de
Psychologie 14:261–316.
[aJKO]
(1991) Motor and representational framing of space. In: Brain and space, ed. J.
Paillard. Oxford University Press.
[aJKO]
Palmer, S. (1999a) Color, consciousness, and the isomorphism constraint.
Behavioral and Brain Sciences 22:923–89.
[KO]
(1999b) Vision science: Photons to phenomenology. MIT Press.
[GO]
Pani, J. R. (1996) Mental imagery as the adaptationist views it. Consciousness and
Cognition 5:288–326.
[JRP]
(2000) Cognitive description and change blindness. In: Visual cognition: Change
blindness and visual memory, ed. D. J. Simons. [Special issue of Visual
Cognition]. Psychology Press.
[JRP]
Pannasch, S., Dornhoefer, S. M., Unema, P. J. A. & Velichkovsky, B. M. (2001) The
omnipresent prolongation of visual fixations. Vision Research 41(25–
26):3345–51.
[BMV]
Paradiso, M. A. & Nakayama, K. (1991) Brightness perception and filling-in. Vision
Research 31(7–8):1221–36.
[aJKO]
Parker, R. E. (1978) Picture processing during recognition. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Human Perception and Performance 4(2):284–93.
[JDR]
Parks, T. E. (1965) Post-retinal visual storage. American Journal of Psychology
78:145–47.
[ZWP]
Pascual-Leone, A., Cammarota, A., Wassermann, E. M., Brasil-Neto, J. P., Cohen,
L. G. & Hallett, M. (1993) Modulation of motor cortical outputs to the
reading hand of Braille readers. Annals of Neurology 34(1):33–37.
[aJKO]
Pascual-Leone, A. & Walsh, V. (2001) Fast backprojections from the motion to the
primary visual area necessary for visual awareness. Science 292(5516):510–12.
[GR]
Penfield, W. & Jasper, H. (1954) Epilepsy and the functional anatomy of the
human brain. Little, Brown.
[aJKO]
Penrose, R. (1994) Shadows of the mind. Oxford University Press.
[aJKO]
Peper, L., Bootsma, R. J., Mestre, D. R. & Bakker, F. C. (1994) Catching balls:
How to get the hand to the right place at the right time. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Human Perception and Performance 20:591–612.
[FL]
References/O’Regan & Noë: A sensorimotor account of vision and visual consciousness
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (2001) 24:5
1027

Pessoa, L., Thompson, E. & Noë, A. (1998) Finding out about filling in: A guide to
perceptual completion for visual science and the philosophy of perception.
Behavioral and Brain Sciences 21(6):723–802.
[aJKO]
Peterhans, E. & von der Heydt, R. (1989) Mechanisms of contour perception in
monkey visual cortex. II. Contours bridging gaps. Journal of Neuroscience
9(5):1749–63.
[aJKO]
Peterson, M. R., Kramer, A. F., Wang, R. F., Irwin, D. E. & McCarley, J. S. (2001)
Visual search has memory. Psychological Science 12(4):287–92.
[JDR]
Petitot, J., Varela, F. J., Pachoud, B. & Roy, J.-M. (1999) Naturalizing
phenomenology. Stanford University Press.
[aJKO]
Pfeifer, R. & Scheier, C. (1999) Understanding intelligence. MIT Press.
[MK]
Phillips, W. A. (1974) On the distinction between sensory storage and short-term
visual memory. Perception and Psychophysics 16:283–90.
[rJKO, BJS]
Piaget, J. (1970) Genetic epistemology. Columbia University Press.
[EW]
Plato (1929) Timaeus. Critias. Cleitophon. Menexenus. Episteles. With an English
translation by R. G. Bury. (Loeb Clasical Library, Plato, vol. IX). Harvard
University Press.
[JB]
Platt, J. R. (1960) How we see straight lines. Scientific American 202(6):121–29.
[aJKO]
Poincaré, H. (1905) La valeur de la science. Flammarion.
[aJKO]
Pollatsek, A., Rayner, K. & Collins, W. E. (1984) Integrating pictorial information
across eye movements. Journal of Experimental Psychology: General
113:426–42.
[PDG]
Pöppel, E., Held, R. & Frost, D. (1973) Residual visual function after brain
wounds involving the central visual pathways in man. Nature 243(405):295–
96.
[aJKO]
Posner, M. I. (1994) Attention: The mechanisms of consciousness. Proceedings of
the National Academy of Sciences USA 91(16):7398–403.
[PB]
Posner, M. I., Snyder, C. R. & Davidson, B. J. (1980) Attention and the detection
of signals. Journal of Experimental Psychology 109:160–74.
[HCN]
Posner, M. I., Walker, J. A., Friedrich, F. J. & Rafal, R. D. (1984) Effects of parietal
injury on covert orienting of attention. Journal of Neuroscience 54:1863–74.
[PB]
Potter, M. C. (11976) Short-term conceptual memory for pictures. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Human Learning 2(5):509–22.
[aJKO]
Pouget, A. & Sejnowski, T. J. (1997) A new view of hemineglect based on the
response properties of parietal neurones. Philosophical Transactions of the
Royal Society of London (B): Biological Sciences 352(1360):1449–59.
[aJKO]
Price, H. H. (1961) Perception. Methuen.
[EW]
Prinz, J. (2000) The ins and outs of consciousness. Brain and Mind 1(2):245–56.
[AC]
Pylyshyn, Z. W. (1988) The imagery debate: Analogue media versus tacit
knowledge. In: Readings in cognitive science: A perspective from psychology
and artificial intelligence, ed. E. E. S. Allan & M. Collins. Morgan Kaufmann.
[aJKO]
(2001) Visual indexes, preconceptual objects, and situated vision. Cognition
80(1/2):127–58.
[ZWP]
(forthcoming) Mental imagery: In search of a theory. Behavioral and Brain
Sciences.
[ZWP]
Radeau, M. (1997) Du ventriloque à l’embryon: Une résponse à Molyneux. In:
Perception et intermodalité. Approches actuelles de la question de Molyneux,
ed. J. Proust. Presses Universitaires de France.
[aJKO]
Radeau, M. & Bertelson, P. (1974) The after-effects of ventriloquism. Quarterly
Journal of Experimental Psychology 26(1):63–71.
[aJKO]
Rainville, R. E. (1994) The role of dreams in the rehabilitation of the adventitiously
blind. Dreaming 4(3):155–64.
[AR]
Ramachandran, V. S. (1992) Filling in gaps in perception: I. Current Directions in
Psychological Science 1(6):199–205.
[aJKO]
(1995) Filling in gaps in logic: Reply to Durgin et al. Perception 24(7):841–45.
[aJKO]
Ramachandran, V. S. & Blakeslee, S. (1998) Phantoms in the brain. William
Morrow.
[aJKO]
Ramachandran, V. S., Cobb, S. & Levi, L. (1994a) Monocular double vision in
strabismus
[letter]. NeuroReport 5(12):1418.
[aJKO]
(1994b) The neural locus of binocular rivalry and monocular diplopia in
intermittent exotropes. NeuroReport 5(9):1141–44.
[aJKO]
Ramachandran, V. S. & Gregory, R. L. (1991) Perceptual filling in of artificially
induced scotomas in human vision. Nature 350(6320):699–702.
[aJKO]
Rees, G. (2001) Neuroimaging of visual awareness in patients and normal subjects.
Current Opinions in Neurobiology 11(2):150–56.
[GR]
Rees, G., Wojciulik, E., Clarke, K., Husain, M., Frith, C. & Driver, J. (2000)
Unconscious activation of visual cortex in the damaged right hemisphere of a
parietal patient with extinction. Brain 123(Pt 8):1624–33.
[GR]
Regan, D. M. & Beverly, K. I. (1982) How do we avoid confounding the direction
we are looking and the direction we are moving? Science 215:194–96.
[N-
GK]
Reid, T. (1785/1969) Essays on the intellectual powers of man. MIT Press.
[NH]
Reingold, E. M. & Merikle, P. M. (1988) Using direct and indirect measures to
study perception without awareness. Perception and Psychophysics 44:563–
75.
[UA]
Reingold, E. M. & Stampe, D. (2000) Saccadic inhibition and gaze contingent
research paradigm. In: Reading as perceptual process, ed. A. Kennedy, R.
Raddach, D. Heller & J. Pynte. Elsevier.
[BMV]
Rensink, R. A. (2000) Seeing, sensing, and scrutinizing. Vision Research 40(10–
12):1469–87.
[BWT]
Rensink, R. A., O’Regan, J. K. & Clark, J. J. (1997) To see or not to see: The need
for attention to perceive changes in scenes. Psychological Science 8(5):368–
73.
[aJKO]
(2000) On the failure to detect changes in scenes across brief interruptions.
Visual Cognition 7(1/2/3):127–46.
[aJKO]
Rep, M., Just, M. A., van Dijl, J. M., Carpenter, P. A., Suda, K., Keller, T. A.,
Schatz, G. & Eddy, W. (1996) Brain activation modulated by sentence
comprehension. Science 274:114–16.
[HCN]
Revonsuo, A. (1995) Consciousness, dreams, and virtual realities. Philosophical
Psychology 8:35–58.
[AR]
(1998) Visual perception and subjective visual awareness. Behavioral and Brain
Sciences 21(6):769–70.
[AR]
(2000) Prospects for a scientific research program on consciousness. In: Neural
correlates of consciousness, ed. T. Metzinger. MIT Press.
[AR]
(2001) Can functional brain imaging discover consciousness in the brain?
Journal of Consciousness Studies 8(3):3–23.
[AR]
Rice, C. E. (1966) The human sonar system, vol. II. Paper presented at the Animal
Sonar Systems Conference: Biology and bionics. NATO Advanced Study
Institute, Frascati, Italy.
[aJKO]
Richards, W. (1969) Saccadic suppression. Journal of the Optical Society of
America 59:617–23.
[aJKO]
Richards, W., ed. (1988) Natural computation. MIT Press/A Bradford Book.
[ZWP]
Ridder, W. H., 3rd & Tomlinson, A. (1997) A comparison of saccadic and blink
suppression in normal observers. Vision Research 37(22):3171–79.
[aJKO]
Rivera, S. M., Wakeley, A. & Langer, J. (1999) The drawbridge phenomenon:
Representational reasoning or perceptual preference? Developmental
Psychology 35:427–35.
[MS]
Rizzolatti, G. & Arbib, M. A. (1998) Language within our grasp. Trends in
Neurosciences 21:188–94.
[HCN]
Rizzolatti, G., Fadiga, L., Gallese, V. & Fogassi, L. (1996) Premotor cortex and the
recognition of motor actions. Cognitive Brain Research 3:131–41.
[VG]
Rizzolatti, G., Matelli, M. & Pavesi, G. (1983) Deficit in attention and movement
following the removal of postarctuate (area 6) and prearctuate (area 8) cortex
in monkey. Brain 106:655–73.
[aJKO]
Rizzolatti, G., Riggio, L. & Sheliga, B. M. (1994) Space and selective attention. In:
Attention and performance XV, C. Umiltà & M. Moscovitch. MIT Press.
[aJKO]
Robertson, I. H. & Hawkins, K. (1999) Limb activation and unilateral neglect.
Neurocase 3:153–60.
[PB]
Rodriguez, E., George, N., Lachaux, J.-P., Martinerie, J., Renault, B. & Varela, F. J.
(1999) Perception’s shadow: Long-distance synchronization of human brain
activity. Nature 397:430–33.
[aJKO]
Roediger, H. L. (1990) Implicit memory: Retention without remembering.
American Psychologist 45:1043–56.
[JDR]
Rogers, B. & Graham, M. (1979) Motion parallax as an independent cue for depth
perception. Perception 8(2):125–34.
[aJKO]
Rogers, S. & Rogers, B. J. (1992) Visual and nonvisual information disambiguate
surfaces specified by motion parallax. Perception and Psychophysics
52(4):446–52.
[aJKO]
Rolls, E. T. (1992) Neurophysiological mechanisms underlying face processing
within and beyond the temporal cortical visual areas. Philosophical
Transactions of the Royal Society of London (B): Biological Sciences
335(1273):11–20; discussion 20–21.
[aJKO]
Rolls, E. T. & O’Mara, S. M. (1995) View-responsive neurons in the primate
hippocampal complex. Hippocampus 5(5):409–24.
[aJKO]
Ross, T. (1933) Machines that think. Scientific American 148:206–208.
[BJS]
Rossetti, Y., Koga, K. & Mano, T. (1993) Prismatic displacement of vision induces
transient changes in the timing of eye hand coordination. Perception and
Psychophysics 54(3):355–64.
[aJKO]
Rossetti, Y., Rode, G., Pisella, L., Farnè, A., Li, L., Boisson, D. & Perenin, M. T.
(1998) Prism adaptation to a rightward optical deviation rehabilitates left
hemispatial neglect. Nature 395:166–69.
[PB]
Royce, J. (1885/1958) The religious aspect of philosophy: A critique of the bases of
conduct and faith. Harper. (Original publication 1885).
[EW]
Royden, C. S., Crowell, J. A. & Banks, M. S. (1994) Estimating heading during eye
movements. Vision Research 34:3197–214.
[N-GK]
Rozenblom Y. Z. & Kornyushina, T. A. (1991) Monocular diplopia. Vcastnik
Oftalmologii 107(3):39–44.
[aJKO]
References/O’Regan & Noë: A sensorimotor account of vision and visual consciousness
1028
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (2001) 24:5

Ryan, J. D., Althoff, R. R., Whitlow, S. & Cohen, N. J. (2000) Amnesia is a deficit
in relational memory. Psychological Science 11(6):454–61.
[JDR]
Ryan, J. D., & Cohen, N. J. (submitted) The nature of visual memory
representations.
[JDR]
Ryle, G. (1949/1990) The concept of mind. Penguin Books.
[JB, DCD, aJKO]
Sadato, N., Pascual-Leone, A., Grafman, J., Deiber, M. P., Ibanez, V. & Hallett, M.
(1998) Neural networks for Braille reading by the blind. Brain 121(Pt.
7):1213–29.
[aJKO]
Salzman, C. D., Britten, K. H. & Newsome, W. T. (1990) Cortical microstimulation
influences perceptual judgements of motion direction. Nature 346(6280):174–
77.
[GR]
Sampaio, E. (1989) Is there a critical age for using the sonicguide with blind
infants? Journal of Visual Impairment and Blindness 83:105–108.
[aJKO]
(1995) Les substitutions sensorielles adaptées aux dèficits visuels importants. In:
Le dèficit visuel. Des fondements neurophysiologiques à la pratique de la
réadaptation, ed. A. B. Assimacopoulos & A. Saffran. Masson.
[aJKO]
Sampaio, E. & Dufier, J. L. (1988) Suppléance sensorielle électronique pour les
jeunes enfants aveugles. Journal Français Ophtalmologique 11(2):161–67.
[aJKO]
Saxberg, B. V. (1987) Projected fire ball trajectories. I. Theory and simulation.
Biological Cybernetics 56:159–75.
[FL]
Schachter, D. L. & Buckner, R. L. (1998) Priming and the brain. Neuron 20:185–
95.
[JDR]
Scheier, C. & Pfeifer, R. (1995) Classification as sensorimotor co-ordination: A case
study on autonomous agents. In: Advances in artificial life: Proceedings of the
Third European Conference on Artificial Life, ed. F. Moran, A. Moreno, P.
Chacon & J. J. Merelo. Springer Verlag.
[MS]
Schlesinger, M. & Barto, A. (1999) Optimal control methods for simulating the
perception of causality in young infants. In: Proceedings of the Twenty First
Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science Society, ed. M. Hahn & S. C.
Stoness. Erlbaum.
[MS]
Schlesinger, M. & Parisi, D. (2001) The agent-based approach: A new direction for
computational models of development. Developmental Review 21:121–46.
[MS]
Schlingensiepen, K.-H., Campbell, F. W., Legge, G. E. & Walker, T. D. (1986) The
importance of eye movements in the analysis of simple patterns. Vision
Research 26(7):1111–17.
[aJKO]
Schmidt, T. (2000) Visual perception without awareness: Priming responses by
color. In: Neural correlates of consciousness, ed. T. Metzinger. MIT Press.
[UA]
Scholl, B. J., Simons, D. J. & Levin, D. T. (submitted) “Change blindness”
blindness: An implicit measure of a metacognitive error.
[BJS]
Schwab, E. C., Nusbaum, H. C. & Pisoni, D. B. (1985) Effects of training on the
perception of synthetic speech. Human Factors 27:395–408.
[HCN]
Scott-Brown, K. C., Baker, M. R. & Orbach, H. S. (2000) Comparison blindness.
Visual Cognition 7:253–67.
[BJS]
Sellars, R. W. (1919) The epistemology of evolutionary naturalism. Mind
28(112):407–26.
[EW]
(1922) Evolutionary naturalism. Open Court.
[EW]
(1932) The philosophy of physical realism. Macmillan.
[EW]
Shakhnovich, A. R. & et al. (1982) Phosphene formation during electrical
stimulation of the visual cortex. Human Physiology 8(1):34–39.
[ZWP]
Sharp, R. H. & Whiting, H. T. (1974) Exposure and occluded duration effects in a
ball catching skill. Journal of Motor Behavior 6:139–47.
[FL]
Shebilske, W. L. (1977) Visuomotor coordination, visual direction and position
constancies. In: Stability and constancy in visual perception: Mechanisms and
processes, ed. W. Epstein. Wiley.
[aJKO]
Shepard, R. N. (1978) The mental image. American Psychologist 33:125–37.
[PByR]
Shinar, D. (1978) Psychology on the road: The human factor in traffic safety. Wiley.
[N-GK]
Siewart, C. (1998) The significance of consciousness. Princeton University Press.
[NB]
Silbersweig, D. A., Stern, E., Frith, C., Cahill, C., Holmes, A., Grootoonk, S.,
Seaward, J., McKenna, P., Chua, S. E., Schnorr, L. & et al. (1995) A functional
neuroanatomy of hallucinations in schizophrenia. Nature 378(6553):176–79.
[GR]
Simon, T. J. (1998) Computational evidence for the foundations of numerical
competence. Developmental Science 1:71–78.
[MS]
Simons, D. J. (1996) In sight, out of mind: When object representations fail.
Psychological Science 7(5):301–305.
[BWT]
(2000a) Change blindness and visual memory: A special issue of the journal
“Visual Cognition.” Psychology Press.
[BJS]
(2000b) Current approaches to change blindness. Visual Cognition 7:1–16.
[aJKO, BJS] Also in: Visual cognition: Change blindness and visual memory,
ed. D. J. Simons. [Special issue of Visual Cognition]. Psychology Press.
[JRP]
Simons, D. J. & Chabris, C. F. (1999) Gorillas in our midst: Sustained inattentional
blindness for dynamic events. Perception 28(9):1059–74.
[aJKO]
Simons, D. J., Chabris, C. F., Schnur, T. & Levin, D. T. (in press) Preserved
representations in change blindness. Consciousness and Cognition.
[BJS]
Simons, D. J., Franconeri, S. L. & Reimer, R. L. (2000) Change blindness in the
absence of a visual disruption. Perception 29:1143–54.
[BJS]
Simons, D. J. & Levin, D. T. (1997) Change blindness. Trends in Cognitive
Sciences 1(7):261–67.
[aJKO]
Singer, W. (1993) Synchronization of cortical activity and its putative role in
information processing and learning. Annual Review of Physiology 55:349–74.
[aJKO]
Singer, W. & Gray, C. M. (1995) Visual feature integration and the temporal
correlation hypothesis. Annual Review of Neurosciences 18:555–86.
[aJKO]
Small, S. L., Burton, M. W., Perfetti, C. A. & Noll, D. C. (2000) Sentence listening
with and without responding. (submitted).
[HCN]
Smania, N., Martini, M. C., Gambina, G., Tomelleri, G., Palamara, A., Natale, E. &
Marzi, C. A. (1998) The spatial distribution of visual attention in hemineglect
and extinction patients. Brain 121(Pt. 9):1759–70.
[PB]
Smeets, J. B. J. & Brenner, E. (1994) The difference between the perception of
absolute and relative motion: A reaction time study. Vision Research 34:191–
95.
[JBJS]
(1995) Perception and action are based on the same visual information:
Distinction between position and velocity. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Human Perception and Performance 21:19–31.
[JBJS]
(1999) A new view on grasping. Motor Control 3:237–71.
[JBJS]
(2001) Action beyond our grasp. Trends in Cognitive Sciences 5:287.
[JBJS]
Smith, K. U. & Smith, W. M. (1962) Perception and motion. W. B. Saunders.
[aJKO]
Southall, J. P. C., ed. (1962) Helmholtz’s treatise on physiological optics. Vol. 2: The
sensation of vision, trans. J. P. C. Southall. (Translated from the third German
edition). Dover.
[VV]
Spelke, E. S. (1998) Nativism, empiricism, and the origins of knowledge. Infant
Behavior and Development 21:181–200.
[MS]
Sperling, G. (1960) The information available in brief visual presentations.
Psychological Monographs 74:1–29.
[JH, VAFL]
Sperry, R. W. (1952) Neurology and the mind-brain problem. American Scientist
40:291–311.
[JH, aJKO]
Stadler, M. (1989) On learning complex procedural knowledge. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition 15:1061–69.
[VGH]
Stelmach, L. B., Bourassa, C. M. & di Lollo, V. (1984) Detection of stimulus
change: The hypothetical roles of visual transient responses. Perception and
Psychophysics 35(3):245–55.
[aJKO]
Sterr, A., Muller, M. M., Elbert, T., Rockstroh, B., Pantev, C. & Taub, E. (1998)
Perceptual correlates of changes in cortical representation of fingers in blind
multifinger Braille readers. Journal of Neuroscience 18(11):4417–23.
[aJKO]
Stewart, I. (1986) Exotic structures on four-space. Nature 322:310–11.
[EW]
Stoerig, P. (1996) Varieties of vision: From blind responses to conscious
recognition. Trends in Neurosciences 19:401–406.
[VAFL]
Stratton, G. M. (1897) Vision without inversion of the retinal image. Psychological
Review 4:341–60; 463–81.
[aJKO]
Strauch, I. & Meier, B. (1996) In search of dreams. Results of experimental dream
research. SUNY Press.
[AR]
Straus, E. (1963) The primary world of senses. The Free Press of Glencoe Collier-
Macmillan.
[UA]
Strawson, G. (1989) Red and ‘red’. Synthese 78:194.
[rJKO]
Strawson, P. F. (1974) Imagination and perception. In: P. F. Strawson, Freedom and
resentment and other essays. Methuen.
[aJKO]
Strelow, E. R. & Brabyn, J. A. (1982) Locomotion of the blind controlled by natural
sound cues. Perception 11(6):635–40.
[aJKO]
Stroud, J. M. (1955) The fine structure of psychological time. In: Information
theory in psychology: Problems and methods, ed. H. Quastler. Free Press.
[rJKO, BJS]
Stubenberg, L. (1998) Consciousness and qualia. John Benjamins.
[RM]
Super, H., Spekreijse, H. & Lamme, V. A. F. (2001) Two distinct modes of sensory
processing observed in monkey primary visual cortex (V1). Nature
Neuroscience 4:304–10.
[VAFL]
Tastevin, J. (1937) En partant de l’expérience d’aristote les déplacements artificiels
des parties du corps ne sont pas suivis par le sentiment de ces parties ni par
les sensations qu’on peut y produire. L’Encéphale XXXII(2):57–84.
[aJKO]
Tatler, B. W. (2001) Characterising the visual buffer: Real-world evidence for
overwriting early in each fixation. Perception 30(8):993–1006.
[JS]
Taylor, J. G. (1962) The behavioral basis of perception. Yale University Press.
[aJKO]
Teller, D. Y. (1984) Linking propositions. Vision Research 24:1233–46.
[aJKO]
Teller, D. Y. & Pugh, E. N., Jr. (1983) Linking propositions in color vision. In:
Colour vision: Physiology and psychophysics, ed. J. D. Mollon & L. T. Sharpe.
Academic Press.
[aJKO]
Theeuwes, J. (1991) Exogenous and endogenous control of attention: The effect of
visual onsets and offsets. Perception and Psychophysics 49(1):83–90.
[aJKO]
References/O’Regan & Noë: A sensorimotor account of vision and visual consciousness
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (2001) 24:5
1029

Thomas, N. J. (1999) Are theories of imagery theories of imagination? An active
perception approach to conscious mental content. Cognitive Science
23(2):207–45.
[JH, aJKO]
Thompson, E. (1995) Colour vision: A study in cognitive science and the
philosophy of perception. Routledge.
[aJKO]
Thompson, E., Noë, A. & Pessoa, L. (1999) Perceptual completion: A case study in
phenomenology and cognitive science. In: Naturalizing phenomenology:
Issues in contemporary phenomenology and cognitive science, ed. J. Petitot, 
J.-M. Roy, B. Pachoud & F. J. Varela. Stanford University Press.
[aJKO]
Thompson, E., Palacios, A. & Varela, F. J. (1992) Ways of coloring: Comparative
color vision as a case study for cognitive science. Behavioral and Brain
Sciences 15(1):1–74.
[aJKO]
Thompson, E. & Varela, F. J. (2001) Radical embodiment: Neural dynamics and
conscious experience. Trends in Cognitive Sciences. (in press).
[aJKO]
Thorpe, S., Fize, D. & Marlot, C. (1996) Speed of processing in the human visual
system. Nature 381(6582):520–22.
[aJKO]
Todorovic, D. (1987) The Craik-O’Brien-Cornsweet effect: New varieties and their
theoretical implications. Perception and Psychophysics 42(6):545–60.
[aJKO]
Toet, A. & Levi, D. M. (1992) The two-dimensional shape of spatial interaction
zones in the parafovea. Vision Research 32(7):1349–57.
[aJKO]
Tolhurst, D. J. (1975) Sustained and transient channels in human vision. Vision
Research 15:1151–55.
[aJKO]
Tong, F., Nakayama, K., Vaughan, J. T. & Kanwisher, N. (1998) Binocular rivalry
and visual awareness in human extrastriate cortex. Neuron 21(4):753–59.
[GR]
Tresilian, J. R. (1993) Four questions of time to contact: A critical examination of
research on interceptive timing. Perception 22:653–80.
[FL]
(1999) Visually timed action: Time-out for ‘tau’? Trends in Cognitive Sciences
3:301–10.
[FL]
Treue, S. & Maunsell, J. H. R. (1996) Attentional modulation of visual motion
processing in cortical areas MT and MST. Nature 382:539–41.
[aJKO]
Tulving, E. & Schacter, D. L. (1990) Priming and human memory systems. Science
247(4940):301–306.
[JDR]
Turvey, M. T., Shaw, R. E., Reed, E. S. & Mace, W. M. (1981) Ecological laws of
perceiving and acting: In reply to Fodor and Pylyshyn (1981). Cognition
9(3):237–304.
[aJKO]
Uchikawa, K. & Sato, M. (1995) Saccadic suppression of achromatic and chromatic
responses measured by increment-threshold spectral sensitivity. Journal of the
Optical Society of America (A) 12(4):661–66.
[aJKO]
Ullman, S. (1979) The interpretation of visual motion. MIT Press.
[ZWP]
(1980) Against direct perception. Behavioral and Brain Sciences 3:373–415.
[BJS]
Umiltà, M. A., Kohler, E., Gallese, V., Fogassi, L., Fadiga, L., Keysers, C. &
Rizzolatti, G. (2001) “I know what you are doing”: A neurophysiological study.
Neuron 31:155–65.
[VG]
Ungerleider, L. G. & Mishkin, M. (1992) Two cortical visual systems. In: Analysis
of visual behavior, ed. D. J. Ingle, M. A. Goodale & R. J. W. Mansfield. MIT
Press.
[aJKO]
Uusitalo, M. A., Virsu, V., Salenius, S., Näsänen, R. & Hari, R. (1997) Activation of
human V5 complex and rolandic regions in association with moving visual
stimuli. Neuroimage 5:1053–59.
[VV]
Vanni, S., Portin, K., Virsu, V. & Hari, R. (1999) Mu ryhthm modulation during
changes of visual percepts. Neuroscience 91:21–31.
[VV]
Vanni, S., Revonsuo, A. & Hari, R. (1997) Modulation of the parieto-occipital alpha
rhythm during object detection. The Journal of Neuroscience 17:7141–47.
[VV]
Vanni, S., Revonsuo, A., Saarinen, J. & Hari, R. (1996) Visual awareness of objects
correlates with activity of right occipital cortex. NeuroReport 8:183–86.
[VV]
Varela, F. J. (1984) Living ways of sense-making. A middle path for neuroscience.
Paper presented at the disorder and order symposium: Proceedings of the
Stanford International Symposium.
[aJKO]
Varela, F. J. & Shear, J. (1999) The view from within. Journal of Consciousness
Studies 6(2/3):293–96.
[aJKO]
Varela, F. J., Thompson, E. & Rosch, E. (1991) The embodied mind: Cognitive
science and human experience. MIT Press.
[aJKO]
Vega-Bermudez, F. & Johnson, K. O. (1999) SA1 and RA receptive fields, response
variability, and population responses mapped with a probe array. Journal of
Neurophysiology 81(6):2701–10.
[EN]
Velichkovsky, B. M., Luria, A. R. & Zinchenko, V. P. (1973) Psychologia vospriatia
[Psychology of perception]. Moscow University Press.
[BMV]
Verfaillie, K. & De Graef, P. (2000) Transsaccadic memory for position and
orientation of saccade source and target. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Human Perception and Performance 26:1243–59.
[PDG]
Virsu, V. & Hari, R. (1996) Cortical magnification, scale invariance, and their
biology. Vision Research 36:2971–77.
[VV]
von der Heydt, R. & Peterhans, E. (1989) Mechanisms of contour perception in
monkey visual cortex. I. Lines of pattern discontinuity. Journal of
Neuroscience 9(5):1731–48.
[aJKO]
von der Heydt, R., Peterhans, E. & Baumgartner, G. (1984) Illusory contours and
cortical neuron responses. Science 224(4654):1260–62.
[aJKO]
von der Malsburg, C. (1983) How are nervous structures organized? In:
Synergetics of the brain, ed. E. Basar, H. Flohr, H. Haken & A. J. Mandell.
Springer.
[aJKO]
von Melchner, L., Pallas, S. L. & Sur, M. (2000) Visual behaviour mediated by
retinal projections directed to the auditory pathway. Nature 404:871–76.
[aJKO]
Vuilleumier, P., Sagiv, N., Hazeltine, E., Poldrack, R., Rafal, R. & Gabrieli, J.
(2001) The neural fate of seen and unseen faces in visuospatial neglect: A
combined event-related fMRI and ERP study of visual extinction. Proceedings
of the National Academy of Sciences USA 98:3495–500.
[GR]
Wagemans, J. & de Weert, C. M. M. (1992) Ways of coloring the ecological
approach. Behavioral and Brain Sciences 15(1):54–56.
[aJKO]
Walker, R., Deubel, H., Schneider, W. X. & Findlay, J. M. (1997) Effect of remote
distractors on saccade programming. Journal of Neurophysiology 78:1108–19.
[BMV]
Wall, J. T., Kaas, J. H., Sur, M., Nelson, R. J., Felleman, D. J. & Merzenich, M. M.
(1986) Functional reorganization in somatosensory cortical areas 3b and 1 of
adult monkeys after median nerve repair: Possible relationships to sensory
recovery in humans. Journal of Neuroscience 6(1):218–33.
[aJKO]
Warren, D. H., Welch, R. B. & McCarthy, T. J. (1981) The role of visual-auditory
“compellingness” in the ventriloquism effect: Implications for transitivity
among the spatial senses. Perception and Psychophysics 30(6):557–64.
[aJKO]
Warren, R. M. (1970) Perceptual restoration of missing speech sounds. Science
167:392–93.
[FI]
Warren, W. H. (1995) Self motion: Visual perception and visual control. In:
Perception of space and motion, ed. W. Epstein & S. Rogers. Academic Press.
[N-GK]
Watson, J. S., Banks, M. S., von Hofsten, C. & Royden, C. S. (1992) Gravity as a
monocular cue for perception of absolute distance and/or absolute size.
Perception 21:69–76.
[FL]
Weber, H., Dürr, N. & Fischer, B. (1998) Effects of pre-cues on voluntary and
reflexive saccade generation. II. Pro-cues for anti-saccades. Experimental
Brain Research 120:417–31.
[BF]
Weiskrantz, L. (1986) Blindsight: A case study and implications. Oxford University
Press.
[aJKO]
(1997) Consciousness lost and found: A neuropsychological exploration. Oxford
University Press.
[aJKO]
Welch, R. B., Bridgeman, B., Anand, S. & Browman, K. E. (1993) Alternating
prism exposure causes dual adaptation and generalization to a novel
displacement. Perception and Psychophysics 54(2):195–204.
[aJKO]
White, J. C., Saunders, F. A., Scadden, L., Bach-y-Rita, P. & Collins, C. C. (1970)
Seeing with the skin. Perception and Psychophysics 7:23–27.
[aJKO]
Whitney, D. & Murakami, I. (1998) Latency difference, not spatial extrapolation.
Nature Neuroscience 1:656–57.
[JBJS]
Wolfe, J. M. (1997) Visual experience: Less than you think, more than you
remember. In: Neuronal basis and psychological aspects of consciousness, ed.
C. Taddei-Ferretti. World Scientific.
[aJKO]
(1999) Inattentional amnesia. In: Fleeting memories, ed. V. Coltheart. MIT
Press.
[aJKO]
Wolfe, J. M., Klempen, N. & Dahlen, K. (2000) Post-attentive vision. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Human Perception and Performance 26(2):693–
716.
[PDG, aJKO, JDR]
Wolpert, D. M. (1997) Computational approaches to motor control. Trends in
Cognitive Sciences 1:209–16.
[VG]
Wolpert, D. M., Ghahramani, Z. & Jordan, M. I. (1995) An internal model for
sensorimotor integration. Science 269:1880–82.
[VG]
Worchel, P., Mauney, J. & Andrew, J. (1950) The perception of obstacles by the
blind. Journal of Experimental Psychology 40:746–51.
[aJKO]
Wright, E. L. (1975) Perception: A new theory. American Philosophical Quarterly
14(4):273–32.
[EW]
(1983) Inspecting images. Philosophy 58(223):51–72.
[EW]
(1990) New representationalism. Journal for the Theory of Social Behaviour
20(1):65–91.
[EW]
(1992) The entity fallacy in epistemology. Philosophy 67(259):33–50.
[EW]
(1994) A new critical realism: An examination of Roy Wood Sellars’
epistemology. Transactions of the C. S. Pierce Society 30(3):477–514.
[EW]
(1996) What it isn’t like. American Philosophical Quarterly 33(1):23–42.
[EW]
(1999) The game of reference. In: Connectionism and the philosophy of
psychology, ed. M. Potrc. Acta Analytica 22.
[EW]
(2000) The Joke, the “As If” and the Statement. In: The analytic Freud, ed. M.
Levine. Routledge.
[EW]
(2001) Faith and the real. In: Slavoj Zizek: Faith and the real, ed. E. Wright.
Paragraph 24:5–22.
[EW]
References/O’Regan & Noë: A sensorimotor account of vision and visual consciousness
1030
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (2001) 24:5

Wynn, K. (1992) Addition and subtraction by human infants. Nature 358:749–50.
[MS]
Yantis, S. (1998) Control of visual attention. In: Attention, ed. H. Pashler.
Psychology Press/Erlbaum/Taylor & Francis.
[aJKO]
Yap, Y. L., Levi, D. M. & Klein, S. A. (1989) Peripheral positional acuity: Retinal
and cortical constraints on 2-dot separation discrimination under photopic and
scotopic conditions. Vision Research 29(7):789–802.
[aJKO]
Zatorre, R. J., Evans, A., Meyer, E. & Gjedde, A. (1992) Lateralization of phonetic
and pitch discrimination in speech processing. Science 256:846–49.
[HCN]
Zeki, S. (1993) A vision of the brain. Blackwell.
[aJKO]
Zihl, J., von Cramon, D. & Mai, N. (1983) Selective disturbance of movement
vision after bilateral brain damage. Brain 106(Pt 2):313–40.
[GR]
Zipser, D. & Anderson, R. (1988) A back-propagation programmed network that
simulates response properties of a subset of posterior parietal neurons. Nature
331:679–84.
[aJKO]
References/O’Regan & Noë: A sensorimotor account of vision and visual consciousness
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (2001) 24:5
1031

