In this target article I discuss the relations among mind,
brain, behavior, and science in the particular domain of
color perception. My reasons for approaching these diffi-
cult issues from the perspective of color experience are
twofold. First, there is a long philosophical tradition of de-
bating the nature of internal experiences of color, dating
from John Locke’s (1690/1987) discussion of the so-called
inverted spectrum argument. This intuitively compelling
argument will be an important historical backdrop for much
of this target article. Second, from a scientific standpoint,
color is perhaps the most tractable, best understood aspect
of mental life. It demonstrates better than any other topic
how a mental phenomenon can be more fully understood
by integrating knowledge from many different disciplines
(Kay & McDaniel 1978; Palmer 1999; Thompson 1995). In
this target article I turn once more to color for new insights
into how conscious experience can be studied and under-
stood scientifically.
I begin with a brief description of the inverted spectrum
problem as posed in classical philosophical terms and then
discuss how empirical constraints on the answer can be
brought to bear in terms of the structure of human color ex-
perience as it is currently understood scientifically. This
discussion ultimately leads to a principled distinction,
called the isomorphism constraint, between what can and
cannot be determined about the nature of experience by
objective behavioral means. Finally, I consider the
prospects for achieving a biologically based explanation of
color experience, ending with some speculation about lim-
itations on what science can achieve with respect to under-
standing color experience and other forms of conscious-
ness.
1. Detecting transformations of color experience
The basic intuition that underlies Locke’s (1690/1987) in-
verted spectrum argument is that other people might have
the same overall set of color experiences you do but they
might be differently connected to objects in the external
world. When you and I look at the same red apple under
the same lighting conditions, for example, do we have the
same internal experience of redness, or might I have the ex-
perience you call greenness, or yellowness, or some other
color? The issue is perhaps most clearly captured by the sit-
uation of looking at a rainbow. You perceive a particular or-
dering of chromatic experiences from red at the top to vio-
let at the bottom, but I might perceive exactly the reverse
of your experiences, with violet at the top and red at the bot-
tom. We would both name the color at the top “red” and the
one at the bottom “violet,” of course, because that is what
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1999) 22, 923–989
Printed in the United States of America
© 1999 Cambridge University Press
0140-525X/99 $12.50
923
Color, consciousness, and the
isomorphism constraint
Stephen E. Palmer
Department of Psychology, University of California, Berkeley, 
Berkeley, CA 94720-1650
palmer@cogsci.berkeley.edu
socrates.berkeley.edu/~plab
Abstract: The relations among consciousness, brain, behavior, and scientific explanation are explored in the domain of color perception.
Current scientific knowledge about color similarity, color composition, dimensional structure, unique colors, and color categories is used
to assess Locke’s “inverted spectrum argument” about the undetectability of color transformations. A symmetry analysis of color space
shows that the literal interpretation of this argument – reversing the experience of a rainbow – would not work. Three other color-to-
color transformations might work, however, depending on the relevance of certain color categories. The approach is then generalized to
examine behavioral detection of arbitrary differences in color experiences, leading to the formulation of a principled distinction, called
the “isomorphism constraint,” between what can and cannot be determined about the nature of color experience by objective behavioral
means. Finally, the prospects for achieving a biologically based explanation of color experience below the level of isomorphism are con-
sidered in light of the limitations of behavioral methods. Within-subject designs using biological interventions hold the greatest promise
for scientific progress on consciousness, but objective knowledge of another person’s experience appears impossible. The implications
of these arguments for functionalism are discussed.
Keywords: basic color terms; color; consciousness; functionalism; inverted spectrum; isomorphism; qualia; subjectivity; symmetry
Stephen E. Palmer is Professor of Psychology, Di-
rector of the Institute of Cognitive Studies, and Direc-
tor of the undergraduate major in Cognitive Science at
the University of California at Berkeley. He is the au-
thor of over 60 scientific publications in the area of vi-
sual perception, including his new textbook Vision sci-
ence: Photons to phenomenology (1999, MIT Press),
which provides an introduction to all aspects of vision
from an interdisciplinary perspective. He is a member
of the Society of Experimental Psychologists, a Fellow
of both the American Psychological Association and the
American Psychological Society, and a member of the
Governing Board of the Psychonomic Society.
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0140525X99292217
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Massachusetts Amherst, on 18 Nov 2019 at 06:30:53, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at

we have all been taught. Color naming is presumably me-
diated by internal color experiences, but it is only the soci-
olinguistically sanctioned stimulus-response associations
that matter in our ability to communicate about colors. The
fact that we name the same objects and lights with the same
color terms is hence insufficient to determine whether our
internal chromatic experiences are the same.
The rainbow-reversal interpretation of the inverted spec-
trum argument is quite literal in the sense that we have sup-
posed that my experiences of the spectrally pure (mono-
chromatic) colors are simply the “inverse” of yours about
the spectral midpoint. Notice that the “inverted spectrum
argument” is actually something of a misnomer: It is not the
spectrum that is inverted – that is, nothing has happened to
the rainbow itself – but the inner experiences in response
to the spectrum. It would therefore be more accurate to call
this the “inverted color argument.” And because Locke’s es-
sential point is not limited to literal inversion, but could ap-
ply equally well to any possible mapping of color experi-
ences in one observer (e.g., you) to the same set of color
experiences in another observer (e.g., me), we will call it the
“transformed color argument.” The problem it poses is
whether any such color-to-color transformation (excluding
the identity mapping) could accurately describe the rela-
tion between our color experiences without the differences
being objectively detectable. Because we do not have direct
access to each other’s internal experiences, the question
boils down to whether any such color-to-color transforma-
tion could exist without being detectable through system-
atic differences in our behavior.
Notice that the transformed color argument as formu-
lated above presupposes two important conditions: (1) that
the two observers (canonically referred to as “you” and
“me”) have experiences in response to different spectra 
of electromagnetic energy, and (2) that their overall sets of
color experiences are the same. Dropping one or both of
these assumptions leads to different versions of the more
general “color problem.” Relaxing condition (2) suggests
the possibility that you and I both have experiences in re-
sponse to different light spectra but that one or both of us
has at least some experiences the other does not. Our ex-
periences might overlap to some degree, or they might even
be completely disjoint, so that all my chromatic experiences
in response to light spectra are qualitatively different from
all of yours. Relaxing condition (1) suggests that I might
have no experiences of color whatsoever in response to dif-
ferent light spectra and yet behave as you do with respect
to them. I would be a “color zombie,” able to name colors
properly and produce standard data in various color dis-
crimination and matching experiments, but without having
any corresponding experiences at all. These possibilities
will come to the fore later in this target article, but for now
we will concentrate on the standard form of the problem in
which it is assumed that both you and I have the same set
of color experiences, whatever those might be, and ask
whether they can be shown to be “differently arranged,” so
to speak.
The first problem is how to get a scientific handle on this
philosophical problem of whether transformed color expe-
riences could be detected in publicly observable behavior.
Locke presumed that we could not, but there are many sci-
entifically documented aspects of color-related behavior
that bear critically on the answer. I will argue that whether
there exist any undetectable color-to-color transformations
can be recast into the simple question of whether an em-
pirically accurate model of human color experience con-
tains any symmetries.
1.1. Color similarities. In scientific discussions, color expe-
rience is usually described in terms of spatial models. Per-
haps the simplest and best known is the color circle devised
by Newton (1704), by now familiar to artists and much of
the general public (see Fig. 1). It is an example of a color
space: a multidimensional spatial representation (or model)
in which different color experiences correspond to differ-
ent points in the model. The locations of points represent-
ing colors are chosen so that the degree of psychological
similarity between pairs of colors corresponds to the dis-
tance between the corresponding points in the model. In
the color circle, the spectral colors of the rainbow are posi-
tioned in order along most of the circle’s perimeter, and the
nonspectral colors, including many reds, all magentas, and
most purples, are located along the perimeter between the
blue-violet and orange-red limits of the visible spectrum, as
indicated in Figure 1 by the location of the color names out-
side the circle.
The color circle is a useful model of many aspects of color
experience because it is easy to comprehend yet manages
to capture an immense number of facts about the relations
among color experiences in a highly economical fashion.
The fact that red is perceived as more similar to orange than
to green, for example, is reflected in the fact that the point
representing red is closer to the point representing orange
than it is to the point representing green. Corresponding
Palmer: Color and consciousness
924
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1999) 22:6
Figure 1.
Newton’s color circle and spectral inversion. Colors are
arranged along the perimeter of a color circle, as indicated by the
names on the outside of the circle. Open circles correspond to
unique colors (red, green, blue, and yellow), which look subjec-
tively pure. The dashed diameter indicates the axis of reflection
corresponding to literal spectral inversion, and the dashed arrows
indicate corresponding experiences under this transformation.
Letters in parentheses inside the circle indicate the color experi-
ences a spectrally inverted individual would have to the same phys-
ical stimuli a normal individual would experience as the colors in-
dicated on the outside of the circle.
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0140525X99292217
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Massachusetts Amherst, on 18 Nov 2019 at 06:30:53, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at

similarity relations among triples of color experiences – that
blue is more similar to purple than to yellow, and so on –
are thus faithfully preserved in the distance relations among
triples of points in the color circle. This correspondence be-
tween psychological similarity relations and spatial proxim-
ity relations lies at the heart of Shepard’s (1962a; 1962b) el-
egant nonmetric method of multidimensional scaling, and
recovering the color circle from similarity data was one of
his first demonstrations of its use.
We will now employ Newton’s (admittedly simplistic)
color space to illustrate how such models relate to the in-
verted spectrum argument and why Locke’s intuition seems
initially so compelling. Consider once again the case of lit-
eral spectral inversion, which we will henceforth call “rain-
bow reversal” to be perfectly clear. The hypothesis that my
color experiences are rainbow-reversed relative to yours
would mean that my color circle is the reflection of yours
about the dashed line shown in Figure 1. The abbreviations
inside the circle indicate the color experiences I have in re-
sponse to the same lights that you experience as indicated
on the outside of the circle. Thus, your red corresponds to
my violet (and vice versa), your orange to my blue (and vice
versa), your yellow to my cyan (and vice versa), and your
chartreuse to my green (and vice versa), as indicated by the
dashed arrows perpendicular to the axis of reflection. The
question is whether this color-to-color transformation could
be detected by behavioral means.
It might seem at first blush that similarity judgments
among colors would reveal rainbow reversal, but, in fact, they
would not. You would say that orange is more similar to red
than to green, but so would I, even though this would corre-
spond internally to my experiencing blue as more similar to
violet than to chartreuse. Indeed, we would make all the
same relative similarity judgments about rainbow colors de-
spite the enormous differences in our internal experiences of
them. With respect to color similarity judgments among rain-
bow experiences, then, Locke was right: Rainbow reversal
cannot be detected behaviorally from such data.
The reason rainbow reversal is not behaviorally de-
tectable from such color similarity judgments is that the
empirical model they specify (i.e, the basic color circle) is
symmetric about the axis of reflection that corresponds to
reversing the rainbow. A symmetry in a spatial model is a
transformation that maps the model onto itself so that it is
the same before and after the transformation. Rainbow re-
versal is thus a symmetry of the color circle – but so is any
central reflection or rotation. Indeed, the only thing that
makes any pair of such reflected or rotated color circles dif-
ferent is the nature of the internal experiences themselves.
Because these are private events, any differences between
yours and mine can be assessed only indirectly through our
publicly observable behavior, as Wittgenstein (1953) ar-
gued so forcefully. The general claim is that any symmetry
in a behaviorally constrained color space necessarily speci-
fies a color-to-color transformation that cannot be detected
by the behaviors that constrain the spatial model.
1.2. Color composition. There is much more that we know
about color experience from behavioral observations, how-
ever, and these facts must also constrain the color space
whose symmetries we seek to understand. One important
factor is the composition relations among colors: how some
color experiences can be analyzed into combinations of
other, more basic color experiences. Most colors of the rain-
bow are binary in the sense that they appear to be com-
posed of (or are analyzable into) two of the four primary
chromatic colors: red, green, blue, and yellow.1 Oranges,
for example, seem to contain both redness and yellowness,
purples seem to contain both blueness and redness, and so
forth. In contrast, there are particular shades of red, green,
blue, and yellow that do not appear to be composed of any
other colors.2 For example, there is a particular red, called
unique red, that appears purely red, with no traces of yel-
lowness, blueness, or greenness in it. There are similarly de-
fined unique colors for green, blue, and yellow, each of
which is pure in the same sense of having no traces of the
other primary colors. Moreover, pairs of these primaries are
related to each other as polar opposites: red versus green,
and blue versus yellow. These important hypotheses about
compositional relations among color experiences were
pointed out by Ewald Hering (1878/1964), who used them
as the basis of his opponent process theory of color vision.
Relations of color composition are not the same as or re-
ducible to the relations of color similarity discussed above.
As the color circle shows, the similarity relations among red,
blue, and purple are essentially the same as those among or-
ange, red, and purple (see Fig. 1). Even so, purple looks like
it is composed of red and blue, whereas red does not look
like it is composed of orange and purple. A complete model
of color experience therefore requires that the uniqueness
of the four chromatic primaries be represented within color
space. It also requires a representation of the composition
of colors in terms of how they are perceived to be analyzed
into the four primaries.
Unique red, green, blue, and yellow can be represented
by singular points at diametrically opposed locations in the
color circle, and color composition relations of binary col-
ors by their projections onto its orthogonal red – green and
blue – yellow axes. Notice that this elaboration of the color
circle now breaks many of the symmetries that were previ-
ously candidates for undetectable color-to-color transfor-
mations based only on color similarity relations. Only seven
remain: the four central reflections about the dimensional
axes and their angular bisectors and the three central rota-
tions of 907, 1807, and 2707. Rainbow reflection has been
eliminated because, if my color experiences were related to
yours by this transformation, I would judge purple, char-
treuse, orange, and cyan to be unique colors rather than
red, green, blue, and yellow. All other transformations that
map unique colors to binary colors are likewise eliminated.
It is now clear how one might proceed in a scientific eval-
uation of the transformed color argument: Document evi-
dence of the existence of asymmetries in a behaviorally 
constrained model of human color experience. If all sym-
metries can be shown to be broken, then Locke was wrong;
my internal color experiences cannot be a transformation of
yours without the difference being detectable in my be-
havior relative to yours. The focus must be on finding asym-
metries rather than finding symmetries because the nature
of scientific hypothesis testing requires ruling out null hy-
potheses (i.e., finding that differences are present) rather
than accepting them (i.e., failing to find such differences).
In the context of symmetries, this amounts to detecting
asymmetries where there are differences rather than de-
tecting symmetries where there are no differences.
1.3. Asymmetries in lightness. The color circle we have
been using as a model of human color experience is inade-
Palmer: Color and consciousness
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1999) 22:6
925
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0140525X99292217
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Massachusetts Amherst, on 18 Nov 2019 at 06:30:53, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at

quate, however, primarily because it leaves out the vast ma-
jority of color experiences, including white, black, all their
mixtures with each other (grays), and all their mixtures with
the chromatic colors along the perimeter of the color circle.
These color experiences are missing because the color cir-
cle is only two-dimensional, whereas the full set of color ex-
periences is three-dimensional. Figure 2 shows a more
complete spatial model of human color experiences that re-
flects color similarity relations in all three dimensions of
perceived surface color and the full set of six compositional
primary colors: red, green, blue, and yellow (as before) plus
black and white.3
The experiences of surface colors represented in Figure
2 are classically defined by three dimensions, which we will
call “hue,” “saturation,” and “lightness.”4 (For lights, the
third dimension is usually designated as “brightness” rather
than “lightness.”) The dimension we normally associate
with the basic color of a surface or light is called its “hue.”
In color space, hue corresponds to the angular direction in
the horizontal plane from the central axis of color space to
the location of the point representing that color. The sec-
ond dimension of color space, called “saturation,” repre-
sents the vividness of color experiences. It corresponds to
the perpendicular distance from the central axis to the po-
sition of the color experience in color space. For example,
the vivid colors of the rainbow lie along the outside edge be-
cause they have maximum saturation. All the grays lie along
the central axis because they have zero saturation. The
“muted,” “muddy,” and “pastel” colors in between have in-
termediate levels of saturation. The third dimension of sur-
face color is called “lightness.” In the coordinates of color
space, lightness refers to the height of a color’s position as
it is drawn in Figure 2. All surface colors have some value
on the lightness dimension, although it is perhaps most ob-
vious for the achromatic grays that lie along the central axis,
with white at the top and black at the bottom. In particular,
it is worth noting that browns are represented as dark yel-
lows and oranges (i.e., ones low in lightness), as indicated
in Figure 2.
The color circle corresponds to the perimeter of an
oblique section through this color solid. This section is
oblique because the most saturated yellows are quite light
(and therefore higher in color space), whereas the most sat-
urated blues and purples are quite dark (and therefore
lower in color space), with the most saturated reds and
greens at intermediate lightness values. This variation in
lightness of maximum saturation colors breaks further sym-
metries in color space. A rotation of 1807 about the vertical
axis, for example, would map yellow to blue and blue to yel-
low. This color transformation could be detected behav-
iorally, however, because you would judge unique yellow to
be lighter than unique blue, whereas I would judge the re-
verse. Because the color solid has no rotational symmetries,
any simple rotation of color space about its lightness axis
can be ruled out as a behaviorally undetectable color-to-
color transformation. That is, rotations of three-dimen-
sional color space can be detected and cannot be used to
support the color-transformation argument.
There are still three approximate reflectional symme-
tries of the three-dimensional color spindle shown in Fig-
ure 3 that are likely to escape behavioral detection except
in the most precise psychophysical tasks. One is reflection
of red and green in the blue-yellow-black-white plane
(Fig. 3A). This works because, at least to a first approxi-
mation, red and green are the same in lightness, and blue
and yellow are mapped to themselves. A second symme-
try is reversing both the blue-yellow and black-white axes
(Fig. 3B). This solves the lightness problem with revers-
ing blue and yellow because it also reverses the lightness
(black-white) dimension. The third symmetry is the com-
position of the other two: namely, reversing all three axes,
red for green, blue for yellow, and black for white (Fig.
3C).
Although all three of these transformations are logically
possible, by far the most plausible is reflecting just the red-
green dimension. Indeed, a persuasive argument can be
made that such red-green-reversed perceivers may actu-
ally exist in the population of so-called “normal trichro-
mats” (see Nida-Rümelin 1996). The argument goes like
this: Normal trichromats have three different pigments in
their three cone types. Some people, called protanopes,
are red-green color blind because they have a gene that
causes their long-wavelength (L) cones to have the same
pigment as their medium-wavelength (M) cones. Other
people, called deuteranopes, have a different form of red-
green color blindness because they have a different gene
that causes their M-cones to have the same pigment as
their L-cones. In both cases, people with these genetic de-
fects lose the ability to experience the red-green dimen-
sion of color space because the visual system codes this di-
mension by taking the difference between the outputs of
the M- and L-cones. Now, suppose that someone had the
genes for both forms of red-green color blindness simulta-
neously. Their L-cones would have the M-pigment, and
their M-cones would have the L-pigment. Such people
would, therefore, not be red-green color blind at all, but
simply red-green-reversed trichromats.5 They should ex-
ist. Assuming they do, they are proof that this color trans-
formation is either undetectable or very difficult to detect
by purely behavioral means, because no one has ever man-
aged to identify such a person.
Palmer: Color and consciousness
926
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1999) 22:6
Figure 2.
Three-dimensional color space. Colors are repre-
sented as points in a three-dimensional space according to the di-
mensions of hue, saturation, and lightness. The positions of the six
unique colors (or Hering primaries) within this space are shown
by circles.
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0140525X99292217
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Massachusetts Amherst, on 18 Nov 2019 at 06:30:53, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at

1.4. Basic color categories. Harrison (1973) and Hardin
(1997) have argued that there are further hurdles for trans-
formed-color arguments to clear concerning the implica-
tions of color categories. Although it is not entirely clear
that such categories reflect basic facts about color experi-
ence rather than some later cognitive stage of processing,
but if they do, they have important consequences for the
behavioral detectability of color transformations. To explain
their import on color transformation arguments, we will
have to review briefly some background claims about color
naming and categorization.6
In their ground-breaking studies of cross-cultural color
naming, Berlin and Kay (1969) found that there are a very
small number of basic color terms (BCTs) across all the lan-
guages they studied. These BCTs refer to a corresponding
set of basic color categories (BCCs) into which color expe-
rience can be partitioned. (We will assume the obvious one-
to-one mapping between BCTs and BCCs in the discussion
that follows.) Further research and analysis have postulated
three different types of BCTs: primary, derived, and com-
posite (Kay & McDaniel 1978). The most basic are the six
primary categories: RED, GREEN, BLUE, YELLOW,
BLACK, and WHITE. From these, six more categories are
“derived” by the fuzzy-logical AND-ing (via fuzzy-set in-
tersection; see Zadeh 1975) of two primary color categories:
GRAY 5 WHITE AND BLACK,
ORANGE 5 RED AND YELLOW,
PURPLE 5 RED AND BLUE,
BROWN 5 BLACK AND YELLOW,
PINK 5 WHITE AND RED,
GOLUBOI (a Russian word) 5 WHITE AND BLUE.7
Notice that this set does not include all possible combina-
tions of primary BCCs. Some are ruled out by the structure
of color space itself, such as red-green and blue-yellow,
which cannot exist because they simply do not overlap and
therefore have no exemplars in their fuzzy-logical intersec-
tion. Other combinations could exist as BCTs, such as blue-
green, but do not for reasons that are as yet unknown.
The four “composite” color categories are formed by the
fuzzy-logical OR-ing of two or more primary color cate-
gories:
WARM 5 RED OR YELLOW,
COOL 5 GREEN OR BLUE,
LIGHT-WARM 5 WHITE OR WARM 5 WHITE OR
RED OR YELLOW,
DARK-COOL 5 BLACK OR COOL 5 BLACK OR
GREEN OR BLUE.
Again, not all possible combinations of primary BCCs exist
as composite BCTs. It seems reasonable that they be re-
stricted to combinations of nearby primary BCCs in color
space, ruling out RED OR GREEN and BLUE OR YEL-
LOW. However, it is not clear why there are either no or
few composite BCTs in known languages for RED OR
BLUE, GREEN OR YELLOW, WHITE OR COOL, or
BLACK OR WARM. These and other mysteries remain to
be solved.
It is important to realize that these facts about BCTs are
relevant to the present discussion only if they reveal im-
portant asymmetries in the structure of human color expe-
riences. For example, if for some reason there are more
just-noticeable-differences (jnds) between unique red and
unique yellow than there are between unique green and
unique blue, the wider psychophysical gap might explain
why there are BCTs for ORANGE in many languages, but
not for CYAN (blue-green). The fact that there are strong
(possibly even universal) constraints on the BCTs that have
been discovered in a large number of natural languages sug-
gests that some basic neural mechanisms of human color vi-
sion are likely to be responsible. The most plausible alter-
native explanations are that the constraints on BCTs reflect
structure in the nature of the environment (e.g., perhaps
there are more salient orange-colored objects than cyan-
Palmer: Color and consciousness
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1999) 22:6
927
Figure 3.
Approximate symmetries of color space. The color space depicted in Figure 2 has three approximate symmetries: reversal of
the red-green dimension only (A), reversal of the blue-yellow and black-white dimensions (B), and reversal of all three dimensions (C).
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0140525X99292217
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Massachusetts Amherst, on 18 Nov 2019 at 06:30:53, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at

colored objects), the nature of an organism’s fit to its eco-
logical niche (e.g., perhaps distinctions between different
shades around orange are more important to the organism
than those around cyan), or the patterns of contact and in-
fluence between languages.
If the empirical constraints on BCTs do, in fact, reflect
underlying nonhomogeneities in the structure of color ex-
perience, they can be used to break further symmetries of
color space. Primary BCTs, for which the evidence of uni-
versality is strongest, actually do not break any of the sym-
metries illustrated in Figure 3. This is because they corre-
spond to the six Hering primaries (red, green, blue, yellow,
black, and white) described above, which have already been
taken into account by the unique points and axes of the
color space.
Adding the derived and composite BCTs, however,
breaks all further symmetries. Consider first derived BCTs.
Red-green reversal (Fig. 3A) is ruled out, for example, by
the asymmetry between the frequency of derived BCTs for
ORANGE and PURPLE (frequently found) versus CYAN
and CHARTREUSE (infrequently or never found). If I
were red-green reversed – and if derived BCTs reflect in-
trinsic nonhomogeneities in my color experience – I should
find it strange that BCTs were distributed in this way rather
than in the opposite way. I should also find it odd that there
is a BCT for PINK rather than light green. These facts pose
no problem for blue-yellow and black-white reversal (Fig.
3B), however, because ORANGE maps to PURPLE (and
vice versa) and PINK maps to itself.
Table 1 shows how different BCTs break the three can-
didate symmetries illustrated in Figure 3. The entries in
this table were generated from Kay and McDaniel’s (1978)
analysis as follows. First, the transformation indicated at the
top of each column dictates the remapping of primary
BCCs as shown in the first six rows. Red-green reversal (col-
umn 1), for example, only requires changing RED to
GREEN and GREEN to RED, where the first term indi-
cates the original system of BCCs and the second desig-
nates the transformed system of BCCs. Next, the appropri-
ate substitutions are made in Kay and McDaniel’s formulas
(see above) for the derived and composite BCCs. If the re-
sulting formula for a new BCC corresponds to one for an
old BCC, then a “1” is placed in the column for that trans-
formation and the row of the original BCT. If not, then an
“3” is entered there. To illustrate, consider the row for
PURPLE. After red-green reversal (column 1 of Table 1),
PURPLE 5 RED AND BLUE becomes PURPLE 5
GREEN AND BLUE. Because GREEN AND BLUE is
not the formula for a BCT in Kay and McDaniel’s theory,
an “3” is indicated in the PURPLE row of the first column,
meaning that this transformation maps this BCC into a non-
BCC. After blue-yellow and black-white reversal (column
2 of Table 1), however, PURPLE 5 RED AND BLUE be-
comes PURPLE 5 RED AND YELLOW. Because RED
AND YELLOW is the formula for a BCT (namely, OR-
ANGE), a “1” is entered in the table, indicating that this
transformation maps a BCC into another BCC. For com-
plete reversal (column 3), PURPLE 5 RED AND BLUE
becomes PURPLE 5 GREEN AND YELLOW, which is
not a BCT; hence the “3” in column 3.
The validity of this analysis rests on the validity of Kay
and McDaniel’s original theory, of course, including the set
of BCTs they enumerate and their definitions in terms of
fuzzy-logical operations. If new BCTs have been discovered
in the meantime or if new formulas have been proposed,
the analysis of Table 1 will be correspondingly wrong in de-
tail. However, the general nature of the reasoning is sound
within this qualitative theoretical framework, and a more
complete or accurate theory can be substituted for Kay and
McDaniel’s original one. Notice also that the analysis in
Table 1 involves only approximate, qualitative evaluations
of asymmetries, not metric evaluations. As long as there is
a BCT in the general neighborhood of the transformed
BCT, the relation is counted as symmetrical (1) in Table 1.
As it turns out, metric precision is unnecessary because the
symmetries are broken qualitatively.
The analysis in Table 1 shows that no color-to-color trans-
formations survive a thorough BCT analysis intact, indicat-
ing that all symmetries are broken by the behavioral con-
straints implied by BCTs. I am not aware, however, of any
behavioral data that directly support these asymmetries for
derived and composite color categories in color experience.
In many cases, the difference between derived or compos-
ite BCTs and non-BCTs is subtle enough that direct intro-
spections are too blunt an instrument with which to decide.
I myself would be hard-pressed to claim, for example, that
it seems “better” or “more natural” to me that there is a
BCT for light reds (PINK) than for light greens, indepen-
dent of the fact that my language actually has a BCT for
light reds and not for light greens. The case for ORANGE
and PURPLE over blue-green and yellow-green seems
somewhat more compelling. Even so, it would be hard to
tell how much of such preferences for derived and com-
posite BCCs over non-BCCs is the product of sociolinguis-
tic training and how much the asymmetries in my underly-
ing color experiences.
The existing evidence most relevant to these asymme-
tries comes from Rosch’s (Heider’s) studies of learning
color terms in the Dani tribe of New Guinea (Heider 1972).
In a classic cross-cultural experiment, Rosch found that the
Dani, who have BCTs only for LIGHT-WARM and DARK-
COOL, were able to learn new categories for RED, BLUE,
GREEN, and YELLOW more easily than new categories
for ORANGE, PURPLE, CYAN, and CHARTREUSE.
This result shows that primary BCCs appear to be preferred
over other color categories for the Dani – and presumably
other cultures with composite BCTs – even though these
categories are not overtly expressed in the BCTs of their
language.
It is not yet clear whether this distinction would also be
supported for derived or composite BCTs – which are the
only ones that break the symmetries in Figure 3 – because
Rosch’s studies with the Dani examined the learnability
only of primary BCTs. Some derived BCTs were used in the
study (ORANGE and PURPLE), but they were actually
employed in the contrasting non-BCT “control” categories.
Moreover, her results, which have traditionally been inter-
preted in terms of the learnability of primary BCTs, can be
explained equally well by color composition relations based
on the four chromatic Hering primaries. The latter expla-
nation has the advantage of a clearer basis in phenomenol-
ogy and physiology than is available for BCTs in general.
The main question is whether the derived and compos-
ite BCTs are grounded firmly enough in color experience
for the asymmetries they imply to be detected. Perhaps a
new category for light green would be just as easy to learn
as PINK for people whose language has neither BCT, and
perhaps a new BCT for blue-green or yellow-green would
Palmer: Color and consciousness
928
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1999) 22:6
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0140525X99292217
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Massachusetts Amherst, on 18 Nov 2019 at 06:30:53, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at

be just as easy to learn as ORANGE or PURPLE. The
strongest argument for a phenomenologically privileged
status of a derived BCC can be made for BROWN, insofar
as it seems qualitatively different from the yellow and or-
ange hue families of which it is part (Hardin 1997).
The crucial question at the center of this issue is whether
the structure associated with BCCs is caused by nonhomo-
geneities of color experience. The most obvious way to doc-
ument such effects of categories on perceptual experience
is to look for so-called categorical perception phenomena.
“Categorical perception” refers to a phenomenon in which
small changes in certain stimulus continua across a cate-
gorical boundary produce large changes in perceptual ex-
perience, whereas corresponding changes within category
boundaries produce much smaller changes in experience.
The classic case is the effect of continuous acoustical vari-
ables on categorical perception of phonemes (e.g., Liber-
man et al. 1957).
In the color domain, the evidence is mixed. On the one
hand, categorical effects in color perception have been re-
ported by several researchers, even in infants (e.g., Born-
stein et al. 1976) and monkeys (e.g., Sandell et al. 1979), for
whom linguistic labels cannot be the mediators of such ef-
fects. On the other hand, these categorical effects are 
seldom as sharply defined as for categories of speech per-
ception, and the fuzziness and ineffability of category
boundaries is well documented in many other studies (e.g.,
Berlin & Kay 1969; Rosch 1973). Moreover, the categorical
effects that have been reported are typically restricted to
the primary BCTs of red, green, blue, and yellow, leaving
us, once again, with an open question about the status of de-
rived BCTs.
One phenomenon of normal experience that can be
viewed as supporting categorical structure in color experi-
ence is the banded appearance of the rainbow (Hardin
1997). The physical continuum of photon wavelength that
underlies the rainbow is purely quantitative and unidimen-
sional, with no physical divisions that would produce
“bands” of any sort. Why, then, does a wavelength rainbow
appear banded? One possibility is that qualitative distinc-
tions between color categories are directly represented in
perceptual experience, as Hardin (1997) has argued, and
that these produce qualitatively distinct bands in the ap-
pearance of the rainbow.
There is an alternative to the categorical explanation that
must be considered, however. Because all chromatic colors
(except the four unique ones) are experienced as mixtures
of different amounts of red, green, blue, and yellow, the
banded appearance of the rainbow might arise simply from
the gradual transitions between these qualitatively different
colors. In this case, the bands are attributable to color com-
position rather than to color categories. The most obvious
way to discriminate between these two possibilities is to ask
whether orange is perceived as a distinct band, qualitatively
different from the adjacent reds and yellows, whether it is
perceived merely as a transition between them, or whether
it is something in between. The BCC view predicts a sepa-
rate orange band because of the existence of the derived
color category for orange, whereas the compositional view
predicts no such band. If people do experience a separate
orange band, there is the further question of whether this
band is present only in the perceptions of people who speak
languages with a BCT for ORANGE or whether it appears
universally. Unfortunately, we do not yet have the answers
to these deceptively simple questions.
Whether derived and composite BCTs are grounded in
color experience may seem like a fine point, but, as Table 1
shows, it has crucial implications for the possibility of be-
Palmer: Color and consciousness
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1999) 22:6
929
Table 1. Basic color terms over three reflectional symmetriesa
Reflectional transformations
BCT (Kay–McDaniel)
R–G
B–Y/Bk–Wh
R–G/B–Y/Bk–Wh
RED (R)
1 (G)
1 (R)
1 (G)
GREEN (G)
1 (R)
1 (G)
1 (R)
BLUE (B)
1 (B)
1 (Y)
1 (Y)
YELLOW (Y)
1 (Y)
1 (B)
1 (B)
BLACK (Bk)
1 (Bk)
1 (Wh)
1 (Wh)
WHITE (Wh)
1 (Wh)
1 (Bk)
1 (Bk)
GRAY (Gr5Wh&Bk)
1 (Wh&Bk5Gr)
1 (Bk&Wh5Gr)
1 (Bk&Wh5Gr)
PURPLE (P5R&B)
3 (G&B5 Ø)
1 (R&Y 5O)
3 (G&Y5 Ø)
ORANGE (O5R&Y)
3 (G&Y5 Ø)
1 (R&B 5P)
3 (G&B5 Ø)
BROWN (Br5Y&Bk)
1 (Y&Bk5Br)
1 (B&Wh5Gb)
1 (B&Wh5Gb)
PINK (Pk5R&Wh)
3 (G&Wh5 Ø)
3 (R&Bk5 Ø)
3 (G&Bk5 Ø)
GOLUBOI (Gb5B&Wh)
1 (B&Wh5Gb)
1 (Y&Bk5Br)
1 (Y&Bk5Br)
WARM (Wm5RvY)
3 (GvY5 Ø)
3 (RvB5 Ø)
1 (GvB5C)
COOL (C5GvB)
3 (RvB5 Ø)
3 (GvY5 Ø)
1 (RvY5Wm)
LT-WARM (LW5WhvRvY)
3 (WhvGvY5O)
3 (BkvRvB5 Ø)
1 (BkvGvB5DC)
DK-COOL (DC5BkvGvB)
3 (BkvRvB5 Ø)
3 (WhvGvY5 Ø)
1 (WhvRvY5LW)
a& 5 fuzzy logical AND; v 5 fuzzy logical OR; Ø 5 no corresponding BCT; 1 5 symmetric BCT present; 3 5 no symmetric BCT
present.
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0140525X99292217
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Massachusetts Amherst, on 18 Nov 2019 at 06:30:53, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at

haviorally detecting color transformations. If BCCs are not
reflected in color experience, or if only primary BCCs are
reflected, then the prior conclusion stands that there are at
least three transformations of color space that may well es-
cape behavioral detection. If composite and/or derived
BCCs are relevant, then no form of the color transforma-
tion argument will actually work.
1.5. Asymmetries in color similarity. Thus far, we have
been assuming that all aspects of color experience can be
naturally represented within a spatial model such as the one
shown in Figure 2, but this is not necessarily true. One po-
tential problem concerns systematic asymmetries in color-
similarity relations. An axiomatic property of all metric di-
mensional spaces is that distances between points are
symmetrical: The distance from A to B is the same as that
from B to A (Krantz et al. 1971). If spatial distance is to rep-
resent experienced (dis)similarity, then color similarity re-
lations must also be symmetrical.
Rosch (1975) has reported similarity results that contra-
dict this assumption with respect to focal versus nonfocal
colors (which correspond approximately to unique and bi-
nary colors, respectively). When Rosch had subjects indi-
cate the perceived similarity between one color (the target)
and another (the standard), she found small but systematic
effects: Nonfocal targets were perceived as more similar to
focal standards than vice versa (e.g., off reds were judged to
be more similar to true red than true red was to off reds).
Although these effects were not large, they are noteworthy
for at least two reasons. One is that they create a serious
problem for capturing all relations among colors in a purely
spatial model. The other is that they may constitute another
kind of evidence that color categories influence color expe-
rience.
Even so, Rosch’s results do not necessarily rule out the
possibility that certain color transformations can escape be-
havioral detection. There are two issues. The first concerns
how these asymmetries in similarity are distributed in color
space. The focal colors for the primary BCCs are essentially
the unique primaries, and we have already noted that the
three transformations of Figure 3 preserve their unique-
ness. Asymmetrical distortions in distance relations with 
respect to these unique points can also be preserved by cer-
tain transformations, as illustrated in Figure 4. This dia-
gram shows a hypothetical representation of asymmetries
in similarity relations within the color circle that would be
preserved by the same reflections that preserve the four
unique points. The magnitude and direction of the asym-
metries are represented by vectors indicating the direc-
tional difference in similarity between the four primary fo-
cal colors (large circles) and various comparison colors
(small circles with arrows). This diagram shows that such
asymmetries in similarity could be symmetrically distrib-
uted in a color space with respect to the primary focal col-
ors. We simply do not have enough information on this is-
sue to arrive at a firm conclusion.
The second critical issue for the behavioral detectability
of color transformations is whether asymmetrical similari-
ties to focal colors hold just for primary categories or
whether they also hold for derived categories. As we have
already noted, derived categories break all global symme-
tries of color space, so asymmetries in similarity with re-
spect to these focal colors (e.g., ORANGE, PURPLE,
PINK, BROWN, and GOLUBOI) would allow detection of
any color-to-color transformations. On this point, I know of
no evidence. Rosch found asymmetries in color similarity
using only the primary focal colors – RED, GREEN,
BLUE, and YELLOW – but did not test for asymmetries
in derived color categories. The primary focal colors are
symmetrically distributed and thus may cause no problems
for any of the candidate symmetries of color space in Fig-
ure 3. A further question is whether these asymmetries are
actually caused by color categories or color composition,
which has a clearer and more obvious bearing on color ex-
perience. Again, we do not yet know the answer.
1.6. Metrical asymmetries. There are other potential sources
of asymmetry in color space that might reflect nonhomo-
geneities in color experience that could be detected be-
haviorally. One concerns the metrical structure of color
space as measured by the discriminability of color samples.
Suppose, for example, that unique red is perceived to be
more different from unique blue than unique blue is from
unique green. Given that they are all unique versions of
chromatic primaries, it seems plausible that they are, in
some sense, equally different, and this is the rationale for
placing them at opposite poles of orthogonal diameters of
the color circle in Figure 1. But there are other ways of de-
termining distances in color space psychophysically, such as
counting the number of jnds between pairs of colors. Each
jnd is measured psychophysically by finding the difference
threshold: the smallest difference along a continuum that
can just barely be detected. Using this method, red and
blue might well prove to be more different from each other
than blue and green. Munsell color space, which is based
on measurements of equally spaced differences in hue,
represents this difference in discriminability by a greater
distance between red and blue, and MacLaury (1997a) has
reported data supporting the same conclusion. Other met-
rical differences might also prove to be asymmetric when
measured by counting jnds, and, if they are reliably differ-
ent, they break what otherwise might be plausible sym-
metries.
Palmer: Color and consciousness
930
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1999) 22:6
Figure 4.
A symmetrical distribution of distance asymmetries.
Rosch’s (1975) results show that nonfocal colors are judged to be
more similar to focal colors than the latter is to the former. The ar-
rows represent the degree and direction of asymmetry between
the four primary focal colors (large circles) and nonfocal colors
(small circles with arrows attached).
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0140525X99292217
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Massachusetts Amherst, on 18 Nov 2019 at 06:30:53, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at

Let us summarize our discussion about the possibility of
detecting color transformations empirically. There are just
three candidate transformations that survive the most basic
behavioral constraints concerning color experience as re-
flected in the global structure of color space: red-green re-
versal, blue-yellow and black-white reversal, and reversal of
all three axes (red-green, blue-yellow, and black-white), as
illustrated in Figure 3. If the color space depicted in Figure
2 is at least roughly accurate, then all three transformations
will preserve the similarity relations among colors, the di-
mensional description of colors in terms of hue, saturation,
and lightness, the decomposition of colors into the six Her-
ing primaries, and the distinguished points of the six unique
colors.
Adding color categories and color-naming data into the
mix makes the situation more complex. The same three
transformations survive further constraints owing to the
primary BCCs and BCTs, including the distribution of the
six primary color categories in color space and the asym-
metries in similarity relations around the focal colors for the
four chromatic primary color categories. Composite and
derived BCCs rule out all transformations, however, by
breaking their symmetries, but only if they are the result of
intrinsic properties of the color system (i.e., based on expe-
riential factors) rather than to extrinsic ecological factors
(i.e., based on the physical environment or sociolinguistic
community).
I have argued that the crucial issue in assessing the va-
lidity of the transformed-color argument is the existence of
symmetries in an empirically accurate model of color expe-
riences. Because no such model presently exists, the exer-
cise is premature for reaching firm conclusions. I have used
color spaces as the focus of this enterprise because they are
by far the dominant modeling tool for this domain and be-
cause the nature of global transformations is particularly
transparent within them. The argument from symmetry is
not limited to spatial models, however; it can be applied to
neural-network models, abstract-propositional models, or
any other sort of model. The only requirements are that the
set of possible color-to-color transformations can be speci-
fied in the model and that the results of such transforma-
tions can be assessed in terms of the requisite empirical
constraints. If the behavior of the model is invariant over
the transformation, it is symmetric with respect to that
transformation, and the transformed-color argument will
work.
2. The isomorphism constraint
The questions to which I now turn concern which aspects
of mental life scientists can hope to study and understand
objectively and which we cannot, using color experiences as
the example. In the present section I will discuss the limi-
tations of behavioral science, and in section 3, I will con-
sider the possibility that biological science can take us be-
yond these limits.
2.1. The subjectivity barrier. It is universally agreed that
there is a behaviorally defined subjectivity barrier with re-
spect to how much others can know about our experiences,
and color experiences are no exception. Some aspects of ex-
perience can be shared across observers, whereas others
cannot be. We know that many aspects of color experience
must be shared across observers because normal trichro-
mats agree in their linguistic statements and other sorts of
discriminative behavior with respect to colors. Color-blind
individuals also agree with others having the same form of
color deficiency, but they do not agree across color-defi-
ciency classes or with normal trichromats. These aspects of
color experience are therefore objectively shared and fully
available to behavioral science. Other aspects are indeter-
minate in this respect, however, in that they appear to be
free to vary without affecting any known aspect of behavior.
They are purely subjective and therefore unavailable to be-
havioral science. Even if they happen to be identical across
observers, scientists would never know with certainty that
this was the case. In this section I attempt to define this bar-
rier between objective and subjective phenomena with re-
spect to behavioral science.
I suggest that the two relevant aspects of experience are
the intrinsic qualities of experiences themselves versus the
relational structure that holds among those experiences.
These two aspects are normally so completely intertwined
that it may seem perverse to advocate separating them, but
if they lie on different sides of the subjectivity barrier, as I
suggest, then it is important to make the distinction.
The most obvious aspect of visual awareness is certainly
the nature of the experiences themselves, such as the sen-
sory quality of redness or circularity, to pick two examples
at random. It seems that the quality of these experiences is
flat-out impossible to define behaviorally, given that we
have access to no one’s experiences but our own. This is why
color-to-color transformations are a legitimate problem in
the first place: The quality of individual experiences lies be-
yond the behavioral subjectivity barrier.
One might suppose that there is at least one aspect of ex-
periences that can be specified behaviorally, namely, their
individuality. The set of colors that a person can individu-
ate (discriminate), for example, determines whether some-
one has full trichromatic color experience or a restricted set
owing to some form of color blindness. Notice, however,
that experiences can be individuated behaviorally only by
asking people to discriminate between two stimuli, re-
sponding “same” or “different” to various pairs. Color-blind
individuals reveal their reduced set of color experiences by
performing at chance in discriminating between certain
color samples that normal individuals distinguish quite 
easily. Thus, even individuating experiences behaviorally is
actually about the relation between two (or more) experi-
ences by designating whether they are the same or different.
2.2. The importance of relational structure. The second
aspect of experience is one to which behavioral science does
have access: namely, structure among experiences carried
by their relations to each other. Regardless of what the ex-
perience of red itself is like, normal trichromats agree that
it is more like orange than green. Likewise, sighted ob-
servers agree that a circle looks more like a regular octagon
than an equilateral triangle. These relations among experi-
ences are just as important as the qualities of experiences
per se – and in certain respects, even more so – because
they determine the structure of experience, which can be
shared despite the subjectivity barrier. If experiences had
no relational structure, they would simply be a collection of
completely different and totally unrelated mental states,
like the “blooming buzzing confusion” that William James
suggested is the nature of sensory experience in infants
(James 1890/1950). Without relational structure, for ex-
Palmer: Color and consciousness
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1999) 22:6
931
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0140525X99292217
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Massachusetts Amherst, on 18 Nov 2019 at 06:30:53, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at

ample, we would not experience colors as a coherent do-
main of experience, more similar to each other than they
are to shapes: Redness would be as much like circularity as
it is like greenness – or middle-C, or the smell of freshly
ground coffee, or the taste of pumpkin pie.
Relational structure is even more crucial within a single
domain of experience such as color. Without it we would
not experience white as being lighter than gray or gray as
being lighter than black; we would experience them only as
different colors, and equally different at that. Because of
lighter-than relations among color experiences, we are
aware of the ordering of colors in terms of the continuous
dimension of lightness, ranging from black to white. In-
deed, the entire structure of color space (see Fig. 2) is de-
termined by relations among colors, particularly relations of
composition and similarity. These relations provide the
rich, complex dimensional superstructure of color experi-
ence. It is quite literally unimaginable what color experi-
ence would be like without this structure.
I have argued at some length that it may not be possible
to be sure that my experiences of colors are the same as your
experiences of colors strictly from our behavior, because
mine could just as easily be some structure-preserving
transformation of yours. We can (and do) agree on basic
color terms that refer to them – I call roses “red,” violets
“blue,” and so forth – so that we can communicate effec-
tively about individual colors. This is an objective behav-
ioral fact about color experience, but it tells us absolutely
nothing about the quality of those experiences except that
they are discriminably different from others. It is an ex-
ceedingly weak constraint in the same sense that a nominal
scale is the weakest type of measurement system (Stevens
1951). We merely learn to attach the same labels to our cor-
responding internal experiences that arise from viewing the
same collections of wavelengths, regardless of what our par-
ticular internal experiences might be.
Further constraints are introduced, however, once we
begin to consider binary or higher-order relations among
experiences (Krantz et al. 1971). Both you and I can make
judgments about the relative similarity of two colors to a
third, or the relative lightness of two colors, for example.
These inherently relational judgments are also objective in
that normal trichromats agree about them, at least within
some margin of error. This is not to say that my relational
experiences are the same as yours or that we can even de-
termine whether or not they are. My experiences of color
similarity relations might be as wildly different from yours
as my individual color experiences are from yours, but the
structure of our experiences and relations can nevertheless
be identical.
Preserving relational structure appears to be a necessary
condition for one set of objects to represent another
(Palmer 1978). Indeed, model theory formalizes the situa-
tion in which one set of objects models another in terms of
the existence of a function that maps objects in the first set
to objects in the second set, so that corresponding rela-
tions are preserved in a precise, set-theoretic sense (Tarski
1954).8 This requirement explains why the same three-di-
mensional color solid is able to model color experiences for
all normal trichromats, even if they happen to have wildly
different color experiences: It captures exactly the rela-
tional structure among the color experiences for each indi-
vidual by mapping them onto points in space so that re-
lations among color experiences are preserved by spatial
relations among points in the color solid (see Fig. 5). This
is not to say that my experience of white is literally above
my experience of black, even though the point represent-
ing white in the color solid is above the one representing
black in the conventional color solid. However, my experi-
ence of white is lighter than that of black, and the relation
above in canonical color space corresponds to the relation
lighter than in color experience and preserves its structure.
The emerging picture is that the nature of color experi-
ences cannot be uniquely fixed by objective behavioral
means, but their structural interrelations can be. This
means that, logically speaking, any set of underlying expe-
riences will do for color, provided the experiences relate to
each other in the required way. The same argument can be
extended quite generally to other perceptual and concep-
tual domains, although both the underlying experiential
components and their relational structure will be different.
The experience of musical pitch, for example, could be
grounded in any of an infinite variety of experiential di-
mensions, but it would always have to have the same dou-
ble-helical structure characteristic of perceived pitch rela-
tions (Shepard 1982). Although these are both cases in
which there is a clear geometrical structure associated with
the experiential domain, this need not be true. The only re-
quirement is that there be some kind of relations among the
experiences that constitute their structure.
2.3. Symmetry, isomorphism, and relational structure. In
section 1, I argued at some length that the existence of sym-
metries in color space is the key issue in assessing the va-
lidity of color-transformation arguments. I now return to
this topic to ask why this might be the case and how the an-
swer relates to the above discussion of the structure of ex-
periences.
Mathematically, symmetries are functions that have two
special properties, known as “automorphism” and “isomor-
Palmer: Color and consciousness
932
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1999) 22:6
Figure 5.
The color/space isomorphism. Color experiences are
mapped to points in a multidimensional space (see Fig. 2) such
that color relations (e.g., lighter-than, redder-than) are preserved
by corresponding spatial relations (e.g., higher-than, closer-to-
unique-red-point).
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0140525X99292217
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Massachusetts Amherst, on 18 Nov 2019 at 06:30:53, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at

phism.” They are automorphisms because they map a given
domain onto itself in a one-to-one fashion. In the case of
symmetries in color space, the automorphic function there-
fore maps a color space onto itself. Automorphism is criti-
cal for Locke’s (1690/1987) argument because, as was men-
tioned at the outset, it assumes that the two observers in
question have the same overall set of color experiences. The
only question is whether their color experiences might have
different causal connections to the outside world.
The second special property of symmetries is that they
are isomorphisms. “Isomorphism,” which means roughly
“having the same structure,” is a mathematical function in
which, intuitively speaking, one set of entities is mapped
onto another set of entities such that the structure of rela-
tions among the first set is preserved by the structure of cor-
responding relations among the second set (e.g., Tarski
1954).9 Figure 5 illustrates the general requirements for an
isomorphism to hold using the (presumed) isomorphic re-
lation between color experience and color space as an ex-
ample. The function maps color experiences onto points in
a dimensional color space such that relations among color
experiences (lighter than, more similar than, etc.) are pre-
served by corresponding relations among corresponding
points in space (higher than, closer to, etc.). This allows a
direct and valid translation from facts about the relations
among color experiences into facts about the relations
among points in color space. The only thing missing is the
capability to say anything about the nature of the color ex-
periences themselves (or the nature of the points them-
selves) except that they satisfy corresponding relations. The
fact that such an isomorphism can be constructed is the
principal reason that spatial models are good representa-
tions of color experiences. Notice further that, because iso-
morphism is both transitive and symmetric, if your color ex-
perience and my color experience are isomorphic to the
same color space, then our color experiences are necessar-
ily isomorphic to each other.10
Isomorphism is crucial for the transformed-color argu-
ment because, I suggest, the only kinds of differences that
can be detected behaviorally are differences in relational
structure, and relational structure is precisely what is pre-
served by isomorphism. I can say (or otherwise indicate be-
haviorally) that color A is lighter than color B, but I cannot
in any way communicate how light either one appears to me
in absolute terms. I can also say with confidence that red is
more similar to orange than it is to green, but I cannot ex-
press either similarity in absolute terms. It might seem that
one can make “absolute” ratings of, say, the lightness of in-
dividual color samples on a rating scale, but such ratings
are, in fact, always relative to the range of possibilities.
Both automorphism and isomorphism are required to
satisfy the assumptions of Locke’s (1690/1987) original in-
verted spectrum argument. There are other versions of the
more general color question that do not require the auto-
morphism component, however. If you and I both have color
experiences, for example, but they are not the same overall
set, then automorphism does not hold. The nonoverlap can
vary from minimal to complete. It would be minimal, for ex-
ample, if everything seemed just a bit lighter to me than to
you. In this case, no new dimensions are involved, just dif-
ferent values over an expanded range of lightness. My ex-
perience of pure white would then be lighter than any ex-
perience you have ever had, and your experience of pure
black would be darker than any experience I have ever had.
This mapping between our experiences is not automorphic
because there are some color experiences – my white and
your black – unique to each of us.
More radically, though, my color experiences might be
totally different from your color experiences in ways neither
you nor I can imagine. This would be the case if my expe-
riences of the three dimensions of color space were qualita-
tively different from yours, as though we lived in completely
different subspaces of some hypothetical “experiential hy-
perspace.” I would have chromatic dimensions for what we
all call red-green and blue-yellow variations, just as you
would, but they would span hue dimensions qualitatively
different from any you have ever experienced. The exis-
tence of such additional experiential dimensions of color
can be inferred from comparative studies of color vision,
which show that some animals have four or even five di-
mensions of color experience (see Thompson et al. 1992).
At least some of the dimensions of chromatic experiences
of such animals, whatever they may be, must be qualita-
tively different from any of yours or mine. There is certainly
no logical requirement that my experiences of the range of
hues (or saturations or lightnesses) be anything like your ex-
periences of them. Biological considerations can be brought
to bear, as we will discuss shortly at some length, but there
are enough differences between the brains of different per-
ceivers to undermine an a priori assumption that the color
experiences they give rise to are necessarily the same, ex-
cept in extraordinary circumstances such as exact clones.
Such considerations lead me to conclude that automor-
phism is not central to understanding the general question
of behavioral detectability of differences in color experi-
ences, even though it is required for Locke’s inverted spec-
trum argument. Isomorphism, however, appears to be key
in evaluating the detectability of any color transformations
under any circumstances. If your color experiences are iso-
morphic to mine, your experiences will be undetectably dif-
ferent from mine, because the structure in the relations
among your color experiences is the same as that in the cor-
responding relations among my color experiences. And if
only relations can be assessed by behavioral means, then
isomorphism is the strongest form of equality that can be
claimed for color experiences across observers based on be-
havior. The relations that must be structurally preserved in-
clude (at least) color similarity, color composition, unique
versus binary colors, and dimensional ordering.
I will call this condition of structural equality to the level
of isomorphism the isomorphism constraint and will sug-
gest that it constitutes a fundamental limitation on what can
be discovered about experience by behavioral methods. It
means that, even if all the dimensions of my color experi-
ences are qualitatively different from yours, we can still be-
have identically with respect to colors as long as our expe-
riences are isomorphic.11 My experiences would clearly
have to be three-dimensional; would have to include six
unique reference experiences (for the unique colors) at the
poles of three axes; would have to include an angular di-
mension for hue, a radial dimension for saturation, and a
linear dimension for lightness, and so forth. If all the rele-
vant conditions were met, then my color experiences could
be arbitrarily different from yours without the differences
being behaviorally detectable.
Again, it is important to understand that none of these
conclusions depends on there being spatial models of the
cognitive domain. Experiential domains in which there are
Palmer: Color and consciousness
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1999) 22:6
933
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0140525X99292217
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Massachusetts Amherst, on 18 Nov 2019 at 06:30:53, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at

viable spatial models make good illustrations because the
idea of isomorphism is particularly clear in such cases, but
spatial models are by no means necessary. The internal re-
lations among experiences could even be fundamentally in-
compatible with spatial representations, conforming to
none of the fundamental axioms of metric dimensional
spaces. The only requirement is that, whatever the qualita-
tive nature of your internal experiences and the relations
among them may be, the relations among my correspond-
ing experiences must have the same structure.
If the shared aspects of experience do indeed coincide
exactly with structural relations – that is, what is preserved
by an isomorphism – the argument thus far can be sum-
marized as follows: Objective behavioral methods can de-
termine the nature of experiences up to, but not beyond, the
criterion of isomorphism. The subjectivity barrier would
then coincide precisely with the isomorphism constraint.
It is interesting that this criterion of isomorphism is not
unique to the subjectivity barrier or to behavioral science;
it also exists in axiomatic formulations of mathematics. In
classical mathematics, a domain is formalized by specifying
a set of primitive elements (e.g., points, lines, planes, and
three-dimensional spaces in geometry) and a set of axioms
that specify the relations among them (e.g., two points
uniquely determine a line, three noncollinear points a
plane, etc.). Given a set of primitive elements, a set of ax-
ioms, and the rules of mathematical inference, mathemati-
cians can prove theorems that specify many further rela-
tions among mathematical objects in the domain. These
theorems are guaranteed to be true if the axioms are true.
However, the elements to which all the axioms and the-
orems refer cannot be fixed in any way except by the nature
of the relations among them; they refer equally to any enti-
ties that satisfy the set of axioms. That is why mathemati-
cians sometimes discover that there is an alternative inter-
pretation of the primitive elements, called a “dual system,”
in which all the same statements hold. For example, the
points, lines, planes, and spaces of projective geometry in
three dimensions can be reinterpreted as spaces, planes,
lines, and points, respectively, because all the same rela-
tions hold when the elements in the latter system are sub-
stituted systematically for their corresponding dual ele-
ments in the former system. All the same axioms hold;
therefore, all the same theorems are true. An axiomatic
mathematical system can, therefore, be conceived as a com-
plex structure of mathematical relations on an underlying,
but otherwise undefined, set of primitives that are free to
vary in any way. As Poincaré (1952) observed: “Mathemati-
cians do not study objects, but the relations between ob-
jects; to them it is a matter of indifference if these objects
are replaced by others, provided that the relations do not
change” (p. 20). The same can be said about behavioral sci-
entists with respect to consciousness: We do not study ex-
periences, but the relations among experiences. It is (or
should be) a matter of indifference to behavioral scientists
if the experiences of one person differ from those of an-
other, provided that the relations among experiences are
the same.
2.4. Relation to functionalism. The analysis we have just
given of color experience bears important relations to cer-
tain aspects of functionalism. One salient characterization
of functionalist accounts of the mind is that they are based
on the causal relations among mental states and their input
and output relations to the external world (Dennett 1978;
Fodor 1968; Putnam 1960). Two cognitive systems that
have the same causal relational structure (i.e., that have cor-
responding causal relations among all their corresponding
mental states) and the same causal relations to the external
world (on both the input and the output ends) are func-
tionally equivalent. Functionalist doctrine claims that such
systems, which we can call “causally isomorphic” (but not
causally equivalent), are therefore mentally equivalent.
However, the analysis in section 1 suggests that this is not
necessarily so. In particular, two systems having the same
causal relational structure (including input-output relations
to the environment) can have radically different conscious
states. There are at least two ways in which this can happen.
One was discussed at length in section 1, namely, the pos-
sibility that the experiences of two people may be quite dif-
ferent even though they have the same relational structure,
as in the behavioral undetectability of causally isomorphic
color experiences. The other is that one of the systems
might have the same causal relational structure over its in-
ternal states and their relations to the world, yet have no
conscious experiences whatever. Let us now consider this
latter case more carefully.
Suppose we were to create a working “color machine”
that actually processes information from light in the same
way that people do and that responds as people typically do.
This is a reasonable goal. Figure 6 illustrates one way to
construct the “front end” of such a machine. It analyzes in-
coming light using prisms, cardboard masks, photometers,
electronic adding and subtracting circuits, and so forth to
process color information according to the principles of
color perception as they are currently understood. The de-
tails of how we now believe receptor outputs are integrated
to compute the dimensional values of color space may be
wrong, of course, but the crucial issue is whether substitut-
ing the right computations would result in the machine hav-
ing color experiences. For such a machine to respond be-
haviorally to light patches, it would have to be extended by
adding processes to produce basic color terms for the col-
ors it is shown, to analyze the composition of colors into
their compositions in terms of the Hering primaries, to
make color-similarity ratings, and so forth. Moreover, it
would have to do all this in a way that is behaviorally and
computationally equivalent to the way in which people per-
form these tasks. Supposing that such a machine could be
constructed – and it would not be very difficult to do – it
seems almost bizarre to claim that, because it derived the
correct coordinates in color space for, say, unique red,
named it “red,” judged it more like orange than green,
agreed that it was a “warm” rather than a “cool” color, and
so on, it necessarily had an experience of intense redness.
Rather, the machine appears to simulate color experiences
without actually having them. This difference between hav-
ing and simulating experience underlies Searle’s (1980) dis-
tinction between “weak AI” and “strong AI.”
Even so, it is surprisingly difficult to prove that this ma-
chine fails to have color experiences. A card-carrying func-
tionalist would claim that such a machine does have color
experiences purely by virtue of the computations it per-
forms. That may seem unlikely to readers not in the grip of
functionalism, but can it be refuted? The underlying diffi-
culty is the “problem of other minds.” Because we do not
have access to the experiences of any other entity – be it a
person, animal, or machine – how can we tell whether the
Palmer: Color and consciousness
934
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1999) 22:6
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0140525X99292217
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Massachusetts Amherst, on 18 Nov 2019 at 06:30:53, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at

color machine actually has color experiences as a result of
performing these computations? There seems to be a logi-
cal possibility that it might, but Searle (1980) has argued
that it cannot. Let us therefore consider an adaptation of his
argument to the present topic of color experience.
2.5. The color room. Searle’s original thought experiment,
known as the Chinese room argument, was not concerned
with color perception but with understanding foreign lan-
guages. He asked whether a computer could literally un-
derstand Chinese if it were programmed so that when it was
asked questions in Chinese, it answered in a way that was
indistinguishable from native speakers of Chinese. The
claim of “strong AI” is that such a computer actually un-
derstands Chinese, including whatever conscious experi-
ences go along with such understanding, but Searle has
claimed it does not.
Searle’s argument can be adapted to make a correspond-
ing, and in some ways simpler and more compelling, point
about the insufficiency of performing information-process-
ing operations to produce color experiences. Consider a
system that takes as input the quantum catches of the three
different types of receptors responsible for color vision (the
cones sensitive to short, medium, and long wavelengths)
and gives as output the name or description of the color in
some language. The claim of strong AI is that such a system
must be having color experiences rather than just simulat-
ing them. This is a form of functionalism, because the claim
is that if the machine’s internal color states and processes
are causally isomorphic to people’s color states and pro-
cesses, then the machine literally has the analogous mental
states, including any experiential component.
The thought experiment is to imagine yourself inside a
“color room.” You receive an ordered set of three numbers
through the “input” door. You then consult a rule book that
tells you how to perform the various numerical calculations
necessary to arrive at three other numbers (corresponding
to hue, saturation, and brightness of a light, although you
do not know that this is what they represent). Ultimately,
the rules in the book tell you how to use these values to se-
lect one of a particular set of letter strings to hand out the
output door. If the language of color naming is German, and
if you do not know German, these would be meaningless
strings of letters to you: “schwarz,” “weiss,” “rot,” “grün,”
“blau,” and so on. You sit in the color room, carrying out
your computations flawlessly, but totally mechanically, be-
cause nothing you are doing has any meaning, other than
the fact that you are performing various arithmetical oper-
ations and following certain logical rules that govern which
letter strings you pass through the “output” door.
Unbeknownst to you, however, people outside the room
interpret the three numbers you receive as inputs to be the
quantum catches of the three types of color-sensitive re-
ceptors in the retina in response to a colored light. They also
interpret the meaningless (to you) letter strings you send
out as basic color terms in German. Thanks to the rules in
the book, the letter strings you send out in response to the
three numbers turn out to be the appropriate German
names for the color patches that produced the three input
numbers.
Let us suppose that you become so well practiced at your
task that your performance is indistinguishable from that of
German speakers with normal color vision. Let us also sup-
pose, for the sake of argument, that the rules you are fol-
Palmer: Color and consciousness
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1999) 22:6
935
Figure 6.
A color machine. A system of mirrors, prisms, cardboard masks, photocells, and computational circuits can derive values cor-
responding to the coordinates of colors in color space.
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0140525X99292217
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Massachusetts Amherst, on 18 Nov 2019 at 06:30:53, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at

lowing in the book conform precisely to the established op-
erations the visual nervous system uses to arrive at internal
representations of colors and color names. These two facts
mean that you have satisfied the usual functionalist criteria
for claiming that you have mental states associated with
color perception and naming. The key question is whether
carrying out these computations would necessarily cause
you to have the color experiences you normally would have
when viewing the corresponding patch of color.
Most people’s intuitions on this question are perfectly
clear. Performing these computations, no matter how
closely they might correspond to visual information pro-
cessing in response to patches of color, would not give rise
to anything like the experiences of color that would sponta-
neously arise if you were actually looking at the patch of
light.
The force of this argument is that it avoids the problem
of other minds in deciding whether a color machine has
color experiences. By inserting yourself into the color room
system of rules and computations, you know that there is a
conscious agent within it who could have color experiences
if that were indeed a necessary consequence of doing the
right computations. Defenders of strong AI have at-
tempted to refute Searle’s (1980) argument on a number of
grounds. We will not consider these arguments here; they
are fairly involved and readily available in the commen-
taries following Searle’s original article, together with his
responses to them. Their translation into the color room
version is straightforward.
It appears that behavioral methods are deficient, not only
in determining the qualities of internal experiences but also
in determining whether there are any internal experiences
at all. They can determine the relational structure among
experiences, but not their subjective quality, including
whether they are simulated (i.e., nonexistent) or real. This
appears to be a great deal less than one expects from a full
scientific understanding of consciousness.
3. Biology to the rescue?
Having considered the inherent limitations of behavioral
approaches to understanding color awareness, let us now
consider the prospects for going further via biological ap-
proaches, as suggested by neuroscientists (e.g., Crick 1994).
Will physiology succeed in penetrating the subjectivity bar-
rier? In particular, will it allow us to go beyond the isomor-
phism constraint to get a handle on the quality of color ex-
periences within and across individuals? If so, how? If not,
why not?
3.1. Correlational versus causal theories. In considering
the status of physiological hypotheses about experience, 
it is important to distinguish two different sorts, which I 
will call “correlational” and “causal” claims. Correlational
claims concern the type of brain activity that takes place
when experiences are occurring and fails to take place when
they are not. Claims that conscious experiences arise only
when there is brain activity at a particular location, within
synapses employing a particular neurotransmitter, or firing
at a particular rate would all be correlational, because they
provide no causal explanation of how this particular kind of
brain activity produces experience. They fail to fill the “ex-
planatory gap” between ordinary physical events and expe-
rience (Levine 1983), because they merely designate a sub-
set of neural activity with which consciousness is associated.
No explanation is given for this association; it simply is the
sort of activity that accompanies consciousness.
At this point it would be appropriate to contrast such cor-
relational claims with a good example of a causal one: a the-
ory that provides a scientifically plausible explanation of
how a particular form of brain activity actually produces ex-
perience.12 Unfortunately, no examples of such theories are
at hand. In fact, to this writer’s knowledge, no one has ever
suggested any theory that the scientific community regards
as giving even a remotely plausible causal account of how
experience arises from neural events. This does not mean
that such a theory is impossible in principle, only that we
have yet to find a serious candidate.
A related difference between correlational and causal bi-
ological theories of experience is that they are likely to dif-
fer in generalizability. Correlations are inherently specific
to the particular biological system within which they have
been identified. In the best-case scenario, a good correla-
tional claim about the neural substrate of human con-
sciousness might generalize to chimpanzees and certain
monkeys, possibly even to dogs or rats, but probably not 
to frogs or snails simply because their brains are too differ-
ent. If a correlational analysis were to show that human 
consciousness is associated with, say, gammabutyric acid
(GABA) activity, would that necessarily mean that creatures
without GABA are not conscious? Or might some other
evolutionarily related neural transmitter serve the same
function in brains without GABA? If so, what features
might they have in common? Even more drastically, what
about extraterrestrial beings, whose whole physical make-
up might be radically different from our own? In such cases,
a correlational analysis is almost bound to break down. A
causal theory of consciousness might have a fighting
chance, however, because the structure of the theory itself
could provide the lines along which reasonable generaliza-
tions might flow.
3.2. The DNA analogy. It seems conceivable that we will
someday attain a full enough understanding of the brain
that the biological mechanisms underlying conscious expe-
rience will be discovered and understood, even though we
currently have few clues regarding what they might be like.
The best we can do right now is appeal to an analogy to the
understanding of the nature of life that was achieved by dis-
covering the molecular structure of DNA.13
The facts to be explained by a theory of life concern cer-
tain differences in macroscopic properties of living organ-
isms versus nonliving objects, particularly their abilities to
grow, sustain their internal functions, and reproduce. The
basic mechanisms available for a truly causal theory to ex-
plain such life functions are the physical behavior of ordi-
nary matter. Prior to the discovery of the structure of DNA
by Crick and Watson (1953), however, there was a huge ex-
planatory gap between the known physical laws and these
molar properties of living organisms. The gap was large
enough that some theorists claimed there must be a special
“vital force” that pervades living tissue and endows it with
the requisite properties. Other theorists rejected this view,
of course, insisting on a mechanistic theory devoid of mys-
terious, nonphysical forces.
In retrospect, the facts about living organisms that
turned out to be most important for discovering the mech-
anisms of life concern their ability to reproduce. Especially
Palmer: Color and consciousness
936
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1999) 22:6
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0140525X99292217
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Massachusetts Amherst, on 18 Nov 2019 at 06:30:53, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at

pertinent were the lawful inheritance relations between
characteristics of offspring and characteristics of their par-
ents. The general nature of these regularities was worked
out by the brilliant Austrian monk, Gregor Mendel, in his
painstaking experiments with garden peas. His results en-
abled him to propose, test, and refine a theory of inheri-
tance based on hypothetical physical entities, now called
“genes,” that were combined in reproduction and ex-
pressed in offspring according to lawful principles. He
worked out this genetic theory without ever directly ob-
serving the physical basis of these genes. Mendel’s work is
a beautiful example of how a molar behavioral analysis can
give insights into underlying molecular mechanisms with-
out those mechanisms being directly observed.
Mendel’s genetic theory did not fill the explanatory gap,
however, because the physical mechanism was not yet spec-
ified. Many years later, when sufficiently powerful micro-
scopes enabled biologists to observe the internal machinery
of cells directly, correlational hypotheses correctly sug-
gested that the nucleus of cells was crucial in their self-
replicating abilities. More refined correlational conjectures
focused on the strands of chromosomes within the nucleus
as the crucial structures involved in cell reproduction. Even
so, the explanatory gap remained, because there were no
serious candidate theories about how the properties of liv-
ing cells might arise from chromosomes, whose internal
structure was unknown.
The gap-filling discovery was made by Crick and Watson
(1953) when they determined the double-helical structure
of DNA. It revealed how a complex molecule, which was
made of more basic building blocks, could unravel and
replicate itself in a purely mechanical way. As further im-
plications of this structure began to be worked out, it be-
came increasingly clear how purely physical processes
could form the basis of not only genetics, but cellular repli-
cation, protein synthesis, and a multitude of other unique
and previously inexplicable properties of living tissue. The
current biological understanding of life is thus a good ex-
ample of how a truly causal theory can fill a seemingly im-
mense explanatory gap in science. It did not appear magi-
cally, but was historically preceded by molar analyses of
organismic phenomena and by correlational observations of
the underlying biological mechanisms. Indeed, if Crick and
Watson had worked out the structure of DNA prior to these
other discoveries, its importance would very likely have
gone completely unnoticed. Thus, all levels of theorizing
were important in the historical development of a scientific
theory of life.
In this analogy, our present knowledge of the biological
substrates of conscious experience is best thought of as pre-
Mendelian. After decades of actively ignoring the problem,
scientists of many persuasions are beginning to work on it.
Behavioral scientists are looking for functional correlates of
consciousness in the hope of discerning regularities that
would allow the formulation of computational theories
(e.g., Baars 1988; Johnson-Laird 1983; Marcel 1983). Such
theories can be thought of as akin to Mendelian genetics:
hypotheses about the nature of consciousness at an abstract
information-processing level distinct from the actual phys-
ical mechanisms that produce it.
Biological scientists are also beginning to look seriously
for neural correlates of consciousness in the hope of nar-
rowing the problem to some relevant subset of the brain
where conscious experiences arise (e.g., Crick 1994; Crick
& Koch 1995; Sheinberg & Logothetis 1997). This work can
be likened to microscopic studies that identified the special
importance of the nucleus and particularly of the strands of
chromosomes in cellular division and reproduction. This bi-
ological analysis of the correlates of consciousness is barely
in its infancy, and much work will be required before we will
know where to look for the relevant mechanisms. And we
are still very much in the pre-DNA phase of our quest to
provide a causal explanation of conscious experience. No
one has a clue as yet about what such a theory might look
like. If and when it is discovered, it will be a scientific break-
through of staggering importance and implications, for it
will unlock one of the deepest scientific problems of all
time. Many scientists believe this to be possible, perhaps
even likely (e.g., Crick 1994). It may not turn out to be a
purely reductionist account, as the explanation of genetics
by DNA turned out to be, but most believe that there is a
biological explanation and that it will eventually be found.
However, even if this is true, it is still unclear whether bi-
ological science will be able to take us beyond the limita-
tions of behavioral science in understanding the nature of
experiences themselves. By analogy with the DNA story,
surely the first task is to find out what aspects of brain ac-
tivity correlate with different experiences. Then we can ask
whether this will tell us more about underlying experiences
than we can find out behaviorally. Finally, we can ask about
the prospects for achieving a truly causal explanation.
3.3. Neural correlates of color experience. Many ques-
tions about the neural correlates of color experience can be
asked and answered within a biological framework. Some
already have been, using present knowledge and technol-
ogy. We know, for example, that the neural mechanisms un-
derlying color experience must be somewhere in the cortex
rather than in the retina or precortical visual system. One
line of evidence is the existence of a form of color blindness
or color weakness, called “achromatopsia,” which is caused
by damage to a certain region of the visual cortex between
the occipital and parietal lobes of the brain (Meadows
1974). We do not yet know whether this region is actually
the neural locus of color experiences or whether they occur
farther along in the chain of neural processing, but we are
slowly working our way toward this goal. It may involve ac-
tivity in the frontal lobes, as Crick and Koch (1995) have
suggested for consciousness in general, activity in the ante-
rior cingulate gyrus, as Posner and Raichle (1994) have pro-
posed, or activity in some other, as-yet-unsuspected struc-
ture in the brain. In any case, there seems little reason to
doubt that someday the region(s) of the human brain in
which color experiences arise will be discovered and that
the pertinent properties of neural activity there will be
identified. The question I now want to address is whether
such discoveries are likely to tell us any more about color
experience than we already know from our own experiences
and from the results of behavioral studies. In asking this
question, there is no reason for our inquiries to be restricted
by the technologies presently available, so from here on we
will resort to thought experiments in which we are freed
from such limitations.
Let us first consider how correlations between brain
events and color experiences could be studied and what
might be discovered by doing so. Suppose I am a subject in
an experiment in which the activity of every cell in my brain
can be monitored by some futuristic “cerebrometer.” Neu-
Palmer: Color and consciousness
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1999) 22:6
937
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0140525X99292217
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Massachusetts Amherst, on 18 Nov 2019 at 06:30:53, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at

roscientists could then study the differences between vari-
ous forms of conscious and unconscious activity in my brain
by correlating this neural activity with my color experi-
ences. They could find out, for example, what particular
patterns of neural activity in what particular regions of my
brain correspond to my experiences of particular shades of
red, orange, green, or any other color.
Presumably, the structure of these patterns of neural fir-
ings would turn out to be isomorphic to the structure of 
my color experiences and also to their representations in
some suitably structured color space. This would mean, to
take just one example, that the pattern of neural activity
corresponding to red experience, whatever it might be,
should be more like the pattern corresponding to orange
experience than to the pattern corresponding to green ex-
perience. This is just the relation envisioned by Gestalt psy-
chologists in their doctrine of psychophysiological isomor-
phism (Köhler 1929). I see no conceptual problems in
carrying out this program of research, other than inventing
the cerebrometer, of course. The results would tell us a
great deal about the neural correlates of color experiences,
but would they allow neuroscientists to determine the qual-
ity of my color experiences or even to determine whether
my color experiences are the same as yours?
Notice that, although these correlations are intended to
study relations between my brain’s neural activity and my
qualitative experiences, they cannot be computed from my
experiences themselves, because I alone have access to
these experiences. Rather, they would have to be computed
from records of my behavioral reports of my experiences,
because calculating conditional dependencies between two
phenomena (in this case, patterns of brain activity and color
experiences) requires repeated, objective, quantitative
measurements of both. Because my experience can be ob-
jectively (and incompletely) assessed only through my be-
havior, the correlations will actually reflect dependencies
between my brain activity and my behavior. That being the
case, it is unclear how such a correlational approach will be
able to go beyond the limitations of behavioral science in
establishing the nature of color experiences, because be-
havioral methods are inherent within it.
This is not to say that we will fail to learn anything about
the biology of color experience from the cerebrometer ex-
periments. On the contrary, we will be able to learn every-
thing there is to know about the biological correlates of ex-
perience up to the level of isomorphism. The results would
tell us, for example, what the neural correlates are for hue,
saturation, and lightness, or for redness/greenness, blue-
ness/yellowness, and blackness/whiteness.14 However, the
correlated brain activity cannot inform us about the quality
of the experiences themselves; these might still be any set
of experiences that have the required relational structure.
We have hit the isomorphism constraint again.
3.4. Defining neurological equivalence classes of color
experience. What about the more modest goal of using bi-
ological methods to settle the color-transformation prob-
lem? Even if scientists cannot determine the exact quality
of my (or your) color experiences from their neural corre-
lates, can they at least determine whether our experiences
of colors are the same? This is a weaker problem; it requires
determining only whether you and I belong to the same
equivalence class of color experiencers rather than deter-
mining what our experiences are actually like.
The obvious approach to this issue is simply to have neu-
roscientists, armed with their cerebrometers, correlate
your brain activity with your reports of color experiences
under controlled conditions, just as they did for mine, and
then compare the two patterns of activity. Certain relations
between our patterns of brain activity might superficially
suggest certain specific kinds of color transformations. For
example, less extreme firing rates in opponent process color
cells in your brain might suggest a contraction of color
space, or the reversal of firing rates in such cells of your
brain might suggest an inversion transformation. However,
only if your brain activity were identical to my brain activ-
ity in response to the same stimuli would one be justified in
concluding that our experiences of the colors were neces-
sarily the same. If they were identical, any other conclusion,
however logically valid, would be eliminated by Ockham’s
razor as unparsimonious, for in the absence of any differ-
ence in brain activity it is simpler to suppose that our expe-
riences are the same than that they differ in some mystical,
ineffable way. This conclusion is consistent with the philo-
sophical notion of supervenience (Kim 1984).
Assessing whether our patterns of brain activity are the
same is not as straightforward as it might seem, however; it
requires specifying a principled physical correspondence
between our two brains. If those portions of our brains that
are involved in color perception were identical, establish-
ing this correspondence would not seem to pose much of a
problem.15 This situation might arise for a tiny subset of in-
dividuals, such as clones and identical twins, but the fact is
that most people’s brains differ from each other in a multi-
tude of ways. Even seemingly minor physiological differ-
ences in color-relevant neurons, such as variations in base-
line firing rates, the fine temporal structure of neural
spiking, or the conduction speed of axons, might conceiv-
ably cause nontrivial differences in experience. In the ab-
sence of a causal theory of experience, it would be impossi-
ble to know which differences matter and which do not.
Even this problem of neural variation might not prove in-
surmountable if there were some way of studying the rela-
tion between biological differences and experiential differ-
ences. That would enable scientists to determine whether
variations across individuals in, say, measures of baseline
rates, fine temporal firing pattern, or axon conduction
speed systematically influence experience. Here we run
into the subjectivity barrier again, however, because assess-
ing experiential differences between individuals requires
somehow comparing their color experiences. As we have
seen, such comparisons below the level of isomorphism are
defeated by the inherent subjectivity of experience and its
underdetermination by purely behavioral methods.
If there are objective differences in the relational struc-
ture of our experiences, such as occur in the various kinds
of color blindness, appropriate behavioral methods can
clearly detect them, and those differences can then be cor-
related with differences in brain activity. This enables us to
determine a set of behaviorally defined equivalence classes
of color perceivers – normal trichromats, protanopes,
deuteranopes, and so on (see Fig. 7) – according to the re-
lational color discriminations they can make. If our rela-
tional structures are identical, however, then our experi-
ences are still free to vary within the isomorphism
constraint without detection, and, if there are any poten-
tially relevant differences between our brains that might
produce experiential differences, it is unjustified to assume
Palmer: Color and consciousness
938
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1999) 22:6
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0140525X99292217
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Massachusetts Amherst, on 18 Nov 2019 at 06:30:53, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at

equivalence of color experiences. Exactly how one decides
what kinds of differences between neural events are “po-
tentially relevant” to experience is a serious problem, but
one to which there are potential solutions, at least in prin-
ciple (see below). Many factors will presumably be judged
irrelevant by these criteria, but others are likely to remain.
It is important to note that even if we were able to con-
clude that two individuals’ experiences are the same be-
cause their underlying physiology is the same, this would
not specify the quality of their experiences to an outside ob-
server. It would indicate only that, whatever they might be,
they are the same. Only if I am one of the people whose ex-
periences have been determined to be the same (or, from
your perspective, if you are one of them) will this fact de-
termine for me (or for you) what the experiences of another
person are actually like. In other words, valid criteria of ex-
periential sameness based on sameness of physiology would
allow one to establish equivalence classes of experiential
qualities, but it would determine the quality of those expe-
riences only for the particular class to which the self be-
longs. An important question remains, however: How are
we to determine which physiological differences matter for
color experience?
3.5. Within- versus between-subject designs. We en-
counter the subjectivity barrier every time we try to make
comparisons of subisomorphic differences across individu-
als. It therefore seems clear that progress in identifying ex-
periential differences below the level of isomorphism can
be made only by studying the problem within individuals.
If pharmacologists were able to produce color-altering
drugs, for example, their experiential and physiological ef-
fects could be studied and correlated within individuals. If
administering “inverticillin,” for example, produced a red-
green reversal of color experiences within individuals, then
some combination of its various physiological effects must
have produced this change. Scientists would have to rule
out certain bizarre, but logically possible, changes in lan-
guage or memory as alternative explanations, but we will
suppose that such alternative explanations can be effec-
tively eliminated.16
It seems intuitively plausible that subisomorphic changes
in experience owing to physiological interventions would be
detected in appropriately designed within-subject experi-
ments. We naturally suppose that, if the experienced world
changed color over a period of seconds, minutes, or even
hours, we would notice that this had happened and in what
way the world had changed. Surely one would realize that
grass now looks red instead of green, and stop signs green
instead of red. Even so, various philosophers have tried to
imagine scenarios in which such changes would not be de-
tectable within an individual (e.g., Putnam 1965), but the
conditions required are complex, convoluted, and generally
unconvincing (e.g., Dennett 1991). The difficulty, in a nut-
shell, is that, although changing the color experiences
would be (conceptually, though not practically) rather sim-
ple, the changes could easily be detected through mis-
matches with memories, such as noticing the oddity of see-
ing red grass. This is precisely the kind of change in
experience that would allow subjects in our hypothetical ex-
periment to report that the world looked different after the
physiological intervention.
In fact, there is clear evidence that people can detect
changes in color experience under circumstances similar to
those we are suggesting. Strokes that damage particular ar-
eas of visual cortex (in the occipitoparietal area) result in
spontaneous reports by patients that their color experience
has disappeared or has lessened noticeably in intensity
(Meadows 1974). Reports from these patients with achro-
matopsia thus provide evidence that changes in color expe-
rience can be detected within individuals by this means of
memory comparisons in at least some cases. There is also
evidence that other types of color changes go experientially
undetected, however. Hardin (1990) has argued that be-
cause the lens yellows with age, the precise colors a person
experiences will change, albeit glacially, during their life-
time, a change that no one seems to notice. The latter 
example is less relevant to our present concerns, however,
because the changes in color experience we are contem-
plating are both swift and enormous compared to the slow,
slight yellowing of the lens. Still, it is worthwhile to realize
that we are making some assumptions in supposing that
people will be able to report changes in color experience
over time as a result of a biological intervention.
One important use of within-subject experiments is to de-
termine whether certain physiological differences are rele-
vant to color experience. If color experiences do not change
when an intervention alters some aspect of an individual’s
neural structure or function, then that particular aspect can
be ruled out as responsible for differences in color experi-
ence, at least in that individual. The situation is actually a bit
more complex than this, because, even if a given factor does
not influence color experience, it might have some influence
in conjunction with another factor. The set of potentially rel-
evant variables is thus the orthogonal combination of all pos-
sible single factors, which is presumably a very large set. In
any case, each factor or combination of factors that can be
eliminated enlarges the number of individuals in each
neural equivalence class and thus increases the number of
individuals who can be inferred to share a particular set of
color experiences at the subisomorphic level.17
One of the most interesting findings about the subjective
Palmer: Color and consciousness
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1999) 22:6
939
Figure 7.
Equivalence classes of color perceivers. The Venn di-
agrams with solid lines indicate the behaviorally defined equiva-
lence classes of color perceivers who have isomorphic color expe-
riences, but not necessarily equivalent color experiences. Dashed
circles indicate the possible existence of three classes of trichro-
mats with color experiences that differ from those of normal
trichromats at a subisomorphic level, corresponding to the three
symmetries of color space indicated in Figure 3.
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0140525X99292217
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Massachusetts Amherst, on 18 Nov 2019 at 06:30:53, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at

quality of color experiences comes from a within-subject
design, albeit one caused by nature rather than scientific in-
tervention. The question addressed is how colors appear to
color-blind individuals versus people with normal color vi-
sion. The subjectivity barrier thwarts direct, between-sub-
ject comparisons of experiences, even though we can obtain
good behavioral evidence that people differ in the particu-
lar pairs of colors they can discriminate. But a within-sub-
ject comparison is possible for individuals who have one
color-normal eye and one color-blind eye (MacLeod &
Lennie 1976; Sloan & Wollach 1948). Although such peo-
ple are extraordinarily rare, they report that some colors in
their color-blind eye look essentially the same as in their
normal eye, that others appear uncolored (gray) instead of
colored, and that still others appear to be mixtures of grays
and colors. Through a red-green color-blind eye, for exam-
ple, such subjects report seeing everything in various
shades of blue, yellow, and gray, as if the normal color solid
were projected onto the blue-yellow-black-white plane of
color space. This result is not definitive for the more gen-
eral, between-subjects case because the two eyes of such a
subject are connected to the same brain, and this may
strongly constrain color appearances arising from stimula-
tion in the color-blind eye. Even so, it is an interesting and
important finding, one that is possible only because nature
has provided an unusual within-subject design.
Many of the fascinating phenomena responsible for the
recent surge of interest in consciousness can also be cast
within this within-subject framework. One of the classic ex-
amples is blindsight, in which a biological intervention (sur-
gical removal of occipital cortex in one hemisphere) caused
an individual to fail to have experiences of the sort he used
to have in one-half of his visual field (Weiskrantz 1986).
Knowing full well what it was like to have visual experiences
in his left visual field before the operation and what it was
still like to have them in his right visual field, D.B. enabled
scientists to conclude that something about the surgery had
eliminated visual experience and gave impetus to the search
to find out what was responsible. Unilateral neglect and
other syndromes of organic brain damage tap into the same
format of within-subject designs with biological interven-
tions induced by natural causes. They are among the most
powerful tools in current scientific methodology for ex-
ploring biological substrates of experience.
3.6. Causal theories of color experience. Thus far, we
have considered only correlational studies of experience
and argued that, unless the color systems within two brains
are identical so that their experiential content can be as-
sumed to be the same, comparisons between color experi-
ences across individuals will be thwarted by limitations in-
herent in behavioral science. But what about a causal theory
of consciousness? Might not such a theory allow between-
subject comparisons of color experiences to be made di-
rectly? Might not such a theory even be able to determine
the quality of different people’s experiences of color in an
objective manner?
Because we have no idea what a causal theory of con-
sciousness might be like, it is impossible to determine
whether it will contain the sort of mechanisms from which
one could predict the specific quality of color experiences
within and/or across individuals. For the sake of argument,
though, let us suppose it purports to do so. A nontrivial fur-
ther requirement of scientific theories, however, is that they
be testable. Could a causal theory of the qualities of expe-
rience be tested?
Again the answer depends on whether the kinds of vari-
ations it predicts can be induced within individuals or only
across individuals. If a physiological intervention – be it a
drug, surgical procedure, or brain-controlling machine –
can be identified that will reliably alter the crucial neural
properties in the required ways, then it could be adminis-
tered to individuals and its effects assessed by having sub-
jects compare their color experiences before and after the
intervention. If colors became systematically lighter, or if
redness/greenness reversed, or if colors began to be expe-
rienced as sounds, as predicted by some causal theory, then
it would be supported; otherwise it would not. Although
such experiments might be technically difficult, they are
conceptually straightforward.
If the required changes could not be induced within in-
dividuals, but only examined across them, we run into the
subjectivity barrier again. Differences that can be mea-
sured behaviorally, which I suggest reflect differences in re-
lational structure, can of course be detected and compared
to the predictions of the theory. However, if the theory
makes predictions that certain physiological differences
will cause experiential differences across individuals below
the level of isomorphism, they cannot be objectively tested.
Biological methods can verify that the appropriate differ-
ence is present across individuals, of course, but behavioral
methods will not be able to detect its subisomorphic effects
on experience for the reasons we have already discussed.
The advantages of within-subject manipulations in re-
vealing subisomorphic variations in color experience actu-
ally fit rather well with the intuitions on which the inverted-
spectrum argument is based. The reason inverting the
spectrum seems so compelling is that I can easily imagine
what it would be like for me to experience such a transfor-
mation of color experience. If I awoke one morning to find
my color experiences transformed, I believe I would know
immediately that it had happened and how it was different.
This is essentially the within-subject design I have argued
is the only method one might be able to use to break the
subjectivity barrier. However, this would not actually
“break” it as much as merely avoid it because, within an in-
dividual, there is no subjectivity barrier.18
On the other hand, even within-subject experiments
have serious limitations arising from the subjectivity bar-
rier. They may enable scientists to detect experiential dif-
ferences within individuals over time that cannot be de-
tected across individuals, but they still cannot fix the quality
of particular experiences. The examples we have discussed
allow scientists to conclude only that the experiences
changed in the particular way described by the subject, not
how they were before the change or how they are after it.
That is, an external observer can find out only about the re-
lation between the experiences before and after the inter-
vention. This does not allow any inferences about the actual
qualities of either set of experiences. For example, if some
drug produced a red/green reversal in a subject, that fact
could be determined, but it would not constrain the nature
of either green or red experiences in any way. This difficulty
should sound familiar; it is the isomorphism constraint
again. It arises because the subjectivity barrier is still in
place, not between one subject and another, but between
the subject and the experimenter. It will always be there as
long as scientific methods require objective measurement.
Palmer: Color and consciousness
940
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1999) 22:6
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0140525X99292217
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Massachusetts Amherst, on 18 Nov 2019 at 06:30:53, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at

4. Implications for functionalism
The theory of mind most relevant to the considerations
raised in this target article is functionalism because of the
central role relations among mental states play in both
cases. In particular, functionalism identifies the nature of
mind with the relations among mental states and their
causal connections to the environment. Crucial to the func-
tionalist view is the assumption that the nature of mental
states does not depend on their particular physical realiza-
tions. Minds must be physically embodied somehow to have
the necessary causal connections to the world, of course,
but functionalists claim that the same mind could be in-
stantiated in wildly different hardware, neural or otherwise,
as long as the same functional relations are present. These
claims have sparked heated arguments about the adequacy
of functionalism as a metatheory of mind, most of which
seem to be aimed at convincing the reader either that func-
tionalism is obviously right or obviously wrong. The con-
siderations raised in the present article suggest that a bet-
ter articulated critique is possible.
Using color experience as a paradigm example, I have ar-
gued that there is a metaphorical brick wall that limits the
kind of knowledge about experience that can be derived
from behavior. On one side of this epistemological wall lie
objective facts about relations among experiences that are
part of our shared cognitive culture and that can be studied
behaviorally. On the other side lie subjective, private as-
pects of individual experiences that cannot. Theoretically, I
have identified this limitation with the isomorphism con-
straint, claiming that behavioral science can specify the
structure of experience up to the level of isomorphism, but
no farther. This analysis is intimately related to functional-
ism insofar as it states that what can be known behaviorally
are relations among experiences. Such relations are, by de-
finition, within the domain of functionalism, so anything
that can be known about experience from behavior (i.e., up
to the isomorphism constraint) can be captured by a func-
tionalist account. I have also argued, however, that the na-
ture of individual experiences (beyond the isomorphism
constraint) cannot be known from behavior, even in princi-
ple. These nonrelational aspects of experience lie, by defi-
nition, outside the domain of functionalism; they are un-
derconstrained by relations among mental states. It seems
that the failure of functionalism to provide an account of
these aspects should be counted against its claim of fully
specifying the nature of mind. It does not seem to be able
to do the whole job.
It can do at least part of the job, however. Specifying con-
scious mental states to the level of isomorphism is nothing
to be sneezed at. In the domain of color experience, it is suf-
ficient to specify completely the shape and structure of
color space, which includes everything we know about color
experience, scientifically speaking. There is even a serious
question about whether there is anything more that can be
known within the methodological/epistemological limita-
tions of science. I have argued, for example, that no theory
of consciousness, even a causal biological one, will be able
to produce a testable account of the nature of individual ex-
periences because the behavioral aspects of the tests re-
quired would not support inferences beyond the isomor-
phism constraint. One might argue, therefore, that it is
unfair to require functionalism (or any other theory of
mind, for that matter) to be able to account for individual
experiences, because such theories cannot be tested in any
case.
The one way in which I have argued that we may be able
to get some understanding of experiential qualities beyond
the level of isomorphism is by the sort of “end run” I de-
scribed previously. If within-subject experiments using bi-
ological interventions can enlarge the experiential equiva-
lence class of color perceivers beyond individuals (e.g., just
me) to groups of individuals (e.g., you and me), then I can
infer that anyone within my equivalence class has the same
color experiences as I do. Such equivalence classes lie be-
yond the isomorphism constraint because there could, in
principle, be many of them within a population of per-
ceivers who are behaviorally indistinguishable (see Fig. 7).
Science could not objectively specify the nature of the un-
derlying experiences within any of these equivalence
classes, but I would have subjective knowledge for the ex-
periences of members of my own equivalence class, just as
you would for members of your own equivalence class.
Thus it seems that functionalism may succeed in specify-
ing experience as fully as objective science will allow, even
though I, as a conscious experiencer of colors, may be able
to get some further knowledge via attributing my own sub-
jective experiences to my equivalence class as defined by
combined evidence from the brain and behavioral sci-
ences.
The indeterminacy of the nature of individual experi-
ences within functionalism is a small shortcoming, however,
compared to the fact that it fails to discriminate between
my experiences and the complete lack of such experiences
in an information-processing system that has the same
causal relational structure among its processes, but no ex-
periences of any kind. The color machine described above,
for example, has the same representational color space as a
normal human trichromat but, because of the implications
of the color-room argument, it seems highly unlikely that
such a machine would have color experiences of any sort.
The causal isomorphism of its color representations to
those of normal trichromats is sufficient to guarantee that
it cannot be distinguished from a normal trichromat by be-
havioral means, but not that it has color experiences of any
sort. This is a problem because it means that, in addition to
having no account of the qualities of experience, function-
alism has no account of experience at all.
There is an interesting parallel here between imple-
mentation and experience with respect to functionalism.19
It has been recognized from the outset that functionalism
treats mental phenomena as independent of their physical
realizations: Any set of physical events will do, provided
they have the right causal relational structure. One way 
of stating this situation is that functionalism induces a set 
of equivalence classes on objects in which all those with
precisely the same causal relational structure among their
internal states fall into the same equivalence class, despite
potentially enormous differences in their physical imple-
mentations. A similar claim can be made about functional-
ism in the experiential domain. Functionalism appears to
be independent of the experiential realization of mental
phenomena in much the same sense: Any set of experiences
– indeed, even nonexperiential computational states – will
do provided they have the right causal relational structure.
Functionalism thus establishes a set of equivalence classes
on minds in which all those with the same causal relational
structure among their experiences fall into the same equiv-
Palmer: Color and consciousness
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1999) 22:6
941
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0140525X99292217
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Massachusetts Amherst, on 18 Nov 2019 at 06:30:53, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at

alence class, despite potentially enormous differences in
their experiential realization.
Notice a crucial difference between these two cases,
however. Although functionalism asserts that minds are
independent of their particular physical realization, it
maintains that they must have a physical realization to
meet the requirement of proper causal connections to the
physical world. Functionalism is therefore merely indif-
ferent about what particular implementation it has. How-
ever, in the corresponding case of experiential realization,
functionalism does not demand that minds have one at all.
There is no requirement corresponding to the causal con-
nection to the environment that can be used to enforce
some kind of phenomenal component as there is in the
case of a physical component. Experience thus does not
have any intrinsic necessity within a functionalist frame-
work, even though experience is the defining characteris-
tic of mental life.
The conclusion I draw is that functionalism is the ap-
propriate, state-of-the-art theory of mind from the stand-
point of purely behavioral science, but it falls short of pro-
viding a full account of mental events. This is perhaps not
too surprising given that one of the cornerstones of func-
tionalism is the irrelevance of physical implementation.
Without physiology, what objective facts are there to con-
strain the nature of mind except behavioral ones? And, if
behavior can reveal only relational aspects of mental events,
then a theory of mind built solely on relations can be ex-
pected to do as well as can be done. Within-subject designs
employing physiological interventions, natural or artificial,
provide ways of going beyond these limitations, however. If
such research is successful – and neuropsychological phe-
nomena such as blindsight suggest that it will be – more
comprehensive, physically based theories of mind will be
required to account for the fact that certain changes in
neural realization produce behaviorally detectable changes
in experience within individuals.
The considerations in this target article cast serious
doubt on the possibility of science being able to give a com-
plete and testable explanation of the quality of color expe-
rience, or any other kind of experience for that matter. Be-
havioral science is limited by the isomorphism constraint in
making between-subject comparisons: It cannot detect dif-
ferences in the experiences of two individuals below the
level of equivalent relational structure. Biological science is
subject to the same limitation, because behavioral mea-
surements are the only way in which it can compare expe-
riences across individuals. The prospects for going further
using biological techniques depend on (1) establishing the
identity of underlying physiology to a level at which it be-
comes implausible to believe that experiential differences
would arise from such minor physical differences, and/or
(2) employing physiological interventions using within-sub-
ject designs. Even if both conditions can be met (and each
will be difficult), there is no way to specify uniquely the
qualities of particular experiences except by reference to
one’s own. Physiological identity can demonstrate only that
two people’s experiences should be the same, not what ac-
tual qualities they have in common. Within-subject designs
can examine changes in experience, but cannot reveal to or
from what they changed. Thus, explaining the qualities of
individual experiences may be one mystery that will not
yield its secret to the seemingly inexorable advance of sci-
ence.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The preparation of this target article was supported by grant 1-
R01-MH46141 from the National Institute of Mental Health to
the author. I wish to thank Alison Gopnik, Paul Kay, Eleanor
Rosch, John Watson, John Searle, Bruce Mangan, Max Vellmans,
Bernard Baars, Elisabeth Pacherie, C. Lawrence Hardin, Robert
E. MacLaury, and two anonymous reviewers for their helpful
comments on earlier drafts of this target article.
NOTES
Requests for reprints should be sent to Stephen E. Palmer at
the Psychology Department, University of California, Berkeley,
CA 94720-1650.
1. Although there is a great deal of consensus among color sci-
entists about the primacy of these four chromatic colors, the mat-
ter is not completely settled. Indeed, Saunders and van Brakel
(1997) have disputed various aspects of this idea in a previous tar-
get article in this journal, to which the interested reader is re-
ferred.
2. Many people object that green is not a primary because it is
a mixture of blue and yellow. Although it is true that mixing blue
and yellow paints or dyes generally produces some shade of green,
people without experience mixing paints do not report that green
looks like the composition of blue and yellow. In any case, virtu-
ally everyone given control over the degree of yellowness/blue-
ness in a green test patch can easily find a setting where it looks
neither yellowish nor bluish. This color is unique green.
3. The color space shown in Figure 2 is intended to be an ab-
stract schematic model of human color experience rather than a
particular one, such as Munsell space, OSA space, NCS space, or
CIE space, each of which has somewhat different properties in
terms of both the types of stimuli and the nature of the relations
they represent. This model will be used to explicate a mode of ar-
gumentation with respect to empirical constraints on the inverted-
spectrum argument rather than to demonstrate definitive results
concerning fine points in terms of which alternative models of
color differ.
4. Again, this generally accepted view of the dimensionality of
color experience is not beyond reproach. Saunders and van Brakel
(1997) have disputed that these are the only or the most appro-
priate dimensions of color experience, citing a number of dissent-
ing voices in the research literature. The interested reader is ref-
ered to their article for further discussion.
5. It can be objected that there is no reason to suppose that
such individuals are any different from normal trichromats in any
biologically meaningful way. This would be true, however, only if
there is no difference between L- and M-cones except the nature
of the pigments they contain and the genetic codes that determine
those pigments. If there are any other differences between L- and
M-cones that are determined by other genes – for example, their
frequency of occurrence, retinal distribution, or output relations
to other cell types – then such individuals should not be biologi-
cally grouped with normal trichromats.
6. This presentation reflects what I take to be a plausible first-
order story about color categories, one that may or may not be cor-
rect in detail. I present it to illustrate the logic of the claim that
the structure of color categories breaks further symmetries of an
empirically accurate color space, rather than as a definitive argu-
ment that they do so. Many aspects of the Berlin-Kay-McDaniel
theory I discuss are open to question, as Saunders and van Brakel
(1997) have argued at length.
7. The status of goluboi as a BCT is controversial, with some
researchers endorsing its inclusion and others not (see MacLaury
1997a).
8. Tarski (1954) took a set theoretic approach to models by
defining an n-ary relation among objects in terms of the set of or-
dered n-tuples of objects for which that relation holds. For in-
stance, the binary lighter-than relation between two color experi-
ences, lighter-than (ci, cj), can be defined as the set of all ordered
pairs of color experiences 7ci, cj8 such that ci is lighter than cj. This
Palmer: Color and consciousness
942
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1999) 22:6
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0140525X99292217
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Massachusetts Amherst, on 18 Nov 2019 at 06:30:53, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at

relation, in the sense of a set of ordered pairs, is then structurally
preserved by the binary higher-than relation in a spatial model of
colors if there is a function, F, that maps colors (c1, c2, . . . , cn) to
points (p1, p2, . . . , pn), F(ci) 5 pi and F(cj) 5 pj, such that 7pi, pj8
is a member of the higher-than set of ordered pairs of points if and
only if 7ci, cj8 is a member of the lighter-than set of ordered pairs
of colors. These conditions ensure that the structure of one set of
objects and the relations among them are identical to the struc-
ture of another set of objects and the relations among them, with-
out either the corresponding objects or relations being identical
in any sense. (In the discussion of interobserver color transforma-
tions, the relevant mapping is from color experiences in one ob-
server to color experiences in another observer.)
9. Formally, an isomorphism can be defined as a function, F,
that maps a relational system, S 57E, R1, R2, . . . Rn8, onto another
relational system, S9 5 7E9, R1, R2, . . . Rn8, such that 7ei9, ej98 is an
element of Rk9 iff 7ei, ej8 is an element of Rk and F(ei) 5 ei 9 and
F(ej) 5 ej9. E and E9 are simple sets of elements in the two rela-
tional systems (in this case, color experiences of two different ob-
servers), and Ri and Ri9 are sets of n-tuples that constitute rela-
tions among the elements within the two relational systems (in this
case, relations among color experiences of two different ob-
servers).
10. Transitivity requires that if A is isomorphic to B, and B is
isomorphic to C, then A is isomorphic to C. Symmetry requires
that if A is isomorphic to B then B is isomorphic to A.
11. The concept of isomorphism has a long and somewhat con-
fusing history in psychology. Members of the Gestalt school dis-
cussed two different relations in terms of isomorphism (e.g., Koffka
1935; Köhler 1929). The clearer and less problematic use was to
describe the “psychophysiological” relation between sensory ex-
periences and underlying neurological processes in terms of hav-
ing the same abstract structure. (We will have more to say about
this relation later in this target article.) The other was to describe
the relation between the physical world and underlying neurolog-
ical representations. Here the authors introduced some confusion
by implying that there was actual similarity between certain spa-
tial qualities of a stimulus, such as a square, and the correspond-
ing pattern of neurological activity, which might itself be similar
to a square. A more realistic view of this psychophysical form of
isomorphism was developed by Shepard and Chipman (1970) as a
natural extension of Shepard’s pioneering work in nonmetric mul-
tidimensional scaling (Shepard 1962a; 1962b). Shepard and Chip-
man called this relation “second-order isomorphism” to empha-
size that, unlike some of the Gestalt ideas about isomorphism, the
“first-order” properties of representations do not have to be the
same or even similar. Thus the internal representation of a square
does not itself have to be square or even remotely similar to a
square, but, whatever it is, it must be more like the internal rep-
resentation of a rectangle than that of a triangle or circle. (Strictly
speaking, the “second-order” qualifier is unnecessary because
mathematical isomorphisms are, by definition, abstracted from
the “first-order” properties of their individual objects and concern
only “second-order” relational structure.) A particularly clear and
cogent early discussion of isomorphism in sensory psychology can
be found in Hayek (1952, pp. 37–41). None of these uses of iso-
morphism is the same as the present one, however, which con-
cerns the relation between the experiences of two different ob-
servers who may, in fact, have qualitatively different experiences
but the same relational structure over those experiences.
12. By “causal” I do not mean a theory of consciousness that
specifies the nonconscious neural events in the causal chain that
ultimately leads to consciousness. In color perception, for exam-
ple, it is clear that the registration of wavelength information by
activity in the short-, medium-, and long-wavelength cones of the
retina is not itself conscious but does lead to color experience
somewhere later in the sequence of neural processing. I take it
that the specification of this causal chain of neural events leading
to consciousness is conceptually unproblematic, although the de-
tails are not yet understood.
13. I hasten to add that this analogy is quite imperfect. I par-
ticularly do not want to be taken as claiming that consciousness
must be reduced to some causal physical mechanism – although
it might – in the same way that biological processes can be re-
duced to physical processes involving DNA or that consciousness
is like the “vital force” that will be eliminated from the scientific
vocabulary once it is properly understood in mechanistic terms.
Both of these conjectures are up for grabs. I offer the analogy only
as a particularly clear example of the important difference be-
tween correlational and causal theories in a scientific domain.
14. There appears to be a fairly widespread belief that the
neural correlates of experienced redness/greenness, blueness/
yellowness, and blackness/whiteness are already known from sin-
gle cell recordings of opponent cells in the retina and lateral genic-
ulate nucleus of monkeys (e.g., De Valois & Jacobs 1968). Al-
though these results are indeed suggestive, they do not support
such an extreme conclusion; it is extremely unlikely that the neural
correlate of color experience arises in precortical structures. The
most that can be said is that there may be some later representa-
tion of experienced color that has a similar neural coding in terms
of three opponent processes, as Hering (1878/1964) suggested
from a phenomenological analysis.
15. We would not require that our entire brains be identical,
for there may be many brain differences that would be irrelevant
to our experiences of color, such as those reflecting different
memories of autobiographical events, different motor skills, or dif-
ferent likes and dislikes. Our own experiences of color do not ap-
pear to vary over the course of our lives as these and many other
factors change, although such conclusions rest on assumptions
that can be challenged.
16. For example, the red-green dimension of color experience
might not have been reversed by the drug but, rather, the set of
associations to the relevant linguistic terms for reporting them.
Grass would then still look green, but the observer would call it
“red.” Such differences could be ruled out in a number of ways.
For one, observers could be shown normal and color-inverted pic-
tures of objects with characteristic colors (green grass and red
grass, red stop signs and green stop signs) and then be asked (1)
which were normal and which were color inverted, and (2) the
name of the color of the object shown. If the experiences were in-
verted, subjects would always be wrong in both tasks; if the lin-
guistic labels were inverted, subjects would name the colors in-
correctly but discriminate normal from reversed colors correctly.
Another approach would be to determine which physiological
structures were altered by the drug. If they were in the color path-
ways of the visual system, color experience would be the more
plausible alternative; if they were in the linguistic or memory cen-
ters, a change in language would be more plausible.
17. A further methodological difficulty in this program of re-
search is accepting the null hypothesis. That is, to eliminate a
given neurological factor as relevant to color experience, one has
to claim that it has no effect, and this is statistically problematic.
18. This is true for normal people under normal circum-
stances. However, in a variety of dissociative states, such as during
hypnosis, fugue states, and episodes of multiple personalities,
there appear to be subjectivity barriers within individuals. These
are complex and interesting phenomena that will ultimately prove
to be of great importance to understanding consciousness but are
well beyond the scope of the present discussion.
19. I thank Alison Gopnik for pointing out this parallelism
when we discussed an earlier draft of this target article.
Palmer: Color and consciousness
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1999) 22:6
943
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0140525X99292217
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Massachusetts Amherst, on 18 Nov 2019 at 06:30:53, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at

Open Peer Commentary
Commentary submitted by the qualified, professional readership of this
journal will be considered for publication in a later issue as Continuing
Commentary on this article. Integrative overviews and syntheses are es-
pecially encouraged.
How to compare color sensations 
in different brains
Werner Backhaus
Theoretical and Experimental Biology, Department of Biology, WE 05, Freie
Universität Berlin, 14195 Berlin, Germany. backhaus@zedat.fu-berlin.de
www.fu-berlin.de/backhaus
Abstract: The qualitative and quantitative properties of color sensations
and neuronal color coding are discussed in relation to physiological color
exchanges and their evolutionary constraints. Based on the identity mind/
matter thesis, additional physical measurements on color sensations are
described that will allow us, at least in principle, to compare the qualita-
tive properties of color sensations in different brains.
1. Qualitative and quantitative properties of color sensations.
Our color sensations consist of six elementary colors with different
hue quality, brightness (lightness) being an additional common
quality. These qualities can be compared and judged by introspec-
tion, at least within one brain (content-analytical experiments). The
hues of the elementary colors can be named (red, green, blue, yel-
low, black, and white) and the intensity of their color brightness can
be judged, as well as the amounts of elementary colors in any color
sensation (see Backhaus et al. 1998; Backhaus 1996; 1998a; 1998e).
Animals can learn, as a food signal, a specific elementary color that
two or more colors have in common (through double or multiple
color training) and they can choose the colors according to the re-
spective amounts of this elementary color (bees: Backhaus 1995;
also Backhaus 1994; 1997a; Backhaus & Kratzsch 1993). Color
names are arbitrarily related to the elementary colors by learning
and are hence unreliable for communicating of the qualitative (on-
tological) properties of colors in different brains.
On the other hand, the brightness ordering of the elementary
colors appears to be fixed and thus provides more information for
this purpose. Further (unconscious) properties are expected to ex-
ist in addition to the (conscious) properties determined by intro-
spection; these can also be used to uniquely determine the ele-
mentary colors in different brains (Backhaus 1997b; 1997c; 1998a;
1998b; 1998e; 1999; in press; in prep.).
2. Neuronal color coding. Neuronal color opponent coding
(COC) appears to be the general strategy for transforming data
from the photoreceptors into information concerning the ele-
mentary colors. COC neurons coding for red/grey/green, blue/
grey/yellow, UV/grey/blue-green, blue/grey/UV-green, and so
forth, as well as black and white have been shown to exist in hu-
mans and other animals. Inverted neurons, with swapped high-
and low-frequency responses to monochromatic light exist, as
well. This is probably to keep the excitation-dependent noise iden-
tical for all elementary colors (see Backhaus 1993; Backhaus et al.
1996). On the other hand, neurons that code exclusively for an el-
ementary color have not been found in any species. Thus the
quantity of elementary color must be encoded by the COC neu-
rons (Backhaus 1998a; 1999). Figure 1 shows the COC model of
color vision in the honeybee, which predicts and explains color
similarity and color discrimination behavior in terms of the neu-
ronal excitation values (Backhaus 1993; 1998c; 1998d). This model
is in the process of being extended by temporal properties (Becker
& Backhaus 1998; in press).
Nothing has so far been assumed about color sensations. Nev-
ertheless, the results of the double-color training experiments
mentioned above could not be explained exclusively by COC neu-
ronal activity; they appear to depend on a component (elementary
color) of a further color representation. Whether this representa-
tion is conscious and colorful like ours can not be answered from
behavioral experiments alone. These results nevertheless support
the hypothesis that the judgments in ordinary color discrimination
and color similarity experiments are performed unconsciously.
Only color content analyses appear to rely on conscious judgments
(Backhaus 1998e; 1999, see Fig. 2).
3. Physiological color exchanges. From the biological point
of view, we expect that the visual system of every species with color
vision, including man, has adapted by coevolution to its environ-
ment for species-specific tasks (Backhaus 1992; Kevan & Back-
haus 1998; Pielot et al., in press; Pielot & Backhaus, submitted).
Thus color vision systems should be almost identical within a
species, up to rare color vision deficiencies caused by mutations
and the population spread related to genetical recombination.
From this point of view, the problem raised in the target article 
reduces to two main questions: (1) Can there be physiological
changes in color vision that have no expression in behavior and
consequently will not have died out because of natural selection?
(2) Is it possible to determine the properties of color sensations
other than by introspection?
Regarding behaviorally silent color differences: Inverting the
COC neurons would have the same result as swapping the corre-
sponding elementary colors. Simultaneous inversion of the code
and swapping of the elementary colors would leave the color vision
system unchanged. Obviously, neither simple nor complicated
transfer motions are possible if they disturb the ordering of color
brightness. Only if all the elementary colors are swapped exactly
Commentary/Palmer: Color and consciousness
944
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1999) 22:6
Figure 1 (Backhaus).
COC model of neuronal color coding and
color choice behavior for the bee. The upper part (above dashed
line) is related to the physiology of the color vision system. The
lower part is related to the psychophysics of color vision. I(l): light
intensity; u, b, g: photoreceptor spectral types; s(l): spectral sen-
sitivity; R: range sensitivity; P: absorbed photon flux; E: photore-
ceptor excitation; V: membrane potential; M: Monopolar cell; A,
B: excitations of the COC neurons; dkj: color difference between
two color stimuli S;kdij: judgment values; F: global scaling factor;
kzij: scaled judgment values; p(z): choice percentages (inverse z-
transformed). The metric of subjective color space can be realized
by simple neurons that receive inverted input from the COC neu-
rons and corresponding color memories (from Backhaus 1993).
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0140525X99292217
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Massachusetts Amherst, on 18 Nov 2019 at 06:30:53, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at

so that the color brightness scale is inverted (i.e., dark is reported
as bright and vice versa), this change will remain undetected, at
least in the experiments mentioned above. Nevertheless, from an
evolutionary point of view this is rather unlikely, because several
genes would have to mutate simultaneously. Once the genes for
the color coding neurons and the elementary colors are known (as
they already are for the photoreceptors), the unlikeliness can be
calculated. Steps in between would die out by natural selection
(see Pielot et al., in press; Pielot & Backhaus, submitted).
4. Physical measurements will allow us to compare color
sensations in different brains. Regarding introspection, consider
physics, which is on the way to describing the world completely
through a grand unified “theory of everything.” This theory should
also describe our conscious mental states, for example, the ele-
mentary colors and color sensations; otherwise, it will be incom-
plete. When the materials that are close to or even identical to the
color sensations (see Fig. 3) are ultimately identified (the identity
thesis), the problem of the nature of color sensations (experiences)
in man and animals will reduce to the ordinary physiological prob-
lem of demonstrating that specific materials exist in respective
parts of their brains.
Apart from conscious qualities, as directly (subjectively) ob-
served by introspection, there should exist further unconscious
physical properties (e.g., masses, quantum properties, etc.), which
can be (objectively) measured (at least in principle). It should be
possible to characterize color sensations physically per se, which
should allow a deeper understanding of color sensations and will
finally allow us to compare color sensations in different brains by
objective methods (see Backhaus 1998b; 1999).
Color: How you see it, when you don’t
Philip J. Benson
University Laboratory of Physiology, Oxford OX1 3PT, United Kingdom.
philip.benson@physiol.ox.ac.uk
www.physiol.ox.ac.uk/~pjb
Abstract: It is worth considering whether particular behavioral measures
from observers are ever consciously (or preattentively) transformed a pri-
ori so as to render inferences about them indistinguishable. This is un-
likely, but recent experiments indicating color sensitivity and selectivity
without visual awareness suggest that the distinction between what can
and cannot be explained about color experience using behavioral re-
sponses may not be as obvious as Palmer concluded.
Consciousness is always accompanied by awareness. Awareness
arises when we have overt access to information that can be used
to influence behavior. Quantitative changes in behavior arising
from associated phenomenal experience is often interpreted in
terms of a functional neurological architecture. When a break-
down of the modularity is exposed in blindsight or apperceptive
agnosia, for example, we can sometimes interpret quite profound
residual skills using knowledge of alternative multiple parallel
pathways. That being the case, when it is suggested that awareness
need not be accompanied by consciousness we must remember
that awareness is intimately influenced by the properties of the
sensory stimulus. So consider the following.
When we asked an observer, known as G.Y., who has suffered
complete degeneration of his left primary visual cortex, to judge
the direction of a color stimulus moving in his blind field, perfor-
mance accuracy was very good. We further found that he was
sometimes conscious of a visual event, that “something hap-
pened,” in his blind hemifield (Guo et al. 1998). But at no time did
he see either the color of the object or its motion. His experiences
are devoid of content, of qualia. Asked to name the hue – red,
green, blue, or yellow – of a small patch of color as bright as its
background, G.Y.’s hesitancy is understandable. However, his
prompted verbal guessing was almost twice as good as he could
have achieved by guessing alone (47%, d9 5 0.74) – all very in-
teresting for someone who has had no experience of chroma in his
blind field in the 35 years since his accident. The pupillary light
reflex of G.Y. and similar patients also shows sensitivity to stimu-
lus-related color and motion (Stoerig et al. 1994), which provides
an important indirect means of measuring the unconscious “per-
ceptions” of his visual system.
Damage to a different brain area results in cortical color blind-
ness and affects observers in a different way. Unlike G.Y., such pa-
tients can readily volunteer comments on their visual experiences
of the same kind of stimuli, but they cannot overtly access their
own representations of chromatic information that nevertheless
allow them to process color contrast boundaries, for example. A
completely achromatopsic observer, M.S., was unable to indicate
verbally the position of the odd-one-out in a color test (Heywood
et al. 1998). His saccadic eye movements to the odd color were
also subject to overt guesswork, but were actually remarkably ac-
curate.
The cognizances of observers like these have the potential to dis-
close important facets of color space and can be framed within
Palmer’s hypothesis. The question of color subjectivity, considered
in terms of access-consciousness (Block 1995), is not, I believe, 
a prima facie reason to disqualify between-subjects designs.
Palmer’s suspicions have to be testable. Are they? I do not think we
have yet journeyed into an experimental or philosophical cul-de-
sac, but we have to assume that the fundamental Lockean question
is worth asking. There are several methods at our disposal – direct,
indirect, and behavioral – that allow us to speculate on the essence
of color similarity judgments and color categories that might be
made without awareness of hue, albeit at a fairly crude level. A
damaged or chronically underused color space may become dis-
torted, leading to tell-tale errors when it is accessed. The time of
injury, and the frequency of participation in intense experimenta-
Commentary/Palmer: Color and consciousness
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1999) 22:6
945
Figure 2 (Backhaus).
Causal chain structure of color vision and
supposed types of judgments (from Backhaus 1998e).
Figure 3 (Backhaus).
Constraints for a physiological model of
color sensations (from Backhaus 1998e).
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0140525X99292217
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Massachusetts Amherst, on 18 Nov 2019 at 06:30:53, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at

tion might be relevant because there may be a strong element of
acquiring the skills to associate subthreshold experiences with
properties of color, motion, and form. Paradoxical neuropsycho-
logical evidence is there to furnish us with an operationalized in-
terpretation of our normal behavioral repertoires and experiences.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
G.Y.’s color naming experiments were carried out in collaboration with
Kun Guo. Preparation of this commentary was supported by the United
Kingdom Medical Research Council.
Jack and Jill have shifted spectra
Ned Block
Department of Philosophy, New York University, New York, NY 10003.
nb21@is5.nyu.edu
www.nyu.edu/gsas/dept/philo/faculty/block
Abstract: There is reason to believe that people of different gender, race
or age differ in spectra that are shifted relative to one another. Shifted
spectra are not as dramatic as inverted spectra, but they can be used to
make some of the same philosophical points.
How important are the facts that may block an actual inverted
spectrum? The inverted and absent qualia arguments against
functionalism that Palmer invokes are well known in the philo-
sophical literature,1 although the wealth of empirical considera-
tions he so convincingly describes are a new and welcome contri-
bution. However, do the empirical issues really matter for the
challenge that the possibility of an inverted spectrum poses for
functionalism? My answer is: only in a subtle and indirect way. For
if there could be creatures who have color experience or at least
visual experience for whom the relevant empirical points do not
apply, then functionalism is refuted even if human spectra cannot
be inverted. For example, perhaps it is a consequence of the hu-
man genome that humans tend to be unwilling to give a name to
light green, even though they are willing to give a name to light
red (“pink”). Still, there could be people whose visual experience
is similar even if not identical to ours who find it equally natural
to give names to light green as to light red. (Perhaps we could even
genetically engineer humans to become so willing.) If this and
other relevant asymmetries could fail to obtain in people (or other
creatures) who have color experience (or at least visual experi-
ence), then the mere possibility of an inverted spectrum shows
that functionalism is false (Block 1990; Shoemaker 1982). It would
be a strange claim that the phenomenal character of our visual
states has a functional/computational essence, even though there
could be other creatures who have visual experiences that have
phenomenal characters that lack that essence.
However, just because it seems that there could be living beings,
even if not humans, who could have an inverted spectrum, does
that show that such creatures really could exist? This, it seems to
me, is where the empirical considerations come in; they move the
burden of proof to the functionalist. Three transformations of
color space survive the asymmetries that are known to be deter-
mined to the visual system itself. As Palmer emphasizes, the 
further asymmetries that may block an indetectible inverted spec-
trum may well be determined by a later cognitive stage of pro-
cessing. Currently available empirical considerations, therefore,
do not count against the possibility that there already exist cases
of inversion of color experience. Suppose, however, that the color
naming and categorization asymmetries do in fact reflect asym-
metries in color experience. Should it not be possible for there to
be people (or creatures of some sort) for whom light green looks
as salient (and therefore nameable) as light red? The difference
between such creatures and humans seems trivial, one of the sort
that might for all I know obtain between my neighbor and me.
This triviality puts the burden on the functionalist.
Philosophers make much of the distinction between a func-
tional state or process and its realizer or implementer (Block
1980). For example, a computational process for finding square
roots might be realized or implemented by a mechanical (gears
and wheels) system, or by an electronic or biological system (a hu-
man doing the computing). In the battle between Computation
and Biology that has defined the last 40 years of controversy in
cognitive science, the Computationalists say that qualia (i.e., the
phenomenal feels of sensory experience) are functional states,
whereas the Biologicists say that qualia are the biological realizers
or implementers of those states. The mere possibility of an in-
verted spectrum, if it can be established, gives the Biologicists an
advantage over the Computationalists when it comes to qualia.2
Shifted spectra. Functionalism is only one of the targets of ar-
guments from inverted and absent qualia. Another is representa-
tionism. Representationism is the view that the phenomenal
character of an experience is (or at least is determined by) its rep-
resentational content. That is, the phenomenal character of an ex-
perience as of red consists simply in the experience representing
something as red. (This view is taken by Dretske 1995; Harman
1996; Lycan 1996; Tye 1995, and, less clearly in McDowell 1994b.)
These representational contents are usually supposed to be non-
conceptual, as distinct from the contents of thoughts. (Noncon-
ceptual contents of perception are shared by people and animals,
even if the people can reason with these contents, whereas the an-
imals cannot. I will not try to spell out the concept of nonconcep-
tual content further; see Crane 1992.) If you and I can have in-
verted phenomenal characters even though our experiences
represent the same color, representationism is refuted.
But although the kind of inverted spectrum needed to refute
functionalism requires behavioral (and functional) isomorphism
(as Palmer notes), representationism can perhaps be refuted em-
pirically without these isomorphisms, as I shall now argue. One in-
teresting empirical argument appeals to the fact that color vision
varies from one normal person to another. Two normal people
chosen at random will differ half the time in peak cone sensitivity
by 1–2 nm or more. (More precisely, the standard deviation is 1–
2 nm; see Lutze et al. 1990.) This is a considerable difference,
given that the red and green cones differ in peak sensitivities only
by about 25 nm. Moreover, there are a number of specific genetic
divisions in peak sensitivities in the population that are analogous
to differences in blood types (in that they are genetic polymor-
phisms, discontinuous genetic differences coding for different
types of normal individuals). The most dramatic of these is a 62%
– 38% split in the population of two types of long-wave (red) cones
that differ by 5–7 nm (roughly 24% of the difference between the
peak sensitivities of red and green cones; Neitz et al. 1993). This
characteristic is sex-linked. The distribution just mentioned is for
men. Women have smaller numbers in the two extreme categories
and a much larger number in between. As a result, the match on
the Rayleigh test (described below) “most frequently made by fe-
male subjects occurs where no male matches” (Neitz & Jacobs
1986).
These differences in peak sensitivities do not show up in nor-
mal activities, but they do reveal themselves in subtle experimen-
tal situations. One such experimental paradigm uses the anom-
aloscope (devised in the nineteenth century by Lord Rayleigh), in
which subjects are asked to make two halves of a screen match in
color, where one half is lit by a mixture of red and green light and
the other half is lit by yellow light. The subjects can control the in-
tensities of the red and green lights. Neitz et al. 1993 note that
“people who differ in middle wavelength sensitivity (M) or long
wavelength sensitivity (L) cone pigments disagree in the propor-
tion of the mixture primaries required” (p. 117). That is, whereas
one subject may see the two sides as the same in color, another
may see them as different, for example, one redder than the other.
Furthermore, variation in peak sensitivities of cones is just one
kind of color vision variation. The shape of the sensitivity curves
likewise varies. These differences are the result of differences in
ocular pigmentation, which vary with “both age and degree of skin
pigmentation” (Neitz & Jacobs 1986). There is also considerable
Commentary/Palmer: Color and consciousness
946
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1999) 22:6
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0140525X99292217
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Massachusetts Amherst, on 18 Nov 2019 at 06:30:53, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at

variation in the amount of light absorption by preretinal struc-
tures, and this factor also varies with age.
So all should agree that a red object probably will not look ex-
actly the same, color-wise, to me as to you, especially if we dif-
fer in age, gender or race. (I emphasize gender, race, and age to
stifle the reaction that one group should be regarded as normal
and the others as defective.) We now have the beginnings of an
argument against representationism. Jack and Jill have experi-
ence that represents red things as red and scarlet things as scar-
let even though they experience both red and scarlet slightly dif-
ferently.
This argument does not quite work, however, for representa-
tionists could reply that the representational contents of Jack’s and
Jill’s color categories may differ, too, so there is still no proven gap
between representational content and phenomenal character.
“Color categories?” you say. “I thought the representationist was
talking about nonconceptual contents.” True, but the representa-
tionist has to allow that our visual experiences represent a scarlet
thing as red as well as scarlet. For we experience scarlet as both
red and as scarlet. We experience two red things of different
shades as having the same color, though not the same shade, so a
representationist has to concede a component of the representa-
tional contents of experience that capture that fact about experi-
ence. The representationist must allow representational content
of both color and shade. Furthermore, pigeons can be conditioned
to peck at things of a certain color, as well as of a certain narrow
shade. Even if the pigeon lacks color concepts, it has something
short of them that involves groups of shades as well as shades, red
as well as scarlet. Let us use the term “category” for this aspect of
the nonconceptual contents that is conceptlike but can be had by
animals that cannot reason with the contents. Now we can see why
the argument I gave does not quite work against the representa-
tionist. Jack’s and Jill’s experiences of a single red fire hydrant may
differ in phenomenal character and also in representational con-
tent, because, say, Jack’s visual category of red may include a shade
that is included instead in Jill’s visual category of orange. So we do
not yet have the wedge between phenomenal character and rep-
resentational content.
The way to get the wedge is to apply the argument just given to
shades rather than colors. Let us co-opt the word “aquamarine” to
denote a shade of blue that is as narrow as a shade can be, one that
has no subshades. If Jack’s and Jill’s visual systems differ slightly in
the ways that I described earlier, then perhaps aquamarine does
not look to Jack the way it looks to Jill. Perhaps aquamarine looks
to Jack the way turquoise (a different minimal shade, let us say)
looks to Jill. But why should we think there is any difference be-
tween the representational contents of Jack’s experience of aqua-
marine and Jill’s? They both acquired their categories of aquama-
rine by being shown (let us suppose) a standard aquamarine chip.
It is that objective color that their (different) experiences of aqua-
marine both represent. The upshot is that there is an empirically
based argument (that one might call “shifted spectra”) for a con-
clusion that, though not as dramatic as an inverted spectrum, has
much the same consequences for representationism and for the
question of whether there are uniform phenomenal characters
corresponding to colors. There may be small phenomenal differ-
ences among normal people that do not track the colors that 
are represented.3 Genders, races, and ages may differ by shifted
spectra.
I mentioned above that there is an objection to my first point
against representationism: Jack’s visual category that represents
red may include a shade that is included in Jill’s visual category that
represents orange. The present point is that the same argument
does not apply to minimal shades themselves.
This possibility should not disturb the functionalist as much as
the representationist, however, for even if there are phenomenal
differences among representationally identical experiences as just
supposed, the phenomenal differences might be revealed in sub-
tle empirical tests of the sort I mentioned. That is, perhaps shifted
spectra always result in different matches on a Rayleigh Anom-
aloscope or other devices. But shifted spectra would still count
against representationism.4
Of course, the argument about the irrelevance of the actual
facts given in the first part of this commentary also applies to the
second part. It is certainly conceptually possible that two normal
people looking at a single color patch have experiences that both
represent it as aquamarine, yet the two have slightly different ex-
periences of it. And the conceptual point in this case is clearer than
in the inverted spectrum case, because there is no issue of whether
someone with a different structure of color space has color expe-
rience at all. The upshot is that the representational contents of
color experiences could be the same even though the phenome-
nal characters are slightly different; representationism is therefore
false.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
I am indebted to Paul Boghossian, Tyler Burge, and Susan Carey for com-
ments on an earlier draft.
NOTES
1. The qualia-based arguments against functionalism that Palmer elu-
cidates appeared first, I believe, in Block and Fodor (1972), who coin the
terms “inverted qualia” and “absent qualia.” The point that functionalism
can characterize mental states up to the level of isomorphism was made by
Shoemaker (1975). Shoemaker (1982) also emphasizes the advantages of
the “within subjects” version of the inverted spectrum hypothesis. A spec-
trum inversion example involving two eyes is given by Byrne and Hilbert
(1997). A version of the absent qualia argument that Palmer bases on
Searle’s (1980) Chinese Room argument was given in Block (1978), the
main difference being that instead of the functional relations being real-
ized in a single person, Block (1978) uses a group of people communicat-
ing electronically.
2. See Rey (1997, p. 311–12) for a functionalist response.
3. Some may wish to avoid this conclusion by insisting that colors are
not real properties of things, that our experience ascribes phenomenal
properties to physical objects that the objects do not and could not have
(Boghossian & Velleman 1989; 1991). But this cannot be said by repre-
sentationists, because it would bring back unreduced phenomenal prop-
erties – which it is the essence of their position to reject. (See Shoemaker,
1994, for arguments that objects do have phenomenal properties.)
4. There is a complication that I cannot treat fully here. If you regard
a certain mixture of red and green as matching the aquamarine chip, but
I do not, then our categories of aquamarine are applied by us to different
things, and in that sense have different extensions. I do not regard this as
showing that our categories have different representational contents, be-
cause representational contents have to do with what objective colors are
represented and the example given exploits an indeterminacy in objective
color. There is no determinate answer as to whether the color of the mix-
ture of red and green (that matches aquamarine according to me but not
you) actually is aquamarine. See Block (1999) for a great deal more dis-
cussion of this issue.
Scaling the metaphorical brick wall
Michael Bradie
Department of Philosophy, Bowling Green State University, Bowling Green,
OH 43403. mbradie@bgnet.bgsu.edu
Abstract: Palmer argues that functionalist accounts of the mind are radi-
cally incomplete in virtue of a “metaphorical brick wall” that precludes a
complete treatment of qualia. I argue that functionalists should remain un-
moved by this line of argument to the effect that their accounts fail to do
justice to some “intrinsic” features of experience.
Intersubjective comparison of qualia run afoul of what Palmer
calls the “metaphorical brick wall” that separates the subjective as-
pects of our experiences (private to each of us) from the objective
aspects of our experiences, which are publicly accessible to others
(sect. 4, para. 2). Functionalist accounts of mental experiences are
capable of dealing with the objective aspects but cannot get a grip
on the subjective aspects. But, these subjective aspects, so Palmer
argues, are central to our concept of what having mental experi-
Commentary/Palmer: Color and consciousness
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1999) 22:6
947
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0140525X99292217
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Massachusetts Amherst, on 18 Nov 2019 at 06:30:53, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at

ences is all about – they are “intrinsic” to the experience (sect. 2.1,
para. 2). So, he concludes, functionalism is, at best, an incomplete
account of our mental experiences, in particular, of our color ex-
periences. (sect. 4, para. 8) Functionalism appears to be unable to
distinguish between cases where I see red and you see blue (the
“inverted spectrum” or “inverted color” problem). Indeed, func-
tionalism seems unable to distinguish between human beings who
experience red from robots, whose functional responses are in-
distinguishable from ours but who have no “experiences” at all. In
short, functionalism leaves the “redness” out of our seeing red.
Palmer concludes: “Experience thus does not have any intrinsic
necessity within a functionalist framework, even though experi-
ence is the defining characteristic of mental life” (sect. 4, para. 7).
If we understand “experience” here to mean what philosophers of
mind typically refer to as “qualia,” then the complaint against
functionalism is that it cannot account for qualia. But, so the ar-
gument goes, what we call our mental life is irreducibly qualia-
laden. So functionalism must be radically incomplete.
Functionalists should remain unmoved by such considerations
on the grounds that the alleged qualia that are supposedly part of
the intrinsic nature of our mental lives remain hopelessly inacces-
sible. It thus behooves the critic of functionalism to provide rea-
sons for thinking that there are any such features of our mental life
that are left out of sophisticated functionalist accounts.
Palmer agrees that interpersonal comparisons of qualia are out
of the question because of the “metaphorical brick wall” that iso-
lates each of our subjectivities from the scrutiny of others. He sug-
gests, however, that we can, in principle at least, do an “end-run”
around this obstacle by appealing to intrapersonal comparisons of
our experiences at one time with our experiences at another. The
claim is that there is no subjectivity barrier within an individual.
(sect. 3.6, para. 5) This is problematic. Someone with a heightened
sense of “qualia” recollection (such as the character in Marcel
Proust’s Remembrance of things past whose reverie is set off by the
smell of madeleines) might claim to be able to recall qualia from
past experiences, compare them with qualia of present experi-
ences, and thereby be able to determine whether like objective cir-
cumstances were or were not producing like qualia (Proust 1934).
On what basis would such a claim rest? One can only claim that
these qualia are the same or different on the basis of some exter-
nal or publicly accessible criteria. I take it that this is one of the
upshots of Wittgenstein’s “private language” argument in the In-
vestigations (Wittgenstein 1972, para. 258 and 265). So, for the
purpose of “qualia- comparison,” my prior self is as alien a being
to my present self as any other mind. If this is right, some other
device must be invoked to persuade us that there is something “in-
trinsic” missing from the functionalist account of color experi-
ences.
A wiring demon meets socialized humans
and calibrated photometers
Michael H. Brill
Sarnoff Corporation, CN 5300, Princeton, NJ 08543-5300.
mbrill@sarnoff.com
Abstract: Ignoring consciousness, I apply Palmer’s ideas to a photome-
ter, for which calibration is analogous to socialization of humans to agree
in color. Some attributes of the photometer – such as its aperture – do
not need to be known because their values are transparent to calibration.
But a writing demon can wreak havoc if it permutes measured values be-
fore interpolation completes calibration – as happens in Palmer’s color
rewirings.
Meet the wiring demon (WD), who lives to mix up the “wires” in
any functional system, subject to rules provided by us. Palmer ex-
amines some possible works of WD, in the complicated and ir-
regular system called color vision. To simplify and to add con-
creteness, I will first discard consciousness from the discussion
and then retreat from color vision into the one-dimensional world
of the laboratory photometer. Then, I will allow WD certain lib-
erties and try to correct them by recalibrating my photometer.
Perhaps the reader will agree that my contest with WD runs the
gamut of Palmer’s substantive issues without getting into unan-
swerable questions that have caused headaches since Plato wrote
the Timaeus.
1. More on isomorphisms, less on consciousness. In agree-
ment with many texts, Merriam-Webster’s Collegiate Dictionary
(10th ed., 1995) defines “isomorphism” as “a one-to-one corre-
spondence between two mathematical sets.” This is a much looser
definition than Palmer’s (attributed to Tarski), which requires a
prespecified “structure of relations” to be preserved by the map-
ping. What kind of structural relations are relevant? If the rela-
tion is distance, the mapping is called an isometry. If each small-
enough neighborhood is mapped to another neighborhood, the
mapping is called a diffeomorphism. Without a prespecified rela-
tion, the dictionary definition of isomorphism gives the widest lat-
itude to WD, who can interchange the final (private) percepts of
all the colors. Subject to certain restrictions, such as not mapping
small measurement errors into large color errors, any such iso-
morphism is behaviorally undetectable. The human, having been
socialized to attribute “red” as others do, is assumed to invert the
isomorphism. Note that consciousness is not part of the picture.
Suppose WD attacks some stage prior to the final, ineffable,
“physical-states-to-percepts” transformation. Then (again irre-
spective of consciousness) Tarski’s relational provisos on “isomor-
phism” become significant. For example, if WD reverses basic
RED and GREEN prior to the presumed derivation of PURPLE
from RED AND BLUE, then (and only then) one gets Palmer’s
PURPLE 5 GREEN AND BLUE. In that case, the only isomor-
phism left for WD would have to preserve all the fuzzy-logic-
linked pairs of the basic colors.
2. Hidden life of a photometer. Calibrating a photometer in-
verts an isomorphism (between photometric scales) in much the
same way that human socialization could compensate for a WD in
color vision. In fact, the units of luminance betray certain internal
parameters of the photometer that are ignored in measurements
because they are “calibrated out.” Luminance (cd/m`2) is the
number of lumens (“visible watts”) per steradian per square me-
ter (see VESA 1998). The square meter refers to a diffusely emit-
ting surface; the steradian refers to the solid angle, from a point
on the surface, subtended by the aperture of the photometer. For
a uniformly emitting plane, the distance of the photometer does
not matter: The photometer intercepts less light from each point
on a more distant plane, but the number of “seen” points is greater
in exact compensation. But the aperture should matter: A smaller
aperture means the photometer gets less light. Why is it not nec-
essary to know the aperture to make a luminance measurement?
The answer is because the luminance scale of the photometer has
been calibrated using one or more known-luminance surfaces.
Each photometer has a private world of received light, but it is cal-
ibrated to agree with other photometers.
When the photometer aperture is calibrated out, the isomor-
phism being inverted is a scaling from R+ to R+, between pho-
tometers, and the relation it preserves is the ratio between two
readings. Other isomorphisms, too, can be calibrated out. For a
smooth, strictly monotonic nonlinearity arising from the light de-
tector, the preserved relation is the ordering of outputs, greatest
to least. Also, neighborhoods are mapped to neighborhoods – a
good thing, because small, random measurement errors map to
small output errors. In contrast, a WD allowed free rein in its in-
put-output permutation would produce large random output er-
rors that would be uncorrectable by recalibration. Similarly, if WD
preserved order but not smoothness in the rewiring, interpolation
of readings would be impossible and it would therefore be im-
possible to recalibrate the device in a finite time.
When WD (alias the difference between photometers) is be-
nign, it is possible to calibrate using a few standard light sources.
Commentary/Palmer: Color and consciousness
948
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1999) 22:6
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0140525X99292217
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Massachusetts Amherst, on 18 Nov 2019 at 06:30:53, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at

These induce a number of fiducial readings. (Dare I say “basic lu-
minance categories”?) Secondary (derived) readings could then
be interpolated from pairs of the fiducial readings. If my interpo-
lations were inaccurate, my photometer’s readings might not agree
with others. The agreement would be disastrous if I calibrated the
fiducials of photometer 2, used those of photometer 1 to derive
secondaries, and adopted these secondaries directly for photome-
ter 2. That would be analogous to Palmer’s PURPLE 5 GREEN
AND BLUE. To see the analogy more clearly, imagine that WD
permutes only the primary measurements, but that the calibration
maps the whole luminance scale back to photometer 1, including
the interpolated values. To conclude, I am not sure how this par-
tial-calibration exercise could enlighten either a user of photome-
ters or (by extension) a color scientist.
3. Outlook. I have tried here to reinterpret the facts in Palmer’s
discussion so as to avoid unanswerable questions in favor of prac-
tical answers. I have not entirely succeeded, for metrology itself
has an intrinsic philosophical question. Calibration is, in theory, a
regress of photometers and light sources. Where does it begin?
Subjectivity is no barrier
Alex Byrne
Department of Linguistics and Philosophy, Massachusetts Institute of
Technology, Cambridge, MA 02139. abyrne@mit.edu
web.mit.edu/philos/www/byrne.html
Abstract: Palmer’s “subjectivity barrier” seems to be erected on a popu-
lar but highly suspect conception of visual experience, and his “color room”
argument is invalid.
Palmer beautifully articulates a view that many philosophers and
psychologists have found compelling: In attempting to understand
the mind, scientists face an impenetrable “subjectivity barrier,”
behind which lies the “nature of [our] experiences themselves”
(sect. 2.1, para. 2 and 3).1 And although Palmer sometimes sweet-
ens the pill with such locutions as “scientists would never know
with certainty” (sect. 2.1, para. 1), and “it may not be possible to
be sure” (sect. 2.2, para. 3), it is perfectly clear that the conclu-
sions of his arguments are – setting futuristic brainometers aside
– that we (not just “behavioral scientists”) have absolutely no rea-
son to believe (not just no “objective knowledge”) that others have
experiences with the same “intrinsic qualities” as our own, or even
that they have any experiences at all (sect. 2.5, para. 8). Thus, what
might seem at first glance a sober essay curbing the pretensions of
science to explain consciousness is in fact a radically skeptical
manifesto.
According to Palmer, we can at best know about the relational
structure of others’ experiences – the similarities and differences
they bear to each other. (For brevity’s sake I shall ignore his fur-
ther claim that we cannot know that others have experiences.)
Skepticism follows because Palmer holds that fixing this relational
structure does not fix the “sensory qualities” of experiences.
Palmer’s main examples of a difference in sensory quality with
no difference in relational structure are variants of the usual “spec-
trum inversion” case (Shoemaker 1981). No doubt some com-
mentators will attack Palmer’s argument by questioning whether
our color space is as symmetric as Palmer makes it out to be. But
this response does not dig deep enough, because on Palmer’s con-
ception there may well be sensory qualities “alien” to us that could
occupy the relational structure of our experiences.
A potentially more promising response disputes Palmer’s cru-
cial claim that sensory qualities can vary independently of rela-
tional structure. This response subdivides into two: the first agrees
with Palmer that interpersonal comparisons of sensory qualities
make sense (Clark 1993; Hilbert & Kalderon, in press), whereas
the second denies that they do (Stalnaker, in press).2 As I am un-
convinced that the response just mentioned can be made to work,
I shall try a different tack, and present a natural conception of vi-
sual experience on which it is hard to get Palmer’s skeptical wor-
ries going.3
Imagine seeing a red object – the proverbial ripe tomato. Focus
your attention on the salient property of the tomato that it shares
with cherries and strawberries. That property is redness, right?
And of course red objects – like tomatoes and cherries – look more
similar, with respect to color, to orange objects than they do to
green objects. These similarity relations among colored objects in-
duce corresponding similarity relations among our experiences of
color, rather than the other way around. It is not true that red ob-
jects are more similar to orange objects than they are to green ob-
jects because our experiences of red objects are more similar to our
experiences of orange objects than they are to our experiences of
green objects. Rather, the explanation goes the other way: Our ex-
periences are similar because the objects of the experiences are
similar. This is because when people have visual experiences they
are only aware of what visually appears to them, or of what their
experience represents: as it might be, the presence of a red tomato.
They are not aware (at least, not without further effort) of their ex-
periences. And similarly with the “nature of the experiences them-
selves”: The perceived nature of the objects of perception (e.g., the
redness of the tomato) explains the nature of perceptions of ob-
jects. If a person has a visual experience that represents the tomato
as being red, then nothing else needs to be added to this experi-
ence for it to have the distinctive “sensory quality of redness” (sect.
2.1, para. 3) that Palmer thinks is hidden from scientific enquiry.
Therefore, because there appears to be no special problem about
knowing whether objects visually appear red to people, there is no
special problem about knowing the nature of others’ visual experi-
ences, and thus there is no “subjectivity barrier.”
Palmer may have been seduced by the following perennially ap-
pealing argument for thinking that something else needs to be
added to a visual experience that represents something as red for
it to have the “sensory quality of redness.” Imagine having a “red”
afterimage. Perhaps unreflectively you would be inclined to call
the distinctive property of the image “red,” but surely the image
cannot really be red – red is a property of physical objects like
tomatoes, not “mental objects” like images. So call the property of
the image “R” instead. But obviously R is present when you see
objects, like ripe tomatoes. And because “mental objects” like im-
ages can have R, it does not seem likely that R can ever be a prop-
erty of a physical object like a tomato. So when you see that a
tomato is red, you are aware that the tomato is red and that some
image-like thing has R. It is the presence of an R-image that gives
your experiences of red objects (and certain afterimages) their dis-
tinctive “sensory quality”; similarly, the distinctive sensory quality
of your experiences of green objects is due to the presence of a G-
image. And now, of course, the question naturally arises whether
others’ experiences of red objects are in fact attended by G-im-
ages rather than R-images.
As tempting as this reasoning is, it is wrong. If R is to explain
the sensory quality of your experience of a ripe tomato, then it is
not sufficient that the experience involve an image that has R: It
must visually appear to you that the image has R (imagine that
even though the image has R, it appears to have G; in that case
you would have an experience with the sensory quality distinctive
of your experiences of green objects). But now the alleged fact that
the image has R is doing no explanatory work: The sensory qual-
ity of your experience is solely explained by the fact that it appears
to you that the image has R, irrespective of whether the image has
R. So the introduction of R was an idle wheel – redness would do
the job just as well. Your afterimage experience was a kind of hal-
lucination: It visually appeared to you that something was red (that
is what gave your experience its distinctive sensory quality), but
nothing in the scene before your eyes was red (that is why it was
a kind of hallucination). Furthermore, although it seemed to you
that there was an image floating before your eyes, in fact there was
no object – not even a mental one – there at all.
Finally, as has been pointed out numerous times (e.g., Cope-
Commentary/Palmer: Color and consciousness
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1999) 22:6
949
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0140525X99292217
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Massachusetts Amherst, on 18 Nov 2019 at 06:30:53, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at

land 1993), the Chinese room argument is fallacious. The conclu-
sion concerns the system (it cannot understand Chinese), but the
premise concerns a part of the system (the man does not under-
stand Chinese). The argument is an instance of “x is not F, x is part
of y, therefore y is not F,” and so is invalid.4 Thus Palmer’s “color
room” argument fails to show anything whatever about function-
alism and experience.
NOTES
1. Palmer cites Wittgenstein as a supporter, but I think the reverse is
true: The view Palmer holds is one that Wittgenstein argued against. Frege
– the inventor of modern logic and one of the founders of analytical phi-
losophy – is a much better candidate (see especially 1918/1988, and also
1884/1950, sect. 26, where Frege uses the dual system analogy of the tar-
get article [sect. 2.3, para. 11 and 12]).
2. Stalnaker draws a helpful analogy with Von Neumann-Morgenstern
utility theory, which assigns utility scales to people who can only be com-
pared intrapersonally, not interpersonally.
3. See Armstrong 1968; Byrne and Hilbert 1997; Dretske 1995; Har-
man 1990; Lycan 1996; Tye 1995. There are important dissenters, in par-
ticular, Block 1990 and 1995.
4. Searle’s response is to let the man perform all the symbolic manipu-
lations in his head, but this appeals to the inference pattern “x is not F, y
is part of x, therefore y is not F,” which is also invalid.
Why asymmetries in color space 
cannot save functionalism
Jonathan Cohen
Department of Philosophy, Rutgers University, New Brunswick, NJ 08901.
joncohen@ruccs.rutgers.edu
ruccs.rutgers.edu/~joncohen/cohen.html
Abstract: Palmer’s strategy of saving functionalism by constraining spec-
trum inversions cannot succeed because (1) there remain many nontrivial
transformations not ruled out by Palmer’s constraints, and (2) the con-
straints involved are due to the contingent makeup of our visual systems,
and are therefore not available for use by functionalists.
The possibility of spectrum inversions has been taken to threaten
the viability of individuating conscious states functionally – by
their connections to perceptual input, behavioral output, and
other mental states; such cases hypothesize token states that are
functionally identical but nonetheless differ in phenomenal char-
acter. Palmer attempts to respond to this threat by pointing to sub-
stantive constraints that he says putative inversions would have to
meet. However, he ultimately gives up on functionalism for two
reasons. First, he is skeptical that his constraints rule out all can-
didate inversions. Second, he is convinced by absent-qualia ob-
jections alleging that no amount of functional connection is suffi-
cient for conscious experience (sect. 2.5).
I share Palmer’s pessimism about the prospects for an adequate
functionalist account of color experience. Indeed, I think things
are even worse for the functionalist than Palmer allows. For even
if Palmer’s constraints worked out better than he supposed, this
would still not be enough to save functionalism from the inverted
spectrum.1
The strategy Palmer considers involves pointing to functional
properties of phenomenal characters of color experiences,
thereby bringing phenomenal characters under the explanatory
scope of functionalism. Palmer argues that phenomenal charac-
ters stand with each other in certain empirically salient relations
(e.g., of similarity and composition), which must be left invariant
by any spectrum inversion (by definition, inversions must leave
functional connections fixed), and that this restriction radically
constrains the space of putative inversions. Indeed, he suggests
that if the relations considered in section 1.4 reflect properties of
the phenomenal characters themselves (not sociolinguistically
transmitted conventions), there can be no nontrivial isomor-
phisms, so functionalism would be saved.
Unfortunately, Palmer’s restrictions on spectrum inversions are
both too weak and too strong to save functionalism. They are too
weak because they do not preclude all nontrivial transformations
(even granting the applicability of the constraints of sect. 1.4). For,
although Palmer does not discuss them, there remain transforma-
tions that map green to green, red to red, and so forth, but effect
slight reorganizations within each color category. For example,
there are transformations that move each unique color onto a
close neighbor within the same color category, while leaving the
ordering and metrical relations between colors fixed (slight rota-
tions, or local stretchings/squeezings, of the color space). Could
these transformations be ruled out by adducing further con-
straints? They’d better not, for some such transformation seems
to be actual: As discussed by Hurvich (1981, pp. 222–23), there is
a non-trivial interpersonal distribution of the loci of unique hues.
Thus, even if all of Palmer’s constraints are met, interpersonal dif-
ferences are still possible (and, in some cases, actual) between the
phenomenal characters of experiences of the same stimulus under
the same viewing conditions.
At the same time, Palmer’s constraints are too strong to save
functionalism, because the relational properties involved are due
to contingent properties of our visual systems, and hence are not
within the reach of functionalism. For, as Palmer points out (sect.
4, para. 6), it is because functionalism individuates states in terms
of functional roles irrespective of these roles’ neuroanatomical im-
plementation that functionalists can (and type-identity theorists
cannot) say that a given state is shared by actual and possible crea-
tures with widely divergent brain structures. But the relations
Palmer wants to leave fixed lack this generality: The generally ac-
cepted accounts derive these similarity and compositional rela-
tions from the contingent makeup of the minds/visual systems of
normal trichromats.2 Even if this makeup is shared by macaques,
it is certainly not shared by all the actual and imaginable creatures
(e.g., dolphins, super-sophisticated Martians) to whom we might
want to attribute color experiences. Therefore, functionalists can
only advert to Palmer’s relational constraints if they are prepared
to become species-chauvinists. Presumably they are not, though,
or they would not be functionalists.
The modal reflex of this problem is quite serious: If it is to spec-
ify the essence of color experiences – to list the features states
must have to count as color experiences, rather than just the fea-
tures color experiences happen to have – functionalism must pro-
vide an analysis of the color experiences of any metaphysically pos-
sible creature who has them. For this reason, functionalism is
vulnerable to spectrum inversions not just between actual human
beings, but between any two metaphysically possible creatures.
And, as noted, Palmer’s constraints lack this modal power. Al-
though our color experiences might be uniquely constrained by
the asymmetries Palmer considers, (1) there seem to be meta-
physically possible subjects of whose color experiences this is not
true, and (2) it is apparently contingent that we are not such crea-
tures.
If this is right, functionalism can only state metaphysically con-
tingent truths about color experience. Contingent truths can be
interesting, but they do not serve the scientific goal of laying bare
essences.3
NOTES
1. I have two reasons for pressing these points against Palmer even
though he ultimately gives up functionalism. First, I think he underesti-
mates the force of inverted spectrum worries. Second, I intend my criti-
cism of the strategy to speak to others (e.g., Tye 1995, p. 202–205) who
apply analogous strategies more confidently, and claim to have answered
the threat of inverted spectra.
2. See Hurvich (1981) for an explanation of such features in terms of
the opponent-process mechanisms of human visual systems.
3. Compare: “Water is my favorite beverage” may be interesting, but it
does not tell us the kinds of things an acceptable scientific account of wa-
ter must (viz., “Water is H2O”).
Commentary/Palmer: Color and consciousness
950
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1999) 22:6
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0140525X99292217
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Massachusetts Amherst, on 18 Nov 2019 at 06:30:53, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at

Intrinsic changes in experience: 
Swift and enormous
Daniel C. Dennett
Center for Cognitive Studies, Tufts University, Medford, MA 02155.
ddennett@tufts.edu
ase.tufts.edu/cogstud/mainpage.htm
Abstract: Because, as Palmer shows, the only kinds of differences that can
be detected are differences in relational structure, and relational structure
is precisely what is preserved by isomorphism, his own arguments can be
used to expose the incoherent motivation behind the traditional idea of
“intrinsic qualities” of experience.
As a left-handed person, I can wonder whether I am a left-hemi-
sphere-dominant speaker or a right-hemisphere-dominant speaker
or something mixed, and the only way I can learn the truth is by sub-
mitting myself to objective, “third-person” testing. I do not “have
access to” this intimate fact about how my own mind does its work.
It escapes all my attempts at introspective detection, and might, for
all I know, shunt back and forth every few seconds without my be-
ing any the wiser. In striking contrast to this is the traditional idea
that there are “intrinsic qualities” of my subjective experience that
I do have access to, but that are inaccessible to objective investiga-
tion. This idea has persisted for centuries, in spite of its incoher-
ence, but perhaps its days are finally numbered. Palmer presents
the case in favor of the traditional view so clearly that his own ar-
guments can be recast to expose the problems with it.
1. “The emerging picture is that the [intrinsic] nature of color
experiences cannot be uniquely fixed by objective behavioral
means, but their structural interrelations can be. This means that,
logically speaking, any set of underlying experiences will do for
color, provided the experiences relate to each other in the re-
quired way” (sect. 2.2, para. 6).
2. “[T]he only kinds of differences that can be detected behav-
iorally [my emphasis] are differences in relational structure, and
relational structure is precisely what is preserved by isomorphism”
(sect. 2.3, para. 4).
Behaviorally, as contrasted with what? Experientially, introspec-
tively, first-personly. The idea is that what cannot be detected be-
haviorally might nevertheless be detected from the first-person-
point-of-view, as one says:
3. “I alone have access to these experiences” (sect. 3.3, para. 4).
But (3) must be defended against the apparently unthinkable hy-
pothesis that not even I “have access to” the intrinsic qualities of
my very own experience. What on earth could this mean? It could
mean that there were intrinsic qualities of my experience whose
comings and goings were, like the spatial properties of my lan-
guage-comprehension and production activities, beyond my di-
rect ken. But this invites the obvious retort: then they would not
be properties of my experience! Now what could that mean?
Palmer shows us, by plotting the path from between-subjects to
within-subject experiments. The real and imaginary within-sub-
ject experiments he discusses all require a “memory comparison”
by the subject. That is the whole point of within-subject experi-
ments here, and Palmer acknowledges the theoretical possibility
that there might be intrinsic qualities that changed so gradually,
over such a long time, that the intrasubjective memory compari-
son would fail to detect them. If a change were slow enough, he
concedes, even a huge change could occur without being de-
tected, and if a change were subtle enough, it could happen
quickly, without the subject noticing. But never mind, he says; he
is concerned only with within-subject changes in experiential
quality that are “swift and enormous” (sect. 3.5 para. 3). How swift
and how enormous? Just swift and enormous enough to be de-
tected by the subject.
Palmer concludes: “Within-subject designs can examine
changes in experience, but cannot reveal to or from what they
changed” (sect. 4 para. 9) – not to outsiders and not, really, to sub-
jects either! You do not “have access to” the intrinsic qualities of
your experiences in any interesting sense, any more than outside
observers do, but only to the relations between them that you can
detect. The very detectability by the subject of “swift and enor-
mous” changes guarantees that any such changes of properties are
“within the domain of functionalism.” This does not establish that
there are no “subisomorphic” intrinsic qualities of experience, but
only that if there are, they are of no importance to psychology (or
“phenomenology”), because their presence or absence makes no
difference to the subjective state of the subject. In the limiting
case, you could gradually become a “color zombie” and never
know it. For all you know, that is what you are now. This is not, as
some have claimed, an intended reductio ad absurdum of the very
idea of consciousness, but rather of the idea that consciousness has
intrinsic qualities that are problematic for functionalism.
Palmer notes that earlier arguments against intrinsic qualities
of subjective experience (e.g., Dennett 1991) were “complex, con-
voluted, and generally unconvincing” (sect. 3.5, para. 2). Perhaps
now that they are recast as implications of his own arguments, he
and others will find them more persuasive.
What does my eye tell your mind?
Rebecca M. Frumkina
Department of Psycholinguistics, Institute of Linguistics, Russian Academy of
Sciences, Moscow 125 167, Russia. frum@frum.mccme.ru
Abstract: Palmer’s suggestion that color might serve as an appropriate
field in which to test the hypotheses on the relations among brain, mind,
and behavior is misleading. Human color experience as related to mind
must be considered as a cultural, as well as a natural phenomenon. It is im-
portant to avoid approaching facts of language as mere nomenclature; oth-
erwise, concepts are reduced to percepts.
I found Palmer’s target article highly controversial, although for
rather uncommon reasons: I am used to discussion at either the
theoretic or metatheoretic level (i.e., on epistemological grounds)
or statements challenging certain experimental designs and/or re-
sults. Even when a general argument is stimulated by doubt about
the validity of a whole paradigm to which a particular line of re-
search belongs, I would expect a clear restatement of what seems
invalid, and how one accounts for the consequences.
By all means, let the epistemological status of any statement in
a contribution be transparent to the qualified reader. An opinion,
however reasonable, should not be taken as the ultimate truth; an
untestable hypothesis should not be presented as testable, and a
model (e.g., of color space) should not be discussed as having its
own ontology – be it Newton’s, Hering’s, or Munsell’s.
It is misleading (though common) to suggest that color might
serve as an appropriate field to test hypotheses on the relations
among brain, mind, and behavior. As to what goes on in the brain
when we discriminate and categorize colors, psychophysiologists
know next to nothing (Dubois 1997; Missa 1993). We can register
wavelengths and show experimentally that they evoke certain
color terms as responses (Chapanis 1965). Does this lead us fur-
ther than we are in the domain of categorization of odors, where
we still cannot register any psychophysical correspondences,
whatever they might be? I doubt it, as do Sahlins (1976) and
Dubois et al. (1997, p. 27).
After 20 years of research in color as represented by the facts of
natural language (Frumkina 1984; Frumkina & Mikhejev 1996), I
conclude that human color experience and perception as related
to the mind must be considered a cultural, as well as a natural phe-
nomenon. Hence, the relation should be investigated by methods
based on the observable behavior, be they questionnaires, map-
ping words to Munsell tables, categorization of color stimuli, or
color-term usage by natural speakers.
We “see” with neither our eyes nor our brains. We see with our
minds. We need our minds, not just our brains, to tell crimson
from red. We might as well skip this difference if we do not be-
Commentary/Palmer: Color and consciousness
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1999) 22:6
951
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0140525X99292217
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Massachusetts Amherst, on 18 Nov 2019 at 06:30:53, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at

long to the culture where this difference is encouraged. Many
people are subject to special cultural conditions that might make
certain differences – negligible under neutral conditions else-
where – crucial and behaviorally important. It is widely known
that textile experts can sort samples of black thread into 16 cate-
gories, and those who promote lipstick will highlight exceptionally
the shades of red and pink. Such experts would be able to make
us “see” the difference, too, but by addressing our minds, not our
brains, let alone our eyes (Goodwin 1997). This brings us back to
the problem of “basic” colors.
The discussion of “basicness” actually refers to color names and
not to their denotata; that is, it does not refer directly to color sam-
ples represented via Munsell tables. Thus, we come across “de-
rived” but basic (and presumably universal) color terms, such as
orange and goluboj, interpreted as red and yellow, white and blue,
correspondingly. I argue that goluboj should be considered cul-
turally basic for Russian, because Russian native speakers cannot
designate most blue eye color and the common color of sky with-
out this term. The general “basicness” of goluboj has been widely
discussed (Corbett & Davis 1997; Moss et al. 1990), but I wonder
whether the term has any culturally important manifestation out-
side the Russian language area.
On the other hand, I have never found any argument about or-
ange possibly not being basic in Russian. However, as long as the
corresponding Russian term oranjevyj is available for the color of
an orange, it obviously belongs culturally to the words borrowed
rather late. Oranjevyj is quite infrequent (cf. Corbett & Davis
1997; MacLaury 1997); it does not make part of any collocations,
nor does it serve as a typical attribute for any culturally relevant
objects.
In sum: It is important to avoid approaching facts of language
as mere nomenclature; otherwise, cognition is reduced to recog-
nition, concepts to percepts, and culture to nature (Sahlins 1976).
Empirical assessment of colour symmetries
Lewis D. Griffin
Department of Optometry and Vision Sciences, Ashton University,
Birmingham B4 7ET, England. l.d.griffin@aston.ac.uk
www.vs.aston.ac.uk/staff/lgriffin.html
Abstract: The quality of potential symmetries of the similarity structure
of the Basic Colour Terms has been assessed. The assessment was made
on the basis of a database of similarity judgements, made by subjects in re-
sponse to linguistically expressed questions. All potential symmetries can
be statistically rejected, although the well-known and some novel inter-
pretable symmetries are shown to be approximately correct.
To investigate possible symmetries of the colours, a database of
colour similarity judgements was amassed using questionnaires.
Each questionnaire consisted of 200 questions of the form “which
is the more similar pair A and B or C and D?” where A–D were
randomly drawn from the 11 Basic Colour Terms (BCTs). The
questions were linguistic; no colour samples were used. Only sub-
jects who assessed themselves as having normal colour vision and
spoke English as their main language were used.
A total of 47,557 responses were collected from 194 subjects.
Ignoring the order of colours within a pair and the ordering of the
two pairs, there are 1,485 possible questions. So on average, each
question had 32.0 responses. The questions elicited varying levels
of agreement. For example, 33 versus 3 choose Purple and Black
as more similar than Green and Black, whereas subjects split 17
versus 17 over Green and Red versus Brown and White. If agree-
ment rate is defined so that it is 91.7% and 50.0%, respectively, for
the previous two examples, the average agreement rate across all
questions was 79.1%.
To appreciate what a symmetry within the database of re-
sponses would amount to, imagine data being collected in the fol-
lowing manner. Suppose questions are asked in the form “A and
B or C and D?” and each questionnaire is accompanied by a 
key translating letters into BCTs. The existence of a symmetry
could be investigated by having two cohorts of subjects complete
questionnaires, with each cohort using a different key. If the
judgements of the two cohorts were found to be statistically dis-
tinguishable, the proposed symmetry, encoded in the relation be-
tween the two keys, would be rejected. Fortunately, given the
number of potential symmetries, this clumsy method of data col-
lection is unnecessary; the assessment can be made by comparing
the response database to a transformed version of itself.
To describe how potential symmetries are assessed, consider a
concrete example: the swapping of Red and Orange, Yellow and
Pink, and Purple and Brown. First, each of the 1,485 questions is
assessed for whether it is affected by the permutation of colours.
A question such as “Red and Yellow or Pink and Blue” is affected,
whereas “Red and Orange or Blue and Grey” is not. Next, con-
sider an affected question such as “Purple and Orange or Yellow
and Green.” This had response 4 versus 26. After permutation of
colours, the question becomes “Brown and Red or Pink and
Green,” which had response 32 versus 0. x2 tests are then used to
measure the discrepancy, in a weak and in a strong sense, between
the two response patterns. The strong measure is the score from
a x2 test that the response patterns are identical; the weak mea-
sure is the score from a x2 test of the hypothesis that the majority
answer is the same in both cases. The weak and the strong x2
scores for all the affected questions are separately summed to give
overall scores for the symmetry. Because different symmetries af-
fect different numbers of questions, the x2 scores of different sym-
metries have different numbers of degrees-of-freedom (v) and so
cannot be directly compared. To allow comparison, x2 scores are
normalised according to
x2 2 v
Sds 5
Ïw
2v
this is valid given the size of v. A Sds (standard deviations) value
greater than 1.64 is evidence that a proposed symmetry should be
rejected.
Table 1 shows the 5 best symmetries of the Hering primaries
and Table 2 shows a selection of symmetries of all 11 BCTs. Both
tables are ordered by the size of the weak Sds measure. The tables
also show for each symmetry the question most violated by the re-
sponses. The remaining column, “fractional agreement,” allows
the quality of the symmetry to be assessed. It is calculated as the
expected rate of agreement between two subjects using different
keys (related by the symmetry), as a fraction of the expected rate
if they use the same key. As can be seen from the Sd score in both
tables all symmetries can be rejected. However, the fractional
agreement scores show that there are several good approximate
symmetries. Some of these are interpretable in relation to the
standard octahedron model of colour space.
The best symmetry for the Hering primaries can be pictured as
a 1808 rotation about the Red-Green axis. As shown by the “worst
question” for this symmetry, its main flaw lies in the mapping of
Blue-White to Yellow-Black. The second best symmetry is a re-
flection in the Black-White-Yellow-Blue plane. Its main flaw is the
mapping of Blue-Red to Blue-Green. The next two symmetries do
not preserve the topology of the colour octahedron. The fifth sym-
metry is the best that transforms all six colours. It is the composi-
tion of the first two symmetries, but can also be understood as a
mapping of the primaries to their complements.
The best 9 symmetries of the 11 BCTs clearly violate the topol-
ogy of the BCTs, for example, the first maps Blue-White to Black-
White. They have good fractional agreements, however, in par-
ticular the third, which has the highest of all the potential
symmetries. The best symmetry that is reasonably in accord with
topology is the 10th, which corresponds to a one-step rotation of
the hue circle. Perhaps its worst violation of topology is the map-
ping from Blue-Brown (not adjacent) to Purple-Brown (adjacent).
The next topologically reasonable symmetry is the 12th, which can
Commentary/Palmer: Color and consciousness
952
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1999) 22:6
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0140525X99292217
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Massachusetts Amherst, on 18 Nov 2019 at 06:30:53, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at

be understood as a 1808 rotation about an axis through Red/Or-
ange-Grey-Blue/Green. I am unaware of any previous mention of
this approximate symmetry. The 19th symmetry is rotation about
an axis through Red-Grey-Green: This is the first symmetry of
Table 1. The 48th symmetry is the best that transforms all 
11 BCTs. It neatly maps Black-Grey-White to White-Pink-Red,
Red-Pink-White to Blue-Purple-Red, Orange-Brown Black to
Black-Grey-White, and Red-Orange-Yellow-Green-Blue-Purple
to Blue-Black-Brown-Orange-Yellow-Green.
Color relations and the power of complexity
C. L. Hardin
Department of Philosophy, Syracuse University, Syracuse, NY 12344-1170.
chardin1@twcny.rr.com
Abstract: Color-order systems highlight certain features of color phe-
nomenology while neglecting others. It is misleading to speak as if there
were a single “psychological color space” that might be described by a
rather simple formal structure. Criticisms of functionalism based on mul-
tiple realizations of a too-simple formal description of chromatic pheno-
menal relations thus miss the mark. It is quite implausible that a functional
system representing the full complexity of human color phenomenology
should be realizable by radically different qualitative states.
Color-order systems are convenient representations of selected
aspects of color experience. Each one is designed to exhibit cer-
tain features and, inevitably, omit others. For example, the Mun-
sell system and the Natural Color System (NCS) are both meant
to represent the appearance of reflective samples. But whereas
Munsell hue samples are meant to be equispaced, and the system
gives no pride of place to the unique hues, NCS hue samples are
spaced according to their degree of resemblance to the unique
hues, but are not equispaced. A Munsell Chroma step is deter-
mined by an estimation of the gray content of a sample as com-
pared with a gray of the same Munsell Value. An NCS chromatic-
ness step is determined by an absolute estimation of the degree of
chromatic content in a sample. The Munsell system is defined by
the samples of its atlas. The NCS system is based on comparisons
Commentary/Palmer: Color and consciousness
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1999) 22:6
953
Table 1 (Griffin). The 5 best symmetries (out of 397) of the 6 Hering primaries
Symmetry
Weak
Strong
Fractional
number
Symmetry
Sds
Sds
Agreement
Worst Question
1
Yellow } Blue, Black } White
7.3
25.9
91.7%
Y & B (4) vs. Bl & W (30)
Bl & W (30) vs. Y & B (4)
2
Red } Green
9.7
26.8
89.7%
Bl & G (26) vs. Bl & R (4)
Bl & R (4) vs. Bl & G (26)
3
r Red r Blue r Yellow r
11.6
42.7
87.1%
Y & G (22) vs. G & R (8)
Black r White r
B & G (5) vs. G & Bl (26)
4
Red } White
11.9
31.2
89.1%
R & B (27) vs. W & B (3)
W & B (3) vs. R & B (27)
5
Yellow } Blue,
12.6
48.6
85.3%
Y & B (4) vs. Bl & W (30)
Black } White, Red } Green
Bl & W (30) vs. Y & B (4)
Color code: Y 5 yellow; B 5 black; Bl 5 blue; W 5 white; R 5 red; G 5 green.
Table 2 (Griffin). A selection of the 19,976,247 potential symmetries of the BCTs
Symmetry
Weak
Strong
Fractional
number
Symmetry
Sds
Sds
Agreement
Worst Question
1
Black } Blue
18.2
74.7
92.2%
Bl & W (29) vs. W & B (1)
B & W (1) vs. W & Bl (29)
2
Yellow } Orange
23.5
92.1
89.8%
O & W (0) vs. Y & W (30)
Y & W (30) vs. O & W (0)
3
Red } Orange, Y } Pink, 
24.2
92.1
93.0%
Pu & B (33) vs. G & B (3)
Green } Purple
G & B (3) vs. Pu & B (33)
10
r Red r Orange r Yellow r
30.8
109.6
90.8%
O & W (0) vs. Y & W (30)
Green r Blue r Purple r
Y & W (33) vs. G & W (1)
12
Red } O, Y. } Pu, P } Br,
32.3
103.6
91.4%
P & Bl (4) vs. Br & G (43)
Green } Blue, Black } W
Br & G (43) vs. P & Bl (4)
19
Y } Blue, Black } W,
35.9
113.8
90.6%
P & G (2) vs. Br & Y (31)
Orange } Pu, Pink } Brown
Br & G (43) vs. P & Bl (4)
48
r R r Bl r Y r Br r Grey r P
41.1
142.1
88.4%
Bl & Gr (27) vs. Gr & W (1)
r Pu r Green r O r B r W r
Y & P (3) vs. O & R (30)
Color code: Y 5 yellow; B 5 black; Bl 5 blue; W 5 white; Pu 5 purple; R 5 red; G 5 green; O 5 orange; P 5 pink; Br 5 brown; 
Gr 5 grey.
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0140525X99292217
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Massachusetts Amherst, on 18 Nov 2019 at 06:30:53, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at

with mental prototypes of the six Hering elementary colors (this
is not a crazy idea!) and the NCS atlas is intended only as an illus-
tration of the system. On the other hand, the HBS (hue-bright-
ness-saturation) system is meant to map the relationships of col-
ored lights; two of its dimensions do not map exactly onto the
(roughly) corresponding dimensions of either Munsell or NCS.
So which of these systems (which by no means exhaust the field)
represents psychological color space? All of them – and none of
them. Not only does each lack an important feature of one of the
others, many important relationships fail to be represented by any
of them. For example, the strikingly unequal size of the green and
red regions that are picked out by all languages that have green
and red as basic color terms can be marked out in either the Mun-
sell or NCS systems, but they are not represented by any struc-
tural features of those systems. (Those who suppose this size in-
equality to be a cultural artifact should read Matsuzawa [1985],
who describes how a chimpanzee generalized from 11 focal color
chips in much the same way as a human being.) Some of the sim-
ilarities and dissimilarities that the Hering elementary colors seem
to bear to each other are completely obscured by both of these sys-
tems. For example, there is some suggestive evidence that people
see elementary green and elementary blue to be more like each
other than are elementary red and yellow. (The question has not
been systematically investigated. Any takers?) This matter is not
directly resolvable by counting just-noticeable differences from
one elementary color to another; it is an open question as to
whether the sum of small color differences is an adequate mea-
sure of large color differences.
Although the models that are in general use exhibit some of the
essential features of perceived color, it is misleading to speak of
“the psychological color solid” as if there were a unitary and sim-
ple psychological model that captures the entire range of color
phenomena as we experience them. This is one of several reasons
why not even someone “in the grip of functionalism” (sect. 2.4)
should have the slightest inclination to suppose that Palmer’s
“color machine” might perceive color. Is it “surprisingly difficult
to prove that this machine fails to have color experiences”? It is
perhaps equally difficult to prove that this stone is not now think-
ing of Vienna (pace Carnap). After all, could not the stone be
thinking a monadic Viennese thought that it was totally unable to
express? The absurdity of this case arises in part from the rock’s
inability to engage in intelligently guided behavior. A bare mini-
mum criterion for something to perceive color is that color can be
used to govern a varied behavioral repertoire. The one-trick pony
that is Palmer’s color machine would be far too impoverished to
serve even as the color module for a robot that is to use color in
its business of avoiding and identifying objects in a real world of
occlusion, shadows, and variable illumination. Constructing some-
thing adequate to this task is not a trivial undertaking, as the ro-
botics vision community will attest.
The existence of chromatic blindsight shows us that even when
receptors are responding, and some degree of opponent process-
ing is present, and some crude color naming can be elicited, there
is no color experience. What is missing is, in a fashion, not myste-
rious. The peripheral color mechanisms are not properly con-
nected to the central mechanisms. In another respect there is here
a very deep mystery indeed, though not an intractable one: the
puzzle of what those more central mechanisms are and how they
interact with the rest of what is going on in the brain. But when
the connections are properly made, the color-relevant mecha-
nisms have become extremely complex, and so has the color-re-
lated behavioral repertoire that these mechanisms make possible.
I invite you to spend an agreeable evening reading a sensitive ac-
count of the rich texture of chromatic relationships such as that in
chapter three of Charles Riley’s Color codes (1995). If you do so,
I would venture to say that you will not find it even remotely pos-
sible that the qualities of color experience in Riley’s brain are rad-
ically different from yours. As the level of behavioral complexity
increases dramatically, the number of alternative models drops
precipitously.
Analogous situations in the physical world are commonplace.
Consider a bedspring that is compressed and then released. Its be-
havior is well described as a damped harmonic oscillator. Alternate
models satisfying this formal structure include a radio circuit and
a loudspeaker in an enclosure. Neither of these is particularly suit-
able for sleeping, any more than the Palmer machine is suitable
for guiding animal behavior. But there is no mystery about distin-
guishing bedsprings from radios: just give a fuller description, and
alternative models become scarce. Indeed, a sufficiently rich de-
scription of materials and behavior would uniquely single out a
Simmons bedspring manufactured in 1959. Of course for any sys-
tem of relationships, however rich, there could always be alterna-
tive models fashioned by Berkeley’s God or Descartes’ evil demon,
but it could never be the task of scientific explanation to rule these
out.
Logical possibility and the isomorphism
constraint
Bernard Harrison
Department of Philosophy, University of Utah, Salt Lake City, UT 84112.
bernh@globalnet.co.uk
Abstract: Palmer’s “isomorphism constraint” presupposes the logical pos-
sibility of two qualitatively disparate sets of sensory experiences exhibiting
the same relationships. Two arguments are presented to demonstrate that,
because such a state of affairs cannot be coherently specified, its occur-
rence is not logically possible. The prospects for behavioral and biological
science are better than Palmer suggests; those for functionalism are worse.
I seem to have been the first to explore at length (Harrison 1967;
1973) the idea that asymmetries of relative similarity between col-
ors might prove fatal to philosophical scepticism based on Locke’s
inverted spectrum argument. However, I soon ceased to find the
arguments I had devised by 1973 altogether satisfying. As I saw it,
I had failed to deal adequately with the possibility, which Palmer
makes the main plank of his argument for his “isomorphism con-
straint,” that the color-experience of B might be qualitatively dif-
ferent from that of A (who perceives what we would call colors) in
ways beyond A’s power to imagine, yet be, nevertheless, struc-
turally isomorphic with A’s color-experience, in the sense of pre-
serving all the relations obtaining between colors as we, and A,
perceive them.
I therefore continued to think about the problem, and by 1984
had devised additional arguments, which appeared in print in a
slightly abridged form two years later (Harrison 1986, pp. 112–14)
and in a fuller version the year after that (Harrison 1987, pp. 184–
87).
The arguments in question, which, because they are available
elsewhere, I will do no more than summarize briefly here, are de-
signed to show that the existence of qualitatively disparate yet
“structurally” or “relationally” isomorphic color experiences is not
a possibility, not even a “logical” one! The notion of “logical possi-
bility” can be deeply misleading in philosophy, and has the poten-
tial to do even more damage in science. The problem is that it is
quite easy to formulate “possibilities” that, while they look entirely
plausible and above board at first sight, are nevertheless incoher-
ently specified.
Such is the case, it seems to me, with the “possibility” of quali-
tatively different yet relationally isomorphic sets of color-experi-
ences. To say that the two proposed sets of color-experiences are
relationally isomorphic is presumably to say that the qualitatively
discriminable sensory presentations making up each set exhibit
the same relationships to one another as those making up the other
set. But what is the same supposed to mean in this context? Palmer
suggests, in effect (sect 2.3), that the required notion of sameness
be explained by analogy with the identity of the sets of mathe-
matical relationships linking the primitive elements of the alter-
Commentary/Palmer: Color and consciousness
954
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1999) 22:6
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0140525X99292217
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Massachusetts Amherst, on 18 Nov 2019 at 06:30:53, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at

native interpretations of a given axiom scheme constituting a dual
system in mathematics. An important disanalogy between the two
cases, however, is that whereas in the mathematical case the ap-
plicable notion of sameness can be specified without reference to
the set of primitive elements constituting either interpretation by
reference to the uninterpreted axiom set, no such move is avail-
able in the case of color. The “space” of color defined by relation-
ships of relative similarity between color presentations can only be
generated by continuous, qualitative modification of the “primi-
tive elements” (the color presentations) composing it.
There is thus no way of characterizing the relationships defin-
ing such a space without reference to its primitive elements. If
now, guided by notions of “logical” possibility better adapted to
the needs of metaphysical speculation than to those of behavioral
science, we attempt to envisage a space (B) of sensory presenta-
tions that would not be (would, indeed, be unimaginably different
from) color presentations, but would nevertheless exhibit the same
relationships as the space (A) of colors, we find that, in dispensing
with the primitive elements of space (A) in favor of the (unimag-
inable) primitive elements of space (B), we have deprived our-
selves of any means of characterizing, with respect to space (B),
the relationships of relative similarity that define space (A). Put
bluntly, the incoherence vitiating this kind of sceptical hypothesis
comes to a head in the question of how, if the primitive elements
of space (B) are not, qualitatively speaking, color presentations,
space (B) could be defined by relationships of relative similarity,
which we have no means whatsoever of characterizing other than
as the relations generated by the possibilities of qualitative modi-
fication qualitatively inherent in color presentations?
Once one sees this, it is easy to show (Harrison 1986; 1987) that
in an actual case of apparently abnormal vision, space (B) must ei-
ther be the familiar space of color, and the apparent abnormality
otherwise explicable, or else it must result from the operation of
some sensory modality other than color, which will have its own
relational structure. The apparent third possibility, of an alterna-
tive sensory modality having the same relational structure as color,
thus requires no empirical work to exclude it, but can be dismissed
out of hand as a philosophical chimaera for the reason just ad-
vanced, namely, that the notion of sameness required by such a
supposition turns out on inspection not merely to defy formula-
tion but to be actually internally incoherent.
If the consequences of putting this antique philosophical
warhorse out to pasture are damaging to certain of Palmer’s tacti-
cal moves, they seem entirely consistent with his objectives. The
“isomorphism constraint” collapses, but so, by the same token,
does the idea that behavioral science is not fully adequate to deal
with “the nature of experience,” and that behavioral methods,
which, as Palmer shows, are perfectly adequate to characterize in
terms of its relational characteristics, what color a given observer
is perceiving, nevertheless remain somehow incapable of reveal-
ing “deeper,” more “subjective” aspects of the subject’s experi-
ence. The ultimate moral of the above argument, indeed, is that
we need to reexamine carefully and suspiciously, perhaps along
the lines suggested by Gaston Bachelard (1972), the intellectual
credentials of the familiar distinction between “objectivity” and
“subjectivity” according to which behavioral methods are “objec-
tive,” whereas “qualia,” “the content of consciousness,” and so
forth, are “subjective.”
Finally, of course, inasmuch as functionalism derives its main
theoretical justification from the plausibility of the distinction be-
tween the “subjective” and the “objective,” considered as distinct
“realms” or departments of reality, to which it presents itself as a
response from the point of view of “materialism,” undercutting
the entire distinction between “materialism” and “subjectivity,” by
appeal to the broadly Bachelardian principles advocated here, will
tend to undercut the need for functionalism, weakening its power
to resist objections of the type tellingly advanced by Palmer.
If not functionalism, then what? 
Eliminative materialism?
Harry Howard
Department of Spanish and Portuguese, Tulane University, New Orleans, LA
70118. howard@mailhost.tcs.tulane.edu
www.tulane.edu/~howard/HHHome.html
Abstract: The isomorphism between relational structures advocated by
Palmer corresponds quite closely to Paul Churchland’s theory of “state-
space semantics,” so much so that one can be used to elucidate problem-
atic areas in the other. The resulting hybrid shows eliminative materialism
to be superior to functionalism as a theory of mental phenomena and
seems to provide the best ontology for cognitive science.
Palmer elaborates two arguments against the functionalist ap-
proach to mental phenomena: (1) humans can have different ex-
periences with the same relational structure, and (2) artificial sys-
tems can be built that are causally isomorphic to humans but lack
conscious experiences altogether.
Palmer devotes the bulk of his target article to the first point, in
particular to the elucidation of the isomorphism between color
percepts and the color solid of psychometric testing. It is helpful
to define the relational structures in question. The first is a set of
color percepts C, ordered by the three relations red-green, #rg,
blue-yellow, #by, and light-dark #ld, which correspond to the
three parameters of color that human vision is sensitive to. The
second is the three-dimensional color solid organized on three
axes that can be abbreviated as #x, #y, and #z. These ingredients
are tabulated in (1):
1.
Relational formalism
Realization in color science
(a) K 5 ,C, #rg, #by, #ld. output of V4, that is, color percepts
(b)
o 5 ,S, #x, #y, #z.psychometric color space, that is, the
color solid
(c)K } o
color psychometric isomorphism
Palmer’s main contention is that external observers can never
know an element of K directly; they can only know the place that
such an element maps onto in o. In other words, in principle,
there is no way to know whether two people share the same ele-
ments of C, that is, whether they see the same color percepts. In
practice, there may be a way if the relational structures K and o
are asymmetric enough so that there is no distortion of one that
cannot be reflected in the other under isomorphy. Unfortunately,
the color solid has at least two axes of symmetry, so a reversal of
one such axis in K can still be mapped isomorphically into o with-
out detection.
As for the second argument, that artificial systems can be built
that are causally isomorphic to human color perception yet lack-
ing in any kind of color experience, I have nothing to add except
that such systems are closer to realization than Palmer suspects
(see the neural-network model of Courtney et al. 1995a; 1995b).
The conclusion is that functionalism cannot be correct, regard-
ing the first argument, for it would imply that “normal” and “re-
versed” color experiences are equivalent, when they clearly are
not. Likewise, regarding the second argument, it would imply that
a neural network along the lines of the one designed by Courtney
et al. would have the same color experiences as humans, whereas
it would surely not.
I find both arguments compelling, and so would like to know
where to turn for an alternative to functionalism, but this is as far
as Palmer goes.
Fortunately, I have an inkling of my own of where to turn,
namely, to the theory of eliminative materialism proposed by
Churchland (1981) and elaborated on in Churchland (1986; 1989;
and especially in 1995). In particular, Palmer’s notion of isomor-
phisms between relational structures is subsumed by Church-
land’s “state-space semantics,” to use the felicitous coinage of
Fodor and Lepore (1992). A vector space with a suitable metric
defined on it reproduces all the properties of Palmer’s relational
Commentary/Palmer: Color and consciousness
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1999) 22:6
955
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0140525X99292217
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Massachusetts Amherst, on 18 Nov 2019 at 06:30:53, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at

structures, and coordinate transformations of vectors reproduce
all the properties of Palmer’s isomorphisms between relational
structures. (2) gives a first approximation of the correspondence
between the two formalisms, where the relation # on the left cor-
responds to a measure of distance d on the right, and the trans-
formation between the two structures is accomplished through
multiplying by the matrix M:
2.
Relational formalism
Vector-space formalism
(a) K 5 ,C, #rg, #by, #ld. K 5 ,C, drg, dby, dld.
(b) o 5 ,S, #x, #y, #z.
o 5 ,S, dx, dy, dz.
(c) K } o
o 5 M * K
The vector-space representations have considerable neurophysio-
logical plausibility, as Churchland goes to great lengths to demon-
strate.
An additional benefit of adopting eliminative materialism is that
certain points that are obscure in one treatment are clarified in the
other. For example, Churchland’s (1995, p. 198) “proprietary,
first-person epistemological access to some phenomenon,” which
is ultimately refined down to an “auto-connected way of knowing,”
is immediately recognizable as Palmer’s subjectivity barrier.
Churchland develops these notions to defend eliminative materi-
alism from Nagel’s (1974) bat and Jackson’s (1982) neuroscientist.
In a nutshell, the argument concerning Nagel’s bat is that, given
how different a bat’s sensory experience is from a human’s, no hu-
man will ever truly understand what it is like to be a bat. Palmer
would say that this is an expected consequence of the subjectivity
barrier: The best we can hope to do is find some kind of partial
mapping between the relational structures of bat and human ex-
perience.
This cuts both ways, though, because flaws in one framework
can adhere to the other. For example, Fodor and Lepore (1992,
pp. 197–98) accuse state-space semantics of “pernicious holism,”
as explained forthwith. For Churchland, at any moment one’s con-
sciousness consists of a huge vector composed of all the active sen-
sory modalities. Modalities are distinguished from one another by
their position in the “consciousness” vector, whereas specific per-
cepts within a modality are distinguished by the values of the vec-
tor at these positions. Fodor and Lepore (1992, pp. 197–98) ob-
ject that under such a holistic approach, it becomes impossible to
tell whether two individuals have the same concept. Concepts are
to be located in this “consciousness” vector, yet the number or
range of the dimensions of the spaces within this vector will vary
from individual to individual and will therefore be incommensu-
rate. If we cannot compare dimensions of representation between
individuals, then we cannot compare the contents of the dimen-
sions. Because Palmer claims that relational structures are neces-
sary both to distinguish between different modalities of percep-
tion and to distinguish specific percepts within a modality, and
Palmer’s relational structures can be correlated with Churchland’s
state spaces, it follows that the charge of pernicious holism also
sticks to Palmer’s framework.
Fortunately for Palmer and Churchland, Laakso and Cottrell
(1998) have found a technique to neutralize this objection. They
show that a two-step algorithm can reliably measure the similarity
of representations embedded in different spaces. The first step is
to measure the distances between like percepts in each space, and
the second step is to calculate the correlation between these dis-
tances across spaces. [See also Edelman: “Representation Is Rep-
resentation of Similarities” BBS 21(4) 1998.] Note the resurfacing
of Palmer’s subjectivity barrier: We cannot compare percepts
themselves, but only their correlates within the encompassing re-
lational structure. So Churchland’s, and by extension, Palmer’s, ac-
count is vindicated, and we may be a step closer to a global theory
of cognitive science.
Disorder of colour consciousness: 
The view from neuropsychology
Glyn W. Humphreys and M. Jane Riddoch
Cognitive Science Research Centre, School of Psychology, University 
of Birmingham, Birmingham, B15 2TT, United Kingdom.
g.w.humphreys@bham.ac.uk
Abstract: We discuss the difficulty of measuring the perceptual experi-
ence of colour, supporting Palmer’s assertion that neuropsychological dis-
orders of colour processing can be informative in this respect. We point
out that some disorders seem to affect the perceptual experience of colour
over and above the perceptual processing of colour, providing direct in-
sights into the neural mechanisms supporting perceptual experience.
In his target article Palmer points out the difficulty of analyzing
the perceptual experience of colour through objective behavioural
means. He points out the problems involved in assessing the qual-
ity of a perceptual experience of colour, particularly by means of
between-subject analyses. Like Palmer, we are sceptical about
even the best hopes for this approach. For example, attempts to
define neurological equivalence classes of colour experience,
based on common neural substrates of colour-related brain activ-
ity across individuals, still run into the subjectivity problem, here
in knowing whether the experience of colour is the same even
when brain states are. Any argument for equivalent experiences
remains a leap of faith, and one that requires a belief that there
are few individual differences in neural localisation.
A solution to this dilemma, Palmer suggests, is to conduct
within-subject analyses. An example of this is acquired cerebral
achromatopsia, where a patient may become functionally colour
blind following a brain lesion. Such patients can detect a change
in their colour experience after their lesion, indicating that mea-
surements of colour experience are possible within individuals,
and that these can also be related back to underlying physiology
(here in terms of the site of any lesion). We wish to point out that
studies of such patients can be even more informative than this,
because colour experience itself can be affected, over and above
effects on colour processing. Humphreys and colleagues (1992)
reported data on one such patient, HJA. Like many achromatop-
sic patients, HJA suffered bilateral damage to occipito-temporal
regions, including the lingual and fusiform gyri, and this not only
led to problems in colour perception but to difficulties in object
and face recognition. Though he had formerly worked in fine art
and advised on colour, HJA reported that he saw the world only in
terms of shades of grey following his lesion. He detected a change
in his colour experience. Nevertheless, aspects of colour process-
ing remained. For example, visual evoked responses to isolumi-
nant colours could be measured and his ability to match isolumi-
nant colour patches was above chance. HJA’s conscious reports
were clearly impaired, however, when he was asked to judge
whether he was right or wrong when making colour-based re-
sponses (and even when the colour responses were correct). Thus,
when asked to point to a colour token matching one pointed to by
the examiner, HJA’s confidence judgements bore no relation to the
accuracy of his performance. He often felt he was guessing when
he was right and he felt confident of being right when he was in
fact wrong. His conscious experience of colour appeared to be dis-
sociated from the residual colour processing abilities he had.
This dissociation of colour experience was also distinct from
HJA’s conscious experience of other perceptual impairments.
Thus his judgements were generally accurate when he was asked
to rate his confidence about whether object and face identifica-
tion responses were correct. He also showed no evidence of resid-
ual access to object or face identities, unlike the results with
colour. Hence, in this instance, the degree of perceptual deficit –
measured in terms of residual perceptual abilities – can be distin-
guished from the conscious experience of the deficit. For one class
of stimulus (colour) there was better residual processing, but less
insight into the deficit, than for other classes of stimulus (objects,
Commentary/Palmer: Color and consciousness
956
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1999) 22:6
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0140525X99292217
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Massachusetts Amherst, on 18 Nov 2019 at 06:30:53, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at

faces). It is not simply that patients with a more profound per-
ceptual deficit experience a more profound loss of the ability.
From this we may conclude several things. For example, it may be
possible to distinguish the neural substrates involved in percep-
tual processing from those involved in conscious awareness of
their products. The neural substrate of conscious experience may
also take a distributed form, and so can be dissociated for differ-
ent stimuli. We suggest that detailed analysis of such patients can
inform us not only about perceptual processes, but about how
such processes are realised in subjective experience.
Overlooking the resources of functionalism?
Zoltán Jakab
Institute of Interdisciplinary Studies, Carleton University, K1S 5B6 Ottawa,
Ontario, Canada. zjakab@ccs.carleton.ca
Abstract: Although the author’s critical view of functionalism has a con-
siderable intuitive pull, his argument based on the color room scenario
does not work. Functionalism and other relational views of the mind are
capable of providing coherent accounts of conscious experience that meet
the challenge set up by the “color room argument.” A simple example of
such an account is presented.
Palmer claims that because functionalism can give only a rela-
tional picture of the mind, it will fail to capture the intrinsic qual-
ities of experience. Experiential qualities are below the level of re-
lational isomorphism that can be captured by the methods of
behavioral science in general and functionalism in particular. In
support of this claim, Palmer sets up an argument in two versions
(sect. 2.5 and sect. 4). First let me reconstruct this argument.
Version one. The color machine in the color room satisfies all
functionalist (computational) requirements associated with color
discrimination and color-related behavior. A functionalist should
therefore conclude that the color machine in the color room has
color experiences. But it is intuitively implausible that the color
machine has any color experience. Therefore functionalism is
probably wrong.
Version two. Put yourself in the color room, thereby bypassing
the other mind’s problem. Master the computation that the color
machine performs; in this case, you become the color machine, you
satisfy all functionalist requirements for having color experiences,
hence (so the functionalist must argue) you will have color experi-
ences simply by means of doing that calculation. But again, very
plausibly, you will not have any color experiences by means of do-
ing that calculation. Therefore functionalism is presumably false.
Overall, the structure of the argument is modus tollens:
1. If functionalism is right, then the color machine (or you) nec-
essarily have color experiences merely by means of performing the
color-related computations.
2. Neither the color machine, nor you (merely by means of do-
ing the relevant calculations) would have any color experience.
Therefore
3. Functionalism is wrong.
Now let me give a reply. Functionalism might be wrong (i.e., in-
capable of accounting for conscious experience), but Palmer’s ar-
gument based on the color-room scenario is insufficient to show
this. The argument is not sound because the first premise is un-
supported. (I will not address the second premise in this com-
mentary, even though doubts might arise about it as well.) Let us
see what the problem is with the first premise.
Version one. The analogy between the human brain as a whole
(or some implementation of its functionally/computationally rel-
evant structure) and the color machine does not hold up. The
color machine is at most the model of an isolated subsystem of the
brain. Should the functionalist conclude that it has color experi-
ences? I think functionalism is not at all committed to drawing this
inference.
Compare: Would a visual brain in itself, isolated from the rest
of the brain, floating in some suitable solution, receiving appro-
priate optical stimuli, have color experiences? When embedded in
the neural/functional architecture of the rest of the brain, the well-
functioning visual brain does give rise to color experience. But
does it do so in isolation? This is questionable, to say the least.
Version two. Does functionalism entail that the human subject
in the color room must have color experiences simply in virtue of
performing the relevant calculations? I think not. Here is why.
There is a possible analysis of experiential qualities, which is (1)
relational and (2) not yet ruled out as insufficient: Perhaps the ex-
perience of seeing red is a relation between a subject and a cer-
tain type of physiological state. The relation is “undergoing” a
state: a token of a physiological state type occurs in one’s brain in
the appropriate way – for example, it is a well-characterized ac-
tivity pattern of area V4. (Additional background conditions like
normal awake state or REM sleep, sufficient attention to events
of visual perception, etc., can be assumed.) My experience of see-
ing red is the undergoing relation between me and that particular
state – the relation set up by that physiological state occurring in
my visual brain. Moreover, in describing such a physiological state,
we necessarily resort to some kind of abstraction. This already
happens when we specify the physiological activity type that, for
example, is tokened in V4 when the subject sees red. In giving
such types we leave out idiosyncratic biochemical and physiolog-
ical variations as irrelevant and specify a generalizable physiolog-
ical pattern. Perhaps we can even specify some sort of computa-
tional operation that is performed by that physiological event.
Furthermore, perhaps seeing a color is a subject’s undergoing re-
lation to an inner state type – identified at the computational level.
If this is right, then we have a functionalist account of qualia.
Intuitively, this account may seem too austere. Is this so much
the worse for the account, or so much the worse for the intuition?
A difficult question. It has not yet been convincingly argued by
anyone (to my knowledge) that this account cannot be right. An
obvious problem with it is that it has yet to be spelled out in rea-
sonable detail; however, even in this extremely sketchy form it ab-
solves the functionalist of the burden of concluding that the sub-
ject in the color room has to have color experiences simply by
virtue of performing the color-related calculations. If I realize the
color-discrimination process by calculating the appropriate com-
putational algorithm in my head, this process will primarily involve
my higher order cognitive machinery. Hence this mental simula-
tion does not at all imply that the physiological states underlying
color experiences occur in my visual system; mental calculation
need not involve activity in V4 or any other color-processing area.
If I am the person in the color room, then it should not be at all
surprising that I have no color experiences merely by means of do-
ing that calculation.
Note also that the proposed relational account predicts that
zombies physiologically identical to us are logically impossible.
Once human subjects entertain some relevant physiological state,
then by definition they have the corresponding experience.
Asymmetries in the distribution of composite
and derived basic color categories
Paul Kay
Department of Linguistics, University of California, Berkeley, Berkeley, CA
94720. kay@cogsci.berkeley.edu
www.icsi.berkeley.edu/~kay
Abstract: PURPLE (RED-and-BLUE) is the most frequently occurring
derived (binary) basic color term (BCT), but there is never a named com-
posite BCT meaning RED-or-BLUE. GREEN-or-BLUE is the most fre-
quently named composite color category, but there is never a BCT for the
corresponding derived (binary) category CYAN (BLUE-and-GREEN).
Why?
Commentary/Palmer: Color and consciousness
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1999) 22:6
957
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0140525X99292217
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Massachusetts Amherst, on 18 Nov 2019 at 06:30:53, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at

Palmer notes that the naming of some but not all of the possible
composite and derived basic color categories constitutes a puz-
zling set of asymmetries in color experience, assuming these cat-
egories are in fact reflections of color experience. He continues;
“I am not aware, however, of any behavioral data that directly sup-
port these asymmetries for derived and composite color categories
in color experience” (sect. 1.4). I think such behavioral data exist,
though they are admittedly few. I return to this point presently.
Meanwhile, I would like to flesh out further the question of which
possible composite and derived categories actually occur, what
their relative frequencies are, and what significance may be at-
tached to these relative frequencies. I will restrict my attention to
the 110 languages of the World Color Survey (WCS; see Kay &
Berlin 1997).
Figure 1 summarizes much – but not all – of the WCS data on
composite and derived categories. It also displays the number of
just noticeable differences (jnds) separating each pair of nonop-
ponent hue primaries (RED, YELLOW), (YELLOW, GREEN),
(GREEN, BLUE), and (BLUE, RED). Palmer raises the issue of
the relevance of jnd separations: “For example, if for some reason
there are more just noticeable differences (jnds) between unique
red and unique yellow than between unique green and unique
blue, the wider psychological gap might explain why there are
BCTs for ORANGE in many languages but not for CYAN (blue-
green)” (sect. 1.4). Although I am not certain that the number of
jnds separating two unique hues measures a psychologically real
distance, this information has been included in Figure 1 to allow
its possible relation to variations in the popularity of correspond-
ing composite and derived categories to be assessed.
The immediately striking facts observable in Figure 1 are (1)
that the most popular composite category, B-or-G, is composed of
primaries whose corresponding derived category, CYAN (B-and-
G), never receives a BCT, and (2) that the most popular derived
category R-and-B (PURPLE) combines primaries whose poten-
tial composite category, R-or-B, never receives a BCT. One is
tempted to speculate that BLUE and GREEN are in some yet-to-
be-determined sense “similar.” If similarity promotes the recog-
nition of a composite category and dissimilarity promotes the
recognition of an intervening, derived category, we have an expla-
nation why BLUE and GREEN are readily lumped into a com-
posite BCT and never separated by a derived BCT. If BLUE and
RED are dissimilar, the same logic explains why BLUE and RED
are most frequently separated by a derived BCT and never
lumped into a composite.
Unfortunately, neither the behavior of the remaining two pairs
of non-opponent hue primaries nor the jnd separation data sup-
port the similarity conjecture. With respect to the pair (RED,
YELLOW), there are 12 instances of the corresponding compos-
ite, R-or-Y, and 7 instances of the corresponding derived category
(R-and-Y 5 ORANGE). With the pair (GREEN, YELLOW) we
have a tiny number of composites and no instances of the cor-
responding derived category (CHARTREUSE). So although it
might be attractive to speculate that nonoccurrence of CYAN as a
BCT coupled with the great popularity of B-or-G makes sense in
terms of the “similarity” of BLUE and GREEN and that the “dis-
similarity” of BLUE and RED accounts analogously for the pop-
ularity of PURPLE and the nonoccurrence of a B-or-R compos-
ite, the hypothetical negative correlation between the number of
composite and derived categories, for pairs of primaries, breaks
down with the (GREEN, YELLOW) and (YELLOW, RED) pairs.
Both the (GREEN, YELLOW) pair and the (YELLOW, RED)
pair show a slightly higher incidence of the composite than the de-
rived category, with inconclusively small absolute numbers.
With regard to jnd separation, the comparison of only the
(BLUE, GREEN) and (RED, BLUE) pairs, 84 jnds and 124 jnds,
respectively, appears to support the similarity hypothesis. BLUE
and GREEN are indeed separated by fewer jnds than are RED
and BLUE. But looking now at the jnd data for the other two pairs,
(RED, YELLOW) and (GREEN, YELLOW), we note both of
these jnd separations far exceed those of either of the first two
pairs, destroying any hope of jnd separation being able to explain
the relative popularity of composite and/or derived categories
among different pairs of nonopponent hue primaries.
We have not been able to explain the striking fact that in the
WCS data the most frequent two-primary composite BCT, G-or-
B, corresponds to a derived category, (G-and-B 5 CYAN), which
never gets a BCT and the most frequent derived BCT, (B-and-R
5 PURPLE), corresponds to a composite, B-or-R, which is never
accorded a BCT. When the 98 languages of the Berlin and Kay
(1969) study are added to the 110 languages of the WCS, this ob-
servation still holds. The negative correlation between the likeli-
hood of a pair of non-opponent hue primaries being combined in
a composite and in a derived category is confirmed in a large num-
ber of languages, but only in the extreme cases of the most popu-
lar composite and derived categories.
Returning to the question of whether there are behavioral data
supporting asymmetries regarding composite colors, two experi-
ments carried out by James Boster (1986) have been summarized
as follows:
The strength of the association of warm hues with W[HITE] and of cool
hues with Bk is reinforced by experiments performed by James Boster
(1986). In one experiment Boster gave twenty-one naive English-speak-
ing subjects eight color chips, representing focal examples of the cate-
gories black, white, red, orange, yellow, green, blue and purple. The ini-
tial instruction was to sort the chips into two groups “on the basis of
which colors you think are most similar to each other . . .” (Boster 1986:
64). The overwhelming preference was to put white, red, orange and
yellow into one group and green, blue and black and purple into the
other. Two-thirds of Boster’s subjects chose this exact division into two
subsets. (There are 2,080 ways a set of eight elements can be divided
into two non-empty subsets.) In a second experiment, the same in-
struction was given to a group of eighteen subjects, using as stimuli the
eight color words rather than the colored chips. Substantially the same
result was obtained (Kay & Maffi, in press).
In subsequent sorts, Boster’s subjects also showed strong pref-
erences for keeping together the pairs (RED, YELLOW) and
(GREEN, BLUE), the latter more strongly than the former.
Commentary/Palmer: Color and consciousness
958
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1999) 22:6
Figure 1 (Kay).
Frequencies among 110 WCS languages of bi-
nary composite and derived categories, with the number of jnds
separating the two primary categories of which they are com-
posed. The first number given for a composite category records
the frequency of that category. The second number (in parenthe-
ses) records the frequency of all composite categories containing
the two indicated primaries. For example, 59 of the 110 WCS lan-
guages contain a B-or-G category; 76 languages contain either a
B-or-G, or a B-or-G-or-Bk, or a B-or-G-or-Y category. (Source for
jnd separations: MacLaury 1997b, p. 88.)
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0140525X99292217
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Massachusetts Amherst, on 18 Nov 2019 at 06:30:53, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at

The inverted colour space of vampires
Karel Kranda
Psychophysiological Laboratory, Universitats Krankenhaus Benjamin
Franklin, D-14057 Berlin, Germany. ksk@zedat.fu-berlin.de
Abstract: Palmer’s attempt to dust off Locke’s construct of “inverted spec-
trum” is discussed here to examine its plausibility. Perceptual inversion
could be fulfilled by adopting the notion of “inverted trichromacy” rather
than by the proposed existence of “red-green reversed trichromats.” Al-
though the former alternative conforms to a hypothetical world of vam-
pires, it fails to conform to the realities of genetics and neuroscience.
A compelling sequel to John Locke’s (1690) discourse on colour,
which Palmer alternately describes as “inverted spectrum argu-
ment” or “problem,” may be the notion of “inverted trichromats,”
because only such radical mutants may appreciate the inherent
beauty of an “inverted” rainbow. I would like to argue here that
unlike in Locke’s days, inverted trichromats no longer belong to
the realm of philosophical constructs; their existence has long
been proven beyond any reasonable doubt. Numerous publica-
tions and films meticulously document the lifestyle of these mu-
tants, who are known as vampires and descend from a single man
named Dracula. Suffering from photophobia, vampires go out at
night while spending most of their daytime in crypts. Night is day
to vampires and they, like most of us normals, prefer “light” to
darkness. In the vampiric world, the moon shines “brighter” than
the sun. But you would not notice this anomaly if you conversed
with an average vampire because the semantic term “darker”
would actually mean “brighter” to him. Vampiric sensation of
colour is also totally inverted so blood appears “green” to a vam-
pire and this apparent “greenness” has a soothing effect on his psy-
che.
In this dark light of the vampire world, Palmer’s treatise is not
particularly enlightening. Instead of proposing vampires as the
true standard-bearers of “inverted trichromacy” – for who else but
they can fully satisfy the conditions of the “complete inversion” set
in his Figure 3c – Palmer fobs us off with some half-breed of “red-
green–reversed perceivers” (sect. 1.3). These individuals suppos-
edly exist (see Nida-Rümelin 1996) but are they more numerous
than vampires?
The choice of an inverted spectrum as a paradigm for any dis-
course on colour is not a fortunate one, because it is easier to imag-
ine it than to conceive any visual mechanism capable of such a feat.
Should we ever discover such a “lucky,” or on second thought, un-
lucky mutant, who sees the world in the “Lockian way,” would we
not face the intractable problem of locating the mechanism re-
sponsible for inverting his colour percept? The photoreceptor
level is a poor candidate because any mirror-like inversion re-
quires an even number of elements. But there are only three cone
types at the retina. In theory, we can “reverse” the outputs of long-
(L-) and middle-wave–sensitive (M-) cones but what about the
short-wave–sensitive (S-) cones? The hypothetical construct of
red-green reversal would not reverse the spectrum but at most
only the percept within the red-green spectral range. Whether this
reversal would preserve the asymmetry in the (L-M) opponent
channel (Kranda & King-Smith 1979) is impossible to predict.
The mechanism proposed by Palmer as an explanation of “red-
green reversal” is unusual as neither protanopes nor deuteranopes
have “special” genes for “colour blindness.” My interpretation of
Palmer’s argument is that he is implying a possibility of reversing
the positions of the L- and M-pigment genes (LMG and LPG) in
the X-chromosome array. The LMG is actually located upstream
of the one or more MPGs (Vollrath et al. 1988). Thus in the “red-
green reversal” case, the LMG would be located downstream,
whereas the MPG would assume the upstream location. Each of
these genes located in tandem has 6 exons, but only exons 2, 3, 4,
and 5 differ from each other. The hypothetical case may thus 
require a complete reversal of those four exons at the two gene lo-
cations. The probability of any single exon mutating can be esti-
mated from the frequency of inherited colour anomalies. Assum-
ing the probability of exon mutation at about 0.03, the chance of
the 2 sets of 4 exons actually reversing is no higher than 1 in 1.5 3
1012. But even in this improbable “mutant,” the “reversed gene,”
expressing the pigment type will also have to be expressed in the
membrane structure of his cones, because the projecting den-
drites of bipolar cells, like wine connoisseurs, cannot sniff the wine
inside and must rely on the label. As there is no chance here of
getting red wine in vinho-verde bottles, this “mutant” should pre-
serve normal colour sensation.
Any type of “inverted trichromacy” expressing an inverted post-
receptor connectivity presents the insurmountable problem of ex-
plaining its evolutionary origin. Unless we assume a macromuta-
tion going far beyond the hypothetical saltations of Gould (1980),
it is difficult to conceive how the post-photoreceptor connectivity
pattern could be reversed in one stride. Connectivity responsible
for signalling colour and luminance, driven by mutations of genes
specifying retinal pigments, must have taken millions of years to
achieve full trichromatic performance. As only a gradual process
can plausibly invert the connectivity pattern, the perceptual in-
version would have to cross the centre of Palmer’s colour space de-
picted in Figure 2. This may become a rather discomfiting expe-
rience for whole generations of mutants because this point equals
zero and zero equals blindness.
Finally, it may indeed be “surprisingly difficult to prove that this
machine [i.e., Palmer’s own invention depicted in his Fig. 6] fails
to have colour experience” (sect. 2.4), but probably not more dif-
ficult than proving the same claim made about a toaster. My guess
is that if anyone ever decided to build Palmer’s “colour machine”
according to the “blueprint” provided, the finished product would
achieve the colour experience of an average toaster. Unless the in-
ventor withheld from us some important information, such as
weighting functions specifying the valence of interconnections,
for any given set of variables at the nodes “S,” “M,” and “L,” the
output values at the nodes “H,” “B,” and “S” would always equal
zero.
Isomorphisms and subjective colors
Gregory R. Lockhead and Scott A. Huettel
Department of Psychology: Experimental, Duke University, Durham, NC
27708. {greg; huettel}@psych.duke.edu
Abstract: Palmer describes a “subjective barrier” that limits knowledge of
others’ experience. We discuss how this barrier extends to all knowledge,
becoming less distinct as theoretical constructs are strengthened. We pro-
vide evidence for isomorphic experience, among individuals with similar
physiologies, by showing that perceived relations between colors are as
similar when viewing pigments as when viewing subjective colors caused
by flickering bars.
Palmer grapples with two questions that are fundamental to the
philosophy of mind: How do I know that my perceptions are sim-
ilar to yours, and how might we explain subjective experience?
The first question is that of transformed qualia, that you and I may
see the same object or color but might not have the same con-
scious experience. This may not be a productive scientific ques-
tion because, as Palmer observes in Note 17, showing that two
people’s perceptions are the same requires accepting a null hy-
pothesis. Concerning what evidence is sufficient for an explana-
tion, we agree with Palmer that relations between elements de-
termine the properties of a set, that isomorphic relations between
set structures indicate association, and that correlated isomorphic
structures do not imply an explanation, even though they might
well reflect an explanation. As the idea of a “subjective barrier” de-
scribes, it is often difficult to know which is the case.
The barrier between correlational and causal explanations of
phenomena is not unique to color or other psychophysical ques-
tions. It holds for all of knowledge. Consider I 5 E/R in elec-
Commentary/Palmer: Color and consciousness
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1999) 22:6
959
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0140525X99292217
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Massachusetts Amherst, on 18 Nov 2019 at 06:30:53, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at

tronics. When we first learned this in school, it was difficult to un-
derstand how the mapping of resistance onto current is explana-
tion rather than only correlation, but our teachers had no such dif-
ficulty. That is because we did not have the considerable theory
and additional evidence they had. Learning about hydraulic flow
made it easier to understand, or at least to predict, current flow,
so we accept I 5 E/R as explanation. The subjective barrier is only
considered to be crossed when we have strong theoretical con-
structs and converging data sets that link the subjective to the ob-
jective. It still exists as a logical construct but it becomes less trou-
bling as data cumulates.
We may never gain enough knowledge about color to ignore the
barrier, but we should come closer as more and different obser-
vations are added. Toward this end we want to add observations
that might help move away from the concern that people who have
similar physiologies and histories perceive identical things differ-
ently.
Subjective colors. Subjective colors are seen when various
black-and-white patterns are flashed or rotated (Cohen & Gordon
1949). Shown at the upper right of Figure 1 is a half-black, half-
white sheet of paper (wrapped around a cylinder) with black lines
in the white portion. When this cylinder is rotated at about 7 rev-
olutions per second, the black lines appear colored. (White et al.
1977).
Color-normal people matched the flickering colors seen in this
display to patches of colored papers (Munsell chips). They re-
ported that subjective colors are more saturated when the lines are
longer, that the dominant wavelength decreases as the distance
between the black/white boundary and the line increases, and that
the color structure reverses when the cylinder is rotated in the op-
posite direction. (Perhaps a reader can explain why distance-of-
line-from-boundary is isomorphic with wavelength; it is unlikely
this is a chance outcome and its basis is not understood.)
When color-normal people rate these flickering lines for simi-
larity, the results are consistent with their similarity scaling of col-
ored patches of paper and with Newton’s color circle – very dif-
ferent wavelength equivalents (such as flickering bars reported as
red and blue, or about 600 and 450 nm) are more similar to each
other than either is to intermediate wavelength equivalents (such
as green, or about 530 nm). This means that the physically one-di-
mensional ordering of wavelength that correlate essentially per-
fectly with border distance are transformed by sensation or per-
ception into a two-dimensional representation. Ostensibly, this
occurs because opponent-process coding in the retina maps the
physically linear space of wavelength onto a space where physi-
cally different reds and purples are close to one another, and
where the physically more similar reds and greens are more dif-
ferent from one another. The structures of the physical stimuli and
the perceptual representations are not isomorphic, but the latter
is a transformation of the former.
Color-deficient observers (protanopes and deuteranopes) were
also asked to scale the flickering bars for similarity, and the re-
sulting similarity space is different from that obtained from color-
normals. Rather than requiring a two-dimensional description
(red-green and yellow-blue axes), a one-dimensional scaling solu-
tion seems to be sufficient; it accounts for 93% of the variance in
the data (White et al. 1977). This is isomorphic with the results ob-
tained when color-anomalous people scale Munsell chips for sim-
ilarity (Shepard & Cooper 1975). Just as when color-deficient peo-
ple judge colored papers, judgments of subjective colors show that
Newton’s color-circle (based on color-normal observers) appears
as if a string has been tied around it at the red-green positions and
pulled taut, resulting in an hourglass or a linear shape.
Similarity spaces for colored paints and flickering lines are iso-
morphic for color-deficient observers, and are isomorphic for
color-normal observers, but these spaces for the different ob-
server types are not isomorphic with each other (see Fig. 1). The
perceptual structures match within groups but not across groups.
From this, it is reasonable to conclude that color-normal people
see subjective colors and colored paints similarly, because the two
similarity structures are isomorphic, and they also see these colors
identically, because the colors from one set are selected as equiv-
alent to those from the other set. It is also reasonable to conclude
that people with the same visual anomaly see colored paints and
flickering lines equivalently, and that their perceptions are not the
same as those of color normals.
These observations extend Palmer’s argument that perception
of color is isomorphic among individuals to observer type and to
flickering lines. It also allows the suggestion that color perception
must be explained at the level of similarity measures because, for
both observer types, these are isomorphic with perceptual reports
of standard colors and of subjective colors, but not with physical
measures of either stimulus set.
Asymmetry among Hering primaries thwarts
the Inverted spectrum argument
Robert E. MacLaury
Department of Anthropology, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA
19104. maclaury@sas.upenn.edu
www.sas.upenn.edu/~maclaury/
Abstract: Purest points of Hering’s six primary colors reside at different
levels of lightness such that inversion of each hue pair would be detectable
in subjects’ choice of foci on the Munsell array. An inverted spectrum
would not impose the isomorphism constraint on a contrast of red-green
or yellow-blue, whatever we conclude about inference in functionalism.
Palmer and I agree that both composite and derived basic color
categories are asymmetrical (target article, sect. 4.1; MacLaury
1997b), which endows them with a structure capable of revealing
inversion. But I disagree that primary basic white, black, red,
green, yellow, and blue are symmetrical and, thus, that inversion
of them would be undetectable (sect. 2.3). Figure 1 diagrams my
reason for objecting. Each part, A or B, depicts the ethnographic
array of 330 Munsell color chips. The left column delineates the
achromatic continuum between white and black poles. The other
40 column delineates the achromatic continuum between white
and black poles. The other 40 columns represent hue at the max-
imal saturation attainable by Munsell chips, which range across
the rainbow from left to right and downward from light to dark
(See MacLaury 1997c for specification). Each row-column inter-
Commentary/Palmer: Color and consciousness
960
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1999) 22:6
Figure 1 (Lockhead & Huettel).
The structure of color percep-
tion in color-normals and color-deficients. For both observer
types, perception of colors resulting from reflected wavelengths is
similar to perception of subjective colors resulting from flickering
lines. However, there are differences across observer types, as
seen in the similarity scaling solutions.
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0140525X99292217
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Massachusetts Amherst, on 18 Nov 2019 at 06:30:53, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at

section plots a separate chip of distinctive pigmentation. Between
parts A and B, four hue names are each affixed to a separate ver-
tical band of the spectral array above and below the names.
“White” and “black” are not shown, but they pertain, respectively,
to rows A and J (upper and lower left column) where they, too,
would be affixed.
Part A extracts information from MacLaury (1997c, p. 202, Fig.
1), wherein I compile 15,186 foci (best-example selections) of all
color terms collected by the World Color Survey from 2,476
speakers of 107 minor and tribal languages in response to the
ships. Marked as W, K, R, G, Y, and B are the six densest clusters
of foci on noncontiguous chips, a worldwide vote for the closest
approximation to the six elemental color points. As shown in
MacLaury (1997c), these attract only pluralities of focus selec-
tions, not the majority. But the rest decrease in frequency pro-
portionally to their distance from the six peaks, forming a his-
togram of stepped troughs between the apexes. If we were to
guess in advance of an ethnographic interview where the subject
would focus his or her primary basic color terms, chips A, J, G1,
C9, G17, and G29 would offer the best chance of accuracy. There
are many reasons why individuals place foci in the troughs, in-
cluding genetically determined variation in hue perception (Neitz
& Neitz 1995) or especially cognitive processes (MacLaury
1997b). But part A is likely to depict within a close tolerance the
pure perceptions of normal trichromats everywhere.
Part A reveals a relational structure among the universal pure
points, with W and K at extremes of lightness, R slightly but de-
tectably darker than G, and Y markedly lighter than B. We must
predict of any individual that his or her primary basic color cate-
gories will be identified with this structure and will be focused in
this relation to each other. Part B shows the same foci after Hering
color pairs have been inverted: W-K to K-W, R-G to G-R, and Y-B
to B-Y. The inversions within the latter two pairs are betrayed by
the asymmetrical lightness levels of their foci, even though colors
are named as G “red,” B “yellow,” R “green,” and Y “blue.” Only K
“white” and W “black” would not be detectable in focus selection.
If inversion of W-K to K-W were ascertainable, behavior in-
volving application of their names might provide the clues. In-
ventories of patterned differences between naming of W versus K
are not published; they are compiled only for the Mesoamerican
Color Survey (MacLaury 1986). Some are as follows, taking ex-
amples from English: (a) the term naming W shows greatest elab-
oration, for example, “off-white” is standard whereas “off-black” is
novel; (b) K is most likely to be renamed, as “blak” once replaced
“swarte”; the term naming W applies to more Munsell chips than
does the term naming K (e.g., MacLaury 1997b, p. 12, Fig. 1.3).
In languages other than English and only rarely, the term naming
W also names K (e.g., MacLaury 1991, p. 40, Fig. 9), but the re-
verse has never been found. The inverted spectrum argument
could make its last stand among only W and K in hope of surviv-
ing indications such as those.
Palmer does not argue that variation in behavior would mask in-
version of W-K, R-G, or Y-B, even though it surely would for many
individuals in the messy real world. I maintain his level of ab-
straction. Otherwise variation in any domain could be said to con-
ceal inversion.
With the tentative exception of W-K, color naming is noticeably
asymmetrical, and thus does not lie on the other side of a subjec-
tivity barrier when we consider contrasts as blatant as R-G or Y-B.
The incommunicability between your experience and mine of, say,
a particular green color chip will be limited to its shade, given that
we may differ genetically within bounds allowing nonanomalous
color vision. Palmer’s arguments concerning functionalist episte-
mology may prevail on their own. But I do not link them in a priv-
ileged way to the naming of color.
Neurophenomenological constraints and
pushing back the subjectivity barrier
Bruce MacLennan
Computer Science Department, University of Tennessee, Knoxville, TN
37996. maclennan@cs.utk.edu
www.cs.utk.edu/~mclennan
Abstract: In the first part of this commentary I argue that a neurophe-
nomenological analysis of color reveals additional asymmetries that pre-
clude undetectable color transformations, without appealing to weak 
arguments based on Basic Color Categories (BCCs); that is, I suggest ad-
ditional factors that must be included in “an empirically accurate model of
color experience,” and which break the remaining asymmetries. In the sec-
ond part I discuss the “isomorphism constraint” and the extent to which
we may predict the subjective quality of experience from its neurological
correlates. Protophenomena are discussed as a way of capturing in a rela-
tional structure all of qualitative experience except for the bare fact of sub-
jectivity.
Via negativa. Many of the issues addressed in Palmer’s target
article can be investigated by a neurophenomenological approach,
which seeks systematic parallels between the structure of experi-
ence, as revealed by phenomenological analysis, and the structure
of the nervous system, as investigated by neuroscience (MacLen-
nan 1995; 1996a). The use of phenomenological techniques is es-
pecially important if we are to avoid theoretically preconditioned
oversimplifications of the phenomena.
Consider first a light/dark (white/black) inversion. The color
sphere suggests that this is possible, but a phenomenological
analysis argues against it, for the light and dark have different phe-
nomenological structures. As Francis Bacon (“Of Unity in Reli-
gion,” Essays, 1625) said, “All colours will agree in the dark”; that
is, all hues merge at the bottom of the color sphere. The sphere
similarly shows the hues merging at the top, but this seems to be
more an artifact of the theory than a phenomenological reality. At
best it is a rare experience, such as one might have staring at the
sun or into a very bright light. But this reveals another asymmetry
of the light/dark axis, for very bright lights are accompanied by
pain, but darkness is not. This experience of pain is an integral part
of the phenomenology of vision.
I have little to add to Palmer’s treatment of the yellow/blue in-
version, except to observe that the “yellow anomaly” (the fact that
yellow is inherently lighter than the other colors) is predicted and
explained by the fact that the response of the yellow channel
(2S1M1L) has the largest overlap with the light (white) channel
(1S1M1L) of all the color channels.1 Here neuroscience com-
plements phenomenology.)
Thus, since ancient times (e.g., Aristotle, De sensu, p. 442a),
phenomenological analyses of color have recognized the similar-
ity between yellow/blue and light/dark, often making them the ex-
Commentary/Palmer: Color and consciousness
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1999) 22:6
961
Figure 1 (MacLaury).
Elemental points among Hering primary
colors, (a) ethnographic pluralities of foci (MacLaury 1997b, p.
202) and (b) inversion of pairs W-K, R-G, and Y-B to K-W, G-R,
and B-Y.
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0140525X99292217
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Massachusetts Amherst, on 18 Nov 2019 at 06:30:53, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at

tremes of a color-series arranged linearly between light and dark.
Furthermore, the first two colors in the Berlin and Kay hierarchy
are conventionally termed “white” and “black,” but are more ac-
curately described as warm-light versus cool-dark, that is, very
much like yellow/blue (Kay & McDaniel 1978).
The red/green inversion is more difficult, and so the target 
article makes a problematic appeal to Basic Color Categories
(BCCs); I think there is a better approach, however. By a careful
phenomenological analysis of colors, Goethe (1840) was able to
identify an important difference between our experiences of red
and green. Yellow and blue as extremes can be combined to yield
green as a mean (para. 697), which is experienced as similar to
both yellow and blue (even though unique-green contains no yel-
low or blue). Red is not intermediate in this way. Instead, by a
process of augmentation (Steigerung) of intensity, blue and yellow
both approach a very pure red or Purpur (para. 699–703), a color
“like fine carmine on white porcelain” (para. 792). Blue passes
through violet to Purpur, and yellow passes through orange (para.
704). Because Purpur is not experienced as a simple mixture or
union, Goethe classifies it as the third primary color (after yellow
and blue). Green, however, is classified as the first secondary color,
because it is seen as a mixture of the primaries blue and yellow.
Goethe’s analysis is supported by the Berlin and Kay studies
(1969), which make red the third color after “black” and “white,”
and green the fourth. The phenomenological analysis is confirmed
by neuroscience, because the green channel (2S1M2L) has a
significant overlap with both yellow (2S1M1L) and blue
(1S2M2L), but red (1S2M1L) overlaps only yellow signifi-
cantly (thus it is similar to yellow but not to blue, this may be
caused in part by the comparatively small number of S cones.)
In summary, the possibility of a spectral inversion arises from a
naive identification of color experience with the linear spectrum.
However, progressively more careful phenomenological analyses
of color (beginning with Goethe, 1840, and Hering, 1878/1964)
have revealed richer structures and imposed additional con-
straints on possible inversions. I expect this progress to continue.
For example, so far as I am aware, there is still no adequate ex-
planation of Benham’s disk, the illusion in which colors emerge
from a rotating black and white disk. However, a neurophenome-
nological explanation of this is likely to reveal additional asymme-
tries in experienced color space. It seems to me that the inverted
spectrum is doomed if not already dead.
Via affirmativa. In the second part of my commentary I would
like to move from the impossibilities of color inversions to the pos-
sibilities of explaining color experience. Thus, we seek to explain
the phenomenology of color in terms of the neurophysiology (and
also neuroethology!) of normal vision, but one of the tests of such
a theory will be our ability to predict experiences associated with
abnormal color vision. However, we must consider first what we
may expect from such an explanation, and what we may not.
We would, of course, like to be able to imagine the color expe-
riences of people and other animals with color vision significantly
different from our own. However, there are good reasons for
doubting our ability to do this. In sensory areas of the brain, imag-
inal layers (with inputs from higher regions) appear to alternate
with perceptual layers (with external inputs) and to have parallel
structures. Therefore, if the structure of our possible experiences
is determined by corresponding neural structure, then our ability
to imagine vividly will be likewise limited. That is, neurological
structure defines the topological structure of our experiences,
both perceived and imagined.
Therefore, it seems unlikely that we can vividly imagine per-
ceptual experiences radically different from our own, a conclusion
that seems to be confirmed by everyday experience. What we can
hope for are qualitative and quantitative verbal descriptions of the
topological structure of alien perceptual systems; we can seek vi-
sualizations where they are possible, but we must be prepared to
abandon them as we explore perceptual systems progressively
more different from our own.
Based on the preceding discussion, we can hypothesize that
whatever color channel has the greatest overlap with the light
channel (1S1M1L) will be experienced as yellow, or to put it the
other way, phenomenal yellow is the experience of the chromic
channel with the greatest overlap with light. Indeed, yellow and
blue can be considered the chromic correspondents of light and
dark (“white” and “black”).
In normal color vision, the unimodal channel (2S1M1L /
1S2M2L) generates yellow and its opposite, whereas the bi-
modal channel (2S1M2L / 1S2M1L) generates green and its
opposite. The unimodal channel generates experiences of yellow
because the two adjacent response curves (M and L) combine
with a greater overlap than the two nonadjacent ones (S, L) in the
bimodal channel; therefore the unimodal channel has the greater
overlap with the light-dark channel.
Green and red are the unique hues that are less like light/dark
than yellow/blue; this is caused by the lesser overlap of the re-
sponse curves. The phenomenological structure of green is given
by its similarity to both blue and yellow, whereas its opposite, 
red, is similar to yellow, but not to blue. The green channel
(2S1M2L) has a substantial overlap with both yellow and blue,
whereas red (1S2M1L) has a substantial overlap with yellow but
a much smaller one with blue. Therefore, we may hypothesize that
green is the experience resulting from the channel with the great-
est overlap with both of the extremes, whereas red results from an
overlap with yellow but not blue.
In an abnormal system that had 1S1M2L and 22M1L for
the unimodal channel, experience of yellows would correspond to
spectral blue-green light (1S1M2L), the region of largest over-
lap with the light channel (1S1M1L), and spectral orange-reds
(2S2M1L) would be experienced as blues. Phenomenal greens
(2S1M2L) would still correspond approximately with spectral
greens, because they have to be similar to both phenomenal yel-
low and blue, but the opposing phenomenal reds (1S2M1L)
would correspond, I think with spectral violets (and nonspectral
purples). Such anomalies could be detected by subjects trained in
the phenomenological description of their color experience; for
example, spectral green light would not be experienced as similar
to both yellow and blue.
A more problematic abnormality replaces the bimodal channel
with a unimodal channel, so that there are two unimodal channels:
2S1M1L (and its opposite) and 1S1M2L (and its opposite).
The problem is that in the worst case there could be complete
symmetry between these channels, so they have equal overlaps
with the light channels and equal claim to generate the yellow ex-
perience (though for different wavelengths). Topologically each of
these channels would appear like yellow in its relation to its op-
posing blue and in the relation of the yellow-blue pair to light-
dark. However, there would be an additional similarity between
each blue and the yellow of the other pair. here we may have an
example of a visual system too alien to permit visualization of the
experience, but the topology is clear. In any case the anomaly
would be easily detectable, because there would be only two spec-
tral unique hues, as opposed to the three spectral unique hues of
normal color vision.
In section 2.3 of the target article it is noted that the isomor-
phism criterion arises in mathematics, as well as in behavioral sci-
ence. Indeed, it arises in any objective science, as traditionally
construed. In the end, they are all expressed in terms of external
relations among primitive objects. Thus physics says nothing
about what electric charge is; it limits itself to describing the rela-
tions between charged particles and electromagnetic fields.
However, it may be argued (Chalmers 1995; 1996; MacLennan
1995; 1996a) that the traditional approach is inadequate for solv-
ing the “hard problem,” that is, for fully integrating consciousness
into the scientific worldview. This is because an adequate account
of subjectivity must deal with certain relations between objects
(specifically, those between subjects and the objects of their con-
sciousness) from a different perspective, from the “inside” of the
subjects out to their objects. Such relations cannot be entirely ex-
ternal to the objects. Therefore, we must expand our domain to
Commentary/Palmer: Color and consciousness
962
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1999) 22:6
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0140525X99292217
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Massachusetts Amherst, on 18 Nov 2019 at 06:30:53, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at

admit that some objects, at least, have two sides (the outside and
the inside, so to speak), one of which is accessible only when the
observer is the object. Thus we are led to some form of dual-ac-
cess monism.
My own approach to these problems is by way of a theoretical
entity, the protophenomenon (MacLennan 1995; 1996a, 1999).
Protophenomena are elementary units of experience, postulated
to correspond to certain brain activity sites (perhaps the somata of
neurons). It must be emphasized that protophenomena are very
small; the number constituting an individual’s consciousness state
would be on the order of the number of neurons in the cortex, say
thirty billion. Each protophenomenon has a subjective intensity,
which we may call the fundamental quale. The intensities of pro-
tophenomena depend on the intensities of other protophenomena
(and on extrinsic independent variables) in mathematically defin-
able ways that correspond to the electrochemical connections be-
tween neurons (MacLennan 1996b). Protophenomena acquire
their qualitative character from these mutual dependencies,
which define the structure of possible experiences.
At the end of section 2.2 we read that “the nature of color ex-
periences cannot be uniquely fixed by objective behavioral means,
but their structural interrelations can be.” I am more optimistic,
however. As we come to better understand the neurophenome-
nology of color we will be able to reduce more of its phenomeno-
logical structure to the relations between protophenomena and
their neurological parallels. In the end, all that should remain
unreduced is the bare (“colorless”) fact of subjectivity, repre-
sented by protophenomenal intensity.
Furthermore, because protophenomenal intensity is a very sim-
ple property, it is possible, at least in principle, to approach many
questions concerning experience empirically by means of phe-
nomenologically trained subjects. For example, by controlling the
activity at activity sites and having subjects report protophenom-
enal intensity we may determine whether absolute or relative
neural activity corresponds to intensity, which will go toward an-
swering questions such as whether one person is experiencing a
“whiter white” than another (cf. sect. 2.3).
In conclusion, neurophenomenology reveals color experience
to have a rich structure that precludes color transformations such
as suggested by Locke (1690/1987). Further, by showing the par-
allels between neural structure and phenomenological structure,
it allows us to predict the phenomenology of color systems differ-
ent from our own. If this structuralist approach is correct, then all
that is behind the “subjectivity barrier” is the bare fact of subjec-
tivity, represented by protophenomenal intensities; the rich qual-
ity of experience will be explicable in terms of protophenomenal
dependencies.
NOTE
1. The De Valois & De Valois (1993) system is a little different from
that used in this commentary. Although they have 2S2M1L for the yel-
low channel, it still has the largest overlap with the light channel, because
of the large proportion of L cones; they use the ratios L:M:S 5 10:5:1.
Consciousness – subject to agreement
Neil Law Malcolm
Clare Hall, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, CB3 9AL, United Kingdom.
malcolm@rowland.org
www.clarehall.cam.ac.uk
Abstract: The claim that isomorphism in perceptual behaviour allows for
differences in inner experience holds only if experience is taken to be an
entity quite distinct from perceptual behaviour and only accidentally re-
lated to it. But this is not so. The two are internally related; experience as
conceptualised being inherent to perception as a species of normative be-
haviour.
My reaction to reading the target article is that Palmer has reached
a correct conclusion – how a colour looks to someone, its subjec-
tive character, is immune to strict behaviourist or biological ex-
planation – but for the wrong reason (that experience lies behind
an objectively impenetrable “subjectivity barrier,” sect. 2.1). Be-
cause of this, Palmer is led to the further, erroneous conclusion
that one can never know another’s colour experiences from that
person’s behaviour, even in principle (sect. 4, para. 2). His argu-
ment for this mistakes the nature of colour experience, its links
with perceptual behaviour, the role of language in identification,
and the appropriate mode of investigation into consciousness of
colours.
1. Colours are not logically private objects of experience, but
are objective properties of things in the world around us.
Palmer’s problem of how we can know what colours another ex-
periences is a relic of his conceiving of subjective experiences as
“internal . . . private events” (sect. 1.1, para. 5), which are entirely
independent of perception and conceptualisation and only con-
tingently, that is, causally, connected to behaviour. Now the mat-
ter of whether I can be sure that you and I are having the same ex-
perience on looking at this page is like the matter of whether I can
be sure that my current judgment of white is the same as my pre-
vious one: there must be criteria for seeing white as the same
again. But if colour experience is a private entity to which only its
possessor has cognitive access, the criteria for reidentification can
only be arbitrary and, as Wittgenstein (1953) famously pointed
out, “whatever is going to seem right to me is right. And that only
means that here we can’t talk about ‘right’.” Were I a speaker of a
private language, no possibility would exist of my checking, veri-
fying, or being wrong about colours because there would be no
difference between my being right and being wrong, except that
it seemed a certain way to me. Only if I am a speaker of a public
language can I attach meaning to the concept of colour. This al-
lows the logical possibility of others, or oneself, checking, verify-
ing, or being wrong about colours, which means it makes sense to
say my judgments are right or not. What we see when we see
something white is not an inner experience, but an objective, ir-
reducible property of that public thing. The easy equation of
colour with experience stems from the refusal to countenance the
objectivity of colours (Malcolm 1999).
2. There is an internal relation, mediated by colour concepts,
between experience and behaviour. The relation between sub-
jective experience and perceptual behaviour is not an entirely ac-
cidental one between distinct entities. Nor is it one of identity.
Rather, it is internal, neither experience nor behaviour being
properly understood apart from the relationship in which they
stand. Because colours, properly construed, can only be seen as
conceptualised, the link between the two is mediated by the con-
cepts of the colours that we share with others. This means that
other people’s colour experiences are not irrevocably hidden from
us but are manifest in and through their behaviour (while still be-
ing more than just behaviour). Remember, the terms of the sub-
jectivity debate are not over whether you and I can have the same
experience in the sense of suffering the one experience; clearly we
cannot. They are about whether I can know, from my third-per-
sonal vantage, what you are experiencing from your first-personal
vantage, specifically, the character of your colour experience. And
the answer is yes, provided the relevant sense of “colour” in the
expression “colour experience” is taken to be “colour as con-
ceived.” If perceptual behaviour is the natural expression of expe-
rience as conceptualised, then, although I cannot physically have
your experience, I can logically know what your experience is,
given its behavioural expression in terms meaningful to me.
3. Colour language is the means of conceptualising experi-
ence in agreed ways. Colour language, pace Palmer (sect. 2.2,
para. 3), does not provide a set of labels for what we privately ex-
perience and recognise, but functions as the means of conceptu-
alising what its speakers experience. Concepts are capacities ex-
ercised in acts of judgment, and acts of colour judgment
presuppose the possession of colour concepts. Without concepts
we can neither think about the colours nor identify them, only dif-
ferentiate coloured things in ways permitted by the workings of
Commentary/Palmer: Color and consciousness
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1999) 22:6
963
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0140525X99292217
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Massachusetts Amherst, on 18 Nov 2019 at 06:30:53, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at

our visual system. A sufficient condition for our having concepts
of the colours is that we have mastered the intelligent uses of
colour-words in some language. If colour experience is naturally
expressed in and through what one says and does then, so long as
your judgments invoke the use of agreed concepts, I can know
what colours you are seeing. Importantly, the basis for this knowl-
edge is public and available; it involves intersubjective agreement
about the rules for the use of colour language and how these rules
are to be applied and it implicates samples of colours. Our mas-
tery of a shared vocabulary and grammar of colour therefore en-
ables us to see the colours – have the same experiences – that oth-
ers do.
4. The nature of subjective experience – consciousness – or
colours is a matter for conceptual investigation. Attempting to
“get a scientific handle on [the] philosophical problem of whether
transformed color experiences could be detected in publicly ob-
servable behavior” (sect. 1, para. 4), Palmer reaches the solipsis-
tic conclusion that “there is no way to specify uniquely the quali-
ties of particular experiences except by reference to one’s own”
(sect. 4, para. 9). But the reason that colour experience is recalci-
trant to scientific explanation is that there are no conceptual 
connections linking neural states or purely physical behaviour to
consciousness of colours. Science is wholly unsuited to the expla-
nation of conceptualised experience, which is what is at issue. The
inaccessibility Palmer adduces is strictly an empirical concern.
Subjective experience – seeing as from a first-personal point of
view – is, however, accessible to conceptual inquiry which can tell
all there is to know. How in practice do we realise what state of
mind someone else is in? We do so not by inference or analogy,
but in what that person says and does under the circumstances,
where what counts is not “hard” physical behaviour, but meaning-
ful, communicative human behaviour enacted for a purpose in so-
cial and visual context. We take another’s behaviour from the start
as expressive of mind. Subjective experience or consciousness of
colours is inherent to perception as a species of normative behav-
iour (Malcolm, in preparation).
Beyond intrinsicness and dazzling blacks
Erik Myin
Department of Philosophy and Artificial Intelligence, Free University Brussels,
B1050 Brussels, Belgium. emyin@vub.ac.be
homepages.vub.ac.be/~emyin/
Abstract: The concept of intrinsic aspects of color experience is flawed
and functionalism remains plausible. The idea of spectrum inversion can-
not survive in the context of a realistic conception of color.
Palmer’s target article is surely one of the most scientifically de-
tailed and knowledgeable treatments of spectrum inversion ever.
Unfortunately, it is built on a very shaky philosophical foundation,
the notion of the “intrinsic.” In the article’s ontology, there are two
kinds of properties of mental states, intrinsic properties and rela-
tional properties. The whole point of the article is that these as-
pects of experience are mutually exclusive: The intrinsic is nonre-
lational and the relational is nonintrinsic.
It is difficult to make sense of the notion of intrinsic aspects of
color experience. Take, for example, a sensation of orange. Ac-
cording to the logic of the target article, the relational aspects of
this color sensation would involve its similarity relations to other
color sensations (such as that it is more similar to red than to blue)
and facts concerning its compositional structure (such as that it is
composed of the Hering primaries red and yellow). But besides
these relational aspects, and completely independent of them,
there would be a still further “intrinsic” aspect. What experiential
content could such an aspect carry? We can only approach this
question negatively, by looking at what is left over after subtract-
ing all relational aspects. This means the “intrinsic” content would
not be experienced as “composed” and it would not be experi-
enced as being related to other colors. It is hard to see, however,
how such a content still specifies anything that would be “orange-
like.”
A more general worry concerns how intrinsic aspects could fig-
ure in experience at all. For is it not the hallmark of experience
that it is subjective, thus experienced as related to the experienc-
ing subject? Subjectivity, being “for a subject” seems to be pre-
eminently relational (cf. Church 1998). If the category of the “in-
trinsic” specifies anything at all, it surely cannot be something that
matters for consciousness! Of course one can launch the category
of the intrinsically subjective, but this seems a merely verbal and
desperate move. The fact that one can give a name to a paradoxi-
cal category does not make it any more viable.
A favorite strategy of believers in the “intrinsic” is to dismiss any
critique of it as “eliminativism,” which then gets further portrayed
as the denial of the existence of consciousness, despite the fact that
critics of the intrinsic are the first to offer – relational! – theories
of consciousness. There is little room for developing such a the-
ory for color experience here, but it should certainly include the
following aspects:
1. First-order representations that code for color. These can
stand in various relations to each other, such as composition or in-
compatibility.
2. Higher order functional entities that are sensitive to these
relations (these could be further representations or first-order
representation using mechanisms).
3. Representations of body and self in terms of which incom-
ing representations can be made sense of in “subject-centered”
coordinates (their application implies conscious content is “for the
subject” and can guide its actions. Representations seem neces-
sary even for the body because of its distance to the brain) (Dama-
sio 1994).
In the target article only representations of type (1) are talked
about, as if they were sufficient for consciousness. This quickly
leads to such pseudoproblems as whether a camera connected to
a color labeling computer has color sensations.1 The sufficiency of
type (1) representations is refuted empirically by the fact that
spectral sensitivity curves measured for color blindsight have their
normal “opponent” form (Stoerig & Cowey 1992).
In a realistic functionalist theory of color experience, color con-
sciousness would arise out of the interactions of various functional
components (such as 1, 2, and 3 mentioned above) and no com-
ponent by itself would suffice for consciousness. The color room
fantasy only works against – to my mind nonexistent – function-
alist theories where the denial of this last assertion is embraced.
But what about spectrum inversion? Should we not address this
problem directly, instead of attacking it indirectly by undermining
intrinsicness? By dismissing the intrinsic, a defender of a func-
tionalist theory would indeed have to construe colors in relational
terms. In the end the identity of a color would be constituted by
its collective set of relations (Harden 1988). However, the set of
relations should not be restricted as in the target article to the
three dimensions of psychophysical color space (which are to a
certain degree artificial, because they describe color experience
only under very narrowly delimited conditions), but could include
relations with anything one can think of, such as: sensations in
other modalities, emotions, colored objects, and physical proper-
ties of light.
Questions of symmetry become immensely more complicated
within this holistic picture. Consider, for example, the property of
being dazzling, and the fact that there can be no dazzling black.
This is a result of optical facts concerning the interaction of light
and objects, essentially the fact that black objects are those that
absorb all incoming light and that being dazzling implies the re-
flection of light from objects. The “nondazzlingness” of black is
thus both experiential (it determines the nature of our experience
of black) and physical (it is determined by physics). The impossi-
bility of a dazzling black seems to make a reversal of the lightness
axis – treated as unproblematic in the target article – impossible,
Commentary/Palmer: Color and consciousness
964
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1999) 22:6
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0140525X99292217
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Massachusetts Amherst, on 18 Nov 2019 at 06:30:53, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at

for such a reversal would create precisely the category of a daz-
zling black. Even if he considered the physical impossibility in-
volved as irrelevant, the defender of spectrum inversion would
have to grant detectability here!
Broadening our concept of color to include more of its relations
roots color more firmly in both the mind and in the world and
brings to the fore the outlandish nature of fantasies such as Locke’s
spectrum inversion.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
Thanks to the Flemish Community (grant CAW 96/29b) and the Free Uni-
versity of Brussels (VUB-project GOA 2) for financial support.
NOTES
1. At the Artificial Intelligence Lab of the Vrije Unversiteit Brussel,
Luc Steels and coworkers – including me – are performing experiments
with color camera-connected programs that very closely fit the description
offered in the target article. Given the relative simplicity of this setup, our
research goal is to investigate artificial color categorization and certainly
not artificial color consciousness.
Normal, pseudonormal, and color-blind
vision: Cases of justified phenomenal belief
Martine Nida-Rümelin
Department of Philosophy, University of Fribourg, CH-1700 Fribourg,
Switzerland. martine.nida-ruemelin@unifr.ch
Abstract: Palmer’s “isomorphism constraint” may be interpreted as a
claim about (1) what can be known with certainty, or (2) what can be de-
tected, or (3) what beliefs can be justified on the basis of a certain kind of
scientific knowledge. I argue that his claim is valid if interpreted in one of
the first two ways, but invalid if interpreted in the third way.
Palmer’s claims about the difference in our epistemical status with
respect to phenomenal structure on the one hand and phenome-
nal quality on the other may be reformulated in three different
ways: On the basis of behavioural, functional, and biological data:
(T1) We can know with certainty that another person’s experi-
ence has certain structural properties, but not know with certainty
that it has a specific intrinsic quality.
(T2) We can detect structural properties of another person’s ex-
perience, but not its intrinsic quality.
(T3) We can form justified beliefs about structural properties
of another person’s experience but not about its intrinsic quality.
Comment on T1. It is not obvious on what reading of “knowing
with certainty” both parts of the claim could turn out to be valid.
If “knowing with certainty” requires that every possible alterna-
tive be logically or conceptually excluded, then the notion is prob-
ably too narrow for the first part of the claim to be valid. If it re-
quires only that the hypothesis at issue be “beyond a reasonable
doubt,” then the second part of T1 may be wrong (see my discus-
sion of T3 below). Despite these difficulties one should, I think,
agree with Palmer that there is a kind (or degree) of certainty
achievable in the first case (phenomenal structure) that cannot be
achieved in the second (phenomenal quality).
Comment on T2. Those who do not know a given intrinsic qual-
ity (e.g., the specific quality called “red”) from their own experi-
ence are – in a certain sense – unable even to consider the ques-
tion of whether another person’s experience is an experience of
this specific kind (e.g., red). What cannot be considered by a given
subject, cannot be believed or known either. This quite radical
epistemic inaccessibility of facts about an intrinsic quality of ex-
perience for a subject not acquainted with the quality at issue can-
not be overcome by acquiring behavioural, functional, and bio-
logical knowledge.1 Knowledge about phenomenal structure, by
contrast, can be acquired without acquaintance with the specific
type of experience at issue. On a natural understanding of “de-
tecting,” the claim that intrinsic quality can be “detected” on the
basis of “objective” data assumes that one can gain phenomenal
knowledge about the intrinsic quality of another person’s experi-
ence even if not acquainted with that quality oneself. If we read
“detect” in thesis T2 in this way, then T2 should be accepted.
Comment on T3. Palmer seems to accept implicitly a quite
strict necessary condition for justified phenomenal belief. He
writes: “if there are any potentially relevant differences between
our brains that might produce experiential differences, it is un-
justified to assume equivalence of color experiences” (sect. 3.4,
para. 5). This quotation still leaves open the question of whether
he thinks my belief that you have an experience of green is justi-
fied only if:
(1) I have no reason to assume that there are potentially rele-
vant differences between your brain on the occasion at issue and
my brain when I have an experience of red, or
(2) I have reason to assume that there are no such differences.
In Palmer’s immediately following lines it seems quite clear,
however, that he tends to choose the second alternative and that
he requires much for its fulfillment. He seems to think that the
phenomenal belief at issue is unjustified unless I have already es-
tablished (a) what differences are potentially relevant, and (b) that
there are no such differences on the relevant occasions between
you and me. I would instead propose the following sufficient con-
dition for a scientifically based justified phenomenal belief: My
phenomenal belief that you have (e.g.) a sensation of green is jus-
tified if:
(3) I have reason to believe that there is a specific type of phys-
iological process R that is in my case responsible for sensations of
green, and
(4) I have reason to believe that a process of this type R occurs
in your brain on the occasion at issue, and
(5) I have no reason to believe that there are potentially rele-
vant differences between your brain when a process of type R oc-
curs and my brain when a process of type R occurs.
Note that I can fulfill (5) even if no empirical results about 
potentially relevant factors like those mentioned by Palmer in sec-
tion 3.5 are at hand. According to the proposed sufficient condi-
tion, there are plenty of cases of scientifically justified phenome-
nal beliefs: (a) the belief of a normally sighted person that red,
green, yellow, and blue are the basic hues experienced by all nor-
mally sighted people, (b) the belief that pseudonormal people are
red-green inverted2, or (c) the belief that completely red-green
blind people have yellow and blue as their only basic hues.
NOTES
1. Nagel (1974) and Jackson (1982) are well-known advocates of this
view (e.g., compare Jackson. A precise formulation requires, in my opin-
ion, the distinction between two kinds of belief (non-phenomenal and
phenomenal belief) about qualities of experience introduced and dis-
cussed at length in Nida-Rümelin (1998). Phenomenal belief about a qual-
ity of experience requires that the epistemic subject be acquainted with
the quality at issue. I use the notion of phenomenal belief in the follow-
ing, although there is no room to introduce the distinction here.
2. Pseudonormal people have their R-receptors filled with the pho-
topigment normally contained in G-cones and their G-receptors filled with
the photopigment normally contained in R-cones. Their existence is pre-
dicted by Piantanida’s theory about the inheritance of red-green blindness
(see Piantanida 1974 and Boynton 1979). It follows from central assump-
tions about the physiological basis of color vision that these people have
normal discriminative capacities but have their red- and green- sensations
reversed. For further information about the hypothesis of pseudonormal
vision and a discussion of related philosophical questions see Nida-
Rümelin (1996; 1999).
Commentary/Palmer: Color and consciousness
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1999) 22:6
965
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0140525X99292217
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Massachusetts Amherst, on 18 Nov 2019 at 06:30:53, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at

Finding a place for experience in the
physical-relational structure of the brain
Gerard O’Brien and Jonathan Opie
Department of Philosophy, University of Adelaide, South Australia 5005,
Australia. gerard.obrien@adelaide.edu.au
jopie@arts.adelaide.edu.au
arts.adelaide.edu.au/Philosophy/{gobrien.htm; jopie.htm}
Abstract: In restricting his analysis to the causal relations of functional-
ism, on the one hand, and the neurophysiological realizers of biology, on
the other, Palmer has overlooked an alternative conception of the rela-
tionship between color experience and the brain – one that liberalizes the
relation between mental phenomena and their physical implementation,
without generating functionalism’s counter-intuitive consequences. In this
commentary we rely on Palmer’s earlier work (especially from 1978) to
tease out this alternative.
What can natural science hope to tell us about the qualitative char-
acter of experience? Palmer is pessimistic: Not only is behavioural
science unable to explain the qualities of individual experiences,
it cannot even distinguish those systems that have experiences
from those that merely simulate them. Biological science is not
much better off, he claims, because it cannot even tell us when
two subjects are having the same experiences (save for those ex-
ceedingly rare cases where neurophysiological identity obtains),
let alone what these experiences are like.
Given this pessimistic assessment, it is somewhat ironic that
Palmer himself has developed some conceptual tools that, when
applied to experience, may extricate natural science from this pre-
dicament. In a paper setting out some fundamental features of
representation, Palmer observes that there are two different
means by which a set of (representing) objects can preserve the re-
lational structure of another (represented) set: “Representation is
. . . intrinsic whenever a representing relation has the same inher-
ent constraints as its represented relation . . . [On the other hand]
representation is . . . extrinsic whenever the inherent structure of
a representing relation is totally arbitrary and that of its repre-
sented relation is not” (1978, p. 271, the emphasis is ours).
Let us apply this distinction to the brain’s representation of
color. Palmer tells us that “the entire structure of color space . . .
is determined by relations among colors, particularly relations of
composition and similarity” (sect. 2.2, para. 2). One way the brain
might preserve this relational structure, and in so doing generate
our color experiences, is via a corresponding set of causal relations
among its representational vehicles. In other words, it might be
that color experiences are nothing more than causal roles, as func-
tionalists suggest. This would render the representation of color
extrinsic, because with enough ingenuity the appropriate set of
causal relations can be imposed on just about any set of repre-
senting objects, regardless of their inherent structure. It is pre-
cisely because it involves extrinsic representation that functional-
ism renders physical implementation irrelevant to mentality,
something Palmer is keen to emphasize: “functionalism treats
mental phenomena as independent of their physical realizations:
Any set of physical events will do, provided they have the right
causal relational structure” (sect. 4, para. 6). And it is this that he
thinks undermines the capacity of functionalism to explain color
experience (sect. 4, para. 6–8).
Another way the brain might preserve the relational structure
of color space is by employing corresponding physical relations
among its representational vehicles. This would render the repre-
sentation of color in the brain intrinsic, because such physical re-
lations obtain only in virtue of the inherent physical structure of
the representing objects. Palmer canvasses this option in section
3, when he examines the biological conception of mental phe-
nomena: the identification of conscious experiences with neuro-
physiological states. The difficulty here is the fact that “most peo-
ple’s brains differ from each other in a multitude of ways,” making
it look extremely unlikely that we will be able to discover a “prin-
cipled physical correspondence” (sect. 3.4, para. 3) on which to
ground a theory of color experience.
However, there is a way of understanding color experience in
terms of intrinsic representation that does not seek to identify
mental phenomena with neurophysiological states. Again, the ba-
sis of this idea is to be found in Palmer (1978). He notes that two
systems can implement the same set of physical relations without
being physically identical (pp. 296–97). This suggests that we haz-
ard an identification of conscious experiences with what might be
termed structural roles, which are defined in terms of the physi-
cal relations among a set of representing objects. Crucially, phys-
ically distinct objects can play the same structural role within dif-
ferent representational systems, so long as they bear the same
physical relations to other members of their respective systems.
Given that this approach relies on the structural roles played by
the brain’s representational vehicles, rather than their particular
physical properties, we propose to call it structuralism.
The distinction between structuralism and the biological con-
ception of mental phenomena can be illustrated by reference to
parallel distributed processing (PDP) systems. It is well known
that two implementations of, say, NETtalk, can vary considerably
at the level of weights and connections (the “biological” level), yet
still perform the same mapping of text onto phonemes (Church-
land 1998; Sejnowski & Rosenberg 1987). Some theorists see this
as a vindication of functionalism. Distinct NETtalks appear to be
merely input-output equivalent. But if one digs deeper, it emerges
that this similarity in causal profile is grounded in an underlying
structural similarity: Cluster analysis reveals that different imple-
mentations of NETtalk partition activation space in the same way.
This indicates that the set of physical relations among hidden layer
activation patterns (as codified by distances in activation space) is
preserved across distinct implementations of NETtalk, even if
they vary at the level of weights and activation patterns.
Structuralism is therefore best understood as occupying a the-
oretical position midway between functionalism and the biologi-
cal conception. Because two representational systems can share
the same set of physical relations without being physically identi-
cal, structuralism, like functionalism, liberalizes the relation be-
tween mental phenomena and their physical implementation in
the brain. Unlike functionalism, but in common with the biologi-
cal conception, structuralism makes physical implementation rel-
evant to mentality: It takes mental phenomena to be constituted
by the physical relations their realizers bear to one another, not
their causal relations. Thus, structuralism has all the virtues of
these traditional rival theories of mind, without possessing their
vices.
When it comes to the explanation of color experience, it is im-
portant to note first that structuralism is capable of being borne
out (in principle) by within-subject experiments involving physio-
logical interventions. If we discover that the color experiences of
an individual are not affected by structure-preserving changes in
brain circuitry, but are affected by alterations to inherent (physi-
cal-relational) structure, we can reasonably conclude that color ex-
periences are identical to structural roles. In this circumstance
similarity at the structural level trumps functional similarity, and
color-zombies can be safely identified by their lack of appropriate
representational structures.
One might object that insofar as structuralism offers a relational
analysis of experience, just like functionalism it fails to address the
subisomorphic features of color experience. In particular, what is
to prevent two people with color representation systems possess-
ing the same physical-relational structure from having qualita-
tively different color experiences? However, there is no more rea-
son for thinking that two such people could have different color
experiences than there is for thinking that neurophysiological
clones could have different color experiences – the latter being
something that Palmer concedes as being unparsimonious (see
sect. 3.4, para. 2). The transformed color thought experiment re-
ally only starts pumping out its famous intuition when the rela-
tional structure at issue is causal.
The deepest source of Palmer’s pessimism revolves around the
incapacity of natural science to explicate the qualitative character
Commentary/Palmer: Color and consciousness
966
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1999) 22:6
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0140525X99292217
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Massachusetts Amherst, on 18 Nov 2019 at 06:30:53, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at

of individual color experiences. Can the structuralist conception
of mentality give us any purchase on this last bastion of subjectiv-
ity? Perhaps Palmer is right that objective science reaches an ul-
timate barrier at this point. But structuralism at least holds up the
prospect that the equivalence class of subjects with identical color
experiences is far larger than the biological conception allows. A
person can thus understand (in the relevant first-person sense) the
color-experiences of another person if their respective color sys-
tems are structurally identical, even if there are quite significant
physical differences between their color representations.
One basic or two? A rhapsody in blue
Galina V. Paramei
Institut für Arbeitsphysiologie an der Universität Dortmund, 44139 Dortmund,
Germany (on leave from the Institute of Psychology at the Russian Academy
of Science, Moscow, Russia). paramei@arb-phys.uni-dortmund.de
www.ifado.de/projekt-06/
Abstract: The controversial status of goluboi as a basic color term is dis-
cussed. Fuzzy logic alone cannot reliably attribute basic status to goluboi.
Recent linguistic studies support a single basic blue category. Psycho-
physical data on color-space distances and color naming are currently am-
biguous in this regard.
Among derived basic color categories (BCCs), Palmer lists Rus-
sian goluboi, “light blue” (sect. 1.4). The term is not listed among
basic color terms (BCTs) identified by Berlin and Kay (1969), and
its basicness is considered disputable. In the context of an inverted
spectrum, if goluboi were deemed a BCT, four more symmetries
in color experience would remain unbroken under reflectional
transformations – those of brown and goluboi under B-Y/Bk-Wh
and under R-G/B-Y/Bk-Wh inversions (see Table 1 of the target
article).
The inclusion of goluboi among derived BCTs would be rea-
sonable following the logic of fuzzy-set membership functions, to
which Palmer adheres. Derived color categories result from the
intersection of two primary color categories, specifically, goluboi
of white and blue. The conjoining of some primary categories,
however, also gives rise to nonbasic terms and as such this opera-
tion cannot automatically warrant basicness.
Palmer’s assumption that the basic status of derived terms may
result from the wider perceptual gap between particular unique
hues can be tested psychophysically, assuming that referents are
defined as samples of the most representative color of those hues
(cf. Saunders & Van Brakel 1997, p. 168). Indeed, a “color circle”
reconstructed from large color differences between Munsell
samples (Indow 1988) demonstrates that the orange (5YR) is lo-
cated at the midpoint between widely separated unique red and
unique yellow, whereas purple commensurably bisects a great
distance between unique red and unique blue; nonbasic cyan
(5BG) lies at the intersection of closely-located blue (5B) and
green (5G). Analogously, the basicness of gray is explained by its
location between polarized samples of white and black. Psy-
chophysical evidence for the basicness of pink and brown can be
adduced from a study by Fenton (1997), who found red to be
most distant from white (as well as from the other primary col-
ors), and yellow farthest from black. Although Fenton found
black to be closer to blue than to red or yellow, this finding pro-
vides insufficient evidence that the separation between blue and
white is large enough to foster emergence of a BCC at their in-
tersection. Thus, on psychophysical grounds the feasibility of gol-
uboi basicness is uncertain.
In the linguistic domain, Corbett and Morgan (1988) and
Davies et al. (1991) maintained that two Russian terms, sinii, “dark
blue,” and goluboi, “light blue,” meet linguistic criteria for basic-
ness in their frequencies of occurrence and derivational elabora-
tions. However, on testing perceptual-cognitive relationships, the
authors recanted, concluding that the two terms in question may
not refer to completely separate perceptual categories, and that
“universal ‘blue’ . . . may remain as a unitary perceptual basic cat-
egory” (Laws et al. 1995, p. 88).
The existence of two “blue” basic color categories is disputed by
MacLaury (1997b), who argues that the initial conclusions of Cor-
bett, Morgan, and Davies rest only on salience measures of the
terms. But for the term to be basic, along with being salient, it also
needs to be general, that is, its meaning should not be subsumable
under the meaning of another term. If goluboi were basic, its core
meaning would stand apart from that of sinii. This appears not to
be the case: Taylor et al. (1997) used the three-part ethnographic
method of assessing overlap among color-term ranges; they posed
relations of coextension, inclusion, and polarized inclusion among
sinii and goluboi for different speakers in their sample, but 
with sinii consistently dominant and basic and goluboi recessive
and nonbasic; the latter became salient without becoming inde-
pendent.
Further data come from color naming of monochromatic lights
obtained from native Russian speakers. Paramei and Cavonius
(1997) collected data from Muscovites, using sinii for “blue” and
adding “white” to the available basic hue terms. The sinii-naming
function at low luminance (2 cd/m2) was in strong agreement with
the “blue”-naming function obtained by Gordon et al. (1994) at
comparable illuminance (20 td). But at higher luminances (20 and
200 cd/m2), values of sinii function were lower than those of the
“blue” function at comparable illuminances in previous studies in
which the “chromatic” format was used (Boynton et al. 1964;
Uchikawa & Ikeda 1987), being partly substituted by “white”-
naming. We are aware that one has to distinguish between the hue
components discernible in a sample and the color category to
which this sample is assigned, for discernment of hue does not ex-
clude coverage of a certain subset of lights by a BCT (as, for ex-
ample, red and yellow components are discerned in orangist sam-
ples that pertain to a basic orange category). Hence, though in our
data short-wavelength lights were fully specified by sinii and
“white” components, they cannot provide a decisive argument for
or against a second independent “blue” category.
The issue was investigated in another color-naming study with
Russians (presumably in the USA), who named monochromatic
lights in Russian or in English (Abramov et al. 1997). When nam-
ing in Russian, subjects were allowed to use the basic hue com-
ponents, with the terms for “blue” allowed in different sessions as
sinii only, goluboi only, or both sinii and goluboi. When sinii was
the permitted term, the naming function agreed closely with the
“blue”-naming function, implying that sinii is the equivalent of
“blue” and describes that unique sensation. But with both terms
permitted, sinii was found to correspond to “blue” 1 “red” and
goluboi to “blue” 1 “green,” which the authors regard as sup-
porting the conclusion that both are BCTs. It is noteworthy that
the obtained components of the goluboi category are at odds with
the blue and white to be inferred from the fuzzy-logic model,
whereas these components better match nonbasic cyan at the in-
tersection of blue and green. The discrepancy is explained by the
set of terms used, but it might also be caused by low photopic light
of exposed stimuli, because the illuminance was only 25 td (J. Gor-
don, personal communication). To clarify whether the sinii- and
goluboi-functions – as expressed through the English-named hue
components – name two formidably distinct “blue” sensations,
further study is needed: The “white”-term must be permitted as a
naming option; luminances should be varied to cover the whole
photopic range, including high levels that are expected to induce
the “white” component.
Although fuzzy logic might portray goluboi as a basic color term,
it is questionable whether this model verily represents operations
of basic-category formation. The most recent linguistic studies
provide evidence for a single “blue” basic category, whereas
presently available results of psychophysical studies have con-
firmed neither this conclusion nor its antithesis of two basic blue
categories.
Commentary/Palmer: Color and consciousness
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1999) 22:6
967
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0140525X99292217
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Massachusetts Amherst, on 18 Nov 2019 at 06:30:53, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at

Phenomenal experience and science:
Separated by a “brick wall”?
Michael Pauen
Institut für Philosophie, Phillips-Universität, Marburg, 35032 Marburg,
Germany. pauen@mailer.uni-marburg.de
staff-www.uni-marburg.de/~pauen/homepage.htm
Abstract: Palmer’s principled distinction between first-person experience
and scientific access is called into question. First, complete color trans-
formations of experience and memory may be undetectable even from the
first-person perspective. Second, transformations of (say) pain experi-
ences seem to be intrinsically connected to certain effects, thus giving sci-
ence access to these experiences, in principle. Evidence from pain re-
search and emotional psychology indicates that further progress can be
made.
Palmer’s central argument is based on a fundamental distinction:
Although we have direct access to phenomenal experience like
color sensations from the first-person perspective, science is re-
stricted to the relations between these sensations, thus being sep-
arated from experience itself by a “brick wall.” I will argue that both
claims can be challenged, thus leveling the difference between sci-
ence and first-person experience and leaving a better chance for
explaining these experiences than Palmer wants to concede.
First, Palmer assumes that we can detect color transformations
from the first-person perspective. This is not beyond question:
Think about a wholesale transformation of color experience and
memory. Chances are that I will not detect such a transformation
because colored objects like tomatoes will appear the way they
have always appeared to me–at least, that is what my memory
would tell me, and, given the isomorphism constraint, there is
nothing and no one to correct it. Even worse, if it occurs to me
that the spectrum has changed, it will be unclear whether this is a
“real” transformation in my actual experience or just a change in
my memory. Thus, my own judgment would be relational, too, be-
cause it depends on the relation between memory and experience,
rather than on the intrinsic properties of experience.
Second, the actual consequences of the isomorphism constraint
depend on whether there is a clear-cut distinction between in-
trinsic and relational properties of experience. Palmer’s central
claim is based on such a fundamental distinction, thus completely
different experiences can act as “role fillers” for a given functional
description, leaving science no chance to detect the difference.
Palmer himself seems to concede certain connections between
experience and relational properties of the color space in section
2.2, thus leaving room for the idea that a (presently unavailable)
appropriate relational description might be able to fix experience
itself rather than an extrinsic property of it. Second, an even
stronger objection to Palmer’s distinction arises from observations
on pain. Palmer’s claim concerning the difference between expe-
rience in general and functional properties would also require that
a “feeling transformation” from pain to an opposite experience,
say, joy, could occur without an effect on pain behavior. Now, take
the case of a newborn baby with such a “feeling transformation”:
I think the intuition is that the baby will start to cry as soon as it
has a pain experience – even if the pain experience is caused by
its mother’s hugging. This idea is supported by empirical evidence:
The prospect for children who do not experience pain is very bad
indeed (Pöppel 1995, p. 237).
It would seem then, that at least in cases like this, certain rela-
tional properties are constitutive of the experience itself: Accord-
ing to our intuitions, experience will not change without affecting
the relational properties. Current research in neurophysiology in-
dicates that relational analyses can be pushed even further and can
connect distinct aspects of pain experience to certain functional
properties: Whereas the sensory aspects of pain states are con-
nected to the discrimination of the nociceptive stimuli, the affec-
tive aspects are related to motivation (e.g., avoidance behavior,
Cross 1994; Rainville et al. 1997). Similar results are provided by
recent psychological research on emotions: bodily perception and
action tendencies seem to be a part of emotional experience
(Damasio 1994; Frijda 1993).
The assumption that phenomenal experiences have functional
properties as their constituents is supported by some considera-
tions concerning the causal connection between mental states and
brain states. Take the case of memory. I assume that episodes of
subjective experience are causally connected to the memory
traces of these episodes in the brain. Moreover, the causal con-
nections have to be specific: Phenomenal states of a certain type
should reliably cause memory states of a corresponding type; oth-
erwise, I might remember a pain state as an experience of fear or
vice versa (Pauen 1999). Palmer himself seems to assume that dif-
ferent experiences differ as far as the associated brain events are
concerned, but these differences may be infinitely small. But re-
gardless of how big or small these differences may be, they have
to serve as an explanation of the functional differences that Palmer
himself acknowledges, thus constituting another connection be-
tween experience and functional properties.
Palmer objects that we cannot infer the actual phenomenal ex-
perience of a given subject from these variations as long as we do
not belong to the same equivalence-class. As far as emotions are
concerned, this objection is susceptible to the above argument
against transformations: If the experience differs, the relevant
functional properties should differ, too. But what about colors?
Following the first part of the target article, only three highly spe-
cific color transformations are possible. Now, because variations
of biological systems like the brain tend to follow a normal distri-
bution, we would expect a lot of small divergences from the aver-
age values and only a few big divergences, as they are required by
the possible transformations. So, if there are color transformations
at all, we should find different sorts of transformations, not only
those three that might pass through undetected by functional cri-
teria. Conversely, if we do not find detectable divergences then it
is highly unlikely that there are divergences at all.
So the conclusion would be that the gap between first- and
third-person accounts of phenomenal experience is far smaller
than Palmer expects it to be. First, even in the first-person per-
spective, changes in color experience can pass through unnoticed.
Second, the dissociation between experience and functional prop-
erties is not as strict as Palmer has it. Thus, it may turn out that
the “brick wall” between science and experience is not as impen-
etrable as Palmer thinks it is.
An externalist approach to understanding
color experience
Peter W. Ross
Department of Philosophy, California State Polytechnic University, Pomona,
Pomona, CA 91711. pross@pomona.edu
Abstract: Palmer demarcates the bounds of our understanding of color
experience by symmetries in the color space. He claims that if there are
symmetries, there can be functionally undetectable color transformations.
However, even if there are symmetries, Palmer’s support for the possibil-
ity of undetectable transformations assumes phenomenal internalism. Al-
ternatively, phenomenal externalism eliminates Palmer’s limit on our un-
derstanding of color experience.
Palmer argues that there are limits on a scientific understanding
of color experience on the basis of possible symmetries in the psy-
chological color space. He points out in his Figure 3A that it is pos-
sible that the red-green poles of the color space are reflectionally
symmetrical about the yellow-blue axis. Consequently, on the ba-
sis of the possibility of symmetries, Palmer purports to establish
the possibility of isomorphic color transformations. Because a
functionalist account of color experience drawn solely in terms of
qualitative relations cannot distinguish between isomorphic color
Commentary/Palmer: Color and consciousness
968
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1999) 22:6
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0140525X99292217
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Massachusetts Amherst, on 18 Nov 2019 at 06:30:53, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at

transformations, the possibility of such transformations indicates
that this account cannot provide an adequate objective character-
ization of particular color experiences (sect. 4, para. 2).
Palmer’s objection to functionalism does not rest merely on the
possibility of symmetries in the color space. Rather, Palmer’s ob-
jection is that functionalism cannot distinguish among certain pos-
sible color transformations. However, Palmer’s move from the
possibility of symmetries to that of functionally (and therefore be-
haviorally) indistinguishable color transformations relies on the
controversial assumption that color experience supervenes on
neurophysiological properties of perceivers (sect. 3.4, para. 2), a
view I will call phenomenal internalism.
For example, in section 1.3, paragraphs 4–5, having put for-
ward the possibility that the red-green poles of the color space are
reflectionally symmetrical, Palmer appeals to an argument offered
by Martine Nida-Rümelin (1996) in support of the possibility of
functionally indistinguishable red-green color transformation.
Nida-Rümelin points out that an explanation of red-green color
blindness indicates that there can be a switch in the photopig-
ments normally contained in the M and L cones, a condition called
pseudonormal vision (for further discussion of this condition, see
Boynton 1979, pp. 355–58). She then contends that pseudonor-
mal vision would be sufficient for functionally indistinguishable
red-green transformation, and that because instances of pseudo-
normal vision are probable, so are cases of such transformation.
However, this reasoning assumes internalism. Clearly, if inter-
nalism is correct, and color experience supervenes on neurophys-
iological properties, a switch in photopigments may be sufficient
for red-green color transformation. Such a transformation would
elude a functionalist account of color experience solely in terms of
qualitative relations.
At least some functionalist accounts (see, for example, Dretske
1995, chap. 5) take an alternative view, called phenomenal exter-
nalism, to the effect that color experiences supervene on relations
between neurophysiological properties of perceivers and colors,
where colors are identified with physical properties of physical ob-
jects. On this alternative view, the property red is a physical prop-
erty of objects, and a switch in neurophysiological properties
would not be sufficient for red-green transformation. Rather, this
physical property of being red would be encoded by different neu-
rophysiological properties between those with normal and those
with pseudonormal vision. Thus according to externalism, even if
there are symmetries in color space, Palmer’s support for the pos-
sibility of color transformations fails.
Furthermore, functionalists who are also externalists offer an
account of color experience that avoids Palmer’s objections. His
color room thought experiment (sect. 2.5) poses the question:
How can computational processes be sufficient for color experi-
ence? Palmer insists that even if the computational processes of
our visual systems can be mimicked in such a scenario, the quali-
tative aspect of color experience is surely left unaccounted for. He
thus concludes that functionalism fails.
However, because he assumes that functionalism must account
for this qualitative aspect solely in terms of internal properties of
perceivers, Palmer ignores the possibility that color experiences
are also determined by their relations to properties in the world.
Indeed, externalist functionalism points to just this possibility, ac-
counting for the qualitative aspect of color experience in terms of
its relations to physical properties of physical objects.
Moreover, Palmer’s claim that the qualitative aspect of color ex-
perience is “purely subjective” and scientifically intractable (sect.
2.1, para. 1) relies in internalism. Certain aspects of color experi-
ence – such as whether one has normal or pseudonormal vision –
are functionally indistinguishable. Neurophysiological investiga-
tion is necessary to determine whether one’s photopigments are
switched.
However, Palmer’s claim that the qualitative aspect of color ex-
perience is subjective simply assumes that color experiences su-
pervene on neurophysiological properties. On this assumption,
the possibility that the red-green poles of the color space are re-
flectionally symmetrical, along with the possibility of pseudo-
normal vision, are all that is needed to prove the possibility of
functionally indistinguishable color transformations. With the
possibility of such color transformations purportedly established,
Palmer concludes that we cannot have knowledge of the color ex-
periences of others who are neurophysiologically different from
us in relevant ways. He claims that the only way that we could have
such knowledge is to have first-person access to their internal
states. Lacking such access, the qualitative aspect of color experi-
ence is irrevocably subjective (sect. 3.6).
Externalism rejects the move from the possibility of symmetries
in the color space to that of functionally indistinguishable color
transformations, however, and thus eliminates Palmer’s limit on
our understanding of color experience. For, according to external-
ism, the qualitative aspect of experiences of red is not a property
of experience itself, but rather is identified with a physical property
of physical objects. By ignoring the externalist option, Palmer fails
to consider the possibility that we have knowledge of others’ color
experiences simply by having access to the same colors.
One machine among many
Barbara Saunders
Departments of Philosophy and Anthropology, University of Leuven, 3000
Leuven, Belgium. pop00127@mail.cc.kuleuven.ac.be
Abstract: In this commentary I point out that Palmer mislocates the
source of the inverted spectrum, misrepresents the nature of colour sci-
ence, and offers no reason for prefering one colour machine over another.
I conclude nonetheless that talk about “colour machines” is a step in the
right direction.
Though in Notes 1, 4, and 6 Palmer acknowledges the contentious
status of the assumptions, he asserts that the colour experiences
of humans would be “three-dimensional, would have to include six
unique reference experiences (for ‘unique colors’) at the poles of
three axes, would have to include an angular dimension for hue, a
radial dimension for saturation, and a linear dimension for light-
ness, and so forth” (sect. 2.3, para. 8). But if the assumptions are
contentious, what basis is there for the imperative? This applies to
the inverted spectrum, as well. Treated as unproblematic, it be-
comes a heuristic to determine “the constraints” on colour.
Locke, Godfather of Empiricism, is presented as the avatar of the
inverted spectrum. What Palmer does not seem to know is that
Locke generally got his colour ideas from Descartes (see Fodor
1981; Wendler 1996).1 On Descartes’ account, crudely speaking,
the spectrum is already in the head and the world is but an arbitrary
set of signs triggering the chromatic forms of thought (plenty of
room for inverted spectra here). As far as I can see, the unintended
consequence of getting Locke into the story is to get Descartes in
by the back door – despite the mantle of Empiricism. I suggest
Palmer come clean about the real precursor of his colour machine.
Throughout, Palmer’s bottom line remains the same. We do not
have “even a remotely plausible causal account of how experience
arises from neural events” (sect. 3.2), which does not mean that
such a theory is impossible in principle, but only that we have not
yet hit upon a serious candidate.” Even when Palmer is pressed to
conclude (given his own Cartesian assumptions) that qualia seem
to be beyond the reach of science, there is still the reassurance that
“specifying conscious mental states to the level of isomorphism is
nothing to be sneezed at.” He is aware that assessing “whether our
patterns of brain activity are the same is not as straightforward as
it might seem.” There is a lot we “do not yet know,” though “there
seems little reason to doubt that someday” we could find out “what
particular patterns of neural activity in what particular regions of
my brain correspond to my experiences of particular shades of red,
orange, green, or any other color.” So where does all this modesty
and boundless faith in the future get us?
Commentary/Palmer: Color and consciousness
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1999) 22:6
969
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0140525X99292217
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Massachusetts Amherst, on 18 Nov 2019 at 06:30:53, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at

Palmer has an idea: Shift authority from troublesome, messy, 
inchoate, and as yet unknowable “experience” to an eminently
knowable simulacrum – a colour machine. What Palmer does not
tell us is that the dominant models of colour perception are al-
ready colour machines – automaton models of colour perception.
Thus when he posits “what is known” about the eye, neurons and
so forth, as natural, he fundamentally misrepresents the state of
the art and its relation to his colour machine. His colour machine
is just one colour machine among many.
Why the preference for this machine rather than another
(other than that it captures a particular dominant ideology)?
Why not use instead a “Landometer” or “retinex machine”? Ac-
cording to Land (1986), a colour patch in a field of vision can be
defined in terms of a triple of numbers representing the three
relative lightnesses of this patch as “recorded” by the three types
of retinal cones. Using physical luminance as a measure of phe-
nomenal lightness, an instrument can compute the triples of rel-
ative lightnesses after screening the whole field of vision, and
measuring local lightness on three scales (in accordance with the
absorption properties of the three retinal cones). If we were to
decide to ascribe to this instrument the capacity “to observe
chartreuse” and the other colour shades (putting aside the ques-
tion of qualia), it is because the results of its computations are
first calibrated relative to human observations and then proven
to correlate well with further human observations. At every stage
of the investigation it is manifest agreement on what is similar
and what is not, that sets the standards (reasoning about animal
studies is similar).
Palmer could also say of the idealised Landometer: “The causal
isomorphism of its color representations to those of normal
trichromats is sufficient to guarantee that it cannot be distin-
guished from a normal trichromat by behavioral means, but not
that it has color experiences of any sort” (sect. 4, para. 5). What
distinguishes Palmer’s colour machine from the Landometer?
Perhaps the general point is that whatever model fits the data
(whatever the data) it will have more structure and fewer symme-
tries. With fewer symmetries, fewer “inverted spectra.” You can
find it all in Descartes, too.
But for the original “sceptical” argument (provided it makes
sense at all – which is does not), all this is irrelevant. No matter
how many symmetries there are, it is always possible to suggest
that observed behaviour and all scientific measurements under-
determine “raw feel” (i.e., the qualia-aspect) – or to suggest that
we are all brains in a vat. If Palmer’s colour machine is at best one
of the many models that fit a limited amount of decontextualised
data, what is all the fuss about?
The unquestioned acceptance of the “colour-machine” defini-
tion of colour and its exploitation by successions of theories pre-
supposes that the processes of “seeing” (of which “colour”-like
“space” is taken as a pars pro toto) has erroneously been conflated
with the scientific method itself. A precursor to the strategy is
Newton’s setting up of the experimentum crucis on the model of
the camera obscura and of the homunculus role of the spectator
(not that I am suggesting this particular variant is still held). The
moral is that if colour science were remotely interested in its own
history it might learn that it merely repeats itself. From Plato’s in-
troextromission theory, to Bacon’s rainbow, Descartes’ and New-
ton’s prisms, Lockean innate ideas, the Young-Maxwell-
Helmholtz versus Hering controversy to the contemporary
squabble between the objectivists and subjectivists, nothing much
has changed.
Having said this, however, let me conclude on a positive note. I
am delighted that cognitive scientists have finally hit on a decent
vocabulary. For some time it has seemed downright unfair to go
round the world with a machine model of “colour vision” improp-
erly described as “natural” (in the head), fitting putative percep-
tuolinguistic units to it and slotting them into a set of evolutionary
pigeon-holes (e.g., in the Kay & Berlin 1997, pp. 196–201 World
Color Survey). It is much more honest to talk about colour ma-
chines.
Computation, levels of abstraction, and the
intrinsic character of experience
Jürgen Schröder
Hanse Institute for Advanced Study, Lehmkuhlenbusch 4, 27753
Delmenhorst, Germany. jschroel@urz-mail.urz.uni-heidelberg.de
Abstract: Palmer’s color room argument is first contrasted with a differ-
ent argument by Tim Maudlin against the sufficiency thesis of strong AI.
This thesis turns out to be false and hence we need to determine the rel-
evant supervenience base of phenomenal consciousness. That could be
done by causal theories and intraindividual experiments. Finally, even if
we cannot explain the intrinsic character of conscious states, we may be
able to know what the experience of another person is like.
1. The color room argument. To answer whether a material
system does have color experiences in virtue of the computations
it performs, Palmer adapts Searle’s Chinese room to the case of
color experience. It is not clear, however, what we should conclude
from Palmer’s color room thought experiment. On the one hand,
he seems to take it as a proof that performing computations of
whatever sort and complexity is not sufficient to provide the com-
puting system with any experience. On the other hand, Palmer
concedes that there is a straightforward translation of the various
objections that have been raised against Searle’s Chinese room ar-
gument into objections against the color room. For example, the
systems reply would hold that the whole system has a color expe-
rience, even if the processing part of it does not. Searle tried to re-
but this objection by assuming that his processing agent could in-
ternalize all the rules and symbols so that he could speak Chinese
fluently without understanding a single word of what he himself
would say (Searle 1980). At this point the defender of strong AI
can say that the agent would either experience understanding or
there would be a second stream of consciousness in the agent to
which he had no access. Because the status of Searle’s argument
seems to be problematic, any argument that has the same struc-
ture, like Palmer’s color room argument, is equally problematic.
Fortunately, there is another argument that has been con-
structed by Maudlin (1989) and seems much more efficient at re-
futing the thesis of strong AI concerning phenomenal conscious-
ness. Because his argument is rather complex I will give only its
gist and refer the reader to Maudlin’s article for the details.
The essential idea is that to perform a nontrivial computation
(excluding, for example, computations that assign a constant out-
put to every input), a machine has to have a physical structure that
guarantees that the state transitions specified by the machine table
would be made if the current input were different, that is, the ma-
chine has to have a counterfactual supporting structure. If the
structure of the machine does not guarantee these transitions, it
does not run the program described by the machine table. Now
Maudlin imagines two machines that display the same physical ac-
tivity during a time interval t0-tn. Only one of them is running a
program p, however, whereas the other is not because it lacks the
necessary structure. If we suppose now that phenomenal con-
sciousness supervenes on the physical activity in both machines,
then if one has a certain experience the other must have it, too.
But according to strong AI only one of them, namely, the one that
runs the program, is conscious. So there is a contradiction be-
tween the supervenience thesis and the thesis that running a cer-
tain program is sufficient for being conscious. The supervenience
thesis is not up for grabs for the defenders of strong AI because
they need it in some of their own thought experiments (Maudlin
1989, p. 427); therefore, the conclusion must be that the suffi-
ciency thesis is false.
A great virtue of this argument, in my view, is that it separates
the question of the adequacy of computationalism from the issue
of functionalism. What it shows is that computationalism is an un-
satisfactory approach to phenomenal consciousness. It does not
show that functionalism is equally inadequate, for it might well be
that consciousness is a matter of the pattern of causal interaction
Commentary/Palmer: Color and consciousness
970
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1999) 22:6
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0140525X99292217
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Massachusetts Amherst, on 18 Nov 2019 at 06:30:53, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at

in the brain. Two machines may implement the same machine
table although the pattern of causal interaction of their physical
states may be different. Computation is a matter of a physical ac-
tivity’s taking place in a system that has the right dispositional
properties to support a certain machine table.
Having excluded the computational level as too abstract a level
for the supervenience of consciousness, one can ask: What is the
relevant level of abstraction on which consciousness supervenes?
Is it the less abstract level of causal interaction? Or does the causal
interaction have to take place in a certain medium, for example,
in the medium of electricity? Or does experience even require that
certain materials like the ones to be found in nerve cells be in-
volved? It is at this point that the distinction between causal and
correlational theories becomes important.
2. Causal and correlational theories. The first task in deter-
mining the relevant level of abstraction is to determine which
parts of the brain are involved in conscious experience. When
these parts are identified we have correlations between activity in
these parts and certain types of experiences, for example, activity
in a certain part of the visual cortex plus activity in certain parts of
the frontal lobes and color experience. As soon as we can be rea-
sonably sure about these locations we could attempt to determine
the relevant level of abstraction by systematically intervening into
the brain processes occurring at these locations. However, the sort
of intervention needed would be much more massive than the ap-
plication of drugs or the stimulation of nerve cells by electrodes.
It would consist of a temporary substitution for brain cells of some
other material or a substitution of mechanical energy for electric-
ity. Outside the clinical context where such interventions could re-
store a certain aspect of experience they would be prohibited for
moral reasons.
Now suppose that the relevant level of abstraction was deter-
mined and that moreover we know which differences at this level
make a phenomenal difference and which do not. We would then
have a causal theory telling us who belongs to the same equiva-
lence class of color experiencers. Those people belong to the same
class whose brain activities are the same relative to the descrip-
tions picked out by our causal theory.
Nevertheless, this causal theory would not explain why our ex-
periences have the intrinsic characters they have; it would only be
able to explain their relational structure. So, in contrast to the case
of DNA, the explanatory gap would still be unbridged. The theory
would not explain the intrinsic character of our experiences be-
cause the connection between a physical activity described at a
certain level of abstraction and a structureless intrinsic phenome-
nal property still appears to be arbitrary. The reason for this ap-
pearance of arbitrariness is precisely that the phenomenal prop-
erty is taken to be atomic or structureless.
3. Explaining and fixing the quality of an experience. There is
a certain indeterminacy in Palmer’s target article concerning the
difference between the explanation and the determination of the
intrinsic character of an experience. As just noted, a causal theory
does not enable us to explain this intrinsic character. But is it also
true that it does not enable us to know what the intrinsic charac-
ter of an experience of another person is like? The knowledge
Palmer is interested in is phenomenal knowledge, knowledge that
consists in the capacity to imagine or to have an experience with
the same intrinsic character. To have such knowledge one must be
able to have the same experience and to have the same experience
one must have the same kind of physical activity in one’s brain rel-
ative to one’s causal theory. Because there may be more than one
equivalence class of experiencers, the intrinsic character of an ex-
perience of an arbitrary person would only be determined for an-
other person if both belonged to the same equivalence class. So
instead of the subjectivity barrier that is supposed to exist between
any two individuals, we have an “equivalence class barrier,” which
exists between the various equivalence classes. The latter barrier
does not owe its existence to the inadequacy of objective mea-
surement, however, but to the fact that two persons have differ-
ent physical activities in their brains (again relative to the best
causal theory) when they are confronted with the same physical
stimulus.
Consciousness and introspection: 
How we get to know the inner world
John Smythies
Brain and Perception Laboratory, Center for Brain and Cognition, University
of California at San Diego, La Jolla, CA 92093-0109; and Department of
Neuropsychiatry, Institute of Neurology, London, England.
smythies@psy.ucsd.edu
Abstract: We can in fact obtain scientific information about the contents
of consciousness by the methods of introspectionist psychology. An exam-
ple comes from the author’s work on the stroboscopic patterns and from
the way psychedelic drugs alter color perception.
Palmer claims that we can have no scientific knowledge about our
experiences, only about the relations between them. Scientific
knowledge relating to consciousness and experience, he says, can
only be obtained by studying behavior or by studying the brain.
I would disagree. We can obtain valid information about our ex-
periences by examining them (e.g., the contents of the visual field)
using introspective techniques under specific circumstances. For
example, many years ago I spent two years studying the strobo-
scopic phenomena (Smythies 1959/1960). These are the geomet-
rical patterns (e.g., grids, checkerboards, families of concentric
circles or parabolas, mazes, stars, etc.) that fill the visual field if the
retina is stimulated by a stroboscopic light flashing at 4–16 Hz.
Using this technique I discovered a large quantity of facts relating
to this natural phenomenon that did not depend on either a study
of behavior or neurophysiological methods. Certainly I could only
study the patterns induced in other people from what they said to
me. But I could study my own very similar patterns first hand. At
this point I felt it was pointless to give way to philosophical doubts
as to whether the patterns seen by my experimental subjects were
or were not exactly like or only somewhat like mine. I took more
interest in finding out the detail of the forms, colors, and move-
ments of the reported patterns themselves. These phenomena
throw light on certain basic aspects of how the visual mechan-
isms work. The cortical mechanisms convert the intermittent tem-
poral pattern of stimulation received at the retina into complex
spatial patterns that fill the visual field in consciousness. Stwertka 
(1993) has suggested that these patterns originate in the nonlin-
ear (chaotic) networks in the brain. Similar introspective methods
now play a large role in contemporary visual science. I do not see
the point in claiming that it is impossible, for philosophical rea-
sons, to study the contents of private experience when introspec-
tionist psychologists such as Gregory (1981) and Ramachandran
and Blakeslee (1998) are doing just that all the time.
In view of this, I would suggest that there is no need to postu-
late any basic “subjectivity barrier” or “isomorphism constraint.”
Phenomenal events simply have the properties that we can ob-
serve them to have. I have argued elsewhere (Smythies 1994a;
1999) that, because these phenomenal events that make up the
content of consciousness clearly have different properties from
the brain events that give rise to them, then, by Leibnitz’s Law
(Russell 1918), they cannot be identical to these brain events. One
rival theory, first put forward by Werner Heisenberg (1958, pp.
106, 179) – the theory of mind-brain complementarity — does not
suffer from this difficulty.
Palmer states that we do not currently have a glimmer of a
causal theory of how a particular form of brain activity actually
produces experience. The theory of mind-brain complementarity
would deny that this relationship is causal. Just as an electron may
behave either as a wave or a particle, depending on the mode of
observation, so a brain may appear as either a collection of neu-
rons or as a collection of sensations, depending on whether it is
Commentary/Palmer: Color and consciousness
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1999) 22:6
971
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0140525X99292217
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Massachusetts Amherst, on 18 Nov 2019 at 06:30:53, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at

being observed by a neurosurgeon or by itself. To ask, “how does
a pattern of neuronal activity in the brain produce conscious sen-
sations?” is no more legitimate, under this theory, than is the ques-
tion, “how does an electron as a wave produce the effects seen if
we examine an electron as a particle?” I have reviewed other com-
petitive theories elsewhere (Smythies 1994b).
Second, Palmer says that a basic analysis of vision reveals that
what we have are experiences of color, for example, “redness.” I
think it is more accurate to say that we have experiences of col-
ored (e.g., red) patches commonly known as sensations. These
may be compounded into visual phenomenal objects as in normal
vision, or free of such objects as in the case of after images, eidetic
images, and hallucinations. They may also form the “space” and
“film” colors that people recovering from cortical lesions experi-
ence.
Palmer suggests that pharmacologists might be able to produce
drugs that alter colors and cause colors to be experienced as
sounds. Such drugs already exist, namely, the psychedelic drugs
like mescaline and LSD. They do not turn red into green, it is true,
but they do produce supersaturated colors, for example, a red
more red than any red normally experienced. Sensory isolation ex-
periments can also induce the experience of “superblack.” Psy-
chedelic drugs also induce synesthesias in which primitive sensa-
tions are experienced, which are neither visual nor auditory but
somehow a compound of both. These drugs induce remarkable
changes in shape and movement perception. For example, still ob-
jects normally develop complex movements, or a moving object is
seen as a series of still ones strung out along the line of motion.
One minor point: Identical twins have far from identical brains
(sect. 3.4): For example, they show extensive differences in the
pattern of their cortical gyri and sulci.
Sensory holism and functionalism
Joseph Thomas Tolliver
Department of Philosophy, University of Arizona, Tucson, AZ 85721.
tolliver@u.arizona.edu
w3.arizona.edu/~phil/faculty.html
Abstract: I defend the possibility of a functional account of the intrinsic
qualities of sensory experience against the claim that functional charac-
terization can only describe such qualities to the level of isomorphism of
relational structures on those qualities. A form sensory holism might be
true concerning the phenomenal, and this holism would account for some
antifunctionalist intuition evoked by inverted spectrum and absent qualia
arguments. Sensory holism is compatible with the correctness of func-
tionalism about the phenomenal.
I believe that functionalism provides the correct account of the na-
ture of mental states. The functionalist is committed to the claim
that mental state properties, such as believing, desiring, intend-
ing, or experiencing, are functional properties. Functional prop-
erties are relational properties understood in terms of the role
their possessors play in the behavior of some system. Functional-
ism seems an ideal framework for the analysis of the phenomenal
properties of color experience, for phenomenal properties appear
to be relational properties. The spatial models, which, as Palmer
notes, are so apt for the description of color experience, are rela-
tional (sect. 1.1 and 1.2). Each kind of color experience is seen as
a position in a structure of relative similarity and difference. Hav-
ing an experience of red is more like having an experience of or-
ange than it is like having an experience of yellow. It is also more
like having an experience of pink than it is like having one of neu-
tral gray. For the functionalist, the similarities and differences
among types of experiences depicted in the spatial models are sim-
ilarities and differences among the functional roles of the neural
states that embody those experience types.
Palmer offers two objections to this view, one based on the pos-
sibility of absent qualia (this is the “color machine” argument and
the “color room” argument), and the other based on the possibil-
ity of quale transformation or substitution (these arguments are
based on the isomorphism constraint). Neither shows that func-
tionalism concerning the phenomenal properties of color experi-
ence is false. The mistake is the same in both cases: The arguments
assume that the functionalist is committed to the possibility of col-
ors, as we experience them, being defined in terms of the relations
of similarity and difference that constitute the relational structure
of the color space. The functionalist is not so committed if colors,
as we experience them, are not so limited. Perhaps colors are de-
fined not just in terms of their relations of similarity and differ-
ence to other colors, but also in terms of their relations of similar-
ity and difference to other sounds, scents, tastes, tactile qualities,
and so forth.
In support of this possibility, one can point to the fact that peo-
ple frequently resort to qualitative metaphors to characterize a
quality in some sensory modality. Sounds are said to be high or low
(appeal to spatial sensations) or soft and sweet (appeal to tactile
and gustatory sensations). Colors can be warm or cool (tactile sen-
sations) or loud (auditory) or vibrant (tactile again). Some combi-
nations of colors can be discordant or inharmonious (auditory).
One can dismiss these analogies as mere metaphors conditioned
by surrounding cultural or linguistic conventions. But one might
regard them as hints at the underlying nature of the qualities
themselves. What they hint at is the possibility that both their in-
tramodal and intermodal relations of similarity and difference to
other sensory qualities determine the nature of all sensory expe-
rience. I call this possibility, “Sensory Holism.”
If Sensory Holism is correct, then it is easy to understand why
the color machine and the color room do not contain color expe-
riences. They only embody a part of the relational structure rele-
vant to determining the quality of color experience. What makes
an experience of red what it is intrinsically includes the way it is
similar to and different from an experience of the sound of a trum-
pet, or the taste of loganberries, or the feel of crushed velvet. Ac-
cording to this version of functionalism, a color machine or color
room whose internal states embodied all of these elements of the
relational structure of color experience would have color experi-
ences. We need to complicate the examples to determine whether
people not in the grip of functionalist dogma would agree that
such devices would appreciate colors in just the ways we do.
The intrinsic qualities of experiences are thought by Palmer to
lie beyond the “subjectivity barrier.” All that a functionalist char-
acterization of those experiences can capture is their relational
structure. But individuals whose inner perceptual states have the
same relational structure might differ in the intrinsic quality of
their perceptual experiences, or their experiences might lack in-
trinsic qualities altogether. Palmer alleges that we know this be-
cause we know that (1) there can be physical differences between
persons that make no difference to the relational structure of their
experiences; and (2) some changes at the subisomorphism level
within single subjects result in detectable changes in the intrinsic
character of the subject’s experience (sect. 3.5). Of course, what
we do not know is whether these two are possible together, that is,
whether there are subisomorphic changes that could result in a
change in color experience that the person could detect, but let us
leave this aside.
I want to focus on the notion of a subjectivity barrier. If there is
such a barrier, the subject might also be on the wrong side of it
along with the behavioral scientist. It is often accepted, and for
good reasons, that in undergoing experiences we acquire more
knowledge about the intrinsic quality of our own experiences than
anyone else could possibly have, but there are reasons for sus-
pecting that this might be false (or at least less true than we think).
The first reason is the commonplace fact that we have such great
difficulty in characterizing our experiences and can have only as
much success as we do by resorting to the sorts of intermodal com-
parisons I noted earlier. Consider that the reason this is so might
be that each sensory quality is a compound constructed from a
limited set of sensory universals that are the basic protophenom-
Commentary/Palmer: Color and consciousness
972
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1999) 22:6
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0140525X99292217
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Massachusetts Amherst, on 18 Nov 2019 at 06:30:53, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at

enal1 units of a combinatorial system that generates all of the sen-
sory qualities. There do seem to be some qualities that are no-
ticeable in many different sensory modalities, including bright-
ness, intensity, and warmth. Many sensory qualities in different
sensory domains can be compared with respect to how bright or
dark they are. This is certainly the case with colors and sounds.
Warmth is a prominent feature of certain tactile sensations, but it
is also apparent in certain colors and sounds. Imagine that these
cross-modal comparisons are caused by each sensory quality be-
ing a structure in which different sensory universals are mixed to-
gether in different amounts and in different ways. Imagine also
that the sensory universals are never themselves presented in their
pure unmixed form. Sensory experience would be made up of a
collection of basic elements that are not themselves accessible to
introspection. This raises the possibility of variations within a sin-
gle person over time in the nature of the sensory universals that
constitute the intrinsic qualities of his experiences (e.g., differ-
ences in the protophenomenal ground of bright/dark variations
among his qualities), which would be undetectable by the person
himself. The reason I raise this possibility is that I see no reason
the sensory universals should not be functionally characterizable,
that is, defined in terms of the contribution they make to create a
system of sensory differentia.
NOTE
1. David Chalmers introduced the notion of protophenomenal prop-
erties in his book The conscious mind (Chalmers 1996). They are funda-
mental nonphysical properties that subserve phenomenal properties. My
use of the term “protophenomenal” is very different from his. The most
important difference is that I do not assume that protophenomena are fun-
damental in the explanatory order.
Whatever seems right to me is right
J. van Brakel
Institute of Philosophy, University of Leuven, 3000 Leuven, Belgium.
p6679000@mail.cc.kuleuven.ac.be
Abstract: It is argued that given the task Palmer sets himself, there are no
constraints on his colour experiences whatsoever.
Qualia seem to some an intractable obstacle to cognitive science.
It is not clear what Palmer’s discussions about inverted spectra
adds to this worn-out issue (Block 1980; Stillings et al. 1987). At
the bottom of Palmer’s interest in inverted spectra is his meta-
physical belief, nowhere justified, that statements like “we have
access to no one’s experiences but our own” (sect. 2.1, para. 3)
make sense (in the relevant sense of internal experiences being
entities with identity conditions). He says (sect. 1.1, last para.):
“Because these are private events, any differences between yours
and mine can be assessed only indirectly through our publicly ob-
servable behavior, as Wittgenstein (1953) argued so forcefully.”
But what Wittgenstein actually argued so forcefully is that this talk
of private events is nonsense, because, in the relevant sense, there
are no private events. This way of talking was introduced long ago
in philosophy and unfortunately, most scientists (and philosophers
under the spell of cognitive science) are still stuck with it. Palmer
may say to himself: “In the future I will call only this kind of ex-
perience.” To which Wittgenstein would reply: “Whatever is go-
ing to seem right to Palmer is right. And that only means that here
we cannot talk about ‘right.’ Being under the impression that you
are following a rule (of correctly or incorrectly labelling an expe-
rience S) is not sufficient to be truly following a rule.”
Palmer assumes “that both you and I have the same set of color
experiences,” and then asks “whether they can be shown to be ‘dif-
ferently arranged,’ so to speak” (sect. 1, para. 3). But what is the
use of this exercise if there is no scientific or philosophical basis
for the assumptions from which he starts? Setting up pseudophilo-
sophical arguments amply spiced with suitably chosen scientific
lore may provide enticing brain teasers for readers of BBS, but no
justification is given that the isomorphism constraint of these
block worlds and their epiphenomenal qualia are modelling any-
thing but “self-isomorphy.”
Why go with Palmer’s metaphysical intuition that it makes sense
to say things like “I alone have access to these experiences” (sect.
3.3, para. 4)? Why not follow up on his intuition that “I myself
would be hard-pressed to claim, for example, that it seems ‘better’
or ‘more natural’ to me that there is a basic color term (BCT) for
light reds (PINK) than for light greens, independent of the fact
that my language actually has a BCT for light reds and not for light
greens” (sect. 1.4, para. 14)? That is an intuition one could build
on. Why not also say: “I myself would be hard-pressed to claim,
for example, that it seems ‘better’ or ‘more natural’ to me that
green is a unique hue and not iban, waln or pk, independent of
the fact that I have been brought up with the idea that green is a
unique hue.” As to iban, waln, and pk consider Bulmer’s (1968)
report on Karam “colour” words:
Leaf surfaces of Munsell rating 5GY/4/4 were variously identified as
mosb (“dark”), waln (“yellow” [roughly co-extensive with pk]) and iban
(“succulent green”), depending on the context of comparison with other
leaves, stems or other vegetal parts. . . . As applied to fruit (banana, pa-
paws) it [i.e., pk] covers the Munsell ratings approximately 5YR-5Y6-8/
7-8; as applied to human skin, approximately 2.5-5YR4-5/4-6, which
would normally be described as gs [“dull brown, green, or olive”] or gac
[“dirt or mud”] in the case of fruit skins.
If we like the sort of games played by the friends of qualia and
inverted spectra we can also play it in the language of the Karam
people. How do I know (being a Karam speaker) that another
Karam speaker’s experiences of iban and pk are not reversed com-
pared with mine? We might both space waln and pk on equal dis-
tance on some psychologist’s just noticeable difference (jnd)-
scale, but what does this say about our true experiences of waln
and pk? How would Palmer’s account of distinguishing the nature
of colour experiences from their structural interrelations apply to
Karam “colours”? Already raising the question strikes me as non-
sense and probably Palmer would agree, because he might con-
sider quoting such esoteric examples utterly irrelevant.
So let us stay home and take for granted that colour is colour
and that is what we should be talking about. Let us ask what local
support there is for one of Palmer’s more mundane assumptions.
Consider his description of the colour circle with red/green and
yellow/blue at opposite poles of orthogonal diameters. This seems
plausible to Palmer (and many of his readers). But why? The
colour circle in Newton’s Opticks (1952) does not confirm these
insights. But there is probably no reason to trust people like New-
ton. There must exist some sophisticated experiments that explain
why we should prefer Palmer’s colour circle over that of Newton.
And there are. Hardin, referring to a proximity analysis of quali-
tative similarity judgments of colours says (1988, p. 42): “Notice
particularly that the unique hues . . . are spaced about 90 degrees
apart.” However, the picture he presents would fit the painter’s
colour wheel better (with the primaries yellow, blue, and red
placed 1208 apart). In the colour hexagon used by printers, 6 pri-
maries (magenta-red, violet-blue, cyan-blue, green, yellow, and
orange-red) are “naturally” placed 608 apart – a variant of the nu-
merous colour circles from the past that had as opposites red/
green, blue/orange, and yellow/violet (Gage 1993). Indow (1988)
provides data spacing the 5 Munsell primaries red, purple, blue,
green, and yellow about 728 apart. Why is it not equally plausible
that the Munsell system, which allegedly is based on jnd’s, con-
firms that the five primary Munsell colours are equally spaced? All
these representations of the “isomorphy constraints inherent” in
the colour circle look equally “natural.” Perhaps it is wiser for
Palmer to conclude, given the task he has set himself, that there
are no constraints on his colour experiences whatsoever.
Commentary/Palmer: Color and consciousness
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1999) 22:6
973
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0140525X99292217
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Massachusetts Amherst, on 18 Nov 2019 at 06:30:53, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at

Out of sight but not out of mind:
Isomorphism and absent qualia
Robert Van Gulick
Department of Philosophy, Syracuse University, Syracuse, NY 12344-1170.
rnvangul@syr.edu
Abstract: The isomorphism constraint places plausible limits on the use
of third-person evidence to explain color experience but poses no difficulty
for functionalists; they themselves argue for just such limits. Palmer’s ab-
sent qualia claim is supported by neither the Color Machine nor Color
Room examples. The nature of color experience depends on relations ex-
ternal to the color space, as well as internal to it.
Palmer proposes the isomorphism constraint as a limit on what be-
havioral evidence can show about the nature of color. Third-per-
son data, whether behavioral or neural, can tell us about the rela-
tional structure of color experiences but not about their intrinsic
natures. Insofar as alternative isomorphic sets of experiences can
have the same relational structure, behavioral evidence can im-
pose no finer constraint.
Palmer views this result as raising an objection to functionalism,
which aims to classify mental states in terms of their functional
roles. Given the isomorphism constraint, the intrinsic nature of ex-
periences seems to escape the functionalist’s net. He writes:
These nonrelational aspects of experience lie, by definition, outside the
domain of functionalism; they are underconstrained by relations among
mental states. It seems that the failure of functionalism to provide an
account of these aspects should be counted against its claim of fully
specifying the nature of mind. It does not seem to be able to do the
whole job. (sect. 4)
As a functionalist – whether “card-carrying” or not (sect. 2.4) –
I find this “objection” puzzling. I agree that behavioral evidence
can reveal only the relational structure of color experiences and
not their intrinsic character. But I do not see that as an objection,
indeed it is a bit of common wisdom among functionalists, going
back a quarter century or more (Shoemaker 1975). Functionalists
also long ago accepted the possibility of “alien qualia,” that is, color
experiences totally distinct from our own but sharing the same re-
lational structure (Shoemaker 1981). I suppose some hypothetical
functionalists might be taken aback by their inability to do the
“whole job,” but most actual functionalists have been well aware
of just such limits for a long time. Moreover, some of them go a
step further to show that a functionalist theory of understanding
predicts and explains just such third-person limits on the effabil-
ity of intrinsic qualitative character (Van Gulick 1985; 1991). If so,
rather than posing a problem for functionalism, such limits pro-
vide further confirmation of its truth.
There is, however, an issue about which Palmer and function-
alists surely disagree: the possibility of absent qualia or color zom-
bies. Palmer moves beyond the possibility of inverted qualia to the
stronger claim that two systems, only one of which has experi-
ences, might nonetheless share all their relevant relational struc-
ture (sect. 2.4). The weaker (inverted) possibility does not by it-
self entail the stronger (absent) possibility (Shoemaker 1975;
1981); additional argument is needed. Palmer imagines a “color
machine” that processes light as our human visual system does (at
least to the level of computational sameness) and responds to col-
ored stimuli as people typically do. He argues that the machine’s
relational structure would be isomorphic to that of our own color
experiences. Thus he concludes that relational facts alone cannot
exclude the possibility of color zombies. He also asserts that func-
tionalists (at least “card-carrying” ones) “would claim that such a
machine does have color experiences purely by virtue of the com-
putations it performs,” a claim he characterizes as seeming “un-
likely to readers not in the grip of functionalism” (sect. 2.4).
However, few if any functionalists would regard the color ma-
chine as having experiences, nor does anything about the theory
support such a view. The machine may share some computational
structure with our visual processing system and perhaps some
links to a “verbal” output system, but no one supposes that those
modules suffice to produce a system with conscious experiences
of color or of anything else. Any plausible functional model of an
experience will be far broader and more holistic. Visual experience
occurs as the experience of a conscious subject or self perceiving
its place in a world of visually presented objects. It is likely to re-
quire the globally integrated activity of many different systems
throughout the brain. How the outputs of various sensory path-
ways get integrated into a conscious percept is as yet not well 
understood, but it is a subject of intense neurophysiological in-
vestigation and offers hope for the sort of causal theory of con-
sciousness that Palmer contrasts with merely correlational ones.
Whatever the outcome of those empirical studies, the philo-
sophical point is clear. Functionalism from its inception has been
holistic in its view of mind and especially of consciousness. Thus
the imagined “color machine” does not even come close to satis-
fying the conditions a functionalist would find plausible. Nor
would the machine’s verbal output satisfy the functional condi-
tions to count as “naming,” “judging” or “agreeing.” Despite its su-
perficial verbal similarity to our responses to the same stimuli, the
machine’s outputs lack the broad context of other behaviors (both
verbal and nonverbal) within which they would need to stand to
count as genuine speech acts of the relevant sort. Contrary to
Palmer’s claim, no functionalist would regard the color machine
as a subject of color experiences.
The same point applies mutatitis mutandis to his Color Room
example (sect. 2.5). Palmer is right that satisfying the conditions
in his example would not suffice to produce color experiences. But
he is wrong to claim that performing the limited range of opera-
tions in the Room would “mean that you have satisfied the usual
functionalist criteria for claiming that you have . . . color percep-
tion and naming” (sect. 2.5). Here, too, considerations of holism
and context would make those limited actions far from sufficient
for a functionalist.1
The take-away moral would seem to be that one must consider
both external and internal relational structure. Given his concerns
about the possibility of inversion, Palmer focuses on intraspatial
relations within the color space. But the relations that the color
space bears to other organized spaces within our mental and rep-
resentational domain are just as important to understanding its
role in conscious experience. We do not simply experience colors.
We experience a world of objects with colored surfaces presented
to us at a given time, place, and context within a meaningful world.
Sometimes when philosophers talk about the phenomenal nature
of experience they use that word interchangeably with “qualita-
tive” and refer only to the supposed raw feels of experience. That
is one legitimate way to use the word, but there is an alternative
use that owes more to Kant and to phenomenology that empha-
sizes the globally meaningful organization of the world as we meet
it in experience of the phenomenal world. Any functionalist or re-
lational theory of consciousness will need to take account of the
larger overall context if it is to understand color experiences as
color experiences.
NOTES
1. Confusion may arise from the fact that when we explain, we do not
feel the need to spell out all the assumed background context. If I say you
can fly to California tomorrow if you have an open return ticket, I do not
need to add that of course you need a functioning airline with planes, pi-
lots, check-in agents, and a running computer system willing to accept
your open ticket. You do need all those things, but we do not feel the need
to list them. Similarly, a functionalist discussing one particular aspect of
mind (e.g., color naming) may focus on the specific features most relevant
to that particular feature without bothering to mention that those condi-
tions must be fulfilled within a much larger context of organization and be-
havior (e.g., those necessary for being a genuine language user able to
name things at all.)
Commentary/Palmer: Color and consciousness
974
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1999) 22:6
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0140525X99292217
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Massachusetts Amherst, on 18 Nov 2019 at 06:30:53, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at

The possibility of subisomorphic 
experiential differences
Christopher D. Viger
Center for Cognitive Studies, Tufts University, Medford, MA 02155-7059.
cviger01@emerald.tufts.edu
ase.tufts.edu/cogstud/mainpage.htm
Abstract: Palmer’s main intuition pump, the “color machine,” greatly un-
derestimates the complexity of a system isomorphic in color experience to
humans. The neuroscientific picture of this complexity makes it clear that
the brain actively produces our experiences by processes that science can
investigate, thereby supporting functionalism and leaving no (color) room
for a passive observer to witness subisomorphic experiential differences.
Palmer distinguishes simulating color experiences from actually
having them by imagining a “‘color machine’ that actually pro-
cesses information from light in the same way as people do and
that responds as people typically do.” (sect. 2.4, para. 3, my em-
phasis). Palmer’s thought experiment relies on his intuition that “it
would not be very difficult” (sect. 2.4, para. 3) to construct such a
machine. Palmer even offers a schematic; a few mirrors, prisms,
cardboard masks, photocells, and computational circuits are up 
to the task. But the plausibility of such a construction being suffi-
cient derives from grossly underestimating the task. People re-
spond to colors with incredible subtlety and variety, including
changes of mood, preference selections, and aesthetic judgments.
On Palmer’s own terms the “color machine” must respond like-
wise. But once the task is made clear it is also clear just how diffi-
cult it would be to construct such a machine, as any AI researcher
will attest. All Palmer offers is the “front end” of such a machine,
which might indeed not be too difficult to construct – but no func-
tionalist would declare that our eyes and, say, V1 (the “front end”
of our visual system) have experiences. It is only by various mech-
anisms playing a functional role within a very complex system that
experience can arise at all, and in such cases it is the entire system
that is the experiencer. Only by presupposing qualia is there any
motivation to attribute experiences to subsystems, which is the
flaw with the color room thought experiment. The subsystem in
the color room is not the locus of experience. Once we expose the
requisite complexity for a system to be experientially isomorphic
to humans vis-à-vis color experience, the force of Palmer’s thought
experiment evaporates. Of course, the kind of machine he imag-
ines would not have color experiences. It has nowhere near the
complexity required to have experiences of any sort.
Consider the neuroscientific account of coming to have a color
experience. “When an individual cone absorbs a photon, its elec-
trical response is always the same, whatever the wavelength of the
photon” (Kandel et al. 1995, p. 456). Individual cones are more
likely to absorb photons of particular wavelengths depending on
the pigment they contain, but the response of an individual cone
does not tell the brain anything about color, because the response
is stochastic. It is only the comparative strength of the responses
by each entire subsystem of cones containing a particular pigment,
subsystems large enough to exploit the stochastic responses of in-
dividual cones, by which color can be discriminated. “For exam-
ple, if an object reflected primarily light of a long wavelength, the
response in the longer-wavelength cone system would be stronger
than the response in the other system, and higher processing cen-
ters would interpret the object as being red or yellow” (Kandel et
al. 1995, p. 458). What emerges from this neuroscientific picture
of color perception is that the brain interprets objects as having a
certain color; our brains actively produce our color experiences.
“Vision is not merely a matter of passing perception, it is an intel-
ligent process of active construction” (Hoffman 1998, preface, 
p. xii). It follows that experiences admit no subisomorphic experi-
ential difference, because the brain’s constructions are not the 
privileged possessions of the person whose brain is doing the con-
structing. For example, consider Palmer’s case of reversing pig-
ments in the cones.
Palmer supposes that someone whose L-cones have the M-pig-
ment and whose M-cones have the L-pigment would be “red-
green reversed trichromats” (sect. 1.3, para. 5). He notes, however
(n. 5), that red-green reversed trichromats could be the case only
if there were some difference other than the pigments that L- and
M-cones contain, otherwise all that would be reversed are the L-
and M-cones themselves. But such a difference would have to be
a functional difference, in that the distinct subsystems containing
a specific pigment would have to play different functional roles
within the larger nervous system. Then, because the brain inter-
prets color based on the relative strengths of responses from each
subsystem of cones containing a particular pigment, a strong re-
sponse by a particular subsystem would be interpreted as a certain
color, in virtue of the functional role of that subsystem. In such a
case reversing the pigments in the cones, but not the functional
roles of the subsystems of cones, a red object would produce a
strong response in the subsystem of cones that results in the brain
interpreting the object as green. So the red object would be ex-
perienced as green. But it would also be reported as green, be-
cause the functional role of the subsystem leads to the object be-
ing interpreted as green, breaking the isomorphism between the
original trichromat and the red-green reversed trichromat. If we
further suppose that the red-green reversed trichromat would re-
port the object as red and act behaviorally identical with someone
who experienced it as red to preserve the isomorphism, we would
also have to reverse the functional roles of the subsystem of cones.
(See Dennett 1991, pp. 389–98 for a more detailed discussion to
the same effect.) The point is simply that experiential differences
that Palmer supposes to be subisomorphic actually presuppose
functionalism to be coherent, in which case they are behaviorally
detectable. The relational structure of experiences, up to isomor-
phism, entirely captures our experiences.
Paradoxically, what Palmer and other defenders of qualia re-
quire are internal states that could make no difference – no dif-
ference – not to emotional states, aesthetic judgments, preference
selections, or any of the myriad other ways that our color experi-
ences matter to us. But if they can make no difference, it should
make no difference to the defenders of qualia if there are no such
states.
Isomorphism: Philosophical implications
Edmond Wright
Hon. Member SCR, Pembroke College, Oxford; 3 Boathouse Court, Trafalgar
Road, Cambridge CB4 1DU, England. eew20@hermes.cam.ac.uk
Abstract: The originator of the notion of structural isomorphism was the
philosopher Roy Wood Sellars. Many modern philosophers are unaware
how this notion vitiates their attacks on the concept of an internal sensory
presentation. His view that this allowed for corrective feedback undercuts
Palmer’s belief that there is a mapping of objects. The privacy of subjec-
tive experience is also shown not to be inviolable.
Palmer’s target article is welcome, especially in view of the fact that
a number of philosophers resistant to acknowledging the existence
of experience internal to the brain have not taken account of struc-
tural isomorphism. To take one example of many, John McDowell,
in his recent Mind and world, repeatedly rejects the notion of re-
semblance between a non-colored light-ray input and an internal
sensory matrix. His rejection, however, takes the form of merely
saying that the claim is incomprehensible: “How can there be a re-
semblance between a color and something we can’t characterize in
terms of how it would look?” (McDowell 1994a, p. 113). He is thus
not aware of a nonpictorial resemblance based on an isomorphic
match, preserving only relations across a field, precisely what
Palmer is putting forward here. Roy Wood Sellars, probably the
first to argue for isomorphism between input and sensory presen-
tation, which he called “structural similarity,” wrote in 1922 that the
only copying is of relations, mediated by causal ratios (Sellars 1922,
Commentary/Palmer: Color and consciousness
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1999) 22:6
975
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0140525X99292217
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Massachusetts Amherst, on 18 Nov 2019 at 06:30:53, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at

p. 37). His view was discussed by Chisholm (1954), though with-
out seeing the further implications, and taken up later by Wright
(1986, pp. 13–14) and Maund (1993, pp. 57–58) to sustain a case
for internal sensory presentations. Sellars, like Palmer, was well
aware that he was thus distinguishing himself from the traditional
empiricist Sense-Datum Theory, for he points out that Locke “did
not see the possibility of similarity between cause and effect on the
lines of a reproduction of pattern” (1932, p. 111).
Here, from Sellars’ comment, arises the first qualification of
Palmer’s argument. Palmer, having correctly accepted, with Sell-
ars, that it is a pattern, a structure of intensities, that is transferred,
moves without explanation to its being a mapping of objects, for
he says: “Preserving relational structure appears to be a necessary
condition for one set of objects to represent another” (sect. 2.2,
para. 5). He also asserts correctly that biological considerations
support the view that color experiences differ from person to per-
son (sect. 2.3, para. 6), and that just noticeable differences (jnd)
and range sensitivities are measurably rarely the same (whatever
the sensory mode); he even allows with Gregory (1983, p. 451) that
there could be a sound/light interchange. What has not occurred
to him is that, given this latter assertion of differences of input, it
is not possible for each person’s selection from that input, that is,
what is to constitute “an object” for that person, not to differ also.
There is the problem of coordination across persons to consider,
one that I have argued is conducted by each agent by joining in a
mutual assumption with his or her opposite in the moment of com-
munication that there already exists one entity on which they are
converging in understanding (Wright 1990, 73–75). As both the
sociologist Alfred Schutz (1962) and the psycholinguist Ragnar
Rommetveit (1974; 1983) have independently maintained, we
create a partial objectivity by behaving together as if we had
achieved a perfect objectivity. This is of the utmost evolutionary
value, because we can capitalize on our differences of sensing and
perceiving to update and (we hope) improve the so-called com-
mon concept. There is actually no practical necessity that there ex-
ist in the real, so to speak, “a single object” at all, merely a region
of intensities on which a rough converging coordination has been
achieved. To use Harnad’s terms, there is a never-to-be-achieved
perfect “convergence” of each agent’s “approximations” to the pu-
tatively common categorization (Harnad 1987, p. 538).
There is thus a social parameter to consider that takes advan-
tage of the fact that we are each provided with a differing field of
intensities on which, either through direct motivation or by the
motivation that is transferred to us in communication, we can
move our gestalts about to alter what “color patches” – though I
would prefer to say three-dimensional regions – we are, for the
time being, to take as objects. The “mapping of objects” is thus
part of a intersubjective venture in getting the most viable sorting
out of those regions of our sensory presentations, the intensities
of which are our only guide to the mass/energy world outside (and
bodily – inside) us. This is, of course, a version of a naturalized,
genetic epistemology, because it claims, with Piaget, that, because
assimilation and accommodation are continuous, objectification is
always no more than viable (Piaget 1970, p. 15; also see Hooker
1995, pp. 257–67; von Glaserfeld 1982, p. 613).
Given this approach, which seems to be the most likely conclu-
sion to be drawn from Palmer’s argument, then Palmer ought not
to regard the Zombie Objection as one with any force. Zombies,
like digital robots, work on “common” concepts, the criteria of
which are made up from a list of individually unalterable elements.
They, like the person in Searle’s Chinese Room, would be quite
unable to change the language for all those who are using it. It is
precisely because we are operating with a field of intensities,
structurally similar to the external input, that we are able to re-jig
our percepts and concepts. It is not objects that are mapped at all:
We do the mapping, that is, the choosing of the most viable selec-
tions and treating them as “objects.” If they were directly mapped,
we should not be able to change our selections when something
rewarding or aversive occurs. This bears out Sellars’ emphasis on
feedback (1969, p. 142).
Because this view takes the sensory fields as nonepistemic, as
knowledgeless evidence on which the motivation system works to
select percepts, there is no reason why neurophysiology should
not one day discover how they are created, nor why it should not
be possible to connect mind to mind. Palmer seems unduly re-
stricted by a lingering Cartesianism in his claim that sensory fields
must remain wholly separate. Why should it not be possible to
make a cross-connection and share even a minuscule part of an-
other organism’s field? There is no “constraint” at all.
Author’s Response
On qualia, relations, and structure 
in color experience
Stephen E. Palmer
Department of Psychology, University of California, Berkeley, CA 94720-165.
palmer@cogsci.berkeley.edu
socrates.berkeley.edu/~plab
Abstract: In this Response, I defend the notion of intrinsic qual-
ities of experience, discuss the distinction between relational ex-
perience and relational structure, clarify the difference between
narrow and broad interpretations of color experience, argue
against externalist approaches to color experience, defend the
concept of isomorphism as a limitation in understanding color ex-
periences, examine critiques of the color machine and color room
arguments, and counter objections to within-subject experiments
based on memory limitations.
To begin, I would like to thank all the contributors for the
time and effort they have invested in their commentaries on
my target article, “Color, consciousness, and the isomor-
phism constraint.” I have learned a great deal by reading
and considering the varied remarks, even though I have
usually come to the unsurprising conclusion that I disagree
with them when they disagree with me. In response to crit-
icisms, I have tried at least to clarify the issues and to re-
state my own views more carefully and coherently than in
the target article.
Because I do not have the space to respond in detail to
every commentary, I have chosen to respond according to
a number of general issues described by the main headings.
There are also two commentaries to which I will not re-
spond: Block’s because the issue he discusses (representa-
tionism), while interesting, is not one I addressed in the tar-
get article, and Brill’s because I do not see any fundamental
disagreement with me in his photometer discussions. I also
will not comment on Smythies’s reference to Heisenberg’s
theory of mind–brain complementarity because I do not
understand this theory. About all the rest, however, I will
have at least something to say.
The central claim of the target article is that a “subjec-
tivity barrier” divides what can and cannot be shared and
communicated between people about the nature of their
experiences. I further claimed that this “metaphorical
brick wall” separates what can be known by objective sci-
entific means from what cannot. I then identified this lim-
itation with the relational structure of isomorphism: Any-
thing below the level of isomorphism lies purely within the
subjective domain and cannot be known with certainty by
others or by objective science. No functionalist account
Response/Palmer: Color and consciousness
976
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1999) 22:6
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0140525X99292217
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Massachusetts Amherst, on 18 Nov 2019 at 06:30:53, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at

can reach down to the subisomorphic level to explain the
intrinsic nature or even the existence of different experi-
ential qualities.
R1. Intrinsic qualities of experience. My claims about in-
trinsic qualities of experience (or “qualia,” as philosophers
tend to call them) provoked many commentators to chal-
lenge a variety of issues from a variety of viewpoints. Some
question the logical coherence of my conception of intrin-
sic qualities of experience in the first place (e.g., Myin),
others simply deny their existence (e.g., Dennett), and still
others deny only that there could be any experiential dif-
ferences between observers at that level (e.g., Viger). I will
respond to each objection in turn.
Myin argues that my description of intrinsic aspects of
experience simply does not make sense. If the intrinsic
qualities of experiences are merely what is left over after
subtracting out all the relational aspects, then intrinsic as-
pects of color experiences cannot have any relations to each
other. His objection is that there is little, if anything, left to
“orangeness” once all its relations to other color experi-
ences are removed.
I believe the confusion underlying this argument is a sub-
tle one concerning the difference between relations and re-
lational structure. I was not as clear about it in the target ar-
ticle as I should have been, at least partly because I am not
as clear about it in my own mind as I would like to be. Since
Myin has called me on it, however, I will attempt to clarify
my thinking.
I tried to be careful in identifying what is knowable to
others and to science through behavior as the relational
structure among experiences, not the relations themselves.
Relations among experiences have intrinsic qualities too –
ones that are intimately tied to the intrinsic qualities of the
individual experiences they relate – and these relational as-
pects of experience are just as unknowable as individual as-
pects of experience. There is something it “feels like,” shall
we say, to experience the stark contrast between adjacent
white and black regions, for instance, even though this con-
trast is a relational aspect of experience. Moreover, I can-
not know whether what I feel on viewing this white/black
contrast is the same as what you feel because the metaphor-
ical brick wall is very much in place for the intrinsic quality
of this relational experience. So there is lots of relational
stuff on the “intrinsic qualities” side of the subjectivity bar-
rier (i.e., below the level of isomorphism); it has not been
“subtracted out” when we distinguish relational structure
from intrinsic qualities. This means that the “orangeness”
of experience on viewing an orange is still all there when I
speak of its intrinsic qualities.
So what, then, is the nature of this other “structural”
stuff? I believe this question to be a deep and poorly un-
derstood one in cognitive science – mathematicians seem
to have a clearer idea – but I will take a shot at it anyway.
My own current views are perhaps most closely related to
those of logician Alfred Tarski (1954), cognitive psycholo-
gist Wendell Garner (1974), and measurement theorists
Krantz, Luce, Suppes, and Tversky (1971). As I use the
term, structure consists of constraints on a set of elements
(or objects) imposed indirectly on those objects via rela-
tions between two or more of them. The individual objects
themselves are completely unconstrained, but relations
among them are not, and these relational constraints 
constitute their structure (or equivalently, their relational
structure, since there is no structure at the level of individ-
ual elements).
To illustrate, consider the case of perceived lightness of
achromatic surfaces. The “objects” are tokens of color ex-
periences that arise from viewing gray surfaces from white
to black. The structure among these objects is the set of
constraints induced by the “lighter than” relation for or-
dered pairs of gray-scale experiences. This structure con-
sists in the fact that the lighter-than relation only holds for
certain, nonrandom, ordered pairs of gray experiences, that
is, there is systematicity in which ordered pairs are and are
not related in this way. Specifically, if A is lighter than B,
then B cannot also be lighter than A. This constraint, called
antisymmetry, is part of the structure of the lighter-than re-
lation. Another constraint, called transitivity, also holds for
lighter-than: If A is lighter than B, and B is lighter than C,
then A must also be lighter than C. These constraints do not
hold for all relations (e.g., “has the same lightness as” is sym-
metric rather than antisymmetric), but together with oth-
ers, they determine the structure of the lightness dimen-
sion. (Notice that they do not – indeed, I would claim,
cannot – define the lightness dimension itself, but only its
structure, because the same linear dimensional structure
characterizes many other sensory dimensions, such as “big-
ger than,” “louder than,” and “saltier than”). It is this con-
ception of structure that underlies an isomorphism be-
tween two sets of experiential objects.
The picture that emerges is not one of individual experi-
ences on the subjective side of the brick wall and relational
experiences on the objective side (as Myin interpreted my
distinction), but of experiences (including relational ones)
on the subjective side and experiential structure on the ob-
jective side. Notice that the special importance of relational
experiences is only that they determine structure, not that
they are magically on the objective side of the brick wall.
Moreover, intrinsic qualities are not what is left over after
the structure has been “taken out,” because the structure
isn’t actually taken out so much as “mirrored” or “ab-
stracted” in the objective domain: Structure exists on both
sides of the subjectivity barrier. The situation is very much
like that in formal mathematics, in which there is a domain
of objects that has some structure, and mathematicians at-
tempt to capture that structure at an abstract level that does
not depend on the identity of the objects. The objects and
their relations have some determinate structure, and math-
ematicians formalize it in a very general way. (See the
replies to Harrison and O’Brien & Opie for discussion of
related topics.)
Dennett does not deny the coherence of intrinsic qual-
ities of experience, but he does claim that people have no
access to them.1 He doesn’t actually say that such experi-
ences don’t exist, but he does claim that we only have ac-
cess to the relations we detect between these inaccessible
experiences. This is, of course, perfectly consistent with
functionalism because functionalism is based on causal re-
lations among mental states. It is an interesting position in
part because relational information is so important in de-
termining experiences in many domains, color included,
that one can almost get away with it. Dennett didn’t bother
to cite any supporting evidence for his claim, but in the in-
terest of proper appreciation for this possibility, I will do it
for him.
The perception of color and lightness depends crucially
on spatial and temporal relations or contrasts (i.e., edges
Response/Palmer: Color and consciousness
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1999) 22:6
977
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0140525X99292217
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Massachusetts Amherst, on 18 Nov 2019 at 06:30:53, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at

and/or gradients in colored space-time). Even a surface
that initially appears to be strongly colored will eventually
lose this appearance if it is uniform in color and texture over
the whole visual field (i.e., a Ganzfeld) and is viewed for an
extended period of time. The visual system eventually
adapts to the point that the surface appears neutral gray, no
matter what color it appeared initially. One reasonable ac-
count of such effects is that they result from the lack of re-
lations to any other color in space or in time. This kind of
“relational determination,” as the Gestaltists called it, is not
restricted to Ganzfelds either. Wallach’s (1948) classic stud-
ies of lightness perception and Land’s later retinex theory
(Land & McCann 1971) both highlight the fact that the vi-
sual system is primarily sensitive to contrast ratios between
the luminances of adjacent regions. More complex effects
of lightness constancy that result from the interpretation of
retinal luminance edges (environmental intensity edges
versus reflectance edges; see, e.g., Gilchrist 1988) are also
likely to be compatible with relational approaches, because
all the information required to interpret the edges is em-
bedded in the relations among the image luminances.
The problem is that although relational effects are cru-
cial in determining visual experience, they are not the
whole story. We perceive not only relations, such as con-
trasts and luminance ratios, but also determinate colors of
individual surfaces. In lightness perception, this is called
the “scaling problem” because once all the appropriate ra-
tios are known, it is still unclear how the entire structure of
ratios maps onto the absolute lightness scale from white to
black. One rectangle of a Mondrian display looks white, an-
other looks medium gray, and a third looks black; they do
not float unanchored in a sea of ratios. Even in the case of
a Ganzfeld, the visual field always has a determinate color
appearance. First it is, say, yellow, and it gradually fades to
gray, but it does not disappear, as it seems it should if we ex-
perience only relations to other regions adjacent to it in
space and time. The rules by which contrasts and ratios are
anchored to perceived lightness are beginning to be un-
derstood, at least in the restricted world of achromatic color
perception (e.g., Cataliotti & Gilchrist 1995). One rule is
that, with proper experimental conditions, the lightest re-
gion in the entire visual field is generally experienced as
white, and other regions are scaled in lightness relative to
it, as determined by their ratios to the lightest region.
As interesting as Dennett’s claim is, I believe that it is
fundamentally mistaken and possibly incoherent. Even by
his own hypothesis, there must be intrinsic qualities of ex-
perience, for otherwise there could be no relations between
them to be detected. But relations are attributes defined
only for two or more objects. If we have access only to re-
lations between experiences, how is it that we experience
qualities of individual objects? The lightest rectangle in an
achromatic Mondrian looks white, not just twice as light as
the next-darker rectangle. Dennett’s view simply does not
square with either introspective experience or with scien-
tific findings.
Viger does not deny that individual experiences have any
intrinsic qualities, but he doubts that there could be any dif-
ference in experience that would occur at this subisomor-
phic level. Specifically, he argues that pseudonormal vision
(i.e., switching the pigments in the M-cones and L-cones)
would not produce any change in experience because there
would be no change in the functional roles of the subsys-
tems, and it is only their function that matters. He there-
fore concludes that pseudonormal vision poses no threat to
functionalism and, moreover, asserts that I actually presup-
posed functionalism in my argument against functionalism
via pseudonormal vision. Both of these claims are mistaken.
First, it is Viger who presupposes functionalism in his ar-
gument, not I. He simply asserts that the brain interprets
seeing a certain color based on a strong response by a par-
ticular subsystem, in virtue of the functional role of that
subsystem (his emphasis). I make no such claim, as I will
show by describing a simple example of how color experi-
ences could plausibly be reversed by switching the photo-
pigments in M-cones and L-cones.
I begin by assuming that the color a person experiences is
determined by the firing of particular genetically deter-
mined central neurons, irrespective of their “functional
roles” in the system. Since we only need to concern our-
selves with red and green experiences at one spatial position
for pseudonormal vision, we will simplify matters and refer
to the single central neuron whose firing causes red experi-
ence in that position as the “R-cell” and the one whose fir-
ing causes green experience as the “G-cell.” The central R-
cell is prewired to receive activation from the retinal
receptors that usually contain the L-pigment (i.e., L-cones)
and to receive inhibition from certain other retinal receptors
that usually contain the M-pigment (i.e., M-cones). The cen-
tral G-cell has the opposite preprogrammed connections
from M-cones and L-cones. Predominately long-wave-
length light will thus cause the R-cell to fire vigorously, but
not the G-cell, and medium-wavelength light will cause the
G-cell to fire vigorously, but not the R-cell, at least for color-
normal observers.
Now suppose that in pseudonormal individuals, genetic
mutations that are quite independent from the genes that
control the wiring from M-cones and L-cones to the R-cell
and G-cell cause the L-cones to contain the M-pigment and
the M-cones to contain the L-pigment. The result will be
that the R-cell will receive excitatory input from L-cones
containing M-pigment and inhibitory input from M-cones
containing L-pigment; the G-cell will receive excitatory in-
put from M-cones containing L-pigment and inhibitory in-
put from L-cones containing M-pigment. The net effect in
pseudonormal observers will be that predominately long-
wavelength light will cause the G-cell to fire vigorously, and
medium-wavelength light will cause the R-cell to fire vig-
orously. By the original assumption that experienced color
is determined by which central is firing, light that appears
red to a normal observer will appear green to the pseudo-
normal observer, and vice versa.
Regardless of whether there actually are any pseudonor-
mal observers and whether the assumptions I have made
are empirically correct, I do not see any logical problem
with this scenario.2 It is not a functionalist scenario because
of the initial assumption that color experience is deter-
mined by which particular central neuron is firing, regard-
less of the pigment in the receptors to which they are con-
nected. The crucial factor is that the difference I have
assumed between red and green internal experiences is not
determined by functional roles within the system, but by
genetic designation. (This may depend on the functional
roles of such cells for the species as a whole, but not on their
roles within the individual.) I make no claim that this is em-
pirically correct, but I do believe it is coherent and that it
straightforwardly predicts subisomorphic experiential dif-
ferences between normal and pseudonormal observers.
Response/Palmer: Color and consciousness
978
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1999) 22:6
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0140525X99292217
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Massachusetts Amherst, on 18 Nov 2019 at 06:30:53, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at

R2. Narrow versus broad views of color experience. An-
other basic issue that underlies many of the commentaries
is the question of what counts as color experience. In the
target article, I took the position that it was a relatively cir-
cumscribed aspect of phenomenology that surely included
primary sensory appearances derived from different physi-
cal spectra of light and the sensory relations between such
appearances, but not much else. The reader will recall that
I was even circumspect about including color-naming cate-
gories, such as basic color terms (BCTs), as being truly part
of color experience. I did end up considering them on the
grounds that systematicities in BCTs might indirectly re-
flect subtle inhomogeneities in sensory experiences that are
otherwise difficult to substantiate. Let’s call this “the nar-
row view” of color experience.
Many commentators (e.g., Frumkina, Myin, Tolliver,
Van Gulick, and Viger) disagree strongly with this narrow
view in one or more respects. They argue that color experi-
ence also includes one or more of the following: cross-
modal sensory components, chromatic mood induction,
memories associated with colors, aesthetic preferences
among colors, and salient cultural conditions. One problem
with this strategy is: Where (if anywhere) does one draw the
line in deciding what is part of a color experience? If one
includes aesthetic responses to the color being viewed,
what about the aesthetic responses to its combination with
other colors? Or with all possible triples or even n-tuples of
other colors? If one includes associative memories (e.g., the
ripe tomato that I most closely associate with the precise
shade of red in question), are we to include the shape of that
tomato in the experience of that color? What about nonvi-
sual aspects, such as its taste and smell? Or perhaps the se-
quence of phonemes that constitutes the name of the com-
pany that made the television on which I saw the image of
the bottle of catsup that had the picture of the tomato that
exemplified the precise shade of red in question? This
“broad view” of color experience does not seem like a pro-
ductive approach, at least to me, as it will count every as-
pect of experience as part of color experience.
Many of the commentators who take this tack seem to be
motivated by trying to “save” functionalism in one way or
another. One rationale is that even if there are a few un-
derlying symmetries in the narrow view of color experience
I advocate in the target article, expanding color experience
to include even a few of these other aspects of experience
surely breaks every possible symmetry, and this seems to
save functionalism from the potential predicament posed
by Locke’s argument. Even so, expanding color experience
does not affect either the alien color argument or the color
zombie argument because neither assumes interobserver
automorphism of experiences. That is, even if all symme-
tries were broken by broadening the nature of color expe-
rience, this would not block replicating the same relational
structure via an isomorphism to a different set of experien-
tial dimensions or to a set of dimensions devoid of experi-
ence (see sect. R4).
Other commentators sought to broaden the domain of
color experience for somewhat different purposes. They ar-
gue that the additional complexity of such expanded color
experiences refutes the color room argument. I will con-
sider this argument in section R5 below.
I am not claiming that the narrow view of color experi-
ence I have taken is “correct” and that the broad view is
“wrong.” Trying to partition experience into different as-
pects is a difficult enterprise at best, and I do not want 
to imply that my narrow view is unproblematic. I took it in
part to provide the greatest likelihood of supporting the un-
examined, commonsense “yes” answer to the question of
whether you and I have the same color experiences under
the same external conditions. If moods, aesthetic prefer-
ences, and associative memories are included in our con-
ception of color experience, then the answer to this ques-
tion is surely “no,” but for what seem to me less interesting
reasons: We all have different memories, associations,
moods, preferences, and the like due to our different life
histories. To the extent that these are included in the defi-
nition of color experience, they preclude the possibility of
color experiences being the same across people. The broad
view of color experience thus throws out the baby with the
bathwater.
Moreover, even after considering the commentator’s 
objections, I believe that there is a sensible notion of color
experience – perhaps I should call it “basic” or “pure” color
experience to differentiate it from the more complex and
inclusive notion some of the commentators argue for – that
does not include preferences, associative memories,
moods, linguistic labels, or even basic color terms. This is
the sense in which the same bowl of, say, split-pea soup
looks the same color to someone who adores that particu-
lar shade of green, someone else who despises it, someone
who eats pea soup daily, and someone who has never seen
the stuff. This is the narrow notion of color experience I in-
tended to discuss in the target article.
Even so, I do have a serious concern, mentioned by
Frumkina, about how representative this situation might
be for other forms of sensory experience. I personally find
it much harder to separate aesthetic responses from an un-
derlying “pure” sensory experience for tastes and smells.
Being strongly liver-phobic, for example, I cannot experi-
ence its taste or smell without having an intense liver-spe-
cific revulsion. Is there a more basic taste or smell of liver
for me that strips off the disgust? Maybe so, but the answer
is far less clear to me than in the case of color.
R3. Internalist versus externalist approaches to experi-
ence. The commentators Byrne, Ross, and Malcolm ob-
ject that my conclusions in the target article are faulty be-
cause I take an “internalist” approach to color experience.
They advocate instead an “externalist” or “objective” ap-
proach in which my color experiences, like the perceived
redness of a rose, are identified with a physical property of
the environmental object rather than with subjective aspects
of my experience. The crucial move here is that if the color
experience I have on viewing the rose is somehow defined
by the physical properties of the rose, then the whole point
of the target article is undermined. There is no subjectivity
barrier to begin with, because color experiences are out in
the world instead of inside my head. Therefore, everyone
has access to the same (external) color experiences. My ex-
perience of the redness of the rose can’t possibly be differ-
ent from that of a pseudonormal individual because we are
just encoding the same physical property (redness) by dif-
ferent neurophysiological mechanisms. Because the exter-
nalist objection is so potentially damaging to my views in the
target article – and because I believe it to be so fundamen-
tally mistaken – I will argue against it in some detail.
I believe that there are a number of serious problems
with the externalist approach. First, it seems almost per-
Response/Palmer: Color and consciousness
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1999) 22:6
979
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0140525X99292217
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Massachusetts Amherst, on 18 Nov 2019 at 06:30:53, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at

verse to claim that redness is a coherent physical property
in anything like the normal usage of this phrase in the phys-
ical sciences. The physical property that most strongly de-
termines the perceived color of an object is its reflectance
spectrum: the proportions of photons it reflects at each
wavelength within the visible range (roughly 400–700 nm).
The physical sense in which the rose itself can be said to be
a particular shade of red (i.e., to produce in a normal hu-
man trichromat that particular experience of redness) is a
very complex function of its reflectance spectrum, one that
would be completely unmotivated except for its effect on
the visual nervous system of the experiencing observer. 
A potentially infinite number of physically different re-
flectance spectra can give rise to the very same experience
of redness, for example, because the infinite number of 
dimensions of reflectance spectra projects onto just three
dimensions of human color experience. These exact per-
ceptual matches despite physical differences are called
“metamers,” and their existence is a fundamental fact about
color perception. About the only thing that metamers have
in common is that they appear to produce identical experi-
ences (and therefore no discrimination behavior) in partic-
ular organisms. As physical properties, then, perceived col-
ors of objects do not seem to “carve nature at its joints”
except with specific reference to color experience.
Even so, let’s expand the usual notion of physical prop-
erties so that we can call the color a person experiences
when viewing a given object one of that object’s physical
properties, simply because it can be determined, at least in
principle, from its physical structure. Notice, however, that
the same object will have to have different objective color
properties for different equivalence classes of observers.
The rose will not cause the same experiences in different
types of color blind individuals and color weak individuals.
Moreover, if one takes the broad view of what constitutes
color experience (see sect. R2), the same rose will have a
different physical color for every observer, and this objec-
tive color will have to include virtually any perceivable
property.
A second problem is that, even if we restrict color expe-
rience to the narrow view, there are a lot of other conditions
that must be imposed before we could predict the precise
color the observer would experience on viewing the rose.
We would need to know not only the rose’s reflectance spec-
trum, but the reflectance spectra of surrounding surfaces,
the illumination spectrum of the illuminating light source,
and the pattern of shadows and reflected light produced by
nearby surfaces in the environment. We would have to
know these things because they all affect the precise color
a person experiences when viewing the same object with
the same purported physical color. Only if color constancy
were perfect – and it is not, by a long shot – could one hope
to equate the experience of redness with the reflectance
properties of the rose itself.
Even so, all these other factors that must be known are
(or could be formulated as) physical properties of physical
objects as viewed in a particular context and from a partic-
ular position, so we could just fold some physical descrip-
tion of all of them into the externalist view of color. Other
problems arise, however, when the state of the observer dif-
fers. The same rose will look less saturated after the ob-
server has adapted to an intensely red region in the same
area of the visual field, and it will look more saturated if the
adapting region is its complementary shade of green.
Even so, these adaptational effects depend on the ob-
server’s viewing history with physical objects, so perhaps we
can fold some physical description of all this recent viewing
history into the externalist definition of color experience.
However, there are color experiences that arise in the ab-
sence of any physical object, such as colored dreams and
colored hallucinations. In the case of some dreams and cer-
tain kinds of hallucinations (like mirages), such color expe-
riences might be based on specific memories of physical ob-
jects, in which case one could conceivably track down the
objects in question and point to their physical properties in
absentia. But in other cases of hallucinations, such as mi-
graine headaches and even pressing on the eyeballs with
one’s fingers, there is no object to whose physical proper-
ties the color experiences can be attributed, and yet the per-
son still experiences colors. The physical properties of an
object are therefore not necessary for the experience of
color. There are also clear cases of color illusions in which
the object has the “wrong” physical properties to produce
the experienced color. Chromatic afterimages and simulta-
neous color contrast are two well-known examples, and
subjective colors induced by lines flickering at particular
rates (as discussed in Lockhead & Huettel’s commentary)
are another. It seems the only way to deal with these prob-
lems is to posit some nonexistent object or even the wrong
object – the one that the subject appears to see – and say
that their physical properties constitute the visual experi-
ence. But this seems nonsensical. What is present in each
and every case is the internal experience, so why twist our-
selves into knots to get some corresponding object with the
corresponding physical properties into the theoretical pic-
ture?
A further complexity that is difficult to understand in ex-
ternalist terms is that observers can be in different modes
of perceiving color at different times (see Palmer 1999, p.
313–14). In “distal mode” perception, people’s color expe-
riences are geared toward color constancy, so that the color
they perceive is mainly determined by the reflectance spec-
trum of the surfaces. This causes externalists no problem,
of course, because it is this mode of perception that they ex-
plicitly use as the rationale for their externalist views. But
in “proximal mode” perception, people’s color experiences
are more closely attuned to the appearance of regions in the
image on the retina, which are not generally constant over
the object’s projected image, even if the object’s surface re-
flectance is entirely uniform. Shadows cast by other objects,
shading caused by gradients of surface orientation or illu-
mination, and highlights reflected from specular surfaces
are just three obvious cases in which differences occur in
experienced color during proximal versus distal modes of
perception. Clearly this would require a second externalist
approach, one that designates the physical spectra of the
light within different image regions as the external “object”
(rather than the actual physical objects). Even adding this
second kind of external entity leaves important things out,
however. One is the fact that in either mode, the percep-
tion appears to be a blend of both stimulus conceptions, al-
beit with different weighting functions. Another is the im-
portance of the internal variable that determines the mode
in which the perceiver is currently experiencing.
All this argues against accepting an externalist view of
color experience. An additional problem I have with the ex-
ternalist argument Ross makes is that I don’t believe it will
work even in the case of pseudonormal vision, to which he
Response/Palmer: Color and consciousness
980
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1999) 22:6
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0140525X99292217
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Massachusetts Amherst, on 18 Nov 2019 at 06:30:53, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at

applies it. If one takes an externalist view, I can see the ra-
tionale for claiming that a normal and a pseudonormal ob-
server both see the same object as a particular shade of red
because it has, by definition, the same physical properties.
But now consider within-subject cases. Suppose a person
becomes pseudonormal after some effective physiological
intervention. The internalist prediction is that, provided the
change is “swift and enormous” enough and that one can
rule out certain memory changes (see sect. R7), the subject
will now see the same rose as green rather than red and be
able to report the change. It seems that the externalist must
predict that he or she will continue to see it as red because
it is, after all, the same object with the same physical prop-
erties. To rule out memory artifacts, such as those suggested
by Dennett, Bradie, and Pauen, the intervention could
be carried out only for one half of the visual field. In this
case internalists predict that the half of the rose will con-
tinue to look red, whereas the other half will now look
green. A true externalist would predict no difference be-
tween the parts of the rose that fall in two different halves
of the visual field. Obviously, I do not know what the results
of such experiments would be, but the externalist predic-
tions seem (to me) strikingly implausible.
R4. The isomorphism constraint. The wedge I used to
separate the behaviorally unknowable intrinsic qualities of
experience from their behaviorally knowable relational
structure is the isomorphism constraint. This device too
comes under fire from various commentators. Harrison
challenges the coherence of the notion of isomorphism it-
self, at least for this particular enterprise, Wright questions
certain aspects of the formulation I use to explain isomor-
phism, O’Brien & Opie raise the issue of how intrinsic 
versus extrinsic representations fit into the notion of iso-
morphism, and Nida-Rümelin presses for more relaxed
criteria to encompass justified beliefs about color experi-
ence.
Although Harrison begins by implicitly endorsing iso-
morphism as at least superficially attractive – he once en-
tertained the idea himself – he ultimately decides that it is
incoherent. The problem he identifies, at least as I under-
stand it, is that two qualitatively disparate sets of sensory ex-
periences simply cannot exhibit the same relationships un-
less they are the same experiences. The argument is a subtle
one that I believe I have also worried about, but I came to
a different conclusion than he did for reasons that I will now
explain.
The difficulty Harrison alludes to (or so I believe, for I
am not sure I fully understand his point) is that two sets of
sensory experiences cannot be isomorphic in the sense of
exhibiting or standing in the same relationships to one 
another, unless they are, in fact, the very same sensory ex-
periences. For example, I would claim that the lightness 
dimension of color experience could be isomorphic to an-
other experiential dimension, such as pitch height in tonal
experience or some alien dimension of visual experience in
which lightness experiences are replaced by corresponding
values on some other, completely different sensory dimen-
sion. Harrison would object that when the elements of color
experiences are mapped systematically to experiences in
another domain, the relationships among corresponding el-
ements are actually not the same. I take this to mean that
he believes that the relations among sensory experiences
are as incommensurable as the sensory experiences them-
selves are. In what way can lighter than relations be the
same as higher pitch than relations? If the relations are ac-
tually the same, then the experiential dimensions must also
be the same.
It is for this reason that I was, or tried to be, careful to
say that by “isomorphic” I meant that they have the same
relational structure rather than if they have the same rela-
tionships. The distinction is important, because although
the relations of “lighter than” between pairs of colors is in-
deed profoundly different from the relation of “higher
than” among tones, there are ways of formalizing these re-
lations so that they are the same at the abstract level of their
structure (see sect. R1). Note 3 of the target article spells
out the notion of “isomorphism” for one particular example
in terms of Tarski’s (1954) model theory in such a way that
the sameness of their abstract relational structures is laid
bare. I conclude that this notion of isomorphism, stripped
of what Harrison calls the “primitive elements” (or “color-
presentations”) and of what I call “intrinsic qualities,”
demonstrates the coherence of the approach that he rejects
as incoherent.
Wright comments on the relation of Sellars’s (1922)
early discussion of isomorphism to my own discussion. I was
not aware of Sellars’s treatment, which I thank Wright for
calling to my attention. There is an important difference in
our use of the concept of isomorphism, however, which I
mentioned in Note 11 of the target article. Sellars appears
to be talking about what I called “psychophysical isomor-
phism:” an isomorphism between environmental objects
and internal representations. I am talking about isomor-
phism between one person’s internal sensory representa-
tion and another person’s. As I say in that note, I am skep-
tical about the general validity of the former, especially for
color, but quite confident about that of the latter.
Wright then objects to my talking about isomorphism in
terms of a mapping of objects that preserves relational
structure. I did so because that is the way Tarski (1954) for-
malized the notion of isomorphism in his model theory, and
that, as I explained in my replies to Myin and Harrison, is
how I understand the notion of “same structure” abstracted
from concrete relations. Wright’s real point, however, ap-
pears to be that I did not worry about how the “objects” of
experience are formulated in different observers. I was as-
suming that scientists were making such decisions in their
theoretical analyses and that they would do so in uniform
ways, but this is not necessarily the case, as he points out.
He refers to this as a “social parameter,” because there must
be agreement on the nature of the “objects” to fix on an
isomorphism. Indeed, differences between people in dif-
ferent cultures in terms of what they take to be the “objects”
of their experience that are picked out by words may un-
derlie at least some of the controversy over cross-cultural
variations in color perception and naming (e.g., Saunders &
Van Brakel 1997). Frumkina also expresses concerns over
sociocultural influences on color experience, and Malcolm
may be making a similar point in his commentary when he
refers to the role of intersubjective agreement and social
context in “conceptualizations” about color experience.
I really do not know quite what to make of or say about
these objections based on social and/or cultural factors.
Surely conceptualizations, social influences, and cultural
variations will play some role in the scientific understand-
ing of the nature of color experiences. My own belief is that
they will turn out to be relatively minor compared with
Response/Palmer: Color and consciousness
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1999) 22:6
981
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0140525X99292217
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Massachusetts Amherst, on 18 Nov 2019 at 06:30:53, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at

more basic sensory and perceptual processes, but I have no
knock-down argument that this is the case.
O’Brien & Opie take a different approach to the iso-
morphism constraint, one that is strongly connected to my
own earlier distinction between intrinsic and extrinsic
forms of representation (Palmer 1978). Although I have al-
ways liked this distinction and wish that it had received
more attention than it did, I am not convinced that O’Brien
& Opie’s application of it is entirely justified.
Intrinsic versus extrinsic representations distinguish be-
tween representations that preserve relational structure of
their source domain in critically different ways. Intrinsic
representations do so by having the same inherent structure
in their own corresponding relations as in the source rela-
tions they represent. Extrinsic representations do so merely
by mimicking relational structure in a less constrained rela-
tion. The “structure” at issue refers to logical properties of
(i.e., constraints on) represented and representing rela-
tions, such as transitivity and symmetry (see sect. R1). By
“inherent” structure of a relation, I mean relational con-
straints that cannot be broken. As I mentioned above, the
relation “lighter than,” for example, is inherently transitive
(if A is lighter than B and B is lighter than C, then A is
lighter than C) and antisymmetric (if A is lighter than B,
then B cannot be lighter than A). Color spaces represent
this relation intrinsically by the “higher than” relation in
space, which is likewise inherently transitive and antisym-
metric. “Lighter than” could be represented extrinsically by
the relation “points to” in a network of nodes that represent
color experiences and directional arrows that represent the
“lighter than” relation. “Points to” in a directional network
is neither inherently transitive (if A points to B and B points
to C, then A might point to C or it might not) nor inherently
antisymmetric (if A points to B, then B might point to A or
it might not). “Points to” can still represent “lighter than,”
however, because it is less constrained than “lighter than,”
thus allowing it to take on the required structure simply by
reflecting the empirical constraints in the source domain.
This is the essence of the intrinsic/extrinsic distinction.
I believe that O’Brien & Opie are wrong in asserting
that functionalism is committed to extrinsic representation.
Functionalism is indeed committed to causal relational
structure, as they say, but causal relational structure can be
embedded in either intrinsic or extrinsic representing rela-
tions. They then contrast their view of functionalism with
what they call “structuralism,” which appears to be defined
by a commitment to intrinsic representation and lies, ac-
cording to them, midway between functionalism and the bi-
ological conception. They further suggest that conscious 
experience can be identified with “structural roles” that 
appear to be defined by physical relations rather than causal
ones. In my understanding of their view, structuralism
would just be a subset of standard functionalism that insists
on intrinsic representations. Moreover, I do not see any
clear connection between intrinsic representations and
conscious experience, especially given that the color ma-
chine (Fig. 6 in the target article) uses intrinsic representa-
tions of color relations, yet is unlikely to produce color ex-
periences.
Nevertheless, O’Brien & Opie’s comments raise the in-
teresting issue of how the intrinsic/extrinsic representa-
tional distinction relates to the ideas expressed in the target
article, and therein lies a puzzle. On the one hand, the in-
trinsic/extrinsic distinction appears to reside at the subiso-
morphic level. The rationale for this claim is that if two rep-
resentations (one intrinsic and one extrinsic) preserve the
same relational structure about the same source domain,
then they are necessarily isomorphic to each other and can-
not be distinguished strictly on the basis of representational
aspects. If the difference does lie at the subisomorphic
level, then I should further have to agree that intrinsic and
extrinsic representations cannot be discriminated by be-
havioral means. But I originally formulated the distinction
to clarify the analog/propositional debate, proposing that
analog representations were intrinsic and propositional
representations were extrinsic, and there is a mountain of
behavioral evidence that has been interpreted as discrimi-
nating between analog and propositional representations.
So there is a conceptual muddle in here somewhere. I
would guess that it results from differences in how intrinsic
and extrinsic representations are processed. That is, the dis-
tinction might actually be below the level of isomorphism
in terms of representations but above it in terms of pro-
cesses.
Nida-Rümelin remarks on a very different aspect of the
isomorphism constraint. She suggests that although the iso-
morphism constraint is true if it is interpreted in terms of
what can be known with scientific certainty about intrinsic
qualities of experience or what can be detected by third-
person observers about these qualities, it is false if it is in-
terpreted in terms of “justified beliefs” about them. The is-
sue, of course, is what standard of evidence one takes for
“justified beliefs.” Obviously, the bar is lower for justified
beliefs than for scientific certainty, but how much lower?
In my target article, I was talking about scientific stan-
dards of evidence for drawing scientific conclusions, not
simply justified beliefs. Although scientific conclusions are
not truly certain in the same way that logical proofs are, sci-
entific standards are at least much higher than everyday
standards for everyday beliefs. Nida-Rümelin has formu-
lated a set of conditions that she offers for justified beliefs
about color experiences, and although I do not pretend to
have a strong view about what constitutes a justified belief,
I have no problem with her suggestions. My only concern
is that by sneaking in the qualifier “scientifically based” be-
fore “justified phenomenal belief,” she might inadvertently
give some scientific credibility to beliefs justified in this
way. I prefer to interpret this qualifier literally, as indicat-
ing merely that the beliefs in question are based on scien-
tific evidence about the brain, not that any conclusions
reached using these relaxed criteria are endorsed by sci-
ence.
R5. The color machine, the color room, and function-
alism. Several of the commentators zeroed in on the color
machine as a weak argument against functionalism, mainly
because my “one trick pony” was overly simple (e.g., Har-
din, Saunders, Van Gulick, and Viger). My stated inten-
tion was that the machine diagrammed in Figure 6 was just
the “front end” of a larger system that would do all the stan-
dard color tasks within the “narrow view” of color experi-
ence (see sect. R2). I did not envision that it would have to
say which colors it liked better, whether red or blue made
it feel more relaxed, or even what colors ripe versus unripe
tomatoes were. The objections these commentators raised
to this machine were (1) that there is a lot more to color ex-
perience than these basic tasks imply (see sect. R2) and (2)
that to produce experience, the entire system is required,
Response/Palmer: Color and consciousness
982
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1999) 22:6
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0140525X99292217
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Massachusetts Amherst, on 18 Nov 2019 at 06:30:53, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at

not just some color-relevant piece of it. Although I admit
that both of these statements are plausibly true, they are not
sufficient to convince me that functionalism contains the
kind of structure required to explain color experience.
The prototypical claim of the commentators is that if the
color machine were made sufficiently complex (presumably
in the right way), it would have color experiences rather
than merely simulating them. My problem with this sort of
complexity argument is that it is unclear to me why or how
experiential qualities would arise from positing more com-
plex computations. The situation reminds me of the cartoon
depicting a professor resembling Einstein doing a mathe-
matical proof at the blackboard up to some point, at which
he writes, “Then a miracle happens!” and finishes the proof.
If experience exists because of additional complexity per se,
then somewhere amidst the additional computations a mir-
acle must indeed happen. And why should it happen just by
connecting the internal color representation to other sorts
of color-related representations, such as preferences, mood
associations, and characteristic colors of objects? I doubt
that the miracle is just more computations of the standard
sort – even many, many more – and functionalists saying
that it is doesn’t make it so.
Neither does my doubting it make it false, of course, for
my skepticism about this holist/functionalist complexity re-
sponse is grounded in intuitions that may turn out to be
wrong. I doubt, for example, that a computer can ever be
programmed to have color experiences, no matter how
complex its computations might be, how sophisticated its
language capabilities might be, or what type of simulated
“self-reflection” on its own internal representations is built
into it. On the contrary, I also believe that there are proba-
bly a large number of biological creatures that do have color
experiences of some sort despite having pretty simple
brains, no language at all, and probably no self-reflective
abilities at all. This leads me to believe that functional/com-
putational complexity is unlikely to be the magic ingredient,
but I do not claim to have proved this by revealing my 
biases.
Other commentators view the color room argument with
similar skepticism (e.g., Byrne, Jakab, Schröder, Van
Gulick, Viger). Several claim that Searle’s original Chinese
room argument has been refuted, either by the “systems re-
ply” or by some other argument made since Searle’s article
appeared. I will try to side-step this hornet’s nest of prob-
lems by stating that if Searle’s Chinese room argument has
been decisively refuted, then so has the color room argu-
ment, because they are really the same argument. I am not
convinced that it has been, but others obviously are. In any
case, I will not attempt to debate that issue here.
Another front on which the color room has been attacked
is a version of the complexity argument. I may not experi-
ence color when I am computing in the color room, but
then neither does the color-processing portion of the brain
necessarily experience color in isolation from the rest of the
brain (e.g., Jakab). I suppose the only reply to this objec-
tion is to presume that I am in the “mind room” and have
the task of computing everything, color included. The prob-
lem is that this move eliminates a good deal of the appeal
of the color room, which was the relative simplicity of the
computations and the strength of the intuition that it would
not have color experiences.
Jakab also sketches an alternative functional analysis of
experience as arising when a subject (one’s self) entertains
a pattern of activity in the appropriate area of the brain; for
example, color arises from the right sort of firings taking
place in V4 neurons. The color room argument then does
not work because the computations aren’t occurring in the
right way or even in the right part of the brain. There may
indeed be something to this idea, but it doesn’t sound like
functionalism to me, primarily because it makes such heavy
reference to brain mechanisms. One of the main tenets of
functionalism is the notion of multiple realizability – the 
hypothesis that the same mental state can be achieved 
by equivalent computations in different physical devices.
Jakab’s formulation thus runs perilously close to contradict-
ing a central tenet of functionalism.
It is comforting to know that at least one reader found
the arguments against functionalism convincing. After en-
dorsing the conclusion that functionalism is inadequate to
the task of understanding color experiences, Howard then
goes on to ask what view should replace it as an adequate
philosophical framework for color experience. His rather
surprising answer is eliminative materialism (e.g., Church-
land 1981). He justifies the choice by pointing to a close fit
between Churchland’s (1995) vector space formulation of
neural networks and the framework of isomorphism in the
target article. The problem is that color experiences seem
very unlikely to be “eliminated” by descriptions in terms of
neural activation patterns rather than simply “reduced” to
neural events. The close correspondence that is already be-
lieved to hold between color perceptions and simple neural
firing rates undercuts the possibility that there is any good
reason to get rid of color experiences as theoretical entities
in favor of the isomorphic activation patterns that underlie
them. Eliminative materialism seems appropriate only
when the mental entities in question are seriously flawed in
relation to the more accurate scientific description of the
underlying brain events. This does not appear to be the case
with perceived colors, however.
R6. Introspection versus behavior as scientific methods.
Both Smythies and MacLennan argue that one need not
(or should not) rely on strict behavioral methods to under-
stand color scientifically because we can rely on introspec-
tion instead. I do not deny that introspection almost always
provides a crucial starting point in color science or any other
psychological science. I do object to the stronger claim that
it is sufficient, either alone (Smythies) or in conjunction
with neurological theories (MacLennan) for doing science.
One problem is that unless one is willing to embrace the
idea that investigations that are limited to one’s self consti-
tute science – that is, that all one needs to do is convince
oneself – behavior of some sort must be included, and the
subjectivity barrier raises its ugly head. Even describing
one’s introspections (as Goethe did according to MacLen-
nan’s example) verbally to someone else involves behavior.
Because introspections are inherently subjective, they can-
not be the basis of objective generalizations (which I take
to be necessary for any scientific inquiry) unless they are ex-
ternalized by some sort of behavior.
Furthermore, when two people’s introspective analyses
differ, there is no way to decide which is correct without be-
havioral measures. One cannot turn to neurological theo-
ries or data as the deciding evidence, as MacLennan sug-
gests, because the disputed fact concerns the nature of the
experiences themselves, not whatever neural events might
underlie them. Having the wrong neural theory could then
Response/Palmer: Color and consciousness
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1999) 22:6
983
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0140525X99292217
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Massachusetts Amherst, on 18 Nov 2019 at 06:30:53, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at

lead one to reject an accurate phenomenological analysis
that was inconsistent with it. This possibility may seem far-
fetched, but something like it almost happened when pro-
ponents of Helmholtzian trichromatic color theory at-
tempted to reject Hering’s analysis of color into four
chromatic primitives (red, green, blue, and yellow) because
it conflicted with the three hypothetical receptor types in
Helmholtz’s neural theory.
R7. Empirical issues about color experience. Many of
the commentators made what I consider to be straightfor-
ward empirical points concerning scientific facts about
color experience, color naming, or related topics. The main
generalization is that color experience is much more com-
plex than I indicated in my bare-bones description of basic
phenomena of color vision. With this I generally agree. Be-
low I briefly state some of the most important clarifications
and explain, where I can, why I did not discuss them. I also
indicate points with which I do not agree and explain why I
do not.
Hardin, van Brakel, and Saunders all mention in one
way or another that there are actually more color spaces
(e.g., Munsell, CIE, NCS) and color models (e.g., Land’s
retinex theory) rather than just the view I present. This is
true. Because these other color structures are constructed
according to different psychometric and scaling principles,
they reflect different relational properties among color ex-
periences and have somewhat different symmetries – if in-
deed they have any at all. MacLaury and Kay similarly
mention metric properties that break symmetries, such as
the fact that there are more just noticeable differences
(jnd’s) between red and blue than between blue and green.
Griffin actually presents what I take to be new data on sim-
ilarity judgments that rule out the existence of any precise
symmetries, although he makes the sensible point that
there can be degrees of symmetry, with gradations of sym-
metry-breaking.
The primary implication of these (and other) facts is that,
on closer inspection, color experience does not have the
three symmetries I suggested in Figure 3 of the target arti-
cle. Such empirical constraints further undermine the pos-
sibility that the color experiences of two individuals could
be the same, yet differently connected to the outside world.
This conclusion holds, however, only if one assumes auto-
morphism, that is, that all normal trichromats have the
same color experiences.
I intentionally avoided these kinds of complications in my
original target article for four reasons. First, my goal was to
elucidate the nature of the argument concerning how em-
pirical constraints bear on the basic question of detecting
color transformations rather than to arrive at a definitive an-
swer to Locke’s thesis. Second, I wanted to base my analy-
sis as much as possible on robust qualitative phenomena
rather than on more questionable quantitative relations
that depend importantly on the details of specific psy-
chophysical methods. For example, is the number of jnd’s
between two colors the appropriate way to measure the
metric aspects of color experience, or should one use more
direct ratio scaling procedures? Third, as Block mentions,
it can be argued that the mere possibility of there being
symmetries in color experience is sufficient to reject func-
tionalism, even if human color vision contains none.
Fourth, and most important, I later use the possibility of
alien colors and color zombies to argue that the automor-
phism assumption is unnecessary to the general question,
thus rendering irrelevant the issue of whether or not the
structure of one’s color experience contains any symme-
tries.
There is one empirically based objection to my line of ar-
gument with which I must take exception, however. If I un-
derstand his argument, Cohen claims that the set of color
transformations I suggest might be undetectable is incom-
plete because it does not include slight rotations, stretches
or squeezes.3 The problem is that such transformations
would, in fact, be behaviorally detectable in appropriate
quantitative psychophysical tasks. In the terminology of my
target article, individuals whose judgments of, say, unique
hues differ significantly are members of different behav-
ioral equivalence classes within the larger class of so-called
“normal trichromats.” In fact, there are a number of well
known kinds of “color weakness” that I did not discuss that
result from the presence of slightly different photopig-
ments in retinal cones. I therefore do not believe that Co-
hen’s objection is a problem with the analysis I gave.
Other writers comment on various empirical matters
concerning BCTs. Kay presents some intriguing data about
complexities in the relation among derived and composite
BCTs, and Paramei argues that goluboi is not a BCT of
Russian. I have no quarrel with these presentations, but see
them as only tangentially relevant to the main points of the
target article. Specifically, I remain unconvinced that BCTs
are properly considered part of one’s “basic” color experi-
ence on viewing the world, but, if they are, then the issues
they raise are relevant to answering Locke’s question about
inverted spectra.
Still other commentators discuss aspects of color vision
that I did not consider in the target article, but should have.
Lockhead & Heuttel remind us of the mysterious “sub-
jective” color experiences induced by particular kinds of
moving or flickering line displays. Nobody knows why these
stimuli should cause such experiences, but they are cer-
tainly relevant to the issue of whether it makes sense to de-
fine color as an internal or external phenomenon (see sect.
R3). Humphreys & Riddoch and Benson report on the
importance of neuropsychological studies of patients with
various deficits in color perception. The findings they dis-
cuss, and others like them, bear importantly on the viabil-
ity of within-subjects designs for detecting changes in color
experience (see sect. R8) and on the possibility of color
zombies.
Kranda and Backhaus discuss the target article with 
respect to the genetics, evolution, and physiological struc-
ture of color vision systems. Kranda argues that the proba-
bility of switching the long- and medium-wavelength cones
would be vanishingly small (10212), and evolutionarily im-
probable as well.4 Backhaus presents his neuronal color op-
ponent coding theory in the honeybee and argues that the
kind of physiological changes required for color transfor-
mations would be highly unlikely because several mutations
would be required simultaneously.
I am not knowledgeable enough in these fields to remark
on the technical arguments that these authors present. By
way of a general response, however, I would like to point
out that (1) logical possibility is not the same as low proba-
bility and my arguments were about logical possibilities, (2)
genetic probabilities under natural selection may be less
relevant in the not too distant future with the advent of ge-
netic engineering, and (3) none of their arguments address
Response/Palmer: Color and consciousness
984
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1999) 22:6
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0140525X99292217
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Massachusetts Amherst, on 18 Nov 2019 at 06:30:53, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at

either the alien color argument or the color zombie argu-
ment, both of which I take to be serious considerations in
understanding color experiences. I also believe that Back-
haus is overly optimistic when he claims that the holy grail
of physics, a grand unified “theory of everything,” must nec-
essarily allow us to compare color experiences in different
brains. That sort of naive acceptance of the reach of physi-
cal science is exactly what the target article was question-
ing, and I still see no good reason to believe that Backhaus
will turn out to be correct in his assessment.
R8. The problem of memory in within-subject experien-
tial changes. Some of my arguments about the power and
usefulness of within-subject designs rest on intuitions about
what would happen as the result of certain biological inter-
ventions. If the photopigments in medium- and long-wave-
length cones could magically be interchanged, for example,
I assumed that the subject would notice the change and be
able to report it behaviorally to an experimenter, provided
the changes were “swift and enormous.”
Several commentators (e.g., Dennett, Bradie, and
Pauen) took exception to this assumption for various rea-
sons. Bradie claimed that for the purposes of qualia com-
parison, one’s prior self is as alien a being to one’s present
self as is any other mind. Dennett claimed that we could all
gradually become color zombies and not know it. Pauen
suggested that experiential changes would be undetectable
if my memories changed in the same way as my experience
did.
As convenient as these possibilities might be from certain
theoretical points of view, the facts indicate that they are not
serious concerns. There are clear cases, cited in commen-
taries by Humphreys & Riddoch and by Benson, in
which neurological patients clearly detect changes in their
color experiences and report them to their physicians. Such
effects are not limited to neuropsychological studies, how-
ever. Putting on tinted goggles or (for some people, at least)
taking a large enough dose of Viagra causes a swift and/or
enormous enough effect to notice a bluing or greening
change in the appearance of objects. The memories of these
people do not change concomitantly, and their present
selves’ access to the color experiences of their prior selves
is manifestly sufficient to detect the alterations in color ap-
pearances.
The fact that some people under some conditions are
able to detect color differences does not entirely answer the
critics’ concerns because there might be other people un-
der other conditions in which memory changes would mask
experiential changes. We therefore would like to devise a
form of physiological intervention in which memory plays
little or no role in people’s ability to detect any color
changes it might produce. Perhaps the best way to accom-
plish this is to envision carrying out the physiological inter-
vention so that it affects only half of the visual field. Corti-
cal interventions would then be performed in only one
cerebral hemisphere, and lower level interventions to the
appropriate portion of the retina or LGN.
The observer could then view half of an object or scene
with the unaffected hemifield and the other half with the
affected hemifield and compare the two simultaneously,
with no memory component to distort the results. There are
no such results that I know of, but we are talking about hy-
pothetical (i.e., thought) experiments to begin with, so this
minor twist causes no real conceptual difficulty. I therefore
do not feel compelled by the memory objection to change
my basic claims about the importance of within-subject de-
signs.
The commentaries on the target article have challenged,
but not changed, my belief that color is one of the most in-
teresting and informative areas of cognitive science, and
one that can usefully serve as a model for investigating other
areas, including their experiential versus behavioral as-
pects. I hope that the target article, commentaries, and re-
ply have advanced our understanding of at least the ques-
tions underlying color experience, if not the answers.
NOTES
1. Dennett makes an odd and misleading analogy that access
to the intrinsic qualities of one’s sensory experience is like access
to whether one’s left or right hemisphere is dominant. The im-
portant difference is that nobody claims to have introspective ac-
cess to which of one’s hemispheres is dominant, whereas every-
body (except perhaps Dennett) claims to have introspective access
to the intrinsic qualities of their own sensory experiences.
2. This scheme would not work if the wiring from M- and L-
cones to the R-cell and the G-cell were determined by the nature of
the pigment, but I know of no logical reason why this needs to be so.
3. Cohen also claims that I was trying to save functionalism –
despite the fact that I ended up arguing against it – but I was not.
I only wanted to give functionalism its best shot.
4. Kranda also states that the H, B, and S outputs of the color
machine in Figure 6 would always equal zero, but this is untrue. I
intentionally did not specify the weightings on the connections to
the hypothetical H, B, and S nodes because the nature of the com-
putation has not been discovered and is not relevant to the argu-
ment I was making. The arrows to the output nodes in the diagram
merely indicate which opponent-process nodes presumably affect
which output nodes, not how they interact.
References
Letters “a” and “r” appearing before authors’ initials refer to target article
and response, respectively.
Abramov, I., Gordon, J., Akilov, V., Babiy, M., Bakis, G., Ilyusha, S., Khamermesh,
K. & Vayner, A. (1997) Color appearance: Singing the Russian blues.
Investigative Ophthalmology and Visual Science 38:S899.
[GVP]
Armstrong, D. M. (1968) A materialist theory of the mind. Routledge.
[AB]
Baars, B. (1988) A cognitive theory of consciousness. Cambridge University Press.
[aSEP]
Bachelard, G. (1972) Le matérialisme rationnel. Presses Universitaires de France.
[BH]
Backhaus, W. (1992) Evolutionary aspects of the theory of color vision in insects.
In: Proceedings of the 3rd International Congress of Neuroethology, McGill
University, Montreal, Quebec, Canada, August 9–14, 1992.
[WB]
(1993) Color vision and color choice behavior of the honey bee. In: Recent
progress in neurobiology of the honey bee. Special issue. Apidologie 
24:309–31.
[WB]
(1994) Color sensations in honeybees? In: Society of Neuroscience Abstracts, vol.
20, part 2: Visual psychophysics and behavior, 647.14.
[WB]
(1995) On the proof of color sensations in animals. Eighteenth European
Conference of Visual Perception, Tübingen, Germany. Abstracts. Perception
24:91a, Supplement.
[WB]
(1996) Allgemeine Sinnesphysiologie. In: Neurowissenschaft. Vom Molekül zur
Kognition, ed. H. J. Dudel, R. Munzel & R. F. Schmidt. Springer.
[WB]
(1997a) Colour sensations in honeybees? In: John Dalton’s colour vision legacy:
Selected Proceedings of the International Conference, ed. C. Dickinson, I.
Murray & D. Carden. Taylor & Francis.
[WB]
(1997b) On the problem of physiological modeling of color sensations. In: 
From membrane to mind. Proceedings of the 25th Göttingen Neurobiology
Conference, vol. II, N. Elsner & H. Wässle. Thieme.
[WB]
(1997c) On the constraints for physiological models of color sensations. (Über
die Randbedingungen für physiologische Modelle von Farbempfindungen).
In: Verhandlungen der Deutschen Zoologischen Gesellschaft, ed. D. Zissler.
Fischer.
[WB]
References/Palmer: Color and consciousness
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1999) 22:6
985
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0140525X99292217
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Massachusetts Amherst, on 18 Nov 2019 at 06:30:53, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at

(1998a) Physiological and psychophysical simulations of color vision in humans
and animals. In: Color vision - perspectives from different disciplines, ed. W.
Backhaus, R. Kliegl & J. S. Werner. De Gruyter.
[WB]
(1998b) On the constraints for a physiological model of color sensations. In: New
neuroethology on the move. Göttingen Neurobiology Report 1998: Proceedings
of the 26th Göttingen Neurobiology Conference 1998, vol. I, ed. N. Elsner &
R. Wehner. Thieme.
[WB]
(1998c) Neuronal color coding in the honeybee. In: From structure to
information in sensory systems, ed. C. Taddei-Ferretti & C. Musio. World
Scientific.
[WB]
(1998d) The internal representation of color information in humans and animals.
In: Downward processes in the perception representation mechanisms, ed. C.
Taddei- Ferretti & C. Musio. World Scientific.
[WB]
(1998e) Conscious and unconscious color vision in man and animals. In:
Downward processes in the perception representation mechanisms, ed. C.
Taddei-Ferretti & C. Musio. World Scientific.
[WB]
(1999) Neuronal coding and color sensations. In: Proceedings of the 5th
International Work-Conference on Artificial and Neural Networks (IWANN
’99), Alicante, Spain, June 2–4, 1999: Vol. I. Foundations and tools for
neuronal modeling, ed. J. Mira & J. V. Sánchez-Andrés. Springer.
[WB]
(in press) Physiological modeling of color sensations. In: Neuronal bases and
psychological aspects of consciousness, ed. C. Taddei-Ferretti & C. Musio.
World Scientific.
[WB]
Backhaus, W., ed. (in preparation) Neuronal coding of perceptual systems.
Proceedings of the International School of Biophysics, Course on “Neuronal
coding of perceptual systems,” Ischia/Naples, Italy, October 12–17, 1998.
Istituto Italiano per gli Studi Filosofici, Study Program on “From neuronal
coding to consciousness.” In: Series of biophysics and biocybernetics, vol. 8,
ed. W. Backhaus. World Scientific.
[WB]
Backhaus, W., Gerster, U., Buckow, H., Pielot, R., Breyer, J. & Becker, K. (1996)
Physiological simulations of neuronal color coding in honeybees. In: Bionet
‘96. Bio-informatics and pulspropagating networks - selected contributions.
3rd Workshop, Berlin, November 14–15, 1996. GFAI.
[WB]
Backhaus, W., Kliegl, R. & Werner, J. S., eds. (1998) Color vision - perspectives
from different disciplines. de Gruyter.
[WB]
Backhaus, W. & Kratzsch, D. (1993) Unique-colors in color vision of the
honeybee? In: Genes, brain and behavior. Proceedings of the 21st Göttingen
Neurobiology Conference, ed. N. Elsner & D. W. Richter. Thieme.
[WB]
Becker, K. & Backhaus, W. (1998) Physiological modeling of temporal properties of
the neuronal color coding system in the honeybee. In: From structure to
information in sensory systems, ed. C. Taddei-Ferretti & C. Musio. World
Scientific.
[WB]
(in press) A quantitative model describing the electrophysiological properties of
dark and light adapted photoreceptors in the honeybee (Apis mellifera)
worker. Biological Cybernetics.
[WB]
Berlin, B. & Kay, P. (1969) Basic color terms: Their universality and evolution.
University of California Press.
[PK, BM, aSEP, GVP]
Block, N. (1978) Troubles with functionalism. In: Minnesota studies in the
philosophy of science, vol. IX, ed. C. W. Savage. (Reprinted in: Mind and
cognition, ed. W. Lycan. Blackwell, 1990; The nature of mind, ed. D. M.
Rosenthal. Oxford University Press, 1991; Philosophy of mind, ed. B. Beakley
& P. Ludlow. Mit Press, 1992; Readings in philosophy and cognitive science,
ed. A. Goldman. MIT Press, 1993.)
[NB]
(1980) What is functionalism? In: Readings in philosophy of psychology, vol. 1,
ed. N. Block. Harvard University Press.
[NB]
(1990) Inverted earth. Philosophical Perspectives 4:51–79.
[NB]
Reprinted in: The nature of consciousness, ed. N. Block, O. Flanagan & G.
Güzeldere. MIT Press, 1997.
[AB]
(1995) On a confusion about a function of consciousness. Behavioral and Brain
Sciences 18:227–47.
[PJB]
Reprinted with changes in: The nature of consciousness, ed. N. Block, O.
Flanagan & G. Güzeldere. MIT Press, 1997. [AB]
(1999) Sexism, racism, ageism and the nature of consciousness. In: The
philosophy of Sydney Shoemaker, ed. R. Moran, J. Whiting & A. Sidelle.
Philosophical Topics 26(1&2).
[NB]
Block, N., ed. (1980) Readings in philosophy of psychology, vol. 1 and 2. Harvard
University Press.
[JvB]
Block, N., Flanagan, O. & Guzeldere, G. (1997) The nature of consciousness:
Philosophical debates. MIT Press.
[NB]
Block, N. & Fodor, J. (1972) What psychological states are not. Philosophical
Review 81:159–81.
[NB]
Boghossian, P. & Velleman, D. (1989) Color as a secondary quality. Mind 98:81–
103. (Reprinted in: Readings on color: The philosophy of color, ed. A. Byrne &
D. Hilbert. MIT Press).
[NB]
(1991) Physicalist theories of color. Philosophical Review 100:67–106.
(Reprinted in: Readings on color: The philosophy of color, ed. A. Byrne & D.
Hilbert. MIT Press).
[NB]
Bornstein, M. H., Kessen, W. & Weiskopf, S. (1976) Color vision and hue
categorization in young human infants. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Human Perception and Performance 2(1):115–29.
[aSEP]
Boster, J. (1986) Can individuals recapitulate the evolutionary development of
color lexicons? Ethnology 25:61–64.
[PK]
Boynton, R. M. (1979) Human color vision. Holt, Rinehart & Winston.
[MN-R,
PWR]
Boynton, R. M., Schafer, W. & Neun, M. E. (1964) Hue-wavelength relation
measured by color-naming method for three retinal locations. Science
146:666–68.
[GVP]
Bulmer, R. H. N. (1968) Karam colour categories. Kivung 1:120–33.
[JvB]
Byrne, A. & Hilbert, D. (1997) Colors and reflectances. In: Readings on color, vol.
1: The philosophy of color, ed. A. Byrne & D. Hilbert. MIT Press.
[NB, AB]
Cataliotti, J. & Gilchrist, A. (1995) Local and global processes in surface lightness
perception. Perception and Psychophysics 57(2):125–35.
[rSEP]
Chalmers, D. J. (1995) Facing up to the problem of consciousness. Journal of
Consciousness Studies 2:200–19.
[BM]
(1996) The conscious mind. Oxford University Press.
[BM, JTT]
Chapanis, A. (1965) Color names for color space. American Scientist 53:327–46.
[RMF]
Chisholm, R. (1954) Sellars’ critical realism. Philosophy and Phenomenological
Research 15(1):33–47.
[EW]
Church, J. (1998) Two sorts of consciousness? Communication and Cognition
31:57–72.
[EM]
Churchland, P. M. (1981) Eliminative materialism and the propositional attitudes.
Journal of Philosophy 78:67–89.
[HH, rSEP]
(1986) Some reductive strategies in cognitive neuroscience. Mind 95:279–309.
[HH]
(1989) A neurocomputational perspective: The nature of mind and the structure
of science. MIT Press.
[HH]
(1995) The engine of reason, the seat of the soul: A philosophical journey into the
brain. MIT Press.
[HH, rSEP]
(1998) Conceptual similarity across sensory and neural diversity: The Fodor/
Lepore challenge answered. The Journal of Philosophy 95(1):5–32.
[GJO]
Clark, A. (1993) Sensory qualities. Oxford University Press.
[AB]
Cohen, J. & Gordon, D. A. (1949) Prevost-Fechner-Benham subjective colors.
Psychological Bulletin 46:97–136.
[GRL]
Copeland, B. J. (1993) The curious case of the Chinese gym. Synthese 95:173–86.
[AB]
Corbett, G. & Davis, R. (1997) Establishing basic color terms: Measures and
techniques. In: Color categories in thought and language, ed. C. L. Hardin &
L. Maffi. Cambridge University Press.
[RMF]
Corbett, G. & Morgan, G. (1988) Colour terms in Russian: Reflections of
typological constraints in a single language. Journal of Linguistics 24:31–64.
[GVP]
Courtney, S. M., Finkel, L. H. & Buchsbaum, G. (1995a) Network simulations of
retinal and cortical contributions to color constancy. Vision Research 33:413–
34.
[HH]
(1995b) A multi-stage neural network for color constancy and color induction.
IEEE Transactions on Neural Networks 6:972–85.
[HH]
Crane, T. (1992) The non-conceptual content of experience. In: The contents of
experience: Essays on perception, ed. T. Crane. Cambridge University Press.
[NB]
Crick, F. H. C. (1994) The astonishing hypothesis: The scientific search for the soul.
Scribner.
[aSEP]
Crick, F. H. C. & Koch, C. (1995) Are we aware of neural activity in primary visual
cortex? Nature 375:121–23.
[aSEP]
Cross, S. A. (1994) Pathophysiology of pain. In: Mayo Clinic Proceedings 69:375–
83.
[MP]
Damasio, A. R. (1994) Descartes’ error: Emotion, reason, and the human brain.
G. P. Putnam.
[EM, MP]
Davies, I. R. L., Corbett, G. G., Laws, G., McGurk, H., Moss, A. E. St. G. &
Smith, M. W. (1991) Linguistic basicness and colour information processing.
International Journal of Psychology 26:311–27.
[GVP]
Dennett, D. C. (1978) Brainstorms. MIT Press.
[aSEP]
(1991) Consciousness explained. Little, Brown.
[DCD, aSEP, CDV]
De Valois, R. L. & De Valois, K. K. (1993) A multi-stage color model. Vision
Research 33:1053–65.
[BM]
De Valois, R. L. & Jacobs, G. H. (1968) Primate color vision. Science
162(3853):533–40.
[aSEP]
Dretske, F. (1995) Naturalizing the mind. MIT Press.
[NB, AB, PWR]
Dubois, D., ed. (1997) Categorisation et cognition: De la perception au discours.
Kime.
[RMF]
Dubois, D., Rouby, C. & Chevalier, G. (1997) Categorization for odors: What
makes smell similar? In: Proceedings of SimCat 1997: An interdisciplinary
workshop on similarity and cognition. University of Edinburgh Press.
[RMF]
Fenton, M. (1997) Psychological approaches to the investigation of colour:
Meaning and representation. Spectrum 11:4–9.
[GVP]
References/Palmer: Color and consciousness
986
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1999) 22:6
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0140525X99292217
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Massachusetts Amherst, on 18 Nov 2019 at 06:30:53, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at

Fodor, J. (1968) Psychological explanation. Random House.
[aSEP]
(1981) The present status of the innateness controversy. In: J. Fodor,
Representations: Philosophical essays on the foundations of cognitive science.
MIT Press.
[BS]
Fodor, J. & Lepore, E. (1992) Holism: A shopper’s guide. Blackwell.
[HH]
Frege, G. (1884/1950) The foundations of arithmetic, trans. J. L. Austin. Blackwell.
[AB]
(1918/1988) Thoughts. In: Propositions and attitudes, ed. N. Salmon & S.
Soames. Oxford University Press. (Reprint.)
[AB]
Frijda, N. H. (1993) Moods, emotion episodes, and emotions. In: Handbook of
emotions, ed. M. Lewis & J. M. Haviland. Guilford Press.
[MP]
Frumkina, R. M. (1984) Zvet, Smysl, Skhodstvo: Aspekty Psikholingvisticheskogo
analiza. Nauka.
[RMF]
Frumkina, R. M. & Mikhejev, A. V. (1996) Meaning and categorization. Nova
Science.
[RMF]
Gage, J. (1993) Colour and culture: Practice and meaning from antiquity to
abstraction. Thames & Hudson.
[JvB]
Garner, W. R. (1974) The processing of information and structure. Erlbaum.
[rSEP]
Gilchrist, A. L. (1988) Lightness contrast and failures of constancy: A common
explanation. Perception and Psychophysics 43(5):415–24.
[rSEP]
Goethe, J. W. von (1840) Goethe’s theory of colours, trans. C. L. Eastlake. John
Murray.
[BM]
Goodwin, C. (1997) The blackness of black: Color categories as situated 
practice. In: Discourse, tools, and reasoning: Essays on situated cognition, ed.
B. Lauren, L. Resnick, R. Säljö, C. Pontecorvo & B. Burge. Springer.
[RMF]
Gordon, J., Abramov, I. & Chan, H. (1994) Describing color appearance: Hue and
saturation scaling. Perception and Psychophysics 56:27–41.
[GVP]
Gould, S. J. (1980) Is a new and general theory of evolution emerging?
Paleobiology 6:119–30.
[KK]
Gregory, R. L. (1981) Mind in science. Penguin.
[JSm]
(1983) Perception: Philosophical issues. In: The encyclopedic dictionary of
psychology, ed. R. Harré & R. Lamb. Blackwell.
[EW]
Guo, K., Benson, P. J. & Blakemore, C. (1998) Residual motion discrimination
using colour information without primary visual cortex. NeuroReport 9:2103–
107.
[PJB]
Hardin, C. L. (1988) Color for philosophers: Unweaving the rainbow. Hackett.
[EM, JvB]
(1990) Color and illusion. Presented at The phenomenal mind: How is it
possible and why is it necessary? Conference held by Zentrum fur
Interdisziplinare Forschung, Bielefeld, Germany, May 1990.
[aSEP]
(1997) Reinverting the spectrum. In: Readings on color: Vol. 1. The philosophy
of color, ed. A. Byrne & D. R. Hilbert. MIT Press.
[aSEP]
Harman, G. (1990) The intrinsic quality of experience. In: The nature of
consciousness, ed. N. Block, O. Flanagan & G. Güzeldere. MIT Press, 1997.
[AB]
(1996) Explaining objective color in terms of subjective reactions. In:
Philosophical issues 7: Perception, ed. E. Villanueva. Ridgeview.
[NB]
Harnad, S. (1987) Category induction and representation. In: Categorical
perception: The groundwork of cognition, ed. S. Harnad. Cambridge
University Press.
[EW]
Harrison, B. (1967) On describing colours. Inquiry 10(1):38–52.
[BH]
(1973) Form and content. Blackwell.
[BH, aSEP]
(1986) Identity, predication and colour. American Philosophical Quarterly
23(1):105- 14.
[BH]
(1987) Identity, predication and colour. In: Philosophy and the visual arts, ed. A.
Harrison. Reidel.
[BH]
Hayek, F. A. (1952) The sensory order. Routledge & Kegan Paul.
[aSEP]
Heider, E. R. (1972) Universals in color naming and memory. Journal of
Experimental Psychology 93(1):10–20.
[aSEP]
Heisenberg, W. (1958) Physics and philosophy. Harper.
[JSm]
Hering, E. (1878/1964) Outlines of a theory of the light sense, trans. L. M. Hurvich
& D. J. Jameson. Harvard University Press.
[BM, aSEP]
Heywood, C. A., Kentridge, R. W. & Cowey, C. (1998) Cortical color blindness is
not “blindsight for color.” Consciousness and Cognition 7:410–23.
[PJB]
Hilbert, D. R. & Kalderon, M. (in press) Color and the inverted spectrum.
Vancouver Studies in Cognitive Science. [AB]
Hoffman, D. (1998) Visual intelligence: How we create what we see. W. W. Norton.
[CDV]
Hooker, C. A. (1995) Reason, regulation and realism: Toward a regulatory systems
theory of evolutionary epistemology. State University of New York Press.
[EW]
Humphreys, G. W., Troscianko, T., Riddoch, M. J., Bouvcart, M., Donnelly, N. &
Harding, G. F. A. (1992) Covert processing in different visual recognition
systems. In: The neuropsychology of consciousness, ed. A. D. Milner & M.
Rugg. Academic Press.
[GWH]
Hurvich, L. M. (1981) Color vision. Sinauer.
[JC]
Indow, T. (1988) Multidimensional studies of Munsell color solid. Psychological
Review 95:456–70.
[GVP, JvB]
Jackson, F. (1982) Ephiphenomenal qualia. Philosophical Quarterly 32:127–36.
[HH, MN-R]
James, W. (11890/1950) Principles of psychology. Holt.
[aSEP]
Johnson-Laird, P. N. (1983) A computational analysis of consciousness. Cognition
and Brain Theory 6:499–508.
[aSEP]
Kandel, E., Schwartz, J. & Jessell, T. (1995) Essentials of neural science and
behavior. Appleton & Lange.
[CDV]
Kay, P. & Berlin, B. (1997) Science ± imperialism: There are non-trivial constraints
on color naming. Behavioral and Brain Sciences 20(2):196–201.
[PK, BS]
Kay, P. & Maffi, L. (in press) Color appearance and the emergence and evolution
of basic color lexicons. American Anthropologist.
[PK]
Kay, P. & McDaniel, C. K. (1978) The linguistic significance of the meanings of
basic color terms. Language 54:610–46.
[BM, aSEP]
Kevan, P. G. & Backhaus, W. (1998) Color vision: Ecology and evolution in making
the best of the photic environment. In: Color vision - perspectives from differ-
ent disciplines, ed. W. Backhaus, R. Kliegl & J. S. Werner. De Gruyter.
[WB]
Kim, J. (1984) Concepts of supervenience. Philosophy and Phenomenological
Research 65:153–76.
[aSEP]
Koffka, K. (1935) Principles of Gestalt psychology. Harcourt, Brace.
[aSEP]
Köhler, W. (1929) Gestalt psychology. G. Bell & Sons.
[aSEP]
Kranda, K. & King-Smith, P. E. (1979) Detection of coloured stimuli by
independent linear systems. Vision Research 19:733–45.
[KK]
Krantz, D. H., Luce, R. D., Suppes, P. & Tversky, A. (1971) Foundation of
measurement, vol. 1. Academic Press.
[arSEP]
Laakso, A. & Cottrell, G. W. (1998) How can I know what you think? Assessing
representational similarity in neural systems. In: Proceedings of the Twentieth
Conference of the Cognitive Science Society. Erlbaum.
[HH]
Land, E. H. (1986) Recent advances in retinex theory. Vision Research 26:7–21.
[BS]
Land, E. H. & McCann, J. J. (1971) Lightness and retinex theory. American
Journal of the Optical Society of America 61:1–11.
[rSEP]
Laws, G., Davies, I. & Andrews, C. (1995) Linguistic structure and non-linguistic
cognition: English and Russian blues compared. Language and Cognitive
Processes 10:59–94.
[GVP]
Levine, J. (1983) Materialism and qualia: The explanatory gap. Pacific
Philosophical Quarterly 64:354–61.
[aSEP]
Liberman, A. L., Harris, K. S., Hoffman, H. S. & Griffith, B. C. (1957) The
discrimination of speech sounds within and across phoneme boundaries.
Journal of Experimental Psychology 54:358–68.
[aSEP]
Locke, J. (1690/1987) An essay concerning human understanding. Clarendon
Press.
[KK, BM, EM, aSEP]
Lutze, M., Cox, N. J., Smith, V. C. & Pokorny, J. (1990) Genetic studies of variation
in Rayleigh and photometric matches in normal trichromats. Vision Research
30(1):149–62.
[NB]
Lycan, W. G. (1996) Consciousness and experience. MIT Press.
[NB, AB]
MacLaury, R. E. (1986) Color in Mesoamerica, vol. II: Primary, derived, and
desaturated categories. Manuscript in possession of author.
[REM]
(1991) Exotic color categories: Linguistic relativity to what extent? Journal of
Linguistic Anthropology 1:26–51.
[REM]
(1997a) An essay concerning human understanding. Clarendon Press.
[aSEP]
(1997b) Color and cognition in Mesoamerica: Constructing categories as
vantages. University of Texas Press.
[RMF, PK, REM, GVP]
(1997c) Ethnographic evidence of unique hues and elemental colors. Behavioral
and Brain Sciences 20:202–203.
[REM]
MacLennan, B. J. (1995) The investigation of consciousness through
phenomenology and neuroscience. In: Scale in conscious experience: Is the
brain too important to be left to specialists to study?, ed. J. King & K. H.
Pribram. Erlbaum. (http://www.cs.utk.edu/~mclennan/papers/ICTPN-
tr.ps.Z).
[BM]
(1996a) The elements of consciousness and their neurodynamical correlates.
Journal of Consciousness Studies 3:409–24. Reprinted in: Explaining
consciousness: The hard problem, ed. J. Shear. MIT Press.
[BM]
(http://www.cs.utk.edu/~mclennan/papers/ECNC.ps.Z)
(1996b) Protophenomena and their neurodynamical correlates. University of
Tennessee Computer Science Department Technical Report UT-CS-96–331.
[BM] (http://www.cs.utk.edu/~mclennan/papers/PNC.ps)
(1999) The protophenomenal structure of consciousness with especial
application to the experience of color. University of Tennessee Computer
Science Department Technical Report UT-CS-99–418.
[BM]
(http://www.cs.utk.edu/~mclennan/papers/PSClong.ps.Z)
MacLeod, D. I. A. & Lennie, P. (1976) Red-green blindness confined to one eye.
Vision Research 16:691–712.
[SEP]
Malcolm, N. L. (1999) Grammars rule OK. Behavioral and Brain Sciences
22(4):722–23.
[NLM]
(manuscript) De coloribus: Analysis and metaphysics.
[NLM]
Marcel, A. J. (1983) Conscious and unconscious perceptions: An approach to the
References/Palmer: Color and consciousness
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1999) 22:6
987
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0140525X99292217
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Massachusetts Amherst, on 18 Nov 2019 at 06:30:53, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at

relations between phenomenal experience and perceptual processes.
Cognitive Psychology 15:238–300.
[aSEP]
Marks, L. E. (1978) The unity of the senses. Academic Press.
[JTT]
Matsuzawa, T. (1985) Colour naming and classification in a chimpanzee (Pan
troglodytes). Journal of Human Evolution 14:283–91.
[CLH]
Maudlin, T. (1989) Computation and consciousness. Journal of Philosophy 86:407–
32.
[JS]
Maund, J. B. (1993) Representation, pictures and resemblance. In: New
representationalisms: Essays in the philosophy of perception, ed. E. Wright.
Avebury Press.
[EW]
McDowell, J. (1994a) Mind and world. Harvard University Press.
[EW]
(1994b) The content of perceptual experience. Philosophical Quarterly 44:190–
205.
[NB]
Meadows, J. C. (1974) Disturbed perception of colors associated with localized
cerebral lesions. Brain 97:615–32.
[aSEP]
Merriam-Webster’s Collegiate Dictionary, 10th edition (1995). Merriam Webster,
Inc.
[MHB]
Missa, J.-N. (1993) La philosophie face aux donnees neuroscientifiques de la vision
des coulers. In: La couleur, ed. L. Couloubaritsis & J. Wunenberger. Ousia.
[RMF]
Moss, A. E., Davies, I., Corbett, G. & Laws, G. (1990) Mapping Russian color
terms using behavioral measures. Lingua 82:313–32.
[RMF]
Nagel, T. (1974) What is it like to be a bat? Philosophical Review 83:435–50.
[HH, MN- R]
Neitz, J. & Jacobs, G. (1986) Polymorphism of long-wavelength cone in normal
human color vision. Nature 323:623–25.
[NB]
Neitz, J., Neitz, M. & Jacobs, G. (1993) More than three different cone pig-
ments among people with normal color vision. Vision Research 33(1):117–
22.
[NB]
Neitz, M. & Neitz, J. (1995) Numbers and ratios of visual pigment genes for
normal red-green color vision. Science 267:1013–16.
[REM]
Newton, I. (1704/1952) Opticks (Books 3). Smith & Walford.
[aSEP]
Dover. [JvB]
Nida-Rümelin, M. (1996) Pseudonormal vision: An actual case of qualia inversion?
Philosophical Studies 82:145–57.
[KK, MN-R, aSEP, PWR]
(1998) On belief about experience. Philosophy and Phenomenological Research
51(1):51–73.
[MN-R]
(1999) Psuedonormal vision and color qualia. In: Tucson III: Towards a theory of
consciousness, ed. S. Hameroff, A. Kaszniak & D. Chalmers. MIT Press.
[MN- R]
Palmer, S. E. (1978) Fundamental aspects of cognitive representation. In:
Cognition and categorization, ed. E. Rosch & B. Lloyd. Erlbaum.
[GJO,
arSEP]
(1999) Vision science: Photons to phenomenology. MIT Press.
[arSEP]
Paramei, G. V. & Cavonius, C. R. (1997) Color naming in dizygotic twin protanopes
at different luminance levels. In: AIC Color 97: Proceedings of the 8th
Congress of the International Colour Association, vol. 2. The Color Science
Associaion of Japan.
[GVP]
Pauen, M. (1999) Das Rätsel des Bewußtseins. Eine Erklärungsstrategie. Mentis.
[MP]
Piaget, J. (1970) Genetic epistemology. Columbia University Press.
[EW]
Piantanida, T. P. (1974) A replacement model of X-linked recessive colour vision
defects. Annals of Human Genetics 37:393–404.
[MN-R]
Pielot, R. & Backhaus, W. (submitted) Simulations of coevolution of color vision
systems of pollinating insects and spectral reflectance of flowers. II. Biological
Cybernetics.
[WB]
Pielot, R., Breyer, J. & Backhaus, W. (in press) Simulations of coevolution of color
vision systems of pollinating insects and spectral reflectance of flowers. I.
Biological Cybernetics.
[WB]
Poincaré, H. (1952) Science and hypothesis. Dover.
[aSEP]
Pöppel, E. (1995) Lust und Schmertz. Über den Ursprung der Welt im Gehirn.
Goldmann.
[MP]
Posner, M. I. & Raichle, M. E. (1994) Images of mind. Scientific American Books.
[aSEP]
Proust, M. (1934) Remembrance of things past. Random House.
[NB]
Putnam, H. (1960) Minds and machines. In: Dimensions of mind, ed. S. Hook.
York University Press.
[aSEP]
(1965) Brains and behavior. In: Analytic philosophy, ed. R. J. Butler. Blackwell.
[aSEP]
Rainville, P., Duncan, G. H., Price, D. D., Carrier, B. & Bushnell, M. C. (1997)
Pain affect encoded in human anterior cingulate but not somatosensory
cortex. Science 277:968–71.
[MP]
Ramachandran, V. S. & Blakeslee, S. (1998) Phantoms in the brain. Morrow.
[JSm]
Rey, G. (1997) Contemporary philosophy of mind. Blackwell.
[NB]
Riley, C. A. (1995) Color codes. University Press of New England.
[CLH]
Rommetveit, R. (1974) On messaage structure: A framework for the study of
language and communication. Wiley.
[EW]
(1983) On negative rationalism in scholarly studies of verbal communication and
dynamic residuals in the construction of human intersubjectivity. In: The
social contexts of method, ed. M. Brenner, P. Marsh & M. Brenner. Croom
Helm.
[EW]
Rosch, E. (1973) On the internal structure of perceptual and semantic categories.
In: Cognitive development and the acquisition of language, ed. T. E. Moore.
[aSEP]
(1975) Cognitive reference points. Cognitive Psychology 7(4):532–47.
[aSEP]
Russell, B. (1918) Introduction to mathematical philosophy. Allen and Unwin.
[JSm]
Sahlins, M. (1976) Colors and cultures. Semiotica 1:1–22.
[RMF]
Sandell, J. H., Gross, C. G. & Bornstein, M. H. (1979) Color categories in
macaques. Journal of Comparative and Physiological Psychology 93(4)
:626–35.
[aSEP]
Saunders, B. A. C. & van Brakel, J. (1997) Are there non-trivial constraints on
colour naming? Behavioral and Brain Sciences 20:167–228.
[arSEP, GVP]
Schutz, A. (1962) Collected papers, vol. I: The problem of social reality. Martinus
Nijhoff.
[EW]
Searle, J. R. (1980) Minds, brains, and programs. Behavioral and Brain Sciences
3(3):417–57.
[NB, aSEP, JS]
Sejnowski, T. J. & Rosenberg, C. (1987) Parallel networks that learn to pronounce
English text. Complex Systems 1:145–68.
[GJO]
Sellars, R. W. (1922) Evolutionary naturalism. Open Court.
[rSEP, EW]
(1932) The philosophy of physical realism. Macmillan.
[EW]
(1916/1969) Critical realism. Russell and Russell.
[EW]
Sheinberg, D. L. & Logothetis, N. K. (1997) The role of temporal cortical areas in
perceptual organization. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences
USA 94:3408–13.
[aSEP]
Shepard, R. N. (1962a) The analysis of proximities: Multidimensional scaling with
an unknown distance function: Part I. Psychometrika 27(3):125–40.
[aSEP]
(1962b) The analysis of proximities: Multidimensional scaling with an unknown
distance function: Part II. Psychometrika 27(3):219–46.
[aSEP]
(1982) Geometric approximations to the structure of musical pitch.
Psychological Review 91:117–47.
[aSEP]
Shepard, R. N. & Chipman, S. (1970) Second-order isomorphism of internal
representations: Shapes of states. Cognitive Psychology 1:1–17.
[aSEP]
Shepard, R. N. & Cooper, L. A. (1975) Representation of colors in normal, blind,
and color-blind subjects. Paper presented at the Meeting of the American
Psychological Association, Chicago, September 1975.
[GRL]
Shoemaker, S. (1975) Functionalism and qualia. Philosophical Studies 27:291–315.
[NB, RVG]
(1981) Absent qualia are impossible. Philosophical Review 90:581–99.
[RVG]
(1982) The inverted spectrum. The Journal of Philosophy 79(7):357–81.
[NB]
Reprinted in: The nature of consciousness, ed. N. Block, O. Flanagan & G.
Güzeldere. MIT Press, 1997.
[AB]
(1994) Self-knowledge and inner sense. Lecture III: The phenomenal character
of experience. Philosophy and Phenomenological Research 54(2):291–314.
[NB]
Sloan, L. L. & Wollach, L. (1948) A case of unilateral deuteranopia. Journal of the
Optical Society of America 38:501–509.
[aSEP]
Smythies, J. R. (1959–60) The stroboscopic patterns. British Journal of Psychology
50:106–16, 305–25; 51:247–55.
[JSm]
(1994a) Requiem for the identity theory. Inquiry 37:311–29.
[JSm]
(1994b) The walls of Plato’s cave. Avebury Press.
[JSm]
(1999) Consciousness: Some basic issues. A neurophilosophical perspective.
Consciousness and Cognition (in press).
[JSm]
Stalnaker, R. (in press) Comparing qualia across persons. Philosophical Topics.[AB]
Stevens, S. S. (1951) Mathematics, measurement, and psychophysics. In:
Handbook of experimental psychology, ed. S. S. Stevens. Wiley.
[aSEP]
Stillings, N. A., Feinstein, M. H., Garfield, J. L., Rissland, E. L., Rosenhaus, D. A.,
Weisler, S. E. & Baker-Ward, L. (1987) Cognitive science: An introduction.
MIT Press.
[JvB]
Stoerig, P., Barbur, J. L., Sahraie, A. & Weiskrantz, L. (1994) Discrimination of
chromatic stimuli in blindsight: Pupilometry and psychophysics. Investigative
Ophthalmology and Visual Science 35:1813.
[PJB]
Stoerig, P. & Cowey, A. (1992) Wavelength sensitivity in blindsight. Brain 115:425–
44.
[EM]
Stwertka, S. A. (1993) The stroboscopic patterns as dissipative structures.
Neuroscience and Biobehavioral Reviews 17:68–78.
[JSm]
Tarski, A. (1954) Contributions to the theory of models: I. and II. Indigationes
Mathematicae 16:572–88.
[arSEP]
Taylor, J. R., Mondry, H. & MacLaury, R. E. (1997) A cognitive ceiling of eleven
basic color terms. In: R. E. MacLaury, Color and cognition in Mesoamerica:
Constructing categories as vantages, (Appendix IV). University of Texas Press.
[GVP]
Thompson, E. (1995) Colour vision: A study in cognitive science and the
philosophy of perception. Routledge.
[aSEP]
Thompson, E., Palacios, A. & Varela, F. J. (1992) Ways of coloring: Comparative
References/Palmer: Color and consciousness
988
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1999) 22:6
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0140525X99292217
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Massachusetts Amherst, on 18 Nov 2019 at 06:30:53, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at

color vision as a case study for cognitive science. Behavioral and Brain
Sciences 15(1):1–74.
[aSEP]
Tye, M. (1995) Ten problems of consciousness: A representational theory of the
phenomenal mind. MIT Press.
[NB, AB, JC]
Uchikawa, K. & Ikeda, M. (1987) Color discrimination and appearance of short-
duration, equal-luminance monochromatic lights. Journal of the Optical
Society of America A 4:1097–1103.
[GVP]
Van Gulick, R. (1985) Physicalism and the subjectivity of the mental. Philosophical
Topics 13:51–70.
[RVG]
(1991) Nonreductive materialism and the nature of intertheoretical constraint.
In: Emergence and reduction, ed. A. Beckermann, H. Flohr & J. Kim. De
Gruyter.
[RVG]
VESA-Video Electronic Standards Association (1998) Flat panel display
measurement standard, Version 1 (May 15, 1998), Section A203, Luminance -
L(z) for a Diffuse Object.
[MHB]
Vollrath, D., Nathans, J. & Davis, R. W. (1988) Tandem array of human visual
pigment genes at Xq28. Science 240:1669–72.
[KK]
Von Glaserfeld, E. (1982) An interpretation of Piaget’s constructivism. Réview
Internationale de Philosophie 142(3):612–35.
[EW]
Wallach, H. (1948) Brightness constancy and the nature of achromatic colors.
Journal of Experimental Psychology 38:310–24.
[rSEP]
Watson, J. D. & Crick, F. H. C. (1953) Molecular structure of nucleic acids: A
structure for deoxyribose nucleic acid. Nature 227(4356) 171:737–38.
[aSEP]
Weiskrantz, L. (1986) Blindsight: A case study and implications. Oxford University
Press.
[aSEP]
Wendler, D. (1996) Locke’s acceptance of innate concepts. Australasian Journal of
Philosophy 74(3):467–83.
[BS]
White, C., Lockhead, G. R. & Evans, N. J. (1977) Multidimensional scaling of
subjective colors by color-blind observers. Perception and Psychophysics
21:522–26.
[GRL]
Wittgenstein, L. (1953) Philosophical investigations. Macmillan.
[NB, aSEP, JvB]
Section 258 in Blackwell edition. [NLM]
Wright, E. L. (1986) Dialectical perception: Lenin and Bogdanov on perception.
Radical Philosophy 43:9–16.
[EW]
(1990) New representationalism. Journal for the Theory of Social Behaviour
20(2):65- 92.
[EW]
(1996) What it isn’t like. American Philosophical Quarterly 23(1):23–45.
Zadeh, L. A. (1975) Fuzzy sets and their applications to cognitive and decision
processes. Paper presented at the U. S.-Japan Seminar on Fuzzy Sets and
Their Applications, University of California, Berkeley.
[aSEP]
References/Palmer: Color and consciousness
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1999) 22:6
989
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0140525X99292217
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. University of Massachusetts Amherst, on 18 Nov 2019 at 06:30:53, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at

