Chapter 26
The Fantasy of First-Person Science
Daniel C. Dennett
A week ago, I heard James Conant give a talk at Tufts, entitled “Two Varieties of
Skepticism” in which he distinguished two oft-confounded questions:
Descartes: How is it possible for me to tell whether a thought of mine is true or false,
perception or dream?
Kant: How is it possible for something even to be a thought (of mine)? What are the
conditions for the possibility of experience (veridical or illusory) at all?
Conant’s excellent point was that in the history of philosophy, up to this very
day, we often ﬁnd philosophers talking past each other because they don’t see the
difference between the Cartesian question (or family of questions) and the Kantian
question (or family of questions), or because they try to merge the questions. I want
to add a third version of the question:
Turing: How could we make a robot that had thoughts, that learned from “ex-
perience” (interacting with the world) and used what it learned the way we can do?
There are two main reactions to Turing’s proposal to trade in Kant’s question for
his.
A. Cool! Turing has found a way to actually answer Kant’s question!
B. Aaaargh! Don’t fall for it! You’re leaving out … experience!
I’m captain of the A team (along with Quine, Rorty, Hofstadter, the Church-
lands, Andy Clark, Lycan, Rosenthal, Harman, and many others). I think the A
team wins, but I don’t think it is obvious. In fact, I think it takes a rather remarkable
exercise of the imagination to see how it might even be possible, but I do think one
(a written version of a debate with David Chalmers, held at Northwestern University, Evanston,
IL,. supplemented by an email debate with Alvin Goldman). © Dennett 2001, Feb 15.
Electronic supplementary material The online version of this chapter (https://doi.org/10.1007/
978-3-319-72478-2_26) contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.
D. C. Dennett (✉)
Center for Cognitive Studies, Tufts University, Medford, MA 02155, USA
© Springer International Publishing AG 2018
S. Wuppuluri and F. A. Doria (eds.), The Map and the Territory,
The Frontiers Collection, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-72478-2_26
455

can present a powerful case for it. As I like to put it, we are robots made of robots—
we’re each composed of some few trillion robotic cells, each one as mindless as the
molecules they’re composed of, but working together in a gigantic team that creates
all the action that occurs in a conscious agent. Turing’s great contribution was to
show us that Kant’s question could be recast as an engineering question. Turing
showed us how we could trade in the ﬁrst-person perspective of Descartes and Kant
for the third-person perspective of the natural sciences and answer all the questions
—without philosophically signiﬁcant residue.
David Chalmers is the captain of the B team, (along with Nagel, Searle, Fodor,
Levine, Pinker, Harnad and many others). He insists that he just knows that the A
team leaves out consciousness. It doesn’t address what Chalmers calls the Hard
Problem. How does he know? He says he just does. He has a gut intuition,
something he has sometimes called “direct experience.” I know the intuition well.
I can feel it myself. When I put up Turing’s proposal just now, if you felt a little
twinge, a little shock, a sense that your pocket had just been picked, you know the
feeling too. I call it the Zombic Hunch (Dennett 2001). I feel it, but I don’t credit it.
I ﬁgure that Turing’s genius permitted him to see that we can leap over the Zombic
Hunch. We can come to see it, in the end, as a misleader, a roadblock to under-
standing. We’ve learned to dismiss other such intuitions in the past–the obstacles
that so long prevented us from seeing the Earth as revolving around the sun, or
seeing that living things were composed of non-living matter. It still seems that the
sun goes round the earth, and it still seems that a living thing has some extra spark,
some extra ingredient that sets it apart from all non-living stuff, but we’ve learned
not to credit those intuitions. So now, do you want to join me in leaping over the
Zombic Hunch, or do you want to stay put, transﬁxed by this intuition that won’t
budge? I will try to show you how to join me in making the leap.
Are You Sure There Is Something Left Out?
In Consciousness Explained, (Dennett 1991) I described a method, heterophe-
nomenology, which was explicitly designed to be
the neutral path leading from objective physical science and its insistence on the
third-person point of view, to a method of phenomenological description that can (in
principle) do justice to the most private and ineffable subjective experiences, while never
abandoning the methodological principles of science. (CE, p72.)
How does it work? We start with recorded raw data. Among these are the vocal
sounds people make (what they say, in other words), but to these verbal reports
must be added all the other manifestations of belief, conviction, expectation, fear,
loathing, disgust, etc., including any and all internal conditions (e.g. brain activities,
hormonal diffusion, heart rate changes, etc.) detectable by objective means.
I guess I should take some of the blame for the misapprehension, in some
quarters, that heterophenomenology restricts itself to verbal reports. Nothing could
456
D. C. Dennett

be further from the truth. Verbal reports are different from all other sorts of raw data
precisely in that they admit of (and require, according to both heterophenomenol-
ogy and the 1st-person point of view) interpretation as speech acts, and subsequent
assessment as expressions of belief about a subject’s “private” subjective state. And
so my discussion of the methodology focused on such verbal reports in order to
show how they are captured within the fold of standard scientiﬁc (“3rd-person”)
data. But all other such data, all behavioral reactions, visceral reactions, hormonal
reactions, and other changes in physically detectable state are included within
heterophenomenology. I thought that went without saying, but apparently
these
additional
data
are
often
conveniently
overlooked
by
critics
of
heterophenomenology.
From the recorded verbal utterances, we get transcripts (e.g., in English or
French, or whatever), from which in turn we devise interpretations of the subjects’
speech acts, which we thus get to treat as (apparent) expressions of their beliefs, on
all topics. Thus using the intentional stance (Dennett 1971, 1987), we construct
therefrom the subject’s heterophenomenological world. We move, that is, from raw
data to interpreted data: a catalogue of the subjects’ convictions, beliefs, attitudes,
emotional reactions, … (together with much detail regarding the circumstances in
which these intentional states are situated), but then we adopt a special move, which
distinguishes heterophenomenology from the normal interpersonal stance: the
subjects’ beliefs (etc.) are all bracketed for neutrality.
Why? Because of two failures of overlap, which we may label false positive and
false negative. False positive: Some beliefs that subjects have about their own
conscious states are provably false, and hence what needs explanation in these cases
is the etiology of the false belief.
For instance, most people—naive people—think their visual ﬁelds are roughly
uniform in visual detail or grain all the way out to the periphery. Even sophisticated
cognitive scientists can be startled when they discover just how poor their capacity
is to identify a peripherally located object (such as a playing card held at arm’s
length). It certainly seems as if our visual consciousness is detailed all the way out
all the time, but easy experiments show that it isn’t. (Our color vision also seems to
extend all the way out, but similar experiments show that it doesn’t.) So the
question posed by the heterophenomenologist is:
Why do people think their visual ﬁelds are detailed all the way out? not this
question: How come, since people’s visual ﬁelds are detailed all the way out, they
can’t identify things parafoveally?
False negative: Some psychological things that happen in people (to put it
crudely but neutrally) are unsuspected by those people. People not only volunteer
no information on these topics; when provoked to search, they ﬁnd no information
on these topics. But a forced choice guess, for instance, reveals that nevertheless,
there is something psychological going on. This shows, for instance, that they are
being inﬂuenced by the meaning of the masked word even though they are, as they
put it, entirely unaware of any such word. (One might put this by saying that there is
a lot of unconscious mental activity—but this is tendentious; to some, it might be
held to beg the vexed question of whether people are brieﬂy conscious of these
26
The Fantasy of First-Person Science
457

evanescent and elusive topics, but just hugely and almost instantaneously forgetful
of them.)
Now faced with these failures of overlap—people who believe they are con-
scious of more than is in fact going on in them, and people who do not believe they
are conscious of things that are in fact going on in them—heterophenomenology
maintains a nice neutrality: it characterizes their beliefs, their heterophenomeno-
logical world, without passing judgment, and then investigates to see what could
explain the existence of those beliefs. Often, indeed typically or normally, the
existence of a belief is explained by conﬁrming that it is a true belief provoked by
the normal operation of the relevant sensory, perceptual, or introspective systems.
Less often, beliefs can be seen to be true only under some arguable metaphorical
interpretation—the subject claims to have manipulated a mental image, and we’ve
found a quasi-imagistic process in his brain that can support that claim, if it is
interpreted metaphorically. Less often still, the existence of beliefs is explainable by
showing how they are illusory byproducts of the brain’s activities: it only seems to
subjects that they are reliving an experience they’ve experienced before (déja vu).
In this chapter we have developed a neutral method for investigating and describing
phenomenology. It involves extracting and purifying texts from (apparently) speaking
subjects, and using those texts to generate a theorist’s ﬁction, the subject’s heterophe-
nomenological world. This ﬁctional world is populated with all the images, events, sounds,
smells, hunches, presentiments, and feelings that the subject (apparently) sincerely believes
to exist in his or her (or its) stream of consciousness. Maximally extended, it is a neutral
portrayal of exactly what it is like to be that subject–in the subject’s own terms, given the
best interpretation we can muster….. People undoubtedly do believe that they have mental
images, pains, perceptual experiences, and all the rest, and these facts–the facts about what
people believe, and report when they express their beliefs–are phenomena any scientiﬁc
theory of the mind must account for. (CE, p98)
Is this truly neutral, or does it bias our investigation of consciousness by stop-
ping one step short? Shouldn’t our data include not just subject’s subjective beliefs
about their experiences, but the experiences themselves? Levine, a ﬁrst-string
member of the B Team, insists “that conscious experiences themselves, not merely
our verbal judgments about them, are the primary data to which a theory must
answer.” (Levine 1994)
This is an appealing idea, but it is simply a mistake. First of all, remember that
heterophenomenology gives you much more data than just a subject’s verbal
judgments; every blush, hesitation, and frown, as well as all the covert, internal
reactions and activities that can be detected, are included in our primary data. But
what about this concern with leaving the “conscious experiences themselves” out of
the primary data? Defenders of the ﬁrst-person point of view are not entitled to this
complaint against heterophenomenology, since by their own lights, they should
prefer heterophenomenology’s treatment of the primary data to any other. Why?
Because it does justice to both possible sources of non-overlap. On the one hand, if
some of your conscious experiences occur unbeknownst to you (if they are expe-
riences about which you have no beliefs, and hence can make no “verbal judg-
ments”), then they are just as inaccessible to your ﬁrst-person point of view as they
458
D. C. Dennett

are to heterophenomenology. Ex hypothesi, you don’t even suspect you have them
—if you did, you could verbally express those suspicions. So heterophenomenol-
ogy’s list of primary data doesn’t leave out any conscious experiences you know of,
or even have any ﬁrst-person inklings about. On the other hand, unless you claim
not just reliability but outright infallibility, you should admit that some—just some
—of your beliefs (or verbal judgments) about your conscious experiences might be
wrong. In all such cases, however rare they are, what has to be explained by theory
is not the conscious experience, but your belief in it (or your sincere verbal judg-
ment, etc.). So heterophenomenology doesn’t include any spurious “primary data”
either, but plays it safe in a way you should approve.
Heterophenomenology is nothing but good old 3rd-person scientiﬁc method
applied to the particular phenomena of human (and animal) consciousness. Sci-
entists who were interested in taking the ﬁrst-person point of view seriously ﬁgured
out how to do just that, bringing the data of the ﬁrst person into the fold of objective
science. I didn’t invent the method; I merely described it, and explained its
rationale.
Alvin Goldman has recently challenged this claim. In “Science, Publicity and
Consciousness” (1997), he says that heterophenomenology is not, as I claim, the
standard method of consciousness research, since researchers “rely substantially on
subjects’ introspective beliefs about their conscious experience (or lack thereof)”
(p. 532). In private correspondence (Feb 21, 2001) he has elaborated his claim thus:
The objection lodged in my paper to heterophenomenology is that what cognitive scientists
actually do in this territory is not to practice agnosticism. Instead, they rely substantially on
subjects’ introspective beliefs (or reports). So my claim is that the heterophenomenological
method is not an accurate description of what cognitive scientists (of consciousness)
standardly do. Of course, you can say (and perhaps intended to say, but if so it wasn’t
entirely clear) that this is what scientists should do, not what they do do.
I certainly would play the role of reformer if it were necessary, but Goldman is
simply mistaken; the adoption of agnosticism is so ﬁrmly built into practice these
days that it goes without saying, which is perhaps why he missed it. Consider, for
instance, the decades-long controversy about mental imagery, starring Shepard,
Kosslyn, and Pylyshyn among many others. If agnosticism were not the tacit order
of the day, Kosslyn would have never needed to do his well-known experiments to
support subjects’ claims that what they were doing (at least if described
metaphorically) really was a process of image manipulation. (The issues are not
settled yet, of course.) In psychophysics, the use of signal detection theory has been
part of the canon since the 1960s, and it speciﬁcally commands researchers to
control for the fact that the response criterion is under the subject’s control although
the subject is not himself or herself a reliable source on the topic. Or consider the
voluminous research literature on illusions, both perceptual and cognitive, which
standardly assumes that the data are what subjects judge to be the case, and never
makes the mistake of “relying substantially on subjects’ introspective beliefs.” The
diagnosis of Goldman’s error is particularly clear here: of course experimenters on
illusions rely on subjects’ introspective beliefs (as expressed in their judgments)
26
The Fantasy of First-Person Science
459

about how it seems to them, but that is the agnosticism of heterophenomenology; to
go beyond it would be, for instance, to assume that in size illusions there really
were visual images of different sizes somewhere in subjects’ brains (or minds),
which of course no researcher would dream of doing. Finally, consider such phe-
nomena as déja vu. Sober research on this topic has never made the mistake of
abandoning agnosticism about subjects’ claims to be reliving previous experiences.
See, e.g., Bower and Clapper, in 1989, for instance, or any good textbook on
methods in cognitive science for the details. (Goldman has responded to this
paragraph in a series of emails to me, which I have included in an Appendix.)
A bounty of excellent heterophenomenological research has been done, is being
done, on consciousness. See, e.g., the forthcoming special issue of Cognition,
edited by Stanislas Dehaene, on the cognitive neuroscience of consciousness. It
contains a wealth of recent experiments all conducted within the methodological
strictures of heterophenomenology, whose resolutely 3rd-person treatment of belief
attribution squares perfectly with standard scientiﬁc method: when we assess the
attributions of belief relied upon by experimenters (in preparing and debrieﬁng
subjects, for instance) we use precisely the principles of the intentional stance to
settle what it is reasonable to postulate regarding the subjects’ beliefs and desires.
Now Chalmers has objected (in the debate) that this “behavioristic” treatment of
belief is itself question-begging against an alternative vision of belief in which, for
instance, “having a phenomenological belief doesn’t involve just a pattern of
responses, but often requires having certain experiences.” (personal correspon-
dence, 2/19/01). On the contrary, heterophenomenology is neutral on just this score,
for surely we mustn’t assume that Chalmers is right that there is a special category
of “phenomenological” beliefs—that there is a kind of belief that is off-limits to
“zombies” but not to us conscious folks. Heterophenomenology allows us to pro-
ceed with our catalogue of a subject’s beliefs leaving it open whether any or all of
them are Chalmers-style phenomenological beliefs or mere zombie-beliefs. (More
on this later.) In fact, heterophenomenology permits science to get on with the
business of accounting for the patterns in all these subjective beliefs without
stopping to settle this imponderable issue. And surely Chalmers must admit that the
patterns in these beliefs are among the phenomena that any theory of consciousness
must explain.
Let’s look at a few cases of heterophenomenology in action (Please refer to the
accompanying video “Ramachandran’s Video” present at the link mentioned at the
beginning of the article). Do you see the motion? You see apparent motion. Does
the yellow blob really move? The blob on the screen doesn’t move. Ah, but does
the subjective yellow blob in your experience move? Does it really move, or do you
just judge that it moves? Well, it sure seems to move! That is what you judge, right?
Now perhaps there are differences in how you would word your judgments. And
perhaps there are other differences. Perhaps some of you not only judge that it
seems to move, but are made slightly dizzy or nauseated by the apparent motion.
Perhaps some people get motion sickness from motion capture and others don’t.
Perhaps some of you don’t even experience the apparent motion at all. Perhaps
some of you can use such apparent motion just like real motion, to help
460
D. C. Dennett

disambiguate shapes, for instance, and perhaps you can’t. We can explore these
variations in as much detail as you like, and can come back to you again and again
with further inquiries, further tests, further suggested distinctions.
You are not authoritative about what is happening in you, but only about what seems to be
happening in you, and we are giving you total, dictatorial authority over the account of how
it seems to you, about what it is like to be you. And if you complain that some parts of how
it seems to you are ineffable, we heterophenomenologists will grant that too. What better
grounds could we have for believing that you are unable to describe something than that
(1) you don’t describe it, and (2) confess that you cannot? Of course you might be lying,
but we’ll give you the beneﬁt of the doubt. (CE, p96-7)
Is there anything about your experience of this motion capture phenomenon that
is not explorable by heterophenomenology? I’d like to know what. This is a fas-
cinating and surprising phenomenon, predicted from the 3rd-person point of view,
and eminently studiable via heterophenomenology. (Tom Nagel once claimed that
3rd-person science might provide us with brute correlations between subjective
experiences and objective conditions in the brain, but could never explain those
correlations, in the way that chemists can explain the correlation between the
liquidity of water and its molecular structure. I asked him if he considered the
capacity of industrial chemists to predict the molar properties of novel artiﬁcial
polymers in advance of creating them as the epitome of such explanatory corre-
lation, and he agreed that it was. Ramachandran and Gregory predicted this motion
capture phenomenon, an entirely novel and artiﬁcial subjective experience, on the
basis of their knowledge of how the brain processes vision.)
See next Rensink’s change blindness (Please refer to the accompanying video
“Rensink’s Video” present at the link mentioned at the beginning of the article). (By
the way, this is an effect I predicted in CE, much to the disbelief of many readers.)
Were your qualia changing before you noticed the ﬂashing white cupboard
door? You saw each picture several dozen times, and eventually you saw a change
that was “swift and enormous” (Dennett 1999; Palmer 1999) but that swift, enor-
mous change was going on for a dozen times and more before you noticed it. Does
it count as a change in color qualia?
The possible answers:
A. Yes.
B. No.
C. I don’t know
1. because I now realize I never knew quite what I meant by “qualia” all along.
2. because although I know just what I have always meant by “qualia”, I have
no ﬁrst-person access to my own qualia in this case.
a. and 3rd-person science can’t get access to qualia either!
Let’s start with option C ﬁrst. Many people discover, when they confront this
case, that since they never imagined such a phenomenon was possible, they never
considered how their use of the term “qualia” should describe it. They discover a
26
The Fantasy of First-Person Science
461

heretofore unimagined ﬂaw in their concept of qualia—rather like the ﬂaw that
physicists discovered in their concept of weight when they ﬁrst distinguished
weight from mass. The philosophers’ concept of qualia is a mess. Philosophers
don’t even agree on how to apply it in dramatic cases like this. I hate to be an old
I-told-you-so but I told you so (“Quining Qualia”). This should be at least mildly
embarrassing to our ﬁeld, since so many scientists have recently been persuaded by
philosophers that they should take qualia seriously—only to discover that
philosophers don’t come close to agreeing among themselves about when qualia—
whatever they are—are present. (I have noticed that many scientists who think they
are newfound friends of qualia turn out to use the term in ways no self-respecting
qualophile will countenance.)
But although some philosophers may now concede that they aren’t so sure what
they meant by “qualia” all along, others are very sure what concept of qualia
they’ve been using all along, so let’s consider what they say. Some of them, I have
learned, have no problem with the idea that their very own qualia could change
radically without their noticing. They mean by “qualia” something to which their
1st-person access is variable and problematic. If you are one of those, then
heterophenomenology is your preferred method, since it, unlike the ﬁrst-person
point of view, can actually study the question of whether qualia change in this
situation. It is going to be a matter of some delicacy, however, how to decide which
brain events count for what. In this phenomenon of change blindness for color
changes, for instance, we know that the color-sensitive cones in the relevant region
of your retina were ﬂashing back and forth, in perfect synchrony with the white/
brown quadrangle, and presumably (we should check) other, later areas of your
color vision system were also shifting in time with the external color shift. But if we
keep looking, we will also presumably ﬁnd yet other areas of the visual system that
only come into synchrony after you’ve noticed. (such effects have been found in
similar fMRI studies, e.g. O’Craven et al. 1997).
The hard part will be deciding (on what grounds?) which features of which states
to declare to be qualia and why. I am not saying there can’t be grounds for this.
I can readily imagine there being good grounds, but if so, then those will be
grounds for adopting/endorsing a 3rd-person concept of qualia (cf. the discussion of
Chase and Sanborn in Dennett 1988, or the beer-drinkers in CE 395-6). The price
you have to pay for obtaining the support of 3rd-person science for your conviction
about how it is/was with you is straightforward: you have to grant that what you
mean by how it is/was with you is something that 3rd-person science could either
support or show to be mistaken. Once we adopt any such concept of qualia, for
instance, we will be in a position to answer the question of whether color qualia
shift during change blindness. And if some subjects in our apparatus tell us that
their qualia do shift, while our brain-scanner data shows clearly that they don’t,
we’ll treat these subjects as simply wrong about their own qualia, and we’ll explain
why and how they come to have this false belief.
462
D. C. Dennett

Some people ﬁnd this prospect inconceivable. For just this reason, some people
may want to settle for option B: No, my qualia don’t change—couldn’t change—
until I notice the change. This decision guarantees that qualia, tied thus to noticing,
are securely within the heterophenomenological worlds of subjects, are indeed
constitutive features of their heterophenomenological worlds. On option B, what
subjects can say about their qualia ﬁxes the data.1
By a process of elimination, that leaves option A, YES, to consider. If you think
your qualia did change (though you didn’t notice it at the time) why do you think
this? Is this a theory of yours? If so, it needs evaluation like any other theory. If not,
did it just come to you? A gut intuition? Either way, your conviction is a prime
candidate for heterophenomenological diagnosis: what has to be explained is how
you came to have this belief. The last thing we want to do is to treat your claim as
incorrigible. Right?
Here is the dilemma for the B Team, and Captain Chalmers. If you eschew
incorrigibility claims, and especially if you acknowledge the competence of
3rd-person science to answer questions that can’t be answered from the 1st-person
point of view, your position collapses into heterophenomenology. The only
remaining alternative, C(2a), is unattractive for a different reason. You can protect
qualia from heterophenomenological appropriation, but only at the cost of declaring
them outside science altogether. If qualia are so shy they are not even accessible
from the 1st-person point of view, then no 1st-person science of qualia is possible
either.
I will not contest the existence of ﬁrst-person facts that are unstudiable by
heterophenomology and other 3rd-person approaches. As Steve White has
reminded me, these would be like the humdrum “inert historical facts” I have
spoken of elsewhere—like the fact that some of the gold in my teeth once belonged
to Julius Caesar, or the fact that none of it did. One of those is a fact, and I daresay
no possible extension of science will ever be able to say which is the truth. But if
1st-person facts are like inert historical facts, they are no challenge to the claim that
heterophenomenology is the maximally inclusive science of consciousness, because
they are unknowable even to the 1st-person they are about!
1Consider Option B for the simpler case raised earlier. Do you want to cling to a concept of visual
consciousness according to which your conviction that your visual consciousness is detailed all the
way out is not contradicted by the discovery that you cannot identify large objects in the peripheral
ﬁeld? You could hang tough: “Oh, all that you’ve shown is that we’re not very good at identifying
objects in our peripheral vision; that doesn’t show that peripheral consciousness isn’t as detailed as
it seems to be! All you’ve shown is that a mere behavioral capacity that one might mistakenly
have thought to coincide with consciousness doesn’t, in fact, show us anything about con-
sciousness!” Yes, if you are careful to deﬁne consciousness so that nothing “behavioral” can bear
on it, you get to declare that consciousness transcends “behaviorism” without fear of contradiction.
See “Are we Explaining Consciousness Yet?” for a more detailed account of this occasionally
popular but hopeless move.
26
The Fantasy of First-Person Science
463

David Chalmers as a Heterophenomenological Subject
Of course it still seems to many people that heterophenomenology must be leaving
something out. That’s the ubiquitous Zombic Hunch. How does the A team respond
to this? Very straightforwardly: by including the Zombic Hunch among the heartfelt
convictions any good theory of consciousness must explain. One of the things that
it falls to a theory of consciousness to explain is why some people are visited by the
Zombic Hunch. Chalmers is one such, so let’s look more closely at the speech acts
Chalmers has offered as a subject of heterophenomenological investigation.
Here is Chalmers’ deﬁnition of a zombie (his zombie twin):
Molecule for molecule identical to me, and identical in all the low-level properties pos-
tulated by a completed physics, but he lacks conscious experience entirely… he is
embedded in an identical environment. He will certainly be identical to me functionally; he
will be processing the same sort of information, reacting in a similar way to inputs, with his
internal conﬁgurations being modiﬁed appropriately and with indistinguishable behavior
resulting…. he will be awake, able to report the contents of his internal states, able to focus
attention in various places and so on. It is just that none of this functioning will be
accompanied by any real conscious experience. There will be no phenomenal feel. There is
nothing it is like to be a Zombie… 1996, p95
Notice that Chalmers allows that zombies have internal states with contents,
which the zombie can report (sincerely, one presumes, believing them to be the
truth); these internal states have contents, but not conscious contents, only
pseudo-conscious contents. The Zombic Hunch, then, is Chalmers’ conviction that
he has just described a real problem. It seems to him that there is a problem of how
to explain the difference between him and his zombie twin.
The justiﬁcation for my belief that I am conscious lies not just in my cognitive mechanisms
but also in my direct evidence [emphasis added]; the zombie lacks that evidence, so his
mistake does not threaten the grounds for our beliefs. (One can also note that the zombie
doesn’t have the same beliefs as us, because of the role that experience plays in constituting
the contents of those beliefs.) (Reply to Searle)
This speech act is curious, and when we set out to interpret it, we have to cast
about for a charitable interpretation. How does Chalmers’ justiﬁcation lie in his
“direct evidence”? Although he says the zombie lacks that evidence, nevertheless
the zombie believes he has the evidence, just as Chalmers does. Chalmers and his
zombie twin are heterophenomenological twins: when we interpret all the data we
have, we end up attributing to them exactly the same heterophenomenological
worlds. Chalmers fervently believes he himself is not a zombie. The zombie fer-
vently believes he himself is not a zombie. Chalmers believes he gets his justiﬁ-
cation from his “direct evidence” of his consciousness. So does the zombie, of
course.
The zombie has the conviction that he has direct evidence of his own con-
sciousness, and that this direct evidence is his justiﬁcation for his belief that he is
conscious. Chalmers must maintain that the zombie’s conviction is false. He says
that the zombie doesn’t have the same beliefs as us “because of the role that
464
D. C. Dennett

experience plays in constituting the contents of those beliefs,” but I don’t see how
this can be so. Experience (in the special sense Chalmers has tried to introduce)
plays no role in constituting the contents of those beliefs, since exhypothesi, if
experience (in this sense) were eliminated—if Chalmers were to be suddenly
zombiﬁed—he would go right on saying what he says, insisting on what he now
insists on, and so forth.2 Even if his “phenomenological beliefs” suddenly ceased to
be phenomenological beliefs, he would be none the wiser. It would not seem to him
that his beliefs were no longer phenomenological.
But wait, I am forgetting my own method and arguing with a subject! As a good
heterophenomenologist, I must grant Chalmers full license to his deeply held,
sincerely expressed convictions and the heterophenomenological world they con-
stitute. And then I must undertake the task of explaining the etiology of his beliefs.
Perhaps Chalmers’ beliefs about his experiences will turn out to be true, though
how that prospect could emerge eludes me at this time. But I will remain neutral.
Certainly we shouldn’t give them incorrigible status. (He’s not the Pope.) The fact
that some subjects have the Zombic Hunch shouldn’t be considered grounds for
revolutionizing the science of consciousness.3
Where’s the Program?
That leaves the B Team in a bit of a predicament. Chalmers would like to fulﬁl the
Philosopher’s Dream:
To prove a priori, from one’s ivory tower, a metaphysical fact that forces a revolution in the
sciences.
It is not an impossible dream. (That is, it is not logically impossible.) Einstein’s
great insight into relativity comes tantalizingly close to having been a purely
philosophical argument, something a philosopher might have come up with just
from ﬁrst principles. And Patrick Matthew could claim with some justice in 1860 to
have scooped Darwin’s theory of natural selection in 1831 by an act of pure reason:
it was by a general glance at the scheme of Nature that I estimated this select production of
species as an a priori recognizable fact–an axiom, requiring only to be pointed out to be
admitted by unprejudiced minds of sufﬁcient grasp. [see DDI, p49]
2“I simply say that invoking consciousness is not necessary to explain actions; there will always be
a physical explanation that does not invoke or imply consciousness. A better phrase would have
been ‘explanatorily superﬂuous’, rather than ‘explanatorily irrelevant.’” (Chalmers’ second reply
to Searle, on his website).
3Chalmers seems to think that conducting surveys of his audiences, to see what proportion can be
got to declare their allegiance to the Zombic Hunch, yields important data. Similar data-gathering
would establish the falsehood of neo-Darwinian theory and the existence of an afterlife.
26
The Fantasy of First-Person Science
465

The Zombic Hunch is accompanied by arguments designed to show that it is
logically possible (however physically impossible) for there to be a zombie. This
logical possibility is declared by Chalmers to have momentous implications for the
scientiﬁc study of consciousness, but as a candidate for the Philosopher’s Dream it
has one failing not shared with either Einstein’s or Matthew’s great ideas: it pre-
scribes no research program. Suppose you are convinced that Chalmers is right.
Now what? What experiments would you do (or do differently) that you are not
already doing? What models would you discard or revise, and what would you
replace them with? And why?
Chalmers has recently addressed this very issue in a talk entitled “First-Person
Methods in the Science of Consciousness” (Consciousness Bulletin, Fall 1999, and
on Chalmers’ website), but I hunt through that essay in vain for any examples of
research that are somehow off limits to, or that transcend, heterophenomenology:
I take it for granted that there are ﬁrst‑person data. It’s a manifest fact about our minds that
there is something it is like to be us ‑ that we have subjective experiences ‑ and that these
subjective experiences are quite different at different times. Our direct knowledge of sub-
jective experiences stems from our ﬁrst‑person access to them. And subjective experiences
are arguably the central data that we want a science of consciousness to explain. [em-
phases added] I also take it that the ﬁrst‑person data can’t be expressed wholly in terms of
third‑person data about brain processes and the like. There may be a deep connection
between the two ‑ a correlation or even an identity ‑ but if there is, the connection will
emerge through a lot of investigation, and can’t be stipulated at the beginning of the day
[emphasis added]. That’s to say, no purely third‑person description of brain processes and
behavior will express precisely the data we want to explain, though they may play a central
role in the explanation. So as data, the ﬁrst‑person data are irreducible to third‑person data.
Notice how this passage blurs the distinctions of heterophenomenology.
“Arguably?” I have argued, to the contrary, that subjects’ beliefs about their sub-
jective experiences are the central data. I’ve reviewed these arguments here today.
So, is Chalmers rejecting my arguments? If so, what is wrong with them? I agree
with him that a correlation or identity—or indeed, the veracity of a subject’s beliefs
—“can’t be stipulated at the beginning of the day.” That is the neutrality of
heterophenomenology. It is Chalmers who is holding out for an opening stipulation
in his insistence that the Zombic Hunch be granted privileged status. As he says, he
“takes it for granted that there are ﬁrst-person data.” I don’t. Not in Chalmers’
charged sense of that term. I don’t stipulate at the beginning of the day that our
subjective beliefs about our ﬁrst-person experiences are “phenomenological” beliefs
in a sense that requires them somehow to depend on (but not causally depend on)
experiences that zombies don’t have! I just stipulate that the contents of those
beliefs exhaustively constitute each person’s (or zombie’s) subjectivity.
In his paper on ﬁrst-person methods, Chalmers sees some of the problems
confronting a science of consciousness:
When it comes to ﬁrst‑person methodologies, there are well‑known obstacles: the lack of
incorrigible access to our experience; the idea that introspecting an experience changes the
experience; the impossibility of accessing all of our experience at once, and the consequent
possibility of “grand illusions”; and more. I don’t have much that’s new to say about these.
466
D. C. Dennett

I think that could end up posing principled limitations, but none provide in‑principle
barriers to at least initial development of methods for investigating the ﬁrst‑person data in
clear cases.
Right. Heterophenomenology has already made the obligatory moves, so he
doesn’t need to have anything new to say about these. I don’t see anything in this
beyond heterophenomenology. Do you? Chalmers goes on:
When it comes to ﬁrst‑person formalisms, there may be even greater obstacles: can the
content of experience be wholly captured in language, or in any other formalism, at all?
Many have argued that at least some experiences are “ineffable”. And if one has not had a
given experience, can any description be meaningful to one? Here again, I think at least
some progress ought to be possible. We ought at least to be able to develop formalisms for
capturing the structure of experience: similarities and differences between experiences of
related sorts, for examples, and the detailed structure of something like a visual ﬁeld.
What a good idea: we can let subjects speak for themselves, in the ﬁrst-person,
and then we can take what they say seriously and try to systematize it, to capture the
structure of their experience! And we could call it heterophenomenology.
If Chalmers speaks of anything in this paper (remember, it is entitled “First-
person Methods in the Science of Consciousness”) that is actually distinct from
3rd-person heterophenomenology, I don’t see what it is. Both there and in his
contribution to our debate he mentioned various ongoing research topics that strike
him as playing an important role in his anticipated 1st-person science of con-
sciousness—work on blindsight and masking and inattentional blindness, for
instance—but all this has long ago been ﬁt snugly into 3rd-person science.
In the debate, Chalmers asserted that a heterophenomenological methodology
would not be able to motivate questions about what was going on in consciousness
in these phenomena. That is utterly false, of course; these very phenomena were,
after all, parade cases for heterophenomenology in Consciousness Explained. It is
important to remember that the burden of heterophenomenology is to explain, in the
end, every pattern discoverable in the heterophenomenological worlds of subjects;
it is precisely these patterns that make these phenomena striking, so heterophe-
nomenology is clearly the best methodology for investigating these phenomena and
testing theories of them.
I ﬁnd it ironic that while Chalmers has made something of a mission of trying to
convince scientists that they must abandon 3rd-person science for 1st-person sci-
ence, when asked to recommend some avenues to explore, he falls back on the very
work that I showcased in my account of how to study human consciousness
empirically from the 3rd-person point of view. Moreover, it is telling that none of
the work on consciousness that he has mentioned favorably addresses his so-called
Hard Problem in any fashion; it is all concerned, quite appropriately, with what he
insists on calling the easy problems. First-person science of consciousness is a
discipline with no methods, no data, no results, no future, no promise. It will remain
a fantasy.
26
The Fantasy of First-Person Science
467

Appendix: Goldman on Heterophenomenology
Alvin Goldman, responding to the paragraph above about Goldman 1997 (see page
5), entered into an email debate with me, lightly edited by me to avoid repetition
and remove material not germane to the topics:
Goldman: First, a brief substantive reply to your points [see above, p5]. When
cognitive scientists rely on subjects’ reports about visual illusions, I take them to be
relying on the veracity of the Ss’ judgments (beliefs) about how the stimuli look
(etc.). That is, after all, what the Ss presumably say, or can be interpreted as saying:
“It looks as if such‑and‑such”. And the cognitive scientist takes that to be true, i.e.,
that it does look that way to the S (roughly at the time of report). Similarly, the
cognitive scientist obviously does not conclude that Ss who report a deja vu
experience really did have the same type of experience in his/her past. That could
not be ascertained by the subject by introspection, which is restricted to present
events. So even if the S’s deja vu report implies that he/she believes that a certain
event or experience occurred in the past (I am not sure it does imply this), the
cognitive scientist does not rely on the accuracy of this belief. However, the cog-
nitive scientist (also) takes the S to report, and to believe, that he/she is currently
having a “seems‑like‑this‑happened‑to‑me‑in‑the past” experience. And the cog-
nitive scientist does trust the S’s report of that. In other words, the scientist con-
cludes that the S does have (roughly at the time of report) an experience of the type
“seems‑like‑this‑ happened‑ to‑me‑in‑the‑past”.
In the context of the treatment of illusions, I do have to talk more about “looks”
or “seems”. As your discussion below indicates (and you have frequently said in
print), you take “seems” only to express something about a S’s belief. There is no
further fact about S (beyond a belief fact) that is expressed by “It seems to S to be
F”. I, on the contrary, think that a seeming‑state is not merely a belief, but a visual
state, an auditory state, or other “perceptual‑phenomenal” state. You think (see your
discussion [above, p. 5]) that such an alleged state would have to involve “images”
of certain sizes in the brain. But that is a totally unwarranted interpretation.
Undergoing a perceptual‑seeming episode need involve nothing like “sense‑data”
of the sort you conjure up. Cognitive scientists do not have to commit themselves to
anything like that when they say that a S really is undergoing a certain type of
perceptual‑seeming episode (when the S reports that he is).
DENNETT REPLY interjected: EXACTLY! They don’t have to commit
themselves to anything like that. They can remain neutral. My example of mental
images in the brain was just a for instance. My point was that to go beyond
heterophenomenological agnosticism, they’d have to suppose something was
implied by their S’s judgments (beyond the bare fact that these were their judg-
ments, which is what heterophenomenology happily allows). Now it MAY be that
your point about “perceptual‑phenomenal” states that go beyond “mere” belief—
states will someday be supported somehow. But in the meantime, cognitive science
proceeds along merrily, leaving itself strictly neutral about that. And in at least
some instances (for instance, sudden hunches of déja vu) the claim that there is
468
D. C. Dennett

anything “perceptual‑phenomenal” about the presentiment over and above the
inclination so to judge seems particularly dubious. (Ask yourself what deja vu
would be like if it didn’t have any so-called “phenomenal” stufﬁng. Isn’t that in fact
what it is like?) But in any case, cognitive science can and should (and does!)
remain strictly neutral about such questions of phenomenality until the case is
clearly made. My point for years is that it never has been made, so it counts, so far,
as just a set of tempting hunches (versions of the Zombic Hunch) that cognitive
science should also be agnostic about. And I know of no research in cognitive
science that has violated that neutrality except by accident.
You say that my view is that “There is no further fact about S (beyond a belief
fact) that is expressed by “It seems to S to be F”.” Not quite. I have challenged
people to show any way in which there is such a further fact. My view is that it has
not been shown that there is any such further fact (beyond the obvious other
“behavioral” facts that accompany such belief facts, typically) and in the meanwhile
cognitive science can proceed quite happily in strict neutrality about this. In fact, it
had better be neutral about this from the outset, so that it can actually have a
standpoint from which it might conﬁrm (or disconﬁrm) your belief.
GOLDMAN, continued: So what is going on when people have a percep-
tual‑seeming episode (whether during actual perception or during imagery)? You
point out, in connection with the Shepard, Kosslyn, and Pylyshyn debate, that
cogscientists would never rely on Ss’ reports to try to settle that. I reply: That is
certainly true! But I would never claim, and have never claimed, that scientists rely
on all aspects or all details of what their Ss might say. This is explicitly addressed in
my “Science, Publicity, and Consc” (SPC) paper on p. 544, the last page of the
article. “Everyone nowadays agrees that introspection is an unreliable method for
answering questions about the micro‑structure of cognition. For example, nobody
expects subjects to report reliably whether their thinking involves the manipulation
of sentences in a language of thought. But this leaves many other types of questions
about which introspection could be reliable”. This point is made again in my JCS
paper, “Can Science Know When You’re Conscious?” (Journal of Consciousness
Studies 2000) Here is what I say on p. 4 of that article: “Cognitive psychologists
and neuropsychologists would not rely, after all, on their subjects’ reports about all
psychological states or processes. When it comes to the nonconscious sphere of
mental processing‑‑the great bulk of what transpires in the mind‑brain‑‑scientists
would not dream of asking subjects for their opinions. Moreover, if subjects were to
offer their views about what happens (at the micro‑level) when they parse a sen-
tence or retrieve an episode from memory or reach for a cup, scientists would give
no special credence to these views.”
So I fully acknowledge that for a wide range of questions, scientists do not allow
their Ss’ introspections to settle anything. (Of course, usually the Ss have nothing to
offer about what happens at the micro‑level.) But for another large range of
questions, I claim, they do trust their Ss’ introspections. (A more precise speciﬁ-
cation of which questions are which I have not yet tried to give. Nor do I know of
anybody who has tried to be precise on this matter.)
26
The Fantasy of First-Person Science
469

DENNETT REPLY interjected: Try me. I have. I have pointed out that they trust
their S’s introspective reports to be ﬁne accounts of how it seems to them‑‑with
regard to every phenomenon in all modalities. And that this exhausts the utility of
their S’s protocols, which they can then investigate by devising experiments that
probe the underlying mechanisms. They “trust” their Ss only after they’ve dis-
covered, independently, that their statements, interpreted as assertions about
objective, 3rd-person—accessible processes going on in their brains, are reliable. In
other words, they only “rely on” S’s statements when they have conﬁrmed that they
can be usefully interpreted as ordinary reliable reports of objective properties.
Ask yourself how things would stand if Pylyshyn’s most extreme line of mental
imagery had turned out to be true (more than the barest logical possibility, I’m sure
you would agree—he was not insane or incoherent to put forward his criticisms). In
that case, I submit, everyone would agree that the agnosticism of heterophe-
nomenology had paid off big time; people turn out to be deeply wrong about what
they are doing. They think they are manipulating mental images with such and such
features when in fact all that is happening in them is X. The fact that it sure seems to
them that they are manipulating mental images would then have to be explained by
showing how they are caused to have these heartfelt convictions in spite of their
now demonstrated falsehood. Now if that was never a possible outcome of the
research, what on earth could Pylyshyn have thought he was doing? For that matter,
what could Kosslyn have thought he was doing?
GOLDMAN continued: In any case, the main point is that I of course agree that
not everything a subject might say, in an introspective spirit, would be regarded as
scientiﬁc gospel. So some of the things you say about conﬂicts between scientiﬁc
practice and my reconstruction of it don’t work.
DENNETT REPLY: I didn’t say you did claim that they held that everything is
regarded as scientiﬁc gospel. I said that you claimed that cognitive scientists aren’t
systematically agnostic. But they are, systematically, so systematically that they
don’t even both mentioning it, in all the cases I cite in this passage where I discuss
your claim.
The proper way to criticize my view is to develop an independent case for “real
seeming.” A number of people have tried. Nobody has yet succeeded. See, e.g., the
essays in the Phil Topics issue of 1994, and my response, “Get Real”. But beyond
establishing this as a philosophical point, there is the obligation to show that
cognitive science has been (or should be) honoring it. When you can show
experiments that get misinterpreted, or can’t be analyzed, or would never be dreamt
up, by people committed to heterophenomenology, then you can claim that I am
mistaken in claiming that heterophenomenology both is, and should be, agnostic.
GOLDMAN, next response: I agree that one of the key issues is whether there is
anything more to visual seeming (e.g.) than belief. At the risk of repeating what
others have said (possibly ad nauseum, from your point of you), this just seems like
the obvious, straightforward interpretation of what goes on in, e.g., the blindsight
patient. The patient doesn’t tell his physician that he doesn’t believe that there are
any objects of such-and-such type in the vicinity (in the area of his scotoma). He
says that he doesn’t see anything in that vicinity [expressing, not reporting his
470
D. C. Dennett

belief that he doesn’t see anything in that vicinity; see CE, pp. 305–6–DCD]. We
might even arrange for there to be a case where he does have beliefs about the target
properties—as a result of somebody else telling him about such properties. But he’ll
still say that he doesn’t see anything there. And the standard, default, entry-level
reaction of the cognitive scientist is to trust that report, to conclude that S really
doesn’t see anything there. Of course, the scientist might be a little more cautious,
since, among other things, the S might be confabulating, or neglecting. But the
reason blindsight is an interesting and challenging phenomenon, a phenomenon
related to vision, is because it’s an absence of seeing. How do we know about this
absence? From the S. From the subjects’ reports. So we are basing our conclusions
on a trust of the subjects’ reports.
DENNETT REPLY interjected: Not so. Anticipating this sort of response in my
own discussion of blindsight in CE, I pointed out the problem of trust. See p. 326,
where I show why “the phenomena of blindsight appear only when we treat sub-
jects from the standpoint of heterophenomenology” and particularly point to how
the phenomenon would evaporate if we concluded that subjects were malingering,
or suffering from hysterical blindness. Heterophenomenology is tailor made for
dealing with blindsight.
Again, in the deja vu case, it doesn’t capture the phenomenon well to describe it
as a belief that one experienced a similar thing in the past. Rather, it’s a phe-
nomenon in which it feels like one experienced such a thing in the past; or one has a
seeming memory of such a thing. One might not believe that it happened at all, but
one still feels as if it did. Again it’s a reliance on the S’s report of this phenomenon
that makes the observer think that the S has really undergone this phenomenon at
the time of report.
DENNETT REPLY interjected: To “feel as if it did”’ is to be strongly tempted to
judge that it did. Of course the temptation can be overridden once one is no longer
naive. And what is the feeling of temptation? Just noticing that one is so tempted to
judge!
GOLDMAN next reply: I realize that a “doxological” (or representational)
reductionist like yourself will want to reduce feeling states to dispositions-
to-believe. A resistor like myself need not deny, of course, that feeling states do
have a tendency to produce beliefs. The question is whether there are “categorical”
features of feeling states in virtue of which they have that tendency, or whether they
are just pure doxological tendency and nothing else. I ﬁnd the former view more
compelling, and don’t think that representational reductionism will work across the
board. But this is another big issue (admittedly one that is intimately tied to the
issue at hand).
DENNETT REPLY: Fine. And isn’t it nice that heterophenomenology can
proceed with all of its research agenda without our having to settle anything about
this “big issue” ﬁrst! If you’re right, the “categorical” features will eventually be
conﬁrmed to be important by some as yet unimagined test. (Or if, as I gather your
colleague David Chalmers holds, no empirical or “behavioral” test could shed any
light on this important but elusive sort of feature, I guess it will have to be some
philosophical argument alone that settles the issue. Seems unlikely in the extreme to
26
The Fantasy of First-Person Science
471

me.) In the meantime, a 3rd-person science of consciousness can proceed apace.
That’s what is so good about its neutrality.
GOLDMAN: One last question about “neutrality”. In your discussion of
blindsight, do you agree that scientists give prima facie credence to a subject who
claims to have no sight in a certain area? You stress that they do not uncritically
trust these subjects. They want to check to see if there is neurological damage, and
they want to rule out the possibility of “hysterical blindness”. But don’t they give
some prima facie credence to the subject’s report? Or do you deny this? If you agree
that they do this, the question arises as to whether this is “neutrality”, or agnosti-
cism. I think not. Most epistemologists would agree that all of our sources of belief
or justiﬁcation are subject to correction from other sources. We don’t trust vision
uncritically, or memory, etc. But to say this is not to say that we are “agnostic”
toward vision or memory. By giving prima facie credibility to each of these sources,
we are doing the most that we ever do to any one source (or any one deliverance of
a particular source). I would argue that the same holds here. Although the scientist
does not uncritically trust a S’s introspection (and there’s an additional factor
here—the S’s report might not stem from introspection at all), he does give it prima
facie trust. And that is very far from agnosticism. So if heterophenomenology
ascribes true agnosticism to scientists, as you claim it does, then it doesn’t get
matters right.
DENNETT REPLY: As I try to make clear in CE, in the section entitled “The
Discreet Charm of the Anthropologist,” (pp. 82–3, on “Feenoman”) heterophe-
nomenology is NOT the NORMAL interpersonal relationship with which we treat
others’ beliefs—with its presumption of truth (marked by the willingness of the
interlocutor to argue against it, to present any evidence believed to run counter,
etc.). That is also true of anthropologists’ relationships with their subjects when
investigating such things as their religion. Actually, it extends quite far—when the
native informants are telling the anthropologists about, say, their knowledge of the
healing powers of the local plants, the anthropologists’ ﬁrst concern is to get
the lore, true or false—something to be investigated further later. Ditto for
heterophenomenology: get the lore, as neutrally and sympathetically as possible.
That is a kind of agnosticism, differing in the ways I detail on pp. 82–3 from the
normal interpersonal stance, but it is the normal researcher/subject relationship
when studying consciousness with the help of S’s protocols. If it doesn’t ﬁt your (or
a dictionary’s, or the majority of epistemologists’) deﬁnition of agnosticism per-
fectly, I have at least made clear just what kind of agnosticism it is, and why it is the
way it is.
As for blindsight, do the researchers give some prima facie credence to the
reports? Of course—otherwise they wouldn’t even consider investigating them.
As I say, their attitude is to take what subjects say as seriously as possible—a policy
that is entirely consistent with a kind of agnosticism, of course. The old intro-
spectionism failed precisely because it attempted, unwisely, to give subjects more
authority than they can handle; as the years rolled on, more cautious and savvy
researchers developed the methodology I have dubbed heterophenomenology. They
crafted a maximally objective, controlled way to turn verbal reports (and interpreted
472
D. C. Dennett

button-pushes, etc., etc.) into legitimate data for science. All I have done is to get
persnickety about the rationale of this entirely uncontroversial and ubiquitous
methodology, and point out how and why it is what it is—and then I’ve given it an
unwieldy name. So when, in my forthcoming Cognition essay, in the special issue
on the cognitive neuroscience of consciousness, I point out that the hundreds of
experiments discussed in the various pieces in that issue all conform to
heterophenomenology, the editors and referees nod in agreement. Of course. It’s
just science, after all. And it does study consciousness. Obviously—unless you
believe that the “easy” problems of consciousness are not about consciousness at
all.
Now I have challenged David Chalmers to name a single experiment (in good
repute) which in any way violates or transcends the heterophenomenological
method. So far, he has not responded to my challenge. My challenge to you is
somewhat different: to show that I misdescribe the standard methodology of cog-
nitive science when I say it adopts the neutrality of heterophenomenology.
References
G.H. Bower, J.P. Clapper, Experimental methods in cognitive science, in Foundations of
Cognitive Science, ed. by M. Posner (MIT Press, 1989)
Chalmers, The Conscious Mind (1996)
Dennett, ‘Quining Qualia’ in Consciousness in Contemporary Science, ed. by A.J. Marcel, E.E.
Bisiach (CUP, 1988)
Dennett, Intrinsic changes in experience: swift and enormous commentary on palmer. BBS 22(6),
December 1999
Dennett, The zombic hunch: extinction of an intuition?, in Philosophy at the New Millenium, ed.
by A. O’Hear, vol. 48 (Cambridge Univ. Press, Royal Institute of Philosophy Supplement,
2001), pp. 27–43
A. Goldman, Philos. Sci. 64, 525–545 (1997)
A. Goldman, Can science know when you’re conscious? J. Conscious. Stud. (2000)
K.M. O’Craven, B.R. Rosen, K.K. Kwong, A. Treisman, R.L. Savoy, Voluntary attention
modulates fMRI activity in human MT/MST. Neuron, 18, XXX (1997)
S. Palmer, Behav. Brain Sci. 22(6), December 1999
26
The Fantasy of First-Person Science
473

Shyam Wuppuluri ⋅Francisco Antonio Doria
Editors
The Map and the Territory
Exploring the Foundations of Science,
Thought and Reality
Foreword by Sir Roger Penrose and
Afterword by Dagﬁnn Føllesdal
123

Editors
Shyam Wuppuluri
R. N. Podar School
Mumbai
India
Francisco Antonio Doria
Advanced Studies Research Group
Universidade Federal do Rio de Janeiro
Rio de Janeiro
Brazil
Additional material to this book can be downloaded from http://extras.springer.com.
ISSN 1612-3018
ISSN 2197-6619
(electronic)
THE FRONTIERS COLLECTION
ISBN 978-3-319-72477-5
ISBN 978-3-319-72478-2
(eBook)
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-72478-2
Library of Congress Control Number: 2017961750
© Springer International Publishing AG 2018
This work is subject to copyright. All rights are reserved by the Publisher, whether the whole or part
of the material is concerned, speciﬁcally the rights of translation, reprinting, reuse of illustrations,
recitation, broadcasting, reproduction on microﬁlms or in any other physical way, and transmission
or information storage and retrieval, electronic adaptation, computer software, or by similar or dissimilar
methodology now known or hereafter developed.
The use of general descriptive names, registered names, trademarks, service marks, etc. in this
publication does not imply, even in the absence of a speciﬁc statement, that such names are exempt from
the relevant protective laws and regulations and therefore free for general use.
The publisher, the authors and the editors are safe to assume that the advice and information in this
book are believed to be true and accurate at the date of publication. Neither the publisher nor the
authors or the editors give a warranty, express or implied, with respect to the material contained herein or
for any errors or omissions that may have been made. The publisher remains neutral with regard to
jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional afﬁliations.
Printed on acid-free paper
This Springer imprint is published by Springer Nature
The registered company is Springer International Publishing AG
The registered company address is: Gewerbestrasse 11, 6330 Cham, Switzerland

