Philosophy and Phenomenological Research 
Vol. XLVIII,
NO. 2, December 1987 
Commentary on Cam 
DANIEL C. DENNETT 
Tufts University 
In "Propositions about Images" Philip Cam accurately analyzes and criti- 
cizes the grounds I gave, in the works he cites, for my denial that we have 
privileged access (of any sort) to anything deserving to be called a mental 
image. He shows that I did not deal properly with the question of how I 
would interpret the ostensive force of "this" and "that" in an introspec- 
tive judgment of the sort: "Now it looks like this and now it looks like 
that." What can one be ostending or referring to in such a case, if not to an 
image (or some feature of an image)? 
My reply in 1979, which he quotes, is that these demonstratives are 
short-hand "promissory notes" for hard-to-articulate descriptive propo- 
sitions, and this is not very convincing. It isn't clear to Cam, he says, that 
my promissory notes can be repaid -without recourse at some point to a 
reference to images. 
I think Cam is right, but now I see that I was wrong to put any impor- 
tance on the possibility-in-principle of getting all the "content" in an 
introspective judgment "expressed" (or "explicit") in a sentence. That 
line of defense was doubly confused on my part. First, as I have more 
recently argued ("Beyond Belief," 1982), there is no uniform and prob- 
lem-free understanding of the relation between propositions (the abstract 
entities taken traditionally as the "objects" of "propositional" attitudes) 
and sentences (of English or any other natural language). You can't put 
into English the most "propositional" (least "imagistic") of 
"propositional attitudes" without risk of loss or distortion, so it should 
not surprise or dismay me that there is a difficulty in finding an intuitively 
adequate sentence to express an introspective judgment about the nature 
of one's putative mental images. 
In the second place, I was wrong to think I needed such an escape to 
sentences to preserve my view about the unprivileged (or even underprivi- 
leged) access we might have to anything worth calling an image. All I 
needed was a distinction between images and judgments about images. 
COMMENTARY O N  CAM 3 39 

(See "Two Approaches to Mental Images," chap. 10 in Brainstorms, 
1978, where I first formulated this alternative idea.) In another more 
recent paper ("How to Study Human Consciousness Empirically: or, 
Nothing Comes to Mind," 1982), I developed the proposal that one's 
capacity to talk about what goes on in one's phenomenology might be 
unavoidably metaphorical, as well as unprivileged, but that this did not 
have the implication that there was any residual ineffable content that 
posed a challenge to materialism, or functionalism. 
In those two 1982 papers I did not, however, explicitly draw attention 
to my abandonment of the position Cam criticizes here, and it is hardly 
obvious how my later view is supposed to replace my earlier view. The 
fundamental point I want to retain is that if there is, on some occasion, 
something going on in you that is well described as an image, your access 
to that is in no way more intimate or more direct than your access to 
"public" images -of the sort you might draw on paper. 
Suppose you draw a picture on a piece of paper and then look at it. (It 
might be a duck-rabbit, for instance.) Now unless you are extraordinarily 
absentminded or drunk or otherwise addled, you are no doubt going to be 
in a very good position, epistemically, to describe the image you have cre- 
ated - but in no better position in principle than any third party who 
watched you create it. You may know things about what you were trying 
to do that the third party doesn't know, and you may know things about 
your subsequent authorial intentions undreamt of by the third party (e.g., 
you had intended to draw a duck-rabbit, but now that you look at it, it 
looks rather like an old man with big nose looking up, so that is what you, 
the "artist," decide it is.) You are in a position, as authorlartist, to declare 
an interpretation of the image you see, but that is the extent of your privi- 
lege. 
Suppose now instead that you solve a problem "in your head" with the 
aid (SO you think) of a mental image you create. Unless you are seriously 
-perhaps 
even systematically- misled about the nature of your activity 
(a prospect that must not be lightly dismissed, given the evidence of con- 
fabulation and illusion in a host of human cognitive activities), you are no 
doubt going to be in a good position, epistemically, to describe what you 
have done -though probably in somewhat metaphorical terms -and if 
what seems best to you to say is that you have created an image, that is apt 
to be a fruitful way for third parties to understand the phenomenon, but 
your "access" to your creation in this case is just like your access in the 
previous case. 
It is tempting to suppose in the former case that there is another image, 
a private, subjective image in between the public image on the page and 
340 DANIEL C. DENNETT 

your various interpretive judgments about that public image. And there 
may well be; thereemay be something in your head that is rather like what 
is in your head in the latter case. But your judgments about that inner 
image are no more privileged than judgments about the public image -
and your authorial privilege to stipulate an interpretation of the public 
image is no less secure than your privilege to stipulate an interpretation of 
your private images. Interpretations aren't images, however. 
What does this leave me to say about someone who avers, in the rele- 
vant circumstances, "Now it looks like this and now it looks like that"? 
To what is this person referring? Perhaps, as Cam suggests, to some actu- 
ally different images -though whether this is the best way of talking is 
not something for the subject to decide! If not to anything worth calling an 
image, then to some other "data structure" which permits a distinction to 
be drawn between duckish duck-rabbits and rabbitish duck-rabbits, and 
whether it is the sort of thing that lends itself to capturing in a sentence is 
an open (and not particularly important) question. 
Bibliography 
Dennett, D. C., "Beyond Belief," in Thought and Object, ed. A. 
Woodfield. Oxford University Press, 1982. Pp. 1-95. 
Dennett, D. C., "How to Study Human Consciousness Empirically: or 
Nothing Comes to Mind." Synthese 53 (1982): 159-80. 
COMMENTARY O N  CAM 341 

