THE COMPUTATIONAL 
PERSPECTIVE 
DANIEL c .  DENNETT 
When I go to a workshop or conference and give a talk, I'm 
actually doing research, because the howls and screeches and 
frowns that I get from people, the way in which they react to 
what I suggest, is often diagnostic of how they are picturing 
the problems in their own minds. And in faa people have 
very diferent covert images about what the mind is and how 
the mind works. The trick is to expose these images, to bring 
them up into public view and then corea them. That's what 
I specialize in. 

D AN I E L  C .  D E N N ETT is University Professor, 
professor of philosophy, and director of the Center for 
Cognitive Studies at Tufts University. A philosopher 
by training, he is lmown as the leading proponent of 
the computational model of the mind. He is the author 
of Content and Consciousness; Brainstorms; Elbuw Room; 
The Intentional Stance; Consciousness &plained; Darwin's 
Dangerous Idea; Kinds of Minds; Brainchildren; and Free­
dom Evolves. With Douglas Hofstadter, he coedited 
The Mind's I, and he is the author of over 200 scholarly 
articles on various aspects of the mind. 
I
f you go back 20 years, or if you go back 200 years, 300 
years, you see that there was one family of phenomena that 
people just had no clue about, and those were mental phe­
nomena-that is, the very idea of thinking, perception, 
dreaming, sensing. We didn't have any model for how that 
was done physically at all. Descartes and Leibniz, great sci­
entists in their own right, simply drew a blank when it came 
to trying to figure these things out. And it's only really with 
the ideas of computation that we now have some clear and 
manageable ideas about what could possibly be going on. We 
don't have the right story yet, but we've got some good ideas. 
At least you can now see how the job can be done. 
Coming to understand our own understanding, and see­
ing what kinds of parts it can be made of, is one of the great 
breakthroughs in the history of human understanding. If you 

Daniel C. Dennett 
1 1 3  
compare it with, say, our understanding of life itself or 
reproduction and growth, those were deep and mysterious 
processes 100 years ago and forever before that. Now we 
have a pretty clear idea of how things reproduce, how they 
grow, repair themselves, fuel themselves. All of those for­
merly mysterious phenomena are falling into place. 
And when you look at such phenomena, you see that at a 
very fundamental level they're computational-that is, there 
are algorithms for growth, development, and reproduction. 
The central binding idea is that you can put together not bil­
lions but trillions of moving parts and get entirely novel, 
emergent, higher-level effects, and the best explanation for 
what governs those effects is at the level of software, the level 
of algorithms. If you want to understand how orderly devel­
opment, growth, and cognition take place, you need to have 
a high-level understanding of how those bilions or trillions 
of pieces interact with each other. 
We never had the tools before to understand what hap­
pens when you put a trillion cells together and let them in­
teract. Now we're getting those tools; even the lowly laptop 
gives us hints, because we see phenomena happening on our 
desks that would astound Newton or Descartes-or Darwin, 
for that matter. Phenomena that look like sheer magic. We 
know they aren't magic. There's not a thing that's magical 
about a computer. One of the most brilliant things about a 
computer is that there's nothing up its sleeve. We know to a 
moral certainty that there are no morphic resonances, psy­
onic waves, spooky interactions; it's good old push/pull, tra­
ditional, material causation. And when you put it together by 
the trillions with software, you get all this magic that's not 
really magic. 
The idea of computation is a murky one; it's a mistake to 
think we have a clear, unified, unproblematic concept of 

114 
THE COMPUTATIONAL PERSPECTIVE 
what counts as computation. It's less clearly defined than the 
idea of matter or the ideas of energy or time in physics, for 
instance. Even computer scientists have only a fuzzy grip on 
what they actually mean by computation. The question is 
where to draw the line between what is computation and 
what isn't. That's not so clear. But that doesn't mean we can't 
have good theories of computation. Almost any process can 
be interpreted through the lens of computational ideas, and 
usually it's a fruitful exercise of reinterpretation. We can see 
features of the phenomenon through that lens that are es­
sentially invisible through any other. 
Human culture is the environment we live in. There's the 
brute physical environment-the streets, the air we breathe, 
the water we drink, the cars we travel in-and then there's all 
the communication going on around us in many different 
media: everyday conversation, newspapers, books, radio, tel­
evision, the Internet. Pigeons live in our world, too, but 
they're oblivious to most of it; they don't care what's written 
in the newspaper they find their crumbs on. It's immaterial to 
them what the content, what the information, is. For us it's 
different; the information is really important. 
If we think about the informational world our species 
lives in, we see that in fact it's got a lot of structure. It's not 
amorphous. Everything is not connected to everything else. 
There are lots of barriers. There's an architecture to this 
world of communication, and that architecture is changing 
rapidly, in ways we don't understand yet. 
Let me give you a simple example of this. You could tune 
in the Super Bowl a couple of years ago and see these dot­
com companies pouring an embarrassingly large amount of 
their initial capitalization into one ad for the Super Bowl; 
they were trying to get jump-started with this ad. And this 
was curious. If this was an Internet company, why didn't it 

Daniel C. Dennett 
1 1 5  
use the Internet? Why do this retrograde thing of advertis­
ing on regular broadcast television? And the answer, of 
course, is that there is a fundamental difference in the con­
ceptual architecture of those two media. When you watch 
the Super Bowl, you're part of a large simultaneous commu­
nity-and you know it. You know that you are one of mil­
lions, hundreds of millions of people. You're all having the 
same experience at once, and you know that you are. And it's 
that second fact-it's that reflexive fact-that's so important. 
You go to a Web site and there might be 100 million people 
looking at that Web site but you don't know that. You may 
have read that somewhere . . .  but you're not sure, you don't 
know. The sense you have when you're communing on the 
Web is a much more private sense than when you're watch­
ing something on network television. And this has huge ram­
ifications regarding credibility. An ad that works well on 
television falls flat on the Web, because the people who see 
it, read it, listen to it, don't know what audience they're a 
part of. T hey don't know how big a room they're in. Is this a 
private communication or a public communication? We 
don't know yet what kind of fragmentation of the world's au­
diences is going to be occasioned by the Internet. The Inter­
net brings people together, but it also isolates them in a way 
we haven't begun to assess. That sense of being utterly lost 
that neophytes have when they first get on the Web-choos­
ing search engines, knowing what to trust, where home is, 
whom to believe, what sites to go to-arises because 
everybody is thirsting for reliable informants, signposts. 
This geography of available information was established 
over centuries in the traditional media. You went to the Times 
and you read something there, and it had a certain authority 
for you. Or you went to the public library and read something 
in the Encyclopedia Britannica. These institutions had their 

116 
THE COMPUTATIONAL PERSPECTIVE 
own character, their own reputations, and their reputations 
were shared communally. It was important that your friends 
also knew that the Tzmes or the Encyclopedia Britannica was an 
important place to look. Suppose somebody writes and pub­
lishes a volume called "Sammy's Encyclopedia of the World's 
Information"? It might well be the best encyclopedia in the 
world, but if people in general don't realize it, nobody's going 
to trust whatŘ in there. It's this credibility issue that, as far as 
I can see, has not yet even begun to crystallize on the Web. 
We're entering uncharted waters there, and the outcome is 
hard to predict. 
Human experience changed tremendously in the last cen­
tury-and especially over the last decade. For instance, I'd 
guess that the average western-world teenager has heard 
more professionally played music than Mozart ever heard in 
his whole life (not counting his own playing and composing 
and rehearsal time). It used to be that hearing professional 
musicians in performance was a very special thing. Now not 
hearing professional musicians is a very special thing­
there's a soundtrack almost everywhere you go. This is a 
huge change in the auditory structure of the world we live in. 
The other arts are similarly positioned. There was a time 
when just seeing written words was a rarity. Now everything 
has words on it. People can stand in the shower and read the 
back of the shampoo bottle. We are completely surrounded 
by the technology of communication-and that's new. Our 
species has no adaptations for it, so we're winging it. 
There are lots of patterns in the world. Some are gov­
erned by the law of gravity, some by other physical principles. 
And some of them are governed by software. That is to say, 
the robustness of the pattern-the fact that it's salient, that 
you can identify it, that it keeps reproducing itself, that it can 
be found here, there, and elsewhere, and that you can predict 

Daniel C. Dennett 
1 1 7  
it-is not because there's a fundamental law like the law of 
gravity that governs it but because these are patterns that oc­
cur wherever you have organisms that process information. 
They preserve, restore, and repair the patterns and keep them 
going. And that's a fundamental, new fearure of the universe. 
If you went to a lifeless planet and surveyed all the patterns on 
it, these patterns wouldn't be there. They're the patterns you 
can find in DNA-those are the ur-patterns, the ones that 
make all the other patterns possible. They're also the patterns 
you find in texts. They have to have some physical embodi­
ment in nucleotides or ink marks or particles and charges. But 
what explains their very existence in the universe is computa­
tion, the algorithmic quality of all things that reproduce and 
have meaning, and that make meaning. 
These patterns are not, in one sense, reducible to the laws 
of physics, although they are based in physical reality. The 
explanation of why the patterns form as they do has to go on 
at a higher level. Douglas Hofstadter once offered a very el­
egant simple example: We come across a computer and it's 
chugging along, chugging along, chugging along. Why 
doesn't it stop? What fact explains the fact that this particu­
lar computer doesn't stop? And in Hofstadter's example, the 
reason it doesn't stop is that pi is an irrational number. 
What? Well, pi is an irrational number, which means that it's 
a never-ending decimal, and this particular computer pro­
gram is generating the decimal expansion of pi, a process 
that will never stop. Of course, the computer may break. 
Somebody may come along with an ax and cut the power 
cord-but as long as it keeps powered, it's going to go on 
generating these digits forever. That's a simple concrete fact 
that can be detected in the world, the explanation of which 
cites an abstract mathematical fact. 

1 1 8  
THE COMPUTATIONAL PERSPECTIVE 
Now, there are many other patterns in the world that 
aren't as arcane and have to do with the meaning we attach to 
things. Why is he blushing? There's a perfectly good expla­
nation of what the process of blushing is: Blushing is the suf­
fusion of blood through the skin of the face. But why is he 
blushing? He's blushing because he thinks she knows some 
fact about him that he wishes she didn't know. That's a com­
plex, higher-order, intentional state, one that's visible only 
when you go to the higher, intentional level. You can't see 
that by looking at the individual states of the neurons in his 
brain. You have to go to the level at which you're talking 
about what this man knows and believes and wants. 
The intentional level is what I call the "intentional 
stance". It's a strategy you can try whenever you're con­
fronted with something complex in nature. It doesn't always 
work. The idea is to interpret that complexity as one or more 
intelligent, rational agents that have agendas, beliefs, and de­
sires and are interacting. When you go up to the intentional 
level, you discover patterns that are highly predictive, robust, 
and not reducible in any meaningful sense to the lower-level 
patterns at the physical level. In between the intentional 
stance and the "physical stance" is what I call the "design 
stance". That's the level of software. 
The idea of abstraction has been around for a long time, 
and 200 years ago you could enliven a philosophical imagi­
nation by asking what Mozart's Haffner Symphony is made 
of. It's ink on pieces of paper. Itȯ a sequence of sounds as 
played by people with various stringed instruments and 
other instruments. It's an abstract thing. It's a symphony. 
Stradivarius made violins; Mozart made symphonies, which 
depend on a physical realization but don't depend on any 
particular one. They have an independent existence, which 
can shift from one medium to another and back. 

Daniel C. Dennett 
1 19 
We've had that idea for a long time, but we've recently 
become much more comfortable with it, living as we do in a 
world of abstract artifacts that jump promiscuously from 
medium to medium. It's no longer a big deal to go from the 
score, to the music you hear live, to the recorded version of 
the music. You can jump back and forth between media very 
rapidly now. It's become a fact of life. It used to be hard work 
to get things from one form to another; that's not hard work 
anymore; it's automatic. You eliminate the middleman. You 
no longer have to have the musician to read the score, to 
produce the music. This removal of all the hard work in 
translating from one medium to another makes it all the 
more natural to populate your world with abstractions, be­
cause you find it's hard to keep track of what medium they're 
in. And that doesn't matter much anymore-you're inter­
ested in the abstraction, not the medium. Where did you get 
that software? Did you go to a store and buy an actual CD 
and put it in your computer, or did you just download it off 
the Web? It's the same software, one way or another. It 
doesn't really· matter. This idea of medium neutrality is one 
of the essential ideas of software, or of algorithms in general. 
And it's one that we're becoming familiar with, but it's amaz­
ing to me how much resistance there still is to this idea. 
An algorithm is an abstract process that can be defined 
over a finite set of fundamental procedures-an instruction 
set. It is a structured array of such procedures. That's a very 
generous notion of an algorithm-more generous than many 
mathematicians would like, because I would include by that 
definition algorithms that may be in some ways defective. 
Consider your laptop. There's an instruction set for that lap­
top consisting of all the basic things its CPU can do; each ba­
sic operation has a digital name or code, and every time that 
bit sequence occurs, the CPU tries to execute that operation. 

120 
TnE CoMPtrATIONAL PERSPECTIVE 
You can take any bit sequence at all and feed it to your laptop 
as if it were a program. Almost certainly, any sequence that 
isn't designed to be a program to run on that laptop won't do 
anything at all-it'll just crash. Still, there's utility in think­
ing that any sequence of instructions, however buggy, how­
ever stupid, however pointless, should be considered an 
algorithm, because one person's buggy, dumb sequence is an­
other person's useful device for some weird purpose, and we 
don't want to prejudge that question. (Maybe that "non­
sense" was included in order to get the laptop to crash at just 
the point it crashed!) One can define a more proper algo­
rithm as one that runs without crashing. The only trouble is 
that if you define algorithms that way, then probably you 
don't have any on your laptop, because there's almost cer­
tainly a way to make almost every program on your laptop 
crash. You just haven't found it yet. Bug-free software is an 
ideal that's almost never achieved. 
Looking at the world as if everything were a computa­
tional process is becoming fashionable. Here one encounters 
not an issue of fact but an issue of strategy. The question isn't 
"What's the truth?" The question is "What's the most fruit­
ful strategy?" You don't want to abandon standards and 
count everything as computational, because then the idea 
loses its sense; it doesn't have any grip anymore. How do you 
deal with that? One way is to try to define, in a rigid central­
ist way, some threshold that has to be passed, and refuse to 
call a process computational unless it has properties A, B, C, 
D, and E. You can do that any number of ways and it will save 
you the embarrassment of having to say that everything is 
computational. The trouble is that anything you choose as a 
set of defining conditions will be too rigid. There will be 
processes that meet those conditions but aren't interestingly 
computational by anybody's standards, and there are 

Daniel C. Dennett 
121 
processes that don't meet the standards but nevertheless are 
significantly like the things you want to consider computa­
tional. So how do you deal with the issue of definition? By ig­
noring it-that's my suggestion. Same as with life! You don't 
want to argue about whether viruses are alive or not; in some 
ways they're alive, in some ways they're not. Some processes 
are obviously computational. Others are obviously not com­
putational. Where does the computational perspective illu­
minate? Well, that depends on who's looking at the 
illumination. 
I describe three stances for looking at reality: the physical 
stance, the design stance, and the intentional stance. The 
physical stance is where the physicists are; it's matter and 
motion. The design stance is where you start looking at the 
software-at the patterns that are maintained-because 
these are designed things that are fending off their own dis­
solution. That is to say, they are bulwarks against the Second 
Law of Thermodynamics. This applies to all living things 
and also to all artifacts. Above that is the intentional stance, 
which is the way we treat that specific set of organisms and ar­
tifacts that are themselves rational information-processing 
agents. In some sense, from the intentional stance you can 
treat Mother Nature-that is, the whole process of evolution 
by natural selection-as an agent, but we understand that 
that's a fafon de par/er, a useful shortcut for getting at features 
of the design processes that are unfolding over eons of time. 
Once we get to the intentional stance, we have rational 
agents, we have minds, creators, authors, inventors, discov­
erers-and everyday folks-interacting on the basis of their 
take on the world. 
Is there anything above that? Well, in one sense there is. 
People-or persons, as moral agents-are a specialized sub­
set of the intentional systems. All animals are intentional sys-

122 
THE COMPUTATIONAL PERSPECTIVE 
terns. Parts of you are intentional systems. You're made up of 
lots of lesser intentional systems-homunculi of sorts-but 
unless you've got multiple personality disorder, there's only 
one person there. A person is a moral agent-not just a cog­
nitive agent, not just a rational agent, but a moral agent. This 
is the highest level I can make sense of. Why it exists at all, 
how it exists, the conditions for its maintenance: these are 
very interesting problems. We can look at game theory as ap­
plied to the growth of trees-they compete for sunlight, it's 
a game in which there are winners and losers. 
But when we look at game theory as applied not just to ra­
tional agents but to people with a moral outlook, we see 
some important differences. People have free will; trees 
don't. It's not an issue for trees in the way it is for people. 
What I like about the idea that people are animals with 
free will is that it agrees with philosophical tradition (includ­
ing Aristotle and Descartes, for instance) in maintaining that 
people are different-that people aren't just animals. Tradi­
tional theorists completely disagree, of course, on what that 
difference consists of. Although it's a naturalization of the 
idea of people, it does say they're different, and this, I dis­
cover, is the thing that most entices and upsets people about 
my view. There are those who want people to be more dif­
ferent than I'm allowing. They want people to have souls, to 
be Cartesian people. And there are those who are afraid that 
I'm trying to differentiate people too much from the other 
animals with my claim that human beings really are, because 
of culture, an importantly different sort of thing. Some sci­
entists view this claim with skepticism, as if I'm trying to sal­
vage for philosophy something that should fall to science. 
But in fact my view about what's different about people is a 
scientific theory; it stands or falls as an implication of a sci­
entific theory, in any case. 

Daniel C. Dennett 
123 
Regarding my own role in cogmnve science-as to 
whether I consider myself a philosopher or a scientist-I 
think I'm good at discovering the blockades of imagination, 
the bad habits of thought, that infect how theorists think 
about the problem of consciousness. '\Vhen I go to a work­
shop or conference and give a talk, I'm actually doing re­
search, because the howls and screeches and frowns that I get 
from people, the way in which they react to what I suggest is 
often diagnostic of how they are picturing the problems in 
their own minds. And in fact people have very different 
covert images about what the mind is and how the mind 
works. The trick is to expose these images, to bring them up 
into public view and then correct them. That's what I spe­
cialize in. 
My demolition of the Cartesian theater, of Cartesian ma­
terialism, is just one of these campaigns of exposure. People 
often pay lip service to the idea that there isn't any privileged 
medium in the brain playing the role that Descartes assigned 
to the nonphysical mind as the theater of consciousness. 
Nevertheless, if you look closely at what they are thinking 
and saying, their views make sense only if you interpret them 
as covertly presupposing a Cartesian theater somewhere in 
their model. Teasing this out, bringing it to the surface and 
then showing what you might replace it with is, to me, very 
interesting work. Happily, some people have come to 
appreciate this as a valuable service that somebody like me, a 
philosopher, can perform: getting them to confront the hid­
den assumptions in their own thinking and showing how 
those hidden assumptions blind them to opportunities for 
explaining what they want to explain. 

THE NEW 
HUMANISTS 
science at the edge 
edited by 
JOHN BROCKMAN 
BARNES 
&.NOBLE 
B 0 
0 
K S 
NlW 
YORK 

A Barnes and Noble Book 
Copyright (c) 2003 by John Brockman 
All Rights Reserved 
No part of this book can be used or reproduced, 
stored in a retrieval system, or transmitted, 
in any form or by any means, electronic, mechanical, 
photocopying, recording or otherwise, without prior 
written permission from the Publisher 
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data 
Available upon request 
The New Humanists: Science At the Edge 
ISBN: 0760745293 
Printed and bound in the United States of America 
03 04 05 06 07 MC 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1 
RRD-H 

