 
 
Journal of Philosophy, Inc. is collaborating with JSTOR to digitize, preserve and extend access to The Journal of Philosophy.
http://www.jstor.org
Journal of Philosophy, Inc.
Review 
Author(s): Daniel C. Dennett 
Review by: Daniel C. Dennett 
Source: 
 
 
The Journal of Philosophy, Vol. 93, No. 8 (Aug., 1996), pp. 425-428
Published by: 
 
Journal of Philosophy, Inc.
Stable URL: 
 
http://www.jstor.org/stable/2941038
Accessed: 23-02-2016 14:47 UTC
Your use of the JSTOR archive indicates your acceptance of the Terms & Conditions of Use, available at http://www.jstor.org/page/
 
info/about/policies/terms.jsp
JSTOR is a not-for-profit service that helps scholars, researchers, and students discover, use, and build upon a wide range of content 
in a trusted digital archive. We use information technology and tools to increase productivity and facilitate new forms of scholarship. 
For more information about JSTOR, please contact support@jstor.org.
This content downloaded from 194.27.18.18 on Tue, 23 Feb 2016 14:47:55 UTC
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

BOOK REVIEWS 
425 
Other Minds: Critical Essays, 1969-1994. THOMAS NAGEL. New York: Ox- 
ford University Press, 1995. 229 p. Cloth $24.95. 
The institution of book reviews, flawed though it may be, still per- 
forms a crucial service of resource enhancement for a discipline, 
funneling informed attention to at least some of the best among a 
superfluity of publications. During the last quarter century, Thomas 
Nagel's book reviews and critical essays have played a major role, 
shaping opinion, and thereby shaping the field. Now he has gath- 
ered his favorites in a collection, ten in philosophy of mind and a 
dozen in ethics and political philosophy, supplemented by the view 
from today: brief reactions to the individual pieces, and a fascinating 
introduction, part intellectual autobiography and part reflection on 
the state of the discipline. The other minds of the title are those of 
Sigmund Freud (and Richard Wollheim and Adolf Gruinbaum), 
Ludwig Wittgenstein 
(and David Pears), Noam Chomsky, Jerry 
Fodor, David Armstrong, Brian O'Shaughnessy, John Searle, and my- 
self in the philosophy of mind; and Aristotle (and John Cooper), 
John Rawls, Robert Nozick, Richard Hare, Bernard Williams, 
Thomas Schelling, Ronald Dworkin, Alasdair Maclntyre, and Leszek 
Kolakowski in ethics and political philosophy. Do not be misled by 
the dustjacket. The picture of brains is as inappropriate as it is ugly; 
Nagel's interest in the mind has always been driven more by his in- 
terest in the mind's role in ethics than by a fascination with neuro- 
science. He is a "moral psychologist," not a "cognitive scientist." 
The essays themselves are deservedly familiar; only two of the es- 
says in the philosophy of mind were new to me, and only half of 
those in ethics. I expect that specialists in ethics would report a simi- 
lar recognition rate biased toward their primary field. I wonder if a 
similar bias would emerge in what we might call persuasion rate; I 
have always found his work in ethics to contain more convincing 
points than his work in philosophy of mind. In both areas Nagel hits 
hard, defending large, interesting claims in no uncertain terms. And 
in every case I can properly judge (the essays that review books I 
have carefully read-or written-myself), 
he passes the most impor- 
tant test of a good reviewer: he gives a fair expression of the author's 
message and its motivation, even when he utterly disagrees with it, 
even when he goes on to scold the author for dereliction of one duty 
or another, as he occasionally does. Several of his essays strike him 
today as "aggressive" enough to warrant comment in his introduc- 
0022-362X/96/9308/425-28 
i 1996 The Journal of Philosophy, Inc. 
This content downloaded from 194.27.18.18 on Tue, 23 Feb 2016 14:47:55 UTC
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

426 
THEJOURNAL OF PHILOSOPHY 
tions, and indeed one of the most salient patterns that emerges from 
these essays is his readiness to pronounce uncompromising verdicts: 
"This last is a bizarre claim" (89). "Vague as his suggestions are..., 
they all suffer from an error of focus..." (144). "This mistake drains 
the argument of its force" (148). 
These negative judgments are overbalanced, however, by a variety 
of forthright endorsements in the course of exposition and, more 
importantly, by many original supporting observations and clarifica- 
tions. His candidates for promotion to philosophers' attention- 
O'Shaughnessy and Schelling-are 
not equally convincing to this 
reviewer, but at least they are equally explicative. Rawls needs no 
promotion, but Nagel's exposition of A Theoiy ofJustice makes one ea- 
ger to return again to the text, and his review of Nozick's first book 
is packed with good ideas, well developed. Yes, Nozick seems to have 
made just the mistakes Nagel says he did, and even to have corrected 
them as best he could in his later work. Nagel often-not 
always- 
goes right to the heart of matter. 
Does he present a globally identifiable philosophical position, the 
view from Mt. Nagel, as it were? I think he does, and his introductory 
essay shows where it is and how he got there. Nagel is the product of 
his education-as 
we all are, to one degree or another (he describes 
my view as "Gilbert Ryle crossed with Scientific American"-ouch, but 
close enough). And what a glorious education he got, first at Cornell 
University with Norman Malcolm, Rawls, and Rogers Albritton, and 
then in 1958 at Oxford University on a Fulbright Fellowship, where 
John Austin was his B.Phil. supervisor, and Paul Grice his utterly 
transforming tutor. This early experience at Cornell and Oxford in- 
noculated him against what he sees as the scientistic influences of W. 
V. Quine and Chomsky when he continued his graduate education 
at Harvard University (with biweekly trips down Massachusetts Av- 
enue to hear Chomsky at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology 
with fellow graduate students Gilbert Harman and Robert Swartz). 
Nagel is above all else a philosophical traditionalist, someone who 
sees philosophy as discontinuous with science, a method of inquiry 
that is deeper and purer, a bulwark against superficial enthusiasms 
engendered by the latest buzzwords. Saul Kripke, another fellow stu- 
dent in the philosophy department at Harvard, helped him secure 
this toehold in tradition, I am sure, as did Thompson Clarke when 
Nagel joined him at Berkeley, where Searle and Barry Stroud were 
among his colleagues. 
I find myself wondering how important temporal order might be: 
I followed a similar path, in the opposite direction. As an undergrad- 
This content downloaded from 194.27.18.18 on Tue, 23 Feb 2016 14:47:55 UTC
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

BOOK REVIEWS 
427 
uate at Harvard at the time, I was quite appropriately in awe of the 
graduate students (add David Lewis, David Lyons, Michael Slote, and 
Margaret Wilson to the aforementioned-it 
was an impressive gang), 
and went on to Oxford, which by 1963 was already showing-to 
me-signs 
of decadence, in spite of its worldwide reputation. Be- 
ware, aspiring graduate students! Reputations of graduate programs 
almost always lag several years behind reality. In any event, Quine's 
message stuck with me, and all Ryle could do is add his own to it. 
There is a straightforward symmetry, then. Nagel is just as sure that 
we Quinians are missing the big, deep problems, providing only su- 
perficial "solutions" to them, as we are sure that he is enamored of a 
false profundity, the comforting frisson of midnight bull sessions, 
perhaps. As he observes, "the disagreement between us will presum- 
ably end only in the grave, if then." 
Wittgenstein makes a particularly good pivot point for this seesaw. 
I want to ask: How can Nagel do such a fine job explaining Wittgen- 
stein's view and not see that he is right (for example, about the in- 
verted spectrum, 50-51)? Wittgenstein raises "enormously difficult" 
questions for traditionalists like Kripke and Nagel, since Wittgen- 
stein-in 
spite of his own almost pathological traditionalism-is 
challenging some of their traditions, most effectively. For some of us, 
on the other hand, Wittgenstein does not seem so enormously diffi- 
cult on these topics at all; we see him as having glided into calm wa- 
ters, having said a few things that are, simply, the surprising, 
countertraditional truth. 
Nagel closes his introductory essay with some reflections on an 
awkward question once raised by Williams: "What is the point of do- 
ing philosophy if you're not extraordinarily good at it?" In the "Epis- 
tle to the Reader" of his Essay Concerning Human Understanding, John 
Locke modestly compared himself to "the incomparable Mr. New- 
ton" and the other great scientists of his day, and said "it is ambition 
enough to be employed as an under-labourer in clearing the ground 
a little, and removing some of the rubbish that lies in the way to 
knowledge," but Williams's implication is that yeoman philosophy, 
unlike yeoman science, is a net contributor of rubbish. Nagel re- 
sponds to Williams's question with an elaborative one of his own: "So 
isn't there something absurd about paying thousands of people to 
think about these fundamental questions" (10)? 
He does not attempt to answer these questions definitively, and 
the reviews that follow, what with their frequent pronouncements of 
flat-footed error by major figures, heighten their urgency. Is this the 
best we can do? In an informal survey, I have been asking philoso- 
This content downloaded from 194.27.18.18 on Tue, 23 Feb 2016 14:47:55 UTC
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

428 
THEJOURNAL OF PHILOSOPHY 
phers a slightly different question recently, and shall be pleased to 
field further answers in response to this review: Which would you 
choose, if Mephistopheles offered you the following options? 
(1) Simply solving an outstanding philosophical problem so definitively 
that, after a few years, only historians ever mentioned it (or your 
work) again. 
(2) Writing a book that was so tantalizingly equivocal and problematic 
that it would be required reading for philosophy students for cen- 
turies to come. 
The history of science offers many instances of the first sort and 
none, really, of the second, but I find that many of my philosophical 
colleagues admit to being at least torn by the choice. They would 
rather be read than right. Perhaps it is of the "essence" of philosoph- 
ical problems to admit of no permanent solutions, though I doubt it, 
but in either case it is no wonder we make so little progress. 
Sometimes, I think that Nagel is telling us what the limits of phi- 
losophy are, and giving the very best reaction to the issues he dis- 
cusses. Other times, I think he is stopping too short, settling for 
urbane and plausible "doubts" where a more hard-bitten, fish-or-cut- 
bait attitude toward these looming implausibilities would better serve 
the field. On these occasions, I think he is trapped in what is obvi- 
ous-to-a-traditional-philosopher, unable to take seriously enough the 
counterintuitive prospects on offer. 
His succinct defense of reason as the final, best arbiter, however, is 
so good, so worth keeping to hand like a fire extinguisher, that I 
want to make sure it gets spread around: 
Reason is universal because no attempted challenge to its results can 
avoid appealing to reason in the end-by 
claiming, for example, that 
what was presented as an argument is really a rationalization. This can 
undermine our confidence in the original method or practice only by 
giving us reasons to believe something else, so that finally we have to 
think about the arguments to make up our minds (213). 
DANIEL C. DENNETI 
Tufts University 
This content downloaded from 194.27.18.18 on Tue, 23 Feb 2016 14:47:55 UTC
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

