REVIEW ESSAY
Homunculi rule: Reﬂections on Darwinian populations
and natural selection by Peter Godfrey Smith
Oxford University Press, 2009
Daniel C. Dennett
Received: 15 November 2010 / Accepted: 16 November 2010 / Published online: 21 December 2010
 Springer Science+Business Media B.V. 2010
Down with essentialism
This is the best, most thought-provoking book in the philosophy of biology that I
have read in a long time. It is rigorously argued, deeply informed, full of wonderful
examples, and it has more novel ideas within its pages than any two other recent
books in the ﬁeld that I can think of. It has opened my mind on several key issues
and changed my mind as well; it is also provoked me to come up with what I hope
are better defenses of some of the points of my position criticized in the book.
One of the most important things we have learned from Darwin (but some
philosophers, alas, still don’t get it), is that essentialism is simply a mistake. There is
no mystery about why many philosophers resist this verdict: their method, going
back to Socrates, demands exceptionless deﬁnitions and self-evident axioms, from
which deductive consequences can be made to ﬂow. Philosophers are not alone in
their weakness for essentialism. Even evolutionary theorists have often succumbed to
the temptation to deﬁne the essence of Darwinism, the necessary and sufﬁcient
conditions for natural selection to occur. For one thing, this makes for effective
pedagogy. But a good Darwinian should attempt to honor Darwinism about
Darwinism itself—in Glenn Adelson’s apt phrase—and Peter Godfrey Smith
(henceforth PGS) shows us how to think about all the many marginal cases—the
semi-Darwinian processes, proto-Darwinian phenomena, quasi-Darwinian relation-
ships—without marginalizing them. Therapsids, after all, were just as real as their
ancestor reptiles and their mammalian descendants, and the question of whether
viruses are alive (or not—do we have to ﬁsh or cut bait?) is less important than seeing
which Darwinian features viruses share with bacteria, with aspen groves, with us—
and why. PGS sets out with a deliberately neutral, maximally latitudinarian, basic
category, Darwinian populations. Literal populations of organisms are populations,
D. C. Dennett (&)
Center for Cognitive Studies, Tufts University, Medford, MA 02155-7059, USA
e-mail: Daniel.Dennett@tufts.edu
123
Biol Philos (2011) 26:475–488
DOI 10.1007/s10539-010-9242-2

of course, but so are all the cells in a multicellular organism, and the set of
chromosomes in a cell, and (maybe) all the songs on the Hit Parade. Some
populations are just more ‘‘Darwinian’’ than others, for a variety of reasons. The
penumbral cases are just as real, and just as important to understanding biology, as
the parade cases, the paradigms that unmistakably exhibit all the key features.
Two contributions
The most valuable contribution of the book, in my opinion, is PGS’s introduction of
a ‘‘spatial tool’’ (p8) a 3-d representation of one or another ‘‘Darwinian Space’’
(p. 63), in which Darwinian populations can be located, permitting us to see—at a
glance—the relationships between key variables such as ﬁdelity of heredity (H),
abundance of variation (V), competitive interaction with respect to reproduction
(a), continuity, or smoothness of ﬁtness landscape (C) and dependence of
reproductive differences on intrinsic character (labeled S—for supervenience,
roughly). As Fig. 1 (p. 64) makes clear, we can comfortably represent only three
variables at a time in a standard 3-d projection, but we can compose diagrams for
any three other variables of interest ad lib., and ‘‘In most cases, the way to think
about Fig. 1 [for instance] is to assume that everything in the graph has high values
on various unseen dimensions, so we can focus on the difference-making role of a
few key factors’’ (p. 63). So if H is really low, for instance, (paradigmatic) evolution
cannot occur because adaptations cannot accumulate faster than they dissipate due
to mistaken transmissions, and we get the ‘‘error catastrophe’’ that must somehow
be avoided in the early days of replication. If S is really low, selection is as good as
random, not ‘‘for cause’’—for any intrinsic merit, in effect, and you get drift. If C is
really low, there are no traversable hill-climbing paths to the optimal arrangements,
so populations will get stuck on inefﬁcient or ineffective arrangements.
Another diagram, Fig. 2 (p. 95) plots bottleneck (B), reproductive specialization
(G, for germ/soma) and overall integration (I). Note that we humans sit in the
paradigm corner, sharing important afﬁnities with oaks and Volvox that we don’t
share with aspens and buffalo herds. Such a visual display of the options ‘‘makes
vivid the role of gradients and partial similarities between cases. Second, it gives us
new ways of thinking about processes with a non-Darwinian character’’ (p. 65).
Exactly. I expect to use these PGS Spaces a lot in the future. The basic schema is so
powerful that it even extends beyond PGS’s use of it, permitting us to notice
omissions and biases in his own account. For instance, in spite of his salutary
opposition to essentialist thinking, he gives short shrift to at least two dimensions
which—I will argue—are just as important to a complete evolutionary account as the
dimensions he discusses so illuminatingly: the gradient between ‘‘formal’’ and
‘‘material’’ replication, and the gradient between differential replication and
differential persistence. It is not that he overlooks these entirely; he notes instances
of purely ‘‘formal’’ parent-offspring relations (prions, retroviruses and LINE
transposons) and he has careful discussions of the murky boundary between
differential growth/persistence (aspen groves, tribal growth) and differential
replication (oaks, Hutterite colonies (Sober and Wilson 1998)), but there are
476
D. C. Dennett
123

candidate generalizations of these observations that are nicely revealed for our
consideration when we plot these on PGS Spaces, generalizations that point to
possible extensions of Darwinian thinking at two of its most notorious—and
‘‘opposite’’—boundaries : the origin of life from pre-biotic phenomena at the early
end and the origin of culture and language at the most recent end. More on this below.
Vying for the laurels of most valuable contribution is PGS’s concept of de-
Darwinizing, which can be visualized in a PGS Space as the motion of some
Fig. 1 Spatial representation.of.cases.in.terms of (H, S, C)
Fig. 2 A space using three reproduction-related dimensions (B, G, I)
Homunculi Rule
477
123

Darwinian populations, over evolutionary time, away from the far-upper-right
paradigm corner to a more marginal position in the space. A vivid case is how the
transition from unicellularity to multicellularity resulted in the partial de-
Darwinizing of somatic-cell reproduction: these cells, a Darwinian population in
their own right, are no longer in such competitive interaction (the a dimension) as
their protist ancestors were, except when they get cancerous. Moreover, thanks to
our high value on the G dimension (the germ/soma distinction) the difference in
ﬁtness between germ line and somatic cells is ‘‘location,’’ not any intrinsic property,
so our somatic cells are also Darwinian populations with low S, which is why their
‘evolutionary activities’ are not paradigmatically Darwinian (p. 56).
The concept of de-Darwinizing permits us to see clearly the similarities between
eukaryotic cells, multi-cellularity and eusociality, for instance (p. 122). PGS stresses
that this motion in the space of Darwinian possibilities is not itself purposive (e.g.,
p. 128), even though it responds to deep constraints.
Two problem themes
These two excellent ideas, PGS Spaces and de-Darwinizing motion within them, are
in tension with two less valuable—indeed mildly obstructionist—themes in PGS’s
book:
1.
His reluctance to characterize any Darwinian processes in terms of information,
and
2.
His disapproval of ‘‘agential’’ description and explanation.
In some regards, there is nothing wrong with this tension, and it is even to be
welcomed. The best bandwagon should have a good set of brakes, and it is a good
thing that PGS wants to limit his tolerance, lest his Darwinism about Darwinism
dissolve into pluralistic mush. But the limits he sets need to be motivated and
defended, and here I ﬁnd some serious blind spots in his vision. His two pet peeves
are related, of course, and can be found united, not surprisingly, in the work of
Richard Dawkins (and John Maynard Smith, and George Williams, and David Haig,
and myself, among others). The fact that most of the outrage expressed against
Dawkins’ talk of ‘‘selﬁsh genes’’ is utterly benighted (e.g., Midgley 1979, 1983)
should not lull us into thinking that there are no informed and sophisticated
criticisms, and PGS sets out to distill the best objections to the widespread
enthusiasm for thinking of genes as agents of sorts, with agendas, pursuing
strategies, probing for weaknesses in their opponents, etc. What sets his critique
apart from others is his uniting of this theme with a steadfast opposition to the
position, most forcefully articulated by Williams (1992) that genes, like poems and
recipes, are properly seen to be the information carried by one physical vehicle or
another, translatable into different media, and properly (and unproblematically)
abstract. Don’t ask what a poem weighs, or what physical elements it is made of,
and don’t make the parallel mistake of thinking that genes are strands of
nucleotides; they are the information carried by those sequences of codons. I had
thought that this perspective was widely accepted as enlightened, but PGS will have
478
D. C. Dennett
123

none of it, so I will deal with his mistrust of information ﬁrst, and then turn to
agents.
For PGS genes are ‘‘treated in a materialist way, as small parts of organisms’’
(p. 9). The language here is interesting. Those of us who view genes, like poems, as
abstract, as informational items that depend on one physical vehicle or another, do
not view ourselves as departing in the slightest from materialism any more than we
regard our appreciation and use of the concept of software as a step towards a
Cartesian view of computers. PGS, in contrast, does see something ominous, or at
least untoward, in such abstractions. But he never says why. Or at least, so far as I
can see, this is an unmotivated and misplaced abstemiousness in his brand of
materialism. To check my own reading of his reluctance, I composed a thought
experiment for him to consider:
Herb and Alice want to have a baby, but here’s how they do it:
1.
They both have their genomes sequenced.
2.
Then they write a little computer program that does the meiosis algorithm on
both their genomes, creating virtual sperm and eggs, which are then (randomly)
united in silico, to create a new genome speciﬁcation (which passes all
bioinformatic tests for being the speciﬁcation of the DNA of an offspring of
Herb and Alice). (So far this is all done literally in terms of A, C, G. T, a purely
computational process of string-rewriting.)
3.
This speciﬁcation is then used to construct, codon by codon, an actual DNA
implementation of the entire genome
4.
Which is then implanted in the nucleus of a human egg (if it matters to you
whose egg this is, let me know), and becomes a ‘‘test tube baby’’ in one of the
usual ways.
Now you might want to compare the resulting infant, Hal, with Swamp Infant,
which is, thanks to Cosmic Coincidence (yuck) genetically identical to Hal. Is
either one of them the offspring of Herb and Alice? I would say Hal is, and
Swamp Infant is not (but Swamp Infant is impossible in every sense that matters—
logical possibility is just not interesting here.) I’m not trying to pin any essentialism
on you; I’m just trying to see how, given your antipathy to informational views, you
would characterize this (quite possible) mode of…reproduction. It seems to me to
be a case where Hal is very clearly the biological offspring of Herb and Alice,
because what matters is information, and the causal transmission of information (in
the form of ASCII code for ‘‘A’’, ‘‘C’’, ‘‘G’’ and ‘‘T’’, not in the form of molecules
(codons). The causal link might, for instance, pass through telecommunication
satellites, instead of taking the more direct, biochemical routes. (personal
correspondence, 4/26/2010).
And here is the response from PGS:
I accept that Hal is the offspring of Herb and Alice.
I guess the closest real-world case of something like this would be
reproduction by retroviruses, where the RNA in the virus gets transformed
into DNA and then back into RNA in the new viral offspring. Your case is a
grander case of the same sort of thing. There is structure in the parent, and by a
Homunculi Rule
479
123

somewhat tortuous causal process we end up with similar structure in the
offspring.
What I am not so sure about is what role ‘information’ has in this case. You say:
It seems to me to be a case where Hal is very clearly the biological offspring
of Herb and Alice, because what matters is information, and the causal
transmission of information (in the form of ASCII code for ‘‘A’’, ‘‘C’’, ‘‘G’’
and ‘‘T’’, not in the form of molecules (codons).
What matters is the re-creation of structure in a new generation. Computers
are information-processing devices, sure. And we use the computer to
represent the genomes of Herb and Alice. I don’t have any problem with the
idea that somewhere in the memory of the machine there is a structure being
used to represent Herb’s genome. But that does not make inheritance an
informational process. Forgetting genes, we could take a representation of
Herb’s facial features and a representation of Alice’s facial features, and get
the computer to do a meiosis-style mixing of them, and then build a robot with
the blended face. Here we use an information-processing device to represent
some structure in Herb and Alice, and also to create a new structure which is
based in a particular way on the old structure.
In your Hal case a form of artiﬁcial inheritance is devised, in which an
information-processing device is used at some crucial steps. But that does not
show that biological inheritance is a matter of transmission of information. It
shows that information-processing can be used in the re-creation of structure
across generations. Most of the time (in normal humans), something other than
information-processing is used. (personal correspondence, 5/3/2010).
I am bemused by this response. The ‘‘recreation of structure’’ would seem to me
to be close to a deﬁning power of information. When a sender has a structure
(a message) and succeeds in getting a receiver to recreate that structure, this just is
successful information-transmission, however, it is accomplished. I think it is
obvious that we want, or even need, a perspective that permits us to theorize, to
make predictions and consider explanations, about phenomena that succeed in
‘‘recreating structure’’ via substrate-neutral paths. We learn that our enemy has
somehow obtained information about the design of our new submarine. Did a spy
copy the blueprints onto pieces of paper and smuggle them across the border, or
encode a recipe for the design into patterns of dots and dashes that were sent by
radio, or memorize the blueprints and walk across the border, or …? We might be
able to discover that the information moved from Bethesda to Beirut to Bern to
Bonn to Baghdad and still not know what physical medium or what code was
involved in each leg of the journey. PGS grants that ‘‘artiﬁcial inheritance’’ can be
accomplished by interposing an information-processing device (and nothing else) in
the normal process. To me, that is as good as a proof that the normal process of
reproduction is fundamentally an information-transmission process. In a similar
vein you can replace the ropes and pulleys and drums connecting the helm to the
rudder with radio links (together with the transducers and effectors needed to give
480
D. C. Dennett
123

the skipper a sense of the resistance, and to actually move the rudder), showing that
steering is fundamentally an information-transmission process or control process, as
Norbert Wiener recognized when he created the term cybernetics from the Greek
verb for steering.
A few days after this exchange, Craig Venter announced the creation of his novel
bacterium with hand-crafted genome, inspiring PGS to send me another email
message:
Here is little Hal.
http://news.bbc.co.uk/2/hi/science_and_environment/10132762.stm
Though actually he has a formal parent and a material parent. (personal
correspondence, 5/21/2010)
Just so; it is now possible to take the information and use it to construct a
new vehicle for that information that can be read just ﬁne by the organism that
contains it.
‘‘Darwinian paranoia’’?
Now let me turn to his anti-agent theme, which is developed in much more detail,
and is, in fact, as good as the punch line of his book.
According to PGS, ‘‘the agential perspective on evolution has always been an
uneasy mix of the metaphorical and the literal…but all talk of beneﬁts and agendas
comes with a peculiar psychological power’’ (p. 10). The peculiar power is, of
course, the power of the intentional stance (Dennett 1971, 1987), which enables us to
think strategically about all manner of phenomena, from our fellow human beings
and animals, to computers and even to evolutionary processes—evolutionary game
theory, the tragedy of the commons, and the question I have claimed to be central to
all evolutionary thinking, cui bono? (who or what is the beneﬁciary of this
competition?). Let me note ﬁrst that I agree with PGS that there is a variable mixture
of the metaphorical and the literal here, but I view this as a feature, not a bug; it is just
another instance of Darwinian anti-essentialism: drawing a ‘‘principled’’ dividing
line between genuine belief-talk or agent-talk and mere as if belief-talk and agent-
talk is the sort of task Jerry Fodor insists on, pounding his ﬁst on the table, not a
methodological maxim any Darwinian should have any truck with.
PGS cites David Haig as describing this as ‘‘a way for us to be smart when we
think about evolutionary problems’’ but PGS doesn’t ‘‘think that this is such a good
thing.’’ (p. 10) Why not? Because it leads to what Richard Francis (2004) has called
‘‘Darwinian paranoia’’, deﬁned as ‘‘the tendency to think of all evolutionary
outcomes in terms of reasons, plots, and strategies’’ (p. 10). And what is wrong with
that? The coinage by Francis is a brilliant propaganda stroke—right up there with
‘‘Just So Story’’ (Gould and Lewontin 1979) and ‘‘Darwinian Fundamentalism’’
(Gould 1997)—but on closer inspection I ﬁnd that, once again, rhetorical branding
has taken the place of calm, objective criticism. I cannot recall a more mean-spirited
Homunculi Rule
481
123

book on evolutionary thinking than Francis (2004)—spare yourself the experience
and read Gintis (2004) accurate and critical review—and I hope that PGS will
jettison Francis’s term as unworthy to express his own critique in the future. My
own experience discussing the term and the issues it raises with evolutionary
biologists during the last year has shown that it gets in the way of serious
communication. For instance, a biologist working on molecular evolution who sees
the deep value of strategic formulations in considering the arms race between
transposons and the genetic elements that combat them is likely to have the
charitable reaction that ‘‘Darwinian paranoia’’ must refer to some pathological
practice far removed from her bailiwick, and be frankly incredulous when told that
she does indeed stand diagnosed as suffering from this disturbance. The plain fact is
that agential talk is not at all restricted to the embattled terrain of evolutionary
psychology—though this is where it is most often deplored by critics1—and is
literally ubiquitous (that is, it can be found everywhere in evolutionary theorizing,
from origin of life research and molecular genetics to cell biology, and yes, even
evo-devo biology of the sort Francis champions as the alternative to it).
Ironically, PGS himself ﬁnds it irresistible to engage in agential talk when
explaining and defending his own best ideas. Here are a few examples among
many,2 in PGS’s discussion of de-Darwinizing: ‘‘Their independent evolutionary
activities are curtailed, constrained, or suppressed [my italics] by what is happening
at the higher level’’ (p. 122), ‘‘Another way of dealing with this problem [my italics]
would be for one member of the collective to prevent [my italics] reproduction
altogether by other individuals…’’ ‘‘This can be put more explicitly in terms due to
Calcott (2008). For a transition to occur there must somehow be both the generation
of beneﬁt and the alignment of reproductive interests’’ (p. 124). So Calcott is praised
for putting it ‘‘more explicitly’’ instead of condemned for indulging in such
metaphorical agential talk. A double standard is clearly visible, and PGS has not yet
shown how to tell the good guys from the bad guys. (I am not asking, Fodor-like, for
the essence of good—or bad –agential talk, but just some serious discussion of when
and why it is good and bad.) PGS does say:
…there is a style of selectionist thinking in biology that I think does not
involve any form of paranoia. This is the kind of investigation where someone
asks: suppose a population was like this, and such-and-such a mutation
1 It is worth noting that evolutionary biologists conﬁdently hypothesize historical events—horizontal
gene transfers, for instance, that occurred billions of years ago, give or take a few hundred million years,
or speciations and migrations that must have occurred at some point, ill-deﬁned in space, time and
causation—without fear of being chastised for indulging in Just So Stories. It is pretty much only
hypotheses about human evolution that are held to a higher—conveniently unattainable—standard of
evidence, by the critics of sociobiology or evolutionary psychology. Yes, there are egregious cases of
hypotheses being defended solely on grounds of their plausibility, given the few facts available, but they
shade into entirely reasonable cases—across biology, so far as I can see—with no clear boundaries. Much
of the progress in evolutionary biology consists in the conﬁrmation or disconﬁrmation of bold hypotheses
that started out as plausible guesses—Just So Stories.
2 See also, e.g., p. 133, on homing endonuclease genes, and p. 134: ‘‘The driving chromosome has a
‘resistant’ element at the place in the genome that the killer targets.’’ See also PGS’s reﬂections on why
he doesn’t accept the gene’s-eye view as fundamental, pp. 134–5.
482
D. C. Dennett
123

appeared, what would happen to it? Thinking this way does not require the
idea that genes are ‘‘ultimate beneﬁciaries’’ of anything (p. 145).
Of course it does not ‘‘require the idea’’; one is entitled to theorize with both
hands tied behind one’s back. The question is whether couching this thinking in
terms of the genes as ultimate beneﬁciaries is enlightening or leads to serious
misdirection. Given PGS’s expression of strong disapproval, I was expecting a
parade of Bad Examples, shocking or embarrassing instances of agentialists led on a
wild goose chase, or blinded to a simpler truth. But I found none in the book, and
when I turned to Francis, I found the parade all right, but most if not all of the cases
were instances of what I call rathering:
A rathering is a rhetorical move much beloved by some of the other
ideologues of biology, such as Steven Rose and the late Stephen Jay Gould.
The general form of a rathering is ‘‘it is not the case that blahblahblah, as
orthodoxy would have you believe; it is rather that suchandsuchandsuch–
which is radically different.’’ Some–not all–ratherings are little more than
sleight-of-hand, since the word ‘‘rather’’ implies–without argument–that there
is an important incompatibility between the claims ﬂanking it. (Dennett
forthcoming)
When encountering a rathering, one should always ask whether instead one can
have one’s cake and eat it too. In the case of Francis, the oft-implied claim is that
one should be an evo-devo theorist instead of an adaptationist/selectionist/
agentialist. Why not be both? Like PGS, Francis is quite content to help himself
to doses of Darwinian paranoia when it is just too obvious that they are illuminating.
(For the details, see the Gintis review.)
One part of the motivation for opposing agentialism has always been the political
hunch that it gives aid and comfort to the enemy, creationism. It is thought by many
that talking about the design or purpose or teleology evident in the workings of
nature is playing into their hands since, as they like to insist, there is no design
without a designer. The alternative political hunch, which I share, is that it is much
better to attack the supposed principle (no design without a designer) as a pre-
Darwinian illusion, like the obsolete principle that atoms are, by deﬁnition,
unsplittable. PGS addresses this division of opinion: ‘‘Sometimes Darwinism is seen
as demolishing the last elements of a teleological outlook, but at other times
Darwinism is seen as constructively domesticating these ideas, showing that they
have a limited but real application to biological processes’’ (p. 12). I have always
thought that the latter view is much more perspicuous, much more defensible, when
explaining evolution to laypeople. It is just so obvious—to them, to everyone
really—that organisms are breathtakingly cleverly designed, all the way down to the
macromolecules. I was disconcerted to overhear some medical students talking in a
bar recently. One exclaimed: ‘‘How could anybody believe in evolution after
learning about the intricacies of the DNA replication machinery?’’ To the extent that
well-meaning evolutionists had inadvertently convinced them that Darwinians are
eager to gloss over or deny these facts, this is evidence that the political tactic of
denying teleology root and branch is apt to be self-defeating. PGS goes so far as to
Homunculi Rule
483
123

countenance a ‘‘very deﬂationary sense of ‘supposed to’’’ (p. 13) and then draws
back:
But these [teleological] intuitions are part of a set of habits and ideas that
steered us wrong for centuries, as far as theorizing is concerned, and had to be
overcome to develop the Darwinian view. The feeling that some particular
way of looking at things yields understanding should not always be taken at
face value, is not the end of the matter (p. 13).
If he means that in the centuries before Darwin, they steered us wrong by
convincing us that there was a Designer who created ‘‘all creatures great and small,’’
he is right, of course, but if he means that Harvey was wrong about the function—the
purpose—of the heart or the circulatory system, that naturalists were wrong about the
purpose of male combat and display in competing for mates, or about the bargains
made between plants and pollinators, he is distorting the history of science badly. It
was after all Paley’s mind-boggling catalogue of the teleological wonders of nature
that inspired Darwin’s curiosity in the ﬁrst place. We can all be grateful that pre-
Darwinian naturalists were not fanatically abstemious about postulating functional
descriptions and explanations of the phenomena they observed, and were largely
right to trust their ‘‘feeling’’ that they were encountering features with purposes.
There is no doubt that there is an all too inviting slide from pre-Darwinian
thinking via agential thinking into mistaken thinking about evolution, but it isn’t
obvious that agential thinking is the culprit. Exactly how is that supposed to work?
PGS notes on p. 143 that Williams, Hamilton, and Maynard Smith developed the
gene’s eye point of view as an antidote to naı¨ve group (and species) selectionism.
But then, he says, it took on an illicit power of its own as a ‘‘special kind of agential
narrative’’ (p. 144). Perhaps, but show us, please. He gives us a list of suspects:
‘‘demonic possession narratives, the sub-personal creatures of Freud’s psychology
(superego, ego, id), and selﬁsh genes and memes’’ (p. 144). But you can’t banish
this whole ﬂock of ideas with an epithet, lumping demonic possession with selﬁsh
genes, as if it were obvious that they were equally dubious ideas. You have to
demonstrate that these are harmful ways of thinking, and that has not been done.
Homuncular functionalism is alive and well in many guises, even in PGS’s book:
‘‘The cells in a human are a bit like a parliament, or an orchestra—but one whose
members reproduce as part of their orchestral activities’’ (p. 149).
As the reader can see, PGS has not made a dent in my unrepentant enthusiasm for
the design stance in biology, for seeing biology as reverse engineering at every
level. Indeed, I emerge from his critical review more conﬁdent than ever that this is
the best way of thinking biologically, largely because his persistent and eloquent
resistance to the idea comes up with so little that perplexes or discomﬁts me.
What about memes?
When PGS turns to cultural evolution, his discussion, as usual, is more open-
minded, nuanced, and imaginative than one generally ﬁnds (among meme-skeptics,
in particular) and he makes some valuable original points. He proposes, contra
484
D. C. Dennett
123

Sperber, for instance, that the focus should be on ‘‘how various mechanisms that
might be found in human culture relate to the Darwinian framework in principle,
rather than to say which mechanisms are the most empirically important ones’’
(p. 147). And he sees that the rejection of an evolutionary approach to culture by
Fracchia and Lewontin (1999) is not conclusive: ‘an initial populational mode of
interaction (which would be Darwinian in various regards) may give rise to
something else’’ (p. 149). Indeed it may; citing Reisman (2005), he suggests that
cultural items are less like a population when the society becomes more structured,
where power relations are more asymmetrical. This is—though he doesn’t note
this—a good place in the discussion for another PGS space, along these lines:
Here we see de-Darwinizing that parallels the multicellular organism case, in
which the structure of relations between the elements (one is tempted to say the
organic structure) render large ‘‘memeplexes’’ (Blackmore 1999), such as theories
and religions, less amenable to (most) Darwinian perspectives.
He even notes the limited applicability of dual pathway (genetic and cultural)
inheritance, where the ﬁtness in question is always considered to be the ﬁtness of the
humans. There is a second way of being a Darwinian about culture, the memes way:
‘‘cultural variants as making up their own Darwinian population’’ (p. 150). This
however,
does not, in principle, require replicators. Here, as before, I understand
replicators as members of a Darwinian population that reproduce asexually
with high ﬁdelity, ‘‘preserving structure’’ over many generations of copying
(p. 151).
PGS does not like the replicator concept, and offers, in addition to the
(inconclusive) objection that it is ‘‘agential,’’ an uncharacteristically opaque argument
against it. He says that the replicator concept isn’t necessary and, more important,
Homunculi Rule
485
123

doesn’t handle all cases. The argument he gives for this is a thought experiment about
an imaginary possibility of evolution occurring in the absence of any replicators at the
lower level (p. 33). But such a mere ‘‘conceptual’’ possibility, methinks, may depend,
like so many philosophical thought experiments about what is possible or impossible
in principle, on not looking deeper at the causal structure of this imagined heritability.
What PGS needs to offer is a positive sketch (it can be equally imaginary) of a
mechanism in which there is clearly no replicator lurking, but in which the molar
effects (tall breeds tall, etc.) are more or less guaranteed.
He also notes that the replicator concept typically breaks things into ‘‘types’’
(alleles at a locus, really) and that this type-casting is ‘‘not necessary.’’ He ‘‘in
contrast, will make much of the simple phenomenon described above: the
possibility of evolution in a situation where everything is unique.’’ He ties this to
‘epigenetic’ inheritance (Jablonka and Lamb, 1995) (p. 34). What is curious about
this objection is that it threatens to violate his own anti-essentialism. How is it an
objection that there are (or, really, might be) cases in which no clear replicator is
found but which still count as (marginal) cases of evolution? Can’t the replicator
folks say ‘‘Yes, there are these marginal phenomena in which replicatorhood is
close to zero’’? PGS notes this possibility (p. 39) but I don’t see that his later
discussion dismisses it. (I think I may well be misunderstanding PGS on this point;
on my reading, his arguments fall clearly short of meeting their burden.)
His discussion of Sober and Wilson’s treatment of the Nuer and Dinka notes that
in this instance, in place of tribal reproduction (with daughter tribes spawned
somehow) tribal growth is the analogue or stand-in, and this is marginal in PGS’s
terms, but he goes on to observe: ‘‘A group that persists does have the opportunity to
transform itself into another kind of group—in that sense persistence is linked to
novelty’’ (p. 152). Yes, and here is where PGS might have looked at the other end of
the biological spectrum, the pre-biotic world, and seen that much the same applies
there. Before there were replicators in a strong sense, there was differential
persistence and differential growth (of metabolic cycles or networks, of proto-
membranes, etc.), and these provide an arguably stable (stable enough) framework
for the development and maintenance of novel features. As he says, in discussing
the origin of novelty early in the book, ‘‘Natural selection can reshape a population
in a way that makes a given variant more likely to be produced via the immediate
sources of variation than it otherwise would be’’ (p. 43). This is the key to the
Baldwin Effect, of course, but also can be seen to be critical in some prebiotic
processes: they raise the probability of certain otherwise extremely improbable
combinations coming into existence—without requiring full-blown replicators to set
the stage. Just as the Tufts undergraduate student body of 2006 becomes the student
body of 2007 and then 2008, with departures and arrivals as well as returning
students, preserving some characteristics while transforming, gaining and losing
others, so the pre-biotic world could contain phenomena that explored the space of
possible characteristics in a way that improved the prospects for the rise of novel
adaptations. PGS acknowledges that persistence can substitute for replication, and
then adds: ‘‘But it is a weaker link than the one seen when there is differential
reproduction’’ (p. 152). Perhaps, but he gives no grounds for this. Is it true? And
even if it is, he has shown us how to embrace marginal, weak cases of Darwinian
486
D. C. Dennett
123

phenomena, and almost certainly such proto-Darwinian processes paved the way for
the paradigm processes that took over so fecundly.
PGS ﬁnds the memes approach ‘‘strange’’ and adds ‘‘It is a strange idea, though
this fact can be obscured by patterns of description that reify cultural traits and make
things like ‘ideas’ sound more concrete than they are’’ (p. 152). What is this
problem of concreteness? He has already cited prions as bona ﬁde cases of parent-
offspring that are entirely ‘‘formal’’ not material, and adds: ‘‘So formal reproduction
can be a basis for Darwinian evolution.’’ Right there he is granting the main point of
Dawkins’ discussion of memes. (See Szathmary 1999, for more on the parallel
between prions and memes.)
Now we just have to look at the details, seeing how memes are like and unlike
other Darwinian populations. PGS offers a nice example of using a turntable as a
musical instrument.
A few people see or hear you, and do the same thing. The behavior spreads. It
is not quite accurate to say that your individual behavior was the parent of
theirs, but something close to this is true (p. 152).
As he says, they acquire a ‘‘disposition.’’ How concrete is that? The induction of
change (e.g., prion protein refolding) will do for formal reproduction (p. 153), so the
induction of disposition acquisition should count as well. We could make good use
of another PGS space with abstract-concrete on one of the dimensions. Another
dimension could be number of parents. As PGS observes (p. 153), having a single
parent is not essential. Words, for instance, are spread from person to person by the
joint action of a variable number of ‘‘parent’’ utterances. The ﬁrst time a new token
is perceived by a child, it is, perhaps, just a distinctive sound; the second time, it is a
rather familiar distinctive sound; the third time, it is a sound plus some recognizable
context, and perhaps the accumulated effect of those three parent tokens is enough
to install a copy in the brain of the child, where it will either soon die without
offspring of its own, or else provoke its own rehearsal, yielding offspring and grand-
offspring of its own. Usage and pronunciation—and, of course, meaning—can then
be pruned and shaped by further encounters with conspeciﬁcs. Not the replication
system of bacteria or bears, but still recognizably a process in which structure
(characterized at a very abstract level!) is recreated by a causal process that depends
on the structure of the ‘‘parents’’ (so that mutations—of meaning or pronunciation,
for instance) get transmitted).
There are a bounty of other thought-provoking claims and suggestions in the
book. One highlight: there are three varieties of reproduction: basic or simple,
collective, and scaffolded. The asexual replication by ﬁssion of single cells is the
paradigm of simple reproduction; our variety is actually an instance of collective
reproduction, and viruses, chromosomes, mitochondria and (for those who take
them seriously) memes are instances of scaffolded reproduction. Another is the very
interesting discussion of Haig and Grafen, and the idea that ‘‘Genes, roughly
speaking, are late-comers’’ (p. 140). The idea is that (re-)identiﬁable sequences of
genetic material that can have ‘‘an evolutionary role’’ arose as a product of the
evolution of crossing-over; ‘‘And the evolution of crossing-over is what set small
genetic elements free as evolutionary players’’ (p. 141). There are many others.
Homunculi Rule
487
123

So PGS has enlightened me, and clariﬁed my thinking on these topics. We are
close to harmony on the question of the potential role of memes: not all of cultural
evolution (in the broadest sense of the term) is illuminated by being considered a
Darwinian process taking one Darwinian population (of memes) to a successor
population, but there is plenty of room for such a perspective, and work for it to do,
particularly in the earliest days of culture, and in the evolution of the simplest units
of cultural transmission (e.g., words, the paradigm memes). What discord remains is
largely due to PGS’s continuing streak of puritanism about the use of the intentional
stance in biology, and a concomitant reluctance to talk in informational terms.
I view the resulting tension as another one of nature’s salutary opponent processes:
I tug in my favored direction and he tugs in the opposite, and we tend to correct each
other’s overstatements.
References
Blackmore S (1999) The meme machine. Oxford University Press, Oxford
Dennett DC (1971) Intentional systems. J Phil 68:87–106
Dennett DC (1987) The intentional stance. MIT Press/A Bradford Book, Cambridge
Dennett DC (forthcoming) Shall we tango? No, but thanks for asking, (commentary on Evan Thompson,
Mind in Life) in J Conscious Stud
Francis R (2004) Why men won’t ask for directions: the Seductions of Sociobiology. Princeton University
Press, Princeton
Gintis H (2004) review of Francis, 2004, Evol Psycholo, [on line]
Gould SJ (1997) Darwinian Fundamentalism (a review of Darwin’s Dangerous Idea), in The New York
Review of Books, June 12, 1997
Gould SJ, Lewontin R (1979) The spandrels of san marco and the panglossian program: A critique of the
adaptationist programme. Proc Royal Soc. (London) B205:581–598
Jablonka E, Lamb MJ (1995) Epigenetic inheritance and evolution: the lamarkian dimension. Oxford
University Press, New York
Midgley M (1979) Gene-juggling. Philosophy 54:439–458
Midgley M (1983) Selﬁsh genes and social darwinism. Philosophy 58:365–377
Sober E, Wilson DS (1998) Unto others: the evolution and psychology of unselﬁsh behavior. Harvard UP,
Cambridge
Szathmary E 1999 Chemes, Genes, memes: a revised classiﬁcation of replicators, Lectures in
Mathematics in the Life Sciences, 26, American Mathematical Society, pp 1-10
Williams CG (1992) Natural selection: domains, levels, and challenges. Oxford University Press,
New York
488
D. C. Dennett
123

