Mind 6 Language ISSN 0268-1064 
Vol. 8 No. 4 Winter 1993 
0 Basil Blackwell Ltd. 1993, 108 Cowley Road, Oxford OX4 IJF, 
UK and 238 Main Street, Cambridge, MA 02142, USA. 
Article 
Learning and Labeling 
DANIEL C. DENNETT 
Clark and Karmiloff-Smith (CKS) have written an extraordinarily valuable 
paper, which sympathetically addresses what has all too often been an 
acrimonious and ideology-ridden ’debate’ and begins to transform it into 
a multi-perspective research program. By articulating the submerged 
hunches on both sides in a single framework, and adding some powerful 
new ideas of their own, they dispel much of the smoke of battle. What 
we can now see much more clearly is the need for a model of a brain/ 
mind that, as they say, ’enriches itself from within by re-representing the 
knowledge that it has already represented’. 
On the one hand, as they note, there is what I propose to call ABC 
learning. This is the foundational animal capacity to be gradually trained 
by an environment (in the wild or the laboratory), and thanks to the 
cumulative effect of several generations of theorists (Associationist to 
Behaviorist to Connectionist), we are getting quite clear about the strengths 
and limits of this real but not all-encompassing variety of learning. 
Although ABC learning can yield remarkably subtle and powerful discrimi- 
natory competences, capable of teasing out the patterns lurking in volumin- 
ous arrays of data, these competences tend to be anchored in the specific 
tissues that are modified by training. They are ‘embedded’ in the sense 
that they are incapable of being ‘transported’ readily to other data domains 
or other individuals. CKS note that while there are clear benefits to a 
design policy that ’intricately interweave[s] the various aspects of our 
knowledge about a domain in a single knowledge structure’, there are 
costs as well: ’the interweaving makes it practically impossible to operate 
Address for correspondence: Center for Cognitive Studies, 11 Miner Hall, Tufts Univer- 
sity, Medford, MA 02155-7059, USA. Email: ddennett@pearl.tufts.edu. 

Learning and Labeling 
541 
on or otherwise exploit the various dimensions of our knowledge indepen- 
dently of one another‘.l 
So opaquely is such knowledge hidden in the mesh of the connections 
that, as CKS say, ‘it is knowledge in the system, but it is not yet knowledge 
to the system’. Once we think of the contrast in these terms, it may remind 
us of many other ‘intelligent’ animal behaviors that are not trained but 
innate. For example, the unsettling and precocious singlemindedness with 
which the newly hatched cuckoo chick shoulders the competing eggs out 
of the nest in which it finds itself provokes what may be a comforting 
judgment: the evolutionary rationale for this behavior is crystal clear, but 
it is nothing to the cuckoo. The ‘wisdom’ of its behavior is in some sense 
embedded in the innate wiring that achieves this effect so robustly, but 
the cuckoo hasn’t a clue about this rationale (see Dennett, 1987, 1991; 
Dretske, 1991; and Dennett, 1992). Why not? What would have to be added 
to the cuckoo’s computational architecture for it to be able to appreciate, 
understand, exploit the wisdom interwoven in its neural nets? 
A popular answer to this question, in its many guises, is ‘symbols!’ 
The answer is well nigh tautological, and hence is bound to be right, in 
some interpretation. How could it not be the case that implicit or tacit 
knowledge becomes explicit by being expressed or rendered in some 
medium of ’explicit’ representation? Symbols, unlike the nodes woven 
into connectionist networks, are ’movable’; they can be ‘manipulated‘; 
they can be composed into larger structures where their contribution to 
the meaning of the whole can be a definite and generatable function of 
the structurethe syntactic structure-of the parts. 
There is surely something right about this; what we human beings have 
that far outstrips the cognitive capacities of both rat and cuckoo (and 
maybe even outstrips the cognitive capacities of all other primates) is the 
capacity for swift, insightful learning-learning that does not depend on 
laborious training but is simply-’simply’!-ours 
as soon as we contem- 
plate a suitable symbolic representation of the knowledge. (We do have 
to understand the representation we contemplate, of course, and there is 
where mystery still lurks.) 
’So,’ CKS ask, ’do we merely need to add to a connectionist network 
a mechanism that generates linguistic labels for the network‘s implicit 
knowledge? How could we take a connectionist network and turn it into 
a symbolic system? Or better, for as the authors show, we need to leave the 
underlying connectionist power intact: How could we take a connectionist 
We must be careful not to exaggerate the embeddedness of interwoven knowlege. 
The trained pianist has subjected only his hands and fingers to laborious training 
in hitting the keys, but will probably find himself already more adept at playing the 
pedals of an organ with his feet than the untrained person. And as Karl Lashley 
famously proved years ago, what the rat learns in the maze is not merely a way of 
moving its legs till it gets to the food; it has learned something much more general: 
roughly, how to get to the food. 
Basil Blackwell Ltd. 1993 

542 
Mind B Language 
network and attach a symbolic system to it? (And if so, what would the 
symbolic system be ’made of‘ if not connectionist parts?) Or still better: 
How could we make a connectionist system grow a symbolic system on 
top of itself? 
CKS are correct to identify me as one who has held that ‘the human 
mind deploys essentially connectionist style representations but augments 
itself with the symbol structures of natural language in the public domain’. 
They go on to claim (p. 505): 
Theories that make the distinctive cognitive characteristics of 
humans dependent on an ability with public language seem, in 
general, to get the cart before the horse. It is more plausible to 
see our abilities with language as one effect or product of a deeper 
underlying difference in the redescriptive architecture of our cog- 
nitive apparatus, a difference that may group us with some non- 
linguistic higher mammals but separate us from hamsters, sea- 
slugs and standard connectionist networks. 
They may be right, but I am inclined to think that they are overstating 
their case, and missing some of the very complexity they rightly insist 
upon. Does the advanced use of language depend on an RR capacity that 
develops, but is ’specified in innate predispositions’, or does the RR 
capacity that develops depend to an important degree on what the child 
acquires when the pre-designed structures of natural language are moved 
from the child’s enveloping culture into its brain? In what follows I want 
to defend, in an exploratory way, the idea that the capacity of a system 
to engage in representational redescription really does depend on that 
system’s capacity-not 
yet fully developed, but in the process of 
development-to 
master and use a natural language. (As they say in 
their conclusion, the crucial question about the ‘concrete computational 
mechanisms’ that accomplish the transition to RR capacities remains unre- 
solved, and I am making some sketchy suggestions about how it may 
come to be resolved.) 
Karmiloff-Smith (1979) offered a pioneer expression of the now familiar 
idea that a main virtue of introducing higher-level representations is that 
one creates a new class of entities that can be operated upon, that can 
become ’objects of cognitive manipulation, transportable to other tasks’ 
(CKS). But these very skills of cognitive manipulation have to be created 
along with the representations; that is, they have to develop out of some- 
thing prior, some capacities that can be harnessed or exapted (to use 
Stephen Jay Gould’s term) to the novel tasks of composing, saving, retriev- 
ing, revising, comparing these new internal objects. Kanniloff-Smith’s 
own research with children gives us some of the best glimpses we have 
of children gradually equipping themselves with these competences, and 
I gladly concede that this process doesn’t always directly involve the child’s 
using natural language explicitly directed to the task in hand. I want to 
@ Basil Blackwell Lid. 2993 

Learning and Labeling 
543 
suggest a few ways, however, in which what is going on during this 
process might nevertheless depend on the natural language competence 
the child is acquiring. 
I begin with a useful analogy with a more recent technological break- 
through. The advent of high-speed still photography was a revolutionary 
technological advance for science because it permitted human beings, for 
the first time ever, to examine complicated temporal phenomena not in 
real time, but in their own good time-in 
leisurely, methodical, backtracking 
analysis of the traces they had created of those complicated events. Here a 
technological advance carried in its wake a huge enhancement in cognitive 
power. Before there were cameras and high speed film, there were plenty 
of observational and recording devices that permitted the scientist to 
extract data precisely from the world for subsequent analysis at his leisure. 
The exquisite diagrams and illustrations of several centuries of science are 
testimony to the power of these methods, but there is something special 
about a camera: it is ’stupid’. It does not have to understand its subject the 
way an artist or illustrator does in order to ’capture’ the data represented in 
its products. 
As I just noted, the sort of learning we human beings can achieve just 
by contemplating symbolic representations of knowledge depends not on 
our merely, in some sense, perceiving them, but also understanding them, 
and my rather curious suggestion is that in order to arrive at this marvel- 
lous summit, we must climb steps in which we perceive but don’t understand 
our own representations. 
Contemplating one’s past experience in such a way as to make it good 
material for general judgments requires recording it, somehow, but record- 
ing one’s past experience in toto is impossible. We are not equipped- 
though some like to think we are-with 
a sort of multi-media recording 
in the brain of all our experience. Recording ’edited’ versions of our past 
experience would be possible if we had an initially ’stupid’ way of doing 
both the editing and storing. (If we had to have a good understanding of 
what we were editing at the time we stored it, we would not need to take 
our time, later, to re-analyze and reconsider what we had done.) CKS 
discuss Mozer and Smolensky’s promising idea of ‘skeletonizing’ net- 
works, to extract the essential knowledge in them. They add the useful 
idea of skeletonizing copies of the networks, leaving the detailed, robust 
parent network intact for use in its original domain, and then, somehow, 
forming ‘new structured representations’ tied to these skeletonized copies. 
I am suggesting that the sophistications necessary to develop such a 
process are exapted from language-processes. 
How might a habit of label-generation, hypothesis-formation and testing 
get started, and what is involved in the general practice of such ‘redescrip- 
tion’? Nobody knows yet-certainly I don‘t know-but 
I have some specu- 
lations to offer that might not be too far wide of the mark. Consider what 
happens early in the linguistic life of any child. ’Hot!’ says mother. ’Don’t 
touch the stove!’ At this point the child doesn’t have to know what ’hot’ 
@ Basil BIackwell Ltd. 1993 

544 
Mind & Language 
or ’touch’ or ’stove‘ mean-they 
are primarily just sounds-auditory event- 
types that have a certain redolence, a certain familiarity, a certain echoing 
memorability to the child. They come to conjure up a situation-type, 
however, and not just a situation in which a specific prohibition is typically 
encountered but also a situation in which a certain auditory rehearsal is 
encountered. 
We may crudely overstate the case and suppose that the child acquires 
the habit of saying to itself (aloud-why 
not?) ‘Hot’, ’Don‘t touch the 
stove!’ without much of an idea what it means, as an associated part of 
the drill that goes with approaching and then avoiding the stove, but also 
as a sort of mantra that might be uttered at any other time. (Cf. Baddeley, 
1984, e.g. on ‘articulatory loops’, a related idea, but rather differently 
positioned). After all, children are taken with the habit of rehearsing words 
they have just heard, in and out of context, building up recognition-links 
and association paths between the auditory properties and concurrent 
sensory properties, internal states, and so forth. That’s a laughably crude 
sketch of the sort of process that must go on, but it could have the effect 
of initiating a habit of what we might call semi-understood self-commentary. 
The child, prompted initially by some insistent auditory associations pro- 
voked by its parents’ admonitions, acquires the habit of adding a sound 
track to its activities, ’commenting’ on them. The actual utterances would 
consist at the outset of large measures of ’scribble’ (the nonsense-talk 
children engage in), real words mouthed with little or no appreciation of 
their meaning, and understood words. There would be mock exhortation, 
mock prohibition, mock praise, mock description, and all these would 
eventually mature into real exhortation, prohibition, praise and descrip- 
tion. But the habit of adding the ‘labels’ would be driven into place before 
the labels had to be understood, even partially understood. 
It is such initially ‘stupid practices, the mere ’mouthing’ of labels in 
circumstances appropriate and inappropriate, I am suggesting, that could 
soon be turned into the habit of redescription. As the child lays down 
more associations between the auditory and articulatory processes, on the 
one hand, and other patterns of concurrent activity on the other, this 
would create ‘nodes’ of saliency in memory; a word can become familiar 
even without being understood. And it is these anchors of familiarity that 
could give a label an independent identity within the system. Without 
such independence, labels are ‘invisible‘. 
Labeling is a non-trivial cognitive tactic, and it is worth a moment’s 
digression to consider the conditions under which it works. Why does 
anyone ever label anything, and what does it take to label something? 
Suppose you were searching through thousands of boxes of shoes, looking 
for a housekey that you had good reason to believe had been hidden in 
one of them. Unless you are an idiot, or so frantic in your quest that you 
cannot pause to consider the wisest course, you will devise some handy 
scheme for cutting down your task by preventing you from looking more 
than once in each box. One way would be to move the boxes from one stack 
@ Basil Blackwell Ltd. 1993 

Learning and Labeling 
545 
(the unexamined stack) to another stack (the examined stack). Another way, 
potentially more energy efficient, is to put a check mark on each box as 
you examine it, and then adopt the rule never to bother looking in a box 
with a check mark on it. A check mark is a way of making the world 
simpler; it cuts down on your cognitive load by giving you a simple 
perceptual task in place of a more difficult-perhaps 
impossible-task. 
Notice that if the boxes are all lined up in a single row, and you don‘t 
have to worry about unnoticed re-orderings of the queue, you don’t need 
to put check marks-you 
can just work your way from left to right, using 
the simple distinguisher nature has already provided you, the left/right 
distinction. 
But now let’s concentrate on the check mark itself. Will anything do as 
a checkmark? Clearly not. ‘I put a faint smudge somewhere on each box 
as I examine it’. ’I bump the corner of each box as I examine it’. Not good 
choices, since the likelihood is too high that something else may already 
have inadvertently put such a mark on a box. I need something distinctive, 
something that I can be confident is the result of my labeling act, not 
some extraneously produced blemish. It should also be memorable, of 
course, so I will not be beset by confusions about whether or not this is 
my label, and if so, what policy I meant to be following when I adopted 
it. Only under these conditions will a label fulfil its raison d‘2tre, which 
is to provide a cognitive crutch, off-loading a bit of cognitive work into 
the environment. This is perhaps the most primitive precursor of writing, 
the deliberate use of parts of the external world as ‘peripheral’ information- 
storage systems. 
An interesting-and 
largely unasked, let alone unanswered-question 
is whether non-human animals ever engage in deliberate labeling or 
marking of this sort. There are the scent trails of insects and other animals, 
of course, and one can easily recognize their capacity to make various 
otherwise difficult cognitive tasks extremely easy. Many animals stake 
out territory by marking the boundary with urine or other idiosyncratic 
productions, but these are at least primarily for the information of other 
animals, not aides-mkmoire for themselves. Clark’s nuthatches are superbly 
good at locating the caches of seeds they have left behind, and they may 
use the debris they leave behind when they empty a cache as a sign to 
themselves that they needn’t re-explore it (just like the shoe box check 
mark), but even if this is a good case (and I am tempted to think it is) it 
is a case of opportunistic exploitation of a disturbance that would be made 
in any case for other reasons. That is nature’s way, of course, but the 
question is whether any other creatures-other than ourselves-have dis- 
covered the practice of creating labels for things for the express purpose 
of making their cognitive tasks easier. 
Now return to the practice of internal labeling. The moral I want to draw 
from the digression about external labeling is that labels always need to 
be independently and readily identifiable, which means in this context 
that they must be ready enhancers of sought-for associations that are 
0 Basil Blackwell Ltd. 1993 

546 
Mind & Language 
already to some extent laid down in the system. Beyond that, they can be 
arbitrary, and their arbitrariness is actually part of what makes them 
distinctive-there is little risk of failing to notice the presence of the 
label-it 
doesn’t just bZend into its surroundings like a dent in the comer 
of a shoebox. It wears the deliberateness of its creation on its sleeve. 
The habit of semi-understood self-commentary could, I am suggesting, 
be the origin of the practice of deliberate labeling, in words (or scribble- 
words or other private neologisms), which in turn could lead to a still 
more efficient practice, dropping all or most of the auditory and articulatory 
associations and just relying on the rest of the associations (and association- 
possibilities) to do the anchoring. The child, I suggest, can abandon such 
vehicles as out-loud mouthings, and create private, unvoiced neologisms 
as labels for features of its own activities. 
We can take a linguistic object as a found object (even if we have somehow 
blundered into making it ourselves, rather than hearing it from someone 
else), and store it away for further consideration, ’off line’. This depends 
on there being a detachable guise for the label, something that is indepen- 
dent of meaning. Once we have created labels, and the habit of ’attaching’ 
them to experienced circumstances, we have created a new class of objects 
that can themselves become the objects of all the pattern-recognition 
machinery, association-building machinery, and so forth. Like the scien- 
tists lingering retrospectively over an unhurried examination of the photo- 
graphs they took in the heat of experimental battle, we can reflect, in 
recollection, on whatever patterns there are to be discerned in the various 
labeled exhibits we dredge out of memory. 
As we improve, our labels become ever more refined, more perspicuous, 
ever better articulated, and the point is finally reached when we approxi- 
mate (at least-and 
in fact at best) to the near magical prowess we began 
with: the mere contemplation of a representation is sufficient to call to mind 
all the appropriate lessons; we have become understanders of the objects 
we have created. We might call these artifactual nodes in our memories, 
these pale shadows of articulated and heard words, concepts. A concept, 
then, is an internal label which may or may not include among its many 
associations the auditory and articulatory features of a word (public or 
private). But words, I am suggesting, are the prototypes or forbears of 
concepts. The first concepts one can manipulate, I am suggesting, are 
’voiced’ concepts, and only concepts that can be manipulated can become 
objects of scrutiny for us. 
Do animals have concepts? Does a dog have a concept of cat? Or food, 
or master? Yes and no. No matter how close extensionally a dog’s ‘concept’ 
of cat is to yours, it differs radically in one way: the dog cannot consider 
its concept. It cannot ask itself if it knows what cats are; it cannot wonder 
whether cats are animals; it cannot attempt to distinguish the essence of 
cat (by its lights) from the mere accidents. Concepts are not things in the 
dog‘s world in the way cats are. Concepts are things in our world because 
we have language. No languageless mammal can have the concept of snow 
@ Basil Blackwell Ltd. 1993 

Learning and Labeling 
547 
the way we can, because such a mammal-a 
polar bear, let’s say-has 
no 
way of considering snow ’in general‘ or ‘in itself‘, and not for the trivial 
reason that it doesn’t have a (natural language) word for snow, but because 
without a natural language, it has no talent for wresting concepts from 
their interwoven connectionist nests. There are good reasons for attributing 
to polar bears a sort of concept of snow. For instance, polar bears have 
an elaborate set of competences for dealing with snow in its various 
manifestations that are lacking in lions. We can speak of the polar bear’s 
implicit or procedural knowledge of snow, and we can even investigate, 
empirically, the extension of the polar bear’s embedded snow-concept, but 
then bear in mind that this is not a wieldable concept for the polar bear.2 
I have expressed these hunches about the indirect dependence of RR 
on language in simple and extreme terms, for the sake of clarity. They 
are, or suggest, hypotheses that are empirically testable, and there is 
probably already plenty of evidence with which I am unfamiliar that 
points to major complications in my story, if it is to survive at all. It is 
possible, even likely, that a still more indirect (and, of course, convoluted) 
story would be closer to the truth, and that there are, as Clark and Karmil- 
off-Smith propose, important innate predispositions for internal labeling. 
But if there are, these might well be Baldwin-effect incorporations of Good 
Tricks that first were implemented in culturally transmitted linguistic (or 
‘proto-linguistic’) habits (Dennett, 1991b, pp. 182-208). Seeing this link as 
a possibility might help us understand whatever we discover. 
Center for Cognitive Studies 
Tufts University 
Medford, MA 02155 
USA 
References 
Baddeley, A. 1984: Reading and Working Memory. Visible Language, 18,311-22. 
Dennett, D.C. 1987: The Intentional Stance. Cambridge, MA.: MIT Press. 
Dennett, D.C. 1991a: Ways of Establishing Harmony. In B. McLaughlin (ed.), 
Dennett, D.C. 1991b: Consciousness Explained. Boston: Little Brown. 
Dennett, D.C. 1992: La Comprehension Artisanale. In Daniel C. Dennett et les 
Dretske, F. 1991: Replies. In B. McLaughlin (ed.), Dretske and his Critics. Oxford: 
Dretske and his Critics. Oxford: Blackwell. 
Stratkgies Intentionelles, in Lekton, 2, Universite de Quebec B Montreal. 
Blackwell. 
The discussion by Clark and Karmiloff-Smith of the ideas of Gareth Evans (1982) is 
relevant here-but there is no time on this occasion for me to discuss it. 
Basil Blackwell Ltd. 1993 

540 
Mind & Language 
Evans, G. 1982: The Varieties of Reference. Oxford: Oxford University Press. 
Karmiloff-Smith, A. 1979: A Functional Approach to Child Language. Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press. 
@ Basil BJackwell Ltd. 1993 

