1. Why is there a problem about mental imagery?
1.1. The pull of subjective experience
Cognitive science is rife with ideas that offend our intu-
itions. It is arguable that nowhere is the pull of the subjec-
tive stronger than in the study of perception and mental im-
agery. It is not easy for us to take seriously the proposal that
the visual system creates something like symbol structures
in our brain since it seems intuitively obvious that what we
have in our mind when we look out onto the world, as well
as when we close our eyes and imagine a scene, is some-
thing that looks like the scene, and hence whatever it is that
we have in our heads must be much more like a picture than
a description. Though we may know that this cannot be lit-
erally the case, that it would do no good to have an inner
copy of the world, this reasoning appears to be powerless to
dissuade us from our intuitions. Indeed, the way we de-
scribe how it feels to imagine something shows the extent
of the illusion; we say that we seem to be looking at some-
thing with our “mind’s eye.” This familiar way of speaking
reifies an observer, an act of visual perception, and a thing
being perceived. All three parts of this equation have now
taken their place in one of the most developed theories of
mental imagery (Kosslyn 1994), which refers to a “mind’s
eye” and a “visual system” that examines a “mental image”
located in a “visual buffer.” Dan Dennett has referred to
this view picturesquely as the “Cartesian Theater” view of
the mind (Dennett 1991) and I will refer to it as the “pic-
ture theory” of mental imagery. There has been a tradition
of analyzing this illusion in the case of visual perception, go-
ing back to Descartes and Berkeley (it also appears in the
seventeenth century debate between Arnaud and Male-
branche – see Slezak 2002a), and revived in modern times
by (Gibson 1966), as well as computationalists like (Marr
1982). More recently, O’Regan (1992) and O’Regan and
Noë (2001) have argued against the intuitive picture-theory
of vision on both empirical and theoretical grounds. De-
spite the widespread questioning of the intuitive picture
view in visual perception, this view remains very nearly uni-
versal in the study of mental imagery (with such notable ex-
ceptions as Dennett 1991; Rey 1981; Slezak 1995); (see also
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (2002) 25, 157–238
Printed in the United States of America
© 2002 Cambridge University Press
0140-525X/02 $12.50
157
Mental imagery: In search of a theory
Zenon W. Pylyshyn
Rutgers Center for Cognitive Science, Rutgers University, Busch Campus,
Piscataway, NJ 08854-8020. zenon@ruccs.rutgers.edu
http://ruccs.rutgers.edu/faculty/pylyshyn.html
Abstract: It is generally accepted that there is something special about reasoning by using mental images. The question of how it is spe-
cial, however, has never been satisfactorily spelled out, despite more than thirty years of research in the post-behaviorist tradition. This
article considers some of the general motivation for the assumption that entertaining mental images involves inspecting a picture-like
object. It sets out a distinction between phenomena attributable to the nature of mind to what is called the cognitive architecture, and
ones that are attributable to tacit knowledge used to simulate what would happen in a visual situation. With this distinction in mind, the
paper then considers in detail the widely held assumption that in some important sense images are spatially displayed or are depictive,
and that examining images uses the same mechanisms that are deployed in visual perception. I argue that the assumption of the spatial
or depictive nature of images is only explanatory if taken literally, as a claim about how images are physically instantiated in the brain,
and that the literal view fails for a number of empirical reasons – for example, because of the cognitive penetrability of the phenomena
cited in its favor. Similarly, while it is arguably the case that imagery and vision involve some of the same mechanisms, this tells us very
little about the nature of mental imagery and does not support claims about the pictorial nature of mental images. Finally, I consider
whether recent neuroscience evidence clarifies the debate over the nature of mental images. I claim that when such questions as whether
images are depictive or spatial are formulated more clearly, the evidence does not provide support for the picture-theory over a symbol-
structure theory of mental imagery. Even if all the empirical claims were true, they do not warrant the conclusion that many people have
drawn from them: that mental images are depictive or are displayed in some (possibly cortical) space. Such a conclusion is incompatible
with what is known about how images function in thought. We are then left with the provisional counterintuitive conclusion that the
available evidence does not support rejection of what I call the “null hypothesis”; namely, that reasoning with mental images involves the
same form of representation and the same processes as that of reasoning in general, except that the content or subject matter of thoughts
experienced as images includes information about how things would look.
Zenon Pylyshyn is Board of Governors Professor of
Cognitive Science at the Rutgers Center for Cognitive
Science, which he helped to found in 1991. Prior to that
he was at the University of Western Ontario, where he
was associated with the departments of psychology,
computer science, philosophy, and electrical engineer-
ing. He is recipient of the Donald O. Hebb Award and
is a fellow of the Canadian Psychological Association,
the American Association for Artificial Intelligence, and
the Royal Society of Canada.
Pylyshyn’s research is on vision and visual attention, and
he has also written on theoretical issues. He is author of
over 120 articles, book chapters, and books. His new
book Seeing and Visualizing: It’s not what you think will
be published this summer by the MIT Press.
. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0140525X02290044
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Chalmers Tekniska Högskola, on 16 Nov 2019 at 15:28:43, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms

the critical remarks by Fodor 1975; Hinton 1979; Pylyshyn,
forthcoming; Thomas 1999).
Why should this be so? Why do we find it so difficult to
accept that when we “examine our mental image” we are
not in fact examining an inner state, but rather are con-
templating what the inner state is about – that is, some pos-
sible state of the visible world – and therefore that this ex-
perience tells us nothing about the nature and form of the
representation? Philosophers have referred to this dis-
placement of the object of thought from the (possible)
world to a mental state as the “intentional fallacy” and it has
much of cognitive science in its grip still.
What I try to do in this article is show that we are not only
deeply deceived by our subjective experience of mental im-
agery, but that the evidence we have accumulated to sup-
port what I call the “picture theory” of mental imagery is
equally compatible with a much more parsimonious view,
namely, that most of the phenomena in question (but not
all – see below) are due to the fact that the task of “imag-
ing” invites people to simulate what they believe would hap-
pen if they were looking at the actual situation being visu-
alized. I will argue that the alternative picture theory, or
depiction-theory, trades so heavily on a systematic ambigu-
ity between the assumption of a literal picture and the much
weaker assumption that visual properties are somehow en-
coded. I will also argue that recent evidence from neuro-
science (particularly the evidence of neural imaging) brings
us no closer to a plausible picture theory than we were be-
fore this evidence was available.
1.2. The imagery debate: What was it about?
There has been a great deal of discussion in the past thirty
years about “the imagery debate.” Many people even be-
lieve that the debate has, at least in general outline, been
put to rest because we now have hard evidence from neu-
roscience showing what (and where) images are (see, e.g.,
Kosslyn 1994; and the brief review in Pylyshyn 1994a). But
if one looks closer at the “debate” one finds that what peo-
ple think the debate is about is very far from univocal. For
example, some people think that the argument that has
been settled is whether images, whatever their nature, are
fundamentally different from the form of representation in-
volved in other kinds of reasoning, or whether there are two
different systems of mental codes. For others, it is the ques-
tion of whether images have certain particular properties –
for example, whether they are spatial, or depictive, or ana-
logue. Others feel that the question that has been settled is
whether imagery “involves” the visual system. I will argue
that none of these claims has been sufficiently well posed
to admit of a solution. In this article I will concentrate pri-
marily on a particular class of theory of mental imagery,
which I refer to as “picture theories,” and will consider
other aspects of the “debate” only insofar as they bear on
the alleged pictorial nature of images.
In this article I defend the provisional view, which I re-
fer to as the “null hypothesis,” that at the relevant level of
analysis – the level appropriate for explaining the results of
many experiments on mental imagery – the process of
imagistic reasoning involves the same mechanisms and the
same forms of representation as are involved in general rea-
soning, though with different content or subject matter.
This hypothesis claims that what is special about image-
based thinking is that it is typically concerned with a certain
sort of content or subject matter, such as optical, geometri-
cal, or what we might call the appearance-properties of the
things we are thinking about. If so, nothing is gained by at-
tributing a special format or special mechanisms to mental
imagery. While the validity of this null hypothesis remains
an open empirical question, what is not open, I claim, is
whether certain currently popular views can be sustained.
In the interest of full disclosure I should add that I don’t
really, in my heart of hearts, believe that representations
and processes underlying imagery are no different from
other forms of reasoning. Nonetheless, I do think that no-
body has yet articulated the specific way that images are dif-
ferent and that all candidates proposed to date are seriously
flawed in a variety of ways that are interesting and reveal-
ing. Thus using the null hypothesis as a point of departure
may allow us to focus more properly on the real differences
between imagistic and other forms of reasoning.
1.3. Plan of the article
Section 2 reviews some observations that have led many
people to hold a picture theory of mental images (although
a detailed discussion of what such a theory assumes is post-
poned until sect. 5). Section 3 introduces a distinction that
is central to our analysis. It distinguishes two reasons why
imagery might manifest the properties that are observed in
experiments. One reason is that these properties are in-
trinsic to the architecture of the mental imagery system –
they arise because of the particular brain mechanisms de-
ployed in imagery. The other reason is that the properties
are extrinsic to the mechanisms employed – they arise be-
cause of what people tacitly believe about the situation being
imagined, which they then use to simulate certain behav-
iors that would occur if they were to witness the corre-
sponding situation in reality. This distinction is then applied
to some typical experiments on mental imagery where I ar-
gue that such experiments tell us little about special dedicated
imagery mechanisms. Since section 4 discusses some material
that has been published elsewhere, readers who have fol-
lowed the “imagery debate” may wish to skim this section.
Section 5 discusses two widely held views about the na-
ture of mental images (Kosslyn 1994): that images are “de-
pictive” and that they are laid out in a “functional space.” I
claim that the preponderance of evidence argues against
the inherent spatial nature of mental images. An exception
is evidence from experiments in which subjects project
their images onto a visual scene. In this case I claim (sect.
5.3) that the use of visual indexes and focal attention pro-
vides a satisfactory explanation for how spatial properties
are inherited from the observed scene, without any need to
posit spatial properties of images. In section 2, I argue that
the notion of a functional space is devoid of any explanatory
power, since such a “space” is unconstrained and can have
whatever properties one wishes to attribute to it (unless it
is taken to be a simulation of a real spatial display as in the
model described in Kosslyn et al. 1979, in which case the
underlying theory really is the literal picture theory). Sec-
tion 6 discusses a claim that is assumed to be entailed by the
depictive nature of images; namely, that information in an
image is accessed through vision. Although there is evi-
dence for some overlap between the mechanisms of im-
agery and those of vision, a close examination of this evi-
dence shows that it does not support the assumption of a
spatial display in either vision or imagery. Section 7 consid-
Pylyshyn: Mental imagery: In search of a theory
158
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (2002) 25:2
. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0140525X02290044
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Chalmers Tekniska Högskola, on 16 Nov 2019 at 15:28:43, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms

ers evidence from neuroscience, which many writers be-
lieve provides the strongest case for a picture theory. Here
I argue that, notwithstanding the intrinsic interest of these
findings, they do not support the existence of any sort of
depictive display in mental imagery. Finally, section 8
closes with a brief discussion of where the “imagery de-
bate” now stands and on the role of imagery in creative
thinking.
2. What is special about image-based reasoning?
Imagery seems to follow principles that are different from
those of intellectual reasoning and certainly beyond any
principles to which we have conscious intellectual access.
Imagine a baseball being hit into the air and notice the tra-
jectory it follows. Although few of us could calculate the
shape of this trajectory, none of us has any difficulty imag-
ining the roughly-parabolic shape traced out by the ball in
this thought experiment. Indeed, we can often predict with
considerable accuracy where the ball will land (certainly a
properly situated professional fielder can). It is very often
the case that by visualizing a certain situation, we can pre-
dict the dynamics of physical processes that are beyond our
ability to solve analytically. Is this because our imagery ar-
chitecture inherently and automatically obeys the relevant
laws of nature?
Opposing the intuition that one’s image unfolds accord-
ing to some internal principle of natural harmony with the
real world, is the obvious fact that it is you alone who con-
trols your image. Perhaps, as Humphrey (1951) once put it,
viewing the image as being responsible for what happens in
your imagining puts the cart before the horse. In the base-
ball example above, isn’t it equally plausible that the reason
the imagined ball takes a particular path is because, under
the right circumstances, you can recall having seen a ball in-
scribe such a path? Surely your image unfolds as it does be-
cause you, the image creator, made it do so. You can imag-
ine things being pretty much any size, color, or shape that
you choose and you can imagine them moving any way you
like. You can, if you wish, imagine a baseball sailing off into
the sky or following some bizarre path, including getting
from one place to another without going through interven-
ing points, as easily as you can imagine it following a more
typical trajectory. You can imagine all sorts of physically im-
possible things happening – and cartoon animators fre-
quently do, to our amusement.
Some imagery theorists might be willing to concede that
in imagining physical processes we must use our tacit
knowledge of how things work, yet insist that the optical
and geometrical properties of images are true intrinsic
properties, despite that fact that the dynamic properties of
images that are often cited in studies of mental images –
properties such as mental rotation, mental scanning, or
“representational momentum” discussed in sections 3.1
and 4. Nonetheless, the suggestion that the intrinsic prop-
erties of images are geometrical rather than dynamic makes
sense both because spatial intuitions are among the most
entrenched, and because there is evidence (Pylyshyn 1999)
that geometrical and optical-geometrical constraints are
built into the early-vision system, as so-called “natural con-
straints.” While we can easily imagine the laws of physics
being violated, it seems nearly impossible to imagine the ax-
ioms of geometry and geometrical optics being violated. Try
imagining a four-dimensional block, or how a cube looks
when seen from all sides at once, or what it would look like
to travel through a nonEuclidian space. However, before
concluding that these examples illustrate the intrinsic
geometry of images, consider whether your inability to
imagine these things might not be due to your not knowing,
in a purely factual way, how these things might look (that is,
where edges, shadows, and other contours would fall). The
answer is by no means obvious. It has even been suggested
(Goldenberg & Artner 1991) that certain deficits in imagery
ability resulting from brain damage are a consequence of a
deficiency in the patient’s knowledge about the appearance
of objects. At the minimum we are not entitled to conclude
from such examples that images have the sort of inherent
geometrical properties that we associate with pictures.
We also need to keep in mind that, notwithstanding one’s
intuitions, there is reason to be skeptical about what one’s
subjective experience reveals about the form of a men-
tal image. After all, when we look at an actual scene we 
have the unmistakable subjective impression that our per-
ceptual representation is of a detailed three-dimensional
panoramic view, yet it has now been convincingly demon-
strated that the information available to cognition from a
single glance is extremely impoverished, sketchy, and un-
stable and that very little is carried over across saccades
(see, e.g., Blackmore et al. 1995; Carlson-Radvansky 1999;
Carlson-Radvansky & Irwin 1995; Intraub 1981; Irwin
1993; O’Regan 1992; O’Regan & Noë 2001; Rensink 2000a;
2000b; Rensink et al. 1997; 2000; Simons 1996). Indeed,
there is now considerable evidence that we visually encode
very little in a visual scene unless we explicitly attend to the
items in question, and that we do that only if our attention
or our gaze is attracted to it (Henderson & Hollingworth
1999; although see O’Regan et al. 2000). There are re-
markable demonstrations that when presented with alter-
nating images, people find it extremely difficult to detect a
difference between the two – even a salient difference in a
central part of the image.1 This so-called change blindness
phenomenon (Simons & Levin 1997) suggests that, notwith-
standing our phenomenology, we are nowhere near having a
detailed internal display since the vast majority of information
in a visual scene goes unnoticed and unrecorded. It would
thus be reasonable to expect that our subjective experience of
mental imagery would be an equally poor guide to the form
and content of the information in our mental images.
3. Why images exhibit certain properties:
Cognitive architecture or tacit knowledge?
Nobody denies that the content and behavior of our men-
tal images can be the result of what we intend our images
to show, what we know about how things in the world look
and work, and the way our mind or our imagery system con-
strains us. The important question about mental imagery is:
which properties and mechanisms are intrinsic to, or con-
stitutive of having and using mental images, and which arise
because of what we believe, intend, or attribute to the situ-
ation we are imagining.
The distinction between effects attributable to the in-
trinsic nature of mental mechanisms and those attributable
to more transitory states, such as people’s beliefs, utilities,
habits, or interpretation of the task at hand, is central not
only for understanding the nature of mental imagery, but
Pylyshyn: Mental imagery: In search of a theory
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (2002) 25:2
159
. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0140525X02290044
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Chalmers Tekniska Högskola, on 16 Nov 2019 at 15:28:43, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms

for understanding mental processes in general. Explaining
the former kind of phenomena requires that we appeal to
what has been called the cognitive architecture (Fodor &
Pylyshyn 1988; Newell 1990; Pylyshyn 1980; 1984; 1991a;
1996) – one of the most important ideas in cognitive sci-
ence. It refers to the set of properties of mind that are fixed
with respect to certain kinds of influences. In particular, the
cognitive architecture is, by definition, not directly altered
by changes in knowledge, goals, utilities, or any other rep-
resentations (e.g., fears, hopes, fantasies, etc.). In other
words, when you find out new things or when you draw in-
ferences from what you know or when you decide some-
thing, your cognitive architecture does not change. Of
course, if as a result of your state of beliefs and desires you
decide to take drugs or to change your diet or even to re-
peat some act over and over, this can result in changes to
your cognitive architecture; but such changes are not a di-
rect result of the changes in your cognitive state. A detailed
technical exposition of the distinction between effects at-
tributable to knowledge or other cognitive states, and those
attributable to the nature of cognitive architecture, is be-
yond the scope of this article (although this distinction is the
subject of extensive discussion in Pylyshyn 1984, Ch. 7).
This informal characterization and the following example
will have to do for present purposes.
Suppose we have a box of unknown construction, and we
discover that it exhibits particular systematic behaviors (dis-
cussed in Pylyshyn 1984). The box emits long and short
pulses according to the following pattern: pairs of short
pulses most often precede single short pulses, except when
a pair of long-short pulses occurs first. What is special about
this example is that it illustrates a case where the observed
behavior, though completely regular when the box is in its
“ecological niche,” is not due to the nature of the box (to how
it is constructed) but to an entirely extrinsic reason. The rea-
son this particular pattern of behavior occurs can only be 
understood if we know that the pulses are codes, and the 
pattern is due to a regularity in what they represent, in
particular, that the pulses represent English words spelled
out in International Morse Code. The observed pattern does
not reflect how the box is wired or its functional architecture;
it is due entirely to a regularity in the way English words are
spelled (the principle being that generally i comes before e
except after c). Similarly, I have argued that in most of the
core experiments on mental imagery – such as the mental
scanning case described in section 4.1 – the pattern does not
reveal the nature of the mental architecture involved in im-
agery, but reflects a principle that observers know governs
the world being imagined. The reason why under certain
conditions the behavior of both the code box and the cogni-
tive system does not reveal properties of its intrinsic nature
(i.e., of its architecture), is that both are capable of quite dif-
ferent regularities if the world they were representing be-
haved differently. They would not have to change their ar-
chitecture in order to change their behavior. The latter
observation, concerning the plasticity of nonarchitectural
properties of thought, is the key to a methodology I have
called “cognitive penetrability” for deciding whether tacit
knowledge or cognitive architecture is responsible for some
particular observed regularity (see sect. 3.2).
In interpreting the results of imagery experiments, it is
clearly important to distinguish between cognitive archi-
tecture and tacit knowledge as possible causes. Take the fol-
lowing example. You are asked what color you see if you
look through a yellow filter superimposed on a blue filter.
The way that many of us would go about solving this prob-
lem, if we did not know the answer as a memorized fact, is
to imagine a yellow filter and a blue filter being superim-
posed; we generally use the “imagine” strategy when we want
to solve a problem about how certain things look. What color
do you see in your image when the two filters are overlapped?
Now ask yourself why you see that color in your mind’s eye
rather than some other color? Some people (e.g., Kosslyn
1981) have argued that the color you see follows from a prop-
erty of imagery, presumably some property of how colors are
encoded and displayed in images. But since there can be no
doubt that you can make the overlapping part of the filters
be any color you wish, it can’t be that the image format or the
architecture involved in representing colors is responsible.
What else can it be? It seems clear in this case that the color
you “see” depends on your tacit knowledge of the principles
of color mixing, or a recollection of how these particular col-
ors combine (having seen something like them in the past).
In fact, people who do not know about subtractive color mix-
ing generally give the wrong answer: mixing yellow light with
blue light produces white light, but overlapping yellow and
blue filters allows green light through.
When asked to do this exercise (as reported in Kosslyn
1981), some people claim that they “see” a color that is dif-
ferent from the one they report when they are simply asked
to say (without using imagery) what would happen. Results
such as this have made people leery of accepting the tacit
knowledge explanation. There are indeed many cases where
people report a different result when using mental imagery,
than when asked to merely answer the question without us-
ing their image. It is not clear what moral ought to be drawn
from this, however, since it is a general property of reasoning
that the way a question is put and the reasoning strategy that
is used to get to the answer, can affect the outcome. Knowl-
edge can be organized and accessed in many different ways
(see sect. 4.3 for more on the relevance of this to mental im-
agery studies). Indeed, it need not be accessed at all if it
seems like more work than it is worth. For example, consider
the following analog of the color-mixing task. Close your eyes
and imagine someone writing the following on a blackboard:
“759 1 356 5
.” Now, imagine that the person continues
writing on the board. What number can you “see” being writ-
ten next? People may give different answers depending on
whether they believe that they are supposed to work it out,
or whether in the interest of speed they are supposed to guess
or merely say whatever comes to mind. Each of these is a dif-
ferent task. Even without a theory of what is special about vi-
sual imagery, we know that the task of saying what something
would look like can be a different task from that of solving a
certain intellectual puzzle about colors or numbers.
In most of the cases studied in imagery research, it would
be odd if the results did not come out the way picture theo-
rists predict. For if the results were inconsistent with the
picture-theory, the obvious explanation would be that sub-
jects either did not know how things would work in reality
or else they misunderstood the instructions to “imagine x.”
For example, if you were asked to imagine in vivid detail a
performance of the Minute Waltz, the failure of the imag-
ined event to take approximately one minute would simply
indicate that you had not carried out the task you were sup-
posed to. Since taking roughly one minute is constitutive of
a real performance, it is natural to assume it to be indicative
of a realistic imaginary re-creation of such a performance.
Pylyshyn: Mental imagery: In search of a theory
160
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (2002) 25:2
. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0140525X02290044
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Chalmers Tekniska Högskola, on 16 Nov 2019 at 15:28:43, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms

3.1. What knowledge is relevant to the tacit knowledge
explanation?
The concept of tacit knowledge plays an important role in
cognitive science (see, e.g., Fodor 1968), though it has fre-
quently been maligned because it has to be inferred indi-
rectly. Such knowledge is called “tacit” because it is not al-
ways explicitly available for, say, answering questions. There
may nonetheless be independent evidence that such knowl-
edge exists. This is a point that has been made forcibly in
connection with tacit knowledge of grammar or of social
conventions, which typically also cannot be articulated by
members of a linguistic or social group, even though viola-
tions are easily detected. In our case the role of tacit knowl-
edge can sometimes be detected using the criterion of cog-
nitive penetrability, discussed below.
Not only is the notion of tacit knowledge often misun-
derstood, but in the case of explaining mental imagery re-
sults, the kind of tacit knowledge that is relevant has also
been widely misunderstood. The only knowledge that is rel-
evant to the tacit knowledge explanation is knowledge of
what things would look like to subjects in situations like the
ones in which they are to imagine themselves. Many writ-
ers have mistakenly assumed that the tacit knowledge ex-
planation refers to one of several other kinds of knowledge.
For example, although tacit knowledge of what results the
experimenter expects (sometimes referred to as “experi-
menter demand effects”) is always an important considera-
tion in psychological experiments (and may be of special
concern in mental imagery experiments; see Banks 1981;
Intons-Peterson 1983; Intons-Peterson & White 1981;
Mitchell & Richman 1980; Reed et al. 1983; Richman et al.
1979), it is not the knowledge that is relevant to the tacit
knowledge explanation, as some have assumed (Finke &
Kurtzman 1981b). The tacit knowledge explanation does
not assume that people know how their visual system or the
visual brain works (as Farah [1988] apparently thought). It
is also not the knowledge people might have of what results
to expect from experiments on mental imagery (as assumed
by Denis & Carfantan 1985). Denis and Carfantan studied
“people’s knowledge about images” and found that people
often failed to correctly predict what would happen in ex-
periments such as mental scanning. But these sorts of ques-
tions invite respondents to consider their folk psychological
theories to make predictions about psychological experi-
ments. They do not reflect tacit knowledge of what it would
look like if the observers were to see a certain event hap-
pening in real life. The tacit knowledge claim is simply the
claim that when subjects are asked to “imagine x,” they use
their knowledge of what “seeing x” would be like (as well as
their other psychophysical skills, such as estimating time-
to-collision) and they simulate as many of these effects as
they can. Whether a subject has this sort of tacit knowledge
cannot always be determined by asking them, and certainly
not by testing them for their knowledge of psychology!
Notwithstanding the importance of tacit knowledge ex-
planations of imagery phenomena, it remains true that not
all imagery results are subject to this criticism. Even when
tacit knowledge is involved, there is often more than one
reason for the observed phenomena. An example in which
tacit knowledge may not be the only explanation of an im-
agery finding can be found in Finke and Pinker (1982). The
example concerns a particular instance of mental scanning
(one in which it takes more time to judge that an arrow
points to a dot when the dot is further away). Finke and
Pinker argued that these results could not have been due to
tacit knowledge because, even though subjects correctly
predicted that judgments would take more time when the
dots were further away, they failed to predict that the time
would actually be longer for the shortest distance used in
the study. But this was a result that even the authors failed
to anticipate, because the aberrant short-distance time was
most likely due to some mechanism (perhaps attentional
crowding) different from the one that caused the mono-
tonic increase of time with distance.
Another example in which tacit knowledge does not ac-
count for some aspect of an imagery phenomenon is in what
has been called “representational momentum.” It was
shown that when subjects observe a moving object and are
asked to recall its final position from memory, they tend to
misremember it as being displaced forward. Freyd and
Finke (1984) attributed this effect to a property of the im-
agery architecture. On the other hand, Ranney (1989) sug-
gested that the phenomenon may actually be due to tacit
knowledge. It seems that at least some aspects of the phe-
nomenon may not be attributable to tacit knowledge (Finke
& Freyd 1989). But here again there are other explanations
besides tacit knowledge or image architecture. In this par-
ticular case there is good reason to think that part of the
phenomenon is actually visual. There is evidence that the
perception of the location of moving objects is ahead of 
the actual location of such objects (Nijhawan 1994). Eye
movement studies have also shown that gaze precedes the
current location of moving objects in an anticipatory fash-
ion (Kowler 1989; 1990). Thus, even though the general
phenomenon involving imagined motion may be attribut-
able to tacit knowledge, the fact that the moving stimuli are
presented visually may result in the phenomena also being
modulated by the visual system. The general point in both
these examples is that even in cases where tacit knowledge
is not the sole determiner of a result in an imagery experi-
ment, the phenomena in question need not reveal proper-
ties of the architecture of the imagery system. They may be
due to properties of the visual system, the memory system,
or a variety of other systems that might be involved.
3.2. Methodological note: “Cognitive penetrability” 
as a litmus
How is it possible to tell whether certain imagery effects re-
flect the nature of the imagery architecture or the person’s
tacit knowledge? In general, methodologies for answering
questions about theoretical constructs are limited only by
the imagination of the experimenter. Typically, they involve
convergent sources of evidence and independent theoreti-
cal motivation. One theoretically motivated diagnostic, dis-
cussed at length in Pylyshyn (1984), is to test for the cogni-
tive penetrability of the observations. This criterion is based
on the assumption that if a particular pattern of observa-
tions arises because people are simulating a situation based
on their tacit beliefs, then if we alter their beliefs or their
assumptions about the task, say by varying the instruc-
tions, the pattern of observations may change accordingly,
in ways that are rationally connected with the new beliefs.
So, for example, if we instruct a person on the principles of
color mixing, we would expect the answer to the imaginary
color-mixing question discussed above to change appropri-
ately. We will see other examples of the use of this crite-
Pylyshyn: Mental imagery: In search of a theory
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (2002) 25:2
161
. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0140525X02290044
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Chalmers Tekniska Högskola, on 16 Nov 2019 at 15:28:43, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms

rion throughout this article (especially the examples in
sect. 4).
Not every imagery-related phenomenon that is gen-
uinely cognitively impenetrable provides evidence for the
nature of mental images or their mechanisms. Clearly,
many beliefs are resistant to change by merely being told
that they are false. Nonetheless, this criterion has proven
useful in identifying parts of the visual system that consti-
tute what is called early vision (Pylyshyn 1999). Cognitive
penetrability remains a necessary but not sufficient condi-
tion for a pattern of observations being due to the architec-
ture of the imagery system.
4. Problem-solving by “mental simulation”: 
Some examples
The idea that what happens in certain kinds of problem
solving can be viewed as off-line simulation has had a re-
cent history in connection not only with mental imagery
(Currie 1995), but also with other sorts of problems in cog-
nitive science (Klein & Crandall 1995). But even if we grant
that the “simulation mode” of reasoning is used in various
sorts of problem solving, the question still remains: What
does the real work in solving the problem by simulation – a
special property of images (i.e., the architecture of the im-
age system), or tacit knowledge?
In what follows I will sketch a number of influential ex-
perimental results often cited in support of the picture the-
ory, and compare explanations given in terms of inherent
properties of the image with those given in terms of simu-
lation based on tacit knowledge.
4.1. Scanning mental images
Probably the most cited result in the entire repertoire of re-
search motivated by the picture-theory is the image-scan-
ning phenomenon. Not only has this experimental para-
digm been used dozens of times, but various arguments
about the “metrical” or spatial nature of mental images, as
well as arguments about such properties of the mind’s eye
as its “visual angle,” rest on this phenomenon. Indeed, it has
been referred to as a “window on the mind” (Denis & Koss-
lyn 1999).
The finding is that it takes longer to “see” a feature in a
mental image that is further away from the place in the im-
age an observer was initially focusing upon. So, for exam-
ple, if you are asked to imagine a dog and inspect its nose,
and then to “see” what its tail looks like, it will take you
longer than if you were asked to first inspect its hind legs.
Here is an actual experiment reported in Kosslyn et al.
(1978). Subjects were asked to memorize a map such as the
one in Figure 1. They were then asked to imagine the map
and to focus their attention on one place – say, the “church.”
In a typical experiment (there are many variants of this ba-
sic study), the experimenter says the name of a second place
(say, “beach” or “tree”) and subjects are asked to examine
their image and to press a button as soon as they can “see”
the second named place on their image of the map. What
many researchers have found consistently is that the further
away the second place is from where the subject is initially
focused, the longer it takes to “see” the second place in the
image.
From this scanning result most researchers have con-
cluded that larger map distances are represented by greater
distances in image space. In other words, the conclusion
that is drawn from this kind of experiment is that mental 
images have spatial properties – that is, they have spatial
magnitudes or distances, as opposed to just encoding such
properties in some unspecified manner. This is a strong
conclusion about cognitive architecture. It says, in effect,
that the symbolic code idea that forms the foundation of
computational theories does not apply to mental images. In
a symbolic encoding two places can be represented as be-
ing further away just the way we do it in language; by say-
ing the places are, say, n meters from one another. But the
representation of larger distances is not itself in any sense
larger.
Is this strong conclusion about the metrical property of
mental images warranted? Does the difference in scanning
time reveal a property of the architecture, or a property of
what is represented? Notice how this distinction exactly
parallels the situation in the color-mixing example dis-
cussed earlier. There we asked whether a particular obser-
vation revealed a property of the architecture, or a property
of what people know or believe – a property of the repre-
sented situation of which they have tacit knowledge. To an-
swer this question for the scanning experiment we need to
determine whether the pattern of increasing reaction time
arises from a fixed capacity of the image-encoding or im-
age-examining system, or whether it can be altered by
changing subjects’ understanding of the task or the beliefs
that they hold about what it would be like to examine a real
map; whether it is cognitively penetrable.
This is a question to be settled in the usual way – by care-
ful analyses and experiments. But even before we do the ex-
periment there is reason to suspect that the time-course of
Pylyshyn: Mental imagery: In search of a theory
162
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (2002) 25:2
Figure 1.
Map to be learned and imaged in one’s “mind’s eye” to
study mental scanning
. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0140525X02290044
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Chalmers Tekniska Högskola, on 16 Nov 2019 at 15:28:43, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms

scanning is not a property of the cognitive architecture. Do
the following test on yourself. Imagine that there are lights
at each of the places on your mental image of the map.
Imagine that a light goes on at, say, the beach. Now imag-
ine that this light goes off and one comes on at the light-
house. Did you need to scan your attention across the im-
age to see the light come on at the lighthouse? Liam
Bannon and I repeated the scanning experiment (see the
description in Pylyshyn 1981) by showing subjects a real
map with lights at the target locations, much as I just de-
scribed. We allowed the subjects to turn lights on and off.
Whenever a light was turned on at one location it was si-
multaneously extinguished at another location. Then we
asked subjects to imagine that very map and to indicate (by
pressing a button) when a light was on and they could “see”
the illuminated place in their image. The time between but-
ton presses was recorded and its correlation to the distances
between illuminated places on the map was computed. We
found that there was no relation between distance on the
imagined map and time. Now, you might think: Of course
there was no increase in time with increasing distance, be-
cause subjects were not asked to imagine scanning that dis-
tance. But that’s just the point: You can imagine scanning
over the imagined map if you want to, or you can imagine
just hopping from place to place on the imaginary map. If
you imagine scanning, you can imagine scanning fast or
slow, at a constant speed or at some variable speed, or scan-
ning part way and then turning back or circling around! You
can, in fact, do whatever you wish since it is your image.2 At
least you can do these things to the extent that you can cre-
ate the phenomenology or the experience of them and pro-
vided you are able to generate the relevant measurements,
such as the time you estimate it would take to get from point
to point.
Whether or not you choose to simulate a certain tempo-
ral pattern of events in the course of answering a question
may also depend in part on whether simulating that partic-
ular pattern seems to be relevant to the task. It is not diffi-
cult to set up an experimental situation in which simulating
the actual scanning from place to place does not appear so
obviously relevant to solving a particular problem. For ex-
ample, we ran the following experiment that involved ex-
tracting information from an image (Pylyshyn 1981). Sub-
jects were asked to memorize a map and to refer to their
image of the map in solving the problem. As in the original
Kosslyn et al. (1978) studies, subjects had to first focus on
one place on their imagined map and then to “look” at a 
second named place. The experiment differed from the
original study, however, in that the task was to indicate 
the compass direction from the second named place to the 
previously focused place. This direction-judgment task re-
quires that the subject make a judgment from the perspec-
tive of the second place, so it requires focusing at the sec-
ond place. Yet, in this experiment, the question of how you
get from the first place to the second place on the map was
far less prominent than it was in the “tell me when you can
see x” task. In this study we found that the distance between
places had no effect on the time taken to make the re-
sponse. Thus, it seems that the effect of distance on reac-
tion time is cognitively penetrable.3
Not only do observers sometimes move their attention
from one imagined object to another without scanning
through the space between them, but we have reason to be-
lieve that they cannot move their attention continuously
through empty imagined space (see sect. 6.4 for a brief de-
scription of the relevant study).
4.2. The “size” of mental images
Another study closely related to the mental scanning para-
digm, is one where it is found that it takes more time to re-
port some visual detail of an imagined object if the object is
imagined to be small, than if it is imagined to be large (e.g.,
it takes longer to report that a mouse has whiskers if the
mouse is imagined as tiny, than if it is imagined as huge).
This seems like a good candidate for a tacit knowledge ex-
planation, since when you actually see a small object you
know that you can make out fewer of its details due to the
limited resolution of your eye. So if you are asked to imag-
ine something small, you are likely to imagine it as having
fewer visible details than if you are asked to imagine it
looming large directly in front of you, whatever form of rep-
resentation that may involve.
The original picture-theory view of this result is prob-
lematic in any case. What does it mean for your image to be
“larger”? Such a notion is meaningful only if the image has
a real size or scale. If, as in our null hypothesis, the infor-
mation in the image is in the form of a symbolic description,
then size has no literal meaning. You can think of something
as large or small, but that does not make some thing in your
head large or small. On the other hand, which details are
represented in your imagination does have a literal mean-
ing: You can put more or less detail into your active repre-
sentation. Inasmuch as the task of imagining the mouse as
“small” entails that you imagine it having fewer visible de-
tails, the result is predictable without any notion of real
scale applying to the image.
The obvious test of this proposal is to apply the criterion
of cognitive penetrability. Are there instructions that can
ameliorate the effect of the “image size” manipulation,
making details easier to report in small images than in large
ones, and vice versa? Could you imagine a small but ex-
tremely high resolution and detailed view of an object, in
contrast to a large but low-resolution or fuzzy view that
lacks details? I know of no one who has bothered to carry
out an experiment that asks subjects to, say, report details
from a large blurry image and then from a small clear one.
What if such an experiment were done and it showed that
it is quicker to report details from a large blurry object than
from a small clear one? The strangeness of such a possibil-
ity should alert us to the fact that what is going wrong lies
in what it means to have a blurred versus a clear image.
Such results would be incompatible with what happens in
seeing. If it took longer to see fine details in a real large ob-
ject, there would have to be a reason for it, such as, that you
were seeing it through a fog or out of focus. Thus, so long
as examining a visual image means simulating what it is like
to see something, the results must be as reported; how
could studies involving different sized mental images, or
blurred versus clear images, fail to show that they parallel
the case of seeing, unless subjects misunderstood the in-
structions (e.g., they did not understand the meaning of
“blurry”)? The same goes for the imagery analogue of any
property of seeing of which observers have some tacit
knowledge or recollection. Thus, it applies to the findings
concerning the acuity profile of imagery, which approxi-
mates that of vision (Finke & Kosslyn 1980). Observers do
not need to have articulated scientific knowledge of visual
Pylyshyn: Mental imagery: In search of a theory
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (2002) 25:2
163
. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0140525X02290044
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Chalmers Tekniska Högskola, on 16 Nov 2019 at 15:28:43, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms

acuity; all they need is to remember roughly how far into
the periphery of their visual field things can go before they
become hard to see – and it is not surprising that this is eas-
ier to do while turning your head (with eyes closed) and pre-
tending to be looking at objects in your periphery (which is
how these studies were done).
4.3. Mental “paper folding”
There are many reasons why one might use a “simulation
mode” strategy in answering a question; reasons that have
nothing to do with the spatial nature of imagery, and some-
times not even with the kind of tacit knowledge available.
For example, to answer the question: What is the fourth (or
nth) letter in the alphabet after “M,” people normally have
to go through the alphabetical sequence (and it takes them
longer, the larger the value of n). Similarly, the findings re-
ported by Shepard and Feng (1972) are easily understood
if one considers how the relevant knowledge is organized.
In their experiment, subjects are asked to mentally fold
pieces of paper, such as shown in Figure 2, and to report
whether the arrows marked on the paper would touch one
another. Shepard and Feng found that the more folds it
would require to actually fold the paper and see whether
the arrows coincide, the longer it takes to imagine doing so.
From this they concluded that working with images paral-
lels working with real objects.
The question that needs to be asked about this task is the
same as the question we asked in connection with the color
mixing task: What is responsible for the relation between
time taken to answer the question and the number of folds
it would have taken in folding real paper? This time the an-
swer is not simply that it depends on tacit knowledge, be-
cause in this case it is not just the content of the tacit knowl-
edge that makes the difference. Yes, it is the knowledge that
subjects have about paper folding that makes it possible for
them to do the task at all. But, in this case, it appears that
imagining making individual folds is required in order to
get the answer. Indeed, it is hard to see how to answer this
question without imagining going through the sequence of
folds. A plausible explanation for this, which does not ap-
peal to special properties of a mental image system, is that
the reason one has to imagine going through a sequence of
individual folds is the same as the reason one had to go
through a series of letters in the earlier alphabet example.
The reason may have to do with how one’s knowledge of the
effects of folding is organized. What we know about the ef-
fects of paper folding is just this: we know what happens
when we make one fold. Consequently, to determine what
would happen in a task that requires four folds, we have to
apply our one-fold-at-a-time knowledge four times. Recall
the parallel case with letters: In order to determine what
the fourth letter after M is, we have to apply the “next let-
ter” rote knowledge four times. In both cases a person
could, in principle, commit to memory such facts as what
results from double folds of different types; or which letter
of the alphabet occurs exactly n letters after a given letter.
If that were how paper-folding knowledge was organized,
the Shepard and Feng results might not hold. The impor-
tant point is that once again the result tells us nothing about
how the states of the problem are represented – or about
any special properties of image representations. They tell
us only what knowledge the person has and how it is orga-
nized.
The role played by the structure of knowledge is ubiqui-
tous and may account for another common observation
about the use of mental imagery in recall. We know that
some things are easier to recall than others, and that it is
easier to recall some things when the recall is preceded by
the recall of other things. Memory is linked in various in-
tricate ways. In order to recall what you did on a certain day
it helps to first recall what season that was, what day of the
week it was, where you were at the time, and so on. Shein-
gold and Tenney (1982), Squire and Slater (1975), and oth-
ers have shown that one’s recall of distant events is far bet-
ter than one generally believes because once the process of
retrieval begins it provides clues for subsequent recollec-
tions. The reason for bringing up this fact about recall is that
such sequential dependencies are often cited as evidence
for the special nature of imagery (Bower & Glass 1976;
Paivio 1971). Thus, for example, in order to determine how
many windows there are in your home, you probably need
to imagine each room in turn and look around to see where
the windows are, counting them as you go. In order to re-
call whether someone you know has a beard (or glasses or
red hair), you may have to first recall other aspects of what
he or she looks like (that is, recall an image of them). Apart
from the phenomenology of recalling an appearance, what
is going on is absolutely general to every form of memory
retrieval. Memory access is an ill-understood process, but
at least it is known that it has sequential dependencies and
other sorts of access paths, and that these paths are often
dependant on spatial arrangements (which is why the
“method of loci” works well as a mnemonic device).
4.4. Mental rotation
One of the earliest and most cited results in the research on
manipulating mental images is the “mental rotation” find-
ing. Shepard and Metzler (1971) showed subjects pairs of
drawings of three-dimensional figures, such as those illus-
trated in Figure 3, and asked them to judge whether the two
objects depicted in the drawings were identical, except for
orientation. Half the cases were mirror reflections of one
another (or the 3D equivalent, called enantiomorphs), and
therefore could not be brought into correspondence by a
rotation. Shepard and Metzler found that the time it took
to make the judgment was a linear function of the angular
displacement between the pair of objects depicted.
This result has been universally interpreted as showing
Pylyshyn: Mental imagery: In search of a theory
164
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (2002) 25:2
Figure 2.
Two of the figures used in the Shepard and Feng
(1972) experiment. The task is to imagine folding the paper (us-
ing the dark shaded square as the base) and say whether the ar-
rows in these two figures coincide. The time it takes increases with
the number of folds required.
. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0140525X02290044
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Chalmers Tekniska Högskola, on 16 Nov 2019 at 15:28:43, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms

that mental images of the objects are “rotated” continuously
and at constant speed in the mind, and that this is, in fact,
the means by which the comparison is made: We rotate one
of the pair of figures until the two are sufficiently in align-
ment that it is possible to see whether they are the same or
different. The phenomenology of the Shepard and Metzler
task is clearly that we rotate the figure in making the com-
parison. I do not question either the phenomenology or the
description that what goes on in this task is “mental rota-
tion.” But there is some question about what these results
tell us about the nature of mental images. The important
question is not whether we can or do imagine rotating a fig-
ure, but whether we solve the problem by means of the
mental rotation. For mental rotation to be a mechanism by
which the solution is arrived at, its utility would have to de-
pend on some intrinsic property of images. As an example,
if it were the case that during mental rotation the figure
moves as a rigid form through a continuum of angles, then
mental rotation would be capitalizing on an intrinsic prop-
erty of the image format.
Contrary to the general assumption, however, figural “ro-
tation” is not a holistic process that operates on an entire
figure, while the figure retains its rigid shape. Subjects in
the original 3D rotation study (Shepard & Metzler 1971)
examined both the target and the comparison figures to-
gether. In a subsequent study that monitored eye move-
ments, Just and Carpenter (1976) showed that observers
look back and forth between the two figures, checking for
distinct features. This point was also made by Hochberg
and Gellman (1977) who used simpler 2D figures and
found that observers concentrate on significant milestone
features when carrying out the task, and that, when such
milestone features are available, there is no rotation effect.
In studies reported in Pylyshyn (1979b), I showed that the
apparent “rate of rotation” depends both on the complexity
of the figure and on the complexity of the postrotation com-
parison task. (I used a task in which observers had to indi-
cate whether a test figure, presented at various orientations,
was embedded within the original figure.) The dependence
of the rotation speed on such organizational and task fac-
tors shows that whatever is going on in this case does not
consist in merely “rotating” one figure in a rigid manner
into correspondence with the reference figure.
Even if the process of making the comparison in some
sense involves the “rotation” of a represented shape, this
tells us nothing about the form of the representation and
does not support the view that the representation is picto-
rial. The proposal that a representation maintains its shape
because of the inherent rigidity of the image while it is ro-
tated cannot be literally true, notwithstanding the phe-
nomenology. The representation is not literally being ro-
tated; no codes or patterns of codes are being moved in a
circular motion. At most, what could be happening is that a
representation of a figure is processed in such a way as to
produce a representation of a figure at a slightly different
orientation, and then this process is iterated (perhaps even
continuously). There are probably good reasons, based on
computational resource considerations, why the compari-
son process might proceed by iterating parts of a form over
successive small angles (thus causing the comparison time
to increase with the angular disparity between the figures)
rather than attempt the “rotation” in one step. For exam-
ple, Marr and Nishihara (1976) hypothesized what they
called a primitive SPASAR mechanism, whose function was
to compute the rotation of a simple dihedral vertex and de-
termine its orthographic projections in a reference frame (a
slightly different version that left out the details of the
SPASAR mechanism, was later published in Marr & Nishi-
hara 1978). This was an interesting idea that assumed a lim-
ited analogue operation that could be applied to one small
feature of a representation at a time. Yet, the Marr and
Nishihara proposal did not postulate a pictorial representa-
tion, nor did it assume that a rigid configuration was main-
tained by an image in the course of its “rotation.” It hy-
pothesized a simple primitive operation on parts of a
structured representation in a response to a computational
complexity issue.
Like the paper folding task discussed earlier, the mental
rotation phenomenon is robust and probably not cogni-
tively penetrable, and is not a candidate for a straightfor-
ward tacit knowledge explanation (as I tried to make clear
in Pylyshyn 1979b). Rather, the most likely explanation is
one that appeals to the computational requirements of the
task and general architectural (i.e., working memory) con-
straints, and therefore applies regardless of the form of the
representation. No conclusions concerning the format of
image representations, or the form of their transformation,
follow from the rotation results. Indeed, these findings il-
lustrate how treating the phenomenology as explanatory
does not help us to understand why or how the behavior oc-
curs.
5. Are images “depictive”?
5.1. Depiction and mandatory spatial properties of
representations
It has frequently been suggested that images differ from
structured descriptions in that the former stand in a special
relationship to what they represent, a relationship referred
to as depiction. One way of putting this is to say that in or-
der to depict some state of affairs the representation needs
to correspond to the spatial arrangement it represents the
way that a picture does. One of the few people who have
tried to be explicit about what this means is Stephen Koss-
lyn,4 so I quote him at some length:
A depictive representation is a type of picture, which specifies
the locations and values of configurations of points in a space.
For example, a drawing of a ball on a box would be a depictive
representation. The space in which the points appear need not
be physical, such as on this page, but can be like an array in a
computer, which specifies spatial relations purely functionally.
Pylyshyn: Mental imagery: In search of a theory
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (2002) 25:2
165
Figure 3.
Examples similar to those used by Shepard and Metz-
ler (1971) to show “mental rotation.” The time it takes to decide
whether two figures are identical except for rotation (a, b), or are
mirror images (a, c), increases linearly as the angle between them
increases.
. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0140525X02290044
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Chalmers Tekniska Högskola, on 16 Nov 2019 at 15:28:43, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms

That is, the physical locations in the computer of each point in
an array are not themselves arranged in an array; it is only by
virtue of how this information is “read” and processed that it
comes to function as if it were arranged into an array (with some
points being close, some far, some falling along a diagonal, and
so on). In a depictive representation, each part of an object is
represented by a pattern of points, and the spatial relation
among these patterns in the functional space correspond to the
spatial relations among the parts themselves. Depictive repre-
sentations convey meaning via their resemblance to an object,
with parts of the representation corresponding to parts of the
object. . . . When a depictive representation is used, not only is
the shape of the represented parts immediately available to ap-
propriate processes, but so is the shape of the empty space. . . .
Moreover, one cannot represent a shape in a depictive repre-
sentation without also specifying a size and orientation. (Koss-
lyn 1994, #880, p. 5)
This quotation introduces a number of issues that need
to be examined closely. One idea we can put aside is the
claim that depictive representations convey meaning
through their resemblance to the objects they depict. This
relies on the extremely problematic notion of resemblance,
which has been known to be inadequate as a basis for mean-
ing (certainly since Wittgenstein 1953). Resemblance is
neither necessary nor sufficient for something to have a par-
ticular meaning or reference: Images may resemble what
they do not refer to (e.g., an image of John’s twin brother
does not refer to John) and they may refer to what they do
not resemble (an image of John taken through a distorting
lens is still an image of John even though it does not re-
semble him).
Despite its obvious problems, the notion of resemblance
keeps surfacing in discussions of mental images, in a way
that reveals how deeply the conscious experience of men-
tal imagery contaminates conceivable theories of mental
imagery. For example, Finke (1989) begins with the obser-
vation, “People often wonder why mental images resemble
the things they depict.” But the statement that images re-
semble things they depict is just another way of saying that
the conscious experience of mental imagery is similar to the
conscious experience one would have if one were to see the
thing one was imagining. Consider what it would be like if
images did not “resemble the things they depict”? It would
be absurd if in imagining a table one had an experience that
was like that of seeing a dog! Presumably this is because (a)
what it means to have a mental image of a chair is that you
are having an experience like that of seeing a chair, and (b)
what conscious content your image has is something on
which you are the final authority. You may be deceived
about lots of things concerning your mental image. You
may, and typically are, deceived about what sort of thing
your image is (that is, what form and substance underlies
it), but surely you cannot be deceived about what your men-
tal image looks like, or what it resembles. These are not em-
pirical facts about imagery, they are just claims about what
the phrase “mental image” means.
In contrast to the vacuity of the criterion of resemblance,
the proposal that images can be decomposed into “parts”
with the spatial relations among parts of the image in some
way mapping onto the parts and the spatial relationships
among the corresponding parts of the world, deserves
closer scrutiny although it has not received systematic treat-
ment in the literature. This proposal is based on the as-
sumption that in imagery there is a certain part-to-part 
homomorphism between the representation and the repre-
sented. Some time ago, Sloman (1971) suggested this as a
defining characteristic of analogue representations and it is
clearly an important criterion. Although it needs to be
spelled out in more detail, this is a reasonable proposal, but
it will not yield the conclusion that images are spatial in any
sense that bears on the “depiction” story. In fact, it is true
of any representational system that is compositional (see
sect. 7.1).
Another proposal mentioned in the quotation is that in
depictive representations certain aspects are mandatory; so
that, for example, if you choose to represent a particular ob-
ject, you cannot fail to represent its shape, orientation, and
size. This claim too has some truth, although the question
of which aspects are mandatory, why they are mandatory,
and what this tells us about the form of the representation
is not so clear. It is a general property of representations
that some aspects tend to be encoded (or assigned as de-
fault value) if other aspects are. Sometimes this is true by
virtue of what it is that you are trying to imagine. For ex-
ample, you can’t imagine a melody without also imagining
each note, and therefore making a commitment as to how
many notes it has. This follows from what it means to “imag-
ine a melody,” not from the inherent nature of some par-
ticular form of representation. The same is true for other
examples of imaginings. When you ask someone to imagine
a familiar shape by giving its name, say, the letter “B,” the
person will make a commitment to such things as whether
it is in upper or lower case. It seems as though you can’t
imagine a B without imagining either an upper case “B” or
a lower case “b.” But is this not another case of a require-
ment of the task to “imagine a ‘B’”? In this example, are you
not being asked to describe what you would see if you were
actually looking at a token of a particular printed letter? If
you actually saw a token of a B you would see either a lower
or an upper case letter, but not both and not neither. If
someone claimed to have an image of a B that was non-
committal with respect to its case, you would surely be en-
titled to say that the person did not have a visual image at
all.
In terms of other contents of an image, the situation gets
murkier because it becomes less clear what exactly the task
of imagining entails. For example, does your image of the
letter “B” have to have a color or texture or shading? Must
you represent the background against which you are view-
ing it, the direction of lighting and the shadows it casts?
Must you represent it as viewed from a particular point of
view? What about its stereoscopic properties; do you rep-
resent the changing parallax of its parts as you imagine mov-
ing in relation to it? Could you choose to represent any or
none of these things? Most of our visual representations, at
least in memory, are noncommittal in various respects (for
examples see Pylyshyn 1978). In particular, they can be
noncommittal in ways that no picture can be noncommit-
tal. Shall we then say that they are not images? How you
feel about such questions is more terminological (i.e., what
you are disposed to count as an image representation) than
empirical. It shows the futility of assuming that mental im-
ages are just like pictures. As the graphic artist M.C. Escher
once put it,
a mental image is something completely different from a visual
image, and however much one exerts oneself, one can never
manage to capture the fullness of that perfection which hovers
in the mind and which one thinks of, quite falsely, as something
that is “seen.” (Escher 1960, p. 7)
Pylyshyn: Mental imagery: In search of a theory
166
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (2002) 25:2
. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0140525X02290044
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Chalmers Tekniska Högskola, on 16 Nov 2019 at 15:28:43, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms

5.2. Real versus functional space
Despite the temptation to do so, imagery theorists have
been reluctant to claim that images are literally laid out in
real space – that is, on a physical surface in the brain. How-
ever, because theories of imagery have had to appeal to such
notions as distance, shape, size, and so on, some notion of
space is always presupposed. Consequently, many writers
who see the need for spatial properties speak of a “func-
tional” space, with locations and other spatial properties be-
ing defined functionally (e.g., Denis & Kosslyn 1999). The
example frequently cited (see the Kosslyn quotation above)
is that of a matrix data structure in a computer, which can
be viewed as having many of the properties of space with-
out itself being laid out spatially in the physical machine.
This is in some ways an attractive idea since it appears to al-
low us to claim that images have certain spatial properties
without being committed to how they are implemented in
the brain – so long as the implementation and its accessing
operations function the way a real spatial system would
function. The hard problem is to give substance to the no-
tion of a functional space that does not reduce it to being
either a summary of the data, with no explanatory mecha-
nisms, or a model of real literal space. This problem has
been so widely misunderstood that it merits some extended
discussion.
Consider first why a matrix data structure might appear
to constitute a “functional space.” As typically used, it seems
to have two (or more) dimensions (since referencing indi-
vidual cells is typically done by providing two numerical ref-
erences or “coordinates”), to have distances (if we identify
distance with the number of cells lying between two
places), and to have empty spaces (so that it explicitly rep-
resents both where there are features and where there are
no features). Graphical elements, such as points, contours,
and regions can be represented by entering features into
the cells at quantized coordinates. There is then a natural
sense of the properties of “adjacency,” as well as of places
being “between” two specified locations (as well as other
simple geometrical properties of sets of features, such as
being collinear, forming a triangle, and so on). Because of
this, operations such as “scanning” from one feature to an-
other, as well as of “shifting” and “rotating” patterns, can be
given natural definitions (see, e.g., Funt 1980). Thus, the
format of such a data structure appears to lend itself to be-
ing interpreted as “depictive” rather than “language-like,”
as noted in the earlier Kosslyn quote.
Notice, however, that all the spatial notions mentioned in
the previous paragraph are properties of a way of thinking
about, or of interpreting, the data structure; they are not in-
trinsic properties of the matrix data structure itself. That is,
what makes cells in a matrix appear to be locations with
properties such as adjacency, between-ness, alignment, dis-
tance, and so on, is not any property of the matrix, nor even
of the way that this data structure must be used. There is
no sense in which any pairs of cells is special and so there is
no natural sense in which some pairs of cells are “adjacent,”
including a sense that derives from how they must be ac-
cessed. There are literally no constraints on the order in
which cells must be accessed. We can, of course, require
that the matrix be accessed in certain ways, and when we
model imagery we typically do stipulate that certain pairs of
cells be considered “adjacent” and that, in accessing any
pair of cells in a serial fashion, certain other cells (the ones
we designate as being “between” the pair) must be visited
first and in a certain order (which we call “scanning”). But
it is critical to the interpretation of a computational process
as a model of mental imagery that we understand exactly
why such constraints hold. If our model of imagery as-
sumed a literal physical surface, then the reason would be
clear: physical laws require that movement over a surface
follow a certain pattern, such as, that the time it takes to get
from one place to another is the ratio of the distance tra-
versed to the speed of movement. But in a matrix no such
intrinsic constraint exists. Such a constraint must be stipu-
lated as an extrinsic constraint (along with many other con-
straints, such as those that govern the invariance of adja-
cency, between-ness, or collinearity, with transformations
of scale, orientation, and translation). The spatiality of a ma-
trix, or of any other form of “functional space,” must be stip-
ulated or assumed over and above any intrinsic property of
the format of the representation. The crucial fact about ex-
trinsic constraints is that such constraints are independently
stipulated, and so could be applied equally to any form of
representation, including a model of imagery that used
symbolic expressions or structured descriptions. So far as
the notion of functional space is concerned, there is noth-
ing to prevent us from modeling the content of an image as
a set of sentence-like expressions in a language of thought.
We could then stipulate that in order to go from examining
one place (referred to, say, by a unique name) to examining
another place (also referred to by a name), you must pass
through (or apply an operation to) the places whose names
are located between the two names on some list. You might
object that this sort of model is ad hoc. It is. But it is no more
ad hoc than when the constraints are applied to a matrix for-
malism. Notice, moreover, that both become completely
principled if they are taken to be simulations of a real spa-
tial display.
You might wonder why the matrix feels more natural than
other ways of simulating space. The answer may be that a
matrix offers a natural model of space because we are used
to thinking of and displaying matrices as two-dimensional
tables (complete with empty cells) and of viewing the cells
as being referenced by names that we think of as pairs of
coordinates.5 We thus find it easy to switch back and forth
between the data-structure view and the (physical) table
view. Because of this, it is natural to interpret a matrix as a
model of real space and therefore it is easy to make the slip
between thinking of it on one hand as merely a “functional
space,” and thinking of it, on the other hand, as a stand-in
for (or a simulation of) real space – a slip we encounter over
and over in theorizing about the nature of mental imagery.
As a simulation of real space it is unproblematic so far as the
sorts of problems discussed here are concerned. But we
must recognize that in this case we are assuming that im-
ages are written on a literal spatial medium, which we hap-
pen to be simulating by a matrix (for reasons of conve-
nience). In fact, in Kosslyn et al. (1979) this view is made
explicit when the authors invoke what they call the “cath-
ode-ray tube model.” In that case it is the literal space that
has the explanatory force, notwithstanding the fact that, as
a practical matter, it is being simulated on a digital com-
puter.
The point is that there is no such thing as a “functional
space” apart from the set of extrinsic stipulations or con-
straints we choose to impose on such things as how sym-
bolic names (e.g., matrix coordinates) map onto places in a
Pylyshyn: Mental imagery: In search of a theory
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (2002) 25:2
167
. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0140525X02290044
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Chalmers Tekniska Högskola, on 16 Nov 2019 at 15:28:43, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms

physical display, and how distances and geometrical predi-
cates are to be interpreted over the data structure. What we
have, rather, is one of two things: either a real physical
space, with its (approximately) Euclidean properties, or a
symbolic model of such a space.6 Anything else is merely
metaphoric and not explanatory. It allows one to think of an
image as spatial without the attending disadvantages of hav-
ing made an untenable assumption about the architecture
of mental imagery.
The real scientific question is not how we can model
space in a theory of mental imagery. Rather, it is whether
there is any sense in which the architecture of mental im-
agery incorporates the geometry of real space. Only after
we have answered this empirical question can we know
whether one should model properties of space in modeling
imagery. My purpose in belaboring the distinction between
intrinsic and extrinsic constraints, and what is being pre-
supposed when we talk of “functional space,” is simply to
set the stage for the real issues, which are empirical. I have
already described some of the relevant empirical findings
in connection with the mental scanning and have suggested
that the same is likely to be true for other findings that im-
ply that images have metrical properties. The cognitive
penetrability of such phenomena suggests that the mind
does not work as though the imagery architecture imposes
constraints like those you would expect of a real spatial dis-
play. It appears that we are not required to scan through ad-
jacent places in getting from one place to another in an im-
age – we can get there as quickly or as slowly as we wish,
with or without visiting intermediate filled or empty places
(assuming that visiting empty places is even possible – see
sect. 6.4).
5.3. Projected mental images: Inheriting spatial
properties from real space
In most imagery studies subjects are asked to imagine
something while looking at a scene; thus, at least in some
phenomenological sense, superimposing or projecting an
image onto the perceived world. Yet, it has been amply
demonstrated (O’Regan & Lévy-Schoen 1983) that true su-
perposition of visual percepts does not occur when visual
displays are presented in sequence, or across saccades. So
what happens when a mental image (whether constructed
or derived from memory) is superimposed over a scene? In
many of these cases (e.g., Farah 1989; Hayes 1973; Pod-
gorny & Shepard 1978) a plausible answer is that one allo-
cates attention to the scene according to a pattern that cor-
responds roughly to the projected image. Alternatively, and
more plausibly, one simply thinks of imagined objects as be-
ing located at places actually occupied by certain perceived
ones. Thinking that something is at a certain location need
not entail projecting an imagined shape onto some back-
ground. It might require nothing more that allocating at-
tention to a particular object in a scene and thinking of that
object as having a certain property. It is no more than think-
ing “this (e.g., referring to a bit of texture) is where I imag-
ine feature F to be located.” The capacity for this sort of
“demonstrative reference” has been investigated exten-
sively and discussed by Pylyshyn (2000; 2001c).
Consider, for example, the study reported by Podgorny
and Shepard (1978). In their vision control condition, ex-
perimenters asked subjects to indicate as fast as possible
whether a dot appeared on, or beside, a simple figure, such
as the letter F. The pattern of reaction times was recorded
(e.g., times were found to be shorter when the dot was ON
the figure than OFF, and shorter when it was at a vertex
rather than mid-stroke, etc.). This pattern was then com-
pared with the pattern obtained when the figure was merely
imagined to be on the grid while a real dot was presented
at corresponding locations (as shown in Fig. 4). In the im-
age condition, the pattern of reaction times obtained was
very similar to the one obtained from the corresponding
real display. This was interpreted as showing that in both vi-
sion and projected imagery, subjects perceived a similar vi-
sual pattern. But a more parsimonious account is that in
imagining the figure in this task, subjects merely attended
to the rows and columns in which the imagined figure
would have appeared. We know that people can indeed di-
rect their attention to several objects such as rows or
columns or cells in a display, or even to conform their at-
tention to a particular shape. Focusing attention in this way
is all that is needed in order to generate the observed pat-
tern of reaction times. In fact, using displays similar to those
used in the Podgorny and Shepard (1978) study, but exam-
ining the threshold for detecting spots of light, Farah (1989)
showed that the instruction to simply attend to certain let-
ter-shaped regions was more effective in enhancing detec-
tion in those regions than instructions to superimpose an
image over the region.
A similar story applies to other tasks that involve re-
sponding to image properties when images are superim-
posed over a perceived scene (e.g., Hayes 1973). If, for ex-
ample, you imagine the map used to study mental scanning
(shown in Fig. 1) superimposed over one of the walls in the
room, you can use the visual features of the wall to anchor
various objects in the imagined map. You can think a
thought which might be paraphrased as “the church is lo-
cated where this (speck) is on the wall, the beach is beside
that (corner) . . . ,” where each of the locative terms “this”
and “that” picks out an object in the visual field and binds
it to terms in the thought. Once the appropriate items are
bound, “scanning the image” is accomplished by scanning
between the selected items in the actual visual display.
Thus, the increase in the time it takes to scan between items
that are further apart on the imagined map is easily ex-
plained, since it involves scanning greater distances in the
real scene. In general, such cases of superposition allow
many of the spatial properties of the real scene (e.g., prop-
erties expressed by Euclidean and metrical axioms) to be
inherited by the combined image-percept. For example, if
image features A, B, and C are imagined to be collinear and
they are bound to three actual collinear features in some
Pylyshyn: Mental imagery: In search of a theory
168
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (2002) 25:2
Figure 4.
Observers were shown a figure (display 1) which they
then had to retain as an image and indicate whether the dot (dis-
play 2) occurred on or off the imagined figure. The pattern of re-
action times was found to be similar to that observed when the fig-
ure was actually present. (Based on Podgorny & Shepard 1978.)
. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0140525X02290044
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Chalmers Tekniska Högskola, on 16 Nov 2019 at 15:28:43, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms

visible scene,7 then the fact that feature B is between A and
C can be visually read off the perceived scene. The mech-
anism for indexing imagined objects to visual features,
called visual indexes, has been described extensively else-
where (e.g., Pylyshyn 1994b; 1998; 2000; 2001c). Such a
binding is an example of the use of indexicals in image rep-
resentations, and illustrates one way in which symbols un-
derlying imagery can be what Barsalou (1999) calls percep-
tual symbols. This also appears to be what Glenberg and
Robertson (2000) have in mind when they speak of image
symbols as being grounded or embodied (this sort of
grounding is discussed extensively in Pylyshyn 2001c).
Note that this vision-plus-indexes story is far from being
equivalent to superimposing an image over the scene, 
because it assumes no pictorial properties of the “super-
imposed” image, only the binding of imagined objects/
locations to real perceived ones. Moreover, because the 
relevant information involves only sparse spatial locations
and not other detailed visual properties, the memory de-
mand is minimal. So this process might conceivably be car-
ried out even for a short time after the scene has been re-
moved, as is the case when subjects are asked to close their
eyes when they recall the image (there is evidence that
short term recall of low-level iconic information can persist
for several minutes; see Ishai & Sagi 1995). Thus this sort
of story might provide another mechanism to explain phe-
nomena such as mental scanning, even when scanning is
carried out with eyes closed.
5.4. Visuomotor interaction with images
Another reason to think of mental images as being spatial is
that they appear to connect with spatial aspects of the mo-
tor system in a way that is similar to how visually perceived
space connects with the motor system. For example, it
seems that you can imagine a scene and point to some ob-
ject in the imagined scene, which suggests that the image 
is in some sense spatial. This apparent coordination with
movements is surely one major reason to think of images as
spatial, since motor control commands must be issued in
spatial coordinates. If we could move our eyes to a place in
an image or point to a feature of the image we would be ex-
hibiting some aspect of the image’s spatiality.8
This raises the empirical question of whether images en-
gage the motor system the way vision does. In a series of in-
genious experiments, Finke (1979) showed that adaptation
to displacing prisms could be obtained using only the imag-
ined location of the observer’s hand as feedback. These
studies are of special interest because they illustrate the way
in which projected images can work like real percepts.
Finke asked subjects to imagine that their (hidden) hand
was in a certain specified location. The sequence of loca-
tions where he asked them to imagine their hand actually
corresponded to the errors of displacement made by an-
other subject who had worn displacing prisms. Finke found
that both the pattern of adaptation and the pattern of after-
effects shown by the subjects who were asked to imagine
the location of their hand was similar to that exhibited by
subjects who actually wore displacing prisms and so could
see the displaced location of their hand.
It is known that adaptation can occur in response to cog-
nitive factors, and indeed even to verbally presented error
information (Kelso et al. 1975; Uhlarik 1973), though in
that case the adaptation occurs more slowly and transfers
completely to the nonadapted hand. Yet, Finke found that
in the case of imagined hand position, the adaptation,
though significantly lower in magnitude, followed the pat-
tern observed with the usual visual feedback of hand posi-
tion. Moreover, when subjects were told that their hand was
actually not where they imagined it to be, the adaptation ef-
fect was nonetheless governed by the imagined location,
rather than by where they were told their hand was, and fol-
lowed the same pattern as that observed with both imagery
and actual visually presented error information.9 It thus
seems that the visuomotor system may be involved when
adapting to imagined hand positions. The question is: What
is the nature of this involvement?
Exactly what causes prism adaptation has been the sub-
ject of some debate (Howard 1982), but it is generally ac-
cepted that an important factor is the discrepancy between
the seen position and the felt position of the hand (or the
discrepancy between visual and kinesthetic or propriocep-
tive location information). Significantly, such discordance
does not require that the visual system recover any visual
property of the hand other than its location. Indeed, in
some studies of adaptation, subjects viewed a point source
of light attached to their hand rather than the hand itself
(Mather & Lackner 1977), with little difference in adapta-
tion. But exactly where the subject attends is important
(Canon 1970; 1971). In some cases, even an immobile hand
can elicit adaptation provided that the subject visually at-
tends to it (Mather & Lackner 1981). In Finke’s experi-
ments, subjects focused their gaze towards a particular 
location, where they were, in effect, told to pretend (incor-
rectly) that their hand was located, thus focusing attention
on the discordance between this imagined location of their
hand and their kinesthetic and proprioceptive sense of the
position of their arm.10 Thus, the imagery condition in
these studies provides all that is needed for adaptation –
without requiring any assumptions about the nature of im-
agery.
It seems that there are a number of imagery-motor phe-
nomena that depend only on orienting one’s gaze or one’s
focal attention to certain perceived locations. The Finke
study of adaptation of reaching is a plausible example of this
sort of phenomenon, as is the Tlauka and McKenna (1998)
study of S-R compatibility for manually responding to in-
formation in images. None of these results require that im-
agery feed into the visuomotor system, let alone that images
be spatial or depictive. Indeed, these cases involve actual
visual perception of location (i.e., there really are visible el-
ements at the relevant locations in real space that are being
attended). Since the adaptation phenomena (as well as the
S-R compatibility phenomena) require only location infor-
mation and no pictorial information (e.g., shape, color, etc.),
they do not in any way implicate the “depictive” character
of mental images.
When we look at cases in which images are not projected
onto a perceived scene (say, they are imagined in the dark
or with eyes closed), or in which more than just the imag-
ined location of an object is relevant to the motor action, we
find that images do not interact with the perceptual motor
system in a way that is characteristic of visual interaction
with that system. To show this we need to look at certain
signature properties of the visual control of movements,
rather than at cases where the control may actually be 
mediated only by spatial attention. One clear example of
strictly visual control of motor action is smooth pursuit.
Pylyshyn: Mental imagery: In search of a theory
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (2002) 25:2
169
. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0140525X02290044
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Chalmers Tekniska Högskola, on 16 Nov 2019 at 15:28:43, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms

People can track the motion of slowly moving objects with
a characteristic sort of eye movement called smooth pur-
suit. There are also reports that under certain circum-
stances people can track the voluntary (and perhaps even
involuntary) movement of their hand in the dark (Mather
& Lackner 1980). They can also track the motion of objects
that are partially hidden from view (Steinbach 1976), and
even of induced (apparent) motion of a point produced by
a moving frame surrounding the point (Wyatt & Pola 1979).
In other words, they can smoothly pursue inputs generated
by the early vision system. Yet, what people cannot do is
smoothly pursue the movement of imagined objects. In
fact, it appears to be impossible to voluntarily initiate
smooth pursuit tracking without a moving stimulus (Kowler
1990).
Another example of a characteristic visually guided con-
trol is reaching to grasp a visible object. Although we can
reach out to grasp imagined objects, when we do so we are
essentially pantomiming a reaching movement, rather than
engaging the visuomotor system. Visually guided reaching
exhibits certain quite specific trajectory properties not
shared by pantomimed reaching (Goodale et al. 1994). For
example, the time and magnitude of peak velocity, the max-
imum height of the hand, and the maximum grip aperture,
are all significantly different when reaching to imagined
than to perceived objects. Reaching and grasping gestures
towards imagined objects exhibit the distinctive pattern
that is observed when subjects are asked to pantomime a
reaching and grasping motion. There is considerable evi-
dence that the visuomotor system is itself encapsulated
(Milner & Goodale 1995) and, like the visual system, is able
to respond only to information arriving from the eyes,
which often includes visual information that is not available
to consciousness. As with the visual system, only certain
limited kinds of modulations of its characteristic behavior
can be imposed by cognition. When we examine signature
properties of the encapsulated visuomotor system, we find
that mental images do not engage it the way that visual in-
puts do.
6. Are images “seen” by the visual system?
One of the most actively pursued questions in contempo-
rary imagery research has been the question of whether
mental imagery uses the visual system. Intuitively the idea
that imagery involves vision is extremely appealing since the
experience of imagery is phenomenally very like the expe-
rience of seeing – indeed, there have been (disputed)
claims that when real perception is faint because of impov-
erished stimuli, vision and imagery may be indistinguish-
able (Perky 1910). But, from the perspective of the present
thesis, there is a more interesting reason for asking whether
the visual system is involved in examining images. If vision
is used to interpret mental images, it might support the idea
that images are things that can be seen, thus lending cre-
dence to the intuitive view of images as pictorial (or depic-
tive). The question of the overlap between imagery and vi-
sion has been investigated with particular zeal within the
cognitive neuroscience community. We shall examine the
neuroscience findings in section 7. For the present I want
to consider some of the psychological evidence that sug-
gests an overlap between imagery and visual perception,
and to ask whether this evidence supports the view that im-
ages are pictorial objects that are “seen” by the visual sys-
tem.
6.1. The experience of seeing and of imagining
It may well be that the most persuasive reason for believing
that mental imagery involves the visual system is the sub-
jective one: Mental imagery is accompanied by a subjective
experience that is very similar to that of seeing. As I re-
marked at the beginning of this article, this sort of phe-
nomenal experience is very difficult to ignore. Yet it is quite
possible that both vision and imagery lead to the same kind
of experience because the same symbolic, rather than pic-
torial, form of representation, underwrites them both. The
experience might correspond to a fairly high level of the
analysis of the visual information, say, at the point where 
the stimulus is recognized as something familiar (e.g., Crick
& Koch 1995, and Stoerig 1996, suggest that the locus of
our awareness occurs higher than primary visual cortex). In
that case, even though imagery and vision shared common
mechanisms and forms of representation, one could not in-
fer that the form was depictive or pictorial. At most one
might conclude, as does Barsalou (1999), that the form of
representation underlying images, while symbolic in na-
ture, is also modality-specific, inasmuch as it consists of
some subset of the neural activity that is associated with the
corresponding visual perception. This alternative is com-
patible with my proposal (in the next section) that the rep-
resentation underlying vision and visual imagery may use
the same modality-specific symbolic vocabulary.
6.2. Interference between imaging and visual perception
One of the earliest findings that persuaded people that im-
ages involve the visual system was that the task of examin-
ing images could be disrupted by a subsidiary visual or spa-
tial task. For example, Brooks (1968) showed that reporting
spatial properties from images is more susceptible to inter-
ference when the response must be given by a spatial
method (e.g., pointing) than by a verbal one (i.e., speaking).
When subjects were asked to describe the shape of the let-
ter F by providing a list of the right and left turns one would
have to take in traveling around its periphery, their perfor-
mance was worse when they had to point to the left or right
(or to left- and right-pointing arrows) than when they had
to say the words “left” and “right.” Segal and Fusella (1969;
1970) subsequently confirmed the greater interference be-
tween perception and imagery in various same-modality
tasks and also showed that both sensitivity and response
bias measures (derived from Signal Detection Theory)
were affected. Segal and Fusella concluded that “imagery
functions as an internal signal which is confused with the
external signal” (p. 458). This may be the correct conclusion
to draw; but it does not show that either of the inputs is pic-
torial. All that it implies is that the same type of represen-
tational contents are involved, or to put it another way, that
the same concepts are deployed. For the sake of argument,
think of the representations in these studies as being in a
common language of thought: What, in that case, do the
representations of visual patterns have in common with
mental images of visual patterns? One obvious commonal-
ity is that they are both about the appearance of visual pat-
terns. Like sentences about visual appearances, they all in-
volve the use of concepts such as “bright,” “red,” “right
Pylyshyn: Mental imagery: In search of a theory
170
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (2002) 25:2
. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0140525X02290044
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Chalmers Tekniska Högskola, on 16 Nov 2019 at 15:28:43, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms

angle,” “parallel to,” and so on. It is not surprising that two
responses requiring the same modality-specific conceptual
vocabulary would interfere. Thus, it may be that visual per-
cepts and visual images interact because both consist of
symbolic representations that use some of the same propri-
etary spatial or modality-specific vocabulary. That the lin-
guistic output in the Brooks study is not as disruptive as
pointing, may simply show that spatial concepts are not rel-
evant to articulating the words “left” or “right” once they
have been selected for uttering, whereas these concepts are
relevant to issuing the motor commands to move left or
right.
6.3. Visual illusions induced by superimposing 
mental images
Other studies that are cited in support of the view that im-
ages are interpreted by the visual system are ones showing
that projecting images of certain patterns onto displays cre-
ates some of the well-known illusions, such as the Müller-
Lyer illusion, the Pogendorf illusion or the Herring illusion,
or even the remarkable McCollough effect.11 For example,
Bernbaum and Chung (1981) showed subjects displays
such as those in the top part of Figure 5. Subjects were
asked to imagine lines connecting the endpoints of the vis-
ible line to either the outside or the inside pairs of dots in
this display (when the endpoints are connected to the in-
side pair of dots they produce outward-pointing arrows, and
when they are connected to the outside pair of dots they
produce inward pointing arrows, as in the original Müller-
Lyer illusion). Bernbaum and Chung (also Ohkuma 1986)
found that imagining the arrows also produced the illusion,
with the inward pointing arrows leading to the perception
of a longer line than the outward pointing arrows. For the
sake of argument, let us take these results as valid, notwith-
standing the obvious susceptibility of such findings to ex-
perimenter demand effects – see note 11.
Before one can interpret such findings one needs to un-
derstand why the illusion occurs in the visual case. Expla-
nations for the Müller-Lyer and similar illusions tend to fall
into one of two categories. They either appeal to the de-
tailed shapes of contours involved and to the assumption
that these shapes lead to erroneous interpretations of the
pattern in terms of 3D shapes, or they appeal to some gen-
eral characteristics of the 2D envelope created by the dis-
play and the consequent distribution of attention or eye
movements. The former type of explanation, which includes
the “inappropriate constancy scaling” theory attributed to
Richard Gregory (1965), has not fared well in general since
the illusion can be produced by a wide variety of types of
line-endings (see the review in Nijhawan 1991). The latter
type of explanation, which attributes the illusion to the way
attention is allocated and to mechanisms involved in pre-
paring eye-movement, has been more successful. For ex-
ample, one theory (Virsu 1971) appeals to the tendency to
move one’s eyes to the center of gravity of a figure. The
involvement of eye movements in the Müller-Lyer illusion
has also been confirmed by Bolles (1969), Coren (1986),
Festinger et al. (1968), Hoenig (1972), and Virsu (1971).
Another example of the envelope type of theory is the fram-
ing theory (Brigell et al. 1977; Davies & Spencer 1977),
which uses the ratio of overall figure length to shaft length
as predictor. Such envelope-based theories have generally
fared better than shape-based theories, not only on the
Müller-Lyer illusion, but also for most cases in which there
are context effects on judgments of linear extent. What is
important about this for our purposes is that these explana-
tions do not appeal to pattern-perception mechanisms and
therefore are compatible with attention-based explanations
of the illusions.
Further evidence that attention can play a central role in
these illusions (as well as in other visual illusions induced by
mental imagery, e.g., Wallace 1984a; 1984b) comes from
studies that actually manipulate attention focus. For exam-
ple, it has been shown (Goryo et al. 1984) that if both sets
of inducing elements (the outward and inward arrowheads)
were present (as in the bottom part of Fig. 5), observers
could selectively attend to one or the other and obtain the
illusion appropriate to the one to which they attended. This
is very similar to the effect demonstrated by Bernbaum and
Chung (1981), but without requiring that any image be su-
perimposed on the line. Coren and Porac (1983) also con-
firmed that attention alone could create, eliminate, or even
reverse the Müller-Lyer illusion. Attention-mediation was
also shown explicitly in the case of an ambiguous motion
percept (Watanabe & Shimojo 1998). This is in keeping
with the evidence we considered in section 5.3 showing that
in many cases in which mental images are interpreted as
having visual effects, the effect can be explained by appeal
to the attention-focusing role that imagery plays in connec-
tion with visual perception. Finally, the relevance of the
imagined induction of the Müller-Lyer and similar illusions
to the picture theory is further cast into doubt when one
recognizes that such illusions, like many other imagery-
based phenomena, also appear in congenitally blind people
(Patterson & Deffenbacher 1972).
6.4. Imagined versus perceived motion
Gilden et al. (1995) used visual motion adaptation to study
whether the visual system is involved in imagery. This study
is of special interest to us since motion adaptation is known
to be retinotopic, and therefore occurs in the early visual
system. When a region of the visual field receives extensive
motion stimulation, an object presented in that region is
seen to move in the opposite direction to the inducing
movement (this is called the “waterfall illusion”) and a mov-
ing object is seen as moving more slowly. Gilden et al. de-
signed their study with the intention of showing that the
Pylyshyn: Mental imagery: In search of a theory
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (2002) 25:2
171
Figure 5.
Figures used to induce the Müller-Lyer illusion from
images. Imagine the end points being connected to the inner or
the outer pairs of dots in the top figure (Bernbaum & Chung
1981), or selectively look at the inward or outward arrows in the
bottom figure (based on Goryo et al. 1984).
. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0140525X02290044
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Chalmers Tekniska Högskola, on 16 Nov 2019 at 15:28:43, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms

motion of an imagined object is affected by the aftereffect
of a moving field. They had subjects gaze for 150 seconds
at a square window on a screen containing a uniformly mov-
ing random texture. Then they showed subjects a point
moving towards that window and disappearing behind what
appeared to be an opaque surface, and they asked subjects
to imagine the point continuing to move across the previ-
ously stimulated region and to report when the point would
emerge at the other side of the surface. Gilden et al. did find
an effect of motion adaptation on imagined motion, but it
was not exactly the effect they had expected. They found
that when the point was imagined as moving in the same di-
rection as that of the inducing motion field (i.e., against the
motion aftereffect), it appeared to slow down (it took longer
to reach the other side of the region). However, when the
point was imagined as moving in the opposite direction to
the inducing motion field (i.e., in the same direction as the
motion aftereffect), the point appeared to speed up (it
reached the other side in a shorter time).
The latter effect is not what happens with real moving
points. In visual motion adaptation, motion appears to slow
down no matter which direction the inducing motion field
moves, presumably because all motion sensitive receptors
have been fatigued. But, as Gilden et al. recognized, the ef-
fect they observed is exactly what one would expect if,
rather than imagining the point moving continuously across
the screen, subjects imagined the point as being located at
a series of static locations along the imagined path. This
suggests a quite different mechanism underlying imagined
motion when the latter is generated as the extrapolation of
perceived motion. We know that people are very good at
computing time-to-contact of a uniformly moving object at
a specified location (e.g., DeLucia & Liddell 1998). What
may be going on in imagined motion is that people may sim-
ply pick out one or more marked places (e.g., elements of
texture) along the path, using the visual indexing mecha-
nism discussed earlier, and then compute the time-to-con-
tact for each of these places.
We explicitly tested this idea (Pylyshyn & Cohen 1999)
by asking subjects to extrapolate the motion of a small
square, which disappeared by occlusion behind an appar-
ent opaque surface. They were asked to imagine the smooth
motion of the square in a dark room. At some unpredictable
time in the course of this motion the square would reap-
pear, as though coming out through a crack in the opaque
surface, and then recede back through another crack, and
subjects had to indicate whether this reappearance oc-
curred earlier or later than when their imagined square
reached that crack. This task was carried out in several dif-
ferent conditions. In one condition, the location of the
“cracks” where the square would appear and disappear was
unknown (i.e., the cracks were invisible). In another condi-
tion, the location at which the square was to appear was
known in advance: it was indicated by a small rectangular
figure that served as a “window” through which, at the ap-
propriate time, subjects would briefly view the square that
was moving behind the surface (the way the squares ap-
peared and disappeared in the window condition was iden-
tical to that in the no-window condition except that the out-
line of the window was not visible in the latter case). And
finally, in one set of conditions the imagined square moved
through total darkness, whereas in the other set of condi-
tions the path was marked by a sparse set of dots that could
be used as reference points to compute time-to-contact. As
expected, the ability to estimate where the imagined square
was at various times (measured in terms of decision time)
was significantly improved when the location was specified
in advance, and also when there were visible markers along
the path of imagined motion.
Both of these findings confirm the suggestion that what
subjects are doing when they report “imagining the smooth
motion of a square,” is selecting places at which to compute
time-to-contact and then merely thinking that the imagi-
nary square is at those places at the estimated times. Ac-
cording to this view, subjects are thinking the thought “now
it is here” repeatedly for different visible objects (picked out
by the visual indexing mechanism mentioned earlier), and
synchronized to the independently computed arrival times.
This way of describing what is happening requires neither
the assumption that the visual system is involved (other
than the attentional indexing mechanism), nor the assump-
tion that an imagined square is actually moving through
some mental space and occupying each successive position
along a real spatial path. Indeed, there is no need to posit
any sort of space except the visible one that serves as input
to the time-to-contact computation.
6.5. Extracting novel information from images: Visual
(re)perception or inference?
One of the alleged purposes of mental images is that they
can be examined in order to visually discover new proper-
ties or new interpretations or reconstruals. It would there-
fore seem important to ask whether there is any evidence
for such visual reconstruals. This question turns out to be
more difficult to answer than one might have expected, for
it is clear that by examining images one can draw some con-
clusions that were not explicitly present in, say, the verbal
description under which it was imagined. So if I ask you to
imagine a square and then to imagine drawing in both di-
agonals, it does not seem surprising if you can tell that the
diagonals cross or that they form an “X” shape. Since this
inference is very simple it does not seem prima facie to
qualify as an example showing that images are interpreted
visually. On the other hand, suppose I ask you to imagine
two parallelograms, one directly above the other on a page,
and then to connect each vertex of the top one to the cor-
responding vertex of the bottom one. What do you see? As
you keep watching, what happens in your image? When
presented visually, this figure leads to certain phenomena
that do not appear in mental imagery. The signature prop-
erties of spontaneous perception of certain line drawings as
depicting three-dimensional objects and spontaneous re-
versals of ambiguous figures do not appear in this mental
image (which happens to be a Necker Cube).
But what counts, in general, as a visual interpretation as
opposed to an inference? I doubt that this question can be
answered without a sharper sense of what is meant by the
term “visual.” Since the everyday (pretheoretical) sense of
the notion of “vision” clearly involves most, if not all, of cog-
nition, the question of the involvement of vision in recon-
struals cannot be pursued without a more restricted sense
of what counts as a visual phenomenon. Clearly, deciding
whether two crossed lines form an “X” is not one of these
phenomena, nor is judging that when a D is rotated coun-
terclockwise by 90 degrees and placed on top of a J the re-
sult looks like an umbrella. You don’t need to use the early
visual system in deciding that. All you need is an elemen-
Pylyshyn: Mental imagery: In search of a theory
172
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (2002) 25:2
. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0140525X02290044
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Chalmers Tekniska Högskola, on 16 Nov 2019 at 15:28:43, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms

tary inference based on what makes something look like an
umbrella (e.g., it has an upwardly convex curved top at-
tached below to a central vertical stroke – with or without
a curved handle at the bottom). Thus, these the sorts of ex-
amples (which were used in Finke et al. 1989), cannot de-
cide the question of whether images are visually (re)inter-
preted.
Hochberg (1968) suggested a few signature properties of
vision, including spontaneous interpretation of certain line
drawings as three-dimensional objects, spontaneous rever-
sal of ambiguous shapes, and spontaneous interpretation of
certain sequences as apparent motion. Although these cri-
teria cannot always be used to decide whether a particular
interpretation is visual, they do indicate the sort of con-
structs that appear to be constitutive of early vision. For the
time being, all we can do is ask whether the candidate re-
construal meets this sort of intuitive condition. A more
thorough analysis would attempt to look at converging evi-
dence concerning the level of the visual system implicated.
The clearest evidence I am aware of that bears on the
question of whether images are subject to visual reconstru-
als, is provided by studies carried out by Peter Slezak (1991;
1992; 1995). Slezak asked subjects to memorize pictures
such as those in Figure 6. Then he asked them to mentally
rotate the images clockwise by 90 degrees and to report
what they looked like. None of his subjects was able to re-
port the appearance (of the mentally rotated shapes) that
they could easily report by rotating the actual pictures. The
problem was not with their recall or even their ability to ro-
tate the simple images; it was with their ability to recognize
the rotated image in their mind’s eye. We know this because
subjects were able to draw the figures from memory, and
when they rotated those, they did see the other construals.
What is special about these examples is that the resultant
appearance is so obvious – it comes as an “aha!” experience
when carried out by real rotation. Unlike the figures used
by Finke et al. (1989), these shapes were not familiar and
their appearance after the transformation (by rotation)
could not be easily inferred from their representation.
A related question that can be asked is whether images
can be ambiguous, since this also concerns the question of
whether images can be visually reinterpreted. This case,
however, presents some additional methodological prob-
lems. Not all ambiguities contained in pictures are visual
ambiguities, just as not all reinterpretations are visual re-
construals. For example, the sorts of visual puns embodied
in some cartoons or, most characteristically, in so-called
“droodles” (see http://www.droodles.com for examples),
rely on ambiguities; but clearly not on ones that are based
in part on different visual organizations being produced by
early visual processes. By contrast, the reversal of figures
such as the classical Necker Cube is at least in part the re-
sult of a reorganization that takes place in early vision. Do
such reorganizations occur with visual images? In order to
answer that question we would have to control for certain
obvious alternative explanations of any reports of apparent
reinterpretations. For example, if a mental image appeared
to reverse, it might be because the observer knew of the two
possible interpretations and simply replaced one of its in-
terpretations with the other. This is the view that many writ-
ers have taken in the past (Casey 1976; Fodor 1981).
Chambers and Reisberg (1985) were the first to put the
question of possible ambiguous mental images to an em-
pirical test. They reported that no reversals or reinterpre-
tations of any kind took place with mental images. Since
that study was reported there have been a series of studies
and arguments concerning whether images could be visu-
ally (re)interpreted. Reisberg and Chambers (1991) and
Reisberg and Morris (1985) used a variety of standard re-
versal figures and confirmed the Chambers and Reisberg
finding that mental images of these figures could not re-
verse. Finke et al. (1989) took issue with these findings, cit-
ing their own experiments involving operations over images
(mentioned above); but, as I suggested, it is dubious that
the reinterpretation of their simple familiar figures should
be counted as a visual reinterpretation. Even if these could
be considered so, the more serious problem is to explain
why clear cases of visual interpretations, such as those stud-
ied by Chambers and Reisberg, do not occur with images.
A more direct and extensive exploration of whether men-
tal images can be ambiguous was undertaken by Peterson
(1993; Peterson et al. 1992), who argued that certain kinds
of reconstruals of mental images do take place. Peterson
first distinguished different types of image reinterpreta-
tions. In particular, she distinguished what she calls refer-
ence-frame realignments (in which one or more global di-
rections are reassigned in the image, as in the Necker cube
or rabbit-duck ambiguous figures), from what she calls re-
construals (in which reinterpreting the figure involves as-
signing new meaning to its parts, as in the wife/mother-in-
law or snail/elephant reversing figures). We will refer to the
latter as part-based reconstruals, to differentiate them from
other kinds of reconstruals (since their defining character-
istic is that their parts take on a different meaning). A third
type, figure-ground reversal (as in the Rubin vases), was ac-
knowledged to occur rarely if ever with mental images (a
finding that was also confirmed by Slezak 1995, using quite
different displays). Among her findings, Peterson showed
that reference-frame realignments do not occur in mental
images unless they are cued by either explicit hints, or im-
plicit demonstration figures, whereas some part-based re-
construals occurred with 30% to 65% of the subjects.
Recall that our primary concern is not whether any rein-
terpretations occur with mental images. The possibility of
some reinterpretation depends upon what information or
content-cues are contained in the image, which is orthogo-
nal to the question of the mechanisms used in processing it.
What we are concerned with is whether the format of im-
ages is such that their interpretation and/or reinterpreta-
tion involves the specifically visual (i.e., the early vision) sys-
tem, as opposed to the general inference system. The
crucial question, therefore, is how Peterson’s findings on
reinterpreting mental images compare with the reinterpre-
tations observed with ambiguous visual stimuli. The answer
Pylyshyn: Mental imagery: In search of a theory
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (2002) 25:2
173
Figure 6.
Orientation-dependent figures used by Slezak (1991,
1995). To try these out, memorize the shape of one or more of the
figures, then close your eyes and imagine them rotated clockwise
by 90 degrees (or even do it while viewing the figures). What do
you see? Now try it by actually rotating the page.
. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0140525X02290044
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Chalmers Tekniska Högskola, on 16 Nov 2019 at 15:28:43, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms

appears to be that even when reinterpretations do occur
with mental images, they are qualitatively different from
those that occur with visual stimuli. For example, Peterson
(1993) showed that, whereas reference-frame reversals are
dominant in vision, they are rare in mental imagery; while
the converse is true for part-based reconstruals. Also, the
particular reconstruals observed with mental images tend
to be different from those observed with the corresponding
visual stimuli. Visual reconstruals tend to fall into major bi-
nary categories – in the case of the figures used by Peter-
son et al. these are the duck-rabbit, or the snail-elephant
categories. On the other hand, in the imagery case subjects
provided a large number of other interpretations (which, at
least to this observer, did not seem to be clear cases of dis-
tinctly different appearances – certainly not as clear as the
cases of the Necker Cube reversal or even the reconstruals
observable when the shapes in Fig. 6 are rotated). The
number of subjects showing part-based reconstruals with
mental images dropped by half when only the particular in-
terpretations observed in the visual case were counted.
Reinterpretation of mental images is also highly sensitive to
hints and strategies, whereas there is reason to doubt that
the early stages of vision are sensitive to such cognitive in-
fluences (Pylyshyn 1999).
The reason for these differences between imagery and
vision is not clear, but they add credence to the suggestion
that what is going on in the mental image reconstruals is not
a perceptual (re)interpretation of a generated picture, but
something else. Perhaps what is going on is inference and
memory retrieval based on shape properties – the sort of
process that goes on in the decision stage of vision, after
early vision has generated shape-descriptions. This is the
stage at which beliefs about the perceived world are estab-
lished so we expect it to depend on inferences from prior
knowledge and expectations, like all other cases of belief
fixation. It seems quite likely that parts of the highly am-
biguous (though not clearly bistable) figures used by Pe-
terson et al. might serve as cues for inferring or guessing at
the identity of the whole figure (for illustrations of these fig-
ures, see Peterson 1993). Alternatively, as suggested earlier,
several possible forms might be computed by early vision
(while the figures were viewed) and stored, and then, dur-
ing the image-recall phase, a selection might be made from
among them based on a search for meaningful familiar
shapes in long-term memory. While in some sense all of
these are reinterpretations of the mental images, they do
not all qualify as the sort of visual “reconstruals” of images
that show that mental images are pictorial entities whose
distinct perceptual organization (and reorganization) is de-
termined by the early vision system. Indeed, they seem
more like the kind of interpretations one gets from
Rorschach inkblots.
7. Can evidence from neuroscience settle 
the question?
7.1. Searching for the “mind’s eye” and the “image” 
in the brain
The neuroscience research concerned with mental imagery
has been devoted primarily to attempting to show that the
early visual system is involved in this process. The involve-
ment of visual mechanisms in mental imagery is of interest
to the picture theorists primarily because of the possibility
that the particular role played by the visual system in pro-
cessing mental images will vindicate a version of the picture
theory, by showing that imagery does indeed make use of a
special sort of spatial display (this is explicitly the claim in
Kosslyn 1994). The question that naturally arises is whether
we can make a case for this view by obtaining evidence 
concerning which areas of the brain are involved in mental
imagery and in visual perception. Before examining the ev-
idence, it is worth reiterating that the question of the in-
volvement of the visual system and the question of the form
of mental images are largely independent questions. It is
logically possible for the visual system to be involved in both
vision and mental imagery and yet in neither case generate
picture-like depictive representations. Similarly, it is possi-
ble for representations to be topographically organized in
some way and yet have nothing to do with visual perception,
nor with any depictive character of the representation.
In a certain sense the physical instantiation of any ade-
quate cognitive representation must be topographically or-
ganized. Fodor and I (Fodor & Pylyshyn 1988) have argued
that any form of representation that is adequate as a basis
for cognition must be compositional, in the sense that the
content of a complex representation must derive from the
content of its parts and the rules by which the complex is
put together (i.e., the way the meaning of sentences is com-
positional and depends on the meaning of its parts, together
with how they are syntactically put together). The physical
instantiation of any representation that meets the require-
ment of compositionality will itself be compositional (see
Pylyshyn 1984, pp. 54–69; 1991b). In the case of symbolic
representations, parts of expressions are mapped recur-
sively onto parts of physical states and syntactic relations are
mapped onto physical relations. As a result, there is a very
real sense in which the criteria in the Kosslyn quotation at
the beginning of section 5.1 are met by any adequately ex-
pressive physical symbol system, not just a depictive one.
Note that in a digital computer, data-structure representa-
tions are compositional and topographically distributed,
and yet are generally not thought to be depictive, whereas
when they are supposed to be depictive, as when they en-
code images (say as JPEG or TIFF files), their topographi-
cal distribution generally does not mirror the physical lay-
out of the picture. Consequently, the question of the spatial
distribution of images, the question of whether they are de-
pictive, and the question of whether they are connected
with vision are logically independent questions.
Notwithstanding the logical independence of the ques-
tion of the format of images and the question of the in-
volvement of the visual system, the following line of rea-
soning continues to hold sway in the neuroscience literature
(Kosslyn et al. 1995; 1999a). Primary visual cortex (Area 17)
appears to be organized retinotopically (at least in the mon-
key brain). So if Area 17 is activated when subjects gener-
ate mental images, then it must be that higher-level corti-
cal centers are generating retinotopically-organized activity
in the visual system. In other words, during mental imagery
a spatial pattern of activity is generated in the same parts of
the visual system where such activity occurs in vision. From
which it follows (so the argument goes) that a spatial or “de-
pictive” form of activity is laid out in the cortex, much as it
is on the retina, and this activity is then interpreted (or “per-
ceived”) by the visual system. This line of reasoning is very
much in keeping with the views held by proponents of the
subjectively satisfying picture theory. It is no surprise then
Pylyshyn: Mental imagery: In search of a theory
174
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (2002) 25:2
. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0140525X02290044
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Chalmers Tekniska Högskola, on 16 Nov 2019 at 15:28:43, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms

that those who hold the picture view welcome any evidence
of the involvement of early vision in mental imagery.
With this as background, we can ask whether there is ev-
idence for the involvement of early, topographically orga-
nized areas of vision cortex in mental imagery and, if so,
whether the involvement is of the right kind. Some evi-
dence has been reported showing that mental imagery in-
volves activity in areas of striate cortex associated with vi-
sion. Most of this evidence comes from studies using neural
imaging to monitor regional cerebral blood flow.12 While
some neural imaging studies report activity in topographi-
cally organized cortical areas (Kosslyn et al. 1995; 1999a),
most have reported that only later visual areas, the so-called
visual association areas, are active in mental imagery (Char-
lot et al. 1992; Cocude et al. 1999; D’Esposito et al. 1997;
Fletcher et al. 1996; Goldenberg et al. 1995; Howard et al.
1998; Mellet et al. 1996; 1998; Roland & Gulyas 1994b;
1995; Silbersweig & Stern 1998); but see the review in
Farah (1995b) and the some of the published debate on this
topic (Farah 1994; Roland & Gulyas 1994a, 1994b). Other
evidence comes from clinical cases of brain damage and is
even less univocal in supporting the involvement in mental
imagery of the earliest, topographically organized areas of
visual cortex (Roland & Gulyas 1994b). There is some rea-
son to think that the activity associated with mental imagery
occurs at many loci, including higher-levels of the visual
stream (Mellet et al. 1998).
Despite the weight placed on neural imaging studies by
proponents of the picture theory, the involvement of visual
areas of cortex – even of topographically organized areas of
early vision – in mental imagery would not itself support a
cortical display view of imagery. In order to support such a
view, it is important not only that such topographically or-
ganized areas be involved in imagery, but also that their in-
volvement be of the right sort – that the way their topo-
graphical organization is involved reflects the spatial
properties of the image, particularly as the latter is experi-
enced and as it is assumed to function in accounting for the
many imagery findings in the literature. Very few neuro-
science studies meet this criterion, even when they show
that early visual areas are activated during mental imagery.
That is because such studies generally do not provide any
evidence concerning how spatial information is mapped in
the visual cortex. One of the few examples of a study that
does address this question was reported in Kosslyn et al.
(1995). Unlike most neural imaging studies, this one relates
a specific spatial property of a phenomenal mental image
(its size) to a pattern of neural activity. Thus it behooves us
to look at the findings in detail.
The Kosslyn et al. (1995) study showed that “smaller”
mental images (mental images that the observer subjec-
tively experiences as occupying a smaller portion of the
available “mental display”) are associated with more activ-
ity in the posterior part of the medial occipital region, while
“larger” images are associated with more activity in the an-
terior parts of the region. Since this pattern is similar to the
pattern of activation produced by small and large retinal im-
ages, respectively, this finding was taken to support the
claim that not only does activation of visual cortical areas
occur during mental imagery, but also that the form of the
activation is the same as that which derives from vision.
This, in turn, is interpreted as showing that imagery creates
a cortical display which maps represented space onto corti-
cal space. Because of this, Kosslyn et al. (1995, p. 496) feel
entitled to conclude that the findings “indicate that visual
mental imagery involves ‘depictive’ representations, not
solely language-like descriptions.”
But notice that even if the cortical activity monitored by
PET scans corresponded to a mental image, the evidence
only showed that a larger mental image involves activity that
is located where parts of larger retinal images tend to pro-
ject – that is, at best they show that larger mental images
involve activity in different locations in the cortex than the
activity associated with smaller mental images. We have
good reason to believe that the reason larger retinal images
activate the regions they do (in the case of vision) is because
of the way that the visual pathway projects from the pe-
riphery of the retina to the occipital cortex (Fox et al. 1986).
This pattern of activation does not map the size of the im-
age onto a metrical spatial property of its cortical represen-
tation. In particular, it is important that the data do not show
that image size is mapped onto the size of the active corti-
cal region, as would be required by the cortical display view,
and as would be required if images had the property that
they “preserve metrical information,” as claimed by Koss-
lyn and others. It is also not the pattern that is required in
order to account for the imagery data reviewed earlier. For
example, the explanation of why it takes less time to notice
features in a large image is supposed to be that it is easier
to discern details in a large cortical display, not that the im-
age is located in the more anterior part of the medial oc-
cipital cortex. The property of being located in one part of
the visual cortex rather than another simply does not bear
on any of the behavioral evidence regarding the spatial na-
ture of mental images discussed earlier. Consequently, the
finding cannot be interpreted as supporting the cortical dis-
play view of mental imagery, nor does it in any way help to
make the case for a literal-space view or for the picture the-
ory.
Those of us who eschew dualism naturally assume that
something different happens in the brain when a different
phenomenal experience occurs. Consequently, something
different must occur in the brain when a larger image is ex-
perienced (this is called the supervenience assumption and
few scientists would dispute it). The point has never been
to question materialism, but only to question the claim that
the content of an image maps onto the brain in a way that
helps explain the imagery results (e.g., mental scanning
times, image-size effects, etc.) and perhaps even the sub-
jective content of mental images. Discovering that a larger
phenomenal image mapped onto a larger region of brain ac-
tivity might have provided some support for this view, since
it might at least have suggested a possible account for such
findings as that it takes longer to scan larger image distances
and that it takes longer to see details in smaller images. But
finding that a larger mental image merely activated a differ-
ent area of the brain is no help in this regard. Incidentally,
while the data tend to confirm that the pattern of cortical
activity changes in similar ways for similar differences in
perceived and imagined patterns, this does not support the
existence of a cortical display in either imagery or vision.
And that is as we would expect, given that there is no evi-
dence that an extended display is involved in visual pro-
cessing beyond the retina and its primary projection (but
see Note 14). The hope of enlisting neuroscience to provide
support for a picture theory of mental imagery by showing
an overlap between vision and imagery rests, in the first in-
stance, on the acceptance of a false theory of vision.
Pylyshyn: Mental imagery: In search of a theory
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (2002) 25:2
175
. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0140525X02290044
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Chalmers Tekniska Högskola, on 16 Nov 2019 at 15:28:43, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms

A somewhat different kind of evidence for the neural ba-
sis of image size was reported by Farah et al. (1992), based
on a clinical case. Farah et al. reported that a patient who
developed tunnel vision after unilateral occipital lobectomy
also developed tunnel imagery. Once again this may well
show that the two cases of tunnel vision have a common un-
derlying neural basis, and that this basis may be connected
with the visual system. But it does not show that this basis
has anything to do with a topographical mapping of the spa-
tial property of images onto spatial properties of a neural
display. I might also point out that other explanations for the
Farah et al. finding are possible which do not assume that
the surgery resulted in damage to the imagery system. If, as
suggested earlier, many of the properties of mental images
actually arise from the implicit task requirement of simu-
lating what things would look like in the corresponding per-
ceptual situation, then a plausible explanation for the Farah
et al. finding is that the patient was simply demonstrating a
tacit knowledge of what the post-surgery world looked like
to her. In the Farah et al. (1992) study, the patient had
nearly a year of post-surgery recovery time before the im-
agery testing took place. During this time she would cer-
tainly have become familiar with what things looked like to
her, and would therefore have been in a position to simu-
late her visual experience by demonstrating the relevant
phenomena when asked to image certain things (e.g., to an-
swer appropriately when asked at what distance an image
of a horse would overflow her image). This would not be a
case of the patient being disingenuous or being influenced
by what the experimenters expected to find, which Farah et
al. were at pains to deny, but of doing her best to carry out
the task required of her, namely, to “imagine how it would
look.”13
7.2. What would it mean if all the neuroscience claims
turned out to be true?
Results such as those of Kosslyn et al. and Farah et al. have
been widely interpreted as showing that retinotopic pic-
ture-like displays are generated on the surface of the visual
cortex during imagery, and that it is by means of this spatial
display that images are processed, patterns perceived from
mental images and the results of mental imagery experi-
ments produced. In other words, these results have been
taken to support the view that mental images are literally
two-dimensional displays projected onto primary visual
cortex. I have already suggested some reasons why the neu-
roscience evidence does not warrant such a strong conclu-
sion (and that a weaker “functional space” assumption is in-
capable of explaining the results of mental imagery studies
without extrinsic constraints that are compatible with, and
could be applied to, any form of representation). In addi-
tion, it should be remembered that standing against this in-
terpretation of the neuroscience findings, is a large body of
behavioral evidence that cannot be ignored. If we are to
take seriously the conclusions suggested by the researchers
who use neuroscience evidence to argue for the picture-
theory (or the cortical-display theory), we need to under-
stand the role that could be played by a literal picture be-
ing projected onto the visual cortex.
Here is a summary of some reasons to doubt the as-
sumption that a picture is projected onto the visual cortex
when we entertain mental images.
(1) There is a great deal of evidence that the capacity for
visual imagery is independent of the capacity for visual per-
ception. It is hard to reconcile the view that it is the topo-
graphical form of activation in early visual areas that is re-
sponsible for the visual image results discussed earlier,
given the evidence for the dissociation between imagery
and visual perception. For example, there is convergent ev-
idence for the dissociation between the capacity for visual
imagery and such visual deficits as cortical blindness (Chat-
terjee & Southwood 1995; Dalman et al. 1997; Goldenberg
et al. 1995; Shuren et al. 1996), dyschromatopsia (Bar-
tolomeo et al. 1997; De Vreese 1991; Howard et al. 1998),
visual agnosia (Behrmann et al. 1992.; 1994; Jankowiak et
al. 1992; Servos & Goodale 1995), and visual neglect
(Beschin et al. 1997). The independence of imagery and vi-
sion is also supported by a wide range of both brain-dam-
age and neuroimaging data, and the dissociation has been
shown in both directions. The case for independence is
made all the stronger by the evidence that blind people
show virtually all the skills and psychophysical phenomena
associated with mental imagery (including the reaction-
time data discussed in sect. 3) (Barolo et al. 1990; Carpen-
ter & Eisenberg 1978; Cornoldi et al. 1979; 1993; Craig
1973; Dauterman 1973; Dodds 1983; Easton & Bentzen
1987; Hampson & Duffy 1984; Hans 1974; Heller &
Kennedy 1990; Johnson 1980; Jonides et al. 1975; Kerr
1983; Marmor & Zaback 1976; Zimler & Keenan 1983).
Blind people may even report a comparable phenomenol-
ogy concerning object shape as that of sighted people.
While there have been attempts to explain these dissoci-
ations by attributing some of the lack of overlap to an “im-
age generation” phase that is presumably involved only in
imagery (see the recent review in Behrmann 2000), this im-
age-generation proposal does not account for much of the
evidence for the independence of imagery and vision; in
particular, it cannot explain how one can have spared im-
agery in the presence of such visual impairments as total
cortical blindness. It has also been suggested that what
characterizes patients who show a deficit on certain im-
agery-generation tasks (e.g., imagining the color of an ob-
ject) is that they lack the relevant knowledge of the ap-
pearance of objects (Goldenberg 1992; Goldenberg &
Artner 1991). Consequently, insofar as blind people know
(in a factual way) what objects are like (including aspects of
their “appearance” – such as their size, shape, and orienta-
tion), it is not surprising that they should exhibit some of the
same psychophysical behaviors in relation to these proper-
ties.
Of course, it is also possible that many cortically blind
people have deficits in only some parts of their visual sys-
tem, and in particular, that they have damage to the more
peripheral parts – those that are closer to sensory neurons.
Thus, it might be that they still have the use of other parts
of their visual system where the input is from a more cen-
tral cortical locus. While this is certainly a possibility, it is
not compatible with the view that in both vision and im-
agery, images are projected onto the primary visual cortex,
since cortical blindness invariably involves damage to the
visual cortex. A more plausible alternative may be that im-
agery studies do not tap a specifically visual capacity, but a
more general spatial capacity.
There is good reason to believe that blind subjects have
normal spatial abilities – and, indeed, blind children show
the same spontaneous acquisition and use of a spatial vo-
cabulary as do sighted children (Landau & Gleitman 1985).
Pylyshyn: Mental imagery: In search of a theory
176
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (2002) 25:2
. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0140525X02290044
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Chalmers Tekniska Högskola, on 16 Nov 2019 at 15:28:43, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms

Thus, mental imagery might involve a spatial mechanism
rather than a visual one. This possibility, however, provides
no comfort to the picture-theorists and it also leaves open
the question of why these mechanisms connect with the
motor system in a different manner than when they are vi-
sually stimulated (see sect. 5.4).
(2) The conclusion that many people have drawn from
the neural imaging evidence cited earlier, as well as from
the retinotopic nature of the areas that are activated, is that
images are two-dimensional retinotopic displays. But that
can’t be literally the case. If mental images are depictive,
they would have to be three-dimensional, inasmuch as the
phenomenology is that of seeing a three-dimensional scene.
Moreover, similar mental scanning results are obtained in
depth as in 2D (Pinker 1980), and the phenomenon of
“mental rotation” is indifferent as to whether rotation oc-
curs in the plane of the display or in depth (Shepard & Metz-
ler 1971). Neither can the retinotopic “display” in the 
visual cortex literally be three-dimensional. The spatial
properties of the perceived world are not reflected in a vol-
umetric topographical organization in the brain: as one pen-
etrates deeper into the columnar structure of the cortical
surface one does not find a representation of the third 
dimension of the scene. Furthermore, images represent
other properties besides the spatial ones. For example, they
represent color and luminance and motion. Are these also
to be found displayed on the surface of the visual cortex? If
not, how do we reconcile the apparently direct spatial map-
ping of 2D spatial properties with a completely different
form of mapping for depth and for other contents of images
of which we are equally vividly aware?
(3) The cortical display view of mental imagery assumes
not only that mental images consist in the activation of a
pattern that is the same as the pattern activated by the cor-
responding visual percept, but also that such a pattern mim-
ics the retinotopic projection of a corresponding visual
scene. In some versions, it even assumes that the pattern
displayed in the cortex is a spatial extension of such a reti-
nal projection, which incorporates a larger region of the
scene than that covered by the retina, thereby explaining
the subjective impression we have of a stable panoramic
view of the world as we move our eyes around. Among the
arguments put forward for the existence of an inner display
is that it is needed to explain stability of the percept over
eye movements and the invariance of recognition with
translations of the retinal image (Kosslyn 1994, Ch. 4). It
has also been suggested that the display is needed to ac-
count for the completion of the apparently detailed visual
percept in the face of highly incomplete and partial sensory
data (Kosslyn & Sussman 1995). The assumption behind
these arguments is that incomplete sensory data are aug-
mented in a visual display before being given over to the vi-
sual system responsible for recognition (and which pre-
sumably leads to our conscious awareness). While it may be
that neural processes are responsible for certain cases of
“filling in” phenomena, it is also clear that they do not do so
by completing a partially filled display. (For a sophisticated
discussion of the issue of filling-in, which makes it clear that
cases of neural completion do not imply “analytical isomor-
phism,” see Pessoa et al. 1998.)
Notwithstanding the fact that the early part of the visual
cortex appears to be organized retinotopically, it is highly
unlikely that this retinotopic organization serves to shield
the inner eye from the incompleteness and instability of the
incoming sensory data, and thereby gives rise to such prop-
erties as the invariance of recognition over different retinal
locations. There is every reason to believe that vision does
not achieve stability and completeness, despite rapidly
changing and highly partial information from the sensors,
by accumulating the information in a spatially extended in-
ternal display. The fact that we sometimes feel we are ex-
amining an internal display in vision is simply a mistaken in-
ference. Even if we had such a display we would not see it;
we see the world and it is the world we see that appears to
us in a certain way. The evidence clearly shows that the 
assumption that visual stability and saccadic integration is
mediated by an inner-display is untenable (Blackmore et 
al. 1995; Irwin 1991; McConkie & Currie 1996; O’Regan
1992), since information from successive fixations cannot
be superimposed in a central image as required by this view.
Recent work on change blindness also shows that the visual
system encodes surprisingly little information about a scene
between fixations, unless attention has been drawn to it
(Rensink 2000a; Rensink et al. 1997; Simons 1996), so there
is no detailed pictorial display of any kind in vision, let alone
a panoramic one.
(4) Although we can reach for imagined objects, there are
significant differences between the way our motor system
interacts with vision compared with the way it interacts with
mental imagery (Goodale et al. 1994), as we saw in section
5.4. Such differences provide strong reasons to doubt that
imagery provides input into the dorsal stream of the early
vision system where the visuomotor control process begins,
as it would if it were a retinotopic cortical projection.
(5) Accessing information from a mental image is very
different from accessing information from a scene. To take
just one simple example, we can move our gaze as well as
make covert attention movements relatively freely about a
scene, but not on a mental image. Try writing down a 3 x 3
matrix of random letters and read them in various orders.
Now imagine the matrix and try doing the same with it. Or,
for that matter, try spelling a familiar word backwards by
imagining it written. Unlike the 2D matrix, some orders
(e.g., the diagonal from the bottom left to the top right cell)
are extremely difficult to scan on the image. If one scans
one’s image the way it is alleged one does in the mental
scanning experiments, there is no reason why one should
not be able to scan the matrix freely. Of course, one can al-
ways account for these phenomena by positing various
properties specific to images generated by cognitive
processes, as opposed to ones we retain from short-term vi-
sual memory. For example, one might assume that there is
a limit on the number of elements that can be generated at
one time, or one might assume that elements decay. But
such assumptions are completely ad hoc. Visual information
does not appear to fade as fast and in the same way from
images held in short-term visual memory (Ishai & Sagi
1995), nor does it appear to fade in the case of images used
to investigate mental scanning phenomena (which are
much more complex, as shown in Fig. 1). Moreover, the hy-
pothesized fading rates of different parts of an image have
to be tuned post hoc to account for the fact that it is the con-
ceptual as opposed to the graphical complexity of the im-
age which determines how the image can be read and ma-
nipulated (i.e., to account for the fact that what one sees the
image as, how one interprets it, rather than its geometry, is
what determines its apparent fading). For example, it is the
conceptual complexity of images that matters in determin-
Pylyshyn: Mental imagery: In search of a theory
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (2002) 25:2
177
. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0140525X02290044
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Chalmers Tekniska Högskola, on 16 Nov 2019 at 15:28:43, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms

ing the difficulty of an image superposition task (Palmer
1977), or in determining how quickly figures are “mentally
rotated” (Pylyshyn 1979).
(6) The central role of conceptual, as opposed to graph-
ical properties of an image, alluded to above, is an ex-
tremely general and important property of images. It re-
lates to the question of how images are distorted or
transformed over time, to how mental images can or can-
not be (re)interpreted, and to how they can fail to be de-
terminate in ways that no picture can fail to be determinate
(Pylyshyn 1973; 1978; 1984). For example, no picture can
fail to have a size or shape, or can fail to indicate which of
two adjacent items is to the left and which to the right, or
can fail to have exactly n objects (for some n), whereas men-
tal images can be indeterminate in many ways. Not sur-
prisingly, there are many ways of patching up a picture the-
ory to accommodate such findings. For example, one can
add assumptions about how images are tagged as having
certain properties (perhaps including the property of not
being based on real perception), and how they have to 
be incrementally refreshed from non-image information
stored in memory, and so on, thus providing a way to bring
in conceptual complexity and indeterminacy through the
image generation function. With each of these accommo-
dations, however, one gives the actual image less and less of
an explanatory role until eventually one reaches the point
where the display becomes a mere shadow of the mecha-
nism that does its work elsewhere, as when the behavior of
an animated computer display is determined by an extrin-
sic encoding of the principles that govern the animation,
rather than by intrinsic properties of the display itself.
(7) The visual appearance of information projected onto
a retinotopic display is very different from the appearance
of information in a mental image. Images on the retina, and
presumably on the retinotopically-mapped visual cortex,
are subject to Emmert’s law: Retinotopic images superim-
posed onto a visual scene change their apparent size de-
pending on the distance of the background against which
they are viewed. Mental images imagined over a perceived
scene do not change their size as the background recedes,
providing strong evidence that they are not actually pro-
jected onto the retinotopic layers of the cortex.
(8) Images do not have the signature properties of early
vision (such as the properties discussed in Hochberg 1968).
If we create mental images from descriptions we do not find
such phenomena as spontaneous interpretation of certain
2D shapes as representing 3D objects, spontaneous rever-
sals of bistable figures, amodal completion or subjective
contours (Slezak 1995), visual illusions, as well as the in-
cremental construction of visual interpretations and rein-
terpretations over time, as different aspects are noticed.
There is even evidence (discussed in sect. 6.4) that such
early vision phenomena as motion aftereffects do not affect
imagined motion the same way that they affect real per-
ceived motion.
7.3. Is the “mind’s eye” just like a real eye?
Here is another way to think about the question of whether
mental images could plausibly consist of patterns projected
onto the cortex. Suppose it turns out that when we enter-
tain a mental image there is an actual copy of that very im-
age (say, in the form of neural activity) on the surface of the
primary visual cortex (or, for that matter, on the retina it-
self; the conceptual issue would be the same in either case).
What would that tell us about the nature and role of men-
tal images in cognition? We have known at least since
Descartes that there is an image on our retina in visual per-
ception, and perhaps there is also some transformed ver-
sion of this image on our cortex, yet knowing this has not
made us any wiser about how visual perception works. In-
deed, ruminating on the existence of an image has only
raised such problems as why we do not see the world as up-
side down, given that the image on the retina is upside
down. The temptation to assume a literal picture observed
through a “mind’s eye” may be very strong, but it leads us
at every turn into blind alleys.
For example, some of the psychophysical evidence that
is cited in support of a picture theory of mental imagery sug-
gests a similarity between the mind’s eye and the real eye
that is so remarkable that it ought to be an embarrassment
to picture-theories. It not only suggests that the visual sys-
tem is involved in imagery and that it examines a pictorial
display, but it appears to attribute to the “mind’s eye” many
of the properties of our own eyes. For example, it seems
that the mind’s eye has a visual angle like that of a real eye
(Kosslyn 1978), and that it has a field of resolution which is
roughly the same as our eyes; it drops off with eccentricity
according to the same function and inscribes a similar el-
liptical acuity profile as that of our eye (Finke & Kosslyn
1980; Finke & Kurtzman 1981a). It even appears that the
“mind’s eye” exhibits the “oblique effect” in which the dis-
criminability of closely-spaced horizontal and vertical lines
is superior to that of oblique lines (Kosslyn et al. 1999b).
Since, in the case of the eye, such properties arise from the
structure of our retina and of its projection onto the visual
cortex, it would appear to suggest that the mind’s eye is sim-
ilarly constructed. Does the mind’s eye then have the same
color profile as that of our eyes – and perhaps a blind spot
as well? Does it exhibit after-images? And would you be sur-
prised if experiments showed that it did?
Of course, the observed parallels could be just coinci-
dence, or it could be that the distribution of neurons and
connections in the visual cortex has come to reflect the type
of information it receives from the eye. But it is also possi-
ble that such phenomena reflect what people have implic-
itly come to know about how things appear to them, a
knowledge which the experiments invite them to use in
simulating what would happen in a visual situation that 
parallels the imagined one. Such a possibility is made all 
the more plausible in view of the fact that the instructions
in these imagery experiments explicitly ask observers to
“imagine” a certain visual situation – that is, to imagine that
they are in a certain visual circumstances and to imagine
what it would look like to see things, say, in their peripheral
vision. (I have often wondered whether people who wear
thick-framed glasses would have a smaller field of vision in
their mind’s eye.)
The picture that we are being presented, of a mind’s eye
gazing upon a display projected onto the visual cortex, is
one that should arouse our suspicion. It comes uncomfort-
ably close to the idea that properties of the external world,
as well as of the process of vision (including the resolution
pattern of the retina and the necessity of moving one’s eyes
around the display to foveate features of interest), are in-
ternalized in the imagery system. If such properties were
built into the architecture, our imagery would not be as
plastic and cognitively penetrable as it is. If the “mind’s eye”
Pylyshyn: Mental imagery: In search of a theory
178
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (2002) 25:2
. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0140525X02290044
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Chalmers Tekniska Högskola, on 16 Nov 2019 at 15:28:43, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms

really had to move around in its socket, we would not be
able to jump from place to place in extracting information
from our image the way we can. And if images really were
pictures on the cortex, the necessity of a homunculus to in-
terpret them would not have been discharged, notwith-
standing claims that such a system had been implemented
on a computer.
Computer implementation does not guarantee that what
is said about the system, viewed as a model of the mind/
brain, is true. Nor does it guarantee that the theory it im-
plements is free of the assumption that there is an intelli-
gent agent in one of the boxes. As Slezak (1995) has pointed
out, labels on boxes in a computational model are not
merely mnemonic; the choice of a label often constitutes a
substantive claim that must be independently justified. La-
beling a box as, say, “attention,” (as is done in the model de-
scribed in Kosslyn et al. 1979) may well introduce a ho-
munculus into the theory, despite the fact that the system
is implemented as a running program which generates
some of the correct predictions in a very limited domain.
That’s because the label implies that the performance of the
system will continue to mirror human performance in a
much broader domain; it implies that the system can be
scaled up in ways that are consistent with the assigned la-
bel.
7.4. What has recent neuroscience evidence done for
the “imagery debate”?
Where, then, does the “imagery debate” stand at present?
In the first place, although many investigators (including
Kosslyn 1994, Ch. 1) write as though recent neuroscience
evidence supersedes all previous behavioral evidence,
nothing could be further from the truth. It was behavior
(and phenomenological) considerations that raised the puz-
zle about mental imagery in the first place, and that sug-
gested the picture theory. And it is a careful consideration
of that evidence and its alternative interpretations that has
cast doubt on the picture theory. Consequently, even if real
colored stereo pictures were found on the visual cortex, the
problems raised thus far in this article would remain, and
would continue to stand as evidence that such cortical pic-
tures were not serving the function attributed to them. For
example, the fact that phenomena such as mental scanning
are cognitively penetrable is strong evidence that whatever
is displayed on the cortex is not what is responsible for the
patterns of behavior observed in mental imagery studies.
The mere fact that the data are biological does not give
them a privileged status in deciding the truth of a psycho-
logical theory, especially one whose conceptual foundations
are already shaky.
As I suggested near the beginning of this article, where
the “imagery debate” stands today depends on what you
think the debate was about. If it was supposed to be about
whether reasoning by using mental imagery is somehow dif-
ferent from reasoning without it, nobody can doubt that. If
it was about whether in some sense imagery involves the vi-
sual system, the answer there too must be affirmative, since
imagery involves similar experiences to those produced by
(and, as far as we know, only by) activity in some part of the
visual system (though not in V1, according to Crick & Koch
1995). The real question is: in what way is the visual system
involved and what does that tell us about the properties of
mental imagery, and about how the mind generates and
uses images? It is much too early and much too simplistic
to claim that the way the vision system is deployed in visual
imagery is by allowing us to look at a reconstructed retino-
topic input of the sort that comes from the eye (or at least
at some locally-affine mapping of this input).
Is the debate, as Kosslyn (1994) claims, about whether
images are depictive as opposed to descriptive? That all de-
pends on what you mean by “depictive.” Is any representa-
tion of geometrical, spatial, metrical, or visual properties
depictive? If that makes it depictive, then any description
of how something looks is thereby depictive. Does being
depictive require that the representation be organized spa-
tially? As I suggested, that depends on what restrictions are
placed on “being organized spatially”; most forms of repre-
sentation, including symbol structures, use different spatial
locations to distinguish among represented individuals.
Does being depictive require that images “preserve metri-
cal spatial information,” as has been claimed (Kosslyn et al.
1978)? Again, that depends on what it means to “preserve”
metrical space. If it means that the image must represent
metrical spatial information, then any form of representa-
tion will have to do that, to the extent that it can be shown
that people do encode and recall such information. But any
system of numerals, as well any analogue medium, can rep-
resent magnitudes in a useful way. If the claim that images
preserve metrical spatial information means that imagery
uses spatial magnitudes to represent spatial magnitudes,
then this is a form of the literal picture theory, which I have
argued is not supported by the evidence.
The neuroscience evidence we briefly looked at, while
interesting in its own right, does not appear capable of re-
solving the issue about the nature of mental images, largely
because the questions have not been formulated appropri-
ately and the options are not well understood – with the sin-
gle exception of the literal cortical display theory which
turns out to be empirically inadequate in many different
ways. One major problem with providing a satisfactory the-
ory of mental imagery is that we are not only attempting to
account for certain behavioral and neuroscience findings,
but we are attempting to do so in a way that remains faith-
ful to certain intuitions and subjective experiences. It is not
obvious that all these constraints can be satisfied simulta-
neously. There is no a priori reason why an adequate theory
of mental imagery will map onto conscious experience in
any direct and satisfactory way. Indeed, if the experience in
other sciences and in other parts of cognitive science is any
indication, the eventual theory will not do justice to the con-
tent of our subjective experience and we will simply have to
live with that fact, the way physics has had to live with the
fact that the mystery of action-at-a-distance does not have
a reductive explanation.
7.5. Is the “picture theorist” a straw man?
The typical response to arguments such as those raised in
this section is that it takes the picture theory too literally and
nobody really believes that there is an actual 2D display in
the brain. For example, Denis and Kosslyn (1999) maintain
that “No claim was made that visual images themselves
have spatial extent, or that they occupy metrically defined
portions of the brain,” and Kosslyn (1994, p. 329) admits
that “images contain ‘previously digested’ information.”
But if that is the case, how does one explain the increase in
time to scan greater image distances or to report details in
Pylyshyn: Mental imagery: In search of a theory
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (2002) 25:2
179
. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0140525X02290044
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Chalmers Tekniska Högskola, on 16 Nov 2019 at 15:28:43, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms

smaller images? An explanation of these phenomena that
appeals to a depictive representation requires a literal sense
of “spatial extent,” otherwise the explanation does not dis-
tinguish the depictive story from what I have called the null
hypothesis (see the discussion of the “functional space” al-
ternative in sect. 5.2). If one denies the literal view of a cor-
tical display, how does one interpret the claim that activa-
tion of topographically organized areas of the visual cortex
during imagery establishes that images are “depictive”? If
one were looking in the brain for evidence of a “functional
space,” what exactly would one look for? It is because pic-
ture theorists are searching for a literal 2D display that the
research has focused on showing imagery-related activity in
cortical Area 17.
The view that is favored by picture theorists is clearly il-
lustrated by the importance that has been attached to the
finding described in Tootell et al. (1982). In this study,
macaques were trained to stare at the center of a pattern of
flashing lights, while the monkeys were injected with ra-
dioactively tagged 2-deoxydextroglucose (2-DG), whose
absorption is related to metabolic activity. Then the
doomed animal was sacrificed and a record of 2-DG ab-
sorption in its cortex was developed. This record showed a
retinotopic pattern in V1, which corresponded closely to
the pattern of lights. In other words, it showed a picture in
the visual cortex of the pattern that the monkey had re-
ceived on its retina, written in the ink of metabolic activity.
This led some people to conclude that we now know that a
picture in the primary visual cortex appears during visual
perception and is the basis for visual perception.14 Al-
though no such maps have been found for imagery, there
can be no doubt that this is what the picture-theorists be-
lieve is there and is responsible for both the imagery expe-
rience and the empirical findings reported when mental
images are being used. People who have accepted this line
of argument are well represented in the imagery debate:
They are not “straw men”!
The problem is that while the literal picture-theory or
cortical display theory is what provides the explanatory
force and the intuitive appeal, it is always the picture
metaphor that people retreat to in the face of the implausi-
bility of the literal version of the picture theory. This is the
strategy of claiming a decisive advantage for the depictive
theory because it has the properties cited in the quotation
in section 5.1 (e.g., it resembles what it represents), it is lo-
cated in the topographically organized areas of visual cor-
tex, it “preserves metrical information,” and so on; then, in
the face of its implausibility, systematically retreating away
from the part of the claim that is doing the work – the lit-
eral spatial layout.
8. Conclusion: What is special about mental
imagery?
The theme that has run through this essay is that we have
thus far not been given adequate reasons to reject the null
hypothesis and to accept that what goes on in mental im-
agery is in any way like examining a picture.15 Yet, the con-
clusion that reasoning using imagery is the same as reason-
ing that is not accompanied by the experience of “seeing in
the mind’s eye” is surely premature. It suggests that the fact
that we have certain phenomenal experiences is irrelevant
to understanding the nature of images or that the image ex-
perience is “epiphenomenal,”16 neither of which is war-
ranted, even if at the present time we have no adequate un-
derstanding of what role the conscious experience of image
content might play (see sect. 6.1). So what exactly are we
entitled to conclude? What I have argued here is primarily
that we are not entitled to take the tempting road of as-
suming that the content of our experience reflects in any di-
rect way the nature of our cognitive information processing
activity (in other words, one ought to guard scrupulously
against what Pessoa et al. [1998] call the “analytical iso-
morphism” assumption). Thus, one ought to start off with
strong skepticism about the idea that images are like pic-
tures.
The search for a system of representation that retains
some of the attractive features of pictures and yet can serve
as the basis for reasoning has been the holy grail of many
research programs, both in cognitive science and in artifi-
cial intelligence. The hope has been that one might develop
a coherent proposal that captures some of what is special
about reasoning with images, without succumbing to the
Cartesian Theater trap. One way to approach this problem
is to consider the most general constraints or boundary con-
ditions that have to be met by a system of imagistic reason-
ing. Even if we do not have a detailed theory of the form of
representation underlying imagistic thoughts, we do know
some of the conditions it must meet. Starting by setting
conditions on an adequate theory is not a new strategy. It
was extremely successful in linguistics (Chomsky 1957a;
1957b) and is routine in theoretical physics (“thought ex-
periments” can be viewed as explorations of what is entailed
by such general conditions). Newell and Simon (1976) have
also remarked on the importance of such orienting per-
spectives (which they called “laws of qualitative structure”)
for scientific progress.
As an example of such constraints, Fodor and I have ar-
gued (Fodor & Pylyshyn 1988) that in order to be adequate
as vehicles of reasoning, such representations must meet
the conditions of productivity, compositionality, and sys-
tematicity. Representations underlying imagery should
meet additional conditions as well. Some years ago I pro-
posed several possible constraints that are specific to men-
tal images (Pylyshyn 1978). These have nothing to do with
how images appear. Rather, they focus on the idea that
mental images represent potentially visible token individu-
als or small sets of individuals. Because they represent in-
dividuals, they do not explicitly encode such set-properties
as the cardinality of the set of individuals (they do not ex-
plicitly encode facts such as that there are eight boxes, or
universally quantified propositions such as “all Xs are Y”).
Because they represent individuals, they in effect assert the
presence of some individuals or properties, and not their ab-
sence (e.g., they cannot represent a prepositional content
such as “there is no X” or “it is not the case that P”). In ad-
dition, the content of images tends to involve visual rather
than abstract properties.
The only theory I am aware of that shares some of the
formal properties listed above, is a system of formal rea-
soning developed by Levesque and Brachman (1985).
Levesque discovered a fundamental trade-off between 
the expressive power of a system of representation and 
the complexity of drawing inferences in that system. In
Levesque (1986), he describes an expressively weaker form
of logical representation (which he calls a “vivid represen-
tation”) that allows inferences to be drawn essentially by
Pylyshyn: Mental imagery: In search of a theory
180
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (2002) 25:2
. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0140525X02290044
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Chalmers Tekniska Högskola, on 16 Nov 2019 at 15:28:43, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms

pattern matching. As in my earlier speculation about what
is special about mental imagery, representations in this sys-
tem do not permit the direct expression of negation (e.g.,
the only way that they can represent the proposition “there
are no red squares” is by representing a scene that contains
no red squares), or disjunction (e.g., they can only repre-
sent the proposition “the squares are either red or large” by
allowing two possible representations, one with red squares
and one with large squares), and they do not allow univer-
sal quantification (e.g., they can only represent the propo-
sition “all squares are red” by explicitly representing each
square, however many there are, and showing each as red).
A vivid representation can only express the fact that there
are five objects in a scene by representing each of the ob-
jects (of which there would be five in all). Levesque then
proves some remarkable complexity properties for data-
bases consisting of such vivid representations. Even though
this work was not directly motivated by the imagery debate,
it has the virtue of meeting the boundary conditions on an
adequate system of representation; it does not postulate
properties that we know are inadequate for the representa-
tion of knowledge, such as literally spatial displays.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
I wish to thank Jerry Fodor, Ned Block, and Peter Slezak for use-
ful exchanges, and reviewers Michael McClosky, David Marks, Art
Glenberg, and Mel Goodale, for providing helpful comments on
an earlier draft. This work was supported by NIH Grant 1R01-
MH60924.
NOTES
1. Some of these demonstrations can be viewed by download-
ing Quicktimer animations from: http://www.cs.ubc.ca/~rensink/
flicker/download/index.html
2. When we first carried out these studies we were criticized
(quite rightly, in my view) on the grounds that it was obvious that
you did not have to scan your image if you did not want to, and if
you did, you could do so according to whatever temporal pattern
you chose. It still seems to me that the studies we carried out only
demonstrate the obvious. That being the case, one might wonder
what the great fuss was (and is) about over the scanning phenom-
enon (as well as the image size phenomenon described below);
why dozens of studies have been done on it; and why it is inter-
preted as showing anything about the nature of mind as opposed
to choices that subjects make.
3. People have suggested that one can accommodate this re-
sult by noting that the observed phenomenon depends on both the
form of the image and on the particular processes that use it, so
that the differences in the process can account for the different
result obtained with different tasks (e.g., in this case attention
might be moved by a “jump” operation). In that case the assump-
tion that there is a depictive representation that “preserves metri-
cal distance” does not play a role. The problem then becomes to
specify the conditions under which the spatial character of the im-
age does or does not play a role. A plausible answer is that scan-
ning results are obtained when the subject thinks that imagining
scanning a display is part of the task at hand. Of course, these are
also the conditions under which the subject understands the task
to be the simulation of visual scanning and, thus, recreating the
time-distance scanning effect.
4. I don’t mean to pick on Stephen Kosslyn, who (along with
Allan Paivio and Roger Shepard) has done a great deal to promote
the scientific study of mental imagery. I focus on Kosslyn’s work
here because he has provided what is currently the most highly
developed and detailed theory of mental imagery, and has tried to
be particularly explicit about his assumptions; and also because his
work has been extremely influential in shaping psychologists’
views about the nature of mental imagery. In that respect, his
views can be taken as the received view in much of the field.
5. If we look closely at what goes on in a computer implemen-
tation of a matrix, we see even more clearly that some of the space-
like features are only in the mind of the user. For example, the 
matrix is said to contain a representation of empty space, in that
the cells between features are actually represented explicitly.
Whether registers are actually reserved in a computer for such
empty cells is a matter of implementation and need not always be
the case – indeed, it often is not the case in efficient implemen-
tations of sparse matrices. Moreover, since an empty place is just
a variable with no value (or a default zero value), any form of rep-
resentation can make the assumption that there are names for un-
filled places. In fact, you don’t even have to assume that such place
names exist prior to an inquiry being made about their contents;
names can be (and are) created on the fly as needed (e.g., using
LISP’s Gensym function). The same goes for the apparent pairs of
numbers we think of as matrix coordinates; these are mapped onto
individual names before being used to retrieve cell contents. The
point is not just that the implementation betrays the assumption
that such properties are inherent, it is also that how a matrix func-
tions can be just as naturally viewed nonspatially since a matrix is
not required by any computational constraints to have the prop-
erties assumed in a table display.
6. There is one other way of interpreting a functional space such
as associated with a matrix. Rather than viewing it as a model of
(real, physical) space, it might be thought of as a model of a (real,
physical) analogue system that itself is an approximate analogue of
space. In order for there to be an analogue model of space in the
brain, however, there would have to be a system of brain proper-
ties that instantiate at least a local approximation of the Euclidean
axioms. It would not do to just have an analogue representation of
some metrical properties such as distance, – which itself is an em-
inently reasonable assumption, but we would need a whole system
of such physically instantiated analogue properties in the brain. As
in any analogue model, there would have to be a well-defined ho-
momorphism from a set of spatial properties to a set of analogue
properties: it would have to be possible to define predicates like
between, adjacent, collinear, and so on, as well as the operation of
moving-through these analogue dimensions at a specified speed.
As far as I know, nobody has seriously developed a proposal for
such an analogue representation (although the work of Nicod 1970
might be viewed as a step towards such a goal). But from the per-
spective of the present thesis this alternative suffers from the same
deficiency that a literal spatial proposal does: It fails to account for
the cognitive penetrability of the empirical phenomena that are
cited in support of the picture theory of mental imagery.
7. There are almost always some visual elements, such as “tex-
tons” (Julesz 1981), that can serve as indexed objects. It is dubi-
ous whether places unoccupied by any visible feature can be in-
dexed (which is why vision in a featureless environment is so
unstable; Avant 1965). The one possibility, suggested by the work
of Taylor (1961), is that locations clearly definable in terms of
nearby visible objects can be indexed. Taylor showed that ob-
servers can encode locations more accurately when they are eas-
ily specified in relation to some visible anchors (such as being the
“midpoint” between two visible objects).
8. Brandt and Stark (1997) reported that the sequence of eye
movements observed when inspecting a mental image inscribe
similar scan paths to those observed when inspecting an actual 
display. But since the experiment was not carried out in total 
darkness, the eye movements could have been made to the faint
visible cues, rather than to image features (see sect. 5.3). In 
addition, since moving one’s eye does not result in viewing differ-
ent parts of an inner picture, the contents of the display could not
provide the feedback required to control a sequence of eye move-
ment beyond the initial ballistic saccade, so that in any case the se-
quence of eye movements during imagery is likely due to a differ-
ent mechanism than the one that controls the sequence of eye
movements in vision.
Pylyshyn: Mental imagery: In search of a theory
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (2002) 25:2
181
. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0140525X02290044
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Chalmers Tekniska Högskola, on 16 Nov 2019 at 15:28:43, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms

9. Finke also found a significant effect of “vividness” of im-
agery, as determined from the Vividness of Visual Imagery Ques-
tionnaire (VVIQ) (Marks 1973), with the adaptation effect being
much higher for vivid imagers. It is not clear how to interpret such
a result, however, given that subjects who were high in vividness
also had significantly higher adaptation scores in the control con-
dition where there was no feedback (visual or imaginal) about er-
rors of movement. These findings (along with the connection be-
tween vividness and hypnotic suggestibility reported by Crawford
1996; Glisky et al. 1995; Kunzendorf et al. 1996) increase the like-
lihood that experimental demand effects may be involved in the
performance patterns of high-scoring subjects.
10. The conditions under which one gets more or less adapta-
tion are discussed in Howard (1982). The most important re-
quirement is that the discordant information be salient for the
subject and that it be interpreted as a discordance between two
measures of the position of the same limb. Thus, anything that fo-
cuses more attention on the discordance and produces greater
conviction that something is awry helps strengthen the adaptation
effect. Thus it is not surprising that merely telling subjects where
their hand is does not produce the same degree of adaptation as
asking them to pretend that it actually is at a particular location,
which is what imagery instructions do.
11. Many of these studies have serious methodological prob-
lems, which we will not discuss here in detail. For example, a num-
ber of investigators have raised questions about many of these il-
lusions (Predebon & Wenderoth 1985; Reisberg & Morris 1985)
where the likelihood of experimenter demand is high. The usual
precautions against experimenter influence on this highly subjec-
tive measure were not taken (e.g., the experiments were not done
using a double-blind procedure). The most remarkable of the il-
lusions, the orientation-contingent color aftereffect, known as the
McCollough effect, is perhaps less likely to lead to an experi-
menter-demand effect since not many people know of the phe-
nomenon. Yet, Finke and Schmidt (1977) reported that this effect
is obtained when part of the input (a grid of lines) is merely imag-
ined over the top of a visible colored background. But the Finke
finding has been subject to a variety of interpretations as well as
to criticisms on methodological grounds (Broerse & Crassini 1981;
1984; Harris 1982; Kunen & May 1980; 1981; Zhou & May 1993)
so will not be reviewed here. Finke himself (Finke 1989) appears
to accept that the mechanism for the effect may be that of classi-
cal conditioning rather than a specifically visual mechanism.
12. In a recent paper, Kosslyn et al. (1999a) also claimed that
if area 17 is temporarily impaired using repetitive transcranial
magnetic stimulation (rTMS), performance on an imagery task is
adversely affected (relative to the condition when they do not re-
ceive rTMS), suggesting that the activation of area 17 may be not
only co-relational, but may also play a causal role. However, this
result must be treated as highly provisional since the nature and
scope of the disruption produced by the rTMS is not well estab-
lished and the study in question lacks the appropriate controls for
this critical question; in particular, there is no control condition
measuring the decrement in performance for comparable tasks
that do not involve imagery.
13. A possible control for this explanation would be to study
patients whose loss of peripheral vision and delay in testing fol-
lowed roughly the same pattern as Farah’s patient but in which the
damage was purely retinal. The expectation is that under the same
instructional conditions such patients would also exhibit tunnel
imagery, even though there was presumably no relevant cortical
damage involved. Another control would be to test the patient im-
mediately after surgery, before she learned how the visual world
looked to her in her post-surgical condition.
14. That a topographic display is involved in vision is hardly
surprising, since we know that vision begins with retinal images.
But before either retinal or cortical patterns become available to
cognition as percepts, they have to be interpreted; this is what vi-
sion is for, it is not for turning one retinotopic pattern into another.
The original motivation for hypothesizing a visual image was to ac-
count for the completeness and spatially extended nature of visual
perception despite the incompleteness of retinal information, the
stability of the perceptual world despite eye movements, and the
robustness of recognition despite differences in the size and loca-
tion of objects on the retina (these are among the reasons Kosslyn
[1994] gives for needing a display that also serves as the screen for
mental images). It is now pretty clear that there are no visual im-
ages serving these purposes in vision (see, e.g., O’Regan & Noë
2001).
15. This paper has been concerned primarily with the picture-
theory account of imagery because it appears to be the over-
whelmingly dominant one. I have not attempted to review other
options, such as those proposed by Barsalou (1999) and Thomas
(1999). In any case, these other approaches are not claimed to pro-
vide an explanation of the many experimental findings sketched in
this paper.
16. The claim that images are epiphenomenal or have no
causal role rests on an ambiguity about what one means by an im-
age. As Block has correctly pointed out (Block 1981), the appeal
to epiphenomenalism is either just another way of stating the dis-
agreement about the nature of a mental image, or else it simply
confuses the functional or theoretical construct “mental image”
with the experience of having a mental image.
Open Peer Commentary
Commentary submitted by the qualified professional readership of this
journal will be considered for publication in a later issue as Continuing
Commentary on this article. Integrative overviews and syntheses are es-
pecially encouraged.
Depicting second-order isomorphism and
“depictive” representations
Hedy Amiri and Chad J. Marsolek
Department of Psychology, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, MN 55455.
amir0010@tc.umn.edu
chad.j.marsolek-1@umn.edu
http://levels.psych.umn.edu
Abstract: According to Pylyshyn, depictive representations can be ex-
planatory only if a certain kind of first-order isomorphism exists between
the mental representations and real-world displays. What about a system
with second-order isomorphism (similarities between different mental
representations corresponding with similarities between different real-
world displays)? Such a system may help to address whether “depictive”
representations contribute to the visual nature of imagery.
Pylyshyn argues that depictive representations can be explanatory
in a theory of imagery only if the physical-spatial extent in the un-
derlying representational medium is used to represent informa-
tion about spatial extent in the real-world display that is being
imagined. We suggest that a different perspective involving sec-
ond-order isomorphism deserves comment within this part of the
imagery debate; a less restrictive notion of veridical representa-
tion may help to clarify fundamental issues.
Shepard and Chipman (1970) used the term first-order iso-
morphism to describe the situation in which a similarity relation
exists between an internal representation and the individual real-
world object being represented. From this perspective, Pylyshyn’s
claim essentially is that depictive representations can be explana-
tory only if there is a certain kind of first-order isomorphism be-
tween the mental representations and the real-world displays; a
first-order isomorphism must exist between the physical-spatial
Commentary/Pylyshyn: Mental imagery: In search of a theory
182
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (2002) 25:2
. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0140525X02290044
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Chalmers Tekniska Högskola, on 16 Nov 2019 at 15:28:43, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms

extent in the representational medium and the spatial information
in the displays being imagined. An alternative to first-order iso-
morphism, according to Shepard and Chipman, is second-order
isomorphism, in which a similarity relation exists between the sim-
ilarities among internal representations and the corresponding
similarities among multiple real-world objects being represented.
Indeed, Shepard and Chipman argued that it is second-order iso-
morphism that should be sought in theories of imagery. A system
with second-order isomorphism may provide an understanding of
visual imagery in which depictive representations of the first or-
der need not be posited; however, important and inherent aspects
of the system may be that “depictive” representations of the sec-
ond order are posited and the visual nature of imagery phenom-
ena may be attributable at least in part to the relevant cognitive
architecture.
To be concrete about such a system, the retina and perhaps
early visual areas presumably represent two-dimensional percep-
tual views of shapes in a manner that is at least close to first-order
isomorphic. However, the ultimate representation underlying
shape recognition resides in high-level visual areas (i.e., inferior-
temporal cortex for nonhuman primates; occipital-temporal areas
in humans) of the sort that are activated very frequently in neu-
roimaging studies of visual mental imagery (see sect. 7.1). Pre-
sumably, multiple transformations from the initial retinotopic rep-
resentation to the high-level representation take place, but the
focus here is on how to understand such high-level representa-
tions. Edelman (1998) put forth a mathematical formulation of the
kinds of transformations that may be performed on visual inputs,
which allow a mapping from distinct points in a high-dimensional
input space to distinct points in a (lower-dimensional) represen-
tation space. The mapping is a composite of four functions, in-
volving the object’s geometrical coordinates, the object’s viewing
conditions, a convolution of the image through a number of filters
and application of a nonlinear function, and a dimensionality re-
duction. Most important for present concerns, the net result of
this mapping is that two points that were near each other before
the mapping will be near each other after the mapping. In this 
way, what is represented is the similarity between shapes, not 
the geometry of the shapes themselves. In other words, the rep-
resentations are second-order isomorphic, and the veridicality is
with respect to a correspondence between original (represented)
and internal (representing) similarities among shapes. Thus, by
Pylyshyn’s relatively strong definition, the representations are not
depictive. But, is there a way in which such representations, if
used in visual imagery, nonetheless reflect an important aspect of
the cognitive architecture?
Within such a system, mental imagery tasks involving visual
shapes could be explained by systematic movements through lo-
cations in the space of second-order isomorphic representations.
Smooth, continuous movements through such a space could be
used to accomplish mental rotation and perhaps mental scanning.
Given that nearby locations in the representation space corre-
spond to nearby locations in what would be perceived in the orig-
inal shape space, the assumption is that, to get from one location
to a distant location in representation space, the intermediate lo-
cations must be worked through not unlike the way an attractor
neural network passes through a series of similar activation states
when settling into an attractor. Of course, this could account for
chronometric results in rotation studies. It is also possible that
such movements through the representation space may be ac-
companied by sequential top-down activations of early visual ar-
eas due to the reciprocal excitatory connectivity of low- and high-
level visual areas (Felleman & Van Essen 1991). But, by this
account, we should note that such activation of early visual areas
may not be sufficient or even necessary for visual imagery (instead,
it could reflect involuntary/automatic top-down activation that is
used normally in perceptual recognition but is not doing the work
of underlying imagery effects).
If imagery is accomplished in such a manner, an inherent and
important aspect of imagery may be that it reflects what Pylyshyn
labels the “cognitive architecture.” The cognitive architecture
cannot be “directly altered by changes in knowledge, goals, utili-
ties, or any other representations (e.g., fears, hopes, fantasies,
etc.)” (sect. 3, para. 2). If mental rotation occurs as it does due to
systematic movement through similar locations in a space repre-
senting visual similarities, then it occurs as it does in part due to
well established mappings between views of real-world shapes and
the higher-level mental representations, where a distinct point in
the former maps to a distinct point in the latter. It is the form of
this representation that would dictate the “visual” nature of the
phenomenology and the observable visual imagery effects. This
would be a stable aspect of the architecture; changing it would en-
tail impairing visual recognition abilities and changing the cogni-
tive architecture. There is also a sense in which the high-level rep-
resentations would not be depictive but would have properties
that make them “pseudo-depictive.” They would not use spatial
extent across cortex to represent information about spatial extent
in the image. However, they may be “pseudo-depictive” in that
they would use an isomorphic representation system (albeit sec-
ond-order) to represent similarities between original images that
do use spatial extent to represent spatial information. The possi-
bility of such second-order “depictive” representations may be im-
portant for addressing whether “depictive” representations con-
tribute to the visual nature of imagery.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This work was supported by NIH grant MH60442.
Visual imagery is not always like visual
perception
Martha E. Arterberry,a Catherine Craver-Lemley,b
and Adam Reevesc
aDepartment of Psychology, Gettysburg College, Gettysburg, PA 17325;
bDepartment of Psychology, Elizabethtown College, Elizabethtown, PA
17022; cDepartment of Psychology, Northeastern University, Boston, MA
02115 USA. arterber@gettysburg.edu
lemleyce@acad.etown.edu
reeves@neu.edu
Abstract: The “Perky effect” is the interference of visual imagery with vi-
sion. Studies of this effect show that visual imagery has more than sym-
bolic properties, but these properties differ both spatially (including “pic-
torially”) and temporally from those of vision. We therefore reject both the
literal picture-in-the-head view and the entirely symbolic view.
Pylyshyn repeatedly draws parallels between imagery and visual
perception to support his argument that imagery is not pictorial.
He suggests that processes that use the same symbolic vocabulary
can explain the similarities between imagery and perception. This
very well may be the case when one considers visual imagery and
visual perception in high-level tasks. We offer one more piece of
evidence for this view. In Craver-Lemley et al. (1999), participants
were asked to imagine a geometrical figure, such as a blue open
triangle, and then they were presented with a display containing
two or more geometrical figures (Fig. 1A). Participants were asked
to report on the features of one of the physically presented objects,
following the methodology of Treisman and Schmidt (1982).
Craver-Lemley et al. found that features of the imagined figure
were mistakenly conjoined with features of the physically pre-
sented figures, and the effect was not due to participants hearing
some features spoken aloud when they were given instructions re-
garding what to imagine (e.g., “a blue, open triangle”). These find-
ings suggest that imagery influences perception at the level of vi-
sual processing at which features are combined, and they are
consistent with Pylyshyn’s contention that the same processes may
underlie the representation of real and imagined objects. More-
over, we can speculate with him that these processes are symbolic,
in the sense that subjects may encode a list of features (red,
Commentary/Pylyshyn: Mental imagery: In search of a theory
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (2002) 25:2
183
. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0140525X02290044
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Chalmers Tekniska Högskola, on 16 Nov 2019 at 15:28:43, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms

square, filled, etc.) and that this list is tagged in some way to indi-
cate their collocation on the same object. If imagined and real fea-
tures are encoded, stored, or represented in the same way, then at
recall they may be confused, resulting in illusory conjunctions be-
tween percepts and images.
The argument of a common symbolic vocabulary is less con-
vincing when one considers other tasks, particularly lower-level
tasks such as acuity or target detection. There are several findings
with visual imagery that do not mirror those with physically pre-
sented stimuli. For example, in a signal-detection paradigm based
on Segal and Fusella (1970), participants presented with an acu-
ity target (vertical line offsets, Fig. 1B) in a region where they
imagined four vertical lines showed strong interference (a loss of
0.8 d9 units). Similar interference was found when imagining four
horizontal lines (Craver-Lemley & Reeves 1987, Fig. 1C). How-
ever, with physically presented lines, only the vertically oriented
lines interfered with acuity. Again, Craver-Lemley and Reeves
found that imagined lines interfered with the target at spatial ex-
tents in which physical lines have no effect, and that imagined
lines still interfered for up to five seconds after the subjects
stopped imagining them, unlike real lines which only interfere (as
masks) for one or two tenths of a second after presentation. A lack
of correspondence between physical and imagined stimuli was
discovered under conditions of induced-depth as well. Imagining
four vertical lines or a solid bar in front of a line target in an in-
duced depth display (Fig. 1D) interfered with acuity but imagin-
ing the four lines or a solid bar behind the target location did not
(Fig. 1E, Craver-Lemley et al. 1997). In contrast, physically pre-
sented bars interfered with acuity regardless of whether they were
located in front of or behind the target. And finally, imagining a
solid bar interfered with target detection (an asterisk) only when
the target overlapped the image location (Craver-Lemley & Arter-
berry 2001). In this case, the target and the image had no features
in common except spatial location.
We explained many of these results by postulating that the vi-
sual system suppresses competing (local) visual input from the vi-
sual field in order to facilitate entertaining a visual (mental) im-
age. But why might imagery and perception compete? We do not
know, but an interesting suggestion is from Sartre (1948), who,
having elegantly dismantled various picture-in-the-head views,
concluded, “The image and the perception, far from being two el-
ementary psychical factors of similar quality which simply enter
into different combinations, represent the two main irreducible
attitudes of consciousness. It follows that they exclude each other”
(p. 153). Whether or not this is so, the properties of the interfer-
ence effect have fairly clear implications for the spatial nature of
visual imagery. We note here that Segal and Fusella (1970) also
demonstrated that complex auditory images (e.g., of bells) inter-
fered with auditory detection (of tones), but no one has followed
this up with simpler images. Our notion that perceptual systems
suppress inputs in order to make room for images (or Sartre’s no-
tion of exclusion) implies that auditory imagery is similar to visual
in this respect. Thus, images of pure notes should interfere chiefly
with neighboring frequencies, should do so over a broader spec-
trum than real-tone maskers, and perhaps should interfere for a
longer period of time.
Thus, we have several examples where we do not find complete
concordance of effects with real and imagined stimuli; a visual im-
age does not always mimic the effects of physical stimuli. The dif-
ference in interference effects between imagined and real stimuli
described in the above examples cannot be accounted for by at-
tentional factors, as shown by dual-task attentional manipulations
(see Craver-Lemley & Reeves 1992). Nor can they be explained
easily by tacit knowledge. Many of the interference effects are
contrary to expectations based on experiences with real stimuli
(e.g., as mentioned, real horizontal lines do not interfere with
Vernier acuity; if subjects knew this to be the case, then imagined
horizontal lines should not interfere with Vernier acuity either, but
they do). Finally, we are sure that expectations are irrelevant.
Craver-Lemley and Reeves (1992) told half the participants in one
experiment that imagined vertical lines would facilitate perfor-
mance, and half that the image would impair it. The participants
all believed the cover story and all showed interference despite
their different expectations.
Pylyshyn states, “It may be that visual percepts and visual im-
ages interact because both consist of symbolic representations
that use some of the same proprietary spatial or modality-specific
vocabulary” (sect. 6.2). We accept that symbol interference may
happen at a higher level of representation responsible for image-
stimulus illusory conjunctions, but we think the application of
“symbolic representations” to spatial and temporal contiguity in
the interference effect is stretching matters. Surely the spatial
properties of interference point to a pictorial component of visual
mental imagery.
Can we change our vantage point to explore
imaginal neglect?
Paolo Bartolomeoa and Sylvie Chokronb
aINSERM Unit 324, Centre Paul Broca, F-75014 Paris, France; bLPE-CNRS
UMR 5105, UPMF, BP 47 38000, Grenoble, France. paolo@broca.inserm.fr
chokron@upmf-grenoble.fr
http://www.upmf-grenoble.fr/upmf/RECHERCHE/lpe/index.html
Abstract: Right brain-damaged patients with unilateral neglect, who ig-
nore left-sided visual events, may also omit left-sided details when de-
scribing known places from memory. Modulating the orienting of visual
attention may ameliorate imaginal neglect. A first step toward explaining
these phenomena might be to postulate that space-related imagery is a
cognitive activity involving attentional and intentional aspects.
Patients with lesions in the posterior part of the right hemisphere
may ignore events on their left side, a condition known as unilat-
eral neglect. Neglect patients are often completely unaware of
their disorder (they are said to be “anosognosic”), and extremely
unwilling to acknowledge it. A large amount of neuropsychologi-
Commentary/Pylyshyn: Mental imagery: In search of a theory
184
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (2002) 25:2
Figure 1 (Arterberry et al.).
A. Stimulus used to study illusory
conjunctions between physical and imagined geometric figures.
The hashed lines represent the item the participant imagined. B.
Vernier acuity target and a four-vertical-line image. C. Vernier
acuity target and a four-horizontal-line image. In D and E the bar
image was positioned either in front of (D) or behind (E) the acu-
ity target in an induced-depth display.
. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0140525X02290044
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Chalmers Tekniska Högskola, on 16 Nov 2019 at 15:28:43, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms

cal evidence (reviewed in Bartolomeo & Chokron 2002) suggests
that left-sided stimuli fail to exert their normal attraction on ne-
glect patients’ attention. Thus, a basic mechanism of left neglect
could be a deficit of exogenous, or stimulus-related, orienting of
attention toward left-sided targets. In partial disagreement with
this interpretation, it has been shown that neglect can occur not
only in vision, but also in the absence of any physical object in the
patient’s visual field. For example, when asked to imagine and de-
scribe from memory familiar surroundings from a determined
vantage point, neglect patients can omit left-sided details, only to
later describe these same details when invited to assume the op-
posite point of view (Bisiach et al. 1981; Bisiach & Luzzatti 1978).
In these studies, imaginal neglect co-occurred with visual neglect.
This association has often been interpreted as supporting picto-
rial models of visual mental imagery (Bisiach & Berti 1990; Koss-
lyn 1994). Neglect patients would avoid mentioning left-sided
imagined details because they would lack the left half of a (spa-
tially organized) mental representation (Bisiach & Luzzatti 1978).
It would indeed be difficult to contend that neglect patients have
a (however tacit) knowledge of their visual exploratory bias, and
would consequently reproduce in imaginal tasks a neglect behav-
ior of which they are, as a rule, completely unaware (Bisiach &
Berti 1990). It is, of course, also hard to see how a propositional
code compatible with Pylyshyn’s “null hypothesis” could have such
spatial or directional properties to account for imaginal neglect.
On the other hand, the accumulation of neuropsychological ev-
idence of multiple dissociations between imagery and perceptual
abilities in brain-damaged patients (recently reviewed in Bar-
tolomeo 2002), has proved devastating for models of mental im-
agery based on a functional and anatomical equivalence between
these abilities, like Kosslyn’s pictorial model. Some of these disso-
ciations are not only functional, but seem to have also an anatom-
ical basis. While occipital damage can determine perceptual
deficits, it seems neither necessary, nor sufficient to produce im-
agery deficits. On the other hand, rather extensive damage of the
left temporal lobe seems necessary in order to produce visual im-
agery deficits for object shape or color (Bartolomeo 2002), as well
as for orthographic material (Bartolomeo et al. 2002). Although
dissociations have been described between visual and imaginal ne-
glect (see Bartolomeo & Chokron 2001 for a recent review), no
such anatomical segregation apparently emerged. Apart from oc-
casional case descriptions of imaginal neglect after right frontal
(Guariglia et al. 1993) or thalamic damage (Ortigue et al. 2001),
most cases of imaginal neglect result from lesions in the right tem-
poral-parietal cortex, which is the same anatomical correlate of vi-
sual neglect (Vallar 1993).
To explore the relationships between visual and imaginal ne-
glect, we assessed them in 30 right- and 30 left-brain-damaged pa-
tients, and found imaginal neglect only in right-brain-damaged 
patients (Bartolomeo et al. 1994). Imaginal neglect always co-
occurred with visual neglect,1 and scores measuring the lateral
bias in the two types of tasks positively correlated, thus suggesting
that the two disorders share some common underlying mecha-
nism. Additional evidence confirming a relationship between vi-
sual and imaginal neglect comes from the outcome of maneuvers
known to modulate visual neglect. When a patient had his eyes and
head physically turned toward the left side, his descriptions from
memory included more left-sided details (Meador et al. 1987).
Similar results were obtained by irrigating patient’s left ear with
cold water (Rode & Perenin 1994), a vestibular stimulation likely
to induce a leftward orienting of attention (Gainotti 1993). Imag-
inal neglect was also reduced by introducing a short adaptation pe-
riod to a prismatic rightward shift of the visual field to the right
(Rode et al. 2001), another maneuver known to ameliorate visual
neglect (Rossetti et al. 1998). Thus, sensory-motor procedures can
influence imaginal neglect.2 It has been proposed that at least
some of these procedures act by facilitating leftward orienting of
attention (Chokron & Bartolomeo 1999; Gainotti 1993).
If so, one could surmise that neglect patients’ visual attention
can be laterally biased during place description, thus producing
signs of imaginal neglect. In section 5.4 of his target article,
Pylyshyn suggests that visuo-motor effects on imagery might de-
pend on orienting one’s gaze or attention on real, as opposed to
imagined, locations. This interesting possibility, which would be
coherent with what we know about the neglect patients’ tendency
to be attracted by right, non-neglected, visual targets (Gainotti et
al. 1991), could perhaps help explain imaginal neglect. During
place description, patients’ attention could be attracted by right-
sided visual details, and this could in some way influence their per-
formance in imaginal tasks. However, this account does not hold,
at least for the studies of the Lyon group, in which patients kept
their eyes closed during the imaginal tasks (Gilles Rode, personal
communication). If there is an asymmetry of attentional shifts in
imaginal neglect, then, it would be rather akin to analogous biases
that neglect patients show in situations where no external stimu-
lus is present, as, for example, in the disappearance of leftward
REMs during sleep (Doricchi et al. 1993). An implication of this
possibility, and one which is relevant to the “imagery debate,” is
that orienting of attention can influence space-related imagery.
Although visual images are certainly not “seen” by the visual sys-
tem, the phenomenon of imaginal neglect is consistent with the
possibility that visual imagery involves some of the attentional-
exploratory mechanisms that are employed in visual behavior
(Thomas 1999). According to a recent proposal (O’Regan & Noë
2001), these motor processes are actually responsible for the “vi-
sual” character of visual experience. The “perceptual” aspects of
visual mental images might thus result not from the construction
of putative “quasi-perceptual” representations, but from the en-
gagement of attentional and intentional aspects of perception in
imaginal activity.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
We thank Nigel Thomas for very helpful discussion on visual mental im-
agery.
NOTES
1. In fact, about two thirds of left neglect patients showed definite signs
of neglect only in visual tasks, and not in imaginal tasks, probably because
right-sided visual details exerted a powerful attraction on patients’ atten-
tion (see Gainotti et al. 1991). However, when imaginal neglect was pres-
ent, it was always associated with visual neglect.
2. Conversely, a purely imaginal training can ameliorate visual neglect
(Smania et al. 1997).
Spatial models of imagery for remembered
scenes are more likely to advance
(neuro)science than symbolic ones
Neil Burgess
Institute of Cognitive Neuroscience and Department of Anatomy, University
College London, London, WC1E 6BT, United Kingdom.
n.burgess@ucl.ac.uk
http://www.icn.ucl.ac.uk/members/Burge12/
Abstract: Hemispatial neglect in imagery implies a spatially organised
representation. Reaction times in memory for arrays of locations from
shifted viewpoints indicate processes analogous to actual bodily movement
through space. Behavioral data indicate a privileged role for this process
in memory. A proposed spatial mechanism makes contact with direct
recordings of the representations of location and orientation in the mam-
malian brain.
Pylyshyn’s target article omits some of the evidence for the spatial
organisation of visual imagery to be found in studies of memory
for spatial scenes or arrays of objects. While not conclusive, this
evidence may be instructive in escaping some of the logical caveats
raised by Pylyshyn, and extending the discussion of the functional
space in which retrieval products from memory are processed. Al-
though other caveats will be found regarding these data, inter-
preting them in terms of their mapping onto space and our phys-
Commentary/Pylyshyn: Mental imagery: In search of a theory
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (2002) 25:2
185
. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0140525X02290044
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Chalmers Tekniska Högskola, on 16 Nov 2019 at 15:28:43, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms

ical movements within it will take us closer to understanding the
relevant neural mechanisms. Thus, since science advances by a
process in which one flawed but partially explanatory theory re-
places another flawed but slightly-less explanatory theory, the spa-
tial interpretation appeals to me as a neuroscientist. The evidence
discussed here concerns (1) the spatial organisation of hemi-spa-
tial neglect in imagery; (2) reaction time and performance data in
memory for spatial locations; (3) the neuronal mechanisms sug-
gested by single unit recordings in animals.
In patients with hemi-spatial neglect, damage to the internal
image or to the means of accessing it occurs preferentially to the
side contra-lateral to the lesion. How could this be unless the in-
ternal image itself were spatially organised? Pylyshyn (sect. 7.1)
discusses Farah et al.’s (1992) patient who shows tunnel vision and
also similar tunnel imagery. He argues that this patient has simply
learned to simulate her impaired visual perception in imagery, that
is, that this may not relate to the “cognitive architecture” of im-
agery. Can this objection be applied to hemi-spatial neglect in im-
agery? The majority of patients showing hemispatial neglect in 
imagery also show a similar perceptual neglect (Bisiach et al. 1979;
1981), indicating significant overlap between the architecture of
the two systems. However, the caveat that imagery might imitate
perception is ruled out by the (albeit much rarer) case of patients
showing relatively pure imaginal neglect (Beschin et al. 1997;
Guariglia et al. 1993), and even imaginal neglect on one side and
perceptual neglect on the other (Beschin et al. 2000).
The second piece of evidence concerns memory for the loca-
tions of objects in an array following a change in viewpoint. In
these experiments, reaction times show a linear dependence on
the size of the change in the subject’s location or orientation be-
tween presentation and retrieval (Diwadkar & McNamara 1997).
Related imagery experiments require the subject, previously
shown an array of locations, to point in the direction a location
would have following a (imagined) rotation or translation of the
subject. These experiments show a similar dependence of reaction
time on the size of the rotation or translation between the subject’s
current position and the position from which they should imagine
pointing (Easton & Sholl 1995). These tasks probably differ from
those involving single objects (e.g., Shepherd & Metzler 1971) in
being solved by imagined movement of viewpoint as opposed to
an equivalent imagined movement of the array (for which RTs and
performance are worse). Only when a single object need be con-
sidered can imagined rotation of the array produce performance
approaching that for imagined movement of viewpoint (Wraga et
al. 2000).
The same caveats apply to the interpretation of viewpoint ma-
nipulation data that Pylyshyn raises against mental rotation of sin-
gle objects. However, in this case, there is independent evidence
that our “cognitive architecture” is specifically adapted to accom-
modate the effects of physical movement through the environ-
ment compared to an equivalent movement of the array (Simons
& Wang 1998; Wang & Simons 1999). In these experiments, sub-
jects’ recognition memory for an array of objects on a circular table
top is better after the subject had moved around the table to a new
viewpoint than after an equivalent rotation of the table top. Since
this effect is also observed in the dark (using phosphorescent ob-
jects) and in purely visual virtual reality (Christou & Bulthoff
1999), the facilitation appears to apply to any processes corre-
sponding to movement of viewpoint within the subject’s mental
model of the world.
What are the neural bases of these processes? A patient with fo-
cal damage to both hippocampi is specifically impaired at shifted
view recognition of two or more object-locations compared to
fixed-view recognition, or shifted view recognition of a single ob-
ject-location (King et al. 2002). The neural bases of self-location
and orientation have been well examined in the rat. “Place cells”
in the hippocampus encode the animal’s current location in the
environment (O’Keefe 1976; Wilson & McNaughton 1993) while
“head-direction cells” nearby in the presubiculum (also mammil-
lary bodies and anterior thalamus) encode its current orientation
(Taube et al. 1990). Additionally, cells in the connected area 7a of
monkey parietal cortex represent stimulus locations in frames of
reference relative to eye, head, and trunk, and allow translation
between these frames and the environmental frame (Andersen et
al. 1985; Pouget & Sejnowski 1999; Snyder et al. 1998). Viewpoint-
dependent retrieval of remembered places can be modelled as an
interaction between the parietal, place and head-direction sys-
tems, possibly accounting for their involvement in episodic mem-
ory (Burgess et al. 2001). Interestingly, current models of the
place and head-direction systems see each representation as a
“continuous attractor” (Zhang 1996), in which the represented lo-
cation or direction can shift under internal dynamics, but at a fixed
speed (determined by the effective asymmetry of the connections
between cells). This mechanism, applied to the viewpoint-depen-
dent retrieval model, could explain the reaction time data, pro-
viding an explanatory model linking cells to spatial memory and
imagery. Symbolic accounts seem less well formed to address
these types of data.
Pictures, propositions, and primitives
in the head
Anjan Chatterjee
Department of Neurology and Center for Cognitive Neuroscience, University
of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA 19104. anjan@mail.med.upenn.edu
http://ccn.upenn.edu/people/anjan.html
Abstract: Data from neuropsychology do not support the idea that the pri-
mary visual cortex necessarily displays internal visual images. However, the
choice of formats used in human cognition is not restricted to depictive or
descriptive representations. Nestled between pictures and propositions,
primitive spatial schemas with simple analog features extracted from pic-
torial scenes may play a subtle but wide role in cognition.
The hypothesis that the primary visual cortex serves as a plasma
screen for our subjective experience of visual images falters when
faced with neuropsychological evidence. We reported that two of
three patients with cortical blindness imaged very well (Chatter-
jee & Southwood 1995). The third had a lesion involving the left
temporal-occipital junction, an area implicated in the generation
of such images. Patients with cortical blindness and relatively
spared imagery are not exceedingly rare (Goldenberg et al. 1995).
Butter and colleagues (Butter et al. 1997) contend that such pa-
tients do not have complete damage to primary visual cortex im-
plying that islands of preserved tissue can display internally gen-
erated images. This position is peculiar. The idea that preserved
islands of primary visual cortex support visual imagery but not vi-
sion undermines the original point of a close functional homology
between imagery and perception in early visual cortex.
To oppose the notion of pictures displayed in primary visual cor-
tex, however, sidesteps the deeper issue of whether human cogni-
tion involves more than one representational format. If one ac-
cepts that much of perception has an analog organization and
much of language does not, and further, that one uses language to
communicate information gleaned from perception, then how
does one get from perception to language? One possibility is that
primitive spatial schemas lie between perceptual and linguistic
representations and play a role in human cognition (Chatterjee
2001). This proposal is sketchy at best since it is informed by em-
pirical observations that are at present limited. However, see
Talmy (2000) for a related and developed discussion of schemas
born of a separate theoretical tradition.
The general idea is that schemas retain some analog features of
perception and incorporate discreteness found in symbol systems.
From pictures, simple geometric features such as points, planes,
and vectors are distilled, while the details and sensorial richness
of perception are discarded. The schemas are discrete in that their
features are distinct, generalizable, and easily categorized. As an
Commentary/Pylyshyn: Mental imagery: In search of a theory
186
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (2002) 25:2
. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0140525X02290044
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Chalmers Tekniska Högskola, on 16 Nov 2019 at 15:28:43, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms

example of such a schema, events with participants involved in ac-
tions are conceived with agents on the left of the recipient of ac-
tions, and with the actions moving from left to right. If this schema
underlies event concepts, then we should see its traces when sub-
jects engage these representations.
The following observations support this hypothesis.
1. When normal subjects make semantic associations of pic-
tures of actions as opposed to objects, elementary visual motion
areas MT/MST are activated preferentially, even though the pic-
tures are not moving (Kable et al. 2002). Although these data do
not establish that action representations are schematic, they
demonstrate that the neural mediation of perception and cogni-
tion overlap.
2. Some aphasic individuals have a grammatical disturbance
called a thematic role assignment deficit (Chatterjee & Maher
2000). They are unable to determine who is doing what to whom
when matching sentences to pictures. We described such a patient
who could not map thematic roles from sentences to pictures.
However, rather than respond randomly, he was accurate with
simple active sentences only on pictures with the agent on the left
(Chatterjee et al. 1995a; Maher et al. 1995). We proposed that his
language deficit uncovered a primitive representation of such
events.
3. Normal subjects demonstrate spatial biases when conceiving
action events. When asked to draw events with two participants
described by sentences, right-handed subjects draw the agent on
the left and the recipient of the action on the right. When asked
to draw either the agent or the recipient alone, they draw agents
to the left of where they draw recipients (Chatterjee et al. 1995b).
They also draw action trajectories, such as the path described by
the phrase “dog running” from left to right. In sentence-picture
matching experiments, they respond faster if pictures have the
agent on the left and if the action proceeds from left to right (Chat-
terjee et al. 1999).
This schema appears in other cognitive domains such as mem-
ory and even aesthetics. Representational momentum alluded to
by Pylyshyn is not symmetric. Subjects recall action pictures as
having proceeded further along if depicted going left to right than
right to left (Halpern & Kelly 1993). Children, including Israeli
and Arab children, draw depth relations in pictures with the
nearer and more salient object on the left (Braine et al. 1993).
Subjects judge pictures with implied left to right motion as more
pleasing than images without such implied motion (Christman &
Pinger 1997; Freimuth & Wapner 1979).
Curiously, portrait paintings in the western canon seem subject
to this schema. Portraits are usually painted from an angle so that
more of one side of the face is depicted (McManus & Humphrey
1973). The gender, social status, and personal characteristics of
the subjects influence these orientation biases. Hypotheses in-
voking motor tendencies in right-handed artists, effects of mater-
nal imprinting, hemispheric specialization for emotional expres-
sion or facial perception have been proposed, but they do not
adequately explain the observations (Chatterjee 2002). If agents
are implicitly conceived on the left, displaying more of the right
side of their face, the bias to show the right versus the left side of
the face reflects the extent to which portrait subjects are consid-
ered agents or recipients of actions. For example, arguably in the
fifteenth century women were considered less “agent-like” than
men. A bias to show the left more than right cheek was far greater
for portraits of woman than men in that period. This bias dimin-
ished over time, and is absent in portraits of women sovereigns
(Grusser et al. 1988). The notion of agency in the spatial schema
offers a parsimonious explanation for these painting tendencies
(Chatterjee 2002).
Whether the features of this schema are determined by prop-
erties of hemispheric specialization or by cultural reading habits
is not clear. Even if fashioned by cultural habits, their influence
across such disparate domains makes them unlikely to be epiphe-
nomenal. Note that this schema does not seem subject to “tacit
knowledge.” Regardless of how narcissistic we are, humans prob-
ably don’t believe that actions in the world proceed from left to
right anchored to our specific viewpoint.
In summary, primitive schemas may be nestled between depic-
tive and descriptive mental representations. This claim does not
address directly the picture in the head proposal, but does address
a question that seems to be at stake: Does human cognition en-
gage different forms of representation including some with ana-
log properties?
The nature of mental imagery: How null is the
“null hypothesis”?
Gianfranco Dalla Barba,a Victor Rosenthal,a
and Yves-Marie Visettib
aINSERM Unit 324, Centre Paul Broca, 75014 Paris, France; bLATTICE-
CNRS-ENS, 92120 Montrouge, France. dallabarba@broca.inserm.fr
victorro@broca.inserm.fr
yves-marie.visetti@ens.fr
Abstract: Is mental imagery pictorial? In Pylyshyn’s view no empirical
data provides convincing support to the “pictorial” hypothesis of mental
imagery. Phenomenology, Pylyshyn says, is deeply deceiving and offers no
explanation of why and how mental imagery occurs. We suggest that
Pylyshyn mistakes phenomenology for what it never pretended to be. Phe-
nomenological evidence, if properly considered, shows that mental im-
agery may indeed be pictorial, though not in the way that mimics visual
perception. Moreover, Pylyshyn claims that the “pictorial hypothesis” is
flawed because the interpretation of “picture-like” objects in mental im-
agery takes a homunculus. However, the same point can be objected to
Pylyshyn’s own conclusion: if imagistic reasoning involves the same mech-
anisms and the same forms of representation as those that are involved in
general reasoning, if they operate on symbol-based representations of the
kind recommended by Pylyshyn (1984) and Fodor (1975), don’t we need
a phenomenological homunculus to tell an imagined bear from the real
one?
The central argument in Pylyshyn’s essay is that mental imagery
does not need to be pictorial and that there is not enough evidence
to reject the “null hypothesis,” that “the process of imagistic rea-
soning involves the same mechanisms and the same forms of rep-
resentation as are involved in general reasoning” (sect. 1.2, para.
2). In addition, he claims that we are deeply deceived by our sub-
jective experience of mental imagery and that phenomenology “as
explanatory does not help to understand why and how the behav-
ior [mental imagery] occurs” (sect. 4.4, last para.). The author is
probably right saying that phenomenology does not explain why
and how mental imagery occurs, but phenomenology has never
aimed at causal explanation. Phenomenology is descriptive, it tells
us what imagery is, what it is like to entertain a mental image, and
what purpose it serves in lived human experience. No scientific
perspective, whether neurobiological or cognitive, can thus ab-
stain from phenomenological description. The latter may even
serve an explanatory purpose telling us, for instance, how mental
imagery differs from visual perception. And indeed what phe-
nomenological evidence tells us is that mental imagery may be pic-
torial, though not in the format of visual perception.
It has been argued (Dalla Barba 2002), following Jean-Paul
Sartre’s work (Sartre 1940), that mental imagery is a specific form
of consciousness, a subjective experience that cannot be mistaken
for the experience of perceiving something. “Imaginative con-
sciousness” reflects a particular way of addressing the world. The
object of perception and that of imagination may be identical: a
pack of cigarettes, for example. But consciousness places itself in
a relationship with the object in two different modes. The image
entertained in consciousness is not a faded reproduction of a real
object, as has long been thought, but reflects an original relation-
ship between consciousness and the object. Imaginative con-
sciousness and visual perception differ in nature and serve differ-
ent goals. The latter yields partial, progressive presentation of the
object while the object of imagination is present in its entirety.
Commentary/Pylyshyn: Mental imagery: In search of a theory
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (2002) 25:2
187
. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0140525X02290044
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Chalmers Tekniska Högskola, on 16 Nov 2019 at 15:28:43, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms

Furthermore, while visual perception aims at exploring the out-
side world, the aim of imaginative consciousness is neither to
know what is there, nor to explore it. Knowing and imagining also
rely on a different relationship to the world. The relationship that
perceptual consciousness entertains with its object is that of “re-
alising”: we see the object of perception as real. The relationship
of imaginative consciousness to its object is, on the contrary, that
of “nonrealising”: we imagine the object as unreal, as imagined.
Note also that the object of visual perception continually reveals
and hides itself. The more I observe this pack of cigarettes the
more I notice details which escaped me before. In contrast, the
object present in imaginative consciousness reveals nothing, for
whatever is in the image is already revealed. “I can keep looking
at an image for as long as I wish: I will never find anything but what
I put there,” Sartre (1940) says. This is to say that in visual per-
ception the object constantly goes beyond consciousness, while in
imagination the object is nothing but consciousness. Thus, for ex-
ample, while my visual perception can betray me, my imaginative
consciousness cannot. I may happen to mistake this pack of ciga-
rettes for a box of sweets. No such error can be made by imagina-
tive consciousness: if I imagine a box of sweets, it is the box of
sweets that I imagine, not a pack of cigarettes which erroneously
appears to me as a box of sweets. Sartre called this quasi-observa-
tion our disposition towards the imagined object. We may inspect,
scrutinize our imagination, but this will teach us nothing new, add
nothing to what is already there. The world of mental images is a
world where nothing happens. “I can make one or other object
evolve into an image as I wish, I can rotate a cube, make a plant
grow, a horse run, there will never be the slightest difference be-
tween the object and consciousness. Not an instant of surprise”
(Sartre 1940).
The foregoing discussion clearly provides an illustration of what
phenomenology can teach us about mental imagery and about the
ways it differs from visual perception. It also shows that mental
imagery may be pictorial, at least in the sense that in mental im-
agery “we see something.” It is not phenomenology that ever sug-
gested that when we close our eyes and imagine a scene we en-
gage in an act of visual perception minus the stimulus on the
retina.
Where do we stand then? Pylyshyn is certainly right when he
says that the available empirical data provide no convincing sup-
port to the “pictorial hypothesis” of mental imagery. He may even
be right when he claims that cognitive neuroscience is irrelevant
to this issue. There is, however, phenomenological evidence which
shows that mental imagery may be pictorial, though clearly not in
the way that mimics visual perception. The “pictorial hypothesis”
is, in Pylyshyn’s view, flawed because the interpretation of “picto-
rial-like” objects in mental imagery takes a “homunculus,” an un-
conscious subject who “sees” mental images and interprets them
as mental images. However, the same point can be objected to
Pylyshyn’s own conclusion: If imagistic reasoning involves the
same mechanisms and the same forms of representation as those
that are involved in general reasoning, if they operate on symbol-
based representations of the kind recommended by Pylyshyn
(1984) and Fodor (1975), don’t we need a phenomenological ho-
munculus to tell an imagined bear from the real bear? Better trust
yourself.
Mental imagery: In search of my theory
Edward de Haan and André Aleman
Neuropsychology Section, Helmholtz Research Institute Utrecht and
University Medical Centre Utrecht, 3584 CS Utrecht, The Netherlands.
e.dehaan@fss.uu.nl
http://www.fys.ruu.nl/~wwwfm/
Abstract: We argue that the field has moved forward from the old debate
about “analogical” versus “symbolic” processing. First, it is questionable
that there is a strong a priori argument for assuming a common process-
ing mode. Second, we explore the possibility that imagery is not a unitary
mental function. Finally, we discuss the empirical basis of the involvement
of primary areas.
So here we are, apparently some thirty years after the “Imagery
Debate” commenced, and one of the original contenders stands
up to deny his rival victory. It transpires that we have not even
been able to decide on the playing field: the task was to defy the
null hypothesis. In essence, the target article by Pylyshyn on the
psychological and neuro-anatomical basis of imagery is timely.
However, some of us who are interested in mental imagery do not
subscribe to the view that there is a line in the sand, and that our
research was aimed at deciding at which side the truth falls. It is
our conviction that we have passed this stage and that recent re-
search allows us to formulate new theoretical ideas concerning
how we are able to mentally imagine the outside world. In this
commentary, we would like to focus on three important issues.
First, we question the suggestion that there is a strong a priori ar-
gument for assuming a central or common processing mode. Sec-
ond, we want to explore the possibility that imagery is not a uni-
tary mental function, and finally, we would like to discuss the
empirical basis of the involvement of primary visual cortical areas
in visual imagery.
First, to be controversial, let us start with the observation that
imagery is a mental function that is close to perception. Indeed, it
has been suggested that mental imagery is a trial run of what it
would be like to experience such a perception. (An instructive ob-
servation is that some neurosurgeons practice complex operations
via imagery; James Reason, personal communication.) In adaptive
terms, it would be useful to develop this ability in order to train
and sharpen the system in the comfort of safety. Thus, if it is rea-
sonable to assume that imagery constitutes a (perceptual) ability
that we share with other species, it follows that the mental
processes that are responsible for imagery are related to the per-
ceptual mechanisms. Certainly, most animals do not appear to
have access to general – perception-independent – representa-
tions for reasoning.
Another reason to question the claim for single mental mode
representation coding (the null hypothesis) is the observation that
memory appears to have a category specific build-up. It has been
demonstrated that our knowledge of the outside world is organ-
ised according to different categories and that these different cat-
egories are instantiated in different brain areas (Tranel et al.
1997). These observations are in line with the proposals of a dis-
tributed organisation of our memory, with the hippocampus as a
central reference system that re-activates primary areas (Rolls
2000). Thus, whatever LISP and Logic gave to the world, there
appears to be – at least – as much circumstantial evidence (and
that is really what we are talking about here) to assume that rep-
resentational coding reflects sensory processing.
Second, the target article appears to neglect a body of neu-
ropsychological literature indicating selective deficits within the
realm of imagery. An interesting double dissociation put forward
by Ziyah Mehta (Mehta et al. 1992; Mehta & Newcombe 1996) is
the distinction between the ability to image a verbal code, that is,
text and pictorial information. Both patients experienced severe
problems in visualising the appearance of common stimuli, but the
type of stimulus was crucial. One of the patients, MS, who also suf-
fered from severe object agnosia, was very poor at mental imag-
ing objects but he could comment on the visual appearance of
Commentary/Pylyshyn: Mental imagery: In search of a theory
188
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (2002) 25:2
. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0140525X02290044
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Chalmers Tekniska Högskola, on 16 Nov 2019 at 15:28:43, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms

words. In contrast, the patient SM showed the opposite pattern.
Other evidence for the multi-dimensionality of mental imagery
comes from specific face imagery deficits (Young et al. 1994), and
studies in which attention-based and memory-based imagery pro-
cessing were clearly distinct from each other on empirical grounds
(Kosslyn 1994).
Third, it has been suggested that a dissociation between depic-
tive and spatial images might explain discrepancies in the neu-
roimaging literature (Kosslyn et al. 1999a). Specifically, according
to these theorists, tasks involving imagery of object forms at a high
resolution would involve the primary cortex, whereas imagery
tasks that require a spatial decision would rely on the parietal cor-
tex. Indeed, the very vivid imagery associated with synesthesia, has
been shown to activate area V1 in the absence of visual stimula-
tion (Aleman et al. 2001a). Transcranial magnetic stimulation, be-
ing a “virtual lesion method,” can provide more decisive answers
to these questions than functional brain imaging, where one does
not know whether activation is essential for task performance. To
our knowledge, two transcranial magnetic stimulation (TMS)
studies of visual mental imagery have been conducted, at differ-
ent laboratories, one using a depictive task (Kosslyn et al. 1999a)
and one using a spatial task (Aleman et al. 2002). Consistent with
the prediction above, repetitive TMS (rTMS) targeted at the pri-
mary visual cortex disrupted performance in depictive imagery,
but not in spatial imagery. In the latter study a significant effect
was observed of rTMS over the right posterior parietal cortex.
From the position considered above, interesting new questions
can be generated, such as the one formulated by Trojano et al.
(2000), “Do spatial operations on mental images and those on vi-
sually presented material share the same neural substrate?” This
approach contrasts conditions that target the same cognitive
process but differ in whether the stimuli on which the mental op-
erations are performed have a top-down versus bottom-up gene-
sis. A similar approach was recently taken in a study reporting ev-
idence that congenitally totally blind people are able to perform
not only “visuospatial imagery” tasks, but also tasks involving im-
agery of the visual shape of objects (Aleman et al. 2001b). This
finding is at odds with both the pictorialist position and the expla-
nation in terms of demand characteristics forwarded by Pylyshyn
(i.e., that tacit knowledge is used to simulate what would happen
in a visual situation).
Moving beyond the classical imagery debate, contemporary re-
search should focus on common pathways in which representa-
tions of different sensory origin converge, the interaction between
top-down and bottom-up processing, and the integration of at-
tention, perception, and performance for which the brain was
probably built in the first place.
Does your brain use the images in it,
and if so, how?
Daniel C. Dennett
Center for Cognitive Studies, Tufts University, Medford MA 02155.
ddennett@tufts.edu
http://ase.tufts.edu/cogstud/
Abstract: The presence of spatial patterns of activity in the brain is sug-
gestive of image-exploiting processes in vision and mental imagery, but not
conclusive. Only behavioral evidence can confirm or disconfirm hypothe-
ses about whether, and how, the brain uses images in its information-pro-
cessing, and the arguments based on such evidence are still inconclusive.
Nobody denies that when we engage in mental imagery we seem
to be making pictures in our heads – in some sense. The question
is: Are we really? That is, do the processes occurring in our brains
have any of the properties of pictures? More pointedly, do those
processes exploit any of the properties of pictures? When you
make a long-distance telephone call, there is a zigzag pattern of
activity running through various media from you to your listener
across the country, but if the curves and loops and angles hap-
pened to spell out “Happy Birthday” (as seen from space), this
would be an image on the surface of the planet that was not ex-
ploited in any way by your information-transmission, even if it was
a birthday greeting.
Consider the mindless doodling that involves filling in all the
closed loops on a printed page with your pen. The word “doodling”
would get ink on every letter except the “lin” group, wouldn’t it?
That process depends only on the image properties of the text, and
not at all on the meaning, or even on the identity of the symbols.
You can perform it just as easily on printed text in any language.
Now consider spell-checking. You can’t spell-check a bit-map pic-
ture of a page of text. You have to run it through OCR (optical
character recognition) first, changing the categories from shapes
of black-on-white to strings of alphabet characters. Is the result-
ing data structure an image or not? Since there is no canonical and
agreed-upon list of image-exploiting processes, this is an ill-posed
question. In some ways it is (like) an image and in some ways it is
not. The processes that can extract depth in a random dot stereo-
gram are, like the doodling process, strongly imagistic – in one
sense: they are totally dependent on the topographical properties
of the pattern of stimulation, and not at all on the content thereby
represented (there being none until after the shape in depth has
been extracted). The processes that can “rotate images” à la Shep-
ard and Metzler are, in contrast, strongly dependent on previously
extracted content (try rotating half a random-dot stereogram), so
they are a bit more like spell-checking, a bit less a matter of “brute”
image-processing.
What sometimes looks like deliberate shifting of the goal-posts
in the long-running debate over imagery is better seen, I think, as
the gradual clarification of the ill-defined question above. But con-
fusion and talking-past-each-other persists. As Pylyshyn stresses,
the evidence from neuroimaging studies is, so far, almost irrele-
vant to the points of contention. The presence of readable images
of activity in the brain is suggestive of image-exploiting processes,
probably a practical necessity for such processes to occur, but 
not conclusive. As Kosslyn (1994, p. 80) notes, in the long passage
quoted by Pylyshyn, the issue is about a functional space, not nec-
essarily a physical space. It’s like computer graphics. As long as the
data structures consist of properly addressed registers over which
the operations are defined, the activity can be arbitrarily scattered
around in space in the computer’s memory without hindering the
image-exploitation that is going on.
I explain this to my students with a little thought experiment:
Dismantle a mosaic, tile by tile, numbering each space consecu-
tively, line by line, and mailing the tiles individually to friends all
over the world, writing the address to which each tile is mailed af-
ter the number on a long list (a list, not a map). The mosaic on the
floor is gone, the physical image destroyed. Then ask yourself
questions such as: “Are there any strings of four black tiles in a hor-
izontal row surrounded by white?” This can be answered, labori-
ously, by asking all your pen pals to send a “Yes” message if they
have been sent a black tile, and then analyzing the list to see if any
four consecutive “Yes” answers show up, and then calculating
which pen pals (the “neighbors” of those four, wherever in the
world they are) to ask if their tiles are white. The physical image
on the floor has been destroyed, but the information in it is all
available for image-exploiting processes to work on. You might
happen to mail neighboring tiles in the mosaic to friends who lived
near each other, but the system’s operation does not at all depend
on this coincidence, however convenient it might be in practical
terms. The brain, needing to work fast with rather slow connec-
tive fibers, probably preserves as much geographical correspon-
dence as possible – the retinotopic maps – for exploitation in such
inquiry-processes.
Probably the brain’s preservation of topological relationships is
no mere byproduct of thrift-in-wiring, but also an enabling condi-
tion for image-exploiting processes of information-extraction.
Now, can we prove it? That is what Pylyshyn has been asking all
these years, and as he says, the answers so far largely fail to come
Commentary/Pylyshyn: Mental imagery: In search of a theory
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (2002) 25:2
189
. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0140525X02290044
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Chalmers Tekniska Högskola, on 16 Nov 2019 at 15:28:43, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms

to grips with the logical requirements for a positive answer. In par-
ticular, one cannot establish that mental imagery involves image-
exploiting processes by showing that it utilizes the brain’s vision
systems, because it has yet to be established when and how vision
utilizes image-processing! Vision isn’t television. The product of
vision is not a picture on the screen in the Cartesian Theater (Den-
nett 1991). The fleeting retinal images punctuated by saccades are
the first images, and they are not the last, as Julesz (1971) demon-
strated by showing perception of depth in random dot stere-
ograms that requires image-processing after the optic chiasma.
But which subsequent cortical processes also exploit any of the 
informational properties of images? The eventual “products” 
of vision are such things as guided hand and finger motions, in-
voluntary ducking, exclamations of surprise, triggering of ancient
memories, sexual arousal, . . . and none of these is imagistic in any
sense, so assuming that the events in their proximal causal ances-
try are imagistic is rather like assuming that power from a hydro-
electric plant is apt to be wetter and less radioactive than power
from a nuclear plant. The raw retinal data are cooked in many ways
betwixt eyeball and verbal report (for instance). How cooked are
the processes involved in (deliberate or voluntary) mental im-
agery? We don’t know yet, though investigations are gradually
peeling away the alternatives.
As Pylyshyn says, behavioral evidence – patterns of ease and dif-
ficulty, timing and vulnerability to disruption, and the like – is the
only evidence that can show that, and how, the brain uses images
in its activities. To organize the evidence, we use the heterophe-
nomenological method (Dennett 1982; 1991) to provide a neutral
catalog of how it seems to subjects under many varied conditions,
and then our task is to devise and confirm theories that predict and
explain all that seeming.
Interpreting the neuroscience of imagery
Ian Gold
Philosophy and Bioethics, Monash University, Clayton, VIC 3800, Australia.
ian.gold@arts.monash.edu.au
http://www.arts.monash.edu.au/phil/department/gold/
Abstract: Pylyshyn rightly argues that the neuroscientific data supporting
the involvement of the visual system in mental imagery is largely irrelevant
to the question of the format of imagistic representation. The purpose of
this commentary is to support this claim with a further argument.
Pylyshyn’s paper provides a review of some of the neuroscientific
evidence concerning the overlap between vision and imagery. The
findings are of considerable interest on their own, but, as Pylyshyn
argues, they are of special interest to proponents of the pictorial
view. If – the implicit argument goes – vision and mental imagery
overlap, then imagery, like vision, must be depictive. Pylyshyn’s re-
sponse to this argument, however, is exactly right: Even if the ev-
idence supports the overlap between vision and imagery, the ar-
gument depends on the assumption that the format of visual
representation is depictive. But it is quite possible that both vision
and imagery share an underlying form of representation that is
non-pictorial.
This seems a very obvious point, and the fact that it is regularly
overlooked suggests that it never occurs to most investigators to
doubt that visual representation is pictorial. What makes this unar-
gued for assumption so compelling? I will suggest that it is based
on the error, familiar to philosophers, of confusing the properties
of the represented thing with the properties of the representing
medium. This error is one that is easy to make, and the natural ten-
dency to make it is, I suggest, the reason why the assumption that
vision is pictorial is rarely questioned.
The error of interest is one that arises in the context of “qualia,”
the putative properties of an experience that give the experience
its felt qualities. One reason for thinking there are such things is
that this is what our experience apparently teaches us. Reflect on
your experience of a strawberry and you will simply observe the
“feel” (i.e., felt-quality) associated with its red color. The “feel” is
not part of the strawberry; as a “feel,” it must be in the mind. It
seems to follow that the experience of the strawberry must have a
property in virtue of which the experience of the strawberry has
its characteristic “feel.”
This argument moves from a feature of experiences – that they
have felt-qualities – to a claim about the ontology of experience –
that experiences have special properties. But, as has often been
pointed out,1 this argument depends on a confusion between what
is a property of an experience and what is a property represented
by the experience. When one is asked to describe the property of
the experience of the strawberry that is its red feel, one inevitably
ends up describing a feature of the strawberry itself and not the
experience. Experience, it is sometimes said, is “diaphanous”: one
sees through it to the object or property the experience is repre-
senting. The experience itself has no properties accessible to the
experiencer. Therefore, the inference from the phenomenology of
experience to the ontology of qualia depends on a confusion be-
tween properties of objects represented – the redness of a straw-
berry, for example – and properties of the experiences that do the
representing – the putative redness of the experience itself. Once
the confusion is pointed out, the argument for the existence of
qualia – this argument, at any rate – can be seen to be flawed.
I believe that this same mistake is the one that leads to the ten-
dency to assume that visual experience must be pictorial. The mis-
taken inference can be reconstructed as follows: visual experience
is picture-like: it represents objects as having spatial properties
(among other things); therefore, the underlying representational
form of vision is depictive. When put this way, the mistake is ob-
vious. From the fact that visual experience represents objects as
having spatial properties, one is supposed to draw the inference
that the representing experience also has spatial properties. But
this is no more valid than the inference from the fact that the sen-
tence “The truck is larger than the car” represents spatial proper-
ties, to the claim that language is a spatial medium.
Once the error is made, however, it provides the needed as-
sumption for the implicit argument above that moves from the
overlap between the neuroscience of vision and of imagery to the
claim that the representational form of imagery is depictive. In
fact, however, the spatial nature of the objects represented visu-
ally says nothing whatsoever about the properties of the repre-
senting medium of visual experience. The similarity between vi-
sion and imagery, therefore, entails nothing about the properties
of the representing medium of imagery.
One might be inclined to object that while it might be correct
to deny that the representational medium of vision is depictive,
one cannot make the same claim about imagery. The reason is that
while there can be a confusion between the properties of the ob-
jects that visual experience represents and the properties of visual
experience itself, the same conflation cannot arise in the case of
imagery because imagery need not represent objects at all. If I vi-
sually image the strawberry I have just eaten, how can I confuse
the properties of my experience with the properties of the thing
represented by that experience? There is no thing whose proper-
ties can be confused with the properties of my imagistic experi-
ence.
Here, however, the similarity of visual experience and imagistic
experience works against the picture theorist. Consider the fol-
lowing case (see Lewis 1980): I am looking at a strawberry on the
table in front of me. Unbeknownst to me, a mad scientist is ma-
nipulating my brain as well as the objects in front of me. At the
very same instant, he destroys the strawberry and preserves the
state of my visual system so that I experience the scene as un-
changed. At one moment, my visual experience represents an ob-
ject; at the next it is a vivid image or hallucination. It makes little
sense, however, to think that I have access to information about
the properties of the representing medium after the strawberry is
destroyed, when I fail to have this while the strawberry is in exis-
Commentary/Pylyshyn: Mental imagery: In search of a theory
190
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (2002) 25:2
. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0140525X02290044
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Chalmers Tekniska Högskola, on 16 Nov 2019 at 15:28:43, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms

tence. The existence of the strawberry has no bearing on my ac-
cess to my own mental states. If visual phenomenology reveals
nothing about the ontology representation, there is no reason to
think that imagery does.
NOTE
1. The modern classic is Harman (1990).
Loss of visual imagery: Neuropsychological
evidence in search for a theory
Georg Goldenberg
Neuropsychological Department, Munich Bogenhausen Hospital, D 81925
Munich, Germany. Georg.Goldenberg@extern.lrz-muenchen.de
Abstract: Observations on patients who lost visual imagery after brain
damage call into question the notion that the knowledge subserving visual
imagery is “tacit.” Dissociations between deficient imagery and preserved
recognition of objects suggest that imagery is exclusively based on explicit
knowledge, whereas retrieval of “tacit” visual knowledge is bound to the
presence of the object and the task of recognizing it.
Pylyshyn concludes that neuropsychological evidence does not
support the contention that mental images are based on retino-
topically organized neural representations. This argument is con-
vincing but does not exhaust the contribution of neuropsychology
to the theory of mental images. Observations of patients who lost
visual imagery after brain damage call for a refinement or revision
of the “tacit knowledge” hypothesis, too.
There are at least five visual categories for which imagery can
be selectively affected by brain damage: shapes and colors of com-
mon objects, shapes of faces, shapes of letters, and topographical
relationships (review in Goldenberg 1993). A patient who is un-
able to answer imagery questions about the shape of the ears or
the length of the tail of animals (Kosslyn 1983) may do perfectly
well on imagery questions like those shown in Figure 4 of the tar-
get article concerning the shape of letters (Goldenberg 1992).
Such dissociations can hardly be explained by damage to a visual
buffer or any other structure subserving generation of visual im-
ages independent of their content. The more likely hypothesis that
these patients have lost knowledge of the visual appearance of only
one category of things calls for a theory of that knowledge. How is
it organized that it can break down for only one category? How is
it related to knowledge of non-visual properties?
Another challenge to the tacit knowledge hypothesis is consti-
tuted by patients with loss of visual imagery and preserved visual
recognition (Basso et al. 1980; Farah et al. 1988; Goldenberg
1992). The proposal that these patients have preserved knowledge
of the visual appearance of objects, but are unable to employ an
“image generation process” transforming knowledge into mental
pictures (Farah 1984), has been criticized on two grounds. First,
as already mentioned, the imagery deficit can be restricted to only
certain categories of things. Second, it has been shown that these
patients make errors when they are shown pictorial versions of im-
agery questions, although in this condition the crucial images are
before them and need not be generated before the “mind’s eye.”
For example, when shown images of bears with rounded and with
pointed ears they cannot decide which of them is correct. Obvi-
ously, they lack knowledge of the shape of the bear’s ears.
Nonetheless they readily recognize that these are bears. Their vi-
sual recognition must have access to knowledge of the global
shape and the characteristic features of bears to distinguish them
from lions or dogs. But they are completely unable to imagine the
visual appearance of a bear and not just that of its ears! The knowl-
edge they use in recognition cannot be used for imagery.
Based on these lines of evidence I proposed that there are two
kinds of knowledge of the visual appearance of things (Golden-
berg 1992; 1998; Goldenberg & Artner 1991). Knowledge used in
recognition is restricted to those features which permit a reliable
identification of an object under varying circumstances. It ne-
glects details like the shape of the bear’s ears. There is a second
store of visual knowledge within semantic memory. This knowl-
edge includes information on features not necessary for recogni-
tion in addition to those used for recognition. The source of se-
mantic visual knowledge may be an active interest in the visual
appearance of objects, possibly enhanced by the high value given
to visual arts in our culture and education (Armstrong 1996; Farah
1995a). The crucial point of this hypothesis is that knowledge used
for visual recognition is completely embedded in visual recogni-
tion and cannot be used for any other purpose. Visual imagery is
based exclusively on visual knowledge within semantic memory. If
only this knowledge is lost, patients are unable to imagine the vi-
sual appearance of objects although the knowledge embedded in
recognition enables them to recognize the same objects.
This hypothesis calls into question the idea that visual imagery
is based on “tacit” knowledge. Pylyshyn states that “knowledge is
called ‘tacit’ because it is not always explicitly available for . . . an-
swering questions” (target article, sect. 3.1). Presumably “not al-
ways” means that retrieval is bound to a certain context or task.
This applies to the knowledge used for recognition: Its retrieval is
bound to the presence of the object and to the task of recognizing
it. By contrast, you can form mental visual images in the absence
of the object and in response to a wide variety of questions (or just
for fun), that is, in principle, always!
I propose that visual imagery is equivalent to the explicit recall
of semantic knowledge of the visual appearance of things. This po-
sition is not meant to be a theory of imagery, but a request for such
a theory. An adequate theory of imagery should explain how such
knowledge is acquired, how it is organized, and how it differs from
knowledge of other properties of things. It seems to me that im-
agery is still in search of a theory.
You are about to see pictorial
representations!
Frédéric Gosselina and Philippe G. Schynsb
aDépartement de Psychologie, Université de Montréal, Montréal QC, H3C
3J7, Canada; bDepartment of Psychology, University of Glasgow, Glasgow
G12 8QB, United Kingdom. frederic.gosselin@umontreal.ca
philippe@psy.gla.ac.uk
http://mapageweb.umontreal.ca/gosselif/cv.html
Abstract: Pylyshyn argues against representations with pictorial proper-
ties that would be superimposed on a scene. We present evidence against
this view, and a new method to depict pictorial properties. We propose a
continuum between the top-down generation of internal signals (imagery)
and the bottom-up signals from the outside world. Along the continuum,
superstitious perceptions provide a method to tackle representational is-
sues.
In a memorable courtship scene from the movie “A beautiful
mind,” John Nash asks his future wife to think of an object. “Any-
thing!” he says. She chooses an umbrella. He then turns toward
the starry sky and, connecting some stars one by one with his fin-
ger, shows her a sparse, but nonetheless recognizable, umbrella.
You might not be capable of performing this feat on demand, but
you have surely seen sparse versions of objects or scenes in the sky
or elsewhere at one time or another. On a continuum extending
from pure top-down mental images (internal signals) to strong
bottom-up signals, these extremely sparse objects (we call them
superstitious perceptions in reference to Skinner’s celebrated
1948 article) are closer to mental images than extraneous signals.
More importantly, we will demonstrate that they provide a pow-
erful analytic tool to address the issue of internal representations.
We have recently produced a situation similar to the “umbrella
in the stars” in our laboratories (Gosselin & Schyns, in press). In
Commentary/Pylyshyn: Mental imagery: In search of a theory
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (2002) 25:2
191
. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0140525X02290044
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Chalmers Tekniska Högskola, on 16 Nov 2019 at 15:28:43, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms

one experiment, we instructed two observers (MJ and NL) to de-
tect the presence of a letter “S” (for Superstitious) inserted in
white noise (black and white pixels peppered across the image
field). The observers were instructed that the letter “S” was black
on a white background, filled the image, and was present on 50%
of 20,000 trials. No more detail was given regarding the attributes
of the letter. Unbeknownst to the observers, each trial only con-
sisted in the presentation of a 50 x 50 pixels white noise image (see
our Fig. 1a, for one example) with a black-pixel density of 50%.
Crucially, no bottom-up external signal (i.e., an “S”) was ever pre-
sented.
At first, the observers found the task rather difficult, but, soon,
they said, they responded with ease. In fact, observer NL said that
after about 1,000 trials the “S” popped out when it was present. In
any case, the observers detected an “S” in noise on 46% (NL) and
11% (MJ) of the trials, respectively.
What did the observers respond to? As already stated, no ex-
ternal signal was ever presented, and the observer only saw white
noise. One possibility is that observers generated an internal sig-
nal via imagery, and tried to superimpose this signal onto the in-
coming white noise. Sometimes, this internal signal will be weakly
correlated (here, a correlation smaller than .026) with the exter-
nal white noise and the observer will detect the letter corre-
sponding to his or her imagined signal. On the remaining trials,
the mismatch will simply be too large and the observer will reject
the noise as being what it is – noise. However, and this is impor-
tant to stress, the observer must first generate an internal signal
via imagery to be able to perform this detection task, and attempt
to superimpose this internal signal to external noise. What is the
internal signal of the observer? We will contend that whatever it
is, it represents pictorial properties of the imagined letter.
From Wiener (1958), we know that systematic responses of a
black box to white noise can be used to analyze its behavior. We are
thus looking for a systematic correlation between the noise fields
(xi) and the detection responses (y). This is what reverse corre-
lation does (see also Ahumada & Lovell 1971). The first Wiener
kernel (the linear component) is equal to k21St y(t)xt, where k is a
constant and t is variables indexing all the trials. Leaving aside k,
this amounts to subtracting the sum of all the noise fields that led
to a rejection response from the sum of all the other noise fields
(see Fig. 1a, NL and MJ). For each observer, we best-fitted a
Gaussian density function (see Fig. 1b, the solid lines) to the en-
ergy distribution of his or her first order Wiener kernel (Fig. 1b,
the open circles). This kernel (called the “classification image”)
represents the template of information that drives the detection of
the target “S” letter for this observer. In other words, the first or-
der kernel provides a first approximation of the representation of
the imagined internal signal for the letter “S.” To better visualize
this representation, we sought an information peak in a spectral
analysis of the kernel, and filtered out all spatial frequencies one
standard deviation away from the mean (i.e., keeping a bandwidth
of 0–3 cycles per letter). The outcomes are black “S”s on a white
background filling the image (see Fig. 1c, NL and MJ).
The first order kernel predicts the detection response from
each pixel, individually. However, it is likely that observers used
higher order relationships between the elements of the internal
signal – for example, combinations of two pixels. The second
Wiener kernel examines what these second order relationships
are. It is equal to k22St y(t)xt9xt. Leaving aside k, this is equivalent
to subtracting the sum of all the autocorrelations of the other noise
fields (i.e., the outer product of each noise field vector with itself)
that led to a rejection response from the sum of all the autocorre-
lations of the other noise fields. Figure 1f (NL and MJ) shows the
regions of the second-order kernels that are statistically significant
(p , .01). The number of significant regions far exceeds what
would be expected by chance for both observers (937 pixels for
NL, p , .01, and 1,318 pixels for MJ, p , .01), revealing that the
imagined internal signal imagined did include nonlinear relation-
ships.
What conclusions can be drawn from this study? We have in-
duced superstitious perceptions of an “S” by instructing observers
to detect this letter in noise. Unknown to them, the stimuli never
comprised the letter, but only white noise. If the observers had
been performing only according to an external signal (i.e., in a bot-
tom-up manner), their kernels should have had the same proper-
ties as averaged white noise – that is, zero energy across all spatial
frequencies. However, there was a marked peak of energy be-
tween 1 and 3 cycles per letter that could only arise from top-down
influences arising from an internally generated signal – that is, a
mental image. Further analyses revealed the properties of the in-
ternal signal driving the detection behavior. With white noise as
inputs, the revealed letter could only depict the observer’s imag-
ined letter “S.”
Is the internal signal pictorial in nature? Functionally, yes, be-
cause, if not from a matched internal signal, where else would the
pictorial properties present in the kernels come from? Does this
imply that the observers actually used an image of a “S” from their
memory? Not necessarily, but they had to have knowledge of all
the pictorial characteristics of an “S,” functionally isomorphic to
an actual image of an “S.” We believe that you have just seen rep-
resentations with pictorial properties!
Commentary/Pylyshyn: Mental imagery: In search of a theory
192
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (2002) 25:2
Figure 1 (Gosselin & Schyns).
Adapted from Gosselin and
Schyns (in press, Experiment 1). (a) Raw first order Wiener ker-
nels. (b) Distributions of the average squared amplitude energy
for different spatial frequencies (collapsed across all orientations)
of (a) (expected energy 5 constant). The solid lines are the best
Gaussian fits. (c) (a) filtered with a smooth Butterfield low-pass.
We squeezed pixel intensities within two standard deviations from
the mean. (d) Best matches between (c) and 11,284 letters. (e)
Raw second order Wiener kernels. (f) Statistically significant (p ,
.01) pixels of (e).
. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0140525X02290044
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Chalmers Tekniska Högskola, on 16 Nov 2019 at 15:28:43, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms

Mental imagery during sleep
Claude Gottesmann
Laboratoire de Neurobiologie Comportementale, Faculté des Sciences,
Université de Nice-Sophia Antipolis, 06108 Nice cedex 2, France.
Gottesma@unice.fr
http://www.unice.fr/neurobiol
Abstract: The descriptive “null” hypothesis is strengthened by the fact
that during dreaming sleep stage, the primary visual cortex is deactivated
as compared with other sleep stages.
The topic of this research field seems to be posited in terms of the-
sis and antithesis. Mental imagery involves either inspection of a
brain-induced picture-like object (depictive theory) (Kosslyn et al.
1999a) or “the same processes as that of reasoning in general, ex-
cept that the content or subject matter of thoughts experienced as
images includes information about how things would look” (target
article, Abstract). Are these two theories inevitably antinomical,
and necessarily exclusive? When the author writes of “image-
based thinking” rather than what could have been “thinking-based
imagery” in view of his theory, one realises the complexity of the
subject. I would like to make some comments on mental imagery
during sleep to possibly fuel the discussion.
The brain is never silent psychologically. Not only during wak-
ing, but also during each sleep stage, the brain gives rise to psy-
chological content, the nature of which varies at different stages.
Already at sleep onset there are hypnagogic hallucinations. These
consist of “floating sensations, flashing lights, lantern slide phe-
nomena, fleeting progressions of thoughts and images” (Foulkes
1962), during which the sleeper is rather passive and an onlooker.
The visual system is involved although there is no clearly orga-
nized mental background. These visual phenomena are difficult to
interpret in respect of the two hypotheses of mental imagery. Dur-
ing the true slow wave sleep which follows, stages II, III, IV, the
main results show moderate “thought-like” contents (Fosse et al.
2001; Foulkes 1962) which follow the rules of the secondary
process (Freud 1875/1975) involving the principle of reality
(Freud 1911) as during waking. Although imagery contents have
been described by several authors (Bosinelli 1995; Cavallero et al.
1992; Foulkes 1962; Tracy & Tracy 1974), recent results suggest
that genuine dreams, with their characteristic visual components,
can only occur against the physiological background of rapid eye
movement (REM) sleep (Gottesmann 1999; Hobson et al. 2000;
Nielsen 2000; Takeuchi et al. 2001), even if this stage is “covered,”
that is, it does not show all its electroencephalographic (EEG) and
peripheral characteristics (Nielsen 2000). Night terrors (different
from nightmares) and somnambulism attacks also occur during
slow wave sleep, all these data showing non-visual mental activity
during sleep.
REM sleep is the real dreaming sleep stage. It is characterized
by activation of the majority of brain structures involved in men-
tation. Several points related to the author’s target article have to
be emphasized. Already, old results showed that the well-known
rapid eye movements are the more numerous as the sleeper is ac-
tive in the dream (Dement & Wolpert 1958); this could be related
to the activation of the cortical saccadic eye movement system
(Hong et al. 1995) and could explain the occasionally observed re-
lationship between eye movements and dreaming content (De-
ment & Kleitman 1957; Herman et al. 1984; Roffwarg et al. 1962).
It is difficult to determine whether this is the result of scanning a
visual scene or of movements generated by theoretical thinking.
However, although intuitively it would seem to suggest the first
process, cerebral blood flow is decreased in the striate visual cor-
tex during REM sleep eye movements while it is increased in ex-
trastriate areas (Braun et al. 1998). Otherwise, there are ponto-
geniculo-occipital phasic (PGO)-like waves in humans (McCarley
et al. 1983; Miyauchi et al. 1987) specifically related to the eye
movements generated by pontine structures (Vanni-Mercier et al.
1996); these spikes were hypothesized to be the instigators of
dreams (Hobson & McCarley 1977; McCarley et al. 1983; Miyau-
chi et al. 1987). Since the spikes end mainly in the visual cortex,
this would suggest direct visual activation processes which would
argue in favour of the depictive approach. Steriade et al. (1989)
even stated that, since prior to REM sleep entrance there are very
high amplitude isolated spikes (without eye movements), vivid im-
agery may occur during these short periods. Nevertheless, verbal
reports obtained after awakening from this period do not reveal
visual contents but “a feeling of indefinable discomfort, anxious
perplexity and harrowing worry “ (Lairy et al. 1968, p. 279). Also
Larson and Foulkes (1969) showed that mental contents during
this stage of sleep “are inconsistent with the hypothesis of an in-
tensification of mental activity or cerebral vigilance” (p. 552).
Moreover, in addition to these old data, which are the only ones
available, the time scale of dreaming is ill-matched to PGO-wave
lengths with a maximum of 100 milliseconds, unless we accept that
the successive spikes are responsible for rapid changes of dream
content, a hypothesis which currently seems unlikely (Gottes-
mann 2000). Their only probable consequence is to induce a tran-
sient higher activation of the posterior cortex areas (Satoh 1971).
Coupled with the eye movement data they do not therefore sup-
port the depictive theory.
Nevertheless, all these results related to REM sleep do not ex-
clude the depictive theory of mental imagery, since hallucinatory
activity is the main characteristic of REM sleep mental activity
(Fosse et al. 2001; Hobson et al. 1998). However, there is a major
point which seems to contradict it: the primary visual cortex is de-
activated throughout this sleep stage (Braun et al. 1998), a result
which moreover reinforces Llinas and Ribary’s (1993) convergent
results showing an absence of reset of gamma EEG activity (cen-
tered on 40 Hz) under sensory stimuli, unlike waking. Indirectly,
it also partly confirms Crick and Koch’s (1995) hypothesis of
dream forgetting. Whether picture-like objects would be elabo-
rated, then this should occur in visual associative areas which are
activated (Braun et al. 1998; Lövblad et al. 1999; Madsen et al.
1991). Today, it has not been definitively established whether 
picture-like depictive representations are possible in the extra-
striate visual cortex but many authors suggest its participation in
mental imagery (Braun et al. 1998; Mellet et al. 1998). Moreover,
as postulated by the psychoanalytic model, although dreams give
rise to vivid and generally precise imagery, these images (“mani-
fest content”) are only the disguised visual display of “latent” psy-
chological contents. For Freud (1900), the spatiality of the oneiric
content is therefore no more than an auxiliary representation. This
theory corroborates the descriptive “null” hypothesis. However,
the results of sleep mechanisms still do not contribute decisive in-
formation to the delicate problem of mental imagery.
Functional versus real space: 
Is pictorialism hopeless?
Verena Gottschling
Philosophisches Seminar, University of Mainz, 55099 Mainz, Germany.
verena@gottschling-net.de
Abstract: Pylyshyn raises hot topics like the number and kinds of pictori-
alist theories there are and their explanatory power. Pylyshyn states that
pictorialists have only two possibilities – they can posit either “only func-
tional” images or “really spatial” images – and that neither of these possi-
bilities is convincing or sufficient in explanatory power for empirical and
theoretical reasons. Is pictorialism, in principle, untenable?
In Pylyshyn’s challenging target article there are two issues that I
want to focus on: (1) The thesis that if depictive theories propose
only functional space, there is no explanatory power; and (2) the
thesis that if depictive theories propose a literal sense of “spatial
extent,” there is no explanatory power and there are logical and
conceptual problems.
Pylyshyn presents a challenging argument1 for (1): Taking up
Commentary/Pylyshyn: Mental imagery: In search of a theory
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (2002) 25:2
193
. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0140525X02290044
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Chalmers Tekniska Högskola, on 16 Nov 2019 at 15:28:43, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms

Kosslyn’s (1981) example of a matrix to explain functional space,
he argues that a matrix is in fact no example for functional space
because the use of spatial notions is only found in our description
of the matrix; the matrix itself is organized differently (sect. 5.2).
There are no intrinsic constraints on how the cells in a matrix must
be processed. And if we use extrinsic constraints there is no ad-
vantage at all because extrinsic constraints can be applied to any
form of representation. That is why the explanatory power lies 
in the extrinsic constraints, not in the format of the representa-
tion.
What does this argument show? It only shows that the normal
intuitive understanding of a matrix as an example of functional
space doesn’t work. However, it does not show that the idea of
purely functional space does not work. Yes, we need intrinsic con-
straints to explain spatial characteristics of mental imagery and to
explain the results of imagery studies. But the central question is:
Are there no other possibilities that can be used to characterize
functional space? Even if the current proposal does not work, we
cannot conclude that the whole idea of functional space as such
has no explanatory power. Thesis (2) presupposes that there is no
interpretation of the functional thesis that can explain the data via
intrinsic properties of the representing relations (sect. 7.2). How-
ever, I think that a possible alternative is hinted at in Note 6 of
Pylyshyn’s target article: what we need is the representation of spa-
tial relations via nonspatial relations. And, in addition, these rela-
tions have to satisfy the same inherent constraints as the spatial re-
lations. A clearer understanding of what that could mean can be
found in Palmer (1978) and Rehkaemper’s (1991) concept of nat-
ural isomorphism.
The imagery debate would not be solved for Pylyshyn even if
we do find “real colored stereo pictures” on the visual cortex (sect.
7.4, para. 1). Why? Because, alongside several empirical argu-
ments, there seem to be a number of important conceptual and
systematic issues, as follows:
The point at issue for Pylyshyn is whether early vision partici-
pates in imagery (sect. 6.5). The key notion is cognitive penetra-
bility: Cognitive penetrability is the criterion for differentiating
functional architecture and the cognitive system.2 In contrast to
high-level vision, early vision is not and cannot be cognitively pen-
etrable, because there is no top-down processing from the cogni-
tive system (see Pylyshyn 1999, sect. 1.1). Early states of vision are
therefore not sensitive to cognitive influences, that is, they are not
cognitively penetrable. But imagery is cognitively penetrable, so
early states of vision cannot be involved in imagery. Images can-
not be located in early vision.
Kosslyn admits the cognitive penetrability of imagery. In his
theory there are many subsystems on different levels of process-
ing (e.g., early and higher level vision). However, even if the whole
process is cognitively penetrable, and this process involves activi-
ties at many levels, we cannot conclude that every part of this
process has to have this property. It is important to be aware that
(at least Kosslyn’s) pictorialism is a hierarchical theory. Images are
subordinated to descriptive representations. It is even more com-
plicated if you look closely: Sometimes an image is taken to be the
conjunction of a quasi-pictorial component (in Kosslyn’s terms;
1981, p. 213) and a descriptive component, stored in long-term-
memory, that is, only one part of an image is pictorial. Most peo-
ple (like Pylyshyn) mean by “image” only the alleged pictorial part
of the representation.
Pylyshyn’s argument only works if we use “image” in the second
meaning. But even then there is a close connection with the cor-
responding knowledge in long term memory, which is usually
thought to be descriptive. For Pylyshyn, bringing in conceptual
complexity is the first step in the direction “where one gives the
actual image less and less of an explanatory role” (sect. 7.2, para.
10). But that does not imply that every proposal of this kind has
no explanatory power at all. If including conceptual information
in a theory of imagery has this consequence, then no hierarchical
depictive theory of imagery is in fact possible. But as far as I know
all proponents of hierarchical pictorialism admit that they need
conceptual information. The whole idea of generating an image in
short term memory from stored descriptive information takes that
for granted.
Another important problem for the real display view is the 
homunculus problem, or in Dennett’s terms the “Cartesian The-
ater” (Dennett 1997, p. 83). That is, the notion that there is a cen-
tral place in the brain where experiences were first presented, and
then analyzed and interpreted. In the reinterpretation debate 
this has remained the central problem too. In my opinion, the de-
scription of the process is itself wrong. Even in the primarily 
visual cortex there is no pure presentation of unanalyzed infor-
mation without analysis. Analysis is an all-pervading functional
process.
Further, pictorialists must show that the processes in the visual
system interpret images in a way that depends on their retinotopic
shape (sect. 7.1). That is a hard nut to crack. It means that pure
neuroscientific findings can never solve the imagery debate, be-
cause all they can find are activities in brain areas. And these ac-
tivities can be epiphenomenal.
To sum up: To defend thesis (1) we need more than the trivial
discovery that the intuitive interpretation of functional space does
not work. There is no principled reason why a proposal like the
one suggested could not work. Central for thesis (2) is Pylyshyn’s
criterion of cognitive penetrability and his conception of the basic
assumptions purportedly shared by all true cognitive theories. In
this conception there is no place for images. So proponents of real
display pictorialism need to propose an alternative conception.
This suggests to me that the situation for pictorialists of both kinds
is not hopeless, rather, it remains very challenging.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
Thanks to Thomas Metzinger and Jesse Prinz for comments.
NOTES
1. Even if he does not call it an argument.
2. In fact its status is more complicated: It is a necessary but not a suf-
ficient condition (sect. 3.2).
Neural substrates of visual percepts, imagery,
and hallucinations
Stephen Grossberg
Department of Cognitive and Neural Systems and Center for Adaptive
Systems, Boston University, Boston, MA 02215. steve@bu.edu
http://www.cns.bu.edu/Profiles/Grossberg
Abstract: Recent neural models clarify many properties of mental im-
agery as part of the process whereby bottom-up visual information is in-
fluenced by top-down expectations, and how these expectations control 
visual attention. Volitional signals can transform modulatory top-down sig-
nals into supra-threshold imagery. Visual hallucinations can occur when
the normal control of these volitional signals is lost.
Pylyshyn quite rightly opposes any view of visual imagery that
takes the form of a naive “picture theory” (see target article, sects.
1.1 and 5.1). He proposes instead to reduce experiences of im-
agery to a kind of “thinking”(sect. 1.1). His question: “Is the ‘mind’s
eye’ just like a real eye?” even leads him to derisively ask if the
mind’s eye has properties like a blind spot (sect. 5.1). People who
would, in fact, view imagery as a “picture” in the mind come dan-
gerously close to falling into the trap of naïve realism. But by 
recoiling too far from this unsupportable extreme view about im-
agery, Pylyshyn seems to embrace too much the “thinking” end of
the dialog between “seeing” and “thinking.”
To fully discuss how imagery relates to visual perception, one
needs to consider all the facts that are known about vision and how
they resemble or differ from those of imagery. Pylyshyn provides
a nice sample of such comparisons. My comments will summarize
some conclusions drawn from neural models of visual perception.
Commentary/Pylyshyn: Mental imagery: In search of a theory
194
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (2002) 25:2
. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0140525X02290044
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Chalmers Tekniska Högskola, on 16 Nov 2019 at 15:28:43, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms

These models gain their predictive force from their ability to
quantitatively simulate perceptual data. The most recent models
go so far as to quantitatively simulate the responses of identified
cortical cells in known anatomical circuits and perceptual proper-
ties that they control; for example, Grossberg and Raizada (2000),
Raizada and Grossberg (2001). These models shed light on many
of the facts and issues raised by Pylyshyn, and suggest that decid-
ing between thinking and seeing (or imagining) is not an either-or
decision. Rather, there are bottom-up and top-down interactions
between seeing and thinking, and the top-down interactions, in
the absence of bottom-up data, can give rise to an experience of
imagery when they are modulated by volition. Perhaps more im-
portant than these particulars, the models provide a theoretical ra-
tionale for why imagery exists, and constitute a rigorous theoreti-
cal framework in which it can be analyzed. Thus, I would contend
that there is an emerging theory of imagery, but it is not a thing
unto itself. Rather, it is part of a larger neural theory of visual see-
ing and thinking.
First, let me state some of the general conclusions from this the-
oretical work. The first model, called Adaptive Resonance Theory,
or ART (Grossberg1999b), suggests how brain mechanisms of
learning, attention, and volition may give rise to mental imagery
during normal behaviors, and to hallucinations during schizo-
phrenia and other mental disorders. It is proposed that normal vi-
sual (and other) learning and memory are stabilized through the
use of learned top-down expectations. These expectations learn
prototypes that are capable of focusing attention upon the combi-
nations of “critical features” that comprise conscious perceptual
experiences. When top-down expectations are active in an atten-
tional priming situation, they can modulate or sensitize their tar-
get cells to respond more effectively to matched bottom-up infor-
mation. They cannot, however, fully activate these target cells.
These predicted matching properties have been supported by
neurophysiological experiments; for example, Bullier et al. (1996),
Lamme et al. (1998), Reynolds et al. (1999), Sillito et al. (1994).
A recent embodiment of ART mechanisms within the laminar
circuits of visual cortex, called the LAMINART model, suggests
how the learned prototype is realized by the on-center of a top-
down on-center off-surround network (Grossberg 1999a). The
modulatory property of such a top-down expectation is achieved
through a balance between top-down excitation and inhibition
within the on-center. Volitional signals can shift the balance be-
tween excitation and inhibition to favor net excitatory activation.
Such a volitionally-mediated shift enables top-down expectations,
in the absence of supportive bottom-up inputs, to cause conscious
experiences of imagery and inner speech, and thereby to enable
fantasy and planning activities to occur. If these volitional signals
become tonically hyperactive during a mental disorder, the top-
down expectations can give rise to conscious experiences in the ab-
sence of bottom-up inputs and volition. These suprathreshold
events help to explain key data properties about hallucinations
(Grossberg 2000). The level of abstractness of learned prototypes
may covary with the abstractness of imagery and hallucinatory
content.
Given this theoretical context, the following remarks briefly re-
spond to some of Pylyshyn’s concerns about imagery: (1) Both bot-
tom-up activation of visual percepts and top-down cognitively-ac-
tivated and volitionally-modulated imagery are possible within the
visual system. Seeing, imagery, and thinking are not mutually ex-
clusive concepts. There is no contradiction in claiming that visu-
ally-based imagery exists and that it can be manipulated by cogni-
tive constraints. (2) Visual representations are not like images on
the retina. Rather, depthful boundary groupings and surface rep-
resentations are formed through hierarchical and interstream in-
teractions in areas V2 to V4 to represent occluding and occluded
surfaces, both modally and amodally (Lamme et al. 1999; Schiller
1994). FACADE theory predicts that the final modal figure-
ground separated visual representation is formed in V4 (Gross-
berg 1994, 1997; Kelly & Grossberg 2000). (3) Top-down expec-
tations and attention operate at all levels of this hierarchy and can
reorganize cell properties using higher-level constraints; for ex-
ample, Bullier et al (1996), Lamme et al. (1998), Reynolds et al.
(1999), Sillito et al. (1994). (3) When higher-level visual and cog-
nitive representations and their top-down expectations act, they
do not always have effects that are equivalent to bottom-up acti-
vation by visual scenes. For example, one would not expect an im-
agery percept of a Necker cube to be bi-stable if the top-down ex-
pectation is already biased to one interpretation.
In summary, the “imagery debate” is often carried out as a thing
unto itself, without engaging the greater theoretical and modeling
literature in vision. Recent neural models clarify why imagery ex-
ists, as well as some of its mechanistic substrates as part of a larger
theory of vision and cognition.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
Author was supported in part by the Air Force Office of Scientific Re-
search (F49620-01-1-0397), the Defense Advanced Research Projects
Agency and the Office of Naval Research (ONR N00014-95-1-0409), and
the Office of Naval Research (ONR N00014-95-1-0624).
Problems with a “cortical screen” for
visual imagery
David Ingle
39 Pratt St., Framingham, MA 01702. lake@gis.net
Abstract: I support Pylyshyn’s skepticism that visual imagery reflects a re-
activation of the spatial layout of active neurons embedded within a topo-
graphical cortical map of visual space. The pickup of visual information via
successive eye movements presents one problem and the two visual sys-
tems model poses another difficulty.
One of Pylyshyn’s most telling critiques of Kosslyn’s “screen pro-
jection” theory of visual imagery deserves more amplification than
he himself offers. He notes that, as we pick up information from
a visual scene during a series of eye saccades, disparate spatial lo-
cations are sequentially projected on the same foveal representa-
tion within the striate cortex. If mental imagery (MI) of a remem-
bered object involved reactivation of the striate neurons, which
were active during the scan sequence, we would witness a jumble
of MIs. My own experiences with unusual “visual persistence”
(VP) effects makes this point clear. I can fixate on an object for as
little as one second, close my eyes and continue to see a pencil, a
face, or a word for at least ten seconds as a vivid positive after-
image. (My VPs may result from use of a morphine-agonist for
chronic pain, but they are confirmed by a second visual scientist
whose images are most intense during hypoglycemia.) Unlike reti-
nal after-images, our persisting images do not move as we turn
eyes or head to the side – rather, they remain fixed in body-cen-
tered coordinates. After I have someone set out three small ob-
jects (unknown to me) in a triangular array on a white background
and then briefly inspect each one in turn through a cardboard
tube, I see for about ten seconds after eye closure persisting im-
ages of the three objects in their real world locations. That is, I see
a spatial configuration that was never present on the retina during
the three brief visual fixations. (A detailed account of several VP
phenomena is in preparation.)
If my VPs reflect continued activity of shape-sensitive and
color-sensitive neurons within a “cortical screen,” its location must
be more central than areas 17 and 18, since these neurons have
receptive fields (RFs) that move with saccades (e.g., in monkeys).
Although objects and colors are sharply discriminated by many
neurons within the inferotemporal cortex (Desimone et al. 1984),
here there does not appear to be a two- dimensional map, but only
cells with very large RFs which register the identity but not the lo-
cation of their optimal stimuli. The parietal cortex is one candidate
for the spatial screen on which my VPs are localized, since the re-
ceptive fields of some parietal cells (in the monkey) also maintain
Commentary/Pylyshyn: Mental imagery: In search of a theory
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (2002) 25:2
195
. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0140525X02290044
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Chalmers Tekniska Högskola, on 16 Nov 2019 at 15:28:43, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms

a constant spatial location during eye and head movements (An-
derson et al. 1990).
However, the map recently found within the parietal cortex
(Sereno et al. 2001) is not based on the usual correspondence of
visual RF locations with neuronal positions within the two-di-
mensional cortical sheet. Here, it is the optimal eye movement di-
rections associated with cell discharge that are mapped in respect
to cortical coordinates. If the parietal cortex provides a map of in-
tended eye movements, then it must be actively searching for a
target for its intrinsic map to come alive. The problem is that
prominent visual objects, VPs and mental images (MIs) are well
localized when the gaze is fixed or when a scene is presented
tachistoscopically.
Another problem with the screen hypothesis is that my VPs re-
main localized in body-centered space, after I rotate my body
more than 90 degrees. Then the VP is located outside my visual
field. I can also obtain vivid MIs of my hands (opening, closing, or
rotating) when each hand is held in the far periphery. These MIs
are not altered by turning my head to one side, so that one MI is
outside my visual field. While there is no current physiological ev-
idence for a brain map which represents the rear (unseen) field,
my unpublished studies have shown that one can localize an MI
of a previously seen target, after rotating away from it, so that it is
located behind the back. A group of 30 college students localized
this rear field MI as accurately as they localized remembered tar-
gets in the frontal field (replication earlier findings of Attneave et
al. 1977). Yet it is possible that some part of the parietal cortex par-
ticipates in representation of body-centered spatial coordinates
(including the space behind the head) since I reported (Ingle
1990) on a single individual whose small parietal damage is asso-
ciated with total loss of short-term memory for contralateral tar-
get directions after self-rotation. Relevant spatial coding in the
parietal cortex might be found if recording experiments were done
in passively rotated monkeys who were trained to reach in the dark
for recently seen targets.
A deep problem with the screen hypothesis is the very nature
of the “two visual systems” model, as updated by Ungerleider and
Mishkin (1982) and by Milner and Goodale (1995). The coding of
object identity (via shape and color-selective neurons) occurs
within a separate visual stream (ventral) than that encoding visual
location (dorsal stream). If temporal and parietal reverberations
are the direct sources of mental imagery (or of my VPs), the ob-
jects and their spatial frameworks must merge within some fur-
ther brain system to which both dorsal and ventral stream targets
project. One candidate for such a perceptual synthesis is the pre-
frontal cortex, where some neurons are found to encode both ob-
ject identity and spatial location (Rao et al. 1999). So far there is
no evidence for a spatially organized “screen” in this region where
the two systems appear to merge. It remains possible that the reg-
istration of a (nonidentifiable) object moving through space does
depend on shifting activity within a parietal map, but it appears
that the confluence of space and identity occurs in a system no
longer operating in maplike coordinates. I don’t wish to exagger-
ate my difference with Kosslyn, since I favor his hypothesis that
visual imagery uses much of the same neural machinery as acti-
vated in direct perception of an object or scene, but I favor the idea
of a brain system which no longer operates in a “map-like” fashion.
Ultimately, a central map of visual space must be read out in
terms of motor coordinates: that is, perception of a given transla-
tion or rotation of an object in space has a precise equivalent in
terms of body, head or hand movement required to produce the
identical change. One result of my own VP experiments is that one
or two persisting images can be moved about (after eye closure)
as my hands move while holding them. A key experiment involves
fixating on a small object (bottle or toothbrush), closing the eyes,
and then moving it to the periphery in one hand, so that the VP is
now vividly seen far to one side. If the second hand then moves
from my lap to the symmetrical peripheral field, the single VP sud-
den appears within the second hand, as if it had instantly jumped
across 150 degrees of empty space. Somehow the brain activity
underlying the VP (in both the temporal lobes?) is co-opted by ac-
tivating the motor (or premotor) system of the second hemi-
sphere.
These facts suggest that my VPs are unusually vivid correlates
of a process preceding the memory formation which underlies
mental imagery. The strong linkages of VP location to hand move-
ments suggest that MIs can be useful in representing peripheral
objects to be grasped or manipulated while the subject is focused
centrally. MIs may be used in guiding routine manual tasks, as well
as used for creative solutions to new challenges.
How do we define “sameness” of the
processing of mental images and general
reasoning processes?
Margaret Jean Intons-Peterson
Department of Psychology, Indiana University, Bloomington, IN 47405.
intons@indiana.edu
Abstract: This commentary raises questions about the central concepts in
the null hypothesis presented by the author of the target article and urges
expansion of the treatment of mental imagery to forms of sensory imagery
beyond the visual.
Professor Pylyshyn provides a stimulating and provocative review
of research on visual imagery, which will serve as an incentive to
expand exploration of this tantalizing and challenging aspect of
human cognition. In recognition of his contribution I raise three
issues that I hope will further such an expansion. The issues in-
volve what Pylyshyn calls his “null hypothesis;” namely,
that reasoning with mental images involves the same form of represen-
tation and the same processes as that of reasoning in general, except that
the content or subject matter of thoughts experienced as images in-
cludes information about how things would look. (Abstract, last sen-
tence)
My first question deals with the definition of the word “same”
and the second asks how the similarity of processing visual images
and general reasoning is to be assessed when the last phrase allows
for the modification of visual image processing by information
about “how things look.” The third issue addresses the use of the
term “mental” images when the article focuses exclusively on vi-
sual images.
How, exactly, is the word “same” to be defined? What are its
philosophical concomitants? Excluding the final phrase of the null
hypothesis for the moment, does Pylyshyn mean that the form of
representation and the processes invoked by mental images must
be identical to those invoked during reasoning in general, to sat-
isfy his null hypothesis? Or does he assume a more fluid interpre-
tation of “sameness,” such that any similarity between processes
stimulated by imagery and general reasoning is sufficient to accept
his null hypothesis? As any one who has followed studies of con-
cept identification knows, the word “same” may refer to a range
of possibilities, extending from exact, unequivocal, duplicative
identity to similarity of various degrees. Hence, the definition of
“sameness” must be specified, for it is not simply a pedantic con-
cern. The concept of identity appears to exclude any deviations
from precise replication, save, perhaps, those resulting from im-
perfect measurements and uncontrolled factors, including infor-
mation about how things look, if we include the last phrase of the
null hypothesis. If Pylyshyn equates identity with sameness, he is
adopting a form of the null hypothesis so strong as to be almost
meaningless, given our inability to control all relevant factors. If
he means anything other than a cloning-type identity, he is adopt-
ing a form of the null hypothesis potentially so weak as to elimi-
nate the possibility of refutation, particularly if information about
visual appearance is allowed. It would be useful to know how
Pylyshyn deals with these conundrums.
Commentary/Pylyshyn: Mental imagery: In search of a theory
196
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (2002) 25:2
. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0140525X02290044
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Chalmers Tekniska Högskola, on 16 Nov 2019 at 15:28:43, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms

My third concern is that the title, the statement of his null hy-
pothesis, and the general thesis of the article will encourage his
readers to apply his reasoning to all mental images, even though
his examples deal exclusively with visual ones. In fact, I regret that
he narrowed his coverage to visual images because the inclusion
of other forms of images, such as those often labeled as auditory,
olfactory, gustatory, kinesthetic, and so forth, have the potential to
provide important tests of his general discussion and even the ex-
pression of the null hypothesis by substituting appropriate final
words such as “hear,” “smell,” “taste,” and “feel” for “look.” Far
less research has been devoted to these types of imagery, to be
sure, but there could be striking support for his central hypothe-
sis if substantially similar (identical?) types of processing occurred
in each of these sensory-proprioceptive areas, when the simulated
sensory inputs were taken into account. Perhaps the next stage of
imagery research is to explore the similarities and differences
among various types of imagery.
Imagery in multi-modal object learning
Martin Jüttnera and Ingo Rentschlerb
aNeuroscience Research Institute, Aston University, Birmingham, B13 9DH
United Kingdom; bInstitut für Medizinische Psychologie, Universität München,
80336 Munich, Germany. m.juttner@aston.ac.uk
ingo@imp.med.uni-muenchen.de
Abstract: Spatial objects may not only be perceived visually but also by
touch. We report recent experiments investigating to what extent prior ob-
ject knowledge acquired in either the haptic or visual sensory modality
transfers to a subsequent visual learning task. Results indicate that even
mental object representations learnt in one sensory modality may attain a
multi-modal quality. These findings seem incompatible with picture-based
reasoning schemas but leave open the possibility of modality-specific rea-
soning mechanisms.
In his target article, Pylyshyn focuses a lot on the depictive nature
of mental images, and on the assumption that examining such im-
ages involves the same mechanisms as those used in visual per-
ception. Linking imagery and vision in such a way implies that pic-
ture-like representations are explanatory for vision in its own right.
Notwithstanding the functional role of early visual mechanisms,
one should keep in mind that vision ultimately is not about per-
ceiving flat, two-dimensional (2D) pictures. Rather, it is about
sensing a three-dimensional (3D) space and 3D objects embed-
ded within that space. In this respect, the discussion about picto-
rial versus non-pictorial formats prevailing in the imagery debate
is reminiscent of the discussion about the nature of mental object
representations.
The latter has been dominated by two opposing views. On the
one hand, it has been postulated that objects are mentally repre-
sented in terms of “symbolic” 3D, object centred, part-based de-
scriptions (e.g., Biederman 1987; 2000; Marr & Nishihara 1978).
On the other hand, there have been studies providing evidence for
a more “pictorial” 2D representation of 3D objects, in terms of
multiple, viewer centred views, among which the visual system in-
terpolates if necessary (e.g., Edelman 1995; Poggio & Edelman
1990; Tarr et al. 1998).
The two hypotheses have been mainly put to test in mental ro-
tation paradigms in which a test object is presented from differ-
ent perspectives and the changes of error rate or response latency
in identification tasks are being measured as a function of viewing
angle. However, it has been shown that within this paradigm the
two alternative explanations may not lead to readily distinguish-
able predictions. First, the dependency on viewpoint is itself de-
pendent on object familiarity (Tarr & Pinker 1989), demonstrat-
ing the necessity to take into account learning processes. Second,
a closer inspection of the apparent complementary approaches
shows that the assumed viewpoint-invariance of the 3D symbolic
descriptions only holds under certain conditions (Biederman &
Gerhardstein 1995). Conversely, representations in terms of mul-
tiple 2D views may become quasi-independent from viewpoint, if
the number of views is sufficiently large, or if the interpolation
mechanism between views becomes more efficient due to train-
ing (Edelman & Bülthoff 1992). Not surprisingly, the interpreta-
tion of such mental rotation experiments has remained contro-
versial (see, e.g., Rentschler et al. 2000).
Yet spatial objects may not only be perceived visually but also
by touch. Experiments on haptic object recognition demonstrate
that the identity of familiar objects may be established very quickly
and seems to be mediated mainly by 3D structural information
(Klatzky & Lederman 1995; 1999). Indeed, there is an intrinsic
similarity between visual and tactile object recognition, in that
both are based on the extraction of basic features, such as contours
and their spatial arrangement, which together define an object.
This raises the possibility that object recognition may benefit from
a multi-modal integration of sensory information.
In a recent study (Rentschler et al., submitted) of trans-modal
object learning we investigated whether prior object knowledge
acquired in either the haptic or visual sensory modality transfers
to a subsequent visual learning task. Three molecule-like models,
each being composed of four spheres, served as learning objects.
The objects were generated both as virtual models (to be dis-
played and manipulated via the computer mouse in a virtual-real-
ity environment) and as physical models. The experiment con-
sisted of two phases, an exploratory phase and a learning phase.
During the exploratory phase the subjects explored the objects ei-
ther haptically (being blindfolded and using the physical object
models) or visually (using the virtual object models). In the sub-
sequent phase of visual learning the subjects were trained in a su-
pervised-learning paradigm to recognize a set of 2D views of the
learning objects. Both the duration of the exploration phase and
the amount of training given in the learning phase were the same
for all subjects.
Three groups of children and adolescents in the age ranges 8–
9 years, 10–11 years, 13–14 years, plus a fourth group of adult
subjects (. 20 years) participated. Each age group was subdivided
into three subgroups which were assigned to one of the conditions:
haptic (haptic exploration 1 visual learning), visual (visual explo-
ration 1 visual learning) and control (visual learning only). Figure
1 summarizes visual recognition performance upon completion of
the learning phase. The data show that the sensory modality em-
ployed during the exploratory phase had a distinct impact on the
Commentary/Pylyshyn: Mental imagery: In search of a theory
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (2002) 25:2
197
Figure 1 (Jüttner & Rentschler).
Visual recognition perfor-
mance as a function of subject age upon completion of a multi-
modal object learning task. The task involved combinations of ei-
ther a visual or a haptic exploration phase and a visual learning
phase. The control condition only involved visual learning.
. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0140525X02290044
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Chalmers Tekniska Högskola, on 16 Nov 2019 at 15:28:43, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms

subsequent visual learning. Moreover, this effect revealed a sig-
nificant interaction with age. Specifically, for subjects aged 13
years and above learning performance was significantly higher if
preceded by a haptic rather than a visual exploration. For children
aged 10–11 years visual and haptic exploration proved equally ef-
ficient, whereas for younger children (8–9 years) only a visual ex-
ploration gave them a significant advantage relative to the control
condition.
The implications of these results are threefold. First, the trans-
fer from haptic to visual learning suggests that mental object rep-
resentations may attain an intrinsically multi-modal quality even
if the training involves only one specific sensory modality at a time.
Second, the fact that the haptic-to-visual transfer proved to be
more efficient than the visual-to-visual transfer shows that such
representations are not compatible with any notion of a pictorial
format. Otherwise one should have expected the reverse finding.
Third, the age-dependent dissociation between the haptic and the
visual condition argues against the notion that the former simply
fosters the involvement of imagery mechanisms (such as mental
rotation) more strongly than the latter, thus leading to a better
learning performance. Rather, the significant interaction between
the factors of age and condition indicates that haptic and visual ex-
ploration contribute independently to the ontogenesis of mental
object representations.
In summary, our results suggest that any attempt to character-
ize mental object representations in terms of spatial images must
be futile, because of the intrinsically multi-modal nature of such
representations. However, they also provide some evidence that
Pylyshyn’s “null hypothesis,” according to which reasoning is a uni-
tary (i.e., modality-unspecific) mechanism, may require revision.
Mental imagery doesn’t work like that
Stephen M. Kosslyn, William L. Thompson,
and Giorgio Ganis
Department of Psychology, Harvard University, Cambridge, MA 02138.
smk@wjh.harvard.edu
www.wjh.harvard.edu/~kwn/
Abstract: This commentary focuses on four major points: (1) “Tacit
knowledge” is not a complete explanation for imagery phenomena, if it is
an explanation at all. (2) Similarities and dissimilarities between imagery
and perception are entirely consistent with the depictive view. (3) Knowl-
edge about the brain is crucial for settling the debate. (4) It is not clear
what sort of theory Pylyshyn advocates.
Pylyshyn has done a service by assembling in one place his argu-
ments against depictive theories of imagery. Although his basic
points are essentially the same as those he presented in Pylyshyn
(1981), our responses have been augmented by recent develop-
ments in cognitive neuroscience. In this brief reply, we focus only
on what we take to be the most central points of Pylyshyn’s argu-
ments. But first, let us try to be clear on what we take to be the
central issue: Does visual mental imagery rely (in part) on a dis-
tinct type of representation, namely, one that depicts rather than
describes? By “depict” we mean that each portion of the repre-
sentation is a representation of a portion of the object such that
the distances among portions of the representation correspond to
the distances among the corresponding portions of the object (as
seen from a specific point of view; see Kosslyn 1994, for a more
complete characterization). The issue is not whether images per-
fectly preserve perceptual phenomena; they obviously do not. Nor
is the issue whether imagery shares processing mechanisms with
perception; it does, but in theory those shared mechanisms need
not rely on depictive representations. Nor is the issue whether
knowledge (tacit or explicit) can affect imagery; it clearly can (in-
deed, many of the uses of imagery rely on this characteristic). The
issue is whether imagery relies in part on a qualitatively distinct
type of internal representation, which is not used in language.
Tacit knowledge. We have five comments regarding the appeal
to tacit knowledge as an explanation for empirical findings about
imagery.
1. The fact that tacit knowledge might explain a result does not
imply that it does explain a result. Unless Pylyshyn can devise ways
to discover whether subjects do in fact have specific tacit knowl-
edge (and can use it to affect their behavior appropriately), then
the claim is vacuous. Indeed, actual empirical studies have shown
that subjects do not necessarily know what “actually perceiving an
object” in specific circumstances would be like (Denis & Carfan-
tan 1985). Given that some of the phenomena that occur in im-
agery, such as the “oblique effect” (i.e., the fact that oblique line
gratings are less resolved than vertical or horizontal ones), can be
demonstrated only in the laboratory, the burden of proof is on
Pylyshyn to show that people somehow know about such proper-
ties of their visual systems and can use this knowledge to produce
behavior like that which would have occurred in the correspond-
ing perceptual situation.
2. Pylyshyn does not offer a theory of mechanism. Tacit knowl-
edge could in fact be represented by depictive representations.
The tacit knowledge theory is a theory of content, not of format –
but the issue at hand is about format, whether mental images rely
on a distinct type of internal code. We applaud Pylyshyn for
proposing alternative interpretations for specific results (such as,
attentional crowding as an account for mental image scanning re-
sults, e.g., Finke & Pinker 1982); these accounts can be tested. But
we need a specific theory of imagery, which can then be subjected
to empirical test. Pylyshyn’s criticisms of the depictive theory are
ad hoc patches where various processes are invoked here and
there to explain empirical results. No cohesive whole is presented.
The depictive theory, in contrast, presents a coherent, internally
consistent view of how mental images may be processed. Such a
view is more parsimonious than the patchwork that Pylyshyn as-
sembles to account for the various findings he discusses.
3. The depictive view has predicted many empirical results that
are now “explained” post hoc by the tacit knowledge view. Indeed,
given the fact that we apparently cannot know in advance exactly
what tacit knowledge people in fact do have (e.g., according to
Pylyshyn’s logic, they have tacit knowledge of the oblique effect
but not color mixing), the tacit knowledge view provides no firm
grounds for making empirical predictions.
4. The issue of cognitive penetration is a red herring: Of
course, knowledge can influence imagery – but this does not im-
ply that all properties of imagery are a result of one’s knowledge.
The claim that people cannot visualize what they have never seen
is inconsistent with a large literature on the role of imagery in cre-
ativity, where people clearly imagine novel shapes (e.g., Finke et
al. 1992).
5. One reason the field has embraced cognitive neuroscience
approaches is that tacit knowledge per se cannot selectively mod-
ulate particular neural mechanisms. For example, the fact that
most studies of imagery find activation of topographically orga-
nized areas – which truly depict information – cannot be easily
dismissed (more on this below).
Imagery and perception. Virtually all theories of imagery claim
that imagery and perception share common mechanisms. The is-
sue focuses on the nature of those mechanisms. We have the fol-
lowing observations.
1. Pylyshyn claims that “it ought to be an embarrassment to
picture-theories” that they postulate so many similarities between
the mind’s eye and our own eyes. For example, citing Kosslyn
(1978) Pylyshyn writes: “it seems that the mind’s eye has a visual
angle like that of a real eye . . . , and that it has a field of resolution
which is roughly the same as our eyes . . .” and “[i]t even appears
that the ‘mind’s eye’ exhibits the ‘oblique effect’ . . .” (sect. 7.3,
para. 2). Pylyshyn seems to confuse theoretical claims with em-
pirical findings; these characteristics have been empirically dem-
onstrated – which hardly seems a reason for embarrassment. Like
it or not, that’s the way the studies came out. The depictive theo-
ries made such predictions, which were successful; we infer that
Commentary/Pylyshyn: Mental imagery: In search of a theory
198
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (2002) 25:2
. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0140525X02290044
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Chalmers Tekniska Högskola, on 16 Nov 2019 at 15:28:43, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms

Pylyshyn would not have made such predictions, based on his
view.
2. Pylyshyn has greatly oversimplified the results of the many
studies that have now addressed ways in which objects in images
can be reinterpreted. The bottom line is that people can in fact
reinterpret images if they are given ways to cope with the limited
working memory capacities. Moreover, people can “break up” the
elementary shapes organized by early vision to “see” new patterns
in images (e.g., see Rouw et al. 1997; 1998).
3. Pylyshyn is correct: Images do not preserve the earliest vi-
sual representations. However, to our knowledge, no depictive
theorist has ever claimed that they do. Rather than being like 
“primal sketches” (in Marr’s terminology), they are like 2.5-D
sketches; they incorporate organized units.
4. The relation between the conscious experience of imagery
and the underlying representation is not necessarily simple or
straightforward. Pylyshyn asks how a patient could have cortical
blindness and still experience imagery. If the experience of im-
agery arises from structures that receive inputs from neural struc-
tures that implement depictive representations, then the answer
is straightforward: the experience occurs when visual memory
representations are activated (in the inferior temporal lobe),
which can occur via top-down inputs (e.g., from frontal cortex)
even when the early visual structures are disrupted. However, if
the depictive representations cannot be formed in early visual cor-
tex, then the patient should not be able to reorganize the pattern
in the image. To our knowledge, this critical study has not been
conducted – and thus Pylyshyn should be careful when asserting
categorically that cortically blind people have perfectly normal im-
agery abilities.
5. As Pylyshyn states, many low-level visual phenomena are
not present in imagery. However, all of these phenomena are stim-
ulus-driven, by input from the eyes. In contrast, visual mental im-
ages are not driven by input from the eyes, and thus cannot be 
expected to mimic effects of such bottom-up processing. Color
mixing begins to occur at the retina, for example, and thus imagery
cannot be used to anticipate the results of novel mixtures. Motor
tracking is another example of bottom-up processing, which we
would not expect imagery to mimic.
6. Pylyshyn is right in saying that we do not have a panoramic
display in imagery or vision, but this is irrelevant to the issue at
hand. Our images depict only a small slice of the visual world, but
that does not imply that they are not depicting this portion.
7. Pylyshyn claims that many of the imagery results can be ex-
plained in terms of attention per se. Our responses are as follows:
(a) Why not assume that imagery is what allows some of the cor-
responding attentional phenomena to occur? It is not clear, for ex-
ample, whether subjects are using imagery as a way to attend.
What, exactly, is meant by “attentional”? (b) Pylyshyn claims that
most imagery studies require subjects to “imagine something
while looking at a scene;” thus “. . . superimposing or projecting
an image onto the perceived world” (sect. 5.3, para. 1); this claim
is simply false. Most imagery studies have no such requirements.
Moreover, comparable results are obtained when imagery exper-
iments are performed with eyes closed and eyes open (e.g., in
mental scanning), which makes the “spatial indexing” idea unten-
able as a general explanation of imagery phenomena. (c) It is not
clear how attention per se can explain the representation of shape
in imagery, as is required for many imagery tasks (such as those re-
quiring verifying subtle properties of objects when one’s eyes are
closed).
The importance of the brain. Pylyshyn dismisses neuroscien-
tific data on numerous grounds. We, in contrast, feel that such
facts are crucial for the current debate, for the following reasons.
1. Anderson (1978) proved that any theory that posits a repre-
sentation (e.g., a depictive image) with processes that operate on
it can be mimicked by another theory that posits a different rep-
resentation (e.g., a list) with a different set of processes. In the al-
ternate theory, the changes in the representation are compensated
for by corresponding changes in the process. Thus, Pylyshyn is
correct in noting that the mental scanning results do not neces-
sarily implicate a depictive representation; they can of course be
explained in other ways (e.g., see Kosslyn & Pomerantz 1977).
Pylyshyn claims that adding constraints to a system to ensure that
patterns in an array are interpreted as depictive representations is
ad hoc, as ad hoc as making up a theory post hoc to explain the ef-
fects of distance on mental image scanning. However, Anderson
also pointed out that neurophysiological data could constrain the-
orizing, preventing the theorist from playing fast-and-loose with
the characterization of the representation and process. One ma-
jor advantage of shifting the theory from a computer metaphor to
one rooted in the brain (compare Kosslyn 1980, with Kosslyn
1994) is that we cannot simply make up properties of representa-
tions and processes as we see fit. In the brain, the projections to
higher areas from early topographically organized areas (which
truly depict information) preserve the topography, with the re-
ceptive fields becoming increasingly large as one goes deeper into
the system. The actual physical wiring is designed to “read” the
depictive aspects of the representation in early visual cortex. In so
doing, the interpretive function is not arbitrary; it is tailor-made
for the representation, which is depictive. Form not only follows
function, but in some cases function follows form! Neuroanatomy
is in fact relevant for cognitive theories.
2. Pylyshyn implies that modern depictive theories posit that a
picture is projected onto visual cortex when we entertain mental
images (sect. 7.2), and that “the visual system is involved in im-
agery and that it examines a pictorial display” (sect. 7.3, para. 2).
Contemporary depictive theories assume that the medium that
supports depictive representations (early visual cortex, for neuro-
logically oriented theories) sends signals to areas that store visual
memories; this input is interpreted by matching to the stored
memories (and is also sent to areas that interpret spatial relations).
In no case is there a “mind’s eye” that is “looking” at something.
There is no need of a homunculus for interpreting patterns in im-
ages, any more than there is a need for a homunculus in visual per-
ception. This parody does not serve to further the debate.
3. Pylyshyn apparently misunderstands how patterns of activa-
tion in topographically mapped cortex represent information. The
cortical magnification factor indicates the number of mm of cor-
tex that are devoted to processing 1 degree on the retina at a given
eccentricity. The cortical magnification factor decreases as stimuli
move toward the periphery; the rate of decrease is maximal at the
fovea, where, in humans, each degree of visual angle is allocated
over 2 cm of striate cortex (Area 17). However, for the present is-
sue it is irrelevant whether the cortical representation of a “large”
peripheral pattern looks larger or smaller than that of a “small”
foveal pattern to an outside observer: The crucial point is that in
the context of the processing system (the connections to other
brain areas, in this case) 1 cm of cortex in rostral Area 17 repre-
sents a larger spatial extent than 1 cm of caudal Area 17. From the
“point of view” of the higher-level visual areas that “read” these
representations – which is the only point of view that matters –
the more anterior parts of Area 17 represent increasingly larger
swaths of space. This is no different from the long-resolved issue
as to why we don’t see the world upside down, given that the reti-
nal image is inverted!
4. Pylyshyn is simply incorrect when he states that most stud-
ies of imagery have found activity only in visual association areas,
not topographically organized regions of cortex. In fact, of the 21
fMRI studies of imagery we are aware of, 15 reported activation
in Areas 17 or 18 (both of which are topographically organized,
and hence implement depictive representations). Thompson and
Kosslyn (2000) provide a review, which is updated in Kosslyn and
Thompson (2002, under review).
5. In discussing topographically organized areas, Pylyshyn
seems unaware of neuroimaging findings that have demonstrated
clear retinotopic organization of the human visual cortex (similar
to that found in other primates; see DeYoe et al. 1994; Hasnain et
al. 1998; Sereno et al. 1995; Van Essen et al. 2001). Furthermore,
he claims that no similar evidence to the Tootell et al. (1982) data
Commentary/Pylyshyn: Mental imagery: In search of a theory
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (2002) 25:2
199
. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0140525X02290044
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Chalmers Tekniska Högskola, on 16 Nov 2019 at 15:28:43, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms

have been produced for imagery. We cannot fault Pylyshyn for not
being aware of the very recent results of Klein et al. (submitted);
nevertheless, these findings are merely the most recent in a steady
stream of neuroimaging findings that point in the same direction.
In this study, subjects visualized checkered bow-tie like patterns
that were either oriented vertically or horizontally. Event-related
fMRI was used to monitor activation in Area 17 while subjects per-
formed the task. When the subjects visualized the shape vertically,
the pattern of activation neatly fell along the vertical meridian of
Area 17; when they visualized it horizontally, the pattern neatly fell
along the horizontal meridian! In another condition, subjects saw
the figure in the two orientations – and the results were virtually
identical to what was found in imagery. This is very strong evi-
dence that the topographic properties of Area 17 are in fact acti-
vated during imagery.
6. Pylyshyn wishes to dismiss the findings of Kosslyn et al.
(1999), who used transcranial magnetic stimulation (TMS) to im-
pair processing in medial occipital cortex – and showed that this
effect in turn disrupted both imagery and perception (to the same
extent). But this is merely one of several studies, which nicely con-
verge in implicating early visual cortex in visual imagery. For ex-
ample, Sparing et al. (2002) showed that visual mental imagery in-
creases the excitability of medial occipital cortex, as indicated by
the fact that TMS to this region evoked more phosphenes follow-
ing imagery; in contrast, a control auditory task did not have this
effect. Moreover, Kosslyn et al. (1996) statistically removed the ef-
fects of variations in blood flow in all other brain areas and still
found that the degree of activation in Area 17 per se predicted re-
sponse times in an imagery task. Thus, the activation in Area 17
cannot be written off as an incidental by-product of activation
elsewhere in the brain. Kosslyn et al. (2001) provide a recent re-
view of the relevant literature.
7. Without question, topographically organized cortical areas
support depictive representations that are used in visual percep-
tion. These areas are not simply physically topographically orga-
nized, they function to depict information. For example, scotomas
– blind spots – arise following damage to topographically orga-
nized visual cortex; damage to nearby regions of cortex results in
blind spots that are nearby in the visual field. Moreover, transcra-
nial magnetic stimulation of nearby occipital cortical sites pro-
duces phosphenes or scotomas localized at nearby locations in the
visual field. These facts testify that topographically organized ar-
eas do play a key role in vision, and that they functionally depict
information.
8. Pylyshyn asks how color and texture could be integrated into
a depictive image unless the image is literally depictive. However,
even if an image of a green object were in fact literally green on
the cortex, this would accomplish nothing. The issue is how phys-
ical states of the brain are “read” by other parts of the system. Tye
(1991) suggests that depictive representations may be annotated;
properties such as color and texture may be represented else-
where, with pointers to specific parts of the depictive representa-
tion. This sort of hybrid representation seems reasonable (espe-
cially given the fact that brain damage can result in dissociations
among these properties), and preserves the distinctive geometric
aspects of depictive representations.
9. Perhaps an argument ad absurdum can help us understand
some of the implications of the claim that early visual cortex uses
propositions to represent visual events. Assume for the moment
that early visual cortex relies on propositions to represent incom-
ing visual images, including any information it receives from the
lateral geniculate nucleus (LGN). Why stop here? Isn’t the LGN
also using propositional representations? And why not go all the
way, and conclude that the retina uses propositions to represent
the images that fall onto it? We see no reason why the arguments
offered in favor of propositional representation in early visual cor-
tex would not also apply to earlier visual stages. Now turn the ar-
gument on its ear: If the retina employs depictive representation,
why wouldn’t the LGN, which is topographically organized? And
if the LGN does, why would early visual cortex – also topo-
graphically organized – discard this information and use propo-
sitions?
Form of a theory. Pylyshyn suggests that our approach has been
fruitless, and that a good theory would begin by laying out general
constraints and boundary conditions. Such a theory would have
the same form as theories of language. We have the following re-
actions.
1. Pylyshyn claims that compositionality guarantees that any
image representation system must be topographically organized –
and thus the notion that a representation can be “depictive” is
meaningless. Not so. A genuine depictive representation gives rise
to emergent properties that must be actively computed in other
systems. For example, the depictive representation of the letter
“A” makes explicit and accessible the triangular enclosed shape;
given only a description of the segments and how they meet, con-
siderable processing is required to derive the fact that such a
shape exists. Certainly, the existence of the enclosed shape could
be included in the description, but now consider spatial relations
among portions of the shape: There are a near-infinite number of
spatial relations that are evident in a depictive representation. For
example, in a depictive image, it is just as obvious that the top of
the A is above the center bar as it is that it’s above the left bottom
terminus, and so on. These relations are immediately accessible in
the depictive representation. In contrast, every one of them would
need either to be explicitly mentioned or computed as needed in
a nondepictive representation.
2. Depictive representations are not composed of discrete
symbols. A depictive representation can be divided up in any ar-
bitrary way and the parts still represent a portion of the object or
scene (e.g., think of cutting up a photograph randomly – the frag-
ments will still be representations of portions of the object or
scene); this is not true of a propositional representation.
3. Pylyshyn discusses imagery simply as another form of rea-
soning, ignoring the many other uses of imagery, such as in mem-
ory encoding and retrieval, mental practice, pain control, and
emotion regulation. In contrast to the views Pylyshyn advocates,
depictive theories have led to a large number of empirical discov-
eries about all these functions of imagery. It is not clear how tacit
knowledge can account for the role of imagery in these other ac-
tivities.
4. Finally, we are intrigued by Pylyshyn’s ideas about how to
formulate better theories, and urge him to get on with it. As soon
as he has formulated an alternative theory, we will be delighted to
conduct studies to evaluate the fruitfulness of its predictions
against those of our theory.
Single cells in the visual system
and images past
Glenn E. Meyer
Department of Psychology, Trinity University, San Antonio, TX 78212.
gmeyer@trinity.edu
http://www.trinity.edu/gmeyer
Abstract: Various techniques have attempted to localize imagery. How-
ever, early findings using single cell recordings of human receptive fields
during imagery tasks have had little impact. Reports by Marg and his
coworkers (1968) found no evidence for imagery in human Area 17, 18,
and 19. Single cells from humans suggest later imagery-related activity in
hippocampus, amygdala, entorhinal cortex, and parahippocampal gyrus.
Myriad tests have tried to localize imagery. Most physiological at-
tempts have not been directly at the cellular level (PET, EEG, 
fMRIs, etc.). However, there have been previous and more direct
tests of early localization that are not well known.
One of the best tests of imagery loci might be recording from
human visual cells during imagery. In fact, this has been done
(Marg 1970;1973; Marg et al. 1968). Single cells, from Areas 17 (1
cell), 18 and 19 (4 cells), were recorded from humans. Receptive
Commentary/Pylyshyn: Mental imagery: In search of a theory
200
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (2002) 25:2
. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0140525X02290044
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Chalmers Tekniska Högskola, on 16 Nov 2019 at 15:28:43, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms

fields were similar to those in monkeys. Then there was a test of
imagery.
Marg et al. (1968, p. 350) state:
Attempts to have the patient mentally control unit rhythms which he
could hear over a loudspeaker were fruitless. Similarly, attempts at
mental imagery, even of the effective target, seen moments previously,
did not noticeably influence the unit response. These cells seem to have
no role in mental visual imagery.
And Marg (1970, p. 154) reports:
None of the units or their plotted receptive fields could be influenced
by a patient’s efforts to change them. For example, we increased the au-
dio gain until the patient could hear the pulses of the unit firing in his
cortex and then asked: “Can you do anything to influence it? Can you
increase it or decrease it, or affect it in any way?” No matter how much
the patient tried to influence the response, we could detect no changes.
We also brought the target into the receptive field and asked: “Did you
hear that sound when the target was brought here? Now, the target is
withdrawn. Imagine it is there and try to make the same sound come
from the loudspeaker.” No one succeeded in doing that.
Wilson, et al. (1983) report no other receptive field mappings in
this part of human visual cortex until their own. However, sample
size was small. Ehrlichman and Barrett (1983), in reviewing EEG
imagery studies, feel that you never know if subjects are really
“imaging” when told to. Marg depended on subjective reports. If
their data are believed, then the proposition of early visual system
localization has failed, but this direct test is little known.
There are other possible sites outside of the classic visual sys-
tem. Object related images were reported with stimulation of pos-
terior hippocampus (Adams & Rutkin 1970; Halgren et al. 1978a;
Horowitz 1970). Adams and Rutkin (1970) and Halgren et al.
(1978b) report visual sensations such as flashing lights and colored
balls with hippocampal stimulation. Cartoon-like or television-like
reports can be produced by medial temporal lobe stimulation
(Halgren et al. 1978a). These data suggest involvement of the hip-
pocampus in imagery that is not surprising given its visual inputs,
some receptive field organization, and roles in memory (Halgren
et al. 1978a; Horowitz 1970; Wilson et al. 1983).
Does subject initiated imagery activate the hippocampal for-
mation? Halgren et al. (1978b) tested this. Human subjects per-
formed various visuo-spatial tests while hippocampal cells were
recorded. The tasks were congruent with Farah’s (1984, p. 250)
criteria for imagery. Five cells fired strongly during recall of re-
cent events. One fired only when the patient was asked to re-
member spatial aspects of his room. However, activation was not
found for memory tasks involving color photographs with unfa-
miliar rooms. This suggests that the hippocampus plays some role
in imagery. Hippocampal involvement in coding memory for
places in the environment has been suggested in animals (Wilson
et al. 1983). Interestingly, Parsons et al. (1987) report that the
“noted amnesic HM” demonstrated no improvement in a mental
rotation task after several days of training. They conclude that lim-
bic structures are at least a necessary component for the im-
provement of a skill for mental rotation (p. 5). Data such as Hal-
gren et al.’s or Parsons et al.’s are not supportive of early linkage
propositions.
Extrastriate human visual physiology, imagery and its interface
with the rest of cortical and subcortical processing is mainly ex-
plored by external scanning methods. However, there is one sug-
gestive cellular level result. Kreiman et al. (2001) recorded from
neurons in hippocampus, amygdala, entorhinal cortex, and para-
hippocampal gyrus while subjects were imagining previously
viewed images. Stimuli were faces showing emotions, household
objects, spatial layouts, cars, animals, drawings, famous faces, food,
and complex patterns. For the neurons that fired selectively for
both vision and imagery, the majority had identical selectivity. Fir-
ing rates during vision and imagery were highly correlated. These
data argue for imagery loci that are far from early visual areas.
Testing human single cells isn’t going to be frequent. How about
other primates? Could a mental rotation curve be obtained while
a monkey is in the stereotaxic and recordings are made from an
appropriate neuron involved in the imagery process? Perhaps a
“linguistic” chimp could be “told” to image in part of the visual
field when a neuron covering that spot is captured by the elec-
trode. This would assume that rotation represents image process-
ing, which is controversial as many propositional models suggest
similar functions. Do monkeys image like we do? Pigeon “mental
rotation” isn’t similar to ours (Hollard & Delius 1982) with flat
functions unlike sloped human ones. Bees (Collett & Kelber 1988)
demonstrate spatial abilities and researchers refer to them as hav-
ing images. Pigeon or bee imagery with their concomitant neuro-
physiology is not yet well understood.
Single cells may not resolve if images are pictorial or proposi-
tional. It does seem that later visual structures are very active in
imagery. One must wonder though: if such cells are activated
when we see things, why would they be doing something differ-
ent when we image? Are we seeing storage of propositional struc-
tures during vision and retrieval during imagery? What brain
chunk actually looks at an image? The homunculus rears its head.
In any case, propositional models must deal with the use of im-
agery by the common folk. To quote the Everly brothers:
Whenever I want you, all I have to do is Drea-ea-ea-ea-eam, dream,
dream, dream.
Personally, anytime, night or day, I have never tried to taste the
lips of a propositional data structure.
Imagery and blindness
Susanna Millar
Department of Experimental Psychology, University of Oxford, Oxford, OX1
3UD, United Kingdom. susanna.millar@psy.ox.ac.uk
http://www.psych.ox.ac.uk
Abstract: My concerns are about the phrase “the nature of imagery,” and
the interpretation of findings with blind people. This discussion considers
reports of imagery by congenitally totally blind people, and what should
not be inferred from comparing efficiency levels of blind and sighted peo-
ple in spatial tasks.
What can be meant by asking about the “nature” of mental im-
agery? The target article does not make it clear what the question
is. I assume that it is not about the ontological status of mental im-
agery. The clarification of hitherto intractable philosophical body-
mind (e.g., single, dual, or epiphenomenal) problems cannot be a
precondition for empirical enquiry.
Images are clearly not explanations. But does any one disagree
with Pylyshyn on that? The discrepancy in reports of “imageless
thought” by the Würzburg school and of visual imagery by Titch-
ener (1909) has been known for over a hundred years.
However, the same doubt applies to what Pylyshyn calls “any
principles to which we have conscious intellectual access” (sect. 2,
para. 1). It is not obvious that conscious access to principles is a
good criterion for how people solve logical problems, or how they
come to understand or to apply the principles of Euclidean geom-
etry. Pylyshyn’s “reason to be skeptical about what one’s subjective
experience reveals about the form of a mental image” (sect. 2,
para. 4) must also apply to other subjective evaluations of how we
solve logical problems.
The “nature” of reported imagery is not necessarily “visual.”
The fact that congenitally, totally blind people report imagery in
other modalities is relevant to the empirical question of what, if
anything, may be modality-specific about subjective experience.
Indirect empirical tests of subjective experiences have not been
as futile as Pylyshyn suggests. It has been shown, for instance, that
the accuracy of Eidetiker who report very vivid imagery, can be
tested and suggests memory effects (e.g., Haber & Haber 1964).
In principle, therefore, methods of testing modality-specific ef-
fects of inputs on memory are relevant.
Commentary/Pylyshyn: Mental imagery: In search of a theory
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (2002) 25:2
201
. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0140525X02290044
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Chalmers Tekniska Högskola, on 16 Nov 2019 at 15:28:43, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms

Reported imagery and empirical tests for modalities other
than vision. Pylyshyn argues cogently for careful scrutiny of meth-
ods and conditions in interpreting empirical findings. But the
same applies to studies with blind participants.
The general reader is unlikely to be aware that only a minute
proportion of blind people is congenitally totally blind. Legally
blind people differ widely in degrees of residual vision and in early
vision. Not all questions about blindness require participants who
totally lack visual experience from birth. However, findings based
on averaging imagery responses from participants whose visual
status can only be conjectured (e.g. Johnson 1980) are not evi-
dence that vision is irrelevant, as suggested in the target article.
Decisive relations between visual experience and responses to im-
agery questions for different modalities have been found (e.g.,
Schlaegel 1953).
Congenitally totally blind people report that they do experience
imagery. The response of a colleague, asked to imagine his room
at home, may be taken as typical. He mentioned feeling cold air
on his face, and hearing some form of echoing sound on entering
his room late at night, touching his desk after walking a certain dis-
tance to the right, and hearing a difference in the sound of his foot-
fall and in sensations underfoot on reaching the rug before the
fireplace.
A more extensive (as yet unpublished) study showed that
younger blind participants also talked about echoing sounds,
touching obstacles, the feel of the ground underfoot, and moving
in certain directions when asked how they walked from one build-
ing to another. The absence of visual terms was striking, because
the same blind people habitually use visual terms in other contexts
(e.g., “yes, I see what you mean”).
Introspective reports may, of course, be descriptions of re-
membered or projected activities rather than of current images of
cold air, sounds, or touch. There is no “litmus test.” But converg-
ing findings that the imagery we experience subjectively is not
confined to a single modality contributes to the probability that
modality-specific aspects of inputs affect recall.
An alternative method is to test modality-specific effects in
memory by comparing effects of actual and imagined movements
on recall (Finke 1979). We found that recall of a target movement
by young congenitally totally blind children was biased only
slightly less by merely imagining shorter or longer movements
during a delay period, than by actually executing the biasing move-
ments during delays (Millar & Ittyerah 1991). It is possible that
the intention to execute a biasing movement mobilised kinaes-
thetic sensations, and retrieval of “tacit” knowledge. But such al-
ternative interpretations of the findings also require precise em-
pirical tests of what “tacit knowledge” was involved, and how it was
retrieved while doing nothing overtly.
What can be inferred from studies with blind participants?
There is good evidence that visual experience is not necessary for
solving spatial problems, including mental spatial rotation, and
good evidence also that such problems constitute a major diffi-
culty for young congenitally totally blind children. The apparent
paradox is explained by memory overload in difficult conditions,
procedural knowledge, but, importantly, also by the availability
and congruence of reference information from different sensory
sources (Millar 1988; 1994).
The important point is that the level of efficiency at which a par-
ticipant arrives, or whether it is higher, lower, or equal to the effi-
ciency of another person or group, is not evidence about the ques-
tion what strategies either participant used, let alone that they
necessarily used the same heuristics. Relative effects, for instance,
of using external and/or body-centred reference cues, can be
tested empirically (e.g., Millar 1979; 1981; 1985; Millar & Al-attar
2000; 2001; 2002). But neither equal efficiency by blind and
sighted participants, nor differences in efficiency tell us anything
about how they solved a given spatial problem, let alone that they
used the same strategy.
Pylyshyn’s null hypothesis is a formal description of problem
solving tasks. It makes no predictions about how people actually
go about solving different types of problems or how we might test
the relation between the heuristics people use and what they say
they experience. Our questions about imagery may well be mis-
leading. But the contention that we are “‘deeply deceived by our
subjective experience of mental imagery” (target article, sect. 1.1,
para. 3) seems odd in the context of evolutionary biology.
Visual imagery and geometric enthymeme:
The example of Euclid I.1
Keith K. Niall
Defence and Civil Institute of Environmental Medicine, Defence Research &
Development Canada, Toronto, M3M 3B9, Canada.
Keith.Niall@drdc-rddc.gc.ca
Abstract: Students of geometry do not prove Euclid’s first theorem by ex-
amining an accompanying diagram, or by visualizing the construction of a
figure. The original proof of Euclid’s first theorem is incomplete, and this
gap in logic is undetected by visual imagination. While cognition involves
truth values, vision does not: the notions of inference and proof are for-
eign to vision.
Seeing a thing is different than thinking about it. As links or rela-
tions between vision and visual imagination are brought to light,
this distinction between vision and cognition can be obscured as a
consequence. When one imagines seeing something, is that more
like seeing or more like thinking? It may seem like a combination
of the two. (It is crucial to ask why we want to say this.) Yet there
is a specific way in which seeing something is different from think-
ing about it. That distinction does not admit half measures, just as
Pylyshyn’s test of cognitive impenetrability does not admit half
measures. The distinction is simple. Thinking involves reputed en-
tities which are truth-valuable, while vision does not. Depending
on one’s account, such things that bear truth values have been
called true propositions or false sentences or just thoughts.
There has been much talk about the metric properties of visual
imagery, and its Euclidean or otherwise-geometric description.
But it is helpful to remember that no one proves Euclid’s first the-
orem by vision. Where truth values do not apply, the notions of
demonstration and inference have no foothold. We may use vision
to avoid stout obstacles or to dodge leaping pussycats, but vision
provides no demonstration of that very first theorem of Euclid.
(Still, vision is intentional: that is a different matter.) Far from be-
ing Euclidean, vision doesn’t get on at all with Euclid. It isn’t that
Euclid’s first proposition is too difficult: the first proposition
comes before the pons asinorum of the fifth proposition, the one
which separates able learners from dunces. Vision does not
demonstrate any theorem of Euclid, rightly or wrongly. Nor is it
that the first proposition involves microscopic quantities or hor-
rendously complicated relations. Euclid’s first proposition does
require a demonstration that two circles intersect. The centre of
each circle lies on the circumference of the other. (If we can’t vis-
ualize that two such circles intersect, what can we visualize?) The
problem is made clear by an old lesson in geometry.
Euclid’s first proposition is “on a given finite straight line to con-
struct an equilateral triangle.” The line segment is AB. One circle
has centre A and radius AB; the other circle has centre B and ra-
dius BA. From the point C at which the circles intersect, the line
segments CA and CB are joined to the line segment AB. We have
already gone beyond Euclid’s definitions, postulates, and common
notions. To speak strictly, there is already a gap in the proof, a gap
unnoticed by the eye. There is nothing in Euclid’s definitions, pos-
tulates, and common notions that enables us to show the two cir-
cles intersect. Zeno of Sidon noticed this in the early first century
B.C.E. (Heath 1956; it seems safe to assume Zeno did not notice
it as a visual illusion, or anything of the sort). David Hilbert (1899/
1999) brought it to attention once more, by his celebrated axiom-
atization of Euclidean geometry. His achievement has been inter-
Commentary/Pylyshyn: Mental imagery: In search of a theory
202
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (2002) 25:2
. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0140525X02290044
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Chalmers Tekniska Högskola, on 16 Nov 2019 at 15:28:43, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms

preted as making geometric proof a thoroughly axiomatic busi-
ness, rather than one of visualization or geometric intuition.
But for centuries this gap in the proof of Euclid’s first proposi-
tion went unnoticed and unheeded. Perhaps a complete proof ex-
isted in the collective intuition of European civilization, but that
seems a wild conjecture. If one draws chalk marks on a black-
board, of course the chalk circles will intersect. And when those
chalk circles intersect, they are seen to intersect. It is as plain as
day that two generously overlapping circles will intersect. Simi-
larly, one can imagine the construction of the present Figure 1 (see
below), and the circles will be imagined to intersect. That act of
imagination is no proof the circles intersect, and in that sense it
does not correspond to Euclid. It might be thought to be an ap-
propriate extension to Euclid’s geometry, or else it might be
thought to represent what Euclid really meant. (That is, one can
be tempted to revise history to suit one’s own ideas.) Yet the gap
in proof and its history tell us that imagination is not proof, just as
perception is not cognition. Vision and visual imagination do not
have the power of logical demonstration: centuries can pass, and
a gap in logic will not be noticed by vision alone. Cognition does
involve truth-valuable items, and involves notions like proof, in-
ference, and demonstration.
Why should the gap in Euclid’s proof, and the inapplicability of
truth values to visual images, be important to the psychology of vi-
sual imagery? It is important because of a claim that is smuggled
into discussion of visual imagery. That is, the claim that items of
visual imagery constitute knowledge. Whether analogical or prop-
ositional, they are supposed to constitute knowledge. Pylyshyn
(1984, p. 135) claims that “perception involves semantic-level
principles – especially those of inference.” In other words, the
properties of mental imagery are represented to the mind without
further effort or explanation. Such a story about visual imagery is
a caricature of the development of knowledge, which can be slow,
deliberate, and collective. Such a story “overlooks the need to give
any account at all of the way the inner understander works, any ac-
count of the mechanics of inner representation, any account of
what kind of reacting is comprehending.” (Millikan 2000, p. 112).
The notion that properties of mental imagery constitute knowl-
edge might be defended as part and parcel of some sort of Em-
piricism, perhaps British Empiricism. After all, a central tenet of
Empiricism is that all knowledge proceeds from the senses.
Knowledge may share the form of sensory information, whatever
such an assertion could mean. So it may be that this debate over
mental imagery is a debate between one sort of Empiricist and an-
other sort. Suppose that visual imagery is propositional, and that
its propositions constitute some of our knowledge of geometry.
Then either it is not Euclidean in the sense of being capable of
proof, or else its propositions have been insufficient to demon-
strate Euclid I.1.
Motion, space, and mental imagery
Romi Nijhawan and Beena Khurana
School of Cognitive and Computing Sciences, University of Sussex, Brighton,
BN1 9QH, England. romin@cogs.susx.ac.ukbeenak@cogs.susx.ac.uk
http://www.cogs.susx.ac.uk/users/romin/index.html
http://www.cogs.susx.ac.uk/users/beenak/index.html
Abstract: In the imagery debate, a key question concerns the inherent
spatial nature of mental images. What do we mean by spatial representa-
tion? We explore a new idea that suggests that motion is instrumental in
the coding of visual space. How is the imagery debate informed by the rep-
resentation of space being determined by visual motion?
The representation of space is critical to Pylyshyn’s arguments
against the notion that mental imagery is “inherently spatial” in na-
ture. He supports his position by drawing a distinction between “in-
trinsic” properties of a mental representation and those that are
transitory and attributable to people’s beliefs. However, what does
it mean for a representation to be “inherently spatial” in nature?
We would like to take a new tack on the problem by considering a
previously unexplored notion of how visual space comes about, as-
suming it is not present at birth in the sense we associate with it.
We shall argue (see below) that spatial maps in the brain are trained
during development by neural activity due primarily to movement
in the world. This activity sets up spatial maps that are then refer-
enced for the visual perception of both moving and stationary stim-
uli in the adult. Thus, the question to be posed becomes one of
whether mental images have access to spatial maps (for example
topographic representations). Perhaps, given Pylyshyn’s litmus test
of cognitive impenetrability, the question of consequence is
whether images have obligatory access to spatial maps.
From the point of view of ontogeny and phylogeny a visual sys-
tem that primarily processes movement is more primitive. The ex-
treme periphery of the retina, which may be considered an older
system, responds only to movement. Indeed, according to Richard
Gregory (1979): “it seems that it is only the eyes of the highest an-
imals which can signal anything to the brain in the absence of
movement.” However, developmentally, a primate’s visual system
during infancy may behave like a primitive visual system capable
of responding only to motion (ontogeny recapitulates phylogeny).
There are at least two important reasons why this may be so. First,
movement (or change) is a much more potent stimulus for the vi-
sual system than stationarity (or continuity), particularly for the
immature visual system which does not respond strongly even to
high contrast stimuli unless motion is introduced (Hubel & Wiesel
1963). Second, given resource limitation and the association of
movement with danger or food, detection of motion is of primary
importance. Although an adult observer may hold a belief that an
everyday visual scene (such as a parking lot) contains stationary ob-
jects relative to which some other objects are moving, we claim that
motion is what sows the seeds for the coding of visual space. (By
visual space we refer to the thing that extends between visual ob-
jects, and not to Newtonian space analogous to Ether). At a later
stage in development, as the system matures and stationary objects
become more effective, such objects are spatially localized ac-
cording to the same principles that were first established by mov-
ing objects. Thus, for example, the rule that point p of a retinotopic
map is associated with position p’ of visual space, first established
on the basis of neural activity due to motion, is then generalized
Commentary/Pylyshyn: Mental imagery: In search of a theory
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (2002) 25:2
203
Figure 1 (Niall).
. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0140525X02290044
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Chalmers Tekniska Högskola, on 16 Nov 2019 at 15:28:43, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms

for stationary objects such that stimulation of point p by a station-
ary object also yields a position p9 in visual space.
These considerations suggest that, while the representation of
space called upon by moving objects is without a doubt “depic-
tive,” stationary objects and mental images of stationary objects
may not warrant the same conclusion. The inherently spatial char-
acter of motion is also supported by entities such as a Reichardt
detector, with two spatially displaced input signals. Perhaps a spa-
tial representation accessed through static images is weak, and
only seems strong; just as we seem to have a detailed representa-
tion of a scene despite this representation being very limited, as
change blindness experiments have convincingly shown. It may
also be the case that the access to spatial representations by men-
tal images is not obligatory; however, when achieved, the result-
ing performance of the observer is akin to that measured for vi-
sual objects. Thus, it may not be an all-or-nothing answer in terms
of the spatial character of imagery, but rather that there is a hier-
archy of accessibility to spatial maps, with moving items being the
quintessential stimuli, followed by stationary stimuli, with static
images holding the least accessibility rights. In this sense mental
images are least like representations triggered by motion.
In sum, the crux of deciding whether a percept or a mental im-
age is spatial in nature is whether it can and does access spatial
maps. Given the above conjecture it may be that moving objects
are privileged in that they have obligatory access to the spatial
maps because they were the stimuli that gave rise to them. Sta-
tionary objects over the time course of development gain access to
the same spatial representations set up through object in motion.
Mental images of stationary objects may be particularly weak in
terms of their ability to access spatial representations. Intriguingly,
though mental images of moving objects may have obligatory ac-
cess to spatial maps, it is this very form of mental imagery that is
not available to observers, in that observers are unable to mimic
or imagine smooth motion. Were that achievable, through a clever
but at this juncture unspecified experiment, would Pylyshyn ac-
cord spatial attributes, albeit limited, to mental images?
Is mental imagery prominently visual?
Marta Olivetti Belardinelli and Rosalia Di Matteo
ECONA (Interuniversity Center for Research on Cognitive Processing in
Natural and Artificial Systems) and Department of Psychology, University of
Rome “La Sapienza”, I-00185 Rome, Italy. marta.olivetti@uniroma1.it
rosalia.dimatteo@uniroma1.it
Abstract: Neuroimaging and psychophysiological techniques have proved
to be useful in comprehending the extent to which the visual modality is
pervasive in mental imagery, and in comprehending the specificity of im-
ages generated through other sensory modalities. Although further re-
search is needed to understand the nature of mental images, data attained
by means of these techniques suggest that mental imagery requires at least
two distinct processing components.
The pictorial account of mental imagery rested on the demon-
stration that mental image processing follows the same rules that
perceptual processing follows. However, this demonstration was
performed quite exclusively with experimental investigation fo-
cusing on visual imagery. In particular, strong support for the ana-
logical theory derived from Kosslyn’s demonstration that visual
images have a spatial extent (Kosslyn 1994). As the debate grew,
the evidence attained for visual imagery was extended to all im-
agery activity, and visual images have been taken as a paradigmatic
“example” of a more general ability to generate and process inter-
nal objects regardless of the sensory modality of the single image.
The only way to legitimize this extension is by investigating: (1)
the specificity of mental images from different sensory channels;
(2) intermodal connections that could support the asserted perva-
siveness of the visual modality in imagery.
In our opinion, comparing visuo-spatial mental images to im-
ages generated by means of other modalities may shed light on the
issue of the depictive nature of mental images and on the role of
mental imagery in reasoning.
As regards point (1), research on images that are not based on
a visual representation is very rare. It is concerned mainly with the
self-evaluation of the ability to form images in terms of vividness
(Betts 1909; Sheehan 1967), although it does not try to define the
dimensions along which each specific representation develops,
nor does it examine the effects of the prominence of the visual
modality in imagery, thus completely bypassing point (2).
As a consequence of the differences in the techniques em-
ployed, the data derived from neuroimaging and psychophysio-
logical research are far from being conclusive. It is, however, pos-
sible that a more systematic investigation with these techniques
could make an essential contribution to clarifying the nature of
mental imagery. On this note, the literature is quite contradictory
with regard to the modalities investigated. D’Esposito et al. (1997)
concluded by means of fMRI that visual association areas, and not
primary visual areas, were engaged during a visual image genera-
tion task.
Few studies examined the neural correlates of modality-specific
processing different from the visual one. Fallgatter et al. (1997) ex-
amined ERPs for auditory, tactile, and visual imagery and found a
distinct localization of the electrical brain activity. The evoked po-
tentials were located mainly in the left hemisphere with tactile im-
agery, in the right hemisphere with visual imagery, and along the
midline with auditory imagery, suggesting that different regions
contribute to the generation of images in different modalities.
Zatorre et al. (1996), by using a PET study, showed that audi-
tory imagery activates the same neural substrate involved in audi-
tory perceptual processes, for example, the secondary auditory
cortex and prefrontal associative areas, but does not activate the
primary auditory cortex. Moreover, in the imagery conditions they
found a significant increase of the cerebral blood flow (CBF) in
two inferior fronto-polar regions that “may reflect some aspects of
retrieval and/or generation of auditory information from long-
term memory.”
Visual-tactile integration processes have been examined by Ba-
nati et al. (2000) by means of a PET study. Their cross-modal
recognition task activated mainly associative areas (inferior pari-
etal lobules, left dorso-lateral prefrontal cortex) and they sug-
gested that these areas are responsible for the binding of infor-
mation into hetero-modal representations.
Data on motor imagery reveal that the Internal Simulation of
Movements (ISM) generally involves the processing of the sup-
plementary motor area and the cingulate areas while usually the
primary motor areas are not involved (Höllinger et al. 1999; Jean-
nerod 1995; Johnson et al. 2001).
The olfactory and gustatory modalities have been virtually ig-
nored by the imagery research, although the olfactory system has
been investigated by Zald and Pardo (2000) by reviewing PET and
fMRI data on odor processing. They suggested that a restricted re-
gion of the orbito-frontal cortex plays an important role in recog-
nition of odors, and that it responds differently depending upon
the type of odor and /or the specific task demands.
From this research we can derive a general concordance about:
(1) the specificity of imagery processing according to the modal-
ity, and (2) the activation of supramodal-associative areas in all the
investigated modalities.
According to our knowledge, the first study concerning all pos-
sible imagery modalities is Olivetti Belardinelli (2001; see also Del
Gratta et al. 2001). In this study, seven different imagery modali-
ties (visual, auditory, tactile, organic, kinesthetic, olfactory, and
gustatory), investigated by means of fMRI, exhibit a specific pat-
tern of activation. In general, primary areas were never activated,
while a compound pattern of activation was found in secondary ar-
eas and in amodal integrative areas. Visual, auditory, tactile, olfac-
tory, and organic imagery activated the middle-inferior temporal
regions and the inferior parietal lobules bilaterally, although the
superposition of the activated areas among modalities was fairly
Commentary/Pylyshyn: Mental imagery: In search of a theory
204
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (2002) 25:2
. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0140525X02290044
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Chalmers Tekniska Högskola, on 16 Nov 2019 at 15:28:43, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms

rough. Distributed activation was also observed in prefrontal ar-
eas, mainly in the middle orbital region with almost all modalities,
except the kinesthetic one, which showed a bilateral activation in
the cingulate cortex. Finally, visual and olfactory modalities ex-
hibited the activation of the left hippocampal/fusiform gyrus,
while visual and gustatory modalities showed the activation of the
right cingulate cortex.
Taken together, all the cited studies show that mental imagery
involves mainly the activation of associative cortical areas while
there is little consensus about the involvement of primary cortical
areas. Moreover, it has been found that the modality-specific ar-
eas were distinct, depending on the modality used as imagery cue.
Finally, it has been shown that supra-modal associative areas in the
parietal and in the prefrontal cortex were also activated. Whether
these areas are involved in generating images, and whether they
reflect either the generation process or the maintenance of men-
tal images, are still open questions.
Although further research is needed to understand the rela-
tionship between the neural substrate of mental imagery and the
nature of mental images, these data suggest that mental imagery
requires at least two distinct processing components: a modality-
independent component, presumably reflecting long-term mem-
ory retrieval processes (abstract/propositional recovery of object
information), and a modality-specific component, reflecting short-
term memory maintenance (concrete/analogical representation
of perceptual objects).
Mental imagery is simultaneously symbolic
and analog
John R. Pani
Department of Psychological and Brain Sciences, University of Louisville,
Louisville, KY 40292. jrpani@louisville.edu
http://www.louisville.edu/~jrpani01
Abstract: With admirable clarity, Pylyshyn shows that there is little evi-
dence that mental imagery is strongly constrained to be analog. He urges
that imagery must be considered part of a more general symbolic system.
The ultimate solution to the challenges of image theory, however, rest on
understanding the manner in which mental imagery is both a symbolic and
an analog system.
Professor Pylyshyn’s article is one of the more insightful and in-
formed analyses of theories of mental imagery in the long history
of this topic (see Pani 1996). But although it is successful in point-
ing out the weaknesses of certain standard ideas, it does not fully
describe the alternative.
A strength of Pylyshyn’s analysis of image theory is the clarity of
his primary goal: to consider whether image phenomena are due
to a cognitive architecture that is intrinsically depictive or to a
more general computational system that happens to generate de-
piction, or apparent depiction, when it is applied to particular
problems. Much of the reach of this paper comes from the in-
sightful application of this question to the experimental literature
on mental imagery. Briefly consider three examples that I think
exemplify the analysis.
The demonstration by Podgorny and Shepard (1978), that a
block letter “imaged” over a grid decreases response time to
events in the covered cells of the grid, has become a standard
demonstration of the seamless interaction between imagery and
perception. Although the demonstration is compelling, it likely
has little to do with mental images. The block letter is generated
by perceptual organization and selective attention within the per-
ceived grid, much as one sees patterns in tile floors, and the asso-
ciated behavioral effects concern high-level perception rather
than imagery. Pylyshyn is to be thanked for challenging inaccurate
characterizations of this experiment.
The second example concerns mental scanning of images (e.g.,
Kosslyn et al. 1978). A clearly appropriate, and important, con-
clusion to be drawn from this work is that people are capable of
behaving as though they were consulting pictures in their heads,
and that this capability is furnished neither by verbal encoding nor
by an internalization of overt behavior. On the other hand, the
common suggestion that scanning across images is something that
people are generally constrained to do when imaging, is unwar-
ranted. Pylyshyn makes this point effectively, and the clarification
is welcome.
The third example concerns the importance of recognizing, as
Pylyshyn does, that there are experimental demonstrations in
which it seems that people really are constrained to generate ana-
log imagery in order to reason correctly. Pylyshyn chooses mental
paper folding (Shepard & Feng 1972) as a prime example of this,
and he is right to do so. (The de facto standard test of spatial abil-
ity, the DAT Space Relations subtest [Bennett et al. 1989], is much
like the paper folding task.) In discussing this task, Pylyshyn points
out that the behavior that indicates analog representation is that
people solve the problems in steps corresponding to folds. But this
means only that the knowledge people bring to bear on the prob-
lem is organized in terms of what happens one fold at a time. This
is a constraint that will force any representational system to be se-
lectively analog as it computes the answer to the problem. That is,
much of the analog nature of thinking comes from its computa-
tional context; reasoning that works from a set of premises to a de-
sired conclusion may create a pattern of representations that cor-
responds directly to concrete objects and transformations. (See
Pani 1996, for a similar analysis of imagery phenomena.)
Pylyshyn’s ultimate theoretical goal is to find a formal charac-
terization of the computational nature of imagery. I think it useful
to point out, however, that the type of system he appears to favor
fits well with one fairly broad perspective on the nature of imagery.
To put it bluntly, mental imagery did not evolve to function in the
manner of cameras and photocopiers. The presence of an image
in mind, its structure, and its function are determined by the re-
quirements of a computational system which generates only the
information it must generate to achieve its ends. The computa-
tional role of imagery will typically determine that images are very
little like pictures and that the individual doing the thinking is
completely unconcerned with whether they are or not. This view
of imagery was common in what used to be called American Func-
tionalism and which now might be called adaptationism (Pani
1996). As Ladd (1894) put it, “If one arrives at the other side of
the stream in safety, one does not notice or remember how each
floating block of ice felt, as it was touched lightly with the toes –
one’s eyes and interests being set on that other side” (p. 284, em-
phasis in the original).
Although Pylyshyn’s critique of image theory is admirable in
many respects, the end result begs an important question. Why do
so many of our mental symbols seem like mental pictures? It is im-
portant to remember in this regard that human vision and human
thought are special purpose biological systems, and there is a great
deal of hardware that is specialized for performing challenging
jobs efficiently. Nothing Professor Pylyshyn says in this article
eliminates the possibility that there is a dense mapping between
concrete structures in the world and physiological structures in
the brain, nor that generating thoughts about things in the world
sometimes involves activating parts of those neural structures in-
volved in the mapping. It remains possible, even probable, that
when imagery occurs in reasoning – due to computational con-
straints that would force any system to be at least selectively ana-
log – and using representations that are symbolic in every impor-
tant sense of the term – the representations depend on tokens
borrowed from the neural mapping of the visual world. Such sym-
bols may be highly selective and abstract compared to pho-
tographs, but the visuospatial properties they do contain will lead
people to report them as experiences in a mental world with an
analog character. Put another way, what is missing from Pylyshyn’s
account is that a symbolic system may draw its symbols from a set
of analog tokens, and it definitely will do that in cases where that
Commentary/Pylyshyn: Mental imagery: In search of a theory
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (2002) 25:2
205
. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0140525X02290044
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Chalmers Tekniska Högskola, on 16 Nov 2019 at 15:28:43, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms

is the only way to get them. The representations are no less sym-
bolic for being analog, and they are no less analog for being sym-
bolic (Pani 1996).
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
I am grateful to Julia Chariker for comments on an earlier draft of this
commentary.
Mental imagery in memory psychophysics
William M. Petrusica and Joseph V. Baranskib
aDepartment of Psychology, Carleton University, Ottawa, Ontario, K1S 5B6,
Canada; bDefence Research and Development Canada, 1133 Shepard
Avenue West, Toronto, Ontario, M3M 3B9, Canada.
bill_petrusic@carleton.ca
joe.baranski@dciem.dnd.ca
Abstract: Imagery has played an important, albeit controversial, role in
the study of memory psychophysics. In this commentary we critically ex-
amine the available data bearing on whether pictorial based depictions of
remembered perceptual events are activated and scanned in each of a
number of different psychophysical tasks.
Imagery in symbolic comparisons? In a landmark paper initi-
ating contemporary studies of human memory processes using
psychophysically based methods, Moyer (1973) asked his partici-
pants to make comparative judgements of the size of animals; for
example, “which is larger, whale or moose?” Moyer also required
his participants to provide estimates of the size of each of the an-
imals named. He showed that response times were linearly related
to the logarithm of the differences in standardized estimated sizes.
Noting the striking parallel with Johnson’s classic (1939) plot of
perceptual comparison times as a function of the logarithm of
physical difference in length of the visual extents compared,
Moyer argued that perceptual and symbolic comparisons might be
based on common processes and/or representations and he re-
ferred to such studies with remembered magnitudes as internal
psychophysics.
Although Moyer (1973, p. 183) was explicit in postulating an
analogue basis for the representations of remembered animal size,
he was careful not to prejudge the basis for this representation;
“they may be positions along an imagined spatial dimension, tem-
poral patterns in neural images, rich images, or an as yet unimag-
ined possibility.” On the other hand, attesting to the charm and al-
lure of the phenomenology of “rich images,” the imagery position
has gathered considerable force. For example, Ashcraft (2002,
p. 460), in the most recent edition of his introductory cognition
text, states in discussing Moyer’s findings, “What is fascinating is
that the judgments are being made on the basis of the visual image
of the object. That is, the evidence suggests that when people make
larger/smaller judgments about real-world objects, they retrieve
mental images of the objects, then mentally scan the images to de-
termine which is larger or smaller.” In fact, though, where does the
empirical evidence stand on imagery in symbolic comparisons,
now some nearly three decades after Moyer’s seminal work?
The range effect. Moyer and Bayer (1976) first trained partici-
pants to associate circles varying in size with nonsense syllables
(CVCs) using a paired associate learning procedure. One group of
participants worked with a relatively widely spaced set of stimuli
and another group worked with a narrow range. In the second
phase of their experiment, participants compared the sizes of pairs
of circles directly (Circle–Circle comparisons) or pairs of circles
from memory (CVC–CVC comparisons). Comparisons with per-
ceived and remembered stimuli were uniformly faster when the
wide range was used. Accordingly, Moyer and Bayer concluded
that this range effect was sufficient evidence for an analogue based
interval scale representation of size information in memory. How-
ever, on balance, the empirical evidence for the range effect, crit-
ical to establishing a necessary condition for analogue representa-
tions is mixed. The range effect is not always obtained (e.g., Banks
1977; Banks et al. 1982), although it can be if the necessary con-
ditions are satisfied (e.g., Petrusic et al. 1998a).
Propositionally based-semantic coding theories of symbolic
comparisons. In a series of forceful and striking papers, Banks
and his students have provided a powerful antidote to the imagery
scanning perspective. First, Banks and Flora (1976, Experiment
1) showed picture versus word effects were strictly additive with
symbolic distance, establishing that the faster picture processing
is due to encoding and not to specialized imaginal processing as
posited by Paivio (1975). Second, Banks and Flora (1976, Exper-
iment 2) demonstrated a symbolic distance effect with an abstract
continuum, the intelligence of animals, portrayed either pictori-
ally or verbally. Moreover, picture processing for this abstract con-
tinuum was faster than with words, although Paivio’s (1971; 1975)
dual coding theory would predict faster processing with the words.
Finally, Banks (1977) and Banks et al. (1982, Experiment 3) found
that CVC–CVC comparisons are faster than Percept–CVC com-
parisons (i.e., the set-size reversal effect). The analogue-mental
imagery view is contradicted by this finding because two mental
image operations are required in the case of CVC–CVC compar-
isons whereas only one such operation is required in the case of
Percept–CVC comparisons.
Failures to replicate. However, not all the evidence provided by
Banks and colleagues has stood the test of replicability. The strictly
additive effects of picture versus word effects on distance and se-
mantic congruity effects are simply not evident in recent work by
Shaki and Algom (2002). Moreover, Petrusic et al. (1998a) failed to
obtain the set-size reversal effect so critical to rejection of the hy-
pothesis that generation and scanning of two mental images must
necessarily take longer than just one. Thus, taken together, the
available evidence leaves a muddled and incomplete picture. It re-
mains to be firmly established whether analogue representations,
a necessary but not a sufficient condition for the pictorial view of
mental imagery, even exist with symbolic comparative judgements.
Analogue representations and psychophysical methods.
However, the evidence in support of analogue-based codes in psy-
chophysically based tasks where the comparison cannot be re-
solved on the basis of ordinal, propositionally based codes alone is
decisive. Baranski and Petrusic (1992) and more recently Petrusic
(2001), first trained their participants to associate CVCs with vi-
sual extents. Subsequently, these CVC-labels served as standards
in the method of constant stimuli with variable perceptual stimuli.
They found: participants could perform the task with a high level
of accuracy, larger Weber fractions were obtained for the remem-
bered standards than for the perceptual standards, the Weber
fractions exhibited end-point effects, and they systematically var-
ied with set size, range, and acquisition conditions. Petrusic et al.
(1998b) also trained their participants to associate labels with line
lengths. Subsequently, participants indicated which pair of two
pairs of labels corresponded to the more similar pair of perceptual
referents. They then showed that the similarity comparisons were
based on the computation of differences of differences of ana-
logue based interval scale representations. Importantly, although
these studies clearly implicate an analogue-based interval scale
representation, there is nothing in these data that inexorably force
pictorial based imaginal representations.
Magnitude estimation: Memory for elementary sensory mag-
nitudes as re-perception. Moyer et al. (1978) and Kerst and
Howard (1978) demonstrated that numerical magnitude esti-
mates of the perceived and remembered sizes of objects were well
described by power functions of their physical sizes. Moreover,
they also asserted that the input to memory is a power function of
the perceptual magnitude. Formally, SM(x) 5 aSP(x)B, where B
denotes the exponent for the transformation from perception to
memory, and SM(x) denotes the subjective magnitude in memory
and the psychophysical function for perception is given by, SP(x)
5 aPxP, where aP and P, respectively, denote the unit of measure-
ment and the exponent on the subjective perceptual scale, and
SP(x) denotes the perceptual magnitude of a stimulus with physical
magnitude, x. According to the strict form of the re-perception 
Commentary/Pylyshyn: Mental imagery: In search of a theory
206
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (2002) 25:2
. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0140525X02290044
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Chalmers Tekniska Högskola, on 16 Nov 2019 at 15:28:43, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms

hypothesis, B 5 P. Consequently, the memory psychophys-ical
function is given by SM(x) 5 aMxM with aM 5 aaP and M 5 P2.
Thus, the re-perception hypothesis is the strongest form of the im-
age as picture hypothesis in memory psychophysics.
However, its empirical status is also dubious. To date, a number
of studies have provided support for the re-perception hypothesis
with B 5 P, (e.g., Algom & Lubel 1994; Bradley & Vido 1984;
Kerst & Howard 1978; Moyer et al. 1978). On the other hand,
Moyer et al. (1982) showed that when P>1 (e.g., heaviness and
sweetness), the memory exponent is less than the perceptual 
exponent, although it should be larger than it. In addition, and 
also contrary to the re-perception hypothesis, Petrusic et al.
(1998b) showed that the memory exponent (0.697) was consider-
ably larger than the predicted square of the perception exponent
(0.564250.318) (see also Algom 1992).
Summary. The consensus of the evidence in memory psy-
chophysics provides little, if any, support for the picture theory of
mental imagery. Indeed, as Pylyshyn states, “nothing is gained by
attributing a special format or special mechanisms to mental im-
agery” (sect. 1.2, para. 2).
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This research was supported by a grant from the Natural Sciences and En-
gineering Research Council of Canada to W. M. Petrusic.
Neural representation of sensory data
Jonathan Polimenia and Eric Schwartzb
aDepartment of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Boston University,
Boston, MA 02215; bDepartment of Cognitive and Neural Systems,
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Department of Anatomy
and Neurobiology, Boston University, Boston, MA 02215. jonnyreb@bu.edu
eric@bu.edu
http://cns-web.bu.edu/Profiles/Schwartz.html
Abstract: In the target article Pylyshyn revives the spectre of the “little
green man,” arguing for a largely symbolic representation of visual im-
agery. To clarify this problem, we provide precise definitions of the key
term “picture,” present some examples of our definition, and outline an
information-theoretic analysis suggesting that the problem of addressing
data in the brain requires a partially analogue and partially symbolic solu-
tion. This is made concrete in the ventral stream of object recognition,
from V1 to IT cortex.
1. What is a “picture”? The core problem with the “picture the-
ory” is the lack of a definition of the key term “picture.” A more
correct term has been suggested earlier (Schwartz 1980) – com-
putational anatomy, the properties of locally regular feature
maps. The “little green man’” problem is clarified by noting that:
(1) No known feature maps are isometric. They do not pre-
serve metric information. They are “distorted,” but
(2) The lack of metric structure is irrelevant to their potential
semantic content. There is no “little green man” to be confused 
by the (distorted) non-isometric maps of the brain. There are 
only neuroscientists looking inwards – and, if they wish not to 
be confused by what they see, they have only to learn about ex-
isting mathematical accounts of the feature maps of the brain. 
Figure 1 and Figure 2 are two examples. But the neurons of 
the brain, “looking” at feature maps from within, have no such
problem!
2. Neural computation: A definition.
Definition 1 (Neural computation). Neural computation,
like all computation, is based on a correct (i.e., expedient) choice
of data structure and algorithm. Neural feature maps can be
viewed as a form of data structure. There is little to say about
neural algorithms at present – no one has ever observed a non-
trivial neural network in vivo – but there are abundant experi-
mental observations of neural data structures.
Definition 2 (Computational anatomy). Patterns of topo-
graphic mapping and columnar architecture are two prominent
forms of (spatial) data structure in the brain. The key requirement
is that nearby neurons in a laminar sheet must have trigger fea-
tures that are nearby in some feature space.
Example 1 (Receptotopic maps of V1, V2, V3, V4, MT,
MST, LGN, S. Colliculus, S1, A1, etc.). For receptotopy, the
feature space is R2, for example, the retinal surface, the body sur-
face, or the cochlear surface. See Figure 1 for an example of hu-
man V1, V2, and V3.
Commentary/Pylyshyn: Mental imagery: In search of a theory
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (2002) 25:2
207
(a)                                                             (b)                                                              (c)
Figure 1 (Polimeni & Schwartz).
(a) “Retinal” view of US Naval Academy, high resolution. (b) Model of V1-V2-V3 complex, produced
as a single dipole map function (Balasubramanian et al. 2002). The dipole map is a direct generalization of the familiar log-polar model
of V1 topography (Schwartz 1994). V1 is the central “ovoid” region, V2 is the first surrounding “ring” and V3 the outer “ring” of cortex.
(c) The USNA image is mapped via the complex dipole map to create an image model of the V1-V2-V3 complex. A face in a window of
the USNA (a), which is visible in the original high resolution image, is clearly seen, repeated three times in the foveal representations of
V1, V2, and V3. The entire campus of the USNA is compressed, via the highly non-linear cortical magnification factor, into the para-
foveal and peripheral regions of the image. This figure represents only the topographic aspects, not the ocular dominance, orientation
map, or other spatially represented data. The result may look confusing to a neuroscientist observer, but we believe that the brain has
little problem interpreting this complex spatial data structure.
. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0140525X02290044
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Chalmers Tekniska Högskola, on 16 Nov 2019 at 15:28:43, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms

Example 2 (Orientation columns in V1, direction columns
in MT). The feature space is P1 (V1) and S1 (MT), orientation
and direction, respectively. The target space is V1(or MT), the
“pinwheel” pattern of orientation (or direction) tuning. The pin-
wheel structures result from the singularities associated with the
different topological structure of the feature space and the corti-
cal target (Schwartz & Rojer 1991; Wood & Schwartz 1999).
Example 3 (Ocular dominance columns in V1). The feature
space is a (double-sheeted copy) of a visual hemi-field (R2). The
target mapping is interlaced via a proto-column construction (see
Landau & Schwartz 1994) to a locally regular map of the two half-
fields, as shown in Figure 2.
Pylyshyn briefly mentions the existence of topographic struc-
ture in V1, but omits mention of the (approximately) 30–40 other
visual topographic areas, as well as the other sensory modalities.
Furthermore, he omits columnar structure entirely from this dis-
cussion. That is, the fact that the neo-cortex is largely organized in
terms of feature maps and that these features maps are potentially
semantic.
3. Information cost of addressing symbols. Pylyshyn’s key un-
stated assumptions are clear from his “null hypothesis”: “reason-
ing with mental images involves the same form of representation
and the same processes as that of reasoning general” (target arti-
cle, Abstract).
We agree that reasoning about pictures may well use the same
processes as reasoning in general. The problem here is the un-
stated assumption that “reasoning in general” is symbolic. But, do
we really know that reasoning is itself not mediated by spatio-tem-
poral representations, that is, a “picture theory” of reasoning?
There appears to be an implicit assumption in parts of the cogni-
tive science community that computation is symbolically medi-
ated. We will now present an argument in support of the idea that
anatomy as data structure is an unavoidable consequence of the
high cost of “addressing” symbolic data in the brain.
Recently, Rieke et al. (1998) demonstrated that the spike se-
quence of the H1 neuron of the fly is a temporal replica of the sen-
sory stimulus. There are only two H1 neurons in the fly brain, one
for each side. They call this idea “flynculus.” This does not seem
like a good candidate for “symbolic” coding. The fly uses time to
code time, not symbols to code time. Time is free, and the fly is
short on neural space. The semantic meaning of an H1 spike is, in
part, the time that it occurs.
The parallel is clear: attaching a spatial label to a spike in V1 is
potentially expensive. There are about 105 resolvable spatial loca-
tions in the human visual field (see (Rojer & Schwartz 1990) for
derivation) – 17 bits. The semantic content of a spike in V1 is prob-
ably no more than 2–5 bits. The obvious solution is to use physi-
cal space to code visual space. Progressing from V1 to V2 . . . and
on to IT, the spatial precision becomes lesser and the semantic
content of a spike becomes greater. It is expedient to pay the price
for a symbolic code (i.e., axons, labeled lines, “grandmother cells”).
It seems that one feasible solution for spatial coding of visual stim-
uli is a gradual transition from a largely (but not completely)
spatio-temporal code near the periphery (i.e., V1, V2, . . .) to a
largely (but not completely) symbolic code centrally ( . . . , V4, IT).
4. Summary. In our analysis, we have not addressed the issue of
“imagery.” It seems obvious that the real issue is visual represen-
tation, and the first area that needs clarification is the representa-
tion of visual stimuli, not mental re-creations of them.
Behavioral-level experiments are impotent, in principle, to ad-
dress questions of neural representation. Purely symbolic and
purely analog “machines” can easily mimic each other at the be-
havioral level.
If the brain is really the symbolic processor that Pylyshyn seems
to envision, then it certainly has an inordinate fondness for “pic-
tures.”
Time matters! Implications from mentally
imaged motor actions
Markus Raaba and Marc Boschkerb
aCenter for Adaptive Behavior and Cognition, Max Planck Institute for Human
Development, Berlin, 10195 Berlin, Germany; bDepartment of Movement
Behavior, Vrije Universiteit, Amsterdam, 1081 BT Amsterdam, The
Netherlands. raab@mpib-berlin.mpg.de
mboschker@fbw.vu.nl
www.mpib-berlin.mpg.de
www.fbw.vu.nl/~mboschker/
Abstract: Pylyshyn provides sound arguments against the dominant pic-
ture theory of mental imagery. However, we claim that mental imagery is
intrinsically dynamic and that the very nature of mental imagery will not
be uncovered by studying static pictures. Understanding mental imagery
of motor actions reveals that any theory of mental imagery should start off
with the temporal nature of real-life experiences.
Pylyshyn’s criticism of the picture theory of mental imagery is in-
spiring and a welcome counterpart to those theorists who thought
that they had resolved the debate (see Kosslyn 1994). Although we
appreciate his contribution, we believe that a fundamental aspect
Commentary/Pylyshyn: Mental imagery: In search of a theory
208
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (2002) 25:2
(a) left visual field                               (b) right visual field                           (c) simulated V1 "picture"
Figure 2 (Polimeni & Schwartz).
Mapping a stereo-pair (a), (b) into a model of V1 layer IV ocular dominance columns. The disparity
is represented as a visual “echo” or offset of repeating image elements. A non-linear cepstral filter extracts the stereo disparity in the
form of a subsequent spatially mapped representation (c) (Yeshurun & Schwartz 1989) (see the proto-column model of (Landau &
Schwartz 1994)).
. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0140525X02290044
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Chalmers Tekniska Högskola, on 16 Nov 2019 at 15:28:43, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms

of all mental imagery is missing and that the debate, regardless of
how it is defined by the participants, focuses on a rather artificial
topic, which might be one of the factors that makes the debate
seem so persistent and insoluble. In this commentary, we will fo-
cus on what the study of human motor and sports behavior can add
to the ongoing imagery dispute.
The imagery debate, as a discussion on the nature of mental im-
agery, has neglected the temporal aspect and limited itself to vi-
sual imagery of pictures, disregarding all other kinds of imagery.
We think the consideration of mentally imaged motor actions
would contribute much in the search for a theory of mental im-
agery, a theory that should proceed from the inherent dynamic na-
ture of all mental images and should not include solely geometric
properties. For instance, Pylyshyn incorrectly argued, that “in-
trinsic properties of images are geometrical rather than dynamic”
(sect. 2, para. 3; see also, Pylyshyn 1999). To sustain this, he insist-
ed that baseball fielders predict the point where the ball will land.
However, this is not what they seem to do (Gigerenzer & Selten
2001). Rather, they use continuous optical information (e.g.,
tracking optical acceleration of an approaching ball) to guide lo-
comotion in catching fly balls (Oudejans et al. 1999).
Basic to the debate is a discussion on how visual perception op-
erates. Mental images occur in the absence of the imagined scene;
therefore, imagery is based on the recall of any kind of experience.
The imagery debate is to a certain extent reducible to a discussion
on what the nature, or in Pylyshyn’s term, the cognitive architec-
ture, of visual perception is. Kosslyn’s notion of visual mental im-
agery, the picture theory, is certainly most closely related to the
widely rendered idea that perception is about appointing mean-
ing to detected stimuli and the processing of percepts. Pylyshyn,
on the other hand, suggests that there is something special about
mental imagery that is not found in the picture-like view of im-
agery, and although he does not elaborate in depth on this special
characteristic of imagery, he also seemed to support the idea that
visual perception starts with the detection of geometric proper-
ties.
It seems that both parties in the debate have adopted an inap-
propriate view of perception. Perception is not the passive detec-
tion of meaningless geometric properties, but the active pick-up
of the significant features of an ever-changing environment. The
imagery debate focuses on visual perception of motionless pic-
tures and ignores the fact that behavior is about change and adap-
tation to changes in one’s environment. The human nervous sys-
tem, and the nervous system of every organism, is constructed to
detect changes. When sensory organs (on the retina, in our mus-
cles, or in our skin) are exposed to a constant stimulation, the pro-
duced signal quickly decreases. For example, it is very difficult to
tell if the temperature is 8 or 14 degrees Celsius, but a change of
half a degree is easily detectable. Visual perception is equipped to
pick up the most relevant or meaningful features of the environ-
ment, and these features appear to be predominantly changes
within the optic array. When mental imagery is based on previous
experiences, it will thus reflect the dynamic nature of perception
(Freyd 1987). We need a fundamentally different notion of per-
ception and imagery that is based on the dynamics of the percep-
tual system.
Moreover, pictures are in fact rather artificial features. Al-
though one could argue that distilled pictures are basic to per-
ception and that motion is established by a specific sequence of
adjacent pictures related to each other in time, this is more or less
turning the world upside down. The human natural environment
or “ecological niche” does not consist of computed displays or
printed pictures. The human perceptual system evolved long be-
fore such things existed. Pictures are man-made, frozen moments
in time that have little to do with normal behavior of organisms. It
seems odd to imply that such an artificial activity could ever reveal
the very nature of any behavior.
If dynamics are so essential in behavior, why not start with
movement imagery, instead of the rather artificial activity of imag-
ining pictures? But what do studies of mentally imagined motor
actions tell us about the nature of mental imagery? For instance,
it is generally recognized that mental images are most vivid when
all sensory modalities (visual, kinesthetic, haptic, auditory, olfac-
tory, and taste senses) are involved and not only the visual one (see
Janssen & Scheik 1994; Weinberg & Gould 1995). Second, a men-
tal image of solely (visual) stimuli properties is not likely to affect
behavior; for this, it is necessary to mentally imagine (motor) re-
sponses as well, that is, to simulate behavior (Lang 1979). Finally,
Boschker et al. (2002) indicated that the effects of movement im-
agery are most pronounced when the imagined motor action is
used to interfere with subsequent behavior, instead of enhancing
it. These findings suggest that dynamic images of action scenes are
not only possible to create, but highly effective in modifying be-
havior. This implies that mental imagery is all about responding:
“our general view . . . is that the mind (i.e., the ensemble of cog-
nitive events) is a system for organizing and directing responses”
(Lang 1987, p. 408).
In conclusion, “in search of a theory” for mental imagery, the
fundamental dynamics of every living creature should not be ne-
glected. A theory of mental imagery of motor actions has to inte-
grate temporal and kinesthetic properties of the image. These
properties are neither pictorial nor spatial and are highly relevant
to explain why temporal components of real and imaged actions
are highly correlated (Frak et al. 2001) and why images are con-
strained by the biomechanical properties of the body (Munzert &
Raab, in preparation).
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
We thank Peter M. Todd for helpful comments.
The imagery debate: Déjà-vu all over again?
Peter P. Slezak
Program in Cognitive Science, University of New South Wales, Sydney,
NSW 2052, Australia. p.slezak@unsw.edu.au
http://www.arts.unsw.edu.au/sts/peter_slezak.html
Abstract: The imagery debate re-enacts controversies persisting since
Descartes. The controversy remains important less for what we can learn
about visual imagery than about cognitive science itself. In the tradition of
Arnauld, Reid, Bartlett, Austin and Ryle, Pylyshyn’s critique exposes no-
torious mistakes being unwittingly rehearsed not only regarding imagery
but also in several independent domains of research in modern cognitive
science.
Pylyshyn’s return to the fray means that at least one thing may be
said with certainty about the imagery debate: Despite Kosslyn’s
(1994) claim to have resolved the controversy, there has been no
progress at all. Worse still, if Pylyshyn’s null hypothesis is right, we
don’t have a viable theory of imagery of any kind. The “tacit knowl-
edge” rival to pictorialism, is not itself an alternative theory but
rather an indication of the direction in which an adequate theory
might be sought – that is, as a theory of high-level belief or knowl-
edge representation.
Pylyshyn’s central criticism of pictorial theories echoes Des-
cartes (1637/1985) who insisted that it is enough that the mind
should adequately represent the properties of the world and does
not have to share them. In the same vein, Edelman (1998) recently
said nobody thinks that a mental representation of a cat is furry.
Perhaps not, but it is telling that such views must be repeatedly
refuted throughout the history of speculation about the mind. U. T.
Place (1956) famously sought to counter a common objection to
materialism by pointing out that, regardless of phenomenology,
there is no green brain state when having a green after-image.
Pylyshyn’s charge has been that pictorialism commits a precisely
parallel fallacy.
Visual images are no more likely to reveal underlying brain
mechanisms than the myriad other things we are capable of think-
ing about. Pylyshyn’s attribution of modern experimental results
Commentary/Pylyshyn: Mental imagery: In search of a theory
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (2002) 25:2
209
. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0140525X02290044
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Chalmers Tekniska Högskola, on 16 Nov 2019 at 15:28:43, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms

to subjects’ beliefs and expectations avoids the embarrassment of
having to postulate vastly many and varied properties of the func-
tional architecture. Thus, using the same experimental paradigm
as the celebrated mental rotation and mental scanning experi-
ments, we may obtain robust reaction-time evidence from a sim-
ilar imagery task – “mental bouncing.” Subjects are asked to imag-
ine holding a basket ball and are told to say “boing” (or press a key)
each time it is imagined to bounce after being released. By parity
of reasoning with mental rotation and scanning, the exponentially
decreasing times between successive responses might lead one to
conclude that the underlying processes have the property of in-
elastic deformations – that is, the brain is made of rubber. Or, per-
haps we should say “quasi-rubber.”
For some reason, the case for spatial properties has seemed
much more persuasive than the same point regarding rubbery-
ness, greenness, or furriness. In view of their compellingness, 
such mistakes evoke Kant’s distinction between mere errors and
those deeper, inherent cognitive illusions. Thus, I disagree with
Pylyshyn only regarding his optimism in hoping that, by repeating
his powerful arguments loudly and slowly, he might succeed this
time where he has failed before. Sufficient ground for my skepti-
cism is the fact that the Imagery Debate is perhaps the most re-
markable modern duplication of controversies concerning the 
nature of “ideas” which have persisted not just for thirty years but
since the seventeenth century. In this recent re-enactment,
Pylyshyn has played Arnauld (1683/1990) against Kosslyn’s Male-
branche (1712/1997). It is a striking and significant fact that the
central error charged by Arnauld is that of ascribing corporeal
properties to mental ones – exactly the one charged by Pylyshyn
against pictorialists. In its modern guise, this is the charge of con-
fusing properties of the things represented with properties of their
representations.
Of course, Pylyshyn is not vindicated merely because he was an-
ticipated by Descartes and Arnauld. The striking historical paral-
lels suggest that the fundamental problems at stake do not arise in
any essential way from the data of modern experiments and com-
putational theories. Indeed, just as we would expect in this case,
we see a recurrence of the same perplexities not only throughout
history, but also in more or less independent domains of cognitive
science today (see Slezak 2002a; 2002b; 2002c). Pylyshyn’s case
against pictorialism is strengthened when it is seen transposed and
deployed in quite unrelated domains of cognition. Thus, for ex-
ample, Carruthers (1996) defends the now unfashionable claim
that we think in a natural language rather than Fodor’s (1975) “lan-
guage of thought.” Undeniably, the theory has a certain persua-
siveness: Just as we seem to visualize in pictures, so we seem to
think in language. However, paradoxically, this very intuitive plau-
sibility provides the strongest case against such theories for, as
Pylyshyn observes, we may be deeply deceived by our subjective
experience. Ryle (1968) suggested that the very idea that we think
“in” language is incoherent, and the introspective experience of
talking to ourselves cannot support any claim about the vehicles
of thought. Significantly, Ryle also mentioned the doctrine of
mental pictures seen with the “mind’s eye” as sharing the unintel-
ligibility of thinking in language.
What these doctrines have in common is the mistake of assum-
ing that we apprehend our mental states rather than just have
them. It is clear why such an implicit conception leads to positing
a representational format – sentences or pictures – which is par-
adigmatically the sort of thing requiring an external, intelligent ob-
server – the notorious homunculus (see Slezak 2002a). Despite
their evident irritation at this repeated accusation (Kosslyn et al.
1979, p. 574), computer simulation does not necessarily prove pic-
torialists’ innocence. As Rorty (1979, p. 235) put it, there is no ad-
vance in replacing the little man in the head by a little machine in
the head.
As Pylyshyn argues, resort to neuroscience is no help either. It is
acutely ironic that pictorialism is thought to be vindicated by “de-
veloping” the cortex like a photographic plate to reveal a retino-
topic “picture” of the stimulus. Much earlier, Skinner (1963, p. 285)
fantasized just such a result and remarked “In many quarters this
would be regarded as a triumph in the physiology of vision. Yet
nothing could be more disastrous.” Although we are unable to ac-
cept Skinner’s solution, it is perhaps not surprising that he should
see the problem very clearly in the dangers of homunculus
pseudo-explanations. The topographical map on the cortex is a
picture all right, but only for the theorist and not the monkey. As
he remarked, “Seeing does not imply something seen.” (1963,
p. 287).
Despite jaundiced views of philosophy as distinct from “strictly
empirical science” (Finke 1989, p. 129; Finke et al. 1989, p. 54;
Kosslyn 1994, p. 409), Pylyshyn’s critique suggests that there re-
main grounds for Wittgenstein’s (1953) gibe “in psychology there
are experimental methods and conceptual confusion.”
Neuronal basis of imagery
Evgeni N. Sokolov
Department of Psychophysiology, Moscow State University, Moscow 103009,
Russia. ensok@mail.ru
Abstract: The depiction of pictures as specified points in a functional
space is achieved by vector encoding. Picture-selective neurons are added
to the declarative memory in the process of learning. New neurons are re-
cruited from stem cells through their proliferation and differentiation.
Electrical stimulation of the temporo-parietal cortex produces subjective
scenes of the past similar to imagery.
The basic concept discussed in the article refers to “depiction” –
a specification of pictures as points in a functional space. The
question arises how such a space is implemented within neuronal
networks. To approach a solution of the problem a universal vec-
tor model of cognitive and executive processes was suggested
(Fomin et al. 1979). Later, the model was tested in color vision
(Izmailov & Sokolov 1991), in the emotional expression of faces
(Sokolov & Boucsein 2000), and in stereovision (Vaitkevicius
2002). Experimental data confirmed the universal characteristic
of the vector model.
According to the vector model, input stimuli are encoded by 
excitations of four modular neurons so that each stimulus is char-
acterized by a specific excitation vector. Due to a normalization
procedure occurring in the neuronal nets, all excitation vectors
become of a constant length, constituting a hypersphere in the
four-dimensional Euclidean space. The excitation vectors partici-
pate in the formation of picture-selective neurons of the declara-
tive memory. Formation of highly selective neurons with respect
to presented visual patterns was demonstrated in the temporal
cortex of monkeys (Miashita et al. 1991).
The declarative memory gets extended in an adult organism by
means of the recruitment of new to-be-learned neurons arising in
the process of neurogenesis by proliferation and differentiation of
stem cells. Newly generated neurons migrate to specific brain ar-
eas: hippocampus, temporal and prefrontal cortex, where they are
incorporated into neuronal nets building up synaptic contacts with
target cells (Gould et al. 2001). The neurogenesis is enhanced by
the novelty of the neurons of the hippocampus.
The neurons of declarative memory are located in the tem-
poroparietal area indicated by Penfield as the “interprative cortex”
(Penfield 1958). Electrical stimulation of this area performed 
during an operation results in a bright scene visualized from the
subject’s past. Similar data were obtained by electrical stimula-
tion of this area through implanted electrodes (Delgado 1969).
Local damage of this area leads to visual agnosia (Luria 1966). It
is assumed that electrically induced and voluntarily controlled 
imagery have common neuronal basis in the declarative mem-
ory.
Commentary/Pylyshyn: Mental imagery: In search of a theory
210
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (2002) 25:2
. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0140525X02290044
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Chalmers Tekniska Högskola, on 16 Nov 2019 at 15:28:43, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms

The false dichotomy of imagery
Nigel J. T. Thomas
Natural and Social Sciences, California State University, Los Angeles, Los
Angeles, CA, 90032-8202. njtt@earthlink.net
http://www.members.leeds.ac.uk/n.j.thomas70
Abstract: Pylyshyn’s critique is powerful. Pictorial theories of imagery fail.
On the other hand, the symbolic description theory he manifestly still fa-
vors also fails, lacking the semantic foundation necessary to ground im-
agery’s intentionality and consciousness. However, contrary to popular be-
lief, these two theory types do not exhaust available options. Recent work
on embodied, active perception supports the alternative perceptual activ-
ity theory of imagery.
Pylyshyn’s return to the fray of the imagery debate is very wel-
come. In typically trenchant fashion he sets forth the serious con-
ceptual and empirical problems afflicting pictorial (including
“quasi-pictorial”) theories of imagery, showing how even vaunted
neuro-imaging evidence fails to support it. Despite its surface ap-
peal, pictorialism is almost certainly false.
Much as I value Pylyshyn’s new contribution, however, I fear his
re-entry into the debate may serve to further entrench a false di-
chotomy that seems firmly established in the minds of most cog-
nitive scientists, and in the textbooks: the view that we are faced
with a stark choice between some form of pictorialist theory of im-
agery,1 or, alternatively, a “propositional” theory wherein imagery
(quasi-perceptual experiences and associated empirical effects) is
identified with descriptions couched in a computational language
of thought (Fodor’s [1975] mentalese). Pylyshyn is reticent about
his positive theory of imagery (indeed, I think it has never been
expounded in detail2), but clearly, under the guise of “the null hy-
pothesis,” he wants to sell us the same “propositional” descrip-
tionist theory long associated with his name.
Because its details remain so underspecified, and because men-
talese is supposed, ex hypothesis, to be able to represent anything
that we can conceive, there are very few empirical constraints on
descriptionism as it stands. Virtually any conceivable empirical 
observation could be accommodated without too much strain.
Probably largely because of this lack of empirical content, descrip-
tionism has remained unpopular, despite all the problems of pic-
torialism.
There is a worse problem, however. Mentalese is conceived by
analogy to natural languages such as English and to computer pro-
gramming languages and representation systems set up within ac-
tual working computer programs. Inasmuch as the symbols of
such systems represent anything in the outside world, they do so
by convention or by stipulation, which requires beings with minds
to be around to do the stipulating or to settle upon the conven-
tions. The whole point of mentalese, however, is to explain how
minds are possible. Fodor postulated it largely to explain the con-
stitutive intentionality of thought, the fact that thoughts, includ-
ing mental images, are semantically meaningful, are thoughts or
images of something or other. Thus, to explain mentalese seman-
tics as stipulative or conventional would be viciously circular.
Admittedly, a lot of philosophical effort over the last quarter
century has gone into trying to devise a naturalistic semantics for
mentalese, one not dependent upon stipulation or convention.
But this work has not even begun to converge upon any generally
acceptable theory. The literature has become a casuistical morass,
where every positive proposal (the underlying idea often, now, ob-
scured beneath a mass of accumulated modifications) seems de-
cisively refuted, even thoroughly incoherent, from the perspective
of its rivals.3 If a naturally meaningful mentalese really could ex-
ist, it would explain an awful lot, but then again, so would a ho-
munculus. It is past due time to admit that the quest for such a
language is hopeless. Certainly we cannot take the conceptual le-
gitimacy of mentalese for granted.
This need not threaten computational theories of specific cog-
nitive competencies and performances, which rarely need to in-
voke intentionality. Once we drop the requirement that computa-
tional cognitive representations should bear or ground intention-
ality, less problematic accounts of such representations become
available (e.g., Cummins 1996; Horst 1996). However, the de-
scriptionist is not just explaining competencies and performances,
he is trying to explain imagery, a quintessentially intentional and
conscious phenomenon (Sartre 1948; Thomas, in press). (Some
philosophers hold that consciousness may be explicable in terms
of representations, but these proposals rely upon the representa-
tions bearing intentionality; Lycan 2000.)
Picture theorists should not cheer, however. The only plausible
account of the intentionality of mental pictures or quasi-pictures
is that it derives from the intentionality of mentalese (Fodor 1975;
Thomas, in press, sect. 3.2; Tye 1991). Without mentalese (or,
worse, a homuncular mind’s-eye), inner pictures will be neither in-
tentional nor consciously experienced.
But the assumption that pictorialism and descriptionism ex-
haust our options for explaining imagery arises from mere histor-
ical accident. In the 1970s computational cognitive science was a
new, exciting paradigm, but imagery – prima facie a thoroughly
un-computational phenomenon, conscious and informal – was
also a newly fashionable topic in psychology, with emerging ex-
perimental evidence demonstrating its objective reality and func-
tional significance (Kessel 1972; Thomas, in press, sect. 2.1). The
notorious “imagery debate” of that era was really about how and
whether the evidence on imagery could be reconciled with sym-
bolic computationalism, and Kosslyn’s quasi-pictorialism (1980)
soon emerged to rival Pylyshyn’s descriptionist answer. Around
the same time, several psychologists (sensitive, like Pylyshyn, to
the defects of pictorialism) suggested alternative, non-computa-
tional mechanisms for imagery, versions of what I call perceptual
activity theory4, but their voices were drowned by the clamor of
the computationalists’ urgent debate.
Circumstances today are very different. Symbolic computa-
tionalism has lost much of its luster, and is certainly no longer “the
only game in town.” With the emergence of embodied and situ-
ated approaches to cognition (not to mention connectionism and
dynamical systems theory) we need no longer remain locked into
a dichotomous choice of theories developed to appease symbolic
computationalists. Perceptual activity theory comports well with
these newer approaches to cognition and has distinct conceptual
and empirical advantages over both quasi-pictorialism and de-
scriptionism (Thomas 1999). It also suggests a promising approach
to naturalizing intentionality and consciousness (Thomas 1999;
2001).
Pylyshyn’s critique appeals to O’Regan’s work, but O’Regan’s
conclusions (1992; O’Regan & Noë 2001) are incompatible with
pictorialism and descriptionism alike. Visual experience, O’Regan
holds, arises not from the presence of representations in the brain
but from the active exercise of our “mastery of the relevant sen-
sorimotor contingencies” (O’Regan & Noë 2001) as we explore
our visual surroundings. Perceptual activity theory holds that im-
agery arises from vicarious exercise of such mastery: a sort of play-
acting of perceptual exploration (Thomas 1999). Although the ev-
idence does not support pictorialism, we should not thereby
conclude that Pylyshyn’s “null hypothesis” is true, or even null.
NOTES
1. Whether in the idiom of symbolic computation (Glasgow 1993;
Kosslyn 1980), connectionism (Julstrom & Baron 1985; Mel 1986; Stucki
& Pollack 1992), neuroscience (Kosslyn 1994), or whatever.
2. Except within very circumscribed task domains (Baylor 1972; Moran
1973).
3. Cummins (1997) persuasively refutes of a broad class of such pro-
posals.
4. For example, Farley (1976); Hebb (1968); Neisser (1976); Sarbin
and Juhasz (1970). See Thomas (1999, sect. 2.3) for further citations.
Commentary/Pylyshyn: Mental imagery: In search of a theory
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (2002) 25:2
211
. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0140525X02290044
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Chalmers Tekniska Högskola, on 16 Nov 2019 at 15:28:43, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms

When is enough enough? The integration 
of competing scientific agendas
Jozsef A. Toth
Institute for Defense Analyses (IDA), Alexandria, VA 22311-1882.
jtoth@ida.org
Abstract: This commentary asks the reader to examine Pylyshyn’s target
article and the imagery debate at four levels of analysis – institutional, pro-
grammatic, empirical, and individual. It is proposed that the debate follows
somewhat generic patterns of discourse at all four levels, but the discourse
associated with one side of the debate may or may not be expressible and
evaluated in terms of the other. The different sides of the debate might bet-
ter serve cognitive science if they proceed as separate research programs
in their respective sub-disciplines. A more inclusive program could result,
however, if the opposing approaches could somehow unite.
The imagery debate might be viewed at four levels. Institutional,
in the form of “hard” and “soft” economic support. Programmatic,
within a broader framework, community, or “paradigm.” Empiri-
cal, as method, evidence, and argument. Individual, involving sci-
entists, their desires, self-esteem, careers, status, students, peers.
This commentary asks the reader to consider the following: 
1. What methods are employed on each side of the debate, how
sound are they, what results have they produced, and how have
they been interpreted? 
2. Rather than focusing on any differences, what do the two
sides of the debate have in common? 
3. Is this really a debate, or are both sides, at times, arguing for
the same result? 
4. What criteria or metrics should be established for resolving
the debate? 
5. If the debate is ever resolved, what are the implications at
each of these four levels?
Research is usually terminated when it results in injury to the
participants, landing the principal investigator and participants, or
their survivors, in court, where penalties and damages are de-
cided. Irrefutable evidence, as in the classic case of plate tecton-
ics, can also resolve scientific disagreements, but is usually ac-
companied by much rancor before one side finally concedes. The
imagery debate, nearing its fourth decade, poses minimal risk to
participants, is still in the “rancor” phase, and could conceivably
continue for years, though Kosslyn (1994; personal communica-
tion 2002) considers it over. The debate follows at least two paths,
theories promoting symbolic representations and computational
processes – that is, Pylyshyn’s approach – and theories more
grounded in physiology – that is, Kosslyn’s approach.
Symbolic computational models emerged after the Second World
War, challenging Gestalt psychology, cybernetics, and neo-behavior-
ism. With limited knowledge of the brain, technology and symbolic
cognitive theory sometimes evolved rapidly in near lock step fashion,
equating the mind with silicon and electromagnetism, rather than
with tissue. The emergence of a technology and an analogous men-
tal representation or process was more than a coincidence, at times
advanced by the same individuals, such as the mapping of higher-
level programming languages with corresponding symbolic models
of thought. This resulted, for instance, in the physical symbol system
hypothesis (PSSH) and the knowledge level (see Edwards 1996, for
a critical historical account). Five decades later, large-scale analyses
comparing the performance of several symbolic cognitive architec-
tures with human subjects are finding significant deficits in the ex-
pected versus observed characteristics of these architectures (Gluck
& Pew 2002). These results and other criticisms notwithstanding,
Pylyshyn’s use of the symbol metaphor follows a deeper philosophi-
cal tradition of which even mainstream cognitive architectures
should only be considered an instance. That is, if the PSSH is not
proven according to one research agenda, the possibility exists that
it could be tested and proven in a future research agenda.
For the purposes of this commentary, the imagery debate is
about representation and method, or the structure and process in-
volved in manipulating visual or protovisual images in the mind (or
brain), and how cognitive scientists generate and gather evidence
for their respective theories. Anderson’s (1978) discussion on this
matter provided key points for the argument even as it continues
today, though at the time he did not have the benefit of recent
brain imaging techniques. Pylyshyn’s arguments are motivated, in
part, by the PSSH, suggesting that a key functional feature of brain
tissue is the ability to represent, perceive, store, retrieve, and ma-
nipulate symbols (personal communication 2002). Although a
clear, disambiguated definition of “symbol” still eludes cognitive
science, symbols, or something like them, nevertheless appear to
be an emergent or epiphenomenal feature of the brain.1 Support
for Pylyshyn’s views is derived from the PSSH (Pylyshyn 2002,
personal communication), behavioral evidence, thought experi-
ments, and longstanding tenets from linguistics and philosophy.
In contrast, Kosslyn’s arguments are based on sub-symbolic
properties of the same neural tissue. Thus, his pictorial or depic-
tional hypothesis centers on the idea that a key representation in-
volved in mental imagery is a multidimensional isomorphism or
homomorphism between the world and regions of brain tissue. He
has embraced a variety of methods – behavioral experiments,
computational modeling and simulation, brain imagery and foren-
sics (dissociative brain function as the result of trauma) – that have
shaped a convincing theory of pictorialism. Kosslyn (1992) has
usually, without fail, risen to each challenge with a programmatic
and empirical response.
Surprisingly, both views realize different notions of the com-
puting metaphor – symbols, as described above, and pictorial rep-
resentations, which are “. . . like an array in a computer . . .” (sect.
5.1). The symbol is once or twice removed from the tissue ac-
cording to the PSSH, and the multidimensional array is a simpli-
fied model of neural tissue. Just as symbols have their fundamen-
tal problems, one issue with the array pertains to the properties of
each item, a neuron, in the array, and the fact that the neurons are
not grouped like data structures in a procedural or object-oriented
programming language. Thus, even sub-symbolic approaches ad-
here, in a sense, to a form of the PSSH, since they are modeled in
the Von Neumann architecture.
In his article, Pylyshyn has again posed specific challenges to
Kosslyn. One dispute addresses how the fundamental notions of
pictorial or depictional representations fail to meet the require-
ments evident in the capabilities of symbolic manipulation men-
tioned above. The standard connectionist definition of input and
output units in neural maps is too rigid, and permits only post hoc
inferences from simulation results. More recent proposals, how-
ever, are beginning to address this matter, suggesting that a large
number of modules each consisting of a relatively small number
of neurons can function in a somewhat generic way. Prompted by
Bartlett’s dynamic notions of memory, and Edelman’s work from
the 1980s and 90s, neural simulations, brain imaging, and foren-
sics may help provide answers to some of these problems (sum-
marized in Clancey 1997). Even more intriguing is recent evi-
dence suggesting that, after an otherwise healthy brain is denied
visual stimuli, the tactile processing of Braille, can, in a matter of
days, call upon visual neural tissue for this non-visual task (Hamil-
ton & Pascual-Leone 1998). Likewise, as in the case of Michelle
Mack (Grafman 2002, personal communication), the right hemi-
sphere of the brain has been found to take on the role of language
after the left hemisphere has been permanently rendered inactive
as the result of infant trauma (see also Grafman 2000; Grafman
and Litvan 1999; Romero et al. in press).
These kinds of modular, flexible, generic, and self-organizing ca-
pabilities of brain tissue, curiously, provide evidence for both sides
of the debate, fulfilling requirements for symbolic and depictional/
pictorial perspectives. On the one hand, these self-organizing capa-
bilities support the hypothesis that the structural aspects of tissue
needn’t be considered as important as the functional – who cares
where the neurons are located, so long as they get the job done? On
the other hand, it is precisely these structural and functional capa-
bilities that provide evidence for pictorialism; particularly when
combined with evidence from brain imaging studies and forensics.
Commentary/Pylyshyn: Mental imagery: In search of a theory
212
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (2002) 25:2
. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0140525X02290044
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Chalmers Tekniska Högskola, on 16 Nov 2019 at 15:28:43, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms

In their present form, both sides of the debate are at an obvi-
ous impasse, are most likely programmatically disjunct, and, from
an epistemic perspective, any comparison between the two might
even be logically incoherent (Bickhard & Terveen 1995; Bickhard
personal communication 1994). But we hope not. This most re-
cent exchange strongly suggests there are matters outstanding that
haven’t satisfied the cognitive science community.
What is the next step?
It may be the case that both sides of the imagery debate have
something to offer towards a final, or interim, resolution. Different
arguments in the debate appear to originate from particular sub-
disciplines in cognitive science. At some point, metrics and crite-
ria for evaluating the arguments and evidence according to these
disciplines need to be established from an objective perspective.
Self-imposed metrics and excessively stringent requirements for
metrics designed for an opposing perspective may not be the best
way to evaluate the debate, or research in general – that is, this calls
for independent review (Emanuel et al. 2002). Model comparison
and evaluation can be a tall order, and it is sometimes unclear the
best way to proceed, that makes all parties happy (Gluck 2002; per-
sonal communication). Pylyshyn’s requirement for compositional-
ity will persist, prompting sub-symbolic approaches to address this
prerequisite, which to an extent, some are. Kosslyn’s requirements
for the neuroscientific basis of imagery, however, will also persist,
and physiology cannot be ignored, since it will only mature over
time. The frame-of-reference problem, symbol grounding prob-
lem, and similar epistemic intractabilities, remain to be fully ex-
plained by symbolic theorists. They cannot be simply characterized
as an annoyance, or recast as a mathematical puzzle as grand as
Fermat’s last theorem. Hybridization of what were once consid-
ered competing models is also a possibility, and can produce ef-
fective operational results, unfortunately, this may not be the an-
swer for those trying to build sound theory.
But, as Clancey (1997; personal communication 1998) suggests,
perhaps it is time to reconsider the either-or discourse and instead
begin considering this problem in “both-and” terms. Rather than
either pictorial or symbolic, it might better serve cognitive science
to recast this debate into a problem in both pictorial and symbolic
terms.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The final preparation and research of this document was funded through
IDA Task AK-2-1801, Cognitive Readiness via Advanced Distributed
Learning, Task BE-2-1624, Advanced Distributed Learning Common
Framework, and Task BE-2-1601, Defense Modeling and Simulation Of-
fice Mission Review, under contract DASW01-98-C-0067 from the Office
of the Secretary of Defense.
NOTE
1. This view is complementary to the earlier notion that mental images
were considered epiphenomena of symbolic activity.
Involvement of a visual blackboard
architecture in imagery
Frank van der Velde and Marc de Kamps
Cognitive Psychology, Leiden University, Leiden, The Netherlands.
vdvelde@fsw.leidenuniv.nl
kamps@fsw.leidenuniv.nl
Abstract: We discuss a visual blackboard architecture that could be in-
volved in imagery. In this architecture, networks that process identity in-
formation interact with networks that process location information, in a
manner that produces structural (compositional) forms of representation.
Architectures of this kind can be identified in the visual cortex, but per-
haps also in prefrontal cortex areas related with working memory.
Pylyshyn argues that imagery results from a reasoning process
based on structural representations. However, reasoning using
mental imagery is “somehow different” from reasoning without it,
and the former “in some sense” involves the visual system. This
raises the question of how the visual system could process struc-
tural forms of representation. To answer this question, it is useful
to look at the relation between object-based attention and im-
agery. Object-based attention concerns the effect of a, for in-
stance, memorized visual object (target) on the processing of cur-
rent visual information. The involvement of memorized visual
information shows a link with imagery.
Work on object-based attention suggests that the visual cortex pos-
sesses a “blackboard” architecture that provides compositional rep-
resentation of visual attributes (e.g., color, form, motion, relative lo-
cation). For example, consider the relative location of objects on a
map, as in Figure 1 of the target article. In the visual cortex, objects
are identified through a feedforward network of areas, going from
the primary visual cortex to the higher areas in the temporal cortex.
In this network, retinotopic representation is gradually transformed
into a location-invariant identity representation. Similarly, location
information is processed in networks that start at the primary visual
cortex. These networks transform retinotopic information into loca-
tion representations related to movements of different body parts.
To determine the relative location of objects on a map, a struc-
tural relation has to be established between the identity repre-
sentation of the objects and the information about their current
location on the map. This is a direct consequence of the composi-
tional nature of the task. That is, objects on a map like Figure 1 of
the target article can be identified irrespective of their location
relative to one another. Monkey studies (e.g., Chelazzi et al. 1993)
indicate how object information can be related with location in-
formation in a compositional manner. Once an object is selected
as a target, a feedback process is initiated in the networks that pro-
duce object identification. This feedback process carries informa-
tion about the identity of the object to the lower areas in the vi-
sual cortex (i.e., areas in-between the primary visual cortex and the
higher-level identification areas). The feedback process interacts
in these areas with the feedforward process described above. This
interaction results in the enhanced activation of target represen-
tations in these areas, which results in the selection of target-
related location information (Van der Velde & de Kamps 2001).
The crucial aspect of this process is the nature of the represen-
tations involved. Identity representation of an object is location in-
variant. However, in these lower “in-between” areas, the represen-
tations consist of conjunctions of (partial) identity information and
location information. This is a direct consequence of the fact that
these areas gradually transform the retinotopic information in the
primary visual cortex into identity-based information. By means of
the interaction process described above, information about the lo-
cation of an identified object can be recovered, even though that
information was lost at the level of object identification. In a con-
verse manner, the selection of a location in the “in-between” areas
can be used to select the information about the identity of an ob-
ject, which will result in the identification of the object on the given
location. This process is compositional because the same identity
(object) representation can be related with different location rep-
resentations, and the same location representation can be related
with different identity (object) representations, through the inter-
actions in these “in-between” areas described above. In computa-
tional terms, these areas provide a “blackboard” architecture be-
cause they link different “processors” to one another (van der Velde
1997). The “processors” in this case are networks for object identi-
fication as well as networks for location representation. However,
the architecture can be extended with networks for color or motion
processing (de Kamps & van der Velde 2001).
The compositional nature of this architecture provides infor-
mation about how structural representations could be formed in
imagery. For instance, the task of scanning a map as in Figure 1 of
the target article by imaging a flying black dot moving from one
object to another (Kosslyn 1980) could proceed as follows. The ob-
jects are used to identify locations in the manner described above,
with one location as the starting point. Then, the imaging of a fly-
ing black dot consists of transforming the location representation
of the first object into the location representation of the second
Commentary/Pylyshyn: Mental imagery: In search of a theory
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (2002) 25:2
213
. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0140525X02290044
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Chalmers Tekniska Högskola, on 16 Nov 2019 at 15:28:43, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms

object in a continuous manner. However, one can also jump from
one object to another in a discontinuous manner. In this case, one
object is selected as a starting point, which results in the selection
of its location as described above. Then, the other object is se-
lected as a target, which results in the selection of the location of
this second object as the new target location. The transformation
between these two locations is then accomplished by a discontin-
uous transformation (jump).
The location of the blackboard architecture described above is
in the visual cortex, in particular the higher and “in-between” ar-
eas of the visual cortex. Besides, in object-based and spatial at-
tention, the architecture located in these areas will likely play a
role in imaging tasks that are related to perception (e.g., imaging
objects on a given visual display). However, as noted above, the
crucial aspect of this architecture is the nature of the representa-
tions involved. As explained, these representations result from the
nature of visual processing. However, this does not exclude the
possibility that an architecture of this kind could (also) be located
elsewhere in the brain. Functional neuroimaging studies, using
working memory tasks, have identified areas in the prefrontal cor-
tex with combined representations of objects and locations (D’Es-
posito 2001). These areas could be part of a blackboard architec-
ture of visual working memory. Maps as illustrated in Figure 1 of
the target article indeed have to be memorized, before they can
be used in imaging tasks (e.g., Kosslyn 1980). Imaging processes
as described above could occur in such a working memory black-
board architecture as well. Given the nature of the representations
involved, an integration between the different views on imagery
(“spatial” vs. “structural”) could evolve on the basis of the pro-
cesses in these architectures.
A visual registration can be coloured without
being a picture
Edmond Wright
Faculty of Philosophy, University of Cambridge, Cambridge CB3 9DA, United
Kingdom. elw33@hermes.cam.ac.uk
www.cus.cam.ac.uk/~elw33
Abstract: Zenon Pylyshyn here repeats the same error as in his original
article (1973) in starting with the premiss that all cognition is a matter of
perceiving entities already given in their singularity. He therefore fails to
acknowledge the force of the evolutionary argument that perceiving is a
motivated process working upon a non-epistemic sensory registration in-
ternal to the brain.
Zenon Pylyshyn is on firm ground in attacking the notion of there
being a picture in the brain for visual mental imagery. He appears
to have made a case against Stephen Kosslyn’s notion of an inner
picture (Kosslyn 1994).
However, nothing in Pylyshyn’s argument undermines the pos-
sibility of there being a registration in the brain. This possibility
does not occur to him because he does not take account of Roy W.
Sellars’ proposal that all sensory experiences are only “structurally
isomorphic” to input at the sensors, that is, they are “differentially
correlated” to it, not necessarily in direct ratio (Sellars 1932, p. 86).
This implies that sensory phenomena of any kind are utterly un-
like what triggers them, so that there is no external “colour” to
match neural colour (e.g., the actually experienced red), no exter-
nal “smell” to match neural smell, and so on for all the modalities.
A fortiori, since real external pictures are therefore actually un-
coloured, there cannot be pictures in the brain. But, nevertheless,
this theory can still claim without inconsistency that there is a
neural-colour registration in the brain. This also renders useless
Pylyshyn’s complaint that some inner “eye” would have to scan a
field in the manner of the real eye, for the direct sensory experi-
ence can be of that very scanning without any supposed movement
of a supposed eye (does a TV screen have to move to “scan” round
a cup?). In any case, real eyes have evolved to pick up light rays,
which are uncoloured, and there are no light rays in the brain.
The experience of stereoscopic space also must bear no picto-
rial resemblance to the real space with which it is correlated
(stereoscopic space can be turned inside out; see Nakajima & Shi-
mojo 1981). There is no point therefore in claiming, as Pylyshyn
does (sect. 5.2), that there cannot be a registration because it could
not be on “a physical surface” in the brain, for there is no re-
quirement that the neural registration be on a physical surface
similar to that of an external object; structural isomorphism rules
out any such similarity. Kant was on the right track (Kant 1787/
1964, p. 69): sensory stereoscopic space is thus not like real space
(although in some form it is in real space in the brain).
It might be said that Pylyshyn half-grants an inner registration
when he says “Yet it is quite possible that both vision and imagery
lead to the same kind of experience because the same symbolic,
rather than pictorial, form of representation, underwrites them
both” (sect. 6.1), but he is wrong in using the word “symbolic.”
Add to Sellars’ suggestion the proposal that such structurally 
isomorphic fields of whatever sense modality are fundamentally
non-epistemic, that is, evidence as material, as brute, as the input
(Collins 1967; Wright 1996, pp. 24–28). The evolutionary advan-
tage of this is that the motivational system is then free to select
portions of what is sensed as guides to action (Piaget 1970); it can
adjust these portions as new contingencies arise (human beings
have evolved the ability through communication to speed up the
spread of such adjustments through the species). The key advan-
tage of such separation of non-epistemic registration and moti-
vated epistemized selection therefrom is the openness to a con-
tinual renewal of adaptation. So the sensory fields are material,
involuntary registrations that present evidence that is not in itself
“informative,” no more than the grain of a piece of wood is infor-
mative, though one may be able to work out that a particular line
indicates, not “symbolizes,” say, a dry summer in 1987.
It is therefore an easily understandable prejudice to begin, as
Pylyshyn does, with the notion that things and persons are given,
which he is doing if he talks of the sensory as “symbolizing.” He is
committing the “Entity Fallacy” (Wright 1992). All his examples
are of an object, which is thought of as beyond adjustment in its
singularity. Singularity is merely a feature of the selection process
and does not guarantee the “singularity” of portions of the exter-
nal flux; if it did, the evolutionary advantage of adaptation would
be lost. This is what “reasoning” is most often about. The only
place Pylyshyn does address the possibility of adaptation is in his
discussion of re-interpreting the mental image (sect. 6.5), where
he denies the possibility. However, if he had taken note of my spe-
cific response to his original article on mental imagery (Pylyshyn
1973; Wright 1983), he would have seen several examples of cred-
ible re-interpretations from the internal registration both for men-
tal images and after-images. Here he has set up a straw man, for
he only considers cases where the whole of one interpretation 
of an image turns into another interpretation of the same whole,
but this is insufficiently general, for there are cases where the
boundaries of the original percept are not preserved. Here is an
experiment to prove it. Ask good audiles to hear in their minds 
the following constantly repeated without a pause: ‘Bell-I-Mud-
Dum’ (Skinner 1957, p. 282). After a while a few of the subjects
will laugh (even one is enough). For those subjects the perceived
boundaries (of the original four “singular” words) will have shifted
over the non-epistemic base.
In conclusion: I am one of those people who can have a short
nap of ten minutes and awake refreshed. Of late, upon waking I
have been having a short but vivid hallucination. In the top left-
hand corner of my vision appears some non-objectified imagery,
as of Lego bricks or printed circuits seen under moving water
(though “they” are none of these, since the imagery is in constant
phantasmagoric transformation). It is so vivid I can half-open my
eye to produce a “split-screen” effect: I can see simultaneously the
hallucination and a window in front of me, both the non-epistemic
imagery and the epistemized window. The hallucination still shows
faintly when I open my eyes wide. It seems counter-intuitive to
maintain that they are not on the same inner “display.”
Commentary/Pylyshyn: Mental imagery: In search of a theory
214
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (2002) 25:2
. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0140525X02290044
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Chalmers Tekniska Högskola, on 16 Nov 2019 at 15:28:43, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms

Generic assumptions shared by visual
perception and imagery
Qasim Zaidi and A. Fuzz Griffiths
College of Optometry, State University of New York, New York, NY 10036.
qz@sunyopt.edu
fuzz@sunyopt.edu
www.sunyopt.edu/research/zaidi.shtml
Abstract: What is difficult to imagine is also surprising to perceive. This
indicates that active visual imagery is an integral part of active visual 
perception. Erroneous mental transformations provide clues to prior 
assumptions in visual imagery, just as visual illusions provide clues to 
perceptual assumptions. Visual imagery and perception share generic as-
sumptions about invariants in images of rigid objects.
Look at the picture in Figure 1. This is the image one sees when
looking up at a solid object that consists of a white board attached
to a vertical black baseboard. Now close your eyes and imagine ro-
tating the baseboard 1808 around the vertical axis.
Does the rotated object look like Figure 2? Every observer who
has tried this visual game with the actual solid object has answered
in the negative. Why is this so? Observers reason as follows: “In the
object in Figure 1, the free edge of the white board is higher than
the attached edge. Since this is a rigid object, after rotation the free
edge should stay above the attached edge, whereas in Figure 2 it is
below the attached edge.” In fact, Figures 1 and 2 are two views of
the same object, a white parallelogram (internal angles 458 & 1358)
attached orthogonal (horizontal) to the black baseboard (Griffiths
& Zaidi 2000). In Figure 1, the free edge is closer to the observer,
whereas in Figure 2 the attached edge is closer. Having been in-
formed of this fact, now try imagining a rotation from Figure 1 to
Figure 2. It is unlikely that you will be able to imagine the rotation
while retaining the assumption that the parallelogram is attached
rigidly to the baseboard. In visual imagery, it seems to be assumed
that the fixed spatial relationships between features of a rigid ob-
ject are preserved in all images of the object. Figures 1 and 2 show
that this assumption can be wrong.
The reader may have noticed that the parallelograms do not
look horizontal in either of these pictures, so obviously there is a
visual illusion involved. In fact, despite being allowed to handle
the solid object and to look at it from all angles, observers are con-
stantly surprised when the object is placed in the view shown in
Figure 1 and the parallelogram appears almost rectangular and
tilted up (Griffiths & Zaidi 2000). The image of the front edge of
the parallelogram is not horizontal because in perspective the far-
ther corner of the edge is projected down towards eye-height. The
illusion demonstrates that a visual percept can be immune to
knowledge of the object, and that the perceptual system cannot
discount the effects of the image formation process. Why is it sur-
prising when the parallelogram appears tilted? A plausible expla-
nation is that an observer imagines that it should remain orthogo-
nal to the baseboard in all images, because relationships among
features should be invariant in images of rigid objects. This points
out that visual perception and visual imagery are intertwined
processes and that any discordance between them is a source of
surprise. It is possible that we register a percept as an illusion
when an object appears different from the shape we imagined
based on an earlier view.
The objects in Figures 1 and 2 were designed to represent the
salient features of a building, two views of which are shown in Fig-
Commentary/Pylyshyn: Mental imagery: In search of a theory
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (2002) 25:2
215
Figure 2 (Zaidi & Griffiths).
A solid white parallelogram shape
with internal angles of 458 and 1358, viewed from below with the
front edge oriented 458 away from the camera.
Figure 1 (Zaidi & Griffiths).
A solid white parallelogram shape
with internal angles of 458 and 1358, viewed from below with the
front edge oriented 458 towards the camera.
. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0140525X02290044
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Chalmers Tekniska Högskola, on 16 Nov 2019 at 15:28:43, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms

ure 3 (Griffiths & Zaidi 2000; Halper 1997). Notice that in the left
panel the balconies seem implausibly tilted up, whereas in the
right panel they implausibly appear tilted down. A frontal view of
the building reveals the balconies to be horizontal parallelograms.
This knowledge never weakens the illusion.
When the object shown in Figure 1 is slowly rotated to the view
in Figure 2, observers report a percept of non-rigidity. Does this
rotating rigid object appear non-rigid because it violates our ex-
pectations about the images of a rigid object? After being shown
this rotation, observers can close their eyes and imagine a rotation
that is similar to the percept, but only by giving up the assumed
rigidity of the object. However, this rotation seems to involve the
visual memory of a geometrical transformation, rather than the
mental geometrical transformation of a visual memory. Since vio-
lations of image assumptions used in mental transformations of
rigid objects create visual percepts that are surprising, this sug-
gests that visual imagery continuously sets expectations in active
visual perception.
A three-dimensional curl illusion described by Griffiths and
Zaidi (1998) illustrates that stereo and motion-parallax effects are
neither incorporated in visual imagery nor anticipated in percep-
tion. The reader should cut the C-shaped object (Fig. 4) out of a
flat piece of rigid material, and try to imagine what this object will
look like when raised and viewed monocularly. When the flat ob-
ject is held at an elevation of 458, it surprisingly acquires an up-
ward curl when one eye is closed and stereo information removed.
Now the reader should imagine what the object will look like if it
is moved up or down. When the rigid object is moved, it appears
to flex and change shape, and be more or less curled as the eleva-
tion above eye level is increased or decreased. Now imagine the
shape of the object if the translation velocity is faster. Most ob-
servers imagine similar percepts whether the motion is slow or
fast. In actuality, the curl disappears and the object appears rigidly
flat if the object is moved quickly. Thus, the perceptual system
uses information provided by motion-parallax and stereo, but
mental imagery is unable to take the presence or absence of such
information into account. This mismatch produces unanticipated
percepts that are surprising to observers.
Pylyshyn has argued persuasively against a picture theory of vi-
sual imagery. As an alternative, erroneous mental visual transfor-
mations could be studied for clues to the generic assumptions
used in imagery, just as visual illusions have provided clues to
generic perceptual assumptions. Visual imagery and perception
seem to share the generic assumption that spatial relationships
among features of a rigid object are preserved in all images of the
object. This implies that both perceived and imagined visual rep-
resentations include spatial relationships. We have demonstrated
that what is difficult to imagine is also surprising to perceive and
vice versa (also illustrated by Fig. 6 of Pylyshyn). This suggests that
active visual imagery is an integral part of active visual perception.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This work was funded by NEI Grants EY07556 and EY13312, to Qasim
Zaidi.
Author’s Response
Stalking the elusive mental image screen
Zenon W. Pylyshyn
Rutgers Center for Cognitive Science, Rutgers University, Piscataway, NJ
08854-8020. zenon@ruccs.rutgers.edu
http://ruccs.rutgers.edu/faculty/pylyshyn.html
Abstract: After thirty years of the current “imagery debate,” it ap-
pears far from resolved, even though there seems to be a growing
acceptance that a cortical display cannot be identified directly
with the experienced mental image, nor can it account for the ex-
perimental findings on imagery, at least not without additional ad
hoc assumptions. The commentaries on the target article range
from the annoyed to the supportive, with a surprising number of
the latter. In this response I attempt to correct some misreadings
of the target article and discuss some of the ideas and evidence in-
troduced by the commentators – much of which I found helpful,
Response/Pylyshyn: Mental imagery: In search of a theory
216
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (2002) 25:2
Figure 3 (Zaidi & Griffiths).
(Left) A view of the apartment
building “The Future,” located at 200 East 32nd Street in New
York City. The balconies appear to tilt up, with tilt becoming more
apparent the higher up the building one looks. (Right) The same
building, but viewed from the opposite side. The balconies now
appear to tilt downwards.
Figure 4 (Zaidi & Griffiths).
The shape shown at left is con-
structed from a pair of identical semicircles, placed parallel to one
another, one radius apart, and joined by a pair of parallel straight
lines. In order to better view the effect at arm’s length, we suggest
using a radius of 4 inches, and cutting the shape out of stiff card or
some other rigid material. The stimulus is viewed monocularly,
placed parallel to the ground and elevated above the line of sight.
Raising and lowering the stimulus as indicated will generate the
effects described in the text.
. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0140525X02290044
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Chalmers Tekniska Högskola, on 16 Nov 2019 at 15:28:43, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms

even though they do not alter my basic thesis. I also further de-
velop the idea that the spatial character of images may come from
the way they are connected to our immediate or immediately-re-
called environment (by attention or by visual indexes) and towards
which we may orient while we are imaging, thus leaving the al-
leged spatial properties of images outside the head and freeing im-
age-representations from having to be displayed on any surface.
R1. Introduction
Nearly thirty years after the first round of the current “im-
agery debate” (Pylyshyn 1973) it appears that we may have
made a small amount of progress. Although the views ex-
pressed by the commentators are as varied as those of the
research communities from which they come, the large
number of at least partially supporting commentaries, from
many disciplines, came as a welcome surprise since the pic-
ture theory is still the dominant view. I had assumed that
the target article would be widely reviled since it asks that
one put aside one’s intuitions about what is in the mind/
brain. This appears to be an exercise that few theorists care
to take up, for reasons that Slezak and Gold clearly lay out:
It is often called the “intentional fallacy” and scientific ar-
guments over it go back to the beginning of the Renais-
sance.
Because Kosslyn’s views about mental imagery are widely
accepted, and because his theory is the most explicit state-
ment of the view I am criticizing, I will devote dispropor-
tional space to the long commentary by Kosslyn, Thomp-
son & Ganis (hereafter Kosslyn et al.). I appreciate the
well-organized set of responses by Kosslyn et al. that clar-
ify their stand on a number of the issues on which Kosslyn
and I have disagreed over the years. I especially appreciate
the clear statement in the latter part of their introductory
paragraph (beginning “The issue is not . . .”) that seems to
represent at least a softening of Kosslyn’s earlier position.
The position they outline in their commentary also diverges
in a number of other respects from the canonical view pre-
sented in Kosslyn 1994. For example, Kosslyn et al. no
longer appear to claim that what we experience in mental
imagery corresponds to the content of the depictive display.
They now maintain (item 4 of their section “Imagery and
perception”) that the experience of imagery does not orig-
inate from the depictive representation (which they claim
is in V1), but from the activation of memory representations
in the inferior temporal lobe. This is a puzzling revision.
For, if what we experience is not in the depictive display but
elsewhere in memory, why do they appeal to properties of
the display to explain what happens when subjects do cer-
tain things to the image that they experience (e.g., examine
or scan it)?
In spite of this and other apparent revisions of the Koss-
lyn position, I will argue that no amount of fine-tuning will
save the depiction theory.
R2. Is imagery primarily a problem for
neuroscience to solve?
I said in the target article that disagreements about the na-
ture of mental imagery are more than a question of differ-
ent interpretations of data. As Slezak’s historical perspec-
tive serves to highlight (and which Dennett 1991 and
Thomas, in press, have also documented), the disagree-
ments rest on much deeper preconceptions and illusions –
which is why they arouse such passionate reactions, and
why the long “imagery debate” does not appear to have re-
solved the basic disagreements. Slezak points out that even
though many people recognize that a representation of a cat
does not have to be furry, nonetheless “it is telling that such
views must be repeatedly refuted throughout the history of
speculation about the mind.”
Kosslyn et al. (as well as Polimeni & Schwartz) feel
that the reason the “debate” was not settled earlier is be-
cause behavioral data are incapable of resolving the ques-
tion of the nature of representations underlying imagery, 
so we have had to turn to the findings of neuroscience.
Kosslyn et al. cite Anderson’s (1978) indeterminism thesis
to support this view – although it is well known that data,
no matter how much of it there is nor what form it takes,
always underdetermine theory.1 However interesting and
important the neuroscience findings are, it still remains the
case that the problem most of us are trying to solve is not
a neurophysiological one but a psychological one: Anyone
who studies mental imagery wants to understand the na-
ture of a particular phenomenon that arises in behavior and
in experience – and that means understanding its formal
and information-processing characteristics as well as its in-
stantiation in the brain. The search for neural correlates or
for neural mechanisms takes it for granted that we know
what they are correlates of, or what functions the mecha-
nisms are computing, and this depends on our under-
standing of the phenomena and in having at least some idea
– preferably one that is not obviously wrong – of how it
works. It also depends on certain assumptions about how
function maps on to structure; an assumption that is very
often questionable, as it is in the studies of vision and im-
agery (see the cautionary note in Young 2000). The idea
that only neuroscience can provide the answers we seek 
is sheer prejudice, although a widely shared prejudice 
that finds expression in the commentaries by Kosslyn et
al., Polimeni & Schwartz, de Haan & Aleman, and
Toth.
Several commentators seem to feel that even raising the
issue of the nature of mental images at this time, given how
much has been written about it, is somehow in poor taste.
For example, de Haan & Aleman claim that we have
“gone beyond” the debate and that “recent research allows
us to formulate new theoretical ideas concerning how we
are able to mentally imagine the outside world.” But they
don’t say what these new theoretical ideas are, and I very
much suspect that they are the very same old theoretical
ideas that were criticized in the target article. Similarly,
Toth urges us “to reconsider the either-or discourse.” This
is all very nice but what matters in the present context is
whether the arguments I presented are valid, because if
they are, the form of the “discourse” becomes moot.
Progress on conceptually difficult problems, like mental
imagery, is unlikely to be furthered by homilies about how
science should proceed, how we connot ignore neuro-
science, and how we should strive to accommodate both
sides. When someone presents neuroscience evidence that
bears on the issues it will not be ignored and when a non-
vacuous version of picture theory is proposed we can then
consider the option of some “hybrid” form of representa-
tion. But we are not there yet.
Response/Pylyshyn: Mental imagery: In search of a theory
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (2002) 25:2
217
. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0140525X02290044
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Chalmers Tekniska Högskola, on 16 Nov 2019 at 15:28:43, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms

R2.1. The involvement of the visual brain in 
mental imagery
I tried to make it clear in the target article that the dis-
agreements are about what, if anything, is special about
mental images that distinguishes them from other forms 
of cognitive representation. The argument is not about
whether certain parts of the brain are involved in both vi-
sion and mental imagery. The notion that some of the same
neural circuits are activated in both cases is raised by a num-
ber of commentators, including Burgess, Bartolomeo &
Chokron, Chatterjee, de Haan & Aleman, Grossberg,
Olivetti Belardinelli & Di Matteo, Pani, and Polimeni
& Schwartz. But the assumption that the vision-like ex-
perience of imagery derives from the deployment of some
of the same neural structures as are activated in corre-
sponding episodes of visual perception, is not in dispute.
What is in dispute is the further assumption that both vision
and imagery use a special form of representation, one that
has become known as “depictive.” Even if one does not
make this assumption, the overlap of vision and imagery is
a platitude unless one has at least the beginnings of a model
of what the two have in common other than the untenable
assumption that they both examine some inner display.
For this reason I welcome attempts, such as Gross-
berg’s, to develop such a model, in which top-down and
bottom-up information interact to produce visual experi-
ences on the one hand, and hallucinations or visual images
on the other, and which also account for some of the major
differences between vision and imagery. On the other hand,
it must be admitted that this is only a very small step to-
wards understanding either the experience of imagery or its
information-processing properties, and is moreover no help
at all in explaining the vast array of behavioral imagery phe-
nomena, such as documented in Kosslyn (1980). (Although,
as I suggest in sects. 3 and 4 of the target article and in sect.
R6 of this response, a great many of these phenomena are
unlikely to be explained in terms of any imagery-specific
mechanisms, but rather in terms of general mechanisms
such as inference from tacit knowledge.)
R3. Depiction and the “Tootell Display”
We see in the kind of neuroscience evidence that is sought
and in the way it is interpreted, that investigators like Koss-
lyn et al. are seeking evidence for an old, intuitively ap-
pealing idea of what goes on when we “see” with our “mind’s
eye,” an idea I called the “picture theory,” that goes back to
Descartes and was revived in modern times by Kosslyn,
Shepard, Paivio, and others. This is clear from the fact that
Kosslyn et al. take as their central paradigm the finding of
Tootell et al. (1982) and similar, more recent findings cited
in their commentary: namely, that in visual perception and
mental imagery there is a literal two-dimensional layout of
neural activity in the visual cortex that “resembles” (Koss-
lyn’s term) what it represents. Moreover, even more criti-
cally, both vision and imagery exploit this spatial layout and
rely on the fact that a particular structure-preserving map-
ping defines the content of the image or percept, in a way
that would not be true of a symbolic form of representation
(even though the latter would likely also be encoded spa-
tially in the brain).
This is a strong thesis with considerable intuitive appeal.
It does not do justice to Kosslyn’s highly focused research
program that he and his colleagues back off from this the-
sis each time a counterexample is raised, as they do when
they admit that images are not exactly like any possible pic-
ture (e.g., they contain “predigested information” – again
Kosslyn’s term), that they are laid out in a “functional
space,” that the process of inspecting images is not really
like the process of visual perception, or that, even though
the depictive display explains imagery phenomena, its con-
tents are not what we experience when we image. The way
that images are supposed to be like pictures is quite clear,
not only in the Kosslyn (1994) text I quoted in the target ar-
ticle, but also in the points made in the Kosslyn et al. com-
mentary: Images and pictures are both laid out in space in
a way that “preserves metrical properties” such as “large
versus small,” “near versus far,” as well as other geometri-
cal properties (e.g., “square” vs. “circular”). And it had bet-
ter be the case that the space they are laid out in is literal
space in the brain, and not some softened “functional” ver-
sion; otherwise none of the predictions that involve size,
distance, relative location, or shape would follow from in-
trinsic properties of the image (and if they do not follow
from intrinsic properties, then the depictive theory does
not differ from the “null hypothesis”).
Many empirical arguments have been cited in support of
the view that images are special insofar as they are “depic-
tive,” or picture-like. But as I argued in the target article
(and documented with quotations in Pylyshyn 1981), the
appeal to “depictive representations” in the literature has
largely been a shell game in which picture theorists get all
the predictive value out of the literal 2D assumption, and
then immediately repudiate that assumption and retreat to
a less specific version of the proposal (“it’s how the process
accesses it that matters”) which, alas, no longer explains
what it was supposed to explain, or at least has no advantage
over the null hypothesis.2 To avoid misunderstandings
about how pictorial the entity hypothesized by Kosslyn et
al. and others really is (and whether it is colored or 3D), let
us call the sort of neural activity map found by Tootell et al.,
a “Tootell Display” or “Tootell Screen” instead of a “pic-
ture.” (I have not attempted a mathematical definition of
“picture” because the picture-theorists do not have any-
thing that definite in mind.) Polimeni & Schwartz’s defi-
nition as a “locally regular feature map” will do, since it sug-
gests that the display might be a wildly but continuously
distorted version of the proximal stimulus. A more techni-
cal way of putting it is that a picture can be any continuous
mapping of the proximal stimulus that preserves local
topology – such as a homeomorphism or locally affine
transformation. (This definition of “picture” allows for the
“cortical magnification factor” that Kosslyn et al. raise in
their commentary.)
While there is neuroscience evidence for a Tootell Dis-
play, such a display cannot explain the facts of imagery that
are driving the imagery research program (e.g., mental
scanning, the effects of different image “size,” mental rota-
tion, and the other lines of research I discussed in the tar-
get article) for at least the following two reasons.
1. In a large number of cases the experimental phenom-
ena are not attributable to properties of the mental image
at all, but to people’s ability to simulate what they believe
they would see if they were to witness certain events (e.g.,
if they were to scan their attention from place to place on a
map). In other words, the facts in question do not constrain
brain structures at all: any structures that could recall past
Response/Pylyshyn: Mental imagery: In search of a theory
218
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (2002) 25:2
. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0140525X02290044
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Chalmers Tekniska Högskola, on 16 Nov 2019 at 15:28:43, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms

episodes, draw inferences, generate sequences of thoughts,
and estimate time intervals such as time-to-collision, would
do. The purpose of introducing the “null hypothesis” is not
primarily to claim that images must be symbolic, but to
show that many phenomena that imagery theorists are con-
cerned with can be accounted for by any theory adequate
to carry out reasoning, including a symbolic one that im-
plements a “language of thought” (the reason I take the 
latter to be the “default” form is treated briefly in sect. 
R4.1 of this response). One reason why proposals, such as
Gottschling’s, or Pani’s, that images are analog would not
work in general, is because the phenomena are very often
not a result of any properties of the image itself. This is not
to say that there are no analog representations of particular
magnitudes in the brain – see section R4.3.
2. The Tootell Display proposal is not compatible with
what we know about either mental imagery or vision. This
was the point of the eight reasons I gave in section 7.2 of
the target article: they are just a sampling of reasons why,
even if a detailed 2D pattern of activity mirroring the expe-
rienced image were found in the cortex during imagery, this
could not be what is responsible for the empirical phenom-
ena of mental imagery (by which I mean the kind of phe-
nomena that have been extensively documented in Kosslyn
1980; 1994). If activity corresponding to the Tootell Display
were found during episodes of mental imagery, this would
indeed be a very interesting finding, but contrary to general
belief we would not be the least bit closer to explaining the
many phenomena of mental imagery than we were before:
the Tootell Display is likely to have as small a role in theo-
ries of mental imagery as it has in fact had in theories of vi-
sual processing. In his commentary, Dennett has some
characteristically picturesque examples for putting the
same point. Dennett’s point is that, when viewed in a cer-
tain way, many interesting patterns might be observed in
the brain without those patterns being exploited by the
brain to compute certain particular behavioral phenomena.
The question of whether the patterns are exploited is also
independent of the question of whether certain brain re-
gions are involved (causally or incidentally) in the activity of
imaging, so the efficacy of rTMS (repetitive transcranial
magnetic stimulation) is not directly relevant to this ques-
tion (pace Kosslyn et al. and de Haan & Aleman). It is
also independent of exactly how the spatial distribution of
the display is implemented in detail in the brain: Whether
this is done on a cell-by-cell basis or whether it uses vector
encoding, as suggested by Sokolov, the conceptual issue
remains the same.
Ingle underscores some of the inadequacies of the
Tootell Display that I had mentioned and provides some ad-
ditional suggestions. He reminds us that in vision the con-
tents of the Tootell Display change several times each sec-
ond so its contents do not actually correspond to how we see
the world. The important point that is often ignored is that
what we experience, in both vision and imagery, is a spatial
configuration that was never present on the retina or on the
Tootell Display, so such a display could not correspond to
the contents of either vision or imagery. The obvious way to
deal with this devastating criticism is to assume that mental
imagery (and visual experience) is associated with some
other stable panoramic display, as opposed to the Tootell
Display, onto which the contents of the Tootell Display are
transferred in registration with eye movements. But, as In-
gle and others have pointed out, there is no evidence for
that sort of display in the brain (and there is plenty of evi-
dence that such a display is never constructed in the course
of saccadic integration; see O’Regan 1992; O’Regan &
Noë 2001). In fact, as Ingle also points out, visual infor-
mation that forms the basis of object recognition is carried
by a distinct pathway (the ventral system) and converges
with information about location – likely in the coordinates
of motor control – that is carried by another pathway (the
dorsal system). These two systems do not merge (as they
would have to, if they corresponded to the contents of vi-
sual or imagery experiences) until perhaps the prefrontal
cortex, where there is no evidence for any sort of topo-
graphical organization. In their commentary, Kosslyn et
al. wisely disavow such a stable panoramic display (see
point 6 in their section “Imagery and Perception”). Inter-
estingly, Kosslyn (1994) clearly embraced it (see Chs. 4 to
7, especially pp. 85–94) and argued that since such a dis-
play is used by vision, it is natural to assume it is also used
by imagery.
Van der Velde & de Kamps have also focused on the
merging of identity and location information from the “two
visual systems” and provide a sketch, using a “blackboard
architecture,” of how these two types of information might
be coordinated – a major problem in models of visual per-
ception. While the term “blackboard” might suggest a spa-
tial layout, none of the appeals to such an architecture in AI
or vision have had that implication. The van der Velde & de
Kamps proposal itself only claims that retinotopically orga-
nized information is transformed continuously into either
the identity of each object or into “location representations
related to movements of different body parts.” So far this is
compatible with the null hypothesis. But they also suggest
that the blackboard may be located in the visual cortex
(which might be taken as support for the depictive view).
But, as Ingle points out, the earliest place where ventral
and dorsal visual systems converge is roughly in the pre-
frontal cortex, where there is no evidence of topographical
organization.
R4. The “null hypothesis” and its detractors
R4.1. Why should we assume a symbolic system as the
“null hypothesis”?
The purpose behind my “null hypothesis” proposal seems
to have been widely misunderstood, leading to some argu-
ments that are not germane. Thomas questions why I con-
sider the symbolic alternative to be the “null” or default
case, and perhaps I did not provide enough discussion of
this point. Millar says that the null hypothesis is a “formal
description of problem solving tasks” that “makes no pre-
dictions about how people actually go about solving differ-
ent types of problems.” The null hypothesis is not a formal
description of anything; it is a proposal, laid on the table
largely as a foil, about what form our representations might
take when they are experienced as visual images. The rea-
son why I treat this particular option as the “default” is be-
cause (1) we know something about it (since it includes all
the various formal languages and symbolic calculi for which
we have a formal semantics to tell us how the meanings of
complex structures are composed from the meanings of
their parts); and (2) because it meets certain minimal re-
quirements that must be met by any system adequate for
the representation of knowledge and for reasoning. In par-
Response/Pylyshyn: Mental imagery: In search of a theory
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (2002) 25:2
219
. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0140525X02290044
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Chalmers Tekniska Högskola, on 16 Nov 2019 at 15:28:43, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms

ticular, we know that a recursive system of symbols has
properties such as productivity, compositionality, and sys-
tematicity, and that these are essential for reasoning and
knowledge representation (for a detailed argument on this
point, see Fodor & Pylyshyn 1988).
Even though the format used by a circumscribed part of
the system need not meet all these requirements, it will still
have to face the problem of providing a seamless interface
between its form and the form used in reasoning, since both
vision and imagery do play a role in reasoning (and since
translating between a picture and beliefs is what the entire
brain does, hence the ever-present danger of a homuncu-
lus regress that Kosslyn et al. like to pooh-pooh).3 I take
considerations such as these to present a serious challenge
to those who advocate some proposal other than the sym-
bolic one. Saying that this proposal “seems odd in the con-
text of evolutionary biology” (as Millar does) is a strange
way to meet this challenge. It buys into the impression fos-
tered by some connectionists (and also discussed in Fodor
& Pylyshyn 1988) that if it does not look like a nervous sys-
tem, it must be biologically implausible.
R4.2. How does a symbol system deal with various
particular phenomena?
Many commentators presented interesting imagery find-
ings that they claim would be difficult for a symbolic system
to accommodate (e.g., Arterberry, Craver-Lemley &
Reeves, Bartolomeo & Chokron, Burgess, Chatter-
jee, and to a lesser extent Jüttner & Renstchler). But why
do they think that? Is it because some of the findings imply
the processing/storage of metrical information? Is it be-
cause the operations on the representations are globally
“spatial,” such as rotating something or viewing it from an-
other viewpoint? These examples are often presented in the
tone of voice, “What do you have to say about that?” Well,
in most cases I have nothing to say about them except that
they are not grounds for favoring the alternative: No pic-
ture theory could even begin to address them without a col-
lection of ad hoc stipulations. And with the benefit of such
stipulations any theory, including a symbolic calculus, could
do equally well. It is worth reiterating that what makes cer-
tain operations (e.g., rotation) appear natural for a pictorial
representation is that it so readily invites the intentional fal-
lacy that Gold discusses: It is easy to forget that what is nat-
ural to rotate is the (solid, rigid, physical) thing that is imag-
ined, not the mental representation or its brain encoding.
It is definitely not natural to rotate a Tootell Display (or its
contents), or to examine it from a different perspective, an
operation that Bartolomeo & Chokron felt was unnatural
in a symbolic system. Some analog operations do make
sense (e.g., rotation of a dihedral vertex through a small an-
gle in 3D, as postulated by Marr & Nishihara 1976), and I
look forward to the development of a theory that incorpo-
rates them, but it is unlikely that it will contain a depictive
display (Marr & Nishihara’s SPASAR mechanism computes
an analog operation on a symbolic representation).
R4.3. Do we need analogs as well as symbol
structures?
Despite the above reasons for putting forth a symbolic form
as a default proposal, there may be good and sufficient rea-
sons for rejecting this form of representation for images
and, instead, to adopt something more intuitive, like a de-
pictive form. The point that I argued in detail in the target
article (for the devil is in the details) is that the known ex-
perimental findings do not provide such reasons.
This is not to suggest that there are no important un-
resolved issues in the symbolic option. One that may be at
the heart of many of the examples commentators have raised
is this: Discrete symbol systems do not seem to have a gen-
erally satisfactory way of dealing with the representation
and manipulation of real-valued magnitudes. They do, of
course, have the venerable numeral systems – even systems
with arbitrarily expandable precision, such as used in the
Dewey decimal system – but these may not be completely
satisfactory for such purposes as, say, controlling biomotor
systems, or perhaps even for accounting for such phenom-
ena as the “symbolic distance effect” cited by Petrusic &
Baranski, or various abilities that implicate a metrical form
of representation (as, for example, in mathematical reason-
ing, see Dehaene et al. 1998; Gallistel & Gelman 2000).
Polimeni & Schwartz make the not unreasonable sugges-
tion that a hybrid analog-symbolic system might be re-
quired to model vision and other cognitive functions, al-
though whether they actually do or do not remains an open
empirical question.
Notwithstanding the various proposed roles for analogs
in mental representations, there are many concerns re-
garding the proposal that image representations involve
an analog component, not the least of which is that there
is a question about the interpretation of much of the data
that lead investigators to that assumption. The considera-
tions discussed in connection with the tacit knowledge
proposal (sects. 3 and 4 of the target article, as well as sect.
R6 of this response) is one sort of worry (viz., that these
data may reflect something other than the form of the
representation); and various problems with the empirical
demonstrations, discussed by Petrusic & Baranski, is
another.
Yet another reason given for favoring analogs comes from
the way we experience images and percepts. For example,
Pani worries about why our experience of both vision and
imagery has the character of continuity, and suggests that
the imagery system may use “tokens borrowed from the
neural mapping of the visual world . . . [so that] the visuo-
spatial properties they do contain will lead people to report
them as experiences in a mental world with an analog char-
acter.” The assumption that some of the same neural struc-
tures are involved in both imagery and vision does not en-
tail that we need what Pani calls a “dense mapping” from
the world to structures in the brain to account for the ex-
perience of dense vistas, any more than that we need an
analog system to talk about dense layouts (I just did so in
this sentence!). To ascribe density to these structures, on
the grounds that we experience dense visual regions, is to
make the same mistake as to ascribe color, shape, or size to
the neural structures because we experience color, shape,
and size in our images; it is the insidious intentional fallacy.
In spite of these concerns, I agree that for many purposes
an analog representation system (in which a system of phys-
ical magnitudes in the represented domain maps to a dif-
ferent system of physical magnitudes in the representing
domain) might be required. Gottschling is right to say 
that despite the indefensible matrix-type functional space,
I have not excluded some interpretation of “functional
space” that depends on a real analog of space (but see Note
Response/Pylyshyn: Mental imagery: In search of a theory
220
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (2002) 25:2
. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0140525X02290044
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Chalmers Tekniska Högskola, on 16 Nov 2019 at 15:28:43, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms

6 of the target article). But caveat lector; there is more to
the notion of an analog representation than meets the eye.
Take, for example, the Polimeni & Schwartz argument for
the efficiency of representing time by time and space by
space, as opposed to using “expensive” symbolic codes. To
reach this conclusion, a particular cost-accounting scheme
had to be assumed, which could turn out to be unjustified.
For instance, Minsky and Papert (1971) discuss an example
of what looks at first glance like an efficient analog com-
puting mechanism, but in which the efficiency turns out to
be illusory when precision and physical constraints are
taken into account.4 Furthermore, one should not be fooled
into thinking that it is even clear what it is for a system to
be analog – it is easy to get into the same difficulties in
thinking about analogs as one does in thinking about “func-
tional space,” and for similar reasons (see Block & Fodor
1972; Lewis 1971; Pylyshyn 1984).
R4.4. Formats and representations in different
modalities
Intons-Peterson challenges my null hypothesis on the
grounds that it lacks criteria for when something is the
“same form of representation” as that used for general rea-
soning. And so it does; this was not intended as an opera-
tional definition, but a challenge to theories. When a
worked-out proposal is available, the criteria will become
clear. For example, if we were to take the predicate calcu-
lus as the proposed form of representation for general 
reasoning, and the “vivid representation” proposed by
Levesque and Brachman (1985) as the form for mental im-
agery, the criterion for being “the same type of representa-
tion” would be met, since the latter is just a subset of the
former (the vocabulary of nonlogical terms would, of
course, be domain specific). In general, sameness can only
be assessed relative to a theory, so Intons-Peterson is cor-
rect in saying that this is an underspecified proposal. She is
also quite right to point out that there are forms of imagery
other than visual ones, and that they could provide further
evidence for my thesis. The work I am familiar with in other
modalities does point to the importance of amodal space, as
opposed to visual space, as an organizer of cognitive repre-
sentation (a point that was also made by Jüttner &
Rentschler in their commentary). Clearly, this is a direc-
tion that merits further research.
Olivetti Belardinelli & Di Matteo make a similar
point regarding the advisability of extending imagery re-
search into other modalities. In their review of a rather
sparse literature on imagery in different modalities, these
commentators found evidence for both modality-specific
and amodal components to imagery. Moreover, they found
that during imagery in the seven sensory modalities they
surveyed, brain areas activated were generally specific to
the modality in question, yet in no case were they the pri-
mary cortical areas associated with perception in that
modality. While these commentators speculate that the
amodal component might be propositional, they conclude
that the modality-specific component is likely “concrete/
analogical.” But this is just the conclusion that I have been
suggesting is unwarranted. So long as we do not know how
brain activity maps onto modal experience, and do not have
evidence that information in different modalities is differ-
ent in format, as opposed to content, the modal-amodal dis-
tinction does not show that we represent the two types of
information differently; as I suggested, again in the spirit of
a null hypothesis foil, they could be the same except for
their content (i.e., what they are about).
The issue of different modalities raises the question of
whether what we call spatial imagery, in the fullest sense of
the word, arises in the blind. Both Chatterjee and de
Haan & Aleman argue that totally cortically blind people
have imagery in this strong sense, though Millar disputes
this, at least for the congenitally blind, citing informal ex-
amples of congenitally blind people who only report
sketchy images in modalities that (judging by her exam-
ples) do not implicate spatial imagery. Of course, without
the experience of vision, blind people might not use color
terms in exactly the same way as sighted people do. But the
preponderance of evidence seems to show that the blind
(including the congenitally blind) have an extremely well
developed sense of space and shape, which they claim 
to experience in the form of images; and that they also 
show the same effects of scanning, mental rotation, and
other signature imagery phenomena as do sighted people
(though Millar claims that they are not as efficient at it).
Moreover, blind children learn to use spatial terms to refer
to space in very nearly the same way as sighted children do
(Landau & Gleitman 1985). This suggests that sight is not
necessary for most of the spatial phenomena that have been
studied by imagery researchers, and therefore neither is
the vision-specific Tootell Display (unless we are to assume
that audition, olfaction, and the tactile and gustatory senses
are also represented in a two-dimensional depictive dis-
play). Certainly Jüttner & Rentschler’s work shows that
a cross-modal representation of object shapes is the rule
rather than the exception, and hence that images of objects
are amodal (or at least not solely visual), thus casting fur-
ther doubt on the inherently visual depictive theory of im-
agery.
Jüttner & Rentschler and others, feel that the null hy-
pothesis is also committed to an amodal conception of per-
ceptual representation. But one of the principal differences
among modalities is that they are about different things and
require different concepts. For example, vision concerns vi-
sual properties like color or luminance, audition concerns
auditory properties such as pitch or loudness, the tactile
sense concerns properties such as smooth or sharp, and so
on. Each modality has its own set of modality-specific con-
cepts. Beyond those is a large array of modality-free con-
cepts such as those referring to spatial properties, which ap-
ply to most modalities. A symbol system can prima facie
accommodate such facts just the way that language does, by
simply using different terms when dealing with different
modalities. The point is that a modality is, at least to a first
approximation, about content and not about format, so
there is no need to hypothesize a different form of repre-
sentation for each modality. Whether this makes symbolic
systems amodal or not, is therefore mostly a matter of ter-
minology.
R4.5. Are there other options besides pictures 
and symbols?
Commentators have offered a number of ideas for a “third
option,” although the options that have been proposed are
either too sketchy to judge, or else are problematic. For ex-
ample, an alternative that Chatterjee has proposed is the
schema, favored by many others as well. For Chatterjee this
Response/Pylyshyn: Mental imagery: In search of a theory
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (2002) 25:2
221
. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0140525X02290044
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Chalmers Tekniska Högskola, on 16 Nov 2019 at 15:28:43, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms

is an abstraction that combines some of the features of both
pictures and language. It is, in fact, not too far from Koss-
lyn’s occasional description of “depictive displays” as con-
taining “predigested information” or being “annotated.”
One version of the schema proposal that has been popular
in artificial intelligence is sometimes called a frame (see,
e.g., Minsky 1975). It is a structure that contains slots that
are eventually bound to particulars as information becomes
available. It also contains default assignments that prevail if
no information to the contrary is available, and it contains
procedures for transforming the structure or for determin-
ing what values go in the slots. That sort of schema is clearly
a symbolic form of representation. What Chatterjee has in
mind, however, and what many people would like to see, is
a form of representation that not only has the properties of
frames, but also has intrinsic spatial properties. But such a
system would still require a literal spatial display on which
to locate the descriptions or annotations, so the locations of
the slots or descriptors would have to follow Euclidean
principles. The only way out of this dilemma may be the one
I have taken in my own theoretical work, in which I provide
a mechanism called a visual index (or FINST) which pro-
vides a limited means for a descriptive representation to
point to, or reference, objects in the world, thereby inher-
iting spatial properties from the world without actually hav-
ing such properties itself (see below).
Thomas is one of the commentators who agrees that pic-
ture theory has all the problems I attribute to it, yet he is
not favorably disposed towards the null hypothesis either.
Rather, he advocates another approach that he calls Per-
ceptual activity theory, which holds that “imagery arises
from vicarious exercise of . . . [mastery of relevant sensori-
motor contingencies]: a sort of play-acting of perceptual ex-
ploration.” The version of activity theory developed by
O’Regan & Noë (2001), which Thomas cites with approval,
has many clear advantages over picture theory, though it
also has some problems of its own (many of which it inher-
its from J. J. Gibson’s direct realism, which minimizes the
role of representations of any kind; see my commentary,
Pylyshyn 2001b in the same issue of BBS).
Having said that, I should point out that many of the
ideas I have proposed, in this response and elsewhere (see
Pylyshyn 2001c), are very much in the spirit of perceptual
action theory. For example, in the next section I suggest that
many of the apparent spatial and directional properties of
images could derive from real space, providing we have a
mechanism for associating features or objects in images
with corresponding objects in real space. This view has
been developed in connection with a theory of visual in-
dexes, which provides a mechanism for preconceptual links
to objects in the world (the theory, alluded to only briefly in
this response, is laid out in detail in Pylyshyn 1998; 2000;
2001a; 2001b; Pylyshyn, forthcoming). If we assume that
the spatial quality of perceived space derives from the way
we interact with, or are potentially able to interact with, ob-
jects in real space, we can explain why images appear to be 
spatial in the same way, so long as the spatial locations of ob-
jects in the images are bound to locations of objects in the
world (as postulated in visual index theory). So in fact my
views do not diverge so radically from Thomas’ insofar as
his views are sufficiently specified to allow comparison. But
I continue to view symbolic forms of representation as the
default or “null” hypothesis for reasons sketched in section
R4.1.
R5. Where does the spatiality of images come
from, if not the display?
R5.1. Space, motion, and motor control 
in visual imagery
Nijhawan & Khurana argue that perhaps the sort of sta-
tic images I criticized are not strongly spatial because spa-
tial maps are constructed from motion information and so
are best accessed through motion stimuli. The idea that mo-
tion may be important in revealing the spatial character of
representations is an interesting one. But, in fact, many 
of the experimental phenomena used to demonstrate the
spatial nature of imagery do involve motion (e.g., mental
scanning, mental rotation, mental paper folding, and other 
dynamic operations performed on images). Nijhawan &
Khurana ask whether I would agree that images are spatial
if smooth motion in an image could be demonstrated. But
this question already assumes a reification of mental space.
What if imagined continuous motion did not literally in-
volve movement through some space by the continuous
change of position? I have argued that imagining a greater
distance does not involve a greater amount of some neural
magnitude, such as cortical distance. Imagining that some-
thing is moving, and imagining that something is further
away, could be nothing more than entertaining the thought
that some particular things are moving or are further away.
There is nothing strange about the idea of distinguishing
motion from change in position in some space. Patients
with cerebral akinetopsia or motion blindness (Zeki 1991)
are able to see that objects change location over time, with-
out seeing them as moving. Conversely, imagining some-
thing as moving could also occur without anything chang-
ing in real time (I once questioned why we assume that
imagined time maps onto real time, but the question just
seemed to puzzle people; Pylyshyn 1979a). In addition, of
course, it could involve imagining something as being at a
sequence of locations (as when observers simulate the ex-
perience of seeing something move, by thinking of it as be-
ing at a series of locations). But where are the locations, if
not on an image display? My contention, sketched out in
sections R4.5, R5.2, and R5.3 of this response, is that the lo-
cations in this case could be places occupied by certain ob-
jects in the world, perceived visually or in some other
modality, or places that are recalled in terms of their rela-
tion to some currently perceived objects. (For instance, in
the target article I described an experiment that showed
that we were better at imagining uniform motion if we had
a series of visible places to think of the object as being at,
while we imagined it to be moving.) The point is that in
imagining motion, the space through which an object
passes need not be in the head.
Raab & Boschker also emphasize the dynamic quality
of the perceptual act, although from a different point of
view; one that focuses on the active exploration of visual in-
formation (this approach is consistent with that advocated
by Thomas, and is one that has gained favor in computer
vision). Whatever the merits of the approach, it has led re-
searchers (e.g., O’Regan & Noë 2001) to focus on the in-
formation available in the world, instead of on its projection
on a cortical display, which is clearly a step in the right di-
rection. From this perspective, Raab & Boschker recom-
mend that we study imagery by first studying dynamic and
motor imagery. I am glad to endorse this recommendation,
and indeed have already endorsed the idea that some parts
Response/Pylyshyn: Mental imagery: In search of a theory
222
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (2002) 25:2
. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0140525X02290044
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Chalmers Tekniska Högskola, on 16 Nov 2019 at 15:28:43, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms

of the proprioceptive/kinesthetic/motor system may be
used to provide the spatial properties usually attributed to
images themselves. But the same intentional fallacy that
pervades visual imagery theory also threatens theories of
motor imagery; it is the illusion that external properties of
the world are not only represented, but are duplicated in
the brain. For example, the idea that we plan the execution
of motor actions by carrying them out imaginally and ob-
serving what happens, presupposes that when we imagine
actions, their consequence is automatically made available
by virtue of some property of the imagery mechanism, with-
out the involvement of knowledge, inference, and thought.
This is exactly like the case of visual imagery, where it is typ-
ically assumed that when we imagine some process (like
mental scanning), all we have to do is wait and “see” what
happens without having to draw inferences – because the
process by which the image unfolds is determined by the
inherent properties of the depictive display.
The role that motor mechanisms play in the transforma-
tion of visual images is even less clear, notwithstanding ev-
idence of correlations between visual image transforma-
tions and activity in parts of the motor system (Cohen et al.
1996; Richter et al. 2000), or the influence of real motor ac-
tions on visual transformations (Wexler et al. 1998). Some
of the cortical activity observed during both motor perfor-
mance and the mental transformation of visual images, may
reflect the fact that these areas (e.g., posterior parietal cor-
tex) compute higher-level functions required for extrapo-
lating trajectories, for tracking, for planning, and for visuo-
motor coordination (Anderson et al. 1997). Since many of
these functions also have to be computed in the course of
anticipating movements visually, it is reasonable that the
same areas might be active in both cases. Although study-
ing the interaction of imagery and the motor system is
clearly important, at the present time we are far from justi-
fied in concluding that dynamic visual imagery is carried
out by means of the motor system (or that visual operations
exploit motor control mechanisms). This way of speaking
suggests that our motor system can grasp and manipulate
our images (a view that is quite compatible with the mental
reification of the world that we find in much mental im-
agery theorizing).
R5.2. Superimposing images on the visual world:
Attention and inhibition
In the target article I suggested that certain things are 
special about the case where images are combined with
visual perception (although the same thing probably applies
when images are combined with other perceptual modalities
that concern space). The example discussed by Gosselin
& Schyns falls into this category, and the comments in sec-
tion 5.3 of the target article apply to it. For over thirty years,
there has been evidence that observers are able to vary
both their response bias (b) and sensitivity (d’) at attended
regions of a display (Bonnel et al. 1987; Downing 1988;
Farah 1989; Mueller & Findlay 1987; Segal & Fusella 1969;
1970). Focusing attention on a region with a certain simple
shape (e.g., an S-shape) while looking at a display of uni-
form noise, could thus lead to the perception of a figure in
the shape of the region being attended: the noise in the at-
tended region would simply be enhanced (either amplified
in amplitude or raised by a pedestal function, depending
on whether the effect was due to a change of criterion or
of sensitivity), creating a real perceptual effect at that re-
gion.
Gosselin & Schyns claim that since there was no infor-
mation in the signal, the relevant information must have
come from “an internally generated signal – that is, a men-
tal image.” I agree with the first part of that claim but see
nothing to be gained by calling a distribution of attention an
“image.” Contrary to the way that Gosselin & Schyns put it,
there is no reason to assume that observers had to have
“knowledge of all the pictorial characteristics of an ‘S’” and
even less reason to claim that what they have is “function-
ally isomorphic to an actual image of an ‘S’.” All they need
is a description of the ‘S’ together with the ability to think
the following sort of demonstrative thoughts while viewing
certain regions in the display: “this region is where Ri would
fall,” where Ri is the part of the overall representation of the
shape that encodes a certain discrete part i of that shape (it
might, for example, be a code for the top upward-concave
semicircle of the ‘S’). Such a mechanism would allow ob-
servers to allocate attention to the appropriate region, and
in so doing would enhance the sensitivity in that region
without having to image the figure. Farah (1989) showed
that instructions to attend to a region were even more ef-
fective in sensitizing a region than instructions to imagine
the relevant-shaped region. Grossberg’s LAMINART model
even provides a neural mechanism for how this can occur
(by shifting the balance between excitation and inhibition
on relevant neural circuits).
This view of what is going on is radically different from
the one proposed by Gosselin & Schyns. For one thing,
according to this view there is no such thing as space in the
image (as required by the depictive theory), there is only
the space where the observer is looking. To put this another
way, the Gosselin & Schyns finding (and their sophisticated
power-spectrum analysis) is compatible with the represen-
tation of the ‘S’ shape being symbolic, and thus without the
need to assume a spatial display in the head at all. For ex-
ample, it might be encoded as symbols denoting different
geons (Biederman 1987), together with some symbolic
form of location code used to direct visual attention to con-
tiguous sets of pixels in the real display, thus leaving all spa-
tial properties where they belong – outside the head. It
would be more interesting if it could be shown that ob-
servers “project” more than a selected region onto a sur-
face. For example, if they could project other visual prop-
erties such as color, shading, texture, depth, and so on,
which had observable visual consequences that could not
plausibly be attributed to the effect of attention.
The Arterberry et al. commentary also involves phe-
nomena that arise when an image is “superimposed” over a
viewed display. The demonstration of dissimilarities be-
tween vision and imagery discussed by Arterberry et al. is
very interesting. Their account, in terms of the suppression
of visual signals that compete with projected imagery, is
particularly intriguing and has far-reaching ramifications
for understanding the involvement of visual cortex in im-
agery. Gottesmann also reports evidence that activity in
primary visual cortex, as monitored by EEG, is suppressed
during vivid dreaming. Meyer points out that single-cell
recordings also do not provide evidence for the activation
of visual cortex in imagery, and Sokolov hypothesizes that
visual information may be located in the temporoparietal
area. Such findings suggest that visual imagery experiences
Response/Pylyshyn: Mental imagery: In search of a theory
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (2002) 25:2
223
. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0140525X02290044
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Chalmers Tekniska Högskola, on 16 Nov 2019 at 15:28:43, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms

may not be associated with activity in the visual cortex (as
Crick & Koch [1995] had already recognized).
Indeed, Gottesmann’s finding that there is actual sup-
pression of activity in the visual cortex during certain visual
experiences, raises the intriguing possibility that the in-
creased blood flow observed by neuroimagining techniques
may not reflect increased information-processing activity (a
possibility previously suggested by Fidelman 1994) but
might perhaps reflect the active suppression of visual in-
formation processing. This would make sense in those ex-
periments that involve examining an image during fMRI or
PET scanning when there is some visual input, or even vi-
sual persistence of the sort that Ingle describes, or that
Ishai and Sagi (1995) report, which would have to be ig-
nored in carrying out the primary task (and this could be
true even if the eyes were closed). Intriguing as it is, such
speculation will clearly need to be submitted to careful em-
pirical scrutiny.
R5.3. Visual neglect and spatial orientation in imagery
One often hears that reports of left hemifield neglect in both
vision and mental imagery supports the view that both in-
volve an image on a cortical display, since, if one side of the
Tootell Display is damaged, the same deficit might be ex-
pected in both vision and imagery. But the idea that what is
damaged in visual neglect is one side of a display, seems too
simplistic5; it does not account for the dissociation between
visual and imaginal neglect (Coslett 1997), for the amodal
nature of neglect (the deficit shows up in audition as well as
vision; see Marshall 2001; Pavani et al. 2002), for the fact that
“neglected” stimuli typically provide some implicit informa-
tion (Driver & Vuilleumier 2001; McGlinchey-Berroth et al.
1996; Schweinberger & Stief 2001), for the characteristic re-
sponse bias factors in neglect (Bisiach et al. 1998; Vuilleu-
mier & Rafal 1999), and for the fact that higher-level strate-
gic factors appear to play a central role in the neglect
syndrome (Behrmann & Tipper 1999b; Bisiach et al. 1998;
Landis 2000; Rode et al. 2001). The “damaged display” view
also does not account for the large number of cases of ob-
ject-centred neglect (Behrmann & Tipper 1999a; Tipper &
Behrmann 1996). Moreover, as Bartolomeo and Chokron
(2002) have documented (and reiterate in their commen-
tary), the primary deficit in neglect is best viewed as the fail-
ure of stimuli on the neglect side to attract attention.
I agree with Bartolomeo & Chokron, as well as with
Burgess and with Chatterjee, that it would be odd for a
symbolic encoding system by itself to have directional pref-
erences, such as found in neglect, and I also agree that most
cases of imaginal neglect are unlikely to be due to tacit
knowledge. Having granted that, one must then ask why we
should expect the explanation for such directional proper-
ties to be found in the format of representations or in the
medium of the Tootell Display. Deficits such as neglect,
whether in vision or in imagery, represent a failure to ori-
ent to one side or the other, and the direction may have
more to do with direction in the world, than direction in an
image. As in the case of the Gosselin & Schyns example
discussed earlier, orienting is a world-directed response.
There is considerable merit in Bartolomeo & Chokron’s
suggestion that perhaps “visual imagery involves some of
the attentional-exploratory mechanisms that are employed
in visual behavior . . . [so] the ‘perceptual’ aspects of visual
mental images might thus result not from the construction
of putative ‘quasi-perceptual’ representations, but from the
engagement of attentional and intentional aspects of per-
ception in imaginal activity.” In other words, when attend-
ing to the left side of an image, patients are actually orient-
ing towards the left side of the perceived world (or perhaps
of their body). Even with eyes closed we have accurate re-
call, at least for a short time, of the location of things in the
world immediately around us (see the remarks about this
by Ingle), and it may be in relation to these world-locations
that attention orients. As I speculated in section 5.3 of the
target article, it may be generally the case that it is the phys-
ical space outside the head that gives imagery its putative
spatial character and that it does so by virtue of how men-
tal contents are associated with (or bound to) places in the
perceived world. This interpretation is given further sup-
port by reports, mentioned by Bartolomeo & Chokron, that
imaginal neglect can be modulated by peripheral manipu-
lations, such as turning the head.
Although the case is clearest when the spatial layout is vi-
sually perceived while imagining, since in that case aspects
of what is imagined can be associated with places in the per-
ceived layout through visual indexes, there is no reason why
this should not also hold when real space is sensed through
other modalities, such as proprioceptive or kinesthetic
modalities. Indeed, motor-space analogs of visual indexes,
called Anchors, were proposed when the visual index the-
ory was first introduced in Pylyshyn (1989). It is known that
people are very good at orienting to stimuli that are not vi-
sually present (Attneave & Farrar 1977). The ability to bind
objects of thought to the location of perceived (or recalled)
external objects allows us to orient to them, thereby en-
hancing the illusion that things are laid out inside the head
the way that the corresponding things are laid out outside
the head, thus reinforcing the intentional fallacy.
R6. Tacit knowledge and cognitive 
penetrability again
In the target article and elsewhere, I have been at pains to
point out that tacit knowledge does not explain all imagery
phenomena (it does not, for example, explain all aspects of
mental rotation or of the crowding effect in mental scan-
ning or the oblique effect). But if it does explain some
things (e.g., the scanning effect, the image size effect), then
the extra apparatus of a depictive display is redundant be-
cause it plays no role in the explanation, however much it
might give comfort to one’s preconceived ideas. It’s not that
the postulated structure is necessarily false, but it is simply
irrelevant to the data at hand. In these cases, if there are
certain activity patterns on the Tootell Display, they are not
the reason that you get the scanning effect, the size effect,
or even the phenomenology of mental imagery. That is why
it does not help to say that tacit knowledge may be encoded
in the form of a depictive representation (as Kosslyn et al.
suggest). Kosslyn et al. are correct to note that I use tacit
knowledge to talk about content rather than form, so that if
the phenomena can be explained by appeal to tacit knowl-
edge, then assuming that such knowledge is encoded in a
depictive manner is gratuitous. It could be encoded in pro-
tein molecules so far as these data are concerned (indeed,
there is evidence in favor of such an idea as regards spatial
memory, see Blum et al. 1999), because these data do not
in any way constrain the format of the representation.
Response/Pylyshyn: Mental imagery: In search of a theory
224
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (2002) 25:2
. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0140525X02290044
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Chalmers Tekniska Högskola, on 16 Nov 2019 at 15:28:43, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms

So why assume a depictive representation as a way of en-
coding tacit knowledge? The answer is surely that Kosslyn
et al. believe that it is the spatial format, and not the con-
tent, that explains the data; but in this they are simply wrong
for those cases (such as scanning) where tacit knowledge
provides a better explanation. The demonstration that they
are wrong consists in showing such things as that, if ob-
servers believed that in viewing a map it would take them
longer to switch from viewing point A to viewing point B
when A and B were, say, on opposite sides of the river on
the map, then they will take longer when they do it from
their image. If you need convincing, just imagine a map and
imagine that switching your point of regard takes longer
when the two imagined places are across the river (you
could do that by thinking of them as moving more slowly
through water or as swimming across or just taking longer
to get there without moving at all). Go ahead, do the ex-
periment: it is your image, so it can have any property you
want it to have! I’m not saying that people do believe that
it will take longer if the fixations are on either side of the
river. But if they did believe it, for whatever reason that may
strike them, then it is obvious that this is the way it would
happen in their image. You might wonder whether this is
only true of dynamical processes like scanning as opposed
to basic geometrical properties. Can your image, for exam-
ple, be non-Euclidean? This is where tacit knowledge is ob-
viously relevant. In order to imagine such a thing as a non-
Euclidean (or four-dimensional) space, you would have to
have certain relevant knowledge; you would have to know
what moving through a non-Euclidean space would look
like, in the sense that you would need to know, for example,
how shapes would change as you moved through this space.
(Contrary to Kosslyn et al.’s claim, I don’t say that you need
to have seen things for you to be able to imagine them, but
you need to know what certain aspects of them would look
like, in the same sense that the patients that Goldenberg
writes about in his commentary do not know what certain
things would look like and consequently cannot image
them.)
The main point about cognitive penetrability is not just
that you can influence your image (as Kosslyn et al. as-
sume), but that your image has no properties other than
those you take it to have – which is precisely Dalla Barba,
Rosenthal & Visetti’s point about there being no surprises
in your image. Anyone who does not believe that their im-
age will do more-or-less what they will it to do is allowing
scientific ideology to override common sense. Your image
will even look like what you make it look like, usually how
you believe that something does look (but not necessarily,
since you can make your image of something look different
from the way you believe it actually looks!). Of course many
factors determine what you do make it look like, whether or
not you can express (in language or in drawings) what some-
thing looks like and the conditions under which you can re-
call what something looks like. Studies showing that people
cannot predict the results of imagery experiments (as in the
Denis & Carfantan [1985] study that Kosslyn et al. cite)
are beside the point, all you need is some idea, however
vague or implicit or ineffable, about what it would be like if
you were to see the thing you are supposed to imagine.
Adopting the image mode of reasoning (i.e., focusing on the
appearance of things, whatever that means in terms of a
theory of imagery) may well alter the likelihood that you will
think of or recall something or the other, just as being in a
certain place affects what you recall. But no conclusion can
be drawn about the nature of images from such properties
of imagery, as these are properties of memory and thought
in general.
Goldenberg appears to agree with most of what I claim
about certain phenomena of imagery being a result of
knowledge, but he insists that, in contrast to the knowledge
that functions in recognition, the knowledge involved in im-
agery is not tacit but explicit. Here, much depends on what
you mean by “tacit.” In very many cases the relevant knowl-
edge is indeed explicit knowledge of how things look, inas-
much as that knowledge is available for answering ques-
tions. But it also seems to me that the knowledge that
determines such properties of imagery as “the visual angle
of the mind’s eye” (Kosslyn 1978), are not available if one
simply asks the subject, which is why I called it tacit; yet it
can be rationally altered by providing the right experience
or information, and it can be revealed in a variety of ways,
which is why I call it knowledge. For Goldenberg the rele-
vant distinction is between knowledge that can have a gen-
eral effect in cognition (which he calls explicit), and knowl-
edge that is part of the modular visual system and is only
used in recognition (which he calls tacit). While that is a dis-
tinction clearly worth preserving, it is not the one I had in
mind in appealing to tacit knowledge, so the apparent dis-
agreement may well be merely terminological.
R7. Second-order and “structural” isomorphism
I do not claim, as Amiri & Marsolek suppose, that repre-
sentations must be first-order isomorphic in order to be ex-
planatory. What I said is that picture-theorists claim that
images are spatially isomorphic (or homeomorphic) to a
picture of what they depict, but that in order for this sort of
isomorphism to explain typical imagery phenomena, the
representation would have to be literally spatial rather than
“functionally spatial.” But second-order isomorphism of the
sort that Shepard studied, though requiring pictures-in-
the-head, is not sufficiently constraining: It is simply func-
tional isomorphism and is compatible with a descriptivist
position (see Pylyshyn 1984, Ch. 9). A system of represen-
tations that is second-order isomorphic to some domain is
just a system of representations that allows a similarity mea-
sure among represented objects to be computed (as in the
original similarity judgment study of Shepard & Chipman
1970). There is no reason why such similarity judgments
could not be based on inferences drawn from symbolic rep-
resentations. Second-order isomorphism by itself places no
constraints on the form of the representation – it could be
depictive or symbolic or anything else. One would need to
at least know why the second order isomorphism held
(what mechanisms were responsible), in order to infer the
form of the representation itself.
The Edelman (1998) paper that Amiri & Marsolek cite,
presents a mathematical analysis of the requirements that
should be met by an adequate system of representation,
which inter alia include second-order isomorphism. The
further step that Amiri & Marsolek take of suggesting that
it is the cognitive architecture, rather than the content of
representations (and inferences drawn from them), that
must be responsible for the second-order isomorphism is
an interesting and substantive proposal. Given the modu-
larity of vision, there are significant belief-independent
Response/Pylyshyn: Mental imagery: In search of a theory
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (2002) 25:2
225
. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0140525X02290044
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Chalmers Tekniska Högskola, on 16 Nov 2019 at 15:28:43, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms

constraints built in to the early vision system, especially in
computing an object’s appearance. Nonetheless, second-
order similarity of the sort that was demonstrated by Shep-
ard and Chipman (1970) is in general cognitively penetra-
ble (and readily altered by attentional strategies, as Shepard
1964 showed) and therefore unlikely to be part of the ar-
chitecture.
I’m not sure whether Wright has something like second-
order isomorphism in mind when he says that visual expe-
riences are only “structurally isomorphic” to sensory inputs.
But he makes a very different point when he goes on to
claim that, although there are no pictures in the brain, there
is “non-epistemic” storage, which he calls “inner registra-
tion,” of sensory events. I assume that he equates these to
uninterpreted sensory images. There is a great deal of em-
pirical data showing that sensory records are not kept, but
even if they were, mental images are certainly not like
records of such sensory events. I argued in the target arti-
cle that while some image reinterpretation may occur, this
sort of reinterpretation is arguably not “visual,” nor is the
record that is reinterpreted a record of “non-epistemic” vi-
sual sensations or of their “structurally isomorphic” internal
responses. While it is known that fairly rich sensory storage
may be available for short times (Ishai & Sagi 1995; Sper-
ling 1960), those sorts of iconic stores are very different
from images constructed from memory. Wright’s “bell-I-
mud-dum” example involves reparsing a phonetic string in
short-term memory (where it was arguably already “epis-
temic” inasmuch as it was likely encoded in terms of
phones), but I am not aware of any evidence of such repars-
ings occurring from an image constructed from long-term
memory.
R8. Other topics: Visual expectations, thoughts,
and phenomenology
R8.1. Visual expectations or visual images?
Zaidi & Griffiths provide some interesting demonstra-
tions of visual illusions that appear when a mental rotation
is carried out on a perceived figure. From these they con-
clude, quite reasonably, that it is the assumptions that view-
ers make that results in their expecting the rotated figure to
look different from what it actually does look like when it is
physically rotated. Zaidi & Griffiths conclude that “active
visual imagery is an integral part of active visual percep-
tion.” I would not have put it that way since visual expecta-
tions are hardly equivalent to the sorts of images that we 
experience or that picture-theorists postulate. Visual ex-
pectations need not take the form of a projected picture, as
opposed to some general prediction as to which elements
should be where. In discussing the Gosselin & Schyns
commentary in section R5.2, I have argued that a visual 
expectation, even one that involves detailed shapes and 
locations, does not need to be more than a spatial distri-
butions of attention over a real scene, which is very differ-
ent from a picture or a pattern of activity on a Tootell Dis-
play.
R8.2. Distinguishing images from thoughts
Niall is right that if images are propositional, then their
propositional content is insufficient to demonstrate a sim-
ple Euclidean theorem. But who is so naïve as to think that
the visual system “sees” the entailments of Euclid’s axioms
in a figure (perhaps a person who believes we can think in
pictures?). As Niall’s example shows, we are deceived if 
we think we have represented all the diagram’s geometri-
cal properties in our image. But the lesson to draw from 
this is not that mental images are “non-epistemic” (to use
Wright’s term), or that they do not constitute knowledge.
Diagrams in the world and on the retina are non-epistemic,
but mental representations of them are epistemic; they con-
stitute beliefs about how things look, which is why we can
think about them and also why we can be mistaken about
their true shape. They are, moreover, too impoverished to
permit proofs of Euclid’s First Proposition without addi-
tional non-diagrammatic representations (i.e., thoughts –
which, contra empiricism, do not derive from sensations).
R8.3. The role of phenomenology
Dalla Barba et al. raise an interesting point concerning
the role of phenomenology in the enterprise of under-
standing mental imagery. They say that in studying imagery,
phenomenology is of the essence and it does support a pic-
ture theory of imagery because that is how we experience
imagery. They assert that I am unfairly maligning phenom-
enology “for what it never pretended to be” and that “phe-
nomenology has never aimed at causal explanation.” This
may well be the case, although my target was not phenom-
enology, but precisely the attribution of causal power to the
experience itself (which is done implicitly and nearly uni-
versally). I find myself agreeing with much of the Dalla
Barba et al. commentary (e.g., concerning the content of
images and its qualitative difference from vision), which
suggests that perhaps the proper use of phenomenological
evidence may be a useful tool, although psychology has
been justifiably suspicious of introspection since the failure
of the method to deliver scientifically useful results at the
turn of the (last) century. The issue of a phenomenological
homunculus, raised by Dalla Barba et al., reduces to the in-
tractable mind-body (or experience-experiencer) problem,
which is beyond the scope of the present article, not to
mention the present author (but see Dennett 1991). In any
case, the phenomenological homunculus (the experience of
being a viewer of one’s image) is irrelevant to a causal the-
ory, as the authors admit at the outset.
R9. Conclusion
What is so unappealing about the current direction in the
study of mental imagery is that it cannot seem to avoid what
Pessoa et al. (1998) call “analytical isomorphism” – the as-
sumption that what one will find in the brain is what appears
in one’s conscious experience. I recommend the following
heuristic: If you feel yourself drawn by some body of data
to the view that what is in your head is a smaller and per-
haps less detailed version of what is in the world, then you
had better stop and reconsider your underlying assump-
tions. While many readers were not persuaded by what I
called the null hypothesis, it does appear that there has
been a move away from naïve picture theory in several ar-
eas of imagery research. Many people are now objecting to
the purely symbolic view by considering other options,
rather than by insisting that it is obvious that imagery must
exploit some sort of spatial display. Others are concentrat-
Response/Pylyshyn: Mental imagery: In search of a theory
226
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (2002) 25:2
. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0140525X02290044
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Chalmers Tekniska Högskola, on 16 Nov 2019 at 15:28:43, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms

ing on studying the parallel mechanisms of vision and im-
agery, while rejecting the implication that this means there
must be a picture-like object for vision to exploit. This is a
conceptually difficult problem and the arguments will no
doubt continue (despite the belief held by many writers
that the debate has already been resolved by evidence from
neuroscience). One can always hope that the next time
around we may approach the question with a better appre-
ciation of the general conditions that have to be met by an
adequate theory. On the other hand, as Slezak intimates,
we may be condemned, like Sisyphus, to repeat the task of
correcting the intentional fallacy without end, creating em-
ployment for future generations of cognitive scientists and
philosophers.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
Work on this paper was supported by the National Institutes of
Health Research Grant 1R01-MH60924. Send reprint requests to
the author at Rutgers Center for Cognitive Science, Center for
Cognitive Science, Psychology Bldg. Addition, Busch Campus,
Rutgers University, Piscataway, NJ 08854–8020. Author email:
zenon@ruccs.rutgers.edu
NOTES
1. I responded to Anderson’s version of the indeterminism 
thesis in Pylyshyn 1979c, and have written extensively on the no-
tion of “strong equivalence” in cognitive science (e.g., Pylyshyn
1984), showing that mere input-output equivalence is not what
cognitive scientists aim for, even without the benefit of neuro-
science data.
2. Kosslyn et al. claim, “The depictive theory . . . presents a
coherent, internally consistent view of how mental images may be
processed.” But so long as the coherence and predictive power
come not from intrinsic properties of the “depictive” form of rep-
resentation itself, but from a variety of ancillary assumptions about
how the representation must be used and what restrictions are
placed on accessing information from it, the depictive theory is co-
herent only in that it fits one’s preconceptions, and its predictive
power derives entirely from the independent constraints which
any theory could adopt. Think of the added epicycles of “annota-
tions,” or the “predigested information,” or the requirement that
to get from A to B one has to pass through places that are “in be-
tween,” even though they are so only by stipulation, or the appeal
to the intuition that smaller images must be harder to “see,” and
so on, all of which are assumed for no “internally consistent” rea-
son except to fit the data at hand, however they turn out. Was it
really the depictive form of images that predicted the oblique ef-
fect? Once laid bare, the depictive theory is no less a patchwork
than any other theory for explaining the experimental phenomena
of mental imagery – which are unlikely to have a single cause in
any case.
3. One hears over and over that since the process has been im-
plemented on a computer, it shows that a homunculus is not
needed (“any more than there is a need for a homunculus in visual
perception” according to Kosslyn et al.). But if vision proceeded
by examining the panoramic display that we experience, we would
need a homunculus (as Dalla Barba et al. correctly point out).
Moreover, what has been implemented on a computer is but a triv-
ial fragment of this process. This fragment, with encouragement
from the names given to various components (e.g., “visual buffer,”
“attention window”) and operations (“look for,” “generate image,”
“determine whether resolution is sufficient,” “zoom,” and so on),
invites the assumption that the basic idea can be extended to
model all of imagery without the intervention of an intelligent
agent. Therein lies the slip “twixt cup and lip” where the ho-
munculus lurks, barely hidden. The problem is that the ho-
munculus has not been “discharged” (as Dennett 1978 would put
it) until the “intentional loan” incurred in using these names is
paid up.
4. The example Minsky and Papert (1971) describe is a method
for finding the cheapest path between two cities connected by
many roads through other cities. Represent each city by a ring and
the cost of going between each pair of cities by the length of a
string tied to the two rings. Then simply grasp the rings repre-
senting the starting and ending cities and pull tight. The solution
is the set of strings that stretch straight across and it appears to be
found instantly. But because of physical constraints that grow non-
linearly with the number of cities, the appearance is illusory, as
Minsky and Papert show.
5. Kosslyn (1994) does not explicitly claim that the “depictive
display” is damaged in cases of neglect, preferring instead to speak
of the parallels between the vision and imagery systems. But to be
consistent he should claim that the display is damaged, since the
point of the display is that it allows one to explain spatial proper-
ties of imagery by appealing to spatial properties of the display.
Simply saying that it shows that vision and imagery use the same
mechanisms does not confer any advantage to the depictive the-
ory, since any theoretical imagery format can claim that (includ-
ing the null hypothesis, which is why it is there: to provide a test
for the irrelevance of assumptions about the image format).
References
[Note: The letters “a” and “r” before author’s initials stand for target article
and response references, respectively]
Adams, J. E. & Rutkin, B. B. (1970) Visual responses to subcortical stimulation in
the visual and limbic system. Confinia Neurological 32:156–64.
[GEM]
Ahumada, A. J. & Lovell, J. (1971) Stimulus features in signal detection. Journal of
the Acoustical Society of America 49:1751–56.
[FG]
Aleman, A., Rutten, G.-J., Sitskoorn, M., Dautzenberg, G. & Ramsey, N. F. (2001a)
Activation of striate cortex in the absence of visual stimulation: An fMRI study
of synesthesia. NeuroReport 12:2827–30.
[EdH]
Aleman, A., Schutter, D. L. J. G., Ramsey, N. F., van Honk, J., Kessels, R. P. C.,
Hoogduin, J. H., Postma, A., Kahn, R. S. & De Haan, E. H. F. (2002)
Functional neuroanatomy of top-down visuospatial processing in the human
brain: Evidence from rTMS. Cognitive Brain Research 14:300–302.
[EdH]
Aleman, A., Van Lee, L., Mantione, M., Verkoijen, I. & De Haan, E. H. D. (2001b)
Visual imagery without visual experience: Evidence from congenitally totally
blind people. NeuroReport 12:2601–604.
[EdH]
Algom, D. (1992) Memory psychophysics: An examination of its perceptual and
cognitive prospects. In: Psychophysical approaches to cognition, ed. D.
Algom. Elsevier Science.
[WMP]
Algom, D. & Lubel, S. (1994) Psychophysics in the field: Perception and memory
for labor pain. Perception and Psychophysics 55:133–41.
[WMP]
Andersen, R. A., Bracewell, R. M., Barash, S., Gnadt, J. W. & Forassi, L. (1990)
Eye position effects on visual, memory and saccade-related activity in anterior
LIP and 7A of macaque. Journal of Neuroscience 10:1176–96.
[DI]
Andersen, R. A., Essick, G. K. & Siegel, R. M. (1985) Encoding of spatial location
by posterior parietal neurons. Science 230(4724):456–58.
[NB]
Andersen, R. A., Snyder, L. H., Bradley, D. C. & Xing, J. (1997) Multimodal
representation of space in the posterior cortex and its use in planning
movements. Annual Review of Neuroscience 29:303–30.
[rZWP]
Anderson, J. R. (1978) Arguments concerning representations for mental imagery.
Psychological Review 85:249–77.
[SMK, rZWP]
Armstrong, J. (1996) Looking at pictures – an introduction to the appreciation of
art. Gerald Duckworth.
[GG]
Arnauld, A. (1683/1990) On true and false ideas. Translated with an introductory
essay by Stephen Gaukroger. Manchester University Press.
[PPS]
Ashcraft, M. H. (2002) Cognition (3rd edition). Prentice Hall.
[WMP]
Attneave, F. & Farrar, P. (1977) The visual world behind the head. American
Journal of Psychology 90(4):549–63.
[DI, rZWP]
Avant, L. L. (1965) Vision in the ganzefeld. Psychological Bulletin 64:246–58.
[aZWP]
Balasubramaniam, M., Polimeni, J. & Schwartz, E. L. (2002) The V1-V2-V3
complex: Quasi conformal dipole maps in primate striate and extra-striate
cortex. Neural Networks 15(10). (in press).
[JP]
Banati, R. B., Goerres, G. W., Tjoa, C., Aggleton, J. P. & Grasby, P. (2000) The
functional anatomy of visual-tactile integration in man: A study using positron
emission tomography. Neuropsychologia 38:115–24.
[MOB]
Banks, W. P. (1977) Encoding and processing of symbolic information in
References/Pylyshyn: Mental imagery: In search of a theory
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (2002) 25:2
227
. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0140525X02290044
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Chalmers Tekniska Högskola, on 16 Nov 2019 at 15:28:43, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms

comparative judgments. In: The psychology of learning and motivation, vol.
11, ed. G. H. Bower. Academic Press.
[WMP]
(1981) Assessing relations between imagery and perception. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Human Perception and Performance 7:844–47.
[aZWP]
Banks, W. P. & Flora, J. (1977) Semantic and perceptual processes in symbolic
comparisons. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human Perception and
Performance 3:278–90.
[WMP]
Banks, W. P., Mermelstein, R. & Yu, H. K. (1982) Discriminations among
perceptual and symbolic stimuli. Memory and Cognition 10:265–78.
[WMP]
Baranski, J. V. & Petrusic, W. M. (1992) The discriminability of remembered
magnitudes. Memory and Cognition 22:254–70.
[WMP]
Barolo, E., Masini, R. & Antonietti, A. (1990) Mental rotation of solid objects and
problem-solving in sighted and blind subjects. Journal of Mental Imagery
14(3–4):65–74.
[aZWP]
Barsalou, L. (1999) Perceptual symbol systems. Behavioral and Brain Sciences
22(4): 577–660.
[aZWP]
Bartolomeo, P. (2002) The relationship between visual perception and visual
mental imagery: A reappraisal of the neuropsychological evidence. Cortex
38(3):357–78.
[PB]
Bartolomeo, P., Bachoud-Lévi, A. C., Chokron, S. & Degos, J. D. (2002) Visually-
and motor-based knowledge of letters: Evidence from a purely alexic patient.
Neuropsychologia 40(8):1363–71.
[PB]
Bartolomeo, P., Bachoud-Levi, A. C. & Denes, G. (1997) Preserved imagery for
colours in a patient with cerebral achromatopsia. Cortex 33(2): 369–78.
[aZWP]
Bartolomeo, P. & Chokron, S. (2001) Levels of impairment in unilateral neglect.
In: Handbook of neuropsychology, vol. 4, 2nd edition, ed. F. Boller & J.
Grafman. Elsevier Science.
[PB]
(2002) Orienting of attention in left unilateral neglect. Neuroscience and
Biobehavioral Reviews 26(2):217–34.
[PB, rZWP]
Bartolomeo, P., D’Erme, P. & Gainotti, G. (1994) The relationship between
visuospatial and representational neglect. Neurology 44:1710–14.
[PB]
Basso, A., Bisiach, E. & Luzzatti, C. (1980) Loss of mental imagery: A case study.
Neuropsychologia 18:435–42.
[GG]
Baylor, G. W. (1972) A treatise on the mind’s eye. Unpublished doctoral
dissertation. Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh. (University Microfilms
No. 72–12, 699.)
[NJTT]
Behrmann, M. (2000) The mind’s eye mapped onto the brain’s matter. Current
Directions in Psychological Science 9(2):50–54.
[aZWP]
Behrmann, M., Moscovitch, M. & Winocur, G. (1994) Intact visual imagery and
impaired visual perception in a patient with visual agnosia. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Human Perception and Performance 20(5):1068–
87.
[aZWP]
Behrmann, M. & Tipper, S. (1999a) Attention accesses multiple reference frames:
Evidence from unilateral neglect. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Human Perception and Performance 25:83–101.
[rZWP]
(1999b) Attention accesses multiple reference frames: Evidence from visual
neglect. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human Perception and
Performance 25(1): 83–101.
[rZWP]
Behrmann, M., Winocur, G. & Moscovitch, M. (1992) Dissociation between
mental imagery and object recognition in a brain-damaged patient. Nature
359(6396):636–37.
[aZWP]
Bennett, G. K., Seashore, H. G. & Wesman, A. G. (1989) DAT – Differential
Aptitude Tests of personnel and career assessment: Space relations. Harcourt
Brace/The Psychological Corporation.
[JRP]
Bernbaum, K. & Chung, C. S. (1981) Müller-Lyer illusion induced by imagination.
Journal of Mental Imagery 5(1):125–28.
[aZWP]
Beschin, N., Basso, A. & Della Sala, S. (2000) Perceiving left and imagining right:
Dissociation in neglect. Cortex 36(3):401–14.
[NB]
Beschin, N., Cocchini, G., Della Sala, S. & Logie, R. H. (1997) What the eyes
perceive, the brain ignores: A case of pure unilateral representational neglect.
Cortex 33(1):3–26.
[NB, aZWP]
Betts, G. H. (1909) The distribution and functions of mental imagery. New York
Teachers College (Contribution to Education Series, No. 26, 1–99). Columbia
University Press.
[MOB]
Bickhard, M. & Terveen, L. (1995) Foundational issues in artificial intelligence and
cognitive science: Impasse and solution. Elsevier Science.
[JAT]
Biederman, I. (1987) Recognition-by-components: A theory of human image
understanding. Psychological Review 94:115–48.
[MJ, rZWP]
(2000) Recognizing depth-rotated objects: A review of recent research and
theory. Spatial Vision 13:241–54.
[MJ]
Biederman, I. & Gerhardstein, P. C. (1995) Viewpoint-dependent mechanisms in
visual object recognition. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human
Perception and Performance 21:1506–14.
[MJ]
Bisiach, E. & Berti, A. (1990) Waking images and neural activity. In: The
psychophysiology of mental imagery, ed. G. Kunzendorf & A. A. Sheikh.
Baywood.
[PB]
Bisiach, E., Capitani, E., Luzzatti, C. & Perani, D. (1981) Brain and conscious
representation of outside reality. Neuropsychologia 19(4):543–51.
[PB, NB]
Bisiach, E. & Luzzatti, C. (1978) Unilateral neglect of representational space.
Cortex 14:129–33.
[PB]
Bisiach, E., Luzzatti, C. & Perani, D. (1979) Unilateral neglect, representational
schema and consciousness. Brain 102(3):609–18.
[NB]
Bisiach, E., Ricci, R., Lualdi, M. & Colombo, M. R. (1998) Perceptual and
response bias in unilateral neglect: Two modified versions of the Milner
Landmark task. Brain and Cognition 37(3):369–86.
[rZWP]
Blackmore, S. J., Brelstaff, G., Nelson, K. & Troscianko, T. (1995) Is the richness of
the visual world an illusion? Transsaccadic memory for complex scenes.
Perception 24(9):1075–81.
[aZWP]
Block, N. J. (1981) Introduction: What is the issue? In: Imagery, ed. N. Block. MIT
Press.
[aZWP]
Block, N. J. & Fodor, J. A. (1972) Cognitivism and the analog/digital distinction.
Unpublished manuscript.
[rZWP]
Blum, S., Moore, A. N., Adams, F. & Dash, P. K. (1999) A mitogen-activated
protein kinase cascade in the CA1/CA2 subfield of the dorsal hippocampus is
essential for long-term spatial memory. Journal of Neuroscience 19(9):3535–
44.
[rZWP]
Bolles, R. C. (1969) The role of eye movements in the Müller-Lyer illusion.
Perception and Psychophysics 6(3):175–76.
[aZWP]
Bonnel, A. M., Possami, C. A. & Schmitt, M. (1987) Early modulation of visual
input: A study of attentional strategies. The Quarterly Journal of Experimental
Psychology 39(4):757–76.
[rZWP]
Boschker, M. S. J., Bakker, F. C. & Michaels, C. F. (2002) Effect of mental imagery
on realizing affordances. Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psychology A:
Human Experimental Psychology 55A(3):775–92.
[MR]
Bosinelli, M. (1995) Mind and consciousness during sleep. Behavioral Brain
Research 69:195–201.
[CG]
Bower, G. H. & Glass, A. L. (1976) Structural units and the reintegrative power of
picture fragments. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human Learning and
Memory 2:456–66.
[aZWP]
Bradley, D. & Vido, D. (1984) Psychophysical functions for perceived and
remembered distance. Perception 13:315–20.
[WMP]
Braine, L., Schauble, L., Kugelmass, S. & Winter, A. (1993) Representation of
depth by children: Spatial strategies and lateral biases. Developmental
Psychology 29:466–79.
[AC]
Brandt, S. A. & Stark, L. W. (1997) Spontaneous eye movements during visual
imagery reflect the content of the visual scene. Journal of Cognitive
Neuroscience 9(1):27–38.
[aZWP]
Braun, A. R., Balkin, H. J., Wesensten, N. J., Gwardy, F., Carson, R. E., Varga, M.,
Baldwin, P., Belenky, G. & Herscovitch, P. (1998) Dissociated pattern of
activity in visual cortices and their projections during human rapid eye
movement sleep. Science 279:91–95.
[CG]
Brigell, M., Uhlarik, J. & Goldhorn, P. (1977) Contextual influence on judgments
of linear extent. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human Perception and
Performance 3(1):105–18.
[aZWP]
Broadhurst, F. M. (1964) Some aspects of the palaeoecology on non-marine faunas
and rates of sedimentation in the Lancashire coal measures. American Journal
of Science 262:865. Lithographic image in: Milton, R. (1997) Shattering the
myths of Darwinism. Park Street Press.
[JAT]
Broerse, J. & Crassini, B. (1981) Misinterpretations of imagery-induced
McCollough effects: A reply to Finke. Perception and Psychophysics 30:96–
98.
[aZWP]
(1984) Investigations of perception and imagery using CAEs: The role of
experimental design and psychophysical method. Perception and
Psychophysics 35(2):155–64.
[aZWP]
Brooks, L. R. (1968) Spatial and verbal components of the act of recall. Canadian
Journal of Psychology 22(5):349–68.
[aZWP]
Bullier, J., Hupé, J. M., James, A. & Girard, P. (1996) Functional interactions
between areas V1 and V2 in the monkey. Journey of Physiology (Paris)
90:217–20.
[SG]
Burgess, N., Becker, S., King, J. A. & O’Keefe, J. (2001) Memory for events 
and their spatial context: Models and experiments. Philosophical Transactions
of the Royal Society of London B: Biological Sciences 356:1493–503.
NB]
Butter, C. M., Kosslyn, S., Mijovic-Prelec, D. & Riffle, A. (1997) Field-specific
deficits in visual imagery following hemianopia due to unilateral occipital
infarcts. Brain 120:217–28.
[AC]
Canon, L. K. (1970) Intermodality inconsistency of input and directed attention as
determinants of the nature of adaptation. Journal of Experimental Psychology
84(1):141–47.
[aZWP]
(1971) Directed attention and maladaptive “adaptation” to displacement of the
visual field. Journal of Experimental Psychology 88(3):403–408.
[aZWP]
Carlson-Radvansky, L. A. (1999) Memory for relational information across eye
movements. Perception and Psychophysics 61(5):919–34.
[aZWP]
Carlson-Radvansky, L. A. & Irwin, D. E. (1995) Memory for structural information
References/Pylyshyn: Mental imagery: In search of a theory
228
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (2002) 25:2
. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0140525X02290044
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Chalmers Tekniska Högskola, on 16 Nov 2019 at 15:28:43, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms

across eye movements. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning,
Memory, and Cognition 21(6):1441–58.
[aZWP]
Carpenter, P. A. & Eisenberg, P. (1978) Mental rotation and the frame of reference
in blind and sighted individuals. Perception and Psychophysics 23(2):117–24.
[aZWP]
Carruthers, P. (1996) Language, thought and consciousness. Cambridge University
Press.
[PPS]
Casey, E. (1976) Imagining: A phenomenological study. Indiana University Press.
[aZWP]
Cavallero, C., Cicogna, P., Natale, V., Occhionero, M. & Zito, A. (1992) Slow wave
sleep dreaming. Sleep 15(6):562–6.
[CG]
Chambers, D. & Reisberg, D. (1985) Can mental images be ambiguous? Journal of
Experimental psychology 11:317–28.
[aZWP]
Charlot, V., Tzourio, N., Zilbovicius, M., Mazoyer, B. & Denis, M. (1992) Different
mental imagery abilities result in different regional cerebral blood flow
activation patterns during cognitive tasks. Neuropsychologia 30(6):565–80.
[aZWP]
Chatterjee, A. (2001) Language and space: Some interactions. Trends in Cognitive
Science 5:55–61.
[AC]
(2002) Portrait profiles and the notion of agency. Empirical Studies of the Arts
20:33–41.
[AC]
Chatterjee, A. & Maher, L. (2000) Grammar and agrammatism. In: Aphasia and
language: Theory to practice, ed. L. Gonzalez Rothi, B. Crosson & S. Nadeau.
Guilford.
[AC]
Chatterjee, A., Maher, L. M., Gonzales-Rothi, L. J. & Heilman, K. M. (1995a)
Asyntactic thematic role assignment: The use of a temporal-spatial strategy.
Brain and Language 49:125–39.
[AC]
Chatterjee, A., Maher, L. M. & Heilman, K. M. (1995b) Spatial characteristics of
thematic role representation. Neuropsychologia 33:643–48.
[AC]
Chatterjee, A. & Southwood, M. H. (1995) Cortical blindness and visual imagery.
Neurology 45(12):2189–95.
[AC, aZWP]
Chatterjee, A., Southwood, M. H. & Basilico, D. (1999) Verbs, events and spatial
representations. Neuropsychologia 37:395–402.
[AC]
Chelazzi, L., Miller, E. K., Duncan, J. & Desimone, R. (1993) A neural basis for
visual search in inferior temporal cortex. Nature 363:345–47.
[FvdV]
Chokron, S. & Bartolomeo, P. (1999) Réduire expérimentalement la négligence
spatiale unilatérale: Revue de la littérature et implications théoriques. Revue
de Neuropsychologie 9(2–3):129–65.
[PB]
Chomsky, N. (1957a) Review of B. F. Skinner’s Verbal behavior. In: The structure
of language, J. A. Fodor & J. J. Katz. Prentice-Hall.
[aZWP]
(1957b) Syntactic structures. Mouton.
[aZWP]
Christman, S. & Pinger, K. (1997) Lateral biases in aesthetic preferences: Pictorial
dimensions and neural mechanisms. Laterality 2:155–75.
[AC]
Christou, C. G. & Bulthoff, H. H. (1999) The perception of spatial layout in a
virtual world. Technical Report 75, Max Planck Institute for Biological
Cybernetics, Tubingen, Germany.
[NB]
Clancey, W. J. (1997) Situated cognition: On human knowledge and computer
representations. Cambridge University Press.
[JAT]
Clancey, W. J. (1999) Conceptual coordination: How the mind orders experience in
time. Erlbaum.
Cocude, M., Mellet, E. & Denis, M. (1999) Visual and mental exploration of visuo-
spatial configurations: Behavioral and neuroimaging approaches.
Psychological Research 62(2–3):93–106.
[aZWP]
Cohen, M. S., Kosslyn, S. M., Breiter, H. C., DiGirolomo, G. J., Thompson, W. L.,
Anderson, A. K., Bookheimer, S. Y., Rosen, B. R. & Belliveau, J. W. (1996)
Changes in cortical activity during mental rotation: A mapping study using
functional MRI. Brain 119(Pt. 1):89–100.
[rZWP]
Colapinto, J. (2000) As nature made him: The boy who was raised as a girl. Harper
Collins.
[JAT]
Collett, T. S. & Kelber, A. (1988) The retrieval of visuo-spatial memories by
honeybees. Journal of Comparative Physiology A 163:145–50.
[GEM]
Collins, A. W. (1967) The epistemological status of the concept of perception.
Philosophical Review 76:436–59.
[EW]
Coren, S. (1986) An efferent component in the visual perception of direction and
extent. Psychological Review 93(4):391–410.
[aZWP]
Coren, S. & Porac, C. (1983) The creation and reversal of the Müller-Lyer illusion
through attentional manipulation. Perception 12(1):49–54.
[aZWP]
Cornoldi, C., Bertuccelli, B., Rocchi, P. & Sbrana, B. (1993) Processing capacity
limitations in pictorial and spatial representations in the totally congenitally
blind. Cortex 29(4):675–89.
[aZWP]
Cornoldi, C., Calore, D. & Pra-Baldi, A. (1979) Imagery ratings and recall in
congenitally blind subjects. Perceptual and Motor Skills 48(2):627–39.
[aZWP]
Coslett, H. B. (1997) Neglect in vision and visual imagery: A double dissociation.
Brain 120:1163–71.
[rZWP]
Craig, E. M. (1973) Role of mental imagery in free recall of deaf, blind, and
normal subjects. Journal of Experimental Psychology 97(2):249–53.
[aZWP]
Craver-Lemley, C. & Arterberry, M. E. (2001) Visual imagery interference in a
detection task. Spatial Vision 14:101–19.
[MEA]
Craver-Lemley, C., Arterberry, M. E. & Reeves, A. (1997) The effects of imagery
on Vernier acuity under conditions of induced depth. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Human Perception and Performance 23:3–13.
[MEA]
(1999) Illusory illusory conjunctions: The conjoining of features of real and
imagined stimuli. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human Perception and
Performance 25:1036–49.
[MEA]
Craver-Lemley, C. & Reeves, A. (1987) Visual imagery selectively reduces Vernier
acuity. Perception 16:599–614.
[MEA]
(1992) How visual imagery interferes with vision. Psychological Review 99:633–
49.
[MEA]
Crawford, H. J. (1996) Cerebral brain dynamics of mental imagery: Evidence and
issues for hypnosis. In: Hypnosis and imagination, ed. R. G. Kunzendorf.
Baywood.
[aZWP]
Crick, F. & Koch, C. (1995) Are we aware of neural activity in primary visual
cortex? Nature 375(11):121–23.
[CG, arZWP]
Cummins, R. (1996) Representations, targets, and attitudes. MIT Press.
[NJTT]
(1997) The LOT of the causal theory of mental content. Journal of Philosophy
94:535–42.
[NJTT]
Currie, G. (1995) Visual imagery as the simulation of vision. Mind and Language
10(1–2):25–44.
[aZWP]
Dalla Barba, G. (2002) Memory, consciousness and temporality. Kluwer Academic.
[GDB]
Dalman, J. E., Verhagen, W. I. M. & Huygen, P. L. M. (1997) Cortical blindness.
Clinical Neurology and Neurosurgery(Dec):282–86.
[aZWP]
Dauterman, W. L. (1973) A study of imagery in the sighted and the blind. In:
American Foundation for the Blind, Research Bulletin, January 1973, pp. 95–
167. American Foundation for the Blind.
[aZWP]
Davies, T. N. & Spencer, J. (1977) An explanation for the Mueller-Lyer illusion.
Perceptual and Motor Skills 45(1):219–24.
[aZWP]
Dehaene, S., Dehaene-Lambertz, G. & Cohen, L. (1998) Abstract representations
of numbers in the animal and human brain. Trends in Neurosciences
21(8):355–61.
[rZWP]
De Kamps, M. & van der Velde, F. (2001) Using a recurrent network to bind form,
color and position into a unified percept. Neurocomputing 38–40:523–28.
[FvdV]
Delgado, J. M. R. (1969) Physical control of mind. Harper and Row.
[ENS]
Del Gratta, C., Di Matteo, R., De Nicola, A., Ferretti, A., Tartaro, A., Bonomo, L.,
Romani, G. L. & Olivetti Belardinelli, M. (2001) Sensory image generation: A
comparison between different sensory modalities with fMRI. In: Proceedings
of the 7th Annual Meeting of the Organization for Human Brain Mapping, ed.
A. W. Toga, R. S. J. Frackowiak & J. C. Mazziotta. Neuroimage 13(6, part
2):S394.
[MOB]
DeLucia, P. R. & Liddell, G. W. (1998) Cognitive motion extrapolation and
cognitive clocking in prediction motion tasks. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Human Perception and Performance 24(3):901–14.
[aZWP]
Dement, W. & Kleitman, N. (1957) The relation of eye movements during sleep to
dream activity: An objective method for the study of dreaming. Journal of
Experimental Psychology 53:339–46.
[CG]
Dement, W. & Wolpert, E. A. (1958) The relation of eye movements, body motility
and external stimuli to dream content. Journal of Experimental Psychology
55:543–53.
[CG]
Denis, M. & Carfantan, M. (1985) People’s knowledge about images. Cognition
20(1):49–60.
[SMK, arZWP]
Denis, M. & Kosslyn, S. M. (1999) Scanning visual mental images: A window on
the mind. Cahiers de Psychologie Cognitive (Current Psychology of
Cognition) 18(4):409–65.
[aZWP]
Dennett, D. C. (1978) Brainstorms. MIT Press/A Bradford Book.
[rZWP]
(1982) How to study consciousness empirically: Or, Nothing comes to mind.
Synthese 53:159–80.
[DCD]
(1991) Consciousness explained. Little, Brown/Allen Lane.
[DCD, arZWP]
(1997) The Cartesian theater and “filling in”: The stream of consciousness. In:
The nature of consciousness. Philosophical debates, ed. N. Block, O. Flanagan
& G. Guezeldere. MIT Press.
[VG]
Descartes, R. (1637/1985) Dioptrics. In: The philosophical writings of Descartes,
vols. 1 and 2, trans. J. Cottingham, R. Stoothoff & D. Murdoch. Cambridge
University Press.
[PPS]
Desimone, R., Albright, T. D., Gross, C. G. & Bruce, C. (1984) Stimulus selective
properties of inferior temporal neurons in the macaque. Journal of
Neuroscience 4:2051–62.
[DI]
D’Esposito, M. (2001) Functional neuroimaging of working memory. In:
Handbook of functional neuroimaging of cognition, ed. R. Cabeza & A.
Kingstone. MIT Press.
[FvdV]
D’Esposito, M., Detre, J. A., Aguirre, G. K., Stallcup, M., Alsop, D. C., Tippet, L. J.
& Farah, M. J. (1997) A functional MRI study of mental image generation.
Neuropsychologia 35(5):725–30.
[MOB, aZWP]
De Vreese, L. P. (1991) Two systems for colour-naming defects: Verbal
References/Pylyshyn: Mental imagery: In search of a theory
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (2002) 25:2
229
. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0140525X02290044
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Chalmers Tekniska Högskola, on 16 Nov 2019 at 15:28:43, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms

disconnection vs. colour imagery disorder. Neuropsychologia 29(1):1–18.
[aZWP]
De Yoe, E. A., Bandettini, P., Neitz, J., Miller, D. & Winans, P. (1994) Functional
magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) of the human brain. Journal of
Neuroscience Methods 54:171–87.
[SMK]
Diwadkar, V. A. & McNamara, T. P. (1997) Viewpoint dependence in scene
recognition. Psychological Science 8(4):302–307.
[NB]
Dodds, A. G. (1983) Mental rotation and visual imagery. Journal of Visual
Impairment and Blindness 77(1):16–18.
[aZWP]
Doricchi, F., Guariglia, C., Paolucci, S. & Pizzamiglio, L. (1993) Disturbances of
the rapid eye movements (REMs) of REM sleep in patients with unilateral
attentional neglect: Clue for the understanding of the functional meaning of
REMs. Electroencephalography and Clinical Neurophysiology 87(3):105–16.
[PB]
Downing, C. J. (1988) Expectancy and visual-spatial attention: Effects on
perceptual quality. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human Perception
and Performance 14:188–202.
[rZWP]
Driver, J. & Vuilleumier, P. (2001) Perceptual awareness and its loss in unilateral
neglect and extinction. Cognition 79(1–2):39–88.
[rZWP]
Easton, R. D. & Bentzen, B. L. (1987) Memory for verbally presented routes: A
comparison of strategies used by blind and sighted people. Journal of Visual
Impairment and Blindness 81(3):100–105.
[aZWP]
Easton, R. D. & Scholl, M. J. (1995) Object-array structure, frames of reference,
and retrieval of spatial knowledge. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Learning, Memory, and Cognition 21(2):483–500.
[NB]
Edelman, S. (1995) Representation, similarity, and the chorus of prototypes. Mind
and Machines 5:45–68.
[MJ]
(1998) Representation is representation of similarities. Behavioral and Brain
Sciences 21:449–98.
[HA, rZWP, PPS]
Edelman, S. & Bülthoff, H. H. (1992) Orientation dependence in the recognition of
familiar and novel views of 3D objects. Vision Research 32:2385–4000.
[MJ]
Edwards, P. N. (1996) The closed world: Computers and the politics of discourse in
cold war America. MIT Press.
[JAT]
Ehrichman, H. & Barrett, J. (1983) Right hemisphere specialization for mental
imagery: A review of the evidence. Brain and Cognition 2:55–76.
[GEM]
Emanuel, E. J., Wendler, D. & Grady, C. (2000) What makes clinical research
ethical? Journal of the American Medical Association 283(20):2701–11.
[JAT]
Engel, S. A., Rumelhart, D. E., Wandell, B. A., Lee, A. T., Glover, G. H.,
Chichilnisky, E. J. & Shadlen, M. N. (1994) fMRI of human visual cortex.
Nature 369:525.
[SMK]
Escher, M. C. (1960) The graphic work of M. C. Escher. Hawthorn Books.
[aZWP]
Fallgatter, A. J., Mueller, T. J. & Strik, W. K. (1997) Neurophysiological correlates
of mental imagery in different sensory modalities. International Journal of
Psychophysiology 25(2):145–53.
[MOB]
Farah, M. J. (1984) The neurological basis of mental imagery: A componential
analysis. Cognition 18:245–72.
[GG, GEM]
(1988) Is visual imagery really visual? Overlooked evidence from
neuropsychology. Psychological Review 95(3):307–17.
[aZWP]
(1989) Mechanisms of imagery-perception interaction. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Human Perception and Performance 15:203–11.
[arZWP]
(1994) Beyond “pet” methodologies to converging evidence. Trends in
Neurosciences 17(12):514–15.
[aZWP]
(1995a) Current issues in the neuropsychology of image generation.
Neuropsychologia 23:1455–72.
[GG]
(1995b) The neural bases of mental imagery. In: The cognitive neurosciences, ed.
M. S. Gazzaniga. MIT Press.
[aZWP]
Farah, M. J., Levine, D. & Calvanio, R. (1988) A case study of mental imagery
deficit. Brain and Cognition 8:147–64.
[GG]
Farah, M. J., Soso, M. J. & Dasheiff, R. M. (1992) Visual angle of the mind’s eye
before and after unilateral occipital lobectomy. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Human Perception and Performance 18(1):241–46.
[aZWP]
Farley, A. M. (1976) A computer implementation of constructive visual imagery
and perception. In: Eye movements and psychological processes, ed. R. A.
Monty and J. W. Senders. Erlbaum.
[NJTT]
Felleman, D. J. & Van Essen, D. C. (1991) Distributed hierarchical processing in
primate visual cortex. Cerebral Cortex 1:1–47.
[HA]
Festinger, L. (1957) A theory of cognitive dissonance. Stanford University Press.
[JAT]
Festinger, L., White, C. W. & Allyn, M. R. (1968) Eye movements and decrement
in the Müller-Lyer illusion. Perception and Psychophysics 3(5-B):376–82.
[aZWP]
Fidelman, U. (1994) A misleading implication of the metabolism scans of the brain.
International Journal of Neuroscience 74(1–4):105–108.
[rZWP]
Finke, R. A. (1979) The functional equivalence of mental images and errors of
movement. Cognitive Psychology 11:235–64.
[SM, aZWP]
(1989) Principles of mental imagery. MIT Press.
[aZWP, PPS]
Finke, R. A. & Freyd, J. J. (1989) Mental extrapolation and cognitive penetrability:
Reply to Ranney and proposals for evaluative criteria. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: General 118(4):403–408.
[aZWP]
Finke, R. A. & Kosslyn, S. M. (1980) Mental imagery acuity in the peripheral visual
field. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human Perception and
Performance 6(1):126–39.
[aZWP]
Finke, R. A. & Kurtzman, H. S. (1981a) Mapping the visual field in mental
imagery. Journal of Experimental Psychology: General 110(4):501–17.
[aZWP]
(1981b) Methodological considerations in experiments on imagery acuity.
Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human Perception and Performance
7(4):848–55.
[aZWP]
Finke, R. A. & Pinker, S. (1982) Spontaneous imagery scanning in mental
extrapolation. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and
Cognition 8(2):142–47.
[SMK, aZWP]
Finke, R. A., Pinker, S. & Farah, M. J. (1989) Reinterpreting visual patterns in
mental imagery. Cognitive Science 13(1):51–78.
[aZWP, PPS]
Finke, R. A. & Schmidt, M. J. (1977) Orientation-specific color aftereffects
following imagination. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human
Perception and Performance 3(4):599–606.
[aZWP]
Finke, R. A., Ward, T. B. & Smith, S. M. (1992) Creative cognition: Theory,
research, and applications. MIT Press.
[SMK]
Fletcher, P. C., Shallice, T., Frith, C. D., Frackowiak, R. S. J. & Dolan, R. J. (1996)
Brain activity during memory retrieval: The influence of imagery and
semantic cueing. Brain 119(5):1587–96.
[aZWP]
Fodor, J. A. (1968) The appeal to tacit knowledge in psychological explanation.
Journal of Philosophy 65:627–40.
[aZWP]
(1975) The language of thought. Crowell.
[GDB, aZWP, PPS, NJTT]
(1981) Imagistic representation. In: Imagery, ed. N. Block. MIT Press.
[aZWP]
Fodor, J. A. & Pylyshyn, Z. W. (1988) Connectionism and cognitive architecture: A
critical analysis. Cognition 28:3–71.
[arZWP]
Fomin, S. V., Sokolov, E. N. & Vaitkevicius, G. G. (1979) Iskusstvennye organy
chuvstv (Artificial sensory organs). Nauka.
[ENS]
Fosse, R., Stickgold, R. & Hobson, J. A. (2001) Brain-mind states: Reciprocal
variation in thoughts and hallucinations. Psychological Science 12:30–36.
[CG]
Foulkes, D. (1962) Dream report from different stages of sleep. Journal of
Abnormal and Social Psychology 65:14–25.
[CG]
Fox, P. T., Mintun, M. A., Raichle, M. E., Miezin, F. M., Allman, J. M. & Van
Essen, D. C. (1986) Mapping human visual cortex with positron emission
tomography. Nature 323(6091):806–809.
[aZWP]
Frak, V., Paulignan, Y. & Jeannerod, M. (2001) Orientation of the opposition axis in
mentally simulated grasping. Experimental Brain Research 136:120–27.
[MR]
Freimuth, M. & Wapner, S. (1979) The influence of lateral organization on the
evaluation of paintings. British Journal of Psychology 70:211–18.
[AC]
Freud, S. (1875/1975) Project for a scientific psychology. Standard edition, vol. I.
The Hogarth Press, 1975.
[CG]
(1900/1975) The interpretation of dreams. Standard edition, vol. IV. The
Hogarth Press, 1975.
[CG]
(1911/1975) Formulation of the two principles of mental functioning. Standard
edition, vol. XII. The Hogarth Press, 1975.
[CG]
Freyd, J. J. (1987) Dynamic mental representations. Psychological Review
94(4):427–38.
[MR]
Freyd, J. J. & Finke, R. A. (1984) Representational momentum. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition 10(1):126–32.
[aZWP]
Funt, B. V. (1980) Problem-solving with diagrammatic representations. Artificial
Intelligence 13(3):201–30.
[aZWP]
Gainotti, G. (1993) The role of spontaneous eye movements in orienting attention
and in unilateral neglect. In: Unilateral neglect: Clinical and experimental
studies, ed. I. H. Robertson & J. C. Marshall. Erlbaum.
[PB]
Gainotti, G., D’Erme, P. & Bartolomeo, P. (1991) Early orientation of attention
toward the half space ipsilateral to the lesion in patients with unilateral brain
damage. Journal of Neurology, Neurosurgery and Psychiatry 54:1082–89.
[PB]
Gallistel, C. R. & Gelman, R. (2000) Nonverbal numerical cognition: From reals to
integers. Trends in Cognitive Sciences 4:59–65.
[rZWP]
Gibson, J. J. (1966) The senses considered as perceptual systems. Houghton Mifflin.
[aZWP]
Gigerenzer, G. & Selten, R. (2001) Rethinking rationality. In: Bounded rationality,
ed. G. Gigerenzer & R. Selten. MIT Press.
[MR]
Gilden, D., Blake, R. & Hurst, G. (1995) Neural adaptation of imaginary visual
motion. Cognitive Psychology 28(1):1–16.
[aZWP]
Glasgow, J. I. (1993) The imagery debate revisited: A computational perspective.
Computational Intelligence 9:310–33.
[NJTT]
Glenberg, A. M. & Robertson, D. A. (2000) Symbol grounding and meaning: A
comparison of high-dimensional and embodied theories of meaning. Journal
of Memory and Language 43(3):379–401.
[aZWP]
References/Pylyshyn: Mental imagery: In search of a theory
230
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (2002) 25:2
. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0140525X02290044
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Chalmers Tekniska Högskola, on 16 Nov 2019 at 15:28:43, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms

Glisky, M. L., Tataryn, D. J. & Kihlstrom, J. F. (1995) Hypnotizability and mental
imagery. International Journal of Clinical and Experimental Hypnosis
43(1):34–54.
[aZWP]
Gluck, K. & Pew, R. (2002) The agent-based modeling and behavior representation
(AMBR) comparison project: Round III—Modeling category learning.
Proceedings of the 24 th annual meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, Aug,
8–10 2002.
Goldenberg, G. (1992) Loss of visual imagery and loss of visual knowledge – a case
study. Neuropsychologia 30(12):1081–99.
[GG, aZWP]
(1993) The neural basis of mental imagery. Bailliere’s Clinical Neurology 2:265–
86.
[GG]
(1998) Is there a common substrate for visual recognition and visual imagery?
Neurocase 4:141–48.
[GG]
Goldenberg, G. & Artner, C. (1991) Visual imagery and knowledge about the visual
appearance of objects in patients with posterior cerebral artery lesions. Brain
and Cognition 15(2):160–86.
[GG, aZWP]
Goldenberg, G., Müllbacher, W. & Nowak, A. (1995) Imagery without perception
– a case study of anosognosia for cortical blindness. Neuropsychologia
33(11):1373–82.
[AC, aZWP]
Goodale, M. A., Jacobson, J. S. & Keillor, J. M. (1994) Differences in the visual
control of pantomimed and natural grasping movements. Neuropsychologia
32(10):1159–78.
[aZWP]
Goryo, K., Robinson, J. O. & Wilson, J. A. (1984) Selective looking and the
Mueller-Lyer illusion: The effect of changes in the focus of attention on the
Mueller-Lyer illusion. Perception 13(6):647–54.
[aZWP]
Gosselin, F. & Schyns, P. G. (in press) Superstitious perceptions reveal properties
of internal representations. Psychological Science.
[FG]
Gottesmann, C. (1999) Neurophysiological support of consciousness during waking
and sleep. Progress in Neurobiology 59:469–508.
[CG]
(2000) Each distinct type of mental state is supported by specific brain
functions. Behavioral and Brain Sciences 23:941–43.
[CG]
Gould, E., Vail, N., Wagers, M. & Gross, C. G. (2001) Adult-generated
hippocampal and neocortical neurons in macaques have a transient existence.
PNAS 98(19):10910–17.
[ENS]
Grafman, J. (2000) Conceptualizing functional neuroplasticity. Journal of
Communication Disorders, 33:345–356.
Grafman, J. & Litvan, I. (1999) Evidence for four forms of neuroplasticity. In:
Neuroplasticity: Building a bridge from the laboratory to the clinic, ed. J.
Grafman and Y. Christen. Springer-Verlag.
Gregory, R. L. (1965) Inappropriate constancy explanation of spatial distortions.
Nature 207(4999):891–93.
[aZWP]
(1979) Eye and brain (3rd edition). Weidenfeld and Nicholson.
[RN]
Griffiths, A. F. & Zaidi, Q. (1998) Rigid objects that appear to bend. Perception
27:799–802.
[QZ]
(2000) Perceptual assumptions and projective distortions in a three-dimensional
shape illusion. Perception 29:171–200.
[QZ]
Grossberg, S. (1994) 3-D vision and figure-ground separation by visual cortex.
Perception and Psychophysics 55:48–120.
[SG]
(1997) Cortical dynamics of 3-D figure-ground perception of 2-D pictures.
Psychological Review 104:1583–605.
[SG]
(1999a) How does the cerebral cortex work? Learning, attention, and grouping
by the laminar circuits of visual cortex. Spatial Vision 12:163–87.
[SG]
(1999b) The link between brain learning, attention, and consciousness.
Consciousness and Cognition 8:1–44.
[SG]
(2000) How hallucinations may arise from brain mechanisms of learning,
attention, and volition. Journal of the International Neuropsychological
Society 6:583–92.
[SG]
Grossberg, S. & Raizada, R. D. S. (2000) Contrast-sensitive perceptual grouping
and object-based attention in the laminar circuits of primary visual cortex.
Vision Research 40:1413–32.
[SG]
Grusser, O.-J., Selke, T. & Zynda, B. (1988) Cerebral lateralization and some
implications for art, aesthetic perception and artistic activity. In: Beauty and
the brain. Biological aspects of aesthetics, ed. I. Rentschler, B. Herzberger &
D. Epstein. Birkhauser Verlag.
[AC]
Guariglia, C., Padovani, A., Pantano, P. & Pizzamiglio, L. (1993) Unilateral neglect
restricted to visual imagery. Nature 364(6434):235–37.
[PB, NB]
Haber, R. N. & Haber, R. B. (1964) Eidetic imagery. Perceptual and Motor Skills
19:131–38.
[SM]
Halgren, E., Babb, T. L. & Crandall, P. H. (1978a) Activity of human hippocampal
formation and amygdala during memory testing. Electroencephalography and
Clinical Neurophysiology 45:585–601.
[GEM]
Halgren, E., Walter, R. D., Cherlow, D. G. & Crandall, P. H. (1978b) Mental
phenomena evoked by electrical stimulation of human hippocampal formation
and amygdala. Brain 101:83–117.
[GEM]
Halper, F. (1997) The illusion of the future. Perception 26:1321–22.
[QZ]
Halpern, A. & Kelly, M. (1993) Memory bias in left versus right implied motion.
Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition
19:471–84.
[AC]
Hamilton, R. H. & Pascual-Leone, A. (1998) Cortical plasticity associated with
braille learning. Trends in Cognitive Sciences 2:168–174.
Hampson, P. J. & Duffy, C. (1984) Verbal and spatial interference effects in
congenitally blind and sighted subjects. Canadian Journal of Psychology
38(3):411–20.
[aZWP]
Hans, M. A. (1974) Imagery and modality in paired-associate learning in the blind.
Bulletin of the Psychonomic Society 4(1):22–24.
[aZWP]
Harman, G. (1990) The intrinsic quality of experience. In: Philosophical
perspectives 4: Action theory and philosophy of mind, ed. J. E. Tomberlin.
Ridgeview.
[IG]
Harris, J. P. (1982) The VVIQ imagery-induced McCollough effects: An alternative
analysis. Perception and Psychophysics 32(3):290–92.
[aZWP]
Hasnain, M. K., Fox, P. T. & Woldorff, M. G. (1998) Intersubject variability of
functional areas in the human visual cortex. Human Brain Mapping 6:301–15.
[SMK]
Hayes, J. R. (1973) On the function of visual imagery in elementary mathematics.
In: Visual information processing, ed. W. G. Chase. Academic Press.
[aZWP]
Heath, T. L., ed. (1956) The thirteen books of Euclid’s elements, vol. 1. Dover.
[KKN]
Hebb, D. O. (1968) Concerning imagery. Psychological Review 75:466–77.
[NJTT]
Heller, M. A. & Kennedy, J. M. (1990) Perspective taking, pictures, and the blind.
Perception and Psychophysics 48(5):459–66.
[aZWP]
Henderson, J. M. & Hollingworth, A. (1999) The role of fixation position in
detecting scene changes across saccades. Psychological Science 10(5):438–43.
[aZWP]
Herman, J. H., Erman, M., Boys, R., Peiser, L., Taylor, M. E. & Roffwarg, H. P.
(1984) Evidence for directional correspondence between eye movements and
dream imagery in REM sleep. Sleep 7:52–63.
[CG]
Hilbert, D. (1899/1999) Grundlagen der Geometrie: 14c. Auflage. B. G. Teubner.
(Original work published in 1899).
[KKN]
Hinton, G. E. (1979) Some demonstrations of the effects of structural descriptions
in mental imagery. Cognitive Science 3:231–50.
[aZWP]
Hobson, J. A. & McCarley, R. W. (1977) The brain as dream state generator: An
activation-synthesis hypothesis of the dream process. American Journal of
Psychiatry 134:1335–48.
[CG]
Hobson, J. A., Pace-Schott, E. F. & Stickgold, R. (2000) Dreaming and the brain:
Toward a cognitive neuroscience of conscious states. Behavioral and Brain
Sciences 23:793–842.
[CG]
Hobson, J. A., Stickgold, R. & Pace-Schott, E. F. (1998) The neuropsychology of
REM sleep dreaming. NeuroReport 9:R1-R14.
[CG]
Hochberg, J. (1968) In the mind’s eye. In: Contemporary theory and research in
visual perception, ed. R. N. Haber. Holt, Rinehart and Winston.
[aZWP]
Hochberg, J. & Gellman, L. (1977) The effect of landmark features on mental
rotation times. Memory and Cognition 5(1):23–26.
[aZWP]
Hoenig, P. (1972) The effects of eye movements, fixation and figure size on
decrement in the Muller-Lyer illusion. Dissertation Abstracts International
33(6-B):2835.
[aZWP]
Hollard, V. D. & Delius, J. D. (1982) Rotational invariance in visual pattern
recognition by pigeons and humans. Science 218:804–806.
[GEM]
Höllinger, P., Beisteiner, R., Lang, W., Lindinger, G. & Berthoz, A. (1999) Mental
representations of movements. Brain potentials associated with imagination of
eye movements. Clinical Neurophysiology 110:799–805.
[MOB]
Hong, C. C. H., Gillin, J. C., Dow, B. C., Wu, J. & Buschbaum, M. S. (1995)
Localized and lateralized cerebral glucose metabolism associated with eye
movements during REM sleep and wakefulness: A positron emission
tomography (PET) study. Sleep 18:570–80.
[CG]
Horowitz, M. J. (1970) Image formation and cognition. Appleton-Century-Crofts.
[GEM]
Horst, S. (1996) Symbols, computation and intentionality: A critique of the
computational theory of mind. University of California Press.
[NJTT]
Howard, I. P. (1982) Human visual orientation. Wiley.
[aZWP]
Howard, R. J., ffytche, D. H., Barnes, J., McKeefry, D., Ha, Y., Woodruff, P. W.,
Bullmore, E. T., Simmons, A., Williams, S. C., David, A. S. & Brammer, M.
(1998) The functional anatomy of imagining and perceiving colour.
NeuroReport 9(6):1019–23.
[aZWP]
Humphrey, G. (1951) Thinking: An introduction to its experimental psychology.
Methuen.
[aZWP]
Ingle, D. (1990) Spatial short-term memory: Evolutionary perspectives and
discoveries from split-brain studies. Behavioral and Brain Sciences 15:760–
62.
[DI]
Intons-Peterson, M. J. (1983) Imagery paradigms: How vulnerable are they to
experimenters’ expectations? Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human
Perception and Performance 9(3):394–412.
[aZWP]
Intons-Peterson, M. J. & White, A. R. (1981) Experimenter naïvete and imaginal
judgments. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human Perception and
Performance 7(4):833–43.
[aZWP]
References/Pylyshyn: Mental imagery: In search of a theory
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (2002) 25:2
231
. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0140525X02290044
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Chalmers Tekniska Högskola, on 16 Nov 2019 at 15:28:43, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms

Intraub, H. (1981) Identification and processing of briefly glimpsed visual scenes.
In: Eye movements: Cognition and visual perception, ed. R. A. M. D. F.
Fisher & J. W. Senders. Erlbaum.
[aZWP]
Irwin, D. E. (1991) Information integration across saccadic eye movements.
Cognitive Psychology 23:420–56.
[aZWP]
(1993) Perceiving an integrated visual world. In: Attention and performance XIV,
ed. D. E. Meyer & S. Kornblum. MIT Press.
[aZWP]
Ishai, A. & Sagi, D. (1995) Common mechanisms of visual imagery and perception.
Science 268(5218):1772–74.
[arZWP]
Izmailov, C. A. & Sokolov, E. N. (1991) Spherical model of color and brightness
discrimination. Psychological Science 2:249–59.
[ENS]
Jankowiak, J., Kinsbourne, M., Shalev, R. S. & Bachman, D. L. (1992) Preserved
visual imagery and categorization in a case of associative visual agnosia.
Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience 4(2):119–31.
[aZWP]
Janssen, J. J. & Sheikh, A. A. (1994) Enhancing athletic performance through
imagery: An overview. In: Imagery in sports and physical performance, ed. 
A. A. Sheikh & E. R. Korn. Baywood.
[MR]
Jeannerod, M. (1995) Mental imagery in the motor context. Neuropsychologia
33(11):1419–32.
[MOB]
Johnson, D. M. (1939) Confidence and speed in the two-category judgment.
Archives of Psychology 34:1–53.
[WMP]
Johnson, R. A. (1980) Sensory images in the absence of sight: Blind versus sighted
adolescents. Perceptual and Motor Skills 51(1):177–78.
[SM, aZWP]
Johnson, S. H., Corballis, P. M. & Gazzaniga, M. S. (2001) Within grasp but out of
reach: Evidence for a double dissociation between imagined hand and arm
movements in the left cerebral hemisphere. Neuropsychologia 39:36–50.
[MOB]
Jonides, J., Kahn, R. & Rozin, P. (1975) Imagery instructions improve memory in
blind subjects. Bulletin of the Psychonomic Society 5(5):424–26.
[aZWP]
Julesz, B. (1971) Foundations of Cyclopean perception. University of Chicago
Press.
[DCD]
(1981) Textons, the elements of texture perception, and their interactions.
Nature 290:91–97.
[aZWP]
Julstrom, B. A. & Baron, R. J. (1985) A model of mental imagery. International
Journal of Man-Machine Studies 23:313–34.
[NJTT]
Just, M. A. & Carpenter, P. A. (1976) Eye fixations and cognitive processes.
Cognitive Psychology 8(4):441–80.
[aZWP]
Kable, J., Spellmeyer-Lease, J. & Chatterjee, A. (2002) Neural substrates of action
event knowledge. Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience 14:795–805.
[AC]
Kant, E. (1787/1964) The critique of pure reason. Macmillan.
[EW]
Kelly, F. & Grossberg, S. (2000) Neural dynamics of 3-D surface perception:
figure-ground separation and lightness perception. Perception and
Psychophysics 62:1596–618.
[SG]
Kelso, J. A. S., Cook, E., Olson, M. E. & Epstein, W. (1975) Allocation of attention
and the locus of adaptation to displaced vision. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Human Perception and Performance 1:237–45.
[aZWP]
Kerr, N. H. (1983) The role of vision in “visual imagery” experiments: Evidence
from the congenitally blind. Journal of Experimental Psychology: General
112(2):265–77.
[aZWP]
Kerst, S. M. & Howard, J. H. (1978) Memory psychophysics for visual area and
length. Memory and Cognition 6:327–35.
[WMP]
Kessel, F. S. (1972) Imagery: A dimension of mind rediscovered. British Journal of
Psychology 63:149–62.
[NJTT]
King, J. A., Burgess, N., Hartley, T., Vargha-Khadem, F. & O’Keefe, J. (2002) The
human hippocampus and viewpoint dependence in spatial memory.
Hippocampus 12(6). (in press).
[NB]
Klatzky, R. L. & Lederman, S. J. (1995) Identifying objects from a haptic glance.
Perception and Psychophysics 57:1111–23.
[MJ]
(1999) The haptic glance: A route to rapid object identification and
manipulation. Attention and Performance 17:165–96.
[MJ]
Klein, G. & Crandall, B. W. (1995) The role of mental simulation in problem
solving and decision making. In: Local applications of the ecological approach
to human-machine systems. Vol. 2: Resources for ecological psychology, ed. P.
Hancock. Erlbaum.
[aZWP]
Klein, I., Dubois, J., Mangin, J. M., Kherif, F., Flandin, G., Poline, J. B., Denis, M.,
Kosslyn, S. M. & Le Bihan, D. (submitted) Retinotopic organization of visual
mental images as revealed by functional Magnetic Resonance Imaging.
Harvard University manuscript.
[SMK]
Kosslyn, S. M. (1978) Measuring the visual angle of the mind’s eye. Cognitive
Psychology 10:356–89.
[SMK, arZWP]
(1980) Image and mind. Harvard University Press.
[SMK, rZWP, NJTT, 
FvdV]
(1981) The medium and the message in mental imagery: A theory. Psychological
Review 88:46–66.
[aZWP]
Also in: Imagery, ed. N. Block. MIT Press,
1981.
[VG]
(1983) Ghosts in the mind’s machine – creating and using images in the brain.
W. W. Norton.
[GG]
(1992) Mental imagery. In: An invitation to cognitive science, vol. 2: Visual
cognition and action, ed. D. N. Osherson, S. M. Kosslyn & J. M. Hollerbach.
MIT Press.
[JAT]
(1994) Image and brain: The resolution of the imagery debate. MIT Press.
[PB,
EdH, DCD, SMK, MOB, arZWP, MR, PPS, NJTT, JAT, EW]
Kosslyn, S. M., Ball, T. M. & Reiser, B. J. (1978) Visual images preserve metric
spatial information: Evidence from studies of image scanning. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Human Perception and Performance 4:46–60.
[JRP, aZWP]
Kosslyn, S. M., Ganis, G. & Thompson, W. L. (2001) Neural foundations of
imagery. Nature Reviews Neuroscience 2:635–42.
[SMK]
Kosslyn, S. M., Pascual-Leone, A., Felician, O., Camposano, S., Keenan, J. P.,
Thompson, W. L., Ganis, G., Sukel, K. E. & Alpert, N. M. (1999a) The role of
area 17 in visual imagery: Convergent evidence from PET and rTMS. Science
284(April 2):167–70.
[EdH, CG, SMK, aZWP]
Kosslyn, S. M., Pinker, S., Smith, G. & Shwartz, S. P. (1979) On the demystification
of mental imagery. Behavioral and Brain Science 2:535–48.
[aZWP, PPS]
Kosslyn, S. M. & Pomerantz, J. R. (1977) Imagery, propositions, and the form of
internal representations. Cognitive Psychology 9:52–76.
[SMK]
Kosslyn, S. M., Sukel, K. E. & Bly, B. M. (1999b) Squinting with the mind’s eye:
Effects of stimulus resolution on imaginal and perceptual comparisons.
Memory and Cognition 27(2):276–87.
[aZWP]
Kosslyn, S. M. & Sussman, A. L. (1995) Roles of imagery in perception: Or, There
is no such thing as immaculate perception. In: The cognitive neurosciences,
ed. M. S. Gazzaniga. MIT Press.
[aZWP]
Kosslyn, S. M. & Thompson, W. L. (2002) When is early visual cortex activated
during visual mental imagery? Psychological Bulletin. (under review).
[SMK]
Kosslyn, S. M., Thompson, W. L., Kim, I. J. & Alpert, N. M. (1995) Topographical
representations of mental images in primary visual cortex. Nature 378:496–
98.
[aZWP]
Kosslyn, S. M., Thompson, W. L., Kim, I. J., Rauch, S. L. & Alpert, N. M. (1996)
Individual differences in cerebral blood flow in area 17 predict the time to
evaluate visualized letters. Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience 8:78–82.
[SMK]
Kowler, E. (1989) Cognitive expectations, not habits, control anticipatory smooth
oculomotor pursuit. Vision Research 29:1049–57.
[aZWP]
(1990) The role of visual and cognitive processes in the control of eye
movement. In: Eye movements and their role in visual and cognitive
processes, ed. E. Kowler. Elsevier Science.
[aZWP]
Kreiman, G., Koch, C. & Itzhak, F. (2001) Imagery neurons in the human brain.
Nature 408:357–61.
[GEM]
Kunen, S. & May, J. G. (1980) Spatial frequency content of visual imagery.
Perception and Psychophysics 28(6):555–59.
[aZWP]
(1981) Imagery-induced McCollough effects: Real or imagined? Perception and
Psychophysics 30(1):99–100.
[aZWP]
Kunzendorf, R. G., Spanos, N. P. & Wallace, B., eds. (1996) Hypnosis and
imagination. Baywood.
[aZWP]
Ladd, G. T. (1894) Psychology: Descriptive and explanatory. Scribner’s.
[JRP]
Lairy, G. C., Barros de Fereira, M. & Goldsteinas, L. (1968) Les phases
intermédiaries du sommeil. In: The abnormalities of sleep in man, ed. H.
Gastaut, E. Lugaresi, G. Berti Ceroni & G. Coccagna. Aulo Gaggi.
[CG]
Lamme, V. A. F., Rodriguez-Rodriguez, V. & Spekreijzse, H. (1999) Separate
processing dynamics for texture elements, boundaries, and surfaces in primary
visual cortex of the macaque monkey. Cerebral Cortex 9:406–13.
[SG] 
Lamme, V. A. F., Super, H. & Spekreijse, H. (1998) Feedforward, horizontal and
feedback processing in the visual cortex. Current Opinion in Neurobiology
8:529–35.
[SG]
Landau, B. & Gleitman, L. R. (1985) Language and experience: Evidence from the
blind child. Harvard University Press.
[arZWP]
Landau, P. & Schwartz, E. L. (1994) Subset warping: Rubber sheeting with cuts.
Computer Vision, Graphics and Image Processing 56:247–66.
[JP]
Landis, T. (2000) Disruption of space perception due to cortical lesions. Spatial
Vision 13(2–3):179–91.
[rZWP]
Lang, P. J. (1979) A bio-informational theory of emotional imagery.
Psychophysiology 16:495–512.
[MR]
(1987) Imagery as action: A reply to Watts and Blackstock. Cognition and
Emotion 1:407–26.
[MR]
Larson, J. D. & Foulkes, D. (1969) Electromyogram suppression during sleep,
dream recall, and orientation time. Psychophysiology 5:548–55.
[CG]
Levesque, H. (1986) Making believers out of computers. Artificial Intelligence
30:81–108.
[aZWP]
Levesque, H. J. & Brachman, R. J. (1985) A fundamental tradeoff in knowledge
representation and reasoning (revised version). In: Readings in knowledge
representation, ed. H. J. Levesque & R. J. Brachman. Morgan Kaufmann.
[arZWP]
Lewis, D. (1971) Analog and digital. Nous 5(3):321–27.
[rZWP]
(1980) Veridical hallucination and prosthetic vision. Australasian Journal of
Philosophy 58:239–49.
[IG]
References/Pylyshyn: Mental imagery: In search of a theory
232
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (2002) 25:2
. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0140525X02290044
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Chalmers Tekniska Högskola, on 16 Nov 2019 at 15:28:43, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms

Llinas, R. & Ribary, U. (1993) Coherent 40-Hz oscillation characterizes dream
state in humans. Proceedings of the National Academy of Science USA
90:2078–81.
[CG]
Lövblad, K. O., Thomas, R., Jakob, P. M., Scammell, T., Bassetti, C., Griswold, M.,
Ives, J., Matheson, J., Edelman, R. R. & Warach, S. (1999) Silent functional
magnetic resonance imaging demonstrates focal activation in rapid eye
movement sleep. Neurology 53:2193–95.
[CG]
Luria, A. R. (1966) Higher cortical functions in man. Basic Books.
[ENS]
Lycan, W. (2000) Representational theories of consciousness. In: Stanford
encyclopedia of philosophy, ed. E. N. Zalta. Stanford Center for the Study of
Language and Information.
[Online serial] http://plato.stanford.edu/
archives/win2001/entries/consciousness-representational/
[NJTT]
Madsen, P. L., Holm, S., Vorstrup, S., Friberg, L., Lassen, N. A. & Wildschiodtz,
G. (1991) Human regional cerebral blood flow during rapid-eye-movement
sleep. Journal of Cerebral Blood Flow Metabolism 11:502–507.
[CG]
Maher, L., Chatterjee, A., Gonzales-Rothi, L. & Heilman, K. (1995) Agrammatic
sentence production: The use of a temporal-spatial strategy. Brain and
Language 49:105–24.
[AC]
Malebranche, N. (1712/1997) The search after truth, ed. and trans. T. M. Lennon
& P. J. Olscamp. Cambridge University Press.
[PPS]
Marg, E. (1970) A neurologic approach to perceptual problems. In: Early experience
and visual information processing in perceptual and reading disorders, ed. F. A.
Young and D. B. Lindsley. National Academy of Science.
[GEM]
(1973) Recording from single cells in the human visual cortex. In: Handbook of
sensory physiology: Vol. VII/3B, ed. R. Jung. Springer-Verlag.
[GEM]
Marg, E., Adams, J. E. & Rutkin, B. (1968) Receptive fields of cells in the human
visual cortex. Experience 24:348–50.
[GEM]
Marks, D. F. (1973) Visual imagery differences in the recall of pictures. British
Journal of Psychology 64(1):17–24.
[aZWP]
Marmor, G. S. & Zaback, L. A. (1976) Mental rotation by the blind: Does mental
rotation depend on visual imagery? Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Human Perception and Performance 2(4):515–21.
[aZWP]
Marr, D. (1982) Vision: A computational investigation into the human
representation and processing of visual information. W. H. Freeman.
aZWP]
Marr, D. & Nishihara, H. K. (1976) Representation and recognition of spatial
organization of three-dimensional shapes. MIT A. I. Memo 377.
[arZWP]
(1978) Representation and recognition of spatial organization of three-
dimensional shapes. Proceedings of the Royal Society of London B 200:269–
94.
[MJ, aZWP]
Marshall, J. C. (2001) Auditory neglect and right parietal cortex. Brain 124(4):645–
46.
[rZWP]
Mather, J. A. & Lackner, J. R. (1977) Adaptation to visual rearrangement: Role of
sensory discordance. Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psychology
29(2):237–44.
[aZWP]
(1980) Visual tracking of active and passive movements of the hand. Quarterly
Journal of Experimental Psychology 32(2):307–15.
[aZWP]
(1981) Adaptation to visual displacement: Contribution of proprioceptive, visual,
and attentional factors. Perception 10(4): 367–74.
[aZWP]
McCarley, R. W., Winkelman, J. W. & Dufy, F. H. (1983) Human cerebral
potentials associated with REM sleep rapid eye movements: Link to PGO
waves and waking potentials. Brain Research 274:359–64.
[CG]
McConkie, G. M. & Currie, C. B. (1996) Visual stability across saccades while
viewing complex pictures. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human
Perception and Performance 22(3):563–81.
[aZWP]
McGlinchey-Berroth, R., Milberg, W. P., Verfaellie, M. & Grande, L. (1996)
Semantic processing and orthographic specificity in hemispatial neglect.
Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience 8(3):291–304.
[rZWP]
McManus, I. & Humphrey, N. (1973) Turning the left cheek. Nature 243:271–72.
[AC]
Meador, K. J., Loring, D. W., Bowers, D. & Heilman, K. M. (1987) Remote
memory and neglect syndrome. Neurology 37:522–26.
[PB]
Mehta, Z. & Newcombe, F. (1996) Selective loss of verbal imagery.
Neuropsychologia 34:441–47.
[EdH]
Mehta, Z., Newcombe, F. & De Haan, E. H. F. (1992) Selective loss of imagery in
a case of visual agnosia. Neuropsychologia 30:645–55.
[EdH]
Mel, B. W. (1986) A connectionist learning model for 3-dimensional mental
rotation, zoom, and pan. In: Proceedings of the Eighth Annual Conference of
the Cognitive Science Society, pp. 562–71. Erlbaum.
[NJTT]
Mellet, E., Petit, L., Mazoyer, B., Denis, M. & Tzourio, N. (1998) Reopening the
mental imagery debate: Lessons from functional anatomy. Neuroimage
8(2):129–39.
[CG, aZWP]
Mellet, E., Tzourio, N., Crivello, F., Joliot, M., Denis, M., & Mazoyer, B. (1996)
Functional anatomy of spatial mental imagery generated from verbal
instructions. Journal of Neuroscience 16(20):6504–12.
[aZWP]
Miashita, Y., Sakai, K., Higuchi, S.-I. & Masui, N. (1991) Localization of primal
long-term memory in the primate temporal cortex. In: Memory: Organization
and locus of change, ed. L. R. Squire, N. M. Weinberger, G. Lynch & L.
McGough. Oxford University Press.
[ENS]
Millar, S. (1979) Utilization of shape and movement cues in simple spatial tasks by
blind and sighted children. Perception 8:11–20.
[SM]
(1981) Self-referent and movement cues in coding spatial location by blind and
sighted children. Perception 10:255–64.
[SM]
(1985) Movement cues and body orientation in recall of location by blind and
sighted children. Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psychology 37:257–79.
[SM]
(1988) Models of sensory deprivation: The nature/nurture dichotomy and spatial
representation in the blind. International Journal of Behavioural Development
11:69–87.
[SM]
(1994) Understanding and representing space: Theory and evidence from studies
with blind and sighted children. Clarendon Press.
[SM]
Millar, S. & Al-Attar, Z. (2000) Vertical and bisection bias in active touch.
Perception 29:481–500.
[SM]
(2001) Illusions in reading maps by touch: Reducing distance errors. British
Journal of Psychology 92:643–57.
[SM]
(2002) Müller-Lyer illusions in touch and vision: Implications for multisensory
processes. Perception and Psychophysics 64:353–65.
[SM]
Millar, S. & Ittyerah, M. (1991) Movement imagery in young and congenitally blind
children: Mental practice without visuo-spatial information. International
Journal for the Study of Behavioral Development 15(1):125–46.
[SM]
Millikan, R. G. (2000) On clear and confused ideas: An essay about substance
concepts. Cambridge University Press.
[KKN]
Milner, A. D. & Goodale, M. A. (1995) The visual brain in action. Oxford
University Press.
[DI, aZWP]
Milton, R. (1997) Shattering the myths of Darwinism. Park Street Press.
[JAT]
Minsky, M. L. (1975) A framework for representing knowledge. In: The psychology
of computer vision, ed. P. H. Winston. McGraw-Hill.
[rZWP]
Minsky, M. L. & Papert, S. (1971) On some associative, parallel and analog
computations. In: Associative information techniques: Symposium at the
General Motors Research Laboratories, ed. E. L. Jacks. Elsevier.
[rZWP]
Mitchell, D. B. & Richman, C. L. (1980) Confirmed reservations: Mental travel.
Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human Perception and Performance
6:58–66.
[aZWP]
Miyauchi, S., Takino, R., Fukuda, H. & Torii, S. (1987) Electrophysiological
evidence for dreaming: Human cerebral potentials associated with rapid eye
movements during REM sleep. Electroencephalography and Clinical
Neurophysiology 66:383–90.
[CG]
Moran, T. P. (1973) The symbolic imagery hypothesis: A production system model.
Unpublished doctoral dissertation, Carnegie-Mellon University, Pittsburgh.
(University Microfilms No. 74–14, 657.)
[NJTT]
Moyer, R. S. (1973) Comparing objects in memory: Evidence suggesting an
internal psychophysics. Perception and Psychophysics 13:180–84.
[WMP]
Moyer, R. S. & Bayer, R. H. (1976) Mental comparison and the symbolic distance
effect. Cognitive Psychology 8:228–46.
[WMP]
Moyer, R. S., Bradley, D. R., Sorensen, M. H., Whiting, J. C. & Mansfield, D. P.
(1978) Psychophysical functions for perceived and remembered size. Science
200:330–32.
[WMP]
Moyer, R. S., Sklarew, P. & Whiting, J. C. (1982) Memory psychophysics. In:
Psychophysical judgment and the process of perception, ed. H. G. Geissler &
P. Petzold. VEB Deutscher Verlag der Wissenschaften.
[WMP]
Mueller, H. J. & Findlay, J. M. (1987) Sensitivity and criterion effects in the spatial
cuing of visual attention. Perception and Psychophysics 42:383–99.
[rZWP]
Munzert, J. & Raab, M. (in preparation) Information processing in sports.
Encyclopedia for Psychology.
[MR]
Nakajima, N. & Shimojo, S. (1981) Adaptation to the reversal of binocular depth
cues: Effects of wearing left-right reversing spectacles on stereoscopic depth-
perception. Perception 10:392–402.
[EW]
Neisser, U. (1976) Cognition and reality. W. H. Freeman.
[NJTT]
Newell, A. (1990) Unified theories of cognition. Harvard University Press.
[aZWP]
Newell, A. & Simon, H. A. (1976) Computer science as empirical inquiry.
Communications of the Association for Computing Machinery 19(3):113–26.
[aZWP]
Nicod, J. (1970) Geometry and induction. University of California Press.
[aZWP]
Nielsen, T. (2000) Cognition in REM and NREM sleep: A review and possible
reconciliation of two models of sleep mentation. Behavioral and Brain
Sciences 23:851–66.
[CG]
Nijhawan, R. (1991) Three-dimensional Müller-Lyer Illusion. Perception and
Psychophysics 49(9):333–41.
[aZWP]
(1994) Motion extrapolation in catching. Nature 370(6487):256–57.
[aZWP]
Ohkuma, Y. (1986) A comparison of image-induced and perceived Mueller-Lyer
illusion. Journal of Mental Imagery 10(4):31–38.
[aZWP]
O’Keefe, J. (1976) Place units in the hippocampus of the freely moving rat.
Experimental Neurology 51(1):78–109.
[NB]
Olivetti Belardinelli, M., Del Gratta, C., Di Matteo, R., Ferretti, A. & Romani, 
G. L. (2001) Intermodal analysis of sensory image generation by means of
fMRI. In: Proceedings of the 8th European Workshop on Imagery and
Cognition, Saint-Malo, France, p. 84. Psychology Press.
[MOB]
References/Pylyshyn: Mental imagery: In search of a theory
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (2002) 25:2
233
. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0140525X02290044
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Chalmers Tekniska Högskola, on 16 Nov 2019 at 15:28:43, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms

O’Regan, J. K. (1992) Solving the “real” mysteries of visual perception: The world
as an outside memory. Canadian Journal of Psychology 46:461–88.
http://nivea.psycho.univ-paris5.fr/CanJ/CanJ.html
[arZWP, NJTT]
O’Regan, J. K., Deubel, H., Clark, J. J. & Rensink, R. A. (2000) Picture changes
during blinks: Looking without seeing and seeing without looking. Visual
Cognition 7:191–212.
[aZWP]
O’Regan, J. K. & Lévy-Schoen, A. (1983) Integrating visual information from
successive fixations: Does trans-saccadic fusion exist? Vision Research
23(8):765–68.
[aZWP]
O’Regan, J. K. & Noë, A. (2001) A sensorimotor account of vision and visual
consciousness. Behavoral and Brain Sciences 24(5):939–73.
[PB, arZWP,
NJTT]
Ortigue, S., Viaud-Delmon, I., Annoni, J. M., Landis, T., Michel, C., Blanke, O.,
Vuilleumier, P. & Mayer, E. (2001) Pure representational neglect after right
thalamic lesion. Annals of Neurology 50(3):401–404.
[PB]
Oudejans, R. R. D., Michaels, C. F., Bakker, F. C. & Davids, K. (1999) Shedding
some light on catching in the dark: Perceptual mechanisms for catching fly
balls. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human Perception and
Performance 25(2):531–42.
[MR]
Paivio, A. (1971) Imagery and verbal processes. Holt, Reinhart, and Winston.
[WMP, aZWP]
(1975) Perceptual comparisons through the mind’s eye. Memory and Cognition
3:635–47.
[WMP]
Palmer, S. E. (1977) Hierarchical structure in perceptual representation. Cognitive
Psychology 9:441–74.
[aZWP]
(1978) Fundamental aspects of cognitive representation. In: Cognition and
categorization, ed. E. Rosch and B. Lloyd. Erlbaum.
[VG]
Pani, J. R. (1996) Mental imagery as the adaptionist views it. Consciousness and
Cognition 5:288–326.
[JRP]
Parsons, L. M., Gabrieli, J. D. E. & Corkin, S. (1987) Failure to improve a skill for
mental rotation in global amnesia. Paper presented at the Annual Meeting of
the Society for Neuroscience.
[GEM]
Pascual-Leone, A., Hamilton, R., Tormos, J. M., Keenan, J. P. & Catalá, M. D.
(1999) Neuroplasticity in the adjustment to blindness. In: Neuronal plasticity:
Building a bridge from the laboratory to the clinic, eds. J. Grafman & Y.
Christen. Springer-Verlag.
Patterson, J. & Deffenbacher, K. (1972) Haptic perception of the Mueller-Lyer
illusion by the blind. Perceptual and Motor Skills 35(3):819–24.
[aZWP]
Pavani, F., Ladavas, E. & Driver, J. (2002) Selective deficit of auditory localisation
in patients with visuospatial neglect. Neuropsychologia 40(3):291–301.
[rZWP]
Penfield, W. (1958) The excitable cortex in conscious man. Liverpool University
Press.
[ENS]
Perky, C. W. (1910) An experimental study of imagination. American Journal of
Psychology 21(3):422–52.
[aZWP]
Pessoa, L., Thompson, E. & Noë, A. (1998) Finding out about filling in: A guide to
perceptual completion for visual science and the philosophy of perception.
Behavioral and Brain Sciences 21(6):723–802.
[arZWP]
Peterson, M. A. (1993) The ambiguity of mental images: Insights regarding the
structure of shape memory and its function in creativity. In: Imagery,
creativity, and discovery: A cognitive perspective. Advances in psychology,
vol. 98, ed. H. Roskos-Ewoldson, M. J. Intons-Peterson & R. E. Anderson.
North Holland/Elsevier Science.
Peterson, M. A., Kihlstrom, J. F., Rose, P. M. & Glisky, M. A. (1992) Mental images
can be ambiguous: Reconstruals and reference-frame reversals. Memory and
Cognition 20(2):107–23.
[aZWP]
Petrusic, W. M. (2001) Contextual effects and associative processes in comparative
judgements with symbolic and perceptual stimuli. In: Fechner Day 2001.
Proceedings of the Sixteenth Annual Meeting of the International Society for
Psychophysics, pp. 75–80, ed. E. Sommerfeldt. The International Society for
Psychophysics.
[WMP]
Petrusic, W. P., Baranski, J. V. & Aubin, P. H. (1998a) Comparing perceived and
remembered magnitudes. In: Fechner Day ‘98. Proceedings of the Fourteenth
Annual Meeting of the International Society for Psychophysics, pp. 44–49, ed.
S. Grondin & Y. Lacouture. The International Society for Psychophysics.
[WMP] 
Petrusic, W. P., Baranski, J. V. & Kennedy, R. (1998b) Similarity comparisons
with remembered and perceived magnitudes: Memory psychophysics 
and fundamental measurement. Memory and Cognition 26:1041–55.
[WMP]
Piaget, J. (1970) Genetic epistemology. Columbia University Press.
[EW]
Pinker, S. (1980) Mental imagery and the third dimension. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: General 109(3):354–71.
[aZWP]
(1984) Visual cognition: An introduction. Cognition 18:1–63.
[GEM]
Place, U. T. (1956) Is consciousness a brain process? British Journal of Psychology.
Reprinted in: The philosophy of mind: Classical problems/contemporary
issues, ed. B. Beakley & P. Ludlow. MIT Press.
[PPS]
Podgorny, P. & Shepard, R. N. (1978) Functional representations common to visual
perception and imagination. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human
Perception and Performance 9:380–93.
[JRP, aZWP]
Poggio, T. & Edelman, S. (1990) A network that learns to recognize three-
dimensional objects. Nature 343:263–66.
[MJ]
Pouget, A. & Sejnowski, T. J. (1999) A new view of hemineglect based on the
response properties of parietal neurones. In: The hippocampal and parietal
foundations of spatial cognition, ed. N. Burgess, K. J. Jeffery & J. O’Keefe.
Oxford University Press.
[NB]
Predebon, J. & Wenderoth, P. (1985) Imagined stimuli: Imaginary effects? Bulletin
of the Psychonomic Society 23(3):215–16.
[aZWP]
Pylyshyn, Z. W. (1973) What the mind’s eye tells the mind’s brain: A critique of
mental imagery. Psychological Bulletin 80:1–24.
[arZWP, EW]
(1978) Imagery and Artificial Intelligence. In: Perception and cognition: Issues
in the foundations of psychology, vol. 9, ed. C. W. Savage. University of
Minnesota Press.
[aZWP]
(1979a) Do mental events have duration? Behavioral and Brain Sciences
2(2):277–78.
[rZWP]
(1979b) The rate of “mental rotation” of images: A test of a holistic analogue
hypothesis. Memory and Cognition 7:19–28.
[aZWP]
(1979c) Validating computational models: A critique of Anderson’s
indeterminacy of representation claim. Psychological Review 86(4):383–94.
[rZWP]
(1980) Cognitive representation and the process-architecture distinction.
Behavioral and Brain Sciences 3(1):154–69.
[aZWP]
(1981) The imagery debate: Analogue media versus tacit knowledge.
Psychological Review 88:16–45.
[SMK, arZWP]
(1984) Computation and cognition: Toward a foundation for cognitive science.
MIT Press.
[GDB, KKN, arZWP]
(1989) The role of location indexes in spatial perception: A sketch of the FINST
spatial-index model. Cognition 32:65–97.
[rZWP]
(1991a) The role of cognitive architectures in theories of cognition. In:
Architectures for intelligence, ed. K. VanLehn. Erlbaum.
[aZWP]
(1991b) Rules and representation: Chomsky and representational realism. In:
The Chomskian turn, ed. A. Kashir. Basil Blackwell.
[aZWP]
(1994a) Mental pictures on the brain: Review of “Image and brain: The
resolution of the imagery debate” by Stephen Kosslyn. Nature 372(17):289–
90.
[aZWP]
(1994b) Some primitive mechanisms of spatial attention. Cognition 50:363–84.
[aZWP]
(1996) The study of cognitive architecture. In: Mind matters: Contributions to
cognitive science in honor of Allen Newell, ed. D. Steier & T. Mitchell.
Erlbaum.
[aZWP]
(1998) Visual indexes in spatial vision and imagery. In: Visual attention, ed. R. D.
Wright. Oxford University Press.
[arZWP]
(1999) Is vision continuous with cognition? The case for cognitive
impenetrability of visual perception. Behavioral and Brain Sciences
22(3):341–423.
[VG, aZWP, MR]
(2000) Situating vision in the world. Trends in Cognitive Sciences 4(5):197–207.
[arZWP]
(2001a) Connecting vision and the world: Tracking the missing link. In: The 
foundations of cognitive science, ed. J. Branquinho. Clarendon Press.
[rZWP]
(2001b) Seeing, acting, and knowing: Commentary on O’Regan & Noë.
Behavioral and Brain Sciences 24(5):999.
[rZWP]
(2001c) Visual indexes, preconceptual objects, and situated vision. Cognition
80(1/2):127–58.
[arZWP]
(forthcoming) Seeing and visualizing: It’s not what you think. MIT Press/
Bradford Books.
[arZWP]
Pylyshyn, Z. W. & Cohen, J. (1999) Imagined extrapolation of uniform motion is
not continuous. Paper presented at the Annual Conference of the Association
for Research in Vision and Ophthalmology, Ft. Lauderdale, FL, May 1999.
[aZWP]
Raizada, R. D. S. & Grossberg, S. (2001) Context-sensitive binding by the laminar
circuits of V1 and V2: A unified model of perceptual grouping, attention, and
orientation contrast. Visual Cognition 8:431–66.
[SG]
Ranney, M. (1989) Internally represented forces may be cognitively penetrable:
Comment on Freyd, Pantzer, and Cheng (1988). Journal of Experimental
Psychology: General 118(4):399–402.
[aZWP]
Rao, S. C., Raier, G. & Miller, E. K. (1999) Integration of “what” and “where” in
the primate prefrontal cortex. Science 276:821–24.
[DI]
Reed, S. K., Hock, H. S. & Lockhead, G. R. (1983) Tacit knowledge and the effect
of pattern configuration on mental scanning. Memory and Cognition 11:137–
43.
[aZWP]
Rehkaemper, K. (1991) Sind mentale Bilder bildhaft? – Eine Frage zwischen
Philosophie und Wissenschaft. Doctoral dissertation, University of Hamburg,
Germany.
[VG]
Reisberg, D. & Chambers, D. (1991) Neither pictures nor propositions: What can
we learn from a mental image? Canadian Journal of Psychology 45(3):336–
52.
[aZWP]
References/Pylyshyn: Mental imagery: In search of a theory
234
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (2002) 25:2
. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0140525X02290044
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Chalmers Tekniska Högskola, on 16 Nov 2019 at 15:28:43, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms

Reisberg, D. & Morris, A. (1985) Images contain what the imager put there: A
nonreplication of illusions in imagery. Bulletin of the Psychonomic Society
23(6):493–96.
[aZWP]
Rensink, R. A. (2000a) The dynamic representation of scenes. Visual Cognition
7:17–42.
[aZWP]
(2000b) Visual search for change: A probe into the nature of attentional
processing. Visual Cognition 7:345–76.
[aZWP]
Rensink, R. A., O’Regan, J. K. & Clark, J. J. (1997) To see or not to see: The need
for attention to perceive changes in scenes. Psychological Science 8(5):368–
73.
[aZWP]
(2000) On the failure to detect changes in scenes across brief interruptions.
Visual Cognition 7:127–45.
[aZWP]
Rentschler, I., Caelli, T., Bischof, W. & Jüttner, M. (2000) Object recognition 
and image understanding: Theories of everything? Spatial Vision 13:129–35.
[MJ]
Rentschler, I., Jüttner, M., Osman, E., Miller, A. & Caelli, T. (submitted) Haptic
exploration reinforces visual category learning for 3-D objects.
[MJ]
Rey, G. (1981) What are mental images? In: Readings in the philosophy of
psychology, vol. II, ed. N. Block. Harvard University Press.
[aZWP]
Reynolds, J., Chelazzi, L. & Desimone, R. (1999) Competitive mechanisms
subserve attention in macaque areas V2 and V4. Journal of Neuroscience
19:1736–53.
[SG]
Richman, C. L., Mitchell, D. B. & Reznick, J. S. (1979) Mental travel: Some
reservations. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human Perception and
Performance 5:13–18.
[aZWP]
Richter, W., Somorjai, R., Summers, R., Jarmasz, M., Menon, R. S., Gati, J. S.,
Georgopoulos, A. P., Tegeler, C., Ugurbil, K. & Kim, S.-G. (2000) Motor area
activity during mental rotation studied by time-resolved single-trial fMRI.
Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience 12(2):310–20.
[rZWP]
Rieke, F., Warland, D., de Ruyter van Stevenink, R. & Bialek, W. (1998) Spikes:
Exploring the neural code. MIT Press.
[JP]
Rode, G. & Perenin, M. T. (1994) Temporary remission of representational
hemineglect through vestibular stimulation. NeuroReport 5:869–72.
[PB]
Rode, G., Rossetti, Y. & Boisson, D. (2001) Prism adaptation improves
representational neglect. Neuropsychologia 39(11):1250–54.
[PB, rZWP]
Roffwarg, H. P., Dement, W. C., Muzio, J. N. & Fisher, C. (1962) Dream imagery:
Relationship to rapid eye movement sleep. Archives of General Psychiatry
7:235–58.
[CG]
Rojer, A. S. & Schwartz, E. L. (1990) Design consideration for a space-variant
sensor with complex-logarithmic geometry. In: Proceedings of the Tenth
International Conference on Pattern Recognition, Atlantic City, NJ, vol. 2,
pp. 278–85.
[JP]
Roland, P. E. & Gulyas, B. (1994a) Beyond ‘pet’ methodologies to converging
evidence: Reply. Trends in Neurosciences 17(12):515–16.
[aZWP]
(1994b) Visual imagery and visual representation. Trends in Neurosciences
17(7):281–87.
[aZWP]
(1995) Visual memory, visual imagery, and visual recognition of large field
patterns by the human brain: Functional anatomy by positron emission
tomography. Cerebral Cortex 5(1):79–93.
[aZWP]
Rolls, E. T. (2000) Memory systems in the brain. Annual Review of Psychology
51:599–630.
[EdH]
Romero, S. G., Manly, C. F. & Grafman, J. (in press) Investigating cognitive
neuroplasticity in single cases: Lessons learned from applying functional
neuroimaging techniques to the traditional neuropsychological case study
framework. Neurocase, in press.
Rorty, R. (1979) Philosophy and the mirror of nature. Princeton University Press.
[PPS]
Rossetti, Y., Rode, G., Pisella, L., Farnè, A., Li, L., Boisson, D. & Perenin, M. T.
(1998) Prism adaptation to a rightward optical deviation rehabilitates left
hemispatial neglect. Nature 395:166–69.
[PB]
Rouw, R., Kosslyn, S. M. & Hamell, R. (1997) Detecting high-level and low-level
properties in percepts and mental images. Cognition 63:209–26.
[SMK]
(1998) Aspects of mental images: Is it possible to get the picture? Cognition
66:103–107.
[SMK]
Ryle, G. (1968) A puzzling element in the notion of thinking. In: Studies in the
philosophy of thought and action, ed. P. F. Strawson. Oxford University Press.
[PPS]
Sadato, N., Pascual-Leone, A., Grafman, J., Ibañez, V., Deiber, M.-P., Dold, G. &
Hallett, M. (1996) Activation of the primary visual cortex by Braille reading in
blind subjects. Nature 380:526–528.
Sarbin, T. R. & Juhasz, J. B. (1970) Toward a theory of imagination. Journal of
Personality 38:52–76.
[NJTT]
Sartre, J.-P. (1940) L’imaginaire. Gallimard.
[GDB]
(1948) The psychology of imagination, trans. Bernard Frechtman. Washington
Square Press/Philosophical Library. (Original French publication, 1940).
[MEA, NJTT]
Satoh, T. (1971) Direct cortical response and PGO spike during paradoxical sleep
of the cat. Brain Research 28:576–78.
[CG]
Schiller, P. H. (1994) Area V4 of the primate visual cortex. Current Directions in
Psychological Science 3:89–92.
[SG]
Schlaegel, T. F. (1953) The dominant method of imagery in blind compared to
sighted adolescents. Journal of Genetic Psychology 83:265–77.
[SM]
Schwartz, E. L. (1980) Computational anatomy and functional architecture of
striate cortex: A spatial mapping approach to perceptual coding. Vision
Research 20:645–69.
[JP]
(1994) Computational studies of the spatial architecture of primate visual cortex:
Columns, maps, and protomaps. In: Primary visual cortex in primates.
Cerebral cortex, vol. 10, ed. A. Peters & K. Rocklund. Plenum Press.
[JP]
Schwartz, E. L. & Rojer, A. S. (1991) Cortical hypercolumns and the topology of
random orientation maps. Technical Report 593, Courant Institute of
Mathematical Sciences, New York University.
[JP]
Schweinberger, S. R. & Stief, V. (2001) Implicit perception in patients with visual
neglect: Lexical specificity in repetition priming. Neuropsychologia
39(4):420–29.
[rZWP]
Segal, S. J. & Fusella, V. (1969) Effects of imaging on signal-to-noise ratio, with
varying signal conditions. British Journal of Psychology 60(4):459–64.
[arZWP]
(1970) Influence of imaged pictures and sounds on detection of visual and auditory
signals. Journal of Experimental Psychology 83(3):458–64.
[arZWP]
Sellars, R. W. (1932) The philosophy of physical realism. Macmillan.
[EW]
Sereno, M. I., Dale, A. M., Reppas, J. B., Kwong, K. K., Belliveau, J. W., Brady, 
T. J., Rosen, B. R. & Tootell, R. B. (1995) Borders of multiple visual areas in
humans revealed by functional magnetic resonance imaging. Science 268:889–
93.
[SMK]
Sereno, M. I., Pitzalis, S. & Martinez, A. (2001) Mapping of contralateral space in
retinotopic coordinates by a parietal cortical area in humans. Science
294:1350–56.
[DI]
Servos, P. & Goodale, M. A. (1995) Preserved visual imagery in visual form agnosia.
Neuropsychologia
:1383–94.
[aZWP]
Shaki, S. & Algom, D. (2002) The locus and nature of semantic congruity in
symbolic comparison: Evidence from the Stroop effect. Memory and
Cognition 30:3–17.
[WMP]
Sheehan, P. W. (1967) A shortened form of Betts’ questionnaire upon mental
imagery. Journal of Clinical Psychology 23:386–89.
[MOB]
Sheingold, K. & Tenney, Y. J. (1982) Memory for a salient childhood event. In:
Memory observed, ed. U. Neisser. W. H. Freeman.
[aZWP]
Shepard, R. N. (1964) Attention and the metrical structure of the similarity space.
Journal of Mathematical Psychology 1:54–87.
[rZWP]
Shepard, R. N. & Chipman, S. (1970) Second-order isomorphism of internal
representations: Shapes of states. Cognitive Psychology 1:1–17.
[HA, rZWP]
Shepard, R. N. & Feng, C. (1972) A chronometric study of mental paper folding.
Cognitive Psychology 3:228–43.
[JRP, aZWP]
Shepard, R. N. & Metzler, J. (1971) Mental rotation of three-dimensional objects.
Science 171:701–703.
[NB, aZWP]
Shuren, J. E., Brott, T. G., Schefft, B. K. & Houston, W. (1996) Preserved color
imagery in an achromatopsic. Neuropsychologia 34(6):485–89.
[aZWP]
Silbersweig, D. A. & Stern, E. (1998) Towards a functional neuroanatomy of
conscious perception and its modulation by volition: Implications of human
auditory neuroimaging studies. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal
Society of London B: Biological Sciences 353(1377):1883–88.
[aZWP]
Sillito, A. M., Jones, H. E., Gerstein, G. L. & West, D. C. (1994) Feature-linked
synchronization of thalamic relay cell firing induced by feedback from the
visual cortex. Nature 369:479–82.
[SG]
Simons, D. J. (1996) In sight, out of mind: When object representations fail.
Psychological Science 7(5):301–305.
[aZWP]
Simons, D. J. & Levin, D. T. (1997) Change blindness. Trends in Cognitive
Sciences 1:261–67.
[aZWP]
Simons, D. J. & Wang, R. F. (1998) Perceiving real-world viewpoint changes.
Psychological Science 9:315–20.
[NB]
Skinner, B. F. (1948) “Superstition” in the pigeon. Journal of Experimental
Psychology 38:168–72.
[FG]
(1957) Verbal behavior. Appleton-Century-Crofts.
[EW]
(1963) Behaviorism at fifty. Science 140:951–58. Reprinted in: The selection of
behavior: The operant behaviorism of B. F. Skinner, ed. A. C. Catania & S.
Harnad. Cambridge University Press.
[PPS]
Slezak, P. (1991) Can images be rotated and inspected? A test of the pictorial
medium theory. Paper presented at the Thirteenth Annual meeting of the
Cognitive Science Society.
[aZWP]
(1992) When can images be reinterpreted: Non-chronometric tests of
pictorialism. Paper presented at the Fourteenth Conference of the Cognitive
Science Society.
[aZWP]
(1995) The ‘philosophical’ case against visual imagery. In: Perspective on
cognitive science: Theories, experiments and foundations, ed. P. Slezak & 
T. Caelli & R. Clark. Ablex.
[aZWP]
(2002a) The tripartite model of reprentation. Philosophical Psychology 15(3) (in
press).
[aZWP]
References/Pylyshyn: Mental imagery: In search of a theory
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (2002) 25:2
235
. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0140525X02290044
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Chalmers Tekniska Högskola, on 16 Nov 2019 at 15:28:43, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms

(2002b) The world gone wrong? Images, illusions, mistakes and
misrepresentations. In: Representation in mind, ed. P. Staines, H. Clapin & 
P. Slezak. Praeger/Greenwood (forthcoming).
[PPS]
(2002c) Thinking about thinking: Language, thought and introspection.
Language and Communication 22:353–73.
[PPS]
Sloman, A. (1971) Interactions between philosophy and artificial intelligence: The
role of intuition and non-logical reasoning in intelligence. Artificial
Intelligence 2:209–25.
[aZWP]
Smania, N., Bazoli, F., Piva, D. & Guidetti, G. (1997) Visuomotor imagery and
rehabilitation of neglect. Archives of Physical Medicine and Rehabilitation
78(4):430–36.
[PB]
Snyder, L. H., Grieve, K. L., Brotchie, P. & Andersen, R. A. (1998) Separate body-
and world-referenced representations of visual space in parietal cortex. Nature
394(6696):887–91.
[NB]
Sokolov, E. N. & Boucsein, W. (2000) A psychophysiological model of emotion
space. Integrative Physiological and Behavioral Science 35:81–119.
[ENS]
Sparing, R., Mottaghy, F. M., Ganis, G., Thompson, W. L., Töpper, R., Kosslyn, 
S. M. & Pascual-Leone, A. (2002) Visual cortex excitability increases during
visual imagery – a TMS study in healthy human subjects. Brain Research
938:92–97.
[SMK]
Sperling, G. (1960) The information available in brief visual presentations.
Psychological Monographs 74 (Whole No. 11).
[rZWP]
Squire, L. R. & Slater, P. C. (1975) Forgetting in very long-term memory as
assessed by an improved questionnaire technique. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Human Perception and Performance 104:50–54.
[aZWP]
Steinbach, M. J. (1976) Pursuing the perceptual rather than the retinal stimulus.
Vision Research 16:1371–76.
[aZWP]
Steriade, M., Paré, D., Bouhassira, D., Deschènes, M. & Oakson, G. (1989) Phasic
activation of lateral geniculate and pregeniculate thalamic neurons during sleep
with ponto-geniculo-occipital waves. Journal of Neuroscience 9:2215–29.
[CG]
Stoerig, P. (1996) Varieties of vision: From blind responses to conscious
recognition. Trends in Neurosciences 19(9):401–406.
[aZWP]
Stucki, D. J. & Pollack, J. B. (1992) Fractal (reconstructive analogue) memory. In:
Proceedings of the Fourteenth Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science
Society, Bloomington, IN. Erlbaum.
[NJTT]
Takeuchi, T., Miyasita, A., Inugami, M. & Yamamoto, Y. (2001) Intrinsic dreams are
not produced without REM sleep mechanisms: Evidence through elicitation of
sleep onset REM periods. Journal of Sleep Research 10:43–52.
[CG]
Talmy, L. (2000) Towards a cognitive semantics: Concept structuring systems. MIT
Press.
[AC]
Tarr, M. J. & Pinker, S. (1989) Mental rotation and orientation-dependence in
shape recognition. Cognitive Psychology 21:233–82.
[MJ]
Tarr, M. J., Williams, P., Hayward, W. G. & Gauthier, I. (1998) Three-dimensional
object recognition is viewpoint dependent. Nature Neuroscience 1:275–77.
[MJ]
Taube, J. S., Muller, R. U. & Ranck, J. B., Jr. (1990) Head-direction cells recorded
from the postsubiculum in freely moving rats. I. Description and quantitative
analysis. Journal of Neuroscience 10(2):420–35.
[NB]
Taylor, M. M. (1961) Effect of anchoring and distance perception on the
reproduction of forms. Perception and Motor Skills 12:203–30.
[aZWP]
Thomas, N. J. T. (1999) Are theories of imagery theories of imagination? An active
perception approach to conscious mental content. Cognitive Science
23(2):207–45. http://www.calstatela.edu/faculty/nthomas/im-im/im-im.htm
[PB, aZWP, NJTT]
(2001) Color realism: Toward a solution to the “hard problem.” Consciousness
and Cognition 10:140–45. http://www.calstatela.edu/faculty/nthomas/col-
real.htm
[NJTT]
(in press) Mental imagery, philosophical issues about. In: Encyclopedia of
cognitive science, ed. L. Nadel. Macmillan/Nature Publishing.
http://www.calstatela.edu/faculty/nthomas/mipia.htm
[rZWP, NJTT]
Thomas, W. L. & Kosslyn, S. M. (2000) Neural systems activated during visual
mental imagery: A review and meta-analysis. In: Brain mapping II: The
systems, ed. A. W. Toga & J. C. Mazziotta. Academic Press.
[SMK]
Tipper, S. P. & Behrmann, M. (1996) Object-centered not scene-based visual
neglect. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human Perception and
Performance 22(5):1261–78.
[rZWP]
Titchener, E. B. (1909) Lectures on the experimental psychology of thought.
Macmillan.
[SM]
Tlauka, M. & McKenna, F. P. (1998) Mental imagery yields stimulus-response
compatibility. Acta Psychologica 98(1):67–79.
[aZWP]
Tootell, R. B. H., Silverman, M. S., Switkes, E. & de Valois, R. L. (1982)
Deoxyglucose analysis of retinotopic organization in primate striate cortex.
Science 218(4575):902–904.
[SMK, arZWP]
Toth, J. A. (in preparation) Research ethics, method, and best practices in the
Department of Defense. Technical Report, Institute for Defense Analysis,
Alexandria, VA, USA.
[JAT]
Tracy, R. L. & Tracy, L. N. (1974) Reports of mental activity from sleep stages 2
and 4. Perceptual and Motor Skills 38:647–48.
[CG]
Tranel, D., Damasio, H. & Damasio, A. R. (1997) A neural basis for the retrieval of
conceptual knowledge. Neuropsychologia 35:1319–27.
[EdH]
Treisman, A. M. & Schmidt, H. (1982) Illusory conjunctions in the perception of
objects. Cognitive Psychology 14:107–41.
[MEA]
Trojano, L., Grossi, D., Linden, D. E. J., Formisano, E., Hacker, H., Zanella, 
F. E., Goebel, R. & Di Salle, F. (2000) Matching two imagined clocks: The
functional anatomy of spatial analysis in the absence of visual stimulation.
Cerebral Cortex 10:473–81.
[EdH]
Tye, M. (1991) The imagery debate. MIT Press.
[SMK, NJTT]
Uhlarik, J. J. (1973) Role of cognitive factors on adaptation to prismatic
displacement. Journal of Experimental psychology 98:223–32.
[aZWP]
Ungerleider, L. G. & Mishkin, M. (1982) Two cortical systems. In: Analysis of
visual behavior, ed. D. Ingle, M. A. Goodale & R. Mansfield. MIT Press.
[DI]
Vallar, G. (1993) The anatomical basis of spatial hemineglect in humans. In:
Unilateral neglect: Clinical and experimental studies, ed. I. H. Robertson & 
J. C. Marshall. Erlbaum.
[PB]
Van der Velde, F. (1997) On the use of computation in modelling behavior.
Network: Computation in Neural Systems 8:1–32.
[FvdV]
Van der Velde, F. & de Kamps, M. (2001) From knowing what to knowing where:
Modeling object-based attention with feedback disinhibition of activation.
Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience 13(4):479–91.
[FvdV]
Van Essen, D. C., Lewis, J. W., Drury, H. A., Hadjikhani, N., Tootell, R. B.,
Bakircioglu, M. & Miller, M. I. (2001) Mapping visual cortex in monkeys and
humans using surface-based atlases. Vision Research 41:1359–78.
[SMK]
Vanni-Mercier, G., Debilly, G., Lin, J. S. & Pelisson, D. (1996) The caudo ventral
pontine tegmentum is involved in the generation of high velocity eye saccades
in bursts during paradoxical sleep. Neuroscience Letters 213:127–31.
[CG]
Virsu, V. (1971) Tendencies to eye movement, and misperception of curvature,
direction, and length. Perception and Psychophysics 9(1-B):65–72.
[aZWP]
Vuilleumier, P. & Rafal, R. (1999) “Both” means more than “two”: Localizing and
counting in patients with visuospatial neglect. Nature Neuroscience 2(9):783–
84.
[rZWP]
Wallace, B. (1984a) Apparent equivalence between perception and imagery in the
production of various visual illusions. Memory and Cognition 12(2):156–62.
[aZWP]
(1984b) Creation of the horizontal-vertical illusion through imagery. Bulletin of
the Psychonomic Society 22(1):9–11.
[aZWP]
Wang, R. F. & Simons, D. J. (1999) Active and passive scene recognition across
views. Cognition 70(2):191–210.
[NB]
Watanabe, K. & Shimojo, S. (1998) Attentional modulation in perception of visual
motion events. Perception 27(9):1041–54.
[aZWP]
Weinberg, R. S. & Gould, D. (1995) Foundations of sport psychology. Human
Kinetics.
[MR]
Wexler, M., Kosslyn, S. M. & Berthoz, A. (1998) Motor processes in mental
rotation. Cognition 68(1):77–94.
[rZWP]
Wiener, N. (1958) Nonlinear problems in random theory. Wiley.
[FG]
Wiesel, T. N. & Hubel, D. H. (1963) Single-cell responses in striate cortex of
kittens deprived of vision in one eye. Journal of Neurophysiology 26:1003–17.
[RN]
Wilson, C. L., Babb, T. L., Halgren, E. & Crandall, P. H. (1983) Visual receptive
fields and response properties of neurons in human temporal lobe and visual
pathways. Brain 106:473–502.
[GEM]
Wilson, M. A. & McNaughton, B. L. (1993) Dynamics of the hippocampal
ensemble code for space. Science 261(5124):1055–58.
[NB]
Wittgenstein, L. (1953) Philosophical investigations[Philosophische Untersuchem].
Basil Blackwell.
[aZWP, PPS]
Wood, R. & Schwartz, E. L. (1999) Topographic shear and the relationship of
ocular dominance columns to orientation columns in monkey and cat visual
cortex. Neural Networks 12:205–10.
[JP]
Wraga, M., Creem, S. H. & Proffitt, D. R. (2000) Updating displays after imagined
object and viewer rotations. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning,
Memory, and Cognition 26(1):151–68.
[NB]
Wright, E. L. (1983) Inspecting images. Philosophy 58(223):57–72.
[EW]
(1992) The Entity Fallacy in epistemology. Philosophy 67(259) 33–50.
[EW]
(1996) What it isn’t like. American Philosophical Quarterly 33(1):23–42.
[EW]
Wyatt, H. J. & Pola, J. (1979) The role of perceived motion in smooth pursuit eye
movements. Vision Research 19:613–18.
[aZWP]
Yeshurun, Y. & Schwartz, E. L. (1989) Cepstral filtering on a columnar image
architecture: A fast algorithm for binocular stereo segmentation. IEEE
Transactions: Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence 11(7):759–67.
[JP]
Young, A. W., Humphreys, G. W., Riddoch, M. J., Hellawell, D. J. & de Haan, E.
H. F. (1994) Recognition impairments and face imagery. Neuropsychologia
32:693–702.
[EdH]
Young, M. P. (2000) The architecture of visual cortex and inferential processes in
vision. Spatial Vision 13(2–3):137–46.
[rZWP]
Zald, D. H. & Pardo, J. V. (2000) Functional neuroimaging of the olfactory system
in humans. International Journal of Psychophysiology 36:165–81.
[MOB]
References/Pylyshyn: Mental imagery: In search of a theory
236
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (2002) 25:2
. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0140525X02290044
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Chalmers Tekniska Högskola, on 16 Nov 2019 at 15:28:43, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms

Zatorre, R. J., Halpern, A. R., Perry, D. W., Meyer, E. & Evans, A. C. (1996)
Hearing in the mind’s ear: A PET investigation of musical imagery and
perception. Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience 8(1):29–46.
[MOB]
Zeki, S. (1991) Cerebral akinetopsia (visual motion blindness): A review. Brain
114(Pt 2):811–24.
[rZWP]
Zhang, K. (1996) Representation of spatial orientation by the intrinsic dynamics of
the head-direction cell ensemble: A theory. Journal of Neuroscience
16(6):2112–26.
[NB]
Zhou, H. & May, J. G. (1993) Effects of spatial filtering and lack of effects of visual
imagery on pattern-contingent color aftereffects. Perception and
Psychophyscs 53,:145–49.
[aZWP]
Zimler, J. & Keenan, J. M. (1983) Imagery in the congenitally blind: How visual are
visual images? Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and
Cognition 9(2):269–82.
[aZWP]
References/Pylyshyn: Mental imagery: In search of a theory
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (2002) 25:2
237
. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0140525X02290044
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Chalmers Tekniska Högskola, on 16 Nov 2019 at 15:28:43, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms

